

“Freedom for the individual, Justice to all.”
“ Production for Use and not for Profit.”
AN OPEN LETTER
COMMANDANT BOOTH, AND HIS RANK AND FILE OF SALVATIONISTS,
Commencing with a resume of an address lately by Herbert Booth,
at Townsville, North Queensland.
HN Outcast was present at the welcome meeting
tendered to you Comrade Booth, and prior
to giving a resume of proceedings for
public benefit he quotes as follows, from
“Whittier” and “ Ruskin,” two great thinkers and
writers :
“Here the dying wail of famine,
There the battle’s groan of pain ;
And in silence smooth-faced Mammon
men like grain. ”
“ The mistake of the best men, through generation to
generation, has been that great one of helping the
poor through almsgiving and through preaching
patience and hope, and by every means except the
one thing God (or Nature) orders for them, viz.
JUSTICE.” ,
The School of Arts, wherein the meeting was held,
showed that care and attention had been bestowed on
the decorations, etc., etc.—several mottoes being
displayed on its walls, notably one bearing following
inscription— North Queensland acknowledges the honour
of your presence Commandant.
Outcast felt no honour, and neither did he feel
surprised at the assumptive mottoes so conspicuously
shown, as generally unthinking persons, led away by
faith and sentiment, imagine they speak for a whole
community and hence have no reason to solicit public
consent.
During the time of waiting such honour the band
(which was one of the best features of the show)
played often and well, whilst the Salvationists sang
with great gusto,
“ On the banks of the Beautiful River,
Keep me there when my journey is o’er.”
The Salvation Staff Captain invited Salvationists to
take a seat on the platform, and asked that when
Booth appeared a great volley should be fired and the
audience clap hands.
Booth, accompanied by his field officers, marched
in front from side rooms, and the soldiers rising en
masse fired an immense volley and gave a hand
clapping of welcome, singing the opening ode—
“ Marching on for God and the right, etc., etc.”
Prayers were then offered up, and amongst otheis
it was prayed “ We hope that blessings previously
received may he insignificant before the blessing of
Booth's piesence to-night.
Prayers over, the Staff Captain introduced Brigadier
Gilmour, Booth’s secretary, who on receiving a volley,
etc., etc., sang
“ We meet the poor of all mankind,
And we fight to win ; , r
We fight to wilt!
God salvation speed the fight to win.”
Booth playing the accompaniment on a concertina
and the Salvoes, with gestures, etc., no doubt inspired
the regiment they were going to win something
What ? They hardly realised.
Whilst this singing was „ v proceeding the Staff
Captain descended amongst the audience and
requested Mr. Castling, M.L.A., with the Presbyterian
and Methodist Ministers to take an elevated seat on
the platform.
The song ended the Brigadier congratulated himself
on not being sick, attributing this fact to the lucky
star which always accompanies Booth.
Speaking of his leader he claimed though not
employed to eulogise still “ our dear General’s son is
a treasure,” “ the quintessence of self denial, highly
devout, and Townsville had managed a grand thing to
get the Commandant here to-night.
The spiritual and social organisations were great,
requiring special exertion on part of the executive to
have Booth here, so they prayed for some considerable
time that he might come, and as a result of pra)er
Booth was here Having arrived he deserved a
rousing reception from such a city as lownsville, one
worthy of the Grand Old General, etc., etc.
Gilmour retiring the eulogised salvation son Booth
stepped to the front and addressed his audience
(chiefly composed of women and children) and
received a rousing salutation of salvos , volleys, etc.,
etc , before so doing.


Quietness at last prevailing Booth said :
Comrades and friends, if it affords you any pleasure
to have me amongst you it affords me more to come
and give you help and blessing.
As God has commissioned me to speak his doctrine
I bring Life, Liberty, and Blessing, to those
who seek the same.
Although walking in the front rank of Salvation
Army I am only flesh and blood, and such rank as I
hold was given to me as a commission from God.
Deprecating the counter attractions of circus and
race meetings the Commandant complimented those
present, as their presence evidenced a desire for
improvement, though strange to each other personally
we were all one brotherhood in Christ, and his Army
despised any stiffneckedness or outward show.
The man or woman who loved Christ was a man
and woman regardless of creed or nationality as such
met in one common brotherhood.
Thanking his hearers for such a splendid reception
Booth said that to complete his Australian education
he came North. He had been told of the beautiful
scenery amongst the tropics, the lively palm trees
and sugar cane, with other exotics, and he felt
compelled to come along to view nature’s treasures
himself. All along the line of coast he had been
looking out through his field glasses for the palms and
sugar cane, etc., but had not seen them yet, and on
enquiring the reason was informed they are further
North—“ Up North.” There are another 700 miles
to travel before the northern limit is reached. Well,
•said— tte speaker, you l4fc in-a great country of
marvellous resources, and though it has cost me six
days and nights of hard steaming to reach Townsville
I have made up my mind—if God spares me—to find
those tropical plants and pot an alligator of two.
God and the General have deputed me to do good,
but I find a great difficulty in satisfying everyone.
The Army has had its »share of grumblers. Some
people are born into the world, prussic acid, vinegar,
crooked or cross eyed, and cannot see straight or
taste properly.
Find me a man or woman who are continually
finding out the miserable surroundings, and I will find
you a man and woman with a moral twist in their
hearts.
Interspersing his remarks with some comic anecdotes
about human failings Booth continued: Plenty of
persons find fault with our methods and actions, but
they do not mention the angels of mercy who take
spiritual and wordly bread to Society’s outcasts, living
in slums and fever dens. Religion should be down
in the gutter as well as in the steeples of a Church.
Our Army is not a perfect movement. We mourn
over sins and omissions with the backslidings of our
own followings, and we judge by principles. But,
said the speaker, what difference is there (symbolically)
between drum and church bells ? They all sound —
empty sound. “ Don't uiterfere with our drums or
down comeyonr church bells.”
At this juncture the speaker entered into a long
dissertation about different religions, music, etc., and
wound up by asserting the difference between a church
organ and Army drum is that the church pay a boy
6d. an hour to blow the bellows whilst the Army has
her drum beating done for nothing.
The Salvationists work on principle only, and have a
reason for the whole of their regulations of 1,200
pages, which will stand the judgment of the great
white throne, and appeal to the inmost recesses of
the people’s hearts.
My credentials said Booth are unassailable—being
Faith , and a firm, consistent belief in God—the top
and bottom principle being God.
Not a belief in intellectual faith, not a belief in
God as in Julius Caesar or Napolean Bonaparte,
whom we know lived, though none the better
for so doing, but a belief in God—manifest,
here, present, spreading light, love and hope The
Salvationist has in his heart a true knowledge of God
the great, the good, the all powerful, who is now
present at this moment to help, to heal, to save fallen,
humanity. Great sinners! —If I did not believe in such
a God I could not exist in this world of sorrow.
Above all the world’s hypocrises and double dealings
there shines forth an infinite light of purity and love
to banish all doubting fears, without such a guiding
star the world would not be fitted to live in, only a
world of turmoil and sorrow —a vail of tears and
misery.
As we move amongst the masses of people we find
thousands who have given up hope and who exclaim,
“There is no God.” Thousands who curse society’s
tactics, but it these outcasts only had unlimited faith
they would realise all is for the best and their reward
is hereafter —in the Sweet Bye-and-Bye.
I am a Salvationist said Booth diTine
movement, raised up for a glorious purpose and has a
mission to save souls and point out the heavenly
road.
Our uniform, said the speaker, may be considered
unique, ridiculous, but it is a matter of taste. Seated
in a New York tram once, reading a paper, there
suddenly entered a woman who seated herself
immediately opposite me, continued Booth, and
looking up from my paper, behold a type of the new
woman, with feathers in her hat, butcher’s skewers in
her hair, baloon sleeves at her arms, ropes and
pulleys encircling her dress, etc., rings, bangles and
chains in great profusion, and I inwardly remarked,
quoting from scripture, “ Behold we are all fearfully
and wonderfully made.”
Paying a great tribute to his wife, whom Booth
claimed as the best woman living, and who looked
best in the poke bonnet and uniform of salvation
pattern. He remarked, after all, dress was a matter
of taste, and society’s dresses might be as ridiculous
in the eyes of Army soldiers as salvation dress was in
the eyes of Society’s men and women.
At all events as we live in a free country we could
dress as we choose, but afi should be done for the
glory of God; the eating, drinking, dressing, and
sleeping, should be in his honor and name.
By the industry and faith of your forefathers, said
Booth, Australia is free. You have great privileges—
Free Education and Most Advanced Legislation \
whilst missing the extreme misery and poverty of the
older country —England.
Claiming that it was a great physical, as well as


expensive undertaking, for his officers and self to
come to Townsville, the General’s son made an
earnest appeal for more money, so that no financial
losses would accrue to any district on account of this
expensive visit, and then made room for Brigadier
Hoskins, who on being introduced with musical
honors, etc., claimed he had known the Lord for
many years, and that all the happiness derivable on
earth was to lead some poor sinner to the foot of the
cross. He had no intention of prolonging the
meeting by a long speech, at some future time an
interchange of thoughts might take place between
himself and soldiers, at present he was satisfied at his
visit and the privilege of holding such a high rank in
the Army, combined with the splendid receptions
received by his Commandant.
Booth next introduced the Reverend Smith,
Methodist Minister, who on rising and being salvoed,
etc., paid a very high tribute to Commandant Booth,
his father, and all salvation work, particularly claiming
that the Army was the child of methodism, on account
■of General Booth’s connection with his church at an
•early period of his spiritual life, and mentioned that
all church work was for the saving of souls and
glorification of God.
Following this speaker the Commandant next
introduced the Reverend Mr. Kerr, the Presbyterian
cleric, who claimed he was one of those who kept the
Sabbath and everything else he could get his hands
on. The Army and the church were closer than
cousins, they were brothers, working for common
interest. was doing a noble, unselfish
work,"and on which Scotland stood
to-day was true religion, which after all was the
broadest platform for any person to stand on.
Churches were not confined to any sect or dogma,
but had a belief in God, which warranted a common
brotherhood and a community of interest.
He (the speaker) welcomed Booth, who was raised
by God to show the church a more just way of doing
good, etc.
The Army had great faith and faith lifts us all up.
Expressing a belief in the true religion, and exhorting
all to lay hold of eternal life, the Presbytertan cleric
said, “ He believed in the roll of saints, and believed
in Saint Catherine , the lately deceased mother of
the Army, who was lately enrolled on that saintly
list.”
A closing solo and prayers brought this welcome
meeting to a close, and Outcast laid his pencil aside,
grieved to know how little (if any) light had been
thrown on the greatest social problem of the age,
namely: The Bread and Butter Problem. Feed my
sheep —Extreme wealth on the one side and extreme
poverty on the other.
Wending his way to the place of meeting the
Outcast thought within himself: To-night, at all
events, will be heard some reasons for all the
Injustices, Poverty, Misery, Starvation and Sweating
under which the proletaire groan.
To-night, at least, a denunciation will take place of
the brutal iniquitous, unjust tactics pursued by the
sweating monopolist and usurious money-lender, who
at present control the means of production and
distribution.
NOV 1992
/V -4'
To-night, surely, will be fully exposed the faw^tous
teachings of theological advocates who, whilst rrychm^ - —-
in luxury and ease themselves, advocate a gospel of
contentment and unlimited faith amongst Society’s
have-nots.
To-night will be clearly shown the cause—the true
cause—which produces ail the evil effects of crime,
drunkenness, prostitution and discontent.
And a remedy .will be advocated, that remedy being
an advocacy of Justice and a restoration to every unit
of humanity, his or her inherent right to land and all
natural products, a right to life implying a right to
standing room on this wonderful planet. A
But, alas ! for Outcast’s optimistic outlook and
thoughts, not a word was said about the causes which
create effects treating mankind unjustly.
Not one single denunciation of the sweater, usurer
or rackrenter with all royal parasitical leeches who
fatten on the toilers’ blood and sweat.
Here you were, Commandant Booth, with an array
of titled officials, with two ministers of religion and a
member of the Legislative Assembly, sitting on a
platform, utilised ostensibly that evening to show how
Society’s outcasts were being dealt with, a mission
which would also involte tlje causes of injustice being
clearly demonstrated ; and the whole tenor of the-
speeches made from first to last was a eulogy of Faith
and Contentment, an unlimited stretch of Faith,
which, though not defined by any of the speakers,
Outcast defines to mean a belief in what you cannot
reason, in what you do not see or know.
The adverse and comic_ccuicisnis-Indulged in by
you, Commandant, having reference to cross-eyed
people, and the mode of dressing indulged in by
certain persons, were not educational and not used as
similes. The implied covert threats, “If you inter-
fere with our drum, down come your bells”; “If you
trample on our flag, down come your steeples,” were
not in harmony that evening, or, in my opinion, justi-
fied at any time, as you Salvationists have a great deal
more latitude allowed you b> “ Law and Order ” than
other organisations do. But the reasons w r hy (and
Outcast draws the special attention of Commandant
Booth and his followers to the same) Law and Order
—Government—so specially intervene on Booth’s
behalf is because the responsibility of looking after
the welfare, material or otherwise, of the poor and
needy, which the Government are in duty bound to
undertake (under present conditions) is shifted on to
the Army’s or someone else’s shoulders, and the
Government, whilst so ignoring their duties, stifle to a
certain extent by your gospel of contentment, an up-
rising of discontent that would shatter for ever
Society’s fabrics of unjust systems.
The sweater, monopolist, usurer, money-lord, and
other royal parasites, praise the work of Booth’s
Salvation Army because it relieves their conscience
and rids them of certain incumbrance.
The above motley gathering, who own the means
of production and distribution, rob and sweat their
common brotherhood in all directions, and having
exacted the last ounce of blood from their impover-
ished bodies, cast them as outcasts on the street for
Booth and other theologians to preach faith and
contentment to.


With public monies your General purchases land
in all directions. Are the deeds of grant made out in
trust for the whole range of humanity, who find the
purchase n- — -'•-are the deeds made out in an
FU739
A/
/ - Is ii
Is it any wonder, comrade Booth, that men and
women so treated deny the existence of a just God?
Any -wonder they disregard your eulogy of faith and
contentment ?
Are you not aware Commandant that every child
born on this planet has a right to standing room ?
Do you not know ;har bv acquiring land for
speculative purposes thousands of humanity are
deprived of their just rights ?
Does your theological beliefs teach you it is right
that certain persons should live on the toil of others ?
If you are a busy man, as you claim to be, are not
your sisters and brothers more busy than you, stitching
and toiling from morn till night for a bare existence,
with no leisure time to study social problems ?
Are you satisfied with the actions of royal and other
parasites of society that you welcome and ask for
their presence on your platforms ?
Is your father so self-conceited as to imagine that
our dear sister Victoria Rex, of good surroundings,
can, by a letter through her private secretary, confirm
his title to General (a title he assumed previously
himself) ?
Aie you people so enamoured of royalty and useless
baubles as to shout yourselves hoarse on such
occasions as occured recently of a letter being sent
General Booth by Queen Victoria, addressing him as
General ?
“ Hoorah, he is a General now,” exclaims your
soldiers. Was he an assumptive General before
Victoria’s message?
Can Victoria make Generals or Reformers except
as empty baubles—useless gee-gaws ?
Ross Island,
Townsville, N.Q., July 27th, 1898.
Accompanying you on your platform on the occasion
of any special meeting are to be seen the parasites
and sweaters of humanity who have the effrontery to
face an injured people and see their names on your
lists, or hear them enunciated from your lips as the
donors (amid much salvos and hallelujahs) of a cheque
for or money exacted from the blood and
sweat of numerous wage-slaves who barely exist on
earth ; with their left hands they hand you a donation
of a few pounds, whilst with their right hands they rob
and despoil their brotherhood of hundreds, nay,
thousands!
They wish to ameliorate the misery caused by
themselves by a money dole, and you Salvationists
shout “ Hallelujah ” and partly induce them to believe
they are performing a good, just action, as if broken
hearts and unjustly treated aspirations can be cured
by a charity dole of money.
If you take one woman off the streets, do you not
see that unless you pay her for the labor she performs
and allow her the full product of her toil that you
thrust two more in the gutter?
Can unsubsidised labor compete with unpaid sub-
sidised labor ?
individua.
Is the meed of praise that parasites give you
accompanied by a cheque, or money dole sufficient
to blot from your vision all Injustices ?
Do you not know that the cause of your alleged sin
is extreme poverty on the one side and extreme
wealth on the other, or from efforts to escape the
one or acquire the other ?
You may, Comrade Booth, by your Army’s gestures,
actions, drums, salvoes, and loud exhortations of
faith appeal to the sentimental side of humanity, but
you must lay bare the INJUSTICES under which
your brotherhood groan, and denounce the rotten,
corrupted systems of society, which allow a despoiling
of humanity to take place before you can effect any
permanent good.
Environed by faith from your birth you of course
fail to see as scientests and humanity see the utter
folly of preaching religion to empty stomachs and
unjust surroundings, unless the key note of your
advocacy is JUSTICE.
Concluding Outcast again quotes Ruskin for th
special benefit of you, Commandant Booth, and yo
followers : —‘ The mistake of the best men, throug.
generation after generation, has been that great on?
of helping the poor through almsgiving and through
jpreaching patience and hope, and meaqi
except the one thing God (or Nature) orders for ther
—JUSTICE !
As to your being commissioned by God to act
you are doing it is a debateable subject and at prese.
I have no leisure time to deal with it.
Concluding, I assert, without fear of contradiction,
the following facts ;
That as children come on this planet passively
every child has a right to live; every child is a child
of Nature— ivedlock or othenvise. That being so
every child must have standing room on this planet to
sustain its inherent right to live, and this also involves
the right of access to all natural products.
By acquiring land (Freeholds) and entering into
trade speculations for profit. The Church from the
Archbishop, Pope and Priests, to Booth, with other
theologians, deprive Humanity of its inherent right to
live as they should live.
Max. Nordau writes ; *• The cry of bread for the
masses fill this latter part of the nineteenth century.
At no period in the world’s history were the contrasts
between rich and poor so decided, so prominent, as
at present.” Yet false teachers and reasoners come
along and tell the masses : — Have faith and all will be
well. Render yourselves lowly and reverently to all
your betters.
Yours fraternally,
E. Y. LOWRY,
An Outcast Reporter.
