

ir/&£t>k k.d.s.s.u.
f
nmiiiiiiiii'iiiiiii
An Old Testament
iijinitiiitU# -TlHEliimiTnl
a 4T4 Ju "Ju at*
TJT T|T TiT TfT TIT TAT TIT TJT TAT
f ,
»' b 5 s .
15 P®M *4 «
JAS. ARBJCKLC a C» >., PRINTERS. 430 BOURKE STREET




%
1."
©lb iXvaoeb\>.
ADDRESS
Delivered to the Kew District Sunday
School Union
By Professor HARPER,
15TH June, 1893,
Reprinted from "The Australian Sunday School Teacher.”
As I am addressing a Sunday School Union, I
should like to be practically useful to you. In
order to be so, I have chosen a subject which will
permit me to describe first, and illustrate after-
wards, the historic method of studying the
Scriptures—the method, that is, by which we try to
put each book back into its original surroundings,
and to read it in its relation to them. It is not
a new method, nor is it the only method of Bible
study. But it is more in accord with the general
tendency of present day thought than others, and
seeks especially to make profitable use of the
materials which Providence is putting into our
hands in these days. It has been misunderstood,
too, and, being misunderstood, it has been spoken
against. Moreover, mistakes have been made in
the use of it, and it cannot be said that all those
who have practised it have been wise or reverent.
But these matters are all beside the question for
7 ,
Pi iiSS%,ai.s3
U5-TT


us. The question is, is there a method of study-
ing the Scriptures specially suitable to our time,
which, if used well, brings us nearer to the mind
and purpose of God as Scripture reveals it ? That
I wish to affirm; and a glance at some of the
results achieved by it will, I think, justify me.
In the first place, it has brought out the contrast
between the fate of Israel’s religion and the fate
of the religions of the other nations which the
Assyrians crushed. When Moab perished,
Chemosh perished; when Ammon perished,
Milcom perished; when Philistia ceased to be a
state, Dagon disappeared. That is, in all these
countries the fate of religion was bound up with
the fate of the state. In Israel, that was not so.
On the contrary, the destruction of the state gave
new life to the religion. Instead of perishing
with the capture of His temple, Jehovah then
first rose in the minds of all His worshippers
to His true position as God over all, blessed
for ever. From the beginning, many, the
elect of Israel, had known and trusted Him
as such, but not all. Henceforth His claims
to that position were never doubted by His people,
and were gradually acknowledged throughout the
world. That is an extraordinarily important
point, and it has been now, by this method of
studying the Scriptures, brought out more clearly
than ever before.
Another point similarly made clear is, that just
when Assyria was threatening destruction to all
the nations of Western Asia, the worshippers of
all the heathen gods were forced back upon those
elements in their respective religions which were
worst. They forgot, and denied, and turned their
backs upon any element of good there had been
in them. They fell back upon the lowest concep-
tions of God, and worshipped their gods merely
as power without any reference to morality.
Their manner of approaching their deities, too,
deteriorated, and magic almost the only
refuge of the troubled soul. In Egypt, Ammon,
Moab, Syria, and Assyria this was the baseband
in all, this decay of religion was not merely the
result, but also an additional cause of national
decay. Now the same calamities fell upon Israel,


but instead of driving men finally back upon a lower
phase of religion, they only gave a more decidedly
upward flight to Israelite thoughts of God. The
love of God to His people had been demonstrated
and pressed home by the prophets just when evil
began to loom on the horizon ; moreover, just
precisely in the evil days of Manasseh, when the
heavens were as brass, and the earth iron, men
brooded over the teachings of the book of
Deuteronomy, in which the demand that the true
Israelite should love the Lord his God with all
his heart and with all his soul, and with all his
might, was first formulated. But now, under
Josiah, for the first time, the people responded to
these inspiring teachings. In the enthusiastic
reception of the king’s proposal to make this
book the basis of public and private life, the truth
that God loves and would be loved was accepted
as never before. It stood out with quite a new
vividness, and, though the popular enthusiasm
waned, the truth thus publicly accepted never
again lost its hold. It ruled the religious future
of Israel, and made it possible that the supreme
religious figure of the world should come from
that nation.
Such facts as these are potent, and persuade us
that God must have specially inspired the leaders
of Israel, and to have brought them clearly out
is a great merit, and should go far to rehabilitate
the historic method in the eyes of any who may
have been looking at it askance. Using this
method, then, let us now come to the “ Old Testa-
ment Tragedy,” I have announced as my subject,
viz., the life and death of Josiah, the reforming
king of Judah. Looked at with all the light
which we can get, I think we shall find in
it lessons that the mere reading of the history
alone would not suggest. Nevertheless these
lessons are actually there—not merely imagined
to be there—arid they are full of instruction
for us even in these remote times, and in this
remote place.
But first let us go back in mind to the
great days of Hezekiah, when king and people
were alike in terror lest their name and their
nation should be taken away by Senna-


cherib. In all the city, Isaiah alone stood
up and said, —“ This thing shall not be. God is
faithful to Zion. Whatever may happen, she
will be safe. Sennacherib and all his armies
shall be driven away ; not by human strength,
but by the Divine power, because Zion is
God’s chosen place amid His chosen people ; He
must therefore interfere to save it, even when
things are darkest and at the worst.” And then
his prophecies blossomed out into most magnifi-
cent pictures of what was to follow the defeat of
the Assyrians. How the desert places were to
blossom as the rose ; how the Messianic
times should come, and all nations should
look to Israel and should gather about Zion
and worship Jehovah. The people listened
and doubted, listened and believed, and when
Sennacherib actually was driven away by the
destruction of his army, and went to his own
land, the enthusiasm was boundless. Through
long years Isaiah had spoken only “to make the
heart of this people fat and their ears heavy, and
to shut their eyes; ” and the king even had
favoured a policy he had disapproved ; but now
they believed him, now they honoured him, and
looked forward to the advent of the Messiah with
peace and victory in His hand. But here they
were misled by a strange peculiarity of .prophecy
in both the Old Testament and the New.
When the prophets foresaw the future—foresaw
it by supernatural enlightenment —there was one
point as to which they were apt fo hasten before
the decrees of God. They saw before them the
immediate deliverance which was to serve to help
their own time and people. They saw it quite
close and in detail. Their word was absolutely
clear in regard to it, but they also saw behind
that the greater glory of the Messianic day.
They did not see the long stretch of varied
fortune that lay between this immediate coming
of the Lord that lay at their door, and that last
coming when all things should be put under His
feet. They looked at it as a far landscape is
looked at. They saw the near hills and they saw
the distant hills. Both were clear and certain to
them, and the near was a part of the distant; but


all the weary tangle of hills and valleys which
lay between they saw not, consequently you find
that they thought each great deliverance of their
people was to be the last. They spoke of it so,
and they seemed to think so ; and their hearers
certainly understood their promises in that
sense. Similarly the people of the New Testa-
ment times constantly expected the coming of the
Lord. St. Paul had to reprove the Thessalonians
for undue haste in this matter, but it nan hardly
be doubted that he himself had no clear knowledge
of the “ long, long time the world should last.”
Men had not learned then, as we have now, that
our expectations are not the measure of the will
of God—that our eager haste runs before Him
often, and that man’s duty is to watch for His
coming as if it were every day at hand, but not to
be disappointed if He has patience with the world
for another thousand years. Consequently, Israel
in Isaiah’s day looked naturally for the Messianic
time.
But as year after year went by and it did
not come, the bulk of the people grew weary.
Instead of the Messiah there came a fresh
increase of the Assyrian power. Everywhere,
notwithstanding its great defeat at Jerusalem,
Assyria seemed to grow in strength, everywhere it
trod down its enemies under its feet, and the
multitude of half-hearted worshippers of God—
who worshipped God because He had once given
His people a great success, but were not prepared
to follow the worship of God when he brought to
pass things that did not look successful—turned
away from Him.
Their zeal cooled and cooled and cooled, until,
when Hezekiah died, what happened ? The whole
nation fell back with a tremendous recoil into the
most cruel, the most abominable idolatry. They
denied God as He had never been denied in Israel
before ; they plunged with an excess of wicked-
ness into every kind of foreign idolatry. They
even brought in that horrible Moloch worship
which had been the crowning shame and horror
of even the heathen religions, and it was
at the very foot of Jehovah’s temple. The whole
nation went mad to do evil along with their new


kings. But Isaiah’s influence was not dead.
Even when things were worst he had never wanted
faithful disciples. Much more now, after he had
been acknowledged by the whole nation, he had
left behind him a number of faithful souls, who
continued to believe in God and the prophetic
teaching. But they had fallen upon evil days.
The heathen party—those who believed in Jehovah
only when He seemed to bring success—persecuted
them, till Jerusalem was filled from “ lip to lip,”
as the Bible says, with the blood of martyrs.
They had to cease speaking from very fear, and
they cherished their faith in silence, but wrought
for the coming of a better day.
And so, for fifty long years all things remained
as Manasseh made them. The whole nation
seemed to be going down into mere worship of
physical power. They had reached the blasphemy
of Napoleon—they began to believe only in the
god of big battalions. But after Manasseh’s
death, and after the short reign of Amon,
the faithful had the reward of their patience.
For the little king Josiah fell into their
hands, and he was brought up under their
influence. It is difficult to explain how this
came about. The probability is that there were
many powerful nobles striving each against the
other for supremacy in the state. None of them
could trust the others to have charge of the boy
king, and so he fell into the hands of the High
Priest. He, they perhaps thought, could have
no dangerous ambitions, and so Josiah came into
the control of the prophetic party, who united all
men of higher faith, whatever their leanings other-
wise might be. This was not the first time in
the history of Judah that the prophetic party
and the priestly party had acted together. In
a similar crisis they had joined for the overthrow
of Athaliah. But now they were welded together
in one, as they had never been in pursuit
of one aim.
The young king then was brought up in the
midst of those who looked back to Isaiah as their
m'aster, and took up the position he had occupied.
They probably believed that Isaiah’s promise
that Zion should not be conquered was still valid,


that a sufficient number would be true to secure
Jehovah’s help for His people. But during the
first eighteen years of Josiah, they were not strong
enough to put down the abuses that Isaiah
denounced and Hezekiah had sought to remove.
But we may be sure that they were not idle.
They sought to indoctrinate the people with some-
thing of the ancient love of God, and they worked
and hoped for the time when they might be able
to move.
At last the day came, and it came borne upon
the wings of devastation and terror and pain.
Suddenly from the north there broke in upon all
those countries, shattering even the Assyrian
power, a horde of fierce Scythians. They
are mentioned very seldom in Scripture, but they
are mentioned. They stormed over the country
upon their swift horses. They never stayed to
capture cities, but raced round them, burning,
plundering, and slaying in all the open country.
None of the countries north of Judah made any
stand against them, and they swept over Judah
to the south, till they were driven back by the
power of Egypt.
The terror of this onslaught brought the people
once more into a better frame of mind, and the
prophet Jeremiah was able to open his lips and
speak. His preaching was that the people were
rotten to the core ; that their sins were piled up
before God so that it seemed impossible that there
could be any deliverance. And he preached
strenuously this doctrine, that unless there was a
radical change in the whole life and thought of
the nation, God was bound to disown them.
God could not endure their works, and
would certainly punish. These new thoughts
stirred up all the conscience that there was among
the people. Moreover, it mightily stirred up the
king and those who surrounded him, and they
made everything ready for the forward movement;
waiting for the final impulse; and then the
impulse came. There is no story in the Old
Testament more surprising or more dramatic than
the finding of the Book of Deuteronomy in the
temple. The critics who have tried to throw
doubt upon the good faith of the finders simply
' • r
fwm


reveal, not the truth of things, but the reckless-
ness or unscrupulousness of their own characters.
Beyond doubt a book was actually found, and
it clearly was not the Pentateuch. For one
thing, it was read in so very short a time to the
king that it could not be more than one of the
five books. Furthermore, all that Josiah did as
the result of his reading of it is just what is
demanded by the book of Deuteronomy. Clearly
it was this book alone, and on hearing its
threatenings the king’s heart was shaken by the
discovery that the things he had been striving
against all his life were just the things denounced
by it. He brought the people together and read
to them the commands and denunciations that
had so alarmed him, and they, led by the pure
hearts and bold minds of those whom they had
despised, turned at once from their heathenism—
they even became enthusiastic for the new time—
and the king had no difficulty in getting them to
swear that this book of Deuteronomy should be
the rule of their life, the guide of their policy, and
the source of their hope. And then he set to
work, with all the vigour and determination of his
nature, to reform religious abuses. He put down
in Judah, first, all the high places where the
worship of Jehovah was carried on with rites more
like those of Baal than befitted the worship of
Jehovah. Then he went over the whole country
of the northern tribes, which was at that time a
no-man’s-land, from which Assyria had practically
withdrawn. He took it, too, under his care, and,
asserting his right as a descendant of David, he
sought out and destroyed idolatry, until the whole
worship of the land was what the book of
Deuteronomy said it ought to be. But he not
only reformed the worship, he made righteous-
ness flow down like a river, and recalled by his
example the best days of Judah’s best kings.
Thus the last thirteen years of his reign appear to us
as a sort of Indian summer in Israelite history—a
period that promised all good things, that seemed
to realise, in embryo at least, all that had ever
been hoped of the Messianic days. Jeremiah,
who knew Josiah well, has borne splendid
testimony to his character in the 22nd chapter of


his prophecies. In the 15th verse, speaking of
Josiah’s unworthy son, he says, “ Shalt thou
reign because thou closest thyself in cedar ? Did
not thy father eat and drink and yet do judgment
and justice ; then it was well with him. He judged
the cause of the poor and needy ; then it was well
with him. Was not this to know Me ? saith the
Lord.”
But perhaps an even more striking proof of
Jeremiah’s approval is that he apparently ceased
prophesying. That would indicate that, in his
view, the reformation he had demanded was so
clearly being brought about that his Avarnings
were no longer needed. The righteous, faithful
nation he had longed to see seemed to be growing
up about him every day. In spite of the selfish,
devilish, sensual rule of those who had gone
before. Josiah was bringing in the rule of justice
and purity, and those who were poor and in need
benefited by it. Moreover, in those years every-
thing prospered with him. When he had sought
for prophetic sanction for his reforms, he had
received the promise, “ Thou shait be gathered
unto thy grave in peace, and thine eyes shall not
see all the evil which I will bring upon this place.”
But the public repentance had been so hearty
that it seemed as if the threats of the book would
not need to be inflicted upon the people any more
than on the king.
Often and often, we may believe, he read
from the book of Deuteronomy, with a beating
heart, what things God had laid up for the king
and people who should keep this law. Moreover,
he must have noted how he was being freed from
his enemies, according to promise. Assyria had
been so sorely wounded by the Scythian invasion
that she was obliged to withdraw from all active
interference with western Asia and Egypt. This
gave Josiah the opportunity he desired, and
enabled him to draw in all the scattered remnants
of the northern people, and it looked as if all
things were to be according to the book.
But as Assyria decreased, Egypt increased, and
when Josiah had thus annexed all the land,
Pharaoh Necho came with a great army to crush
Assyria, and secure some at least of the spoils of


the falling empire. He had to pass over
the northern part of Palestine, which Josiah
had made his own, and the latter had to
decide what his attitude should be. Being
what he was, we may be sure he did not
decide on merely political grounds. Had he
been set upon merely political ends, he would
have had no difficulty in deciding that his course
was to join Pharaoh, and attack the common foe
and share the spoil. That would have been the
part of worldly wisdom ; but Josiah had higher
aims than those.
No doubt he thought it intolerable that when
the foot of the destroyer was withdrawn from one
direction it should be put down upon the land
from another. It was like unbelief to allow this,
and no doubt in these days he was much in
prayer, and read diligently in Deuteronomy to
ascertain the mind of God. What he found was
this (Deut. xxviii. 1): —“And it shall come to
pass if thou shalt hearken diligently unto the
voice of the Lord thy God, to observe and to do
all His Commandments, which I command thee
this day, that the Lord thy God will set thee on
high above all nations of the earth.” Yer. 7,
“ The Lord shall cause thine enemies that rise up
against thee to be smitten before thy face ; they
shall come out against thee one way and flee
before thee seven ways.”
And so, conscious that he had hearkened unto
the voice of the Lord —that he had striven to do
all the Commandments —he decided for war.
Having thus solemnly risked all upon his faith,
we may be sure that there were prayers offered up
in the temple asking the Divine blessing, and
prayers by men who believed in God. There
were psalms and hynins sung which promised
victory to those who were faithful; which
recognised that God was the God of all the
nations, and gave victory to His people. And
when the day came for him to march out from
Jerusalem, he went full of confidence founded
upon the Word of God, full of hope for the future,
believing that God had greater things in store for
him than any that had been given him. He was
perfectly certain that he was doing the will of


God, and was bound to succeed. He took with
him, too, the might and the strength and the glory
of Israel, and he went forth apparently with the
blessing of God upon him. And in a week there
came back a chariot all spattered with blood, with
harness worn by swift driving, with no guard to
speak of royal dignity, and in that chariot there lay
the beloved of the Lord, the last true king of Israel
wounded to death, and with him lay dying all the
hope that this book of God had brought to Israel.
Could anything more tragic, more confound-
ing, more shattering to faith be imagined ?
There are many tragedies of mere blood, but they
are nothing to such a tragedy of hope deferred
and hope destroyed.
Do you not sympathise deeply, when you
think of it, with these people ? Can you not
imagine what the mind and thought of Josiah
was as he lay slowly dying ? Did he lose faitli
in God ? Did he think that all this that had
been the guide of his life had been a mistake ?
Did he ask bitterly, “ Is this the fashion in
which I was to be ‘ gathered to my grave in
peace ?’ ” Do you think he turned his face to
the wall in total despair, and said, “ 1 trusted it
was Jehovah that should have delivered Israel,
and here is Jehovah’s answer?”
I have no doubt whatever he had such
thoughts, but I have just as little doubt that
he was not suffered to be overcome by them.
I believe he had been too earnest, too sincere,
too faithful a servant of God to be abandoned
by Him. I believe that he was saved from
that worst tragedy, the entire shipwreck of his
faith. But His people were not. The blow
seemed to undo all the work of those beautiful
years. They mourned indeed for their king, so
that in his successor’s reign Jeremiah had to
say to them —“ Weep ye not for the dead.”
They mourned with a kind of fierce abandon-
ment which betrayed the bitterness of their
disappointment, and they scoffed at the faith
they had held. Jehovah had proved himself
false, they thought; He had deceived them.
He had led them into a trap and they turned
away from Him. The kings that followed


gave themselves up to the old ways—the old
idolatries came back—the faith that had
bloomed for a time disappeared and seemed to
carry with it the foundations for all future
faith. In all respects it seemed as if this
people in its last state was worse than in its first.
And should many of us have been any
better ? The effect of it was like the effect of
Christ’s death upon the disciples when they
went away with that saddest word of all
Scripture upon their lips—“ We thought it had
been he that should have delivered Israel.”
“We thought it had been." And these people
had thought that God was with Josiah. They
thought he had done everything that the Word
of God demanded. He had swept away the
idols. He had put down the high places. He
had made righteousness to reign in all depart-
ments of life, and he had put in force that
beautiful Deuteronomic law which remains
even yet an aspiration and an unrealised ideal
for our most civilised modern states. But they,
too, had supported and sympathised with him
in everything he did. The promises of God
ought to have stood sure, and they did not,
and the heart of Israel was hardened.
Looking back upon all this, we see that
there must have been some mistake in their
faith—now where was it ? It was quite
evident there was something wrong, but
it was impossible for them, as it is difficult
for us, to see where the error was. Well,
your own reflections will perhaps help you
to a truer explanation, but it seems to me
that the main fault lay here : Josiah took him-
self too rashly for an ordinary normal man of
that day. He thought the people as faithful to
God as he himself was, and expected for a
people only half faithful what only a wholly
faithful people could receive. He knew his own
faith, his own sincerity, his own trust. He
knew that he was absolutely upon the side of
God, and he knew that God was with him, for
he felt at times the power of God upon him,
and when all the people came and took up this
new law with such enthusiasm he judged


them, too, by himself. He thought when the
outside of the cup and the platter was made
clean, as it ought to be, that all was well. But
after-events showed that the people were not
made whole. The reformation was but “ from
the lips outward.” They had been moved in
a way, but their natures had not been
changed, and the result was that the good
that was promised to a people wholly
penetrated with love to God could not —
could not —come to this people who loved
God when He brought them prosperity, but
had time and again refused to love Him when
He brought adversity.
Another mistake Josiah seems to me to have
made was that he hastened unduly before the
promises of God. Ido not see that he could
have helped it —that is the tragic thing. Ido
not see that he could have done anything or
thought anything but what he actually did and
thought. But his history should teach us,
should warn us, not to be impatient; not to
think that every gleam of light is the final
illumination of the world ; not to press forward
before God leads us ; not to believe that things
that look exceedingly desirable to us are
necessarily the end of the will of God.
But the great lesson of this story is to me
very plain—it is to beware of externalities—
externalities in moral reformation and con-
ventionality in our understanding of the Word of
God. As for the first, any improvement that does
not spring from the heart, that does not involve
a renewal of love to God, that does not open
up the soul to the movements of the Divine
Spirit, can end only in disappointment
and relapse. Yet how easily accepted and how
popular such reformations are. We love
to have things externally right, but when
the Word pierces to the dividing asunder
of soul and spirit and of the joints and marrow
—that is quite another thing. But that is
precisely what is needed, that is the essence of
the whole matter. If the love of God to us do
not beget in us some real personal love to Him,
then whatever we do the best and brightest
blessings of God cannot be ours.


And as for the latter, Josiah himself took in
the true spirit of all these promises, but the
people were just as certain as he was that they
had done honour to God by taking His words
in the narrowness of the letter. He said by
His prophets and law-givers, If you do so-and-
so, all these good things will come. Zion will
be impregnable and all the nations will fear
you. Well, they did so, but the good things
did not come. The reason was that they built
upon the external promise without troubling
to understand it. Isaiah had promised that
Jerusalem should not be taken, and it was not
taken, Jeremiah prophesied that it should be
taken, and they would not believe it. Ihey
said Isaiah was a greater prophet than
you, and he said that it would not be taken.
They would not see how the changed times
demanded these different prophecies. The
underlying reason for the differing expectation
was the same, but the circumstances were
different, and when they clung to the mere
external word, they were refusing the Divine
teaching. They would not look beyond the
letter, and so they brought disaster upon
themselves, and their faith suffered shipwreck.
And the last lesson I would draw is that we
should not be too sure that the best things God
can give us are not wrapped up in misfortune.
Had Josiah lived to old age he would have
seen the utter destruction of Jerusalem. Had
Israel been spared the exile, so far as we can
see, the purpose of God to bless all nations by
them could not have been fulfilled. Con-
sequently, though this was a trying blow to
Israel, and drove many to despair ; though it
led right on to captivity, oppression, and
extinction as a nation, yet it also prepared a
people fit for the high destiny of Israel. After
the terrible discipline of the captivity, Israel
never again fell back into the idolatry to which
they had been so prone before. This cured
them, and fitted them to be trustees of true
religion for the race. It was upon that cure,
upon that fitness, the whole mind of God had
been set, and by misfortunes this will of God


was done. And similarly that is the mind of
God with regard to us if we be His people.
He seeks to cure us —cure us of our sins—and
He will not stop His discipline till He has cured
us. Misfortune is often the best that God can
do for us. It will stay, too, till it has done its
work, and we ought to receive it as our great
Christian poet, Browning, teaches in “ Rabbi
Ben Ezra.” We ought to say with him—
“ Then, welcome each rebuff
That turns earth’s smoothness rough,
Each sting that bids, nor sit, nor stand, but go !
Be our joys three parts pain !
Strive, and hold cheap the strain ;
Learn, nor account the pang ; dare, never grudge
the throe.”
For among all the things for which we owe
gratitude to God, for His wondrous love to us
in Christ Jesus, for our present privileges, for
our hopes for the future, I think we ought not
to be least grateful that He sends us in His own
good time, and in His own good way, mis-
fortune and disappointment to drive us to
Himself.
Jas. Arbuckle & Co., Printer?, 430 Bourke Street, Melbourne.


-
\
H
