

NUMBER  THREE.   1948
THE INHUMAN RACE  and
A TRIBUTE  TO O.  M. SOMERVILLE


W JPERGUSON COLLEGTIOI^AP
11 RATIONAL LIBRARY" J1]


HARRY  HOOTON
Extracts  from
THE INHUMAN RACE                     
("Oh manity of inanity, all is mainly ')
A BOOK starts with its title. If that title is bad the book can be
thrown away. No responsible literary artist will put two words
on paper, let alone 200,000, without significance, direction and
necessity. I do not expect, in these days of millions on millions of books,
any reader to struggle with my context of 50,000 words; I shall be
satisfied if a few people read one text, one sentence, any group of words
between two full stops but read that thoroughly. I am happy in
knowing my titles must be read, and perhaps eventually understood. .. .
Ulysses. A human being, a proper noun, an ancient Greek. Who
could turn to this exhausted soil without overpowering disgust, save the
crawlers who putrefy in the universities! Ulysses. Seven letters wasted,
ten seconds sacrificed of the all too brief and sacred span of Art! No
artist could pen the name without spiritual agony. I am giving you in
my first words the Inhuman. Get your teeth into tl\at. To occupy our
minds with Ulysses, St Joan, Thomas a' Beckett, Ned Kelly, or anything
that has happened in the last 10,000 years is cannibalism. Leave the
humanist necrophagites to crawl. What is food for the mind is outside
the mind. Before it, in the future. I give you what is new.
It is our business as human beings to expand and grow at the expense
of what is not human. Nothing eats its own kind and continues to grow.
x\nd nothing eats its food twice, when it has become excrement. And
what is true of the body is true of the mind. I give you food which is
sweet and fresh; food from beyond man, beyond mind; food beyond
manna from human heavens — food which is more than humanity.
• J -
beyond words: Worlds without words.
This is the least egoistic of all books. lam human. This is the
voice of humanity, integrated and contemptible. The tiger could not
sieze one ounce of meat without contempt for his eyes, his teeth, his
stomach and what hangs to it.
THE WORDS in books are like bluebells don t pick the bloody lot-
Pluck a few, gentle reader and leave the rest to refresh others or
rot. Three bluebells may be as beautiful as a million, and one line
may be a poem, one word a work of art. The painter puts every ounce
1


of his strength into each brushstroke, the poet into every line. Every
fragment is a microcosm, a whole.. So don't read all that follows twice,
reader it'll take you too long. Take any group of words and read it a
score of times. Don't baulk at what you do not understand, what yon
understand you know already.
And give up reading" books. Suspend reading operations in order
to think. Don't let bad literature do your thinking for you. Refuse to
be constipated with words, inflated with wind; excrete and live, exhale
and breathe anew. .. . For you do not need to open bad books the
title is enough. . . . The Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man' 1 Portraits
stink, so do artists, so do young men. l am for ART and not the artist.
I am for what young men do and not young men . Pomes Pennyeach?
Oh VERSITY of varsity, all is virtuosity !
All the scholars can see (dimly) is James Joyce.
But James Joyce isn't in it.
(But there's a Maninit.)
Oh inanity of youngmeninity all is unanimity
All the scholars run to seed (if there's a man in it)
And what have I to do with Joyce
Who said there was an agenbite of in wit in it ?
About as much as 1 have to do with Eliot
Who says there's an infinite.
Or with Henry Miller who says there are
Idee, lust and excrement in it,
Or Lav, 'rence who said there were peaches, a snake and elephants in it.
Stand up all those whose artsouls smart from sitting bull
By Frazer's houghed man fabulous;
Keep out of sight our things obscene
Or Butler will discobulus. . . .
Well I don't talk about agenbites or infinites
Or ancient writs or testicles or humanits
I talk about machinery, and how we can keep man out of it.
OUTSIDE the gates of a beautiful city a tangled mass of human
beings sways from side to side. Their arms are around one another's
necks. It is hard to say from this perspective whether they are
embracing each other in love, or strangling each other in hat e.But it
doesn't matter. The end is the same. Death.
Wnroaching closer dervishes may be seen detatch themselves
•• • »•• J" I' 5 D
from the scrimmage. It is hard to say whether they are reciting at a
beer party, or inciting at a political party but it doesn't matter,the
the adjective is nothing, the substantive is the same. Or if they are
lecturing on philosophy or psychology the end, man, is the the
applause is the same.
2


The referee, or the chairman, is very flustered, but the breakaways
return to their places in the ranks, execute the appropriate figures. The
dancers form two long lines facing one another, which alternately
recede from and approach each other. They form circles, for the Lancers.,
the Cotillion, the Quadrille. The M.C. beams, hum- accompaniment,
beats time with his hands.
(A little to one side a thicket of monstrous trees with long creeper dike
branches weaves and undulates in unison. The trees, too, have their
arms round each other, crests boughed down around each other's boles.
Their roots, like the legs of the dancers, plough I he earth and kick up
in frenzied abandon. The trees here do not elude their fellows in
vertical lines to meet the sun; they grow down into foetid gloom. The
flora here are furtive, the fauna fornicate continually. On the rare
occasions when the "artists" we have left look away from their fellows
it is always in this direction. . . )
A ring is cleared for fun, games. The contests wrestling, etc. —
are easily organised. .But for the races space is constricted. Everyone
is a runner, and the tiny circle means that leaders and tailenders are
mixed up together.. . . The judge frowns, but he metamorphoses with
bewildering speed He now has his benignant smile again but he
has become the conductor of a huge orchestra, with human instrumei ts
(the instruments have their mouths open a little) and now they have
chinged. They are fishes. . .And he has a big net or line in his hand. He
is a fisherman. What is he saying ? Come with me and I will
make you
Fisheks of men ! (parables, sermons, theses, hypotheoses, conjuring
tricks, wrestling matches, speeches, lectures, and poetry of a very
low order ( Order! ) move suspension standing orders. Second !
(seconds out of the ring) Time
time. Men were hauled up in nets, dangled on hooks, baited, bought,
bundled in millions on millions for work, for welfare and for wars.
The last net result of this was the millions menmeshed in Europe
and Asia last year.
This is no reflection on Jesus. When he spoke to his crew of idealists
the human. being was the all-important end. Work was a simple multiple
of the individual human laborers involved. In art, the discobolus or the
venus, figures in human form were the central ideal. And of course
in religion, in Christ's own words, god was the son of 21 AX. But now
the human muscular element in work is negligible, a crane could lift
the stone which took 200 slaves two years. to place. In art, first
landscape aud t hen material structures have displaced the human being


into the background of the picture. And in religion the apotheosis of
humanity is complete. Alan is God. And the psychologists are his priests.
Psychology is the theology of the 20th century. They don't save
souls today, they save minds but they are the same things, myths.
All that we can be concerned with is the machine. (But there's Alan
in it) Yes pull up your filthy nets — you organisers, manahsers,
manpowerers, and see if there's a
MANINIT !
150 years ago the workers decided to take possession of the machines but
it was pointed out, by some particularly perspicacious inbeHigentleman,
there was man behind it. So before we can get at the machine we must
get at the man who controls the machine and before we can get at him
we must get at the man behind him and we can go on like that forever
getting at man for there is man upon mans behind.
(Order [please. Will everyone please keep their seats and let those
behinds be seen. Move, second, we will now call upon Mr ( cheers! )Mr
Cheers will now er give (speech ) on (free speech !)onfree (cheers!)
on Free cheers for Mr hip! Air hippup
But there must be a man in it. The nasty capitalist wants to
mechanise his mine but the comrade says, No, we want a man in it.
When one of those robombs was brought down at Churchill's feet d'you
know what he said ? (No, what did he say ? ) He said what a pity
there's not a Hun I mean a man in it... .
Of course, you can see how ridiculous my position is that w©
will take possession of the machines only by taking possession of the
machines. Obviously the thing to do is take possession of men and
then? Well then, you'll be where you began. (Where) in possession of
Man. Precisely.Perfectly self-possessed. But the boss is not self-posessed
he is perfectly pelf-obsessed. The boss possesses the world.
But isn't man's humanitytoman a manmademandate of man's long
manthropomorphic mystery man? How can man manage machine not
manage meant? ( Stop these nomantic antics, learn semantics. —But
suppose you manachronistic maniacs take a dose of my m anaesthetic.
SEMENTICS ! ( there's semen in it. )
Oh inanity of inanity to inanity
All the rivers run into the sea
Yet man is so dull.
Semen runs into the soil
Seeds into trees
( And trees won't stand still).
All things move into the sun
Bar man who is so small.. ..
4


Men run to men to amend
(I move you second we move mend men meant)
But trees never run into trees
Nor rills into rills.
The little tributaries run into stream®
And the Amazon is swell;
But all the fish aren't in nets
Some men won't COME ! They call for ~
Lectures on the cancelled enragemeant arts music the people (cama,
semenment) But the people won't come.
On the freudian concept of the demonology of the half-conscious in ifs
relation to the spiral reconciliation of triads, theses, thoses in the realist
(or pluralist, plurealist, puerilist) interpretation of mystery
But the people won't come.
Mr Cheers. Practically conscious minority. Vngd.Prlt. Def.Fth.,Doctrd
Divinity M.A.,8.A.,N.E.M.A.,E.5.P.0.A. Eude Sculler,skull dragger,ad
inf. Author: Biographica Litteraria, esoterica erotica Politica Sciatica
graduata scientifica, materialissimuss dialectica socialissimuss. Berlin
But the people won't come.
And one day they 11 call for a war
And the people won't come.
( Wait a minute I'm in it, So'm I I move, second.minutes last meet
Move amendment: move machines (move men meantJOf course. Ahem
if hon member r'members motion matically comes amend men - impro\ e
em, mend em, tend em Move addendum ! Eeferendum. Sorry your move
check, queen pawns bishops castle move menmen hon treas organise
raffle shuffle chess social wrestle tournamendment... AND NOW will
you ALL take your partners for the next dance the
MEDLEY of meddlers with men, second women sickly
manly move womenmeant
Oh this man'll go an kiss that man's arm
That man'll go an kiss thine,
The yother man'll go an kiss the yother man's arm
And the whole flocking lot kiss mine.
vU sV sV v'/ v'/ »'/ *'/ vp v'/ v!«*
/j-. *"1"* N /| >
and now ME ELIOT will perform his famous conjuring trick!
WITEEE WAS I (find the mind
I'm present, I'm absent (little kidding
I'm maybe passed pleasant pasture ( burnt ochre
And rhyme verdure time last ( I'm in it I second
And now you see me and now you don't ( Got away !
a


Beyond the reality the realisation (falls the shadow
Before the shadow the pre-adumbration ( for mine is a
Form without shape core without centre ( brandy, whisky
Mobile but motionless ( and soda, power
Light without dark without illumination ( and glory, turn
Here with thou without then ( over and over
Nuance without nous ( again
Between the actual ( what might of was n isn't
And the potential ( might 'f didnt (little bidding
Betwixt the notion and the idea and the form and the reality and
the time an the emotion
(LOOK ! There it is underlying (lying under
round and round wheels in wheels and words WITHOUT MEANING
( your turn
Slime past slime present
I'm perhaps present in time hereafter ( do you
believe in the hereafter? —Yes Well I'm here after a f —k.
Whatahout it ?
Oh! I'm here was there and hereinafter why here I am sir!
What meaning is there in this slime pleasant!
There is no meaning ! Eliot is petty bourgeois, decad- ( Who are you?
1 am a modern young man, once as unenlightened as you. Now 1 have
seen the light.
(Lady Light, vice pres. Hswvs. Assn., sec. whrf. iabre.
w'mns. auxiliary, Eedn. mhr. cnt. cmtee. Cmanenlist Pty., Aust., I Move
broth, come, bubble loud give his testimony bother of all. moved sickle
noted dated, voted, rated. Favour say I. I've had it. So've I. Buck fir'w'd
do you mind if I sing it...1 have had my voice trained and lam
something of a poet (we know what part) not at all
The Modern Young Mans Song ( sweet tame an softly
1 put in two weeks solid thinking fore I came along
(It didn't take me long
But then I am so modern. You see I have been to the university read
everything, but understood nothing till I struck dialectics
Oh friends ! You will never believe what weight was lifted from my
bourgeois mind ( which was not strong)
When I joined the church whose sacred names preclude all thinking
(Which they say is wrong)
(Sweet Lady Light runs softly dancing round and round him while-
he ends his song....


SUDDENLY angry voices ascend, curve, concentring down on the
thickest part of the throng. [we must get at the man behind all
this j Who is it ? Dishevelled, disreputable a bagman probably
[quite obviously he knows nothing] What an open mini for any old
idea made new ! Ignorant, illiterate a bcu Cdering object. Will they
put him to death? yes. a living death. He will be stupefied by education
He scatters them like pygmies
I AM BIG BARRETT. THE MAN WHO USED TELEGRAPH
POLES FOR TOOTH-PICKS, WHO WALKED INTO THE
BI LLIARD ROOM AT MOREE AND ATE THE SNOOKER BALLS
IN MISTAKE FOR HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS , WHO
WHEELED HIS SWAG FROM BOURKE TO WILCANNIA IN A
WHEELBARROW, BAREFOOT, AND JUMPED THE NAMOI
RIVER WITH A TWO FURROW PLOUGH IN EACH HAND FOR
WEIGHTS Get him
This Way for the MANHUNT!
(There's a plumber. What is there sweet or clean in that man twisting
bits of tin.
He oughtta be a politician (every cook a politician
He oughtta be a politician and muck about with Men
Give him a ballot paper, newspaper, a rifle, a Mission !
Give him a commission to manhandle men.
This Way for the WRESTLING MATCH Ino holds barred, "or
the Muddlewit Championship of the WOBD 1 I'll move. Second
( seconds out of the ring) TIME
Intelligentlemen of the J awry ! This is the apathetic abject
object, lowgrade ingrate for whom we made great wars Are you in
a party? NO. Don't you think you think you ought to join one and
reform yourself and society...Hopeless. Next witness. Are you normal?
schizophrenic, manic, paranoiac? You don't like Freud. Ah a Catholic
moralist. Don't hide your phallus from me should be proud. Don!
you know the symbolic crux is a cross between Frazer's acrostic crutch
and the crusader's crucifix where the sacrd hull forsook the golden
cow and the rosicrucian cat crept into the crypt, crapt and crept out
again and What/lo you mean defiling the mysteries of the esoteric
erotic craste. Silence when you speak to a lecherer ! Have you anything
to say before sense and breath is blasted fromvou? NOTHING.
Mr Barrett, you have forgotten your humanity. You have turned youi"
back on the past. lam disposed to be lenient. I think you can he
humanised again, liberalised, hellenised. If you survive these youwillfcs
psycho-analysed, surrealised, and then personalised. We will start wR
your beautiful bare body and the ancient Greeks....Bernard ! 1B A
Butler there call him Coming ! ( Take off his clothes )


OH GOD, OH MONTREAL
( recitative. Butler strikes a pose, his left hand 011 his loins, his
right hand on his left)
In a musty mausoleum Samuel Butler stands with his back to the
world.
Beauty cries in every beat of the commerce of the nineteenth
century,
Beauty, which is strength which is science which is truth which is
food for the body and the mind (which is everything but the
body and the mind )
Yea, the despised of Manchester, of Clyde, of the Midlands
cry out unto him
In road and train and bridge and Faraday and a million songs of
light
From both continents in mighty art beauty crieth across the wide
Atlantic
But no man heareth. Mr Butler regardeth
Mr Spuigeon and his brother in law, parts of the clad bourgeoisie who
build Boats, Neons, Nylons, Plastics, Televised fantasias Planes
to ascend as meteoric rays at war with space, but
Mr Butler focusseth on: one penis, two testicles, one torso , teats,
biceps, on a dead embodiment of Hitler Youth who wears no
pants and has excellent bowels
Mr Butler w 7 ears clothes of w r hich he is ashamed, and is really with
the apes, seals, fish, elephants and lice which DON'T wear pants
or trowsers. . . but w r e
Mr Spurgeon and me. and anyone who refines the crude contours of
the carcase by wearing clothes woven in the most entrancing
tweeds, velvets, silks, rayons of twentieth century art desp'se
Mr Butler this self-conscious nostalgic snob whose greasy hobby
was raking the dust of contempt the living leave over the
dead, to re-disinterr the vile odours of Greece
Mr Butler, who would be forgotten, done, if he had not been exhumed
by the backters in the reaction of two worldwars,fasc:sm,freudian
-ism, basic english, Bernard Shaw and bunk, James Joyce,
gentle Jesus, jehovah joe's wutless nits and junk
111 tell you: Let t T e Elgin marbles and Elgar music, the inelegant
Goghs and etiolated Goyas, the discobolos and the Grecian vases
and Rousseau Picasso rot in the dust and stench of the unvenfc
-dated museums
While we build ART !
6"


FRIENDS , COMRADES, LOVERS ! Let us leave these maulers of
humanity 1 o their artistic, poetical, political slawm. While Butler
wOl ships the beauty of his genital organs in a niche of the wall
(wheic no man legardeth) while Eliot introspects from poetry to
i eligion to culture to time and back to poetry again in one obscene
circle of vile slush (slime past, slime pleasant) while the low.
unimaginative fourth internationalists propose to re-enact the whole
foul faice again ( with atom bombs? ) while the anarchic individualisers
atomise society into free, fat, inflated conscientious ohieetors to war.
wealth and wit, While the apocalvptics proclaim for the ten
thousandth time. (Are you a person ? ) While the historians
prosecute their minute microscopic subdivisions, chattel,feudal,capital,
comical man ( dead with yester-day's ten thousand years ) There are
t n o stages ot history human, and sublime, What is, what is to be.
With one sweep I consign all pasts to muck and misery. Whatever is
is a movement. Man is a movement to something other than man
There are men, Poets, Miltons, seeking pastures NE IF,Pastures of
steel concrete, electronics Men, forging extrahuman relations with
the WORLD outside. Regardless of their selves ( "Can a tool criticise
its ovn fitness ? ) regardless of others ( ever regardful of others" )
not loving their fellow MEN("for each man kills the thing he loves")
Loving material things ( " Glory to Man in the highest for he is the
mastei of Things There is no worthwhile line in logic, in poetiy.
which used to be logic ,in art, in anything today , which does not
pioclaim the eteinal dichotomy! Man and LII/A(fS ! but this is prose
Oh politely of poetries here are my professies;
The psychologist runs into the poet, the poet into the politician,
I he man to the sere and the seed is so 5ma11....
It is impossible to govern man without studying him
And it is impossible to study man without governing him
There's nothing new under the sun,
But the World teams with suns and
Space is not full
" ( Wait a minute! (Second.)
it has been moved ( seconded ) we are sickened ( moved sickeneded )
of the first worst second and third ( turned inter national) jeers/
I say if we can when the world is where well we can find monev for
Peace! (dense cheers ) Everyone home is own, Subvert six Liberty
Lone ! Five days one week, five elevens are fiftyfive. Five twelves are
y


Sixty ! ( Hooray !) On to the Fifth International! They're OFF!
starters and riders acceptances Mr Cheers got off to a good start closely
followedbyYoungMan on the rails then comingLadySweetEcclesiastesT
S.EliotandSamuelßutler comingup fast on the outside at the firstfurlong
Mr Cheers wasleaving a length in Lady Light alength further back James
Joyce was pulling away from Samuelßutler with the M.C.MrEliot and
the Duke of York last passing the halfmilepost yesitsßigßarrett leading
by fivelengths fromM.C.and lookslike Butler closely followed by Lady
Sweet with Agenbite, Discobolos, Bull, Standing Orders a few lengths
back at the fiye furlong Coming is leaving the field and Going is left
leading Blockbuster and Homburg are now right out of the picture - but
Moving up smartly on the outside is Atom, Leon and Lady Light with
Butler Eliot Mr-Cheers and Big Barrett last. Cominto the straight ! the
leaders are racing neck and neck ! and it's anyone's race / and you're
ALL in it where one man adresses, redresses, dresses, undresses
another it's circles,wheels,balls,spheres, closed systems with first sickle
move third amend fourth'interhumanational fifth atom it's six seventh
heavens it's Joyce no Thomas Aquinas Dylan Ogden Miller Richards
Yutang bar Confuseus '
Oh interminable manity , all is inter hum inanity .
Oh manity of me nit y ( too many eminent 'll feminine men in it. Amen.
Ah men,amenities,all is magnanimity.(round an round in pleasant slime
and sweet discovery loverydovery up abovery( and always a plan in it)
Oh mugmaninity of man there's always a mug man in it.
]\To MATTER how angry we may become we must always remember
that there is one side to every question the outside.Gods are inside.
God is within you but the Kingdom of god is without you.Man is God.
Comte apotheosised; T hypotheosise : Gods are beyond study and therefore
beneath contempt. To the scientist and to the,artist only the world visible
exists.Man is one,indivisible,and fast becoming invisible.This is the new
theology atheology.The religion of god - which is to get aw T ay from god.
God does not study himself —he is himself.He creates,he rules. We must
rule,not man,but man's Kingdom: machines,architecture,the w T orld out-
side. This is the new politicsiplastios,technics, power over things. Not the
rule of one ma: over man,monarchy,nor of no man over man, anarchy,
but the rule of all men over matter , Manarchy! And this is the new
aesthetics, Manaesthetics. The anaesthesia,of self-forgetfulness, forget-
fulness of man, the unself c onsciousness which lies at the sourc.e of
all creativity. The river must forget its source to reach the Sea Art
may begin in man but it doesn't end in man. It ends in Matter. The
subject matter of the artist is the matter we must subject. This is great
art, the art of gods, of rulers. This is the DICTATORSHIP OF ART.


O. M. SOMERVILLE
The death of Oliver Someiville in June last year took from
our ranks a libertarian and a poet of considerable promise. This faint
praise does not mean he lagged behind with the thousand wasters of
paper who claim to be poets. In some respects Somerville went further
than any poet has gone in Australia, or in the world. It should not be
necessary to add that he did not have to go very far: modern poetry is
at a very low ebb.
Somerville was a member of that Sydney group which included
A. D. Hope, James McAuley, Harold Stewart unquestionably the
three best poets of our generation. Their work may be summed up
roughly as realistic, classical, intellectual, in contradistinction to the
surreal, romantic, religious, and of course utterly worthless poetry
which was issuing from Adelaide, Melbourne, at the time during
the war years. It ranged from the perfect satire of Hope ( much of
which was published in this magazine ) to the joint masterpiece of
McAuley-Stewart, 'Ern Malley.' I should in fairness say that they did
not compose a school they were and are independent voices. It is
only in their accidental concurrence in Sydney, in their common
social-critical view r s, derived perhaps from the Andersonian ferment at
the University, and in their real worth that they may be grouped to-
gether. Also they would probably disclaim the importance of their social
satire; but it is this, incidental as it may be to the main body of their
work, which provides the link with Somerville, who was predominantly
a poet of social criticism.
This common feature of the work of these four men may be
best summarised in Mc Auley's excellent
BALLADE OF LOST PHRASES
In what museum now abide
The pamphlets that we read of yore:
Where are the orators who cried
We will not fight a bosses' war,
The system's not worth fighting for,
To Hell with Jingo profiteer,
The Empire's rotten to the core,
—Where are the phrases of yesteryear?
No longer can it be denied,
The Left Book Club's become a bore:
We're social patriots double-dyed,
And social fascists too, what's more,


We tolerate Sir Samuel Hoare!
Churchill now delights the ear,
And Beaverbrook is to the fore
—Where are the phrases of yesteryear?
The Party Line from side to side
Zig-zagged till our eyes were sore
Can it be the Marxists lied ?
Peace to the shades of Imprecorr !
The left wing's moulting on our shore :
It will not fly again, I Par.
Freedom has become a whore.
—Where are the phrases of yesteryear ?
ENVOI
Comrades , we argued, fought and swore :
We might as well have stuck to beer.
The Japanese are in Johore
-—Where are the phrases of yesteryear?
Of course many critics of Stalinism could have originated
similar sentiments but it is not merely an attack on the comical
party, it is a reaffirmation of clarity, of technique in verse construction
Oliver specialised in the ballade form but nowhere does he equal this
specimen of Mc Auley .
Social criticism was incidental to these poets , but it was
everything to Oliver . His work as poetry suffers from the sacrifice of
technique to his fervour as propagandist; although as his Ballade of
Modern Painters shows he could write much better . He was trying to
say something and his form suffered. But it is precisely here that he
surpassed his associates. For the Hope - McAuley - Stewart triangle
could not get past the negative critical attitude. They could not reach
the positive position of anarchism attained by Somerville . This, since
they did not lay so much store on social theory, need not worry them
in the least they were after poetic expression. But they did not
advance their aesthetic theories either , past a mere classical revival
against romanticism . They were in the toils of the age-old polarity of
the art schools . . . Oliver , after his stay in Ingleburn military camp,
takes a much broader view of the question he comes to doubt " the
civilised validity of art . " All art. After Tolstoy,after Gill, after every
serious thinker on the subject, Somerville calls the whole subject itself
and not one of its myriad schools into question «
Oliver , excitable , over sensitive, was very unhappy . His un -
fortunate inability to solve many personal emotional problems , which


accounts for a constriction and despair in many of his poems, made
the impact of war more shattering on him . But this was the source
of his strength, or of his potential strength as a poet. For Oliver was
struggling with something more important than his contemporaries. B.e
was struggling for something beyond, I am not idealising, heroicising.
ihe legend of him as superficial caf o wit is onesided: his poems slightly
more chaotic than those of the others clumsier, more intensely personal,
petulant, petty even are yet potentially greater.
After graduating from the university he immediately set about
graduating from academic prejudice. Most university men stop with
their degree. Oliver was not satisfied, until he had invalidated Bohemia
the sacred intellectuals, his own snobbery. He fought to attain the
comparative objectivity of the ordinary proletarian. And from the dusty
oiscurity of Hay he gives usln Australia Infelix, in which he gives the
credit to tlie ordinary untutored men and women.*
... rut common humanity, the world and his wife
g:°ss with sublime contempt all I could say."
It takes a lot to dump one's own pretensions. And Oliver had a lot he
could say.
. Somerville was big, big with our common destiny, possibly at
precisely those points where his poetry seems to evaporate. In these
apparent lapses it is interesting to compare him with Garry Lyle. Lvle
is a better poet, a lyricist as well as satirist, a surer, more authentic
writer but he also is at times an " ordinary man's poet. " tie may
appear to fail, m his warm democratic sentiment, just where he rises
to the occasion He does not fall so heavily I think. Their work however
is not comparable, But m one respect they are identical. They both look
our ot academic comfort to something more disturbing, more fundam-
ental and powerful. Some of this they find in the people. This need led
bcmerville to anarchism.
•TT I °V LY , t,hmg that has happened to poetry in this century
is He: beit Bead s statement: The poet is an anarchist. With this we
can leave discussions of spondees and pentameters to those who are
weak m the head, and discuss the intellectual determinants of poetry
What is anarchism? "
. Anarchism is a system of society wherein no man rules another
It is not a system with no rule. That w«*ld not be a system at all. The
iules m anarchism are applied to inanimate, mechanical obiects —to
things, as m the classic forecast: " There will come a time when the
government of Men will be replaced by the administration of Things "


This, though no-one seems to have the vaguest idea of it, implies that
we must cease worrying about man, and take an interest in things.
But the anarchists cannot further this end." They do not
understand anarchism,any more than the marxists understand marxism
or the christians Christianity. They hate things. They hate the most
important things of all, machines. They pine for " natural "man. These
" green aesthetes ", in Hope's apt phrase, are insulated from everything
which is vital, significant, in the 20th century world. I cannot resist
quoting Hope on these well-meaning people
" ...whenever the green aesthete starts to whoop
with horror at the house not made with hands
and w T hen from vacuum cleaners and tinned soup
another pure theosophist demands
rebirth in other, less industrial stars
where huge towns thrust up in synthetic stone
and films, and sleek miraculous motor cars
and celluloid and rubber are unknovm,
when from his vegetable Sunday School
emerges with the neatly maudlin phrase
still one more nature poet, to rant and drool
about the "Standardisation of the Race"
I see, stooping among her orchard trees
the old, sound, Earth, gathering her windfalls in,
broad in the hams and stiffening at the knees
pause, and I see her grave, malicious grin.
For there is no manufacturer competes
with her in the mass production of shapes and things
Over and over she gathers and repeats
the cast of a face, a million butterfly w T ing's.
" Exception can be made of the more syndicalist section,
of the x\narchist Federation, publishers of Direct Action, who are
oriented to mechanised industry. It is only the arty followers of Her-
bert Bead who obstruct real anarchist action, thought, and of course
art. In the ten years since Bead's "conversion" to anarchism a host
of worthless periodicals have arrived. The titles are more than enough
Circles, Windmills there's a lot of wind in them and movement,
but rotatory mcvament there is no advance forward. The hub of
this is, or was, the Now", arrested in an eternal present.
Here you can read little poems for x\pril or appeals for New Life to the
Land. etc.


She does not tire of the pattern of a rose
her oldest tricks still catch us with surprise.
She cannot recall how long ago she chose
the streamlined hulls of fish, the snail's long eyes.
It is of course too much to expect that the modern poet will
recognise himself above. He does not write about dickybirds, moonshine
and flowers —he is through with nature. That's what he thinks. He
is merely for another brand of nature, human nature. And this is inf-
initely worse. The continuity stressed in Hope's poem is only the start.
Over the unity of phenomena we are obliged to make a duality and to
take sides. Wilde's antithesis was art versus nature, including human
nature, This is the position of the artist. It was also Somerville's,or at
least the direction indicated in his poems. In one place he saysf
"Princess, the novels that you write
of souls and sex lack all relation
to art; we brand them, you despite,
the fruits of mental masturbation"
This is applicable, not only to the effeminate fiction so popular today,
but to all the soul- searching of this century, from psychoanalysis to
existentialism it bears no relation to art.
Somerville was an uneasy anarchist. He did not think the
Prudhon-Bakhunin-Kropotkin jargon a much better substitute for orig-
nal thought than the Marx-Engels-Lenin steamroller. He knew that
to really understand a position is to extend it. He did not reach the con
-cept of a purely technical society, of the artist ruling things, but he
was close to its indispensible condition: he was about through with the
maulers of men in his own words, with those who
" make other men their lewd laboratories' 3
Had he lived he would have repudiated humanism. Anyway the problems
set for him are our problems, and we shan't solve them without that
repudiation.
Somerville's work, slight as it may be, is an inseparable part
of the fight of poetry in this country and in the world. In this rough
valuation it is quite likely some injustice has been done, to Oliver, and
to the others mentioned. ( None has been done other poets in Australia,
who with very few exceptions are not worth any mention.) But I have
been conerned mainly with what furthers my own views. Indeed it is
only this which made the article possible.
This has been difficult to write. Obituaries, tributes, are the
work of hacks, literary undertakers. Art can have no time for this sort
of sentiment. But a mere notice of his death, since he first bought ( with


John Sillett) this printing press to be devoted at any time, without
payment, to any libertarian artistic venture and since he was our
friend, would have been rude. He has left a gap which it will be impos-
sible to fi11... But I think the memorial he would have liked, if he'd
expected one, (for he made no claim to greatness for his poems ) would be
continuation of fight. This first assessment is part of it. There is more
to do. A fuller critical study of the above poet grouping is needed,
study of their background, of the whole intellectual movement in Syd-
ney and Australia in the war years. We need a good theoretical maga-
zine. One in which poetry can be reinstated as the greatest force 011
earth. .
Somerville was in the middle of writing his copy for No 3 at
the time of his death. Bather than print unfinished fragments, or what
appear to me unrevised drafts, I have printed some earlier works. The
first, Ballade of Modern Painters for instance, dates back to 1940.
Picasso doesn't think at all now — he has joined the Communist Party.
But then he never did think :he was always a politician really. All
artists, despite their protests, are politicians. Art, like is politics
by other means. ... How great it will be when it has other ends.
Harry Hooton


BALLADE OF MODERN PAINTERS
The educated mob exudes
its unepateable caprice;
the avant-garde its tongue protrudes
in agonies of mock release;
orders for cubist works increase,
red artists fade to paler pinks,
art s Jasons find their golden fleece,
I wonder what Picasso thinks.
Modigliani's daring nudes
that shattered our neurotic peace
now publicise the patent foods
that mark us off from ancient Greece;
Manet no more suggests police,
Epstein adorns our skating-rinks;
Derain is growing more obese;
1 wonder what Picasso thinks.
But I, abhorring prigs aud prudes
alike, to pack in mind's valise
a cold perception which excludes
the biasses which never cease,
although I've learned to play with ease
the psycho-analytic lynx,
before each frenzied masterpiece
I wonder what Picasso thinks.
ENVOY
Prince, we have understood Matisse:
your likeness done by Sargent stinks.
High art is quacked by human geese;
I wonder what Picasso thinks.


REGRESSIONS
(1)
The shutters which my heart,
that potent, furious engine, wrought to blind
the windows fashioned by its opponent mind,
before the insidious onrush of the day
stand wide agape, nor is there aught that may
the shadows to my shadow-loves restore.
(2)
Last of the high ethereal race who ruled
their span within these cranial palaces
and made Avilions of the gaudy slums
and orchestras transmute from bang of drums,
back through chaotic mirk of alleyways
and halls down which the tattered tapestries
still sway and shiver in the wind, I come,
to reinstate that blazing tenantry
whose spiderspun investiture remains
AFTER INGLEBURN
To satirise the educated mob
sounds an attractive dilettante job,
were not these unfanatical ballades
so soon perceived elaborate facades
for wormy mansions of the child in pain,
pent in the amber of an adult brain.
No aureole suffuses coffee-lounging
starving in high Bohemia, drinking, scrounging,
when one has come to doubt oh deepest smart!
the civilised validity of art.


ENCAMPED
Here in this womb of crime
a nation's Fagins teach each crafty fetch;
no pacifism prates of a Jack Ketch
in Damoclean time
to bring these brides of Bridewell to their drop.
Has hell however hallowed yet its stop?
Or must the old men still instruct their gang
immune from myrmidons of Mr. Fang?
Here, where most men are Sikes,
perverted practitioner of cracks not strikes,
I, in my secret fancy,
am Sikes' Nancy,
and look to expiate
his muddled pent-up hate.
Randwick Military Camp, 1943.
IN AUSTRALIA INFELIX
Australia, I have heard men puffing you
from puling platforms and poetic stumps,
this one exclaiming, "We shall have no more slumps
the other damning Japanese or Jew,
forging our national character anew,
feelirg his own head for the abo's bumps,
mouthing of nature's nurture of the rumps
of dead sheep dust-bowled over. I could spew
gobbets like these of undigested life,
swop washing with soft soapers, and betray
full ignorance of intra-social strife
\
(or knowledge that such knowledge doesn't pay )
but common humanity, the world and his wife
gloss with sublime contempt all I could say.


BALLADE OF THE GREAT POST-WAR
On fallen tyranny's delight
the tyrant victors smugly sate
the maws of lurid appetite;
atrocitarians orate;
hillbillies echo hymns of hate:
punctilious propagandists laud
the methods we decried of late,
the morals of the naked sword
The headsman's head will fall tonight
to sanctify our superstate;
on ruins of the Axis Right
our Rightist Left consolidate;
our murderers adjudicate
the murders of that alien horde
whose sin of failure seals their fate,
not morals of the naked sword!
The Empire umpires its own fight
with men who knew it vain to wait
for guarantees of some respite
from empire to eventuate;
our gallant dead we dedicate
to freedom for the squalid fraud
our hypocrites perpetuate
with morals of the naked sword,
ENVOY (to the Indonesians and others )
Victims, our victory won't abate
victimization we deplored
but practised; nor eradicate
pur morals of the naked sword.


Printed by H. Hooton, 37 Rose Street, Sydner
v * •'


A J?-
lit . . '
' • ■-'/ I'll
* • ■ ..
' ' ? I" 1
-
,» '. M
Q
y 1 ii ■ ■ I
I
