

r / e/y




scdf sy{%
\ an
Unfashionable Holiday
OLD SCENES REVISITED
OLD MEMORIES REVIVED.
WITH SOME REMARKS ON THE
Coasting and Fishing Industries
By W. H. BUNDEY.
ildtfatfee:
Printed by Vardon and Pritchard, Gresham Street.
1899.


DEDICATED
TO THOSE
u Who never see the ocean, but that they feel its hand
Clutch like a siren at the heart, to drag it from the land.”
—Day.


PREFACE.
The cruise described in the following pages was undertaken
during the course of an enforced rest—not a voluntary holiday.
A sudden and severe breakdown in health compelled a cessation
from duty for a time.
Although an extremely boisterous trip, it was perhaps in itself
too uneventful to be worth recording; but it occurred to me that
by adding some account of previous experiences in coasting craft,
and some remarks on the coasting and fishing ihdustries,
sufficiently interesting matter might be found to warrant its
publication.
Twelve years ago “Yachting in Australia” was penned with
the object of endeavoring to inculcate feelings of goodwill towards
the followers of that healthy and manly pastime. This effort is
to pay a sincere tribute of respect to the masters and crews of
the useful, if less ornamental, vessels composing our coastal and
fishing fleets.




INTRODUCTION.
Towards the end of the winter of 1899 it became advisable for
me to seek a complete change in order, if possible, to gain
further strength. My medical man recommended a voyage, and
numerous friends advised a long one, either to England or to some
interesting foreign country. The thought of going on board one
•of the floating towns, such as the steamers that trade to Aus-
tralia now are, was distasteful to me for many reasons. I did
not feel well enough to be sure I could share in the necessary
social amenities on boai’d. To many these are a burden even
when in good health, but to a sick man they are sometimes
intolerable, and unless able to follow the fashion adopted on
board one necessarily becomes isolated. I am not carping at
such amenities, they are probably necessary and assist to while
away the tedium of a voyage. Nevertheless, to one desirous of
being freed from them as much as possible they do not conduce to
ease or comfort. To men in robust health, who can see what is to
be seen, there is, of course, no holiday equal to a visit to the
Motherland and the Continent, but without the necessary
strength sight-seeing is a wearisome ordeal. Looking, therefore,
at the question from all standpoints I determined to again try
the charm of the sea nearer home. With this view I chartered
the ketch “ Bronzewing,” John Blanch, master, for a cruise of
some weeks duration. The “ Bronzewing ”is one of the finest
ketches that sails out of Port Adelaide, and I have known her
master for upwards of thirty years—to know him is to respect
him. The master and his vessel are aptly described by slightly
altering and adapting a few words in the chorus of H.M.S.
u Pinafore”:—
He sails the ocean blue,
And his saucy ship’s a beauty
He’s a sober man and true,
And attentive to his duty.


I could without an approach to flattery say much more in favor
of the kind-hearted skipper, but he is of a modest and retiring
nature, and feel I shall best consult his feelings by refraining.
The “ Bronzewing” is about 80 feet long by a beam of 22 feet,
and a draught when full of cargo of upwards of 8 feet—a con-
siderable draught for a ketch. She carries about 130 tons. Her
cargo boat carries over four tons, and this boat is exceedingly
convenient in any land-locked harbor, as she is roomy, fast under
canvas, and very comfortable, admirably suited for fishing, or to
land on any desirable spot, without the necessity of getting the
larger vessel under way. In addition to this fine boat, a handy,
buoyant, little dinghy is on board. The length and beam of the
larger ketches enables one to get plenty of exercise on deck. It
is a great assistance to health when this is obtainable. The
“Bronzewing” has a two-berth cabin, and I occupied one of these,
and a friend that accompanied me for the first fortnight the other,
the captain sleeping on a sofa placed athwartships until the second
berth was available. The cabins on board these coasters, where
cargo-room is so important, are necessarily confined in space-
It was too cold to attempt to occupy the spacious hold. Seven
years ago I chartered the same craft, and took several young
fellows away for a month’s enjoyment. Then the hold was admir-
ably fitted up by the master, and each man had a comfortable
berth ; but it was in the middle of summer. In this way young
men combining together to obtain a healthy outing could utilise
a ketch.
Despite the limited room in the cabin, I never was in one
where the motion of the vessel, or the roar of wind and waves,
was less felt and heard. These beamy craft never heel to the
extent of the deeper and narrower yachts —indeed, they could
not do so without the danger of “ turning turtle.” The conse-
quence is that with the wind a few points free, or aft, they are
wonderfully steady, and make excellent headway, but when they
come to haul on the wind in a rough sea, they strike heavily, ar e
not fast, are much affected by tides, and consequently liable to
make considerable leeway—that is as compared with yachts.


Extremely comfortable—more so than yachts—on all other points,
they are not so comfortable in a dead beat to windward in a
nasty sea. Personally I have never yet been on board any
vessel, sailing or steamer, that is what may be called “comfort-
able” under such circumstances. Take them all round, however,
these coasting vessels have done, and are doing, splendid work
for the colony. I shall have some further remarks to make
respecting them later on.
Having now given a description of our floating home, it only
remains for me to say that we had an excellent crew, every one
of whom tried to make things go as pleasantly as possible
throughout the stormy period we were shipmates. Not a sour
look or a cross word did I witness or hear, notwithstanding all
the extra trouble entailed by gear and sails carrying away, tkc.
It is easy enough to be cheerful and willing in fine weather, but
when day after day gales succeed gales, with almost incessant
showers of rain and intense cold, it is a very different matter. I
am very grateful for all the kindness experienced from the
w'orthy captain and his crew. May good luck attend them all on
life’s voyage!


THE CETJISE.
CHAPTER I.
<> / #
And I have loved ; and my joy
Of youthful sports,was on thy breast to be
Borne like thy bubbles, onward : from a boy
I wanton’d with thy breakers ; they to me
Were a delight. — Byron .
On Saturday, the 2nd September, 1899, I boarded the
u Bronzewing ”at her moorings in the Port Adelaide River. I
was glad enough to find myself on her spacious deck with the
consciousness that at last I could reasonably hope for complete
rest, any amount of fresh air, and a never-ending interest in the
handling of the vessel and the visiting of old familiar scenes.
The ketch was all but ready for sea, and looking her best with
new paint and cleanliness. The cabin was as sweet and fresh as
the deck above. The Captain had everything arranged for our
comfort, and as these vessels are sometimes known to have some
objectionable little insects that make themselves lively at night,
I may here mention that during the whole cruise I never saw or
felt one —nor did I notice the odour of bilge water. To the
initiated these facts speak volumes as to the care that has been
taken of the vessel’s cleanliness. Lying in close proximity to the
“Bronzewing” was the “ Storrabird,” George Simmonds, master
the same George Simmonds who many years ago assisted to
teach me how to handle a yacht properly, and although, like the
celebrated Jno. Anderson, he now exhibits a “frosty prow,” he
is, nevertheless, still an active and energetic mariner, and his
vessel is, I imagine, the most yacht-like coaster sailing out of
Port Adelaide. I have never heard of her being beaten in any
of the interesting ketch races that have taken place in our Gulf.
Simmonds came on board to see me, and we expected to meet
again at Port Lincoln, but the bad weather upset our
calculations. Several friends, amongst others a very old and
valued one at the Port, came to say good-bye and wish me


a pleasant and health-giving cruise, and at 4 o’clock in the
afternoon a steam launch took us in tow and cast us off abreast
of the false arm. It was such a hot, calm afternoon that it took
some four hours to get from there to the Quarantine Station, at
which we anchored for the night, my friend and guest (Mr. W.
G. Randall) joining us after we were at anchor. The next
morning we got under way early and ran out of the river with a
strong ebb tide and a light N.E. wind, which freshened at first
and then fell away altogether at mid-day. Later on it came in
lightly from the S.E., enabling us to reach and anchor in Sultana
Bay to the south of Edithburg, Yorke’s Peninsula, about 45 miles
from our starting point. On passing the Largs and Semaphore
Signalling Stations we hoisted the signal “ Good-bye,” but no one
took the slightest notice. As a matter of fact, I believe it was
not seen, as I am confident my very old friend and frequent ship-
mate, Mr. Skipper, would have reciprocated the intended
courtesy, but I am almost sure he was away to the westward in
a launch boarding a vessel. As the wind was dead ahead and
the glass falling, we remained at anchor in Sultana Bay all the
following day, and took the opportunity of getting averything
ship-shape above and below for our future comfort. This bay
forms a good anchorage for every wind from N.W. to S.E., and
there is an inside channel for light draught craft by which a
long beat around and outside of Troubridge Island is avoided.
Fishing cutters from the Straits avail themselves of this channel
when bringing their catches to Edithburg to send over to the
Adelaide market, per the steamer “ Warooka.”
Early on the morning of Tuesday, the sth September, we up
anchor and started for Point Marsden, Kangaroo Island, the wind
being S. W. and ahead for Port Lincoln. During the early part of
the day it was light and uncertain, but towards the afternoon it
freshened, and the high, bold, sugar-loafed top of Point Marsden
soon began to open up ; and at 6 p.m. the Captain ordered the
anchor to be let go in a beautiful spot well up under its lee, in
perfectly smooth water, From this anchorage, Queenscliffe—or
rather the northern side of the hill on which Queenscliffe is
situated—is in full view. The long shallow sandspit that pro
tects Queenscliffe from the' N.E. and East also protects the
anchorage under Point Marsden from the S.W. and South.


When it begins to blow from any point East of South round to
North of Nor’-West, it is advisable to get away to Queenscliffe,
which is thoroughly protected from all quarters where bad
weather is usually looked for ; but it is not a nice place with a
black S.-Easter. I remember once riding out there one of these
gales in my old pet the “ Wanderer,” and although we reefed the
bowsprit, she was gaily dipping it under continually. There was
no such thing as landing in a boat, or a boat coming off. A very
interesting cricket match between an Australian Eleven then in
England and an eleven of All England had been played, and my
guests and myself were anxious to know the result. I said I
thought I could gain the information for them, as I had heard
that the telegraph-master was an expert signalman, and pleased
at any chance of showing his skill. The code flags were soon
obtained, the enquiry hoisted, and most courteously responded
to. We thought ourselves somewhat smart signalmen on board,
but our telegraph-master quite equalled, if not surpassed, us. We
obtained the respective totals of each team, and the individual
scores as well. It was one of the most pleasing events of an
interesting yachting cruise.
On Wednesday, the 6th September, we started from Point
Marsden for Port Lincoln at 3.30 a.m., with a very light easterly
wind. As soon as we got fairly into the Straits we found a heavy
head swell, against which the vessel made slow progress, and it
was not until 10 p.m. that we were past the Althorpes—(the
grand sentinel rocks at the western entrance of Investigators
Straits, arid the place of all places upon which to have erected a
o-ood lighthouse). When a light is placed upon the Neptunes, it
must be a very careless or incompetent mariner that comes to
grief in any weather. The rays from the two lights—the one
upon Cape Borda, and the one at the Althorpes—are shown
upon a chart I possess as overlapping each other. If this is
correct in all weathers, a man picking up either light ought to
make no mistake. I believe many masters keep too far to the
Southward now in order to avoid the dangerous Neptunes. I
have heard of a foreign shipmaster lately passing these Islands
in a dirty night under a press of canvas without realising his
danger until it was passed. Had his,vessel struck either of them,
probably not a soul would have been left to tell the tale. If a


good light is placed upon them, such a catastrophe will in the
near future be practically impossible. I have said we passed the
Althorpes about 10 p.m. By this time I had turned in, but
noticed that the glass was falling rapidly, and that dark heavy
banks of clouds were hanging ominously about to the N. and N.-
West. It had been extremely close and sultry all day, and I
should not have been surprised to have seen a good deal of elec-
tricity about. We had got well round Cape Spencer, when about
2 a.m. on Thursday the weather suddenly changed and blew in
terrific squalls from the N.W. We soon had two reefs in main
and mizen sails, and with a reefed jib and staysail we held on for
a while against a rising and nasty head sea and a heavy swell.
The sea and swell together made the vessel labor heavily. The
wind soon increased to a JST.W. gale, dead ahead for Port
Lincoln; and as plunging into a heavy head sea for several days
together when travelling for health would be folly, the captain
resolved to up helm and run back to Point Marsden. It was
very disappointing to us all, but it could not be helped. As soon
as the vessel was before the wind, she made fine weather of it.
At daybreak it looked ugly and threatening, but cleared some-
what as the day wore on; but the signs continued so ominous
that we determined on seeking shelter at Queenscliffe instead of
at Point Marsden. We arrived there the same evening, every
man on board tired with the buffetting we had gone through, and
glad enough to obtain a good night’s rest in this safe harbor. I
suppose we ran about 150 miles on the outward and return
passage. This unsuccessful attempt lessened Mr. Randall’s
chance of going to Port Lincoln with me, as the time left at his
disposal was so limited. It shows the folly when out for such a
cruise to fix definitely upon a distant spot, and determine on
reaching that, and no other. Many a pleasant outing is so
spoiled. At the time of the year we were out it is never a certain
thing that a Western port can be reached without a long and
wearisome beat to windward against high seas and strong
breezes.


CHAPTER 11.
The wind is fresh, the wind is foul,
The clouds are long and low and gray ;
The rocky headland wears a cowl,
And looks a monk who kneels to pray.
—Day.
As the weather remained adverse for getting to the westward
we decided on making the best of our stay at the Island until it
changed. Up to this time we had not been able to catch any
fish, so we resolved to try the grounds known to us in the two
coves—Eastern and Western Coves. From an old fisherman,
who had been successful in catching whiting at the Queenscliffe
Jetty, we purchased some for our table, and very welcome they
were. We could not get the vessel under way on Friday, the
Bth September, as there was not sufficient wind, but during the
morning a very fine sight was witnessed from the deck. Western
Cove, in which we were lying, was literally swarming with black
fish—small whales—many, I should think, exceeding half a ton
in weight. Far as one could see on every side these unwieldly
fish were rising to the surface, sometimes leaping an incredible
height out of the water. There must have been many hundreds,
if not thousands, of them. If they had been upon a more
thickly inhabited coast quantities of them would have been
surrounded, driven ashore, or otherwise captured for their oil ;
as it was they were unmolested, and remained for hours in the
spacious bay. I have only once before seen a very large number
together—that was up Gulf St. Vincent, opposite Black Point,
thirty years ago. I described the incident in “ Yachting in
Australia,” and only mention it again to point the extract from
the English yachting magazine that follows. We were becalme
in a three-quarter-decked yacht when an enormous school of these
whales came up from the Southward. At first the commotion
they made in the water when some miles distant made us jump
to our halliards and sheets, thinking a feather-white breeze was
about to strike us; but it was soon recognised that it was not
wind, but, as we thought, an immense school of porpoises. We
were soon undeceived, and as this most formidable-looking army
approached, with the noise of their spouting, leaping, and rollick-
ing through the water, I honestly confess I felt that if one should


’by mistake leap into the yacht, we should stand a poor chance,
as we had no way upon her and no dinghy astern. Ido not
remember that I expressed this concern aloud. That it was not
a wholly unfounded apprehension will appear by the following
extract from The Yachtsman of the 7th September, 1899. If a
whale-thrasher can make such a mistake, why not a black fish 1
unless indeed the thrasher mistook the yacht for his enemy a
whale :
CORRESPONDENCE.
Fishing Extraordinary.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE “YACHTSMAN.”
Sir—l trust the enclosed authentic account of an incident (of yesterday’s
date) may interest some of your readers.
Yours, &c., KATE MORRIS.
Ilfracombe, September sth.
“ The fish known as the ‘ whale thrasher ’ is sufficiently rarely met
with as to make its capture at any time a matter of local interest; but to
a specimen recently secured at Ilfracombe, a wider need of interest is due,
because of the remarkable and unprecedented circumstances under which its
capture was effected. Three visitors to Ilfracombe, enjoying an afternoon’s
sail off the coast, in a small half-decked yacht of five tons, were surprised
■by the sudden intrusion of what seemed at first to be a dead weight of
lead, while the two ladies of the party found their parasols, which had
been open, torn out of their grasp. The ‘ dead weight ’ was soon found
•to be very much alive, being nothing less than a splendid specimen of the
fish aforementioned. The creature, leaping into the boat from the stern
end, had buried its huge head in the doorway of the little cabin, and after
a moment’s quiet, in which perhaps it, as well as the other occupants of
'the boat, were recovering from the first stupor of surprise, its struggles to
free itself became very violent. These, however, were ineffectual; the
animal was so securely trapped that it could neither release itself nor be
released. It succeeded, nevertheless, in dying hard and doing considerable
damage. By the first lash of its tail, which is six feet long, tke main
boom was broken, and from the second, one member of the party sustained
a severe blow, resulting in an ugly wound across the forehead. By the
combined efforts of the four passengers the creature was at last securely
lashed to the seats, and afterwards the party, unable to proceed by reason
of the breaking of the boom, were taken ashore in another vessel. The
whale-thrasher which met its doom in this remarkable manner is a fine
specimen of its kind, measuring 14 ft. 6 in. in length, and weighing over
8 cwt. That there must have been a sword fish in its close vicinity is
almost certain, as this fish and the sword fish hunt in couples, the former


jumping on the back of the unfortunate whale it elects to victimise, digging
its three rows of formidable teeth into the flesh, lashing vigorously with
its tail meanwhile, while its ally, the sword fish, directs its attack from
underneath. As the main staple of food of the whale-thrasher consists of
small fry, its motive in thus attacking whales is a matter of conjecture.
The hero of the above incident must have been of a Shakesperian turn,
and when it spied the little vessel above it, may have said, with Hamlet,
Yes, very like a whale.’ ”
On the first as well as on the present occasion these fish were
the precursors of bad weather. This commenced again on Friday
afternoon, with rain, which continued all night. Later in the
day on Saturday, the 9th, it fined somewhat, and we did a little
dredging to dry our sails; but the wind soon freshened too much
to continue this. We obtained a considerable quantity of
scallops. It is passing strange how these fine shell fish are dis-
carded in Australia. I remember reading an article in an
English magazine respecting them many years ago, in which it
was stated that they formed one of the most delicate dishes the
poor enjoyed, and that they were essentially wholesome food.
Frequently after this I eat them. They are very good cooked as
follows :—Place them in their shells upon the galley hob, and as
the upper shells fly open, drop a piece of butter into the lower
shell sufficiently large to fry them in. This prevents the shell
burning, and increases the toothsomeness of the fish. When cooked
add a little pepper, and serve whilst hot in the shell. To my
taste they are richer in flavor than any fish. They are also good
curried or stewed. On my recommendation the captain ate some
stewed, and thoroughly enjoyed them. I could not join him, but
looked on with envious eyes. To many scallops look a little un-
inviting, with their peculiar shape and color, but once this
prejudice is overcome, they will never be thrown away as they
now are. We obtained nothing else in the dredge worth men-
tioning. I had methylated spirits and other materials on board,
and a* dredge from the Museum, kindly lent me by Mr. Zeitz,
the respected Assistant-Curator, and I intended and hoped
obtain a good supply of interesting material for him indeed
was wholly for the Museum we carried the dredges. Unfor-
tunately, however, there was only one other opportunity of trying
them owing to the foul weather experienced, and we were equally


unsuccessful on that occasion. Sunday, the 18th, was most
boisterous, blowing a “ black S.-Easter.” This is a very uncom-
fortable wind at Queenscliffe, as it has a long stretch of water to
come across, and brings up a nasty unpleasant sea, dead on shore.
It fined a little towards evening. Monday morning the weather
looked more promising, so we resolved to get outside and anchor
under Point Marsden, preparatory to starting at 3 a.m. on
Tuesday, the 12th, for another attempt to reach Port Lincoln.
The captain had successfully placed a mesh net, and caught a few
fish in it. On lifting it, however, what appeared to be whole
whiting were merely the skins of fish, every particle of the
interior, eyes and all, having been cleaned away by sea lice. We
seemed fated to have no fish, either by line or neb. We felt the
greatest interest in those sea lice, but it was destructive, not
scientific. It is a curious fact that some of these are often found
in the throats of living fish. In tommy roughs, and I think the
other fish I have noticed them are trevally and salmon trout,
they are always alive and nncrushed —apparently not there as
food for the fish—but for what other purpose I cannot conjecture*
They are something like the wood-louse, but are yeljow instead
of dark-colored.
We were doomed to another disappointment on Tuesday morn-
in" ; instead of the wind holding fair for us, it had backed to
the North, the glass was again rapidly falling, and we recognised
all the tokens of another bad weather change. This time we
resolved to vary our anchorage, and go into Eastern Cove instead
of Western Cove. The wind was so strong that we were in
American River and anchored shortly after breakfast time.
Eastern Cove is a splendid summer harbor, and often an
excellent one in winter also. Every headland, bay, inlet, and
most of the best fishing grounds are familiar to me, for after
Black Point it was my most usual yachting resort. The sight of it
again revived many a pleasant reminiscence, and some that were
not wholly pleasant, for on one of my earliest cruises I stood a
good chance of losing the number of my mess by the drunkenness
of a man who was not to be trusted : on another occasion, when
I had chartered the cutter “Swallow” (old residents at Port
Adelaide will remember what a bonny craft she was, and what a


handsome, competent, genial little Welshman was her skipper,
James Lewis—he afterwards became master of the “ Prima
Donna ” ketch, which went down with all hands when coming
from a South Eastern port with a load of potatoes) we had an
exciting incident as we were running for this anchorage.
Lewis had a fine black water dog on board —a splendid watch
dog—whose pet aversion was a porpoise. Whenever these fish
came flashing round the cutter’s bow, the dog got into a great
state of excitement, jumping about and barking furiouly.
We were bowling along under the land near Rapid Bay with
a fresh South-Easter, when a school of porpoises appeared.
The dog espied them and began his usual antics. The animal
and I had become great friends, and never dreaming of
what was about to follow, I applauded him and urged him on.
At last up he sprang on to the bulwarks and overboard he went
after the fish, and now followed an action that causes me to
narrate the incident, as it taught me, and may be useful in teach-
ing other yachtsmen, how a life may be saved even on the darkest
night—it was a dark, but not very dark night, and not much sea
—quick as thought Lewis up with his helm, yelled out “ look
out for a jibe,” and jibed the cutter with everything standing,
fortunately nothing carried away, and we shortly had the satis-
faction of seeing the beautiful animal swimming alongside and
his master quickly grasped him by his long hair and pulled him
aboard. Lewis would not have lost him for anything, as he was
greatly attached to him. We should probably never have seen
him again if Lewis had stayed instead of wearing the vessel, as
she would have been hundreds of yards away from where the
animal touched the water, whereas by jibing we came round to
almost the exact spot. He risked his mast and gear, but saved
his pet. It was an object lesson not thrown away in my subse-
quent yachting experience. This incident occurred some 36
years ago, but I remember it as if it were only as many days. A
few years after this I was with the late James Brook cruising in
the schooner “Nancy,” built and owned by George Simmonds,
and his father-in-law, old Capt. Storrow. Simmonds was then, as I
shrewdly suspect he still is, fond of fun, and he thought it would
be a good joke to get some of the sails from the “ White Cloud ”
and add a temporary topmast to the “Nancy’s” foremast to


carry them. I lent him her biggest gaff topsail and a jib. He
was like a schoolboy rigging up the mallee-stick mast and gear to
carry them, and he certainly did it wonderfully well, the jib he
set as a jib topsail. For a time all went well, as the wind was
light, and the sails undoubtedly added to the little schooner s
speed, but the weather was threatening, and old Capt. Storrow
was ill at ease. He considered we ran a good chance of capsizing
the vessel if a sudden squall struck us, and he was right. We
had just rounded Ballast Head when the wind came with a will.
In an instant the vessel was heeling to a dangerous angle, but
amidst the howling of the squall we could hear Simraonds’ loud
laugh. He was at the helm, and in a minute brought the
schooner to the wind, at the same time carrying away his im-
provised topmast, and sending it and my nice clean sails over the
lee into the water. He thought it was splendid fun. lam sure
Mr. Storrow did not, perhaps I did not either; however, all’s well
that ends well, and we had a most enjoyable time in this handy,
comfortable little vessel up in American River. I think, if I
remember rightly, that Capt. Storrow and Simmonds not only
built her, but went into the Tiers and cut the timber for doing
We remained in American River all Tuesday and Wednesday,
the 12th and 13th September. There were three cutters and a
ketch sheltering there also. The worst of the weather burst
again from the N.W., veering subsequently to S.W. I took the
opportunity of sending a letter by a cutter that was running up
with this S.-Wester to my family, telling them where we were;
and fortunate it was I did so, for the day it arrived a report had
gained currency that the “ Bronzewing” had been wrecked on
Buffalo Reef in Spencer’s Gulf. It was, unfortunately, too true
that a wreck had occurred there, the topsail schooner “Lucretia”
having struck the reef during the late bad weather. Fortunately,
however, no lives were lost, owing to the courage and capacity of
Captain Creswell, C.M.G., and his gallant crew, who, with their
excellent rocket apparatus, saved all hands. The vessel, however,
has since become a total wreck.
Whilst in American River I renewed acquaintance with that
fine old Islander, Mr. John Buick, who is now 79 years of age,


his estimable wife being only a few years younger. Both look
hale and hearty, and show what a healthy place Kangaroo Island
is. Mr. Buick and I first became known to each other in 1863
or 1864, and many’s the pleasant hour we have spent together on
my subsequent visits to the Island. His children have married,
and are away from their parents—some near, and some far ; but
the old folk are cheerful and contented. For his age Mr. Buick
is a wonderfully active man, and he showed the greatest interest
in overhauling the “ Bronzewing.”
We ran outside the river late on Tuesday afternoon to take
advantage of a promised S.-East change, and anchored for the
night on the flats to the north of the fairway buoy. Thursday,
the 14th September, broke badly for our hoped-for passage. The
wind came in from the N. light at first, gradually increasing to
a strong hard breeze, the glass again falling. Not one of us on
board had previously experienced such persistently bad weather.
During the early part of the evening the Captain caught a fine
skate, weighing, I suppose, at least 50 lbs. It is only rarely this
member of the ray family is secured. The stinging ray, or, as it
is usually called, the stingaree, is common enough. The crew
enjoyed the wings, &c., of the skate, but I cannot say that I
cared much for it. I secured its jaws—the teeth in which are
very fine—for a naturalist, a friend of mine. We up anchor and
again beat into Queenscliffe, all hope of my companion being able
to go on with me to Port Lincoln having to be abandoned, as his
leave was nearly exhausted. The continued rough and adverse
weather was keenly disappointing, but we had just to make the
best of it. When we got to Queenscliffe we found that some of
our friends had been making anxious enquiries about us through
the telegraph wires, in consequence of the reported loss of the
“Bronzewing” on Buffalo Reef, previously referred to.
Friday, the 15th, was extremely oppressive and close in the
morning, and in the afternoon a steady rain set in, which con-
tinued all day and the whole of the night. In the morning it was
blowing hardly from the S.-West. The “ Governor Musgrave,”
Government steamer, from Port Adelaide, placed a buoy upon
the remains of the wreck of an American ship lying outside the
spit. This wreck is in a nasty place for coasters beating down


under the sandspit at night, and it is a pity it cannot be blown up.
Probably, however, the buoy will prevent future mishaps, if it is
not, as it possibly may be, mistaken for one that marks the end-
of the sandspit. It ought not to be so mistaken with proper
care, but it is not when proper care is being exercised that mis-
takes are usually made.
The next day our friend, Mr. Randall, left us to join the
steamer for Pt. Adelaide. We were thoroughly sorry to part
with him. I have had the privilege of his friendship for many
years, and many a pleasant cruise we have had together. He is
a very old yachtsman, and his name is a household word amongst
them. In company with one of his connections he once sailed
from where we were—Queenscliffe —right round Kangaroo Island
in his little heavily-ballasted three-quarter-decked craft the
“ Gazelle,” not touching at a single place en route. Although I
will not refer to his private virtues, I am at liberty to refer to
his public acts, and this was one of them, and I believe I am
correct in saying that he publicly received the Humane Society’s
medal for rescuing a fellow creature from drowning. It is this
manly spirit that such a pastime as yachting engenders. In dis-
cussing some of our old yachting experiences he related to me a
striking evidence of physical pluck on the part of one of the most
prominent of the present yachtsmen. In a cruise in the Gulf,
he (Mr. Randall) was steering the yacht, and the gentleman
referred to had the pump spear in his hand pumping the
yacht; at the same • time he was smoking a pipe. Suddenly,
and without warning, the yacht jibed, and the main boom
knocked the pumper overboard; under he went with the pump
spear in one hand and pipe in mouth. In falling he managed
to grasp the main sheet, and after considerable difficulty he was
got on board, but he had stuck to his pump spear and pipe, and
was the most unconcerned of the crew over the mishap. Those
who know what it is to be suddenly pitched overboard and
dragged through and often under the water in this way can
appreciate the pluck and coolness required to hold on to a piece
of heavy metal like a pump spear.


CHAPTER 111.
But, ah ! to-day is sweet; and, lo !
The ocean is at rest,
Save for a breathing low and slow
Of wind across its breast.
After bidding adieu to Mr. Randall, we went out under Point
Marsden, and anchored. At 4 a.m. on the morning of the 18th
September we made another effort to get to Port Lincoln, and
again came a great trial of patience. We did not gam a mile in
five hours after the start. All day long until 5 p.m. we were
dodging about in a light W. wind (dead a head), with no steerage
way. About 5 p.m., however, a light breeze sprang up from the
S.E., which for a time promised well, and we bowled along at six
or seven knots an hour. Shortly after this I caught my first fish
for the trip, and a beauty it was—a very fine barracoutta,
weighing, I should think, from 12 to 15 lbs. It is very seldom
these fish are obtained in Investigator Straits, but this year
they have been caught there in considerable numbers. They are,
however, I am told, unprofitable to the fisherman as fresh fish, as
I understand they will not live in the vessels’ wells ; so they are
dried, and sold as salted fish, and are a favorite food with many
so treated, but few eat them when fresh. Our Captain said this
was a mistake, and we had some cooked, and I agree with him
that they are excellent. One of the crew caught another, and
this was the total secured. We apparently sailed out of their
bounds. A fishing cutter would have gone about and kept cruis-
ing over the place where they had congregated.
I had never sailed along the coast of Kangaroo Island so
early as September before, and could not help being struck with
the beauty of many of its bays. The scenery on the mainland
from Rapid Bay to the Southward of Cape Jervis, abreast of the
old Talisker Mine, is also very fine. The land rises at this spot
to 964 feet above the sea level, and the rocky headlands are very
bold and imposing. Crossing Backstairs Passage to Kangaroo
Island one reaches a‘different coast line, not so rugged and bold,
but still of sufficient elevation to make it interesting. From
Cape Coutts to Hog Bay and Kangaroo Head it is very pretty,
and the deep bay to the South of Kangaroo head, forming


Eastern Cove, is flanked by lightly-timbered, gently-rising
ground, green and fresh-looking at this season of the year. We
several times sailed past two pretty homesteads, with their
healthy-looking barley crops, and their cattle and horses enjoying
the fresh crisp grass in the neighborhood of Point Morrison. For
years I have held the opinion that Point Morrison would have
made an ideal quarantine station. It could easily have been
completely isolated, as it has water on its Eastern, N.-Eastern, and
Northern sides. Its harbor would have been almost perfect. It
possesses a beautiful climate. A great portion of the land could,
I think, be cultivated so as to grow both fruit and vegetables,
and it is as accessible to ships coming up the Straits as through
the Passage, and is within an easy distance of the mainland.
The telegraph wire could be easily annexed that now runs from
Queenscliffe to within some four or five miles of it. An enforced
sojourn in such a place as this could be made would be a very
different experience in the heat of summer to confinement at
Torrens Island.
The coast from Pt. Morrison around Western Cove is uninter-
esting until it reaches Queenscliff’e, which is a very pretty place.
From Pt. Marsden (the land to the West of which is 584 feet
high), along to Emu Bay, Smith Bay, Dashwood Bay, Stokes
Bay, Snelling Beach to Snug Cove, it is generally high, bold, and
in some places very striking. There are points where the high
land to the South of the coast line reaches 700 feet, and at Mt.
McDonnell, to the South of Cape Cassini, it is nearly 1,000 feet.
Most of the bays mentioned above have homesteads, and cultiva-
tion of a more or less substantial character is carried on. Many
of them have pretty sandy beaches, and some are wooded to
the water’s edge, and all were, at this time, inviting and fresh
looking. Unfortunately, none of them can be relied on as
harbors when the wind comes from the N.W. round to N.E. It
is a thousand pities it is so, as this fine Island would, I believe,
be a favorite resort for many if safe anchorage were obtainable.
I shall not readily forget a night I spent at anchor in Snug Cove
many years ago, I thought the “send” of the ground swell
would take the windlass and bits out of the yacht. Shortly after
the sun went down the nice S.E. breeze upon which we had been


reckoning to reach our destination by morning went with it, and
we only had enough to take us along at the rate of about two
knots an hour. This continued all night. There was a heavy
S.-W. swell owing to the late rough weather, and the wind not
being strong enough to steady the vessel, she wallowed in it.
This is always a little trying to the temper, and tries the
sails and cordage more than a good spanking breeze. We
managed to get a short spell of smooth water under the lee of
Wedge Island, and took advantage of it to have breakfast com-
fortably. This over we drifted lazily on between the W'edge and
Gambier Islands, on both of which, and especially to the North
of the Gambier, where there are some ugly reefs, the swell breaks
magnificently. The Northern side of the Wedge is pretty;
portion of it is cultivated, and a number of sheep are kept upon
it. At one time a great number of pigs were kept there, but
these did not pay apparently. It was well on in the afternoon
before we were abreast of Thistle Island, with its imposing and
precipitous cliffs on its Northern side. These are nearly 800 feet
high between Whaler’s Bay and Observatory Point. We passed
inside of Black Rock, the bearing of which is given in the sailing
directions as N. f W., nearly 1£ miles from Observatory Point.
In the daytime this rock ought never to be dangerous to the
mariner; but Porter Rock, N.N.E. \ E., about 1| miles from
Black Rock, 400 yards long by 150 broad, is a very dangerous
obstacle indeed for vessels unacquainted with the locality, and
no stranger ought to venture there at night. Indeed, when one
remembers that within about 15 miles in a N. \ Westerly direc-
tion from the South Point of Thistle Island is the well-named
Dangerous Reef, and that Howard or Beatrice Rock —a still
more dangerous impediment to navigation, because it is nine feet
below water, and seldom breaks—lies W.S.W. under three mile s
from Dangerous Reef, one realises how little room there is for
any craft to safely boxhaul about at night, or even to lie-to.
Fortunately, however, there are several good anchorages at the
Thistle, Taylor’s Island, Memory Cove, &c.; and unless a vessel
is very unfortunate, such as being in a dead calm before a coming
storm at nightfall—which sometimes happens, and cannot be
avoided—one or other of these anchorages can be reached.


Shortly after passing Black Rock I was on deck looking over
the bulwarks, watching the beautiful marine flora visible on the
bottom in the clear water, when a lively little seal came up close
to the vessel and continued to approach, and then leave her some
distance. It kept up these antics for some time, but at last,
apparently satisfied, took its departure. The eye of the seal is
lovely To kill them is simply taking li fe for no other purpose—
except, of course, where, as in Bffng/j Straits, they are butchered
by thousands for their oil. It may be right to kill the fur seal
for its skin to adorn our women-folk. It will at least be held to
be so so long as they (the ladies) continue to desire sealskin
■cloaks. We managed to reach Taylor’s Island in Thorny Passage
at sundown, and anchored for the night. The Captain had been
suffering severely with symptoms resembling those of influenza,
and I felt anxious about him; and, as he had been up all night, a
good sleep was welcome.
We got under way early on the morning of Wednesday, the
20th, and reached Port Lincoln about 11.30, where a large
budget of letters and newspapers was awaiting us. As usual,
my good friends Mr. and Mrs. Seddon were at once in evidence
by sending off delicacies not obtainable on ship board. They
were most kind during the whole of our stay, and the cabin table
was constantly adorned with beautiful flowers from their garden.
CHAPTER IV.
Where rose the mountains, there to him were friends ;
Where rolled the ocean, thereon was his home ;
Where a blue sky, and glowing clime extends,
He had the passion and the power to roam.
It is not my intention to give any lengthened description of
Port Lincoln —one of the very best harbors in the world because
I have already done this in “Yachting in Australia.” In that
work I ventured to express the opinion that ere many years
elapsed some of the officers of the British Navy would find out
its wonderful capacity. They have done so; several of H.M.’s
ships have been there. Unfortunately, it is not a good place for
victualling and watering them. It is out of the way in some
respects, and probably many things required when these vessels
enter ports are at present unobtainable, or only obtainable with
difficulty. For instance, coal could not be had at Lincoln,


which, of course, is a very important item. This militates against
frequent visits. I earnestly recommend all young Australians
who have any taste for the sea to visit and see for them-
selves what a grand and beautiful harbor there is in their native
land. I can scarcely understand anyone desirous of smooth-
water sailing, good fishing, a cool climate, and beautiful scenery
going elsewhere. I had never seen Boston Island at this season
of the year before, and—if I may be pardoned for using a favorite
expression amongst young ladies—it is simply lovely. This Island
affords protection to, and really constitutes, Port Lincoln a land-
locked harbor. It is about four miles long, running N. by W.
and S. by E., by a maximum breadth of about one and a-half
miles. It is clothed in parts with wood of a dark clustering
foliage. This wood at a distance, interspersed, as it is, with
grassy knolls and gently sloping ground, has an exceedingly
attractive appearance. Many a Bronze wing pigeon found its
home in these wooded slopes in years gone by, and some of them
in my younger days were converted into excellent roasts and
stews. The Island runs up to a height of about 320 feet in its
centre. It was, I believe, lately sold, and maintains a number
of cattle, sheep, and some horses, A glance at the chart will show
what splendid roomy entrances to the harbor there are on each
end of this Island. These entrances and the wide expanse of deep
water enclosed affords facilities for ships of the greatest draught
to sail about, tack, or wear in perfect safety. In fact, it is a
better big ship harbor than one for smaller craft, as the great
depth of water, and the long stretches of it in some parts, occa-
sionally bring up quite enough sea for a ten-tonner. Many a
good dressing down I have had in it thrashing a small craft to
windward under double-reefed canvas.
We remained in Port Lincoln from the 21st to the 27th Sep-
tember, and rode out some very bad weather in Porter Bay,
which I prefer as an anchorage to that opposite the township, as
it is much more sheltered from N. and N.-Eastern winds, which
are generally the precursors of any violent changes. The weather
was so rough that we could do little fishing, four or five whiting
and one red mullet being our total catch. At a different season
of the year I caught whiting, schnapper, and trevally in this bay.


Like some of the places previously mentioned, Porter Bay
reminds me of many pleasant, and some not such pleasant, expe-
riences. I was anchored in it on one occasion in the pastime the
-day before that fixed for the Port Lincoln Regatta—a great event
when the numerous and pretty oyster cutters were at Lincoln. I
had invited several friends to accompany me in the yacht to
witness the contest, and had, of course, to prepare food for their
entertainment. The man upon whom I relied to do this did not
turn up, and I was left with only a boy on board to get things
ready. A day or two previously a friend from Thistle Island had
given me a fine crayfish, which I had determined should form
part of our entertainment; but, on inspecting the cooking
utensils, found we had nothing large enough to boil it in. This
-considerably nonplussed me—happy thought, however. I put
the tail, or best end, into the saucepan first, and cooked it
thoroughly, then end for ended it, and cooked the head also, thus
making a capital job; and it was not enjoyed any the less next
day when it was explained how the difficulty was got over.
Speaking of end for ending it, puts me in mind of a good
nautical story I was told by a sailor on one of the occasions at
night on board the yacht on which we were whiling" away the
long weary hours when it was my watch on deck. These are th e
times when sailormen like to spin yarns. In order that the un-
initiated may grasp its full meaning, it is perhaps advisable to
explain that where a landsman is desirous of changing one end
of anything for the other end, he would probably say, “Will you
pass me the other end of that rope, if you please ? ” a seaman
simply exclaiming, “End for end;” and every sailor would
answer either “ End for end, sir/' or “Ay, ay, sir !” and pass it
at once.
The tale as told me was as follows—it may be as old as the
hills for all I know, but I had not heard it before, and perhaps
some of my readers have not done so. A sailor and his wife had
taken their firstborn to a church to have it christened. Jack
was greatly out of his element, and when requested to hold the
baby near the font, he made a decided hash of the attempt, and
put the infant’s head on the wrong arm, away from the baptismal
water. The minister said, quietly, “You have got the child
wrong ; turn it the other way.” Jack immediately turned it over


on its stomach, presenting only its back to the parson. “ No r
no,” said the latter, “the other way.” Jack turned it face up
again, blushing scarlet, and much confused. An old sea captain,
sitting in the gallery and realising the predicament, gave a short,
sharp, “End for end, Jack.” “Ay, ay, sir!” said Jack, much
relieved; and the youngster was instantly passed from one arm
to the other into its proper position, and so the trouble ended.
On the evening of the 27th September we ran out to the Sir
Joseph Banks’ Group, and anchored for the night under Revesby
Island in perfectly smooth water. Revesby Island and Spilsby
Island are, I think, the two largest of the 20 islands and rocks
known as the Sir Joseph Banks’ Group, and they have the best
anchorages. Spilsby is about two miles long and one and a-half
miles broad. Revesby is somewhat shorter, and I think a good
deal less in breadth. These islands lend an additional charm to
cruising about Port Lincoln, as they are within a few hours’ sail,
and by watching the weather one can nearly always reckon on
getting away from them in time to obtain the more certain refuge
of Boston Bay. To those well acquainted with the various
anchorages at the islands, a lee can always be obtained for any
weather ; but if short of provisions or water they would be
awkward quarters in which to be detained. Thursday, the 28th
September, was a warm, fine day, and the scene from the vessel s
deck was very beautiful. The water was quite clear, and the
contrast between its deep blue outside and green shade close to
the shore was very marked. Away to the west of us was Lusby
Island ) a mile from this was Marum Island, while to the S.W.
was Partney Island, and a little to the East of North was
Winceby Island, while away to the W. and N.W. was the main-
land—all standing out clear and distinct in the crisp, fresh
morning air. It was a sight to gladden the heart of a lover of
Nature, and to make one wish that more hearts were with one to
share in one’s gladness. The large boat was got out, and we
were soon away off Marum Island in the hope of obtaining som c
schnapper. In this we were disappointed, but we caught a score or
so of as fine whiting as I have ever seen. Then rock cod and
leather-jackets spoilt our sport, and we returned to the vessel well
satisfied to have at last broken the fishless spell. In the after-
noon the Captain went exploring and taking the bearings and


depths of several reefs, shoals, and sandspits for future guidance;
and some of the crew took the smaller boat and went ashore to
collect shells for me to bring home to some of my young friends
—and very successful they were. We tried dredging, but with
no success. This was the first real yachtsman’s day we had. At
sunset it looked promising for fine weather next day. We were,
therefore, surprised to find the next morning that the glass had
fallen considerably during the night, and as the wind began to
come in fiftful gusts from the North, it was time for us to clear
out, as we were on a lee shore. We made good progress till we
got within a few miles of Boston Island, when the wind suddenly
shifted to the S.W., and blew with great violence, compelling us
to work under double reefs in every sail we carried. We were
forced to take the Southern instead of the Northern entrance to
Port Lincoln, and had a dead beat from Spalding Cove, past
Bicker Island, and across the Bay to Porter Bay, which we
reached about midday. It rained steadily all day, with very
heavy squalls of wind, and very cold. This is the coldest Sep.
tember I ever experienced in Australia, the thermometer usually
ranging from 54° to 58° in the cabin. I only remember its being
above 60° on two occasions during our trip.
On Saturday, the 30th September, it was blowing a full gale
of wind in the squalls. As we were getting under way to go
into Port Lincoln with only a reefed mizen and reefed head sails,
a terrific squall struck the vessel and carried away the powerful
wire forestay just above the stem head. In a moment the fore-
sail was torn to such an extent as to be useless. Lucky it was
for us that this serious mishap did not occur with the mainsail
set and in a heavy sea on a lee shore, or in all probability the
mast would have gone by the board, and we might all have gone
to Davy Jones’s locker in a few seconds. After we arrived at
the township, the stay was unshackled, and it took the local
blacksmith all the remainder of the day to repair the damage.
The wear and tear on the standing and running gear of a ketch
is very great. The stability and unyieldingness of this class of
vessel have, I imagine, a good deal to do with this. Where a
yacht will heel enough to spill much of the wind’s force, a ketch
remains almost upright. We lay at anchor all night off the jetty.
The mail arrangements at some of these outports are very


embarrassing, as so little time is given after the delivery of the
incoming to answer by the outgoing mail. But for the courtesy
of Capt. Crocker, of the s.s. “ Ferret,” I should on two occasions
have been much inconvenienced. I have several times been in-
debted to this excellent officer for little acts of kindness. I can
speak as a skilled witness of the dangers of careless navigation
on the route he has to take every week, yet such entire confi-
dence have I in his skill and judgment that the thought ,of any
of these perils would not disturb my sleep whatever the weather
if I knew the veteran was in charge.
From the Ist to the 4th October the weather was intensely
cold, and generally boisterous. On the 4th it was blowing a gale
from N.W., veering to W. and W.S.W., making it ticklish work
landing in a dinghy. The continued cold and cheerlessness of
this Westerly coast made me determine to try and get into Gulf
St. Vincent as soon as possible, and visit some of the old haunts
there. I was the more anxious to do this, as the Captain was
not shaking off his illness at all quickly, and also because I had
only another ten days to spare of my six weeks’ charter of the
vessel.
CHAPTER V.
There’s many a ship with taller mast,
There’s many of squarer yard,
There’s many a one that sails as fast,
And many that roll as hard,
With decks as white, with paint as bright.
With hull as staunch and sound ;
But never ship that steers so light]
As the ship that’s homeward bound.
—Day.
On Thursday, the sth October, we got a few necessary articles
from the shore at Port Lincoln, and after having breakfast with
us, Mr. Sedden bade us good-bye, and we cleared out for Spald-
ing Cove, anchoring for the night on the East side of Monument
Hill, preparatory to starting in the morning. Barometer, 29 ’SQ,
and weather looking very wild.
Friday, 6th October, with two reefs in our sails, we started in
a gale of wind for our first stage—Whalers’ Bay, Thistle Island.
The wind chopped about continually all day from N.W. to S.W.


We got to Whalers’ Bay at noon, and found the anchorage there
anything but comfortable, as there was too much Northerly in
the wind. Ido not like Whalers’ Bay as an anchorage, except
in breezes from the S.W. to the S.E. The water is too deep until
a vessel gets close in, and then if the wind veers to the North of
West it is an ugly place to get out of, as the gusts are so fitful,
and the tide just outside very erratic. I think Observatory
Point is a better anchorage, as it affords as much protection from
every point of the compass (except the East and N.-East) as
Whalers’ Bay; and when the wind is anything to the S. of West
the water is smoother; and should it get to the North of West
it is easier and safer to get under way there. Like other places,
Whalers’ Bay reminds me of past experiences, one of which I
can now safely relate, as the chief actor in it “crossed the bar”
several years ago. Accompanied by three yachting friends, I
was returning from Port Lincoln, and sheltered in Whalers’ Bay
from a strong S.W. gale. Amongst these yachtsmen was as fine
an old sea-dog as ever trod a deck, but he was of rather an
aggressive nature at times, and fond of practical jokes. At
the time I am dealing with—now more than a quarter of a
century ago—Thistle Island was covered with dead and green
scrub, and an intensely thick undergrowth, amongst which
it was impossible for grass to grow well. Finding it rather
dull work lying at anchor waiting for the weather to moderate,
we all determined to ascend the high land, running up to
nearly 800 feet, and go across to the south side of the Island
to witness the break of the ocean in the gale ; and a fine sight
it was, well repaying the steep climb. There was a terrific
noise with the roll and break of the ocean upon the cliffs, sending
the spray in snowy flakes many feet above them; and the howling
of the wind, joined to the roar of the sea, was something to be
remembered. Having satisfied our curiosity, we were returning.
I was in company with one who, alas ! has also gone to join the
great majority, some distance ahead of my other two companions,
when all of a sudden we heard a great crackling behind us, and
on glancing backwards we saw that the bush was on tire in two
or three places. It took but a few moments in such a fierce gale
for it to spread with almost marvellous rapidity, and it would
have been utterly useless to attempt to put it out. I was in-


tensely annoyed about it, and feared trouble might result, as 1
had heard the Island was leased to some one, but to whom I did
not know, I told the chief actor in the scene that he had seriously
compromised my and the yacht’s good name. I had been many
times down to the West, and never heard an unkind word f
but if the “Zephyr” was to be the means of carrying fire
to the people’s property, she and her owner would justly be
given a wide berth for the future. I felt it was not only
bad form, but he had laid himself open to a very serious
charge, should it be preferred against him. He insisted that
it was the very best thing that could be done for the Island,
that it was useless as it was, and that the tire would really
double its value, as the grass would spring and grow luxuri-
antly after the first rain. It was useless arguing the question,
and all that I would promise to do was not to disclose his
folly if I could honorably avoid doing so; but I thought it more
than probable that it might bring trouble upon me personally,
and I was not mistaken, as the sequel will show. I shall never
forget the grandeur of the conflagration. It illuminated the
whole sea for a long distance, and made it almost as light as day
in the yacht’s cabin. Some nautical friends told me it was seen
nearly 100 miles up the Gulf. The large and smell of the s'mokej
with the crackling noise of the burning bush, accompanied by the
howling of the wind, rendered sleep, to me at least, impossible.
The author of the mischief slept like a top. As I anticipated,
about a week after my return I received a letter from the alleged
lessee of the Island, demanding compensation in damages for the
injury he represented he had suffered, and which he said he had
evidence to prove had been caused by someone connected with
the “ Zephyr.” I knew, of course, that he had no legal or moral
claim upon me; and, although he did not deserve it, I set to
work to frame an answer that would be truthful, and yet not
compromise the real delinquent. So I replied to the effect that
neither I or anyone over whom I had any control caused the fire
in question. But I determined to give the real culprit a fright,
so sent him the letter, with a request to know what he intended
to do in the matter. When I next saw him, he was a little more
humble, and anxious about it. However, no further step of any
kind was taken. In all probability the fire really did benefit the


lessee. It was a foolish and mischievous act—thoughtlessly, but
nob maliciously, indulged in.
To return, however, to our present cruise. I mentioned how
the wind had been shying about all day, and how uncomfortably
the vessel was rolling and pitching at her anchor in Whalers’
Bay. As the evening advanced, the Captain felt pretty sure the
wind would again back to the North, and decided on keeping an
anchor watch. He was a true prophet. About 1 a.m. on Satur-
day, the 7th October, it came in from the N.N. West with a
will, and with shoal water, and the land close under our lee, an
8-cwt. anchor to get up in a nasty sea, and a beat to windward
to clear the bay, was a somewhat anxious time—it is on such
occasions that one hopes that everything will hold—the carrying
away of any important stay or sail, may mean the loss of one’s
vessel, and possibly one’s life. Fortunately, everything did hold, and
as the vessel was double-reefed in anticipation of the change that
had come, it was mainly a question of her gathering way before
making too much of a stern board. It was dark, with a sombre
threatening look to windward, and under our lee was the equally
sombre and threatening-looking precipitous cliffs of the'lsland ;
but the “Bronzewing” quickly gathers steerage-way, and once
fairly started, it is only a question of handling, assuming every-
thing holds, and I know that no man could teach her skipper
how to handle her. With the exception of the reference to top
sails, the following lines from the recent and excellent publication
“ Songs of Sea and Sail,” by Thomas Fleming Day, before-
mentioned, aptly describe our experiences that gloomy morning:—
Then tack on tack, she weathers out;
Her topsails shiver in the wind.
Down goes the helm, she flies about,
And leaping off soon leaves behind
The rocky dangers, and has past
The headland, when the wrathful blast,
Bursts from the cloud, and wild and grand
Howls in the sea against the land.
Roar, roar, 0 sea ! Thy stormy song
Appals the weak, but nerves the strong.
As soon as we were well clear of the Island we dodged along
as quietly as we could until daylight, but there was a heavy


•confused sea running, and the vessel labored and pitched about
in anything but a pleasant fashion. We passed the Wedge at
7 a.m. When we got round Cape Spencer, and before the wind,
we bowled along at the rate of ten knots an hour until we
reached Sandy Point, the western corner of Sturt Bay on the
southern coast line of Yorke’s Peninsula. Here we found seven
other vessels sheltering—six cutters and one paddle-wheel
steamer. Sandy Point is an excellent anchorage for winds from
H.E. round to South. We found it the smoothest anchorage we
had been in since we started, and glad enough we were to
obtain the desired rest. On Sunday, the Bth October, the
weather was still worse, the barometer standing at 29-45, the
wind blowing strongly from the N. As the day advanced, it
veered to the N.-West, blowing a full gale, and necessitating the
letting go of our second anchor \ the other vessels having done
this before we did, as our largest anchor previously lowered is an
exceptionally heavy one for a vessel the size of the “ Bronze-
wing.” It was fortunate for us that we cleared out of Whalers’
Bay. Where we were there was no sea at all. There is no
better shelter on the coast than Sandy Point for any wind from
N. to S. On Saturday we had purchased some schnapper, snook,
flathead, and whiting from one of the fishing cutters. The fisher-
men complained bitterly of the long-continued bad weather.
Some of them had not earned a living for over a fortnight. I
shall have something to say about these enterprising and
deserving colonists, and their well-kept craft, later on. We had
been so short of any fish diet during our cruise—which was the
more disappointing, as we reckoned on having some every
morning for breakfast—that our purchase was thoroughly enjoyed
by all hands.
CHAPTER VI.
Then give her a spoke, and keep her West-
Hurrah ! for the world is round.
And here’s to the ship that steers the best—
Hurrah ! for the homeward bound.
—Day.
On Monday, the 9th October, we got under way, and ran from
Sandy Point to Edithburg. It was still blowing so strongly that
we were double-reefed. We got to Edithburg about midday, and


received from and sent telegrams to friends. I was shocked and-
sincerely grieved on hearing of Mr. Christopher Bagot’s death
through pneumonia, supervening on influenza. No one who knew
him could fail to like and esteem him. X found the influenza was
raging at Edithburg and Stansbury, and heard it was all along
the Peninsula, as it was at every other place at which we had
touched.
Amongst other cutters that were anchored at Edithburg was
my old yacht, the “ Zephyr,” as before-mentioned, now usefully
employed in providing fish for the Adelaide market, and, I hope,
a good living for her owners. She is greatly altered in appear-
ance, but appears to be admirably kept. I hear she has had the
lead taken off her keel, and consequently does not go to wind-
ward as she did when I owned her. She has, of course, the
usual well in her for keeping the fish alive. The sight of her
called up recollections of many thousand miles of Australian waters
sailed over in her, many a yarn in her comfortable cabin, and the
name of many a shipmate whose voice is stilled for ever.
Edithburg was one of the places I visited in the early days of
my yachting career. I remember being there in the “ Nancy ”
and meeting the then Collector of Customs. This energetic
officer was extremely fond of hunting—indeed, of sport generally.
Unless my memory is playing me false, there was not a single
house where the flourishing township is now situated, or at any
rate, nothing more imposing than a shepherd’s hut. It was on a
Sunday morning we landed, and the Collector came ashore from
the Government schooner with two kangaroo dogs in the boat.
Mounts had been provided for him and one or two others, and
in a very short time the dogs were in full chase of kangaroo,
which abounded on the Peninsula at that time. I was sitting
down on a log, as I had driven a schnapper bone into my foot
the day before, and it was too swollen and inflamed for me to
move about much. The Collector came up at a canter, and as he
approached sang out, “ Good-bye, Bundey ; I can’t lose my dogs,
can I,” and was after them at full tilt, I thought this about as
neat and ingenious an apology as could be made for Sabbath-
breaking. I heard afterwards’ they killed a large number of
kangaroos.
On Tuesday, the 10th, we ran-up from Edithburg to Stans-


bury (Oyster Bay); still blowing a gale from the W.N.W. For
eight successive days the “ Bronze wing ” was compelled to sail
under double-reefed canvass—an unprecedented experience in
her history. There can be no doubt that the weather during
September and October has been more constantly severe than in
former years, and it is not surprising that the intense cold has
caused a great deal of pneumonia amongst the old and very
young. We got into Stansbury, and anchored not far from the
Jetty in 11 feet of water. It is exceedingly shallow in this bay
towards its southern corner. We could not.land in the dinghy
as it was blowing too hardly. We rode out the gale in the bay,
and on the afternoon of Thursday ran up to nearly abreast of
Port J ulia and anchored for the night, as the Captain antici-
pated a northerly wind in the morning and wished to be as far
to windward as possible. The glass was again rapidly falling,
and we had now only two days left of the chartered time to get
homeward. At 4 a.m. we started for Port Adelaide with a N.E.
wind and short uncomfortable sea. We got into the River by
mid-day. In trying to beat up through the narrows before
reaching Light’s Passage we carried away an important stay, and
had to let go our anchor. The wind had now increased to a
o-ale—a regular brick-fielder, bringing clouds of dust to where
we were. We had some difficulty in getting under way again,
but as I have previously mentioned the “ Bronzewing ” quickly
gathers way upon her, and although we were pretty close to the
southern bank we did not touch, and we ran to and anchored at
the North Arm for the night. About dusk the wind suddenly
shifted to the westward, and for a few moments blew very hard,
with plenty of lightning about. Mr. Belt, in his pretty yacht
the “ Electra,” was at anchor near to us. The next morning,
Saturday the 14th October, we essayed to get the ketch under-
way to go up to the Port. Unfortunately, the tide was too strong
for the wind, which was now slight with occasional rain showers.
It, therefore, became necessary to row up, so the big boat was
lowered, and having the tide with us we had even too much
time on our hands. We caught the desired train without
difficulty, and a very hearty good-bye and thanks to all hands
terminated a happy and health giving cruise which, despite all its
drawbacks of bad weather, rough seas, and intense cold, had the
effect of giving me much greather strength than I felt at starting.


©lie(Toasting Craft of Soulf) Jlaslralia^
Our sails are never lost to sight;
On every gulf and bay
They gleam in winter wind-cloud white,
In summer rain-cloud grey.
We hold the coast with slippery grip,
We dare from cape to cape,
Our leaden fingers feel the dip,
And trace the channel’s shape.
We sail or bide, as serves the tide;
Inshore we cheat its flow,
And side by side at anchor ride
When stormy head-winds blow.
Here and there to get a load,
Freighting anything;
Running off with spanker stowed,
Loafing wing-a wing- -
That’s the way the coaster goes,
Chumming with the land
Everywhere the tide flows,
Everywhere the wind blows,
From port to farthest strand.
— T. F. Day (adapted).
The preceding pages have shown that my earliest nautical
experience was gained from coasters, particularly from the
“Nancy,” schooner, and the “Swallow,” cutter; but these were
by no means the only craft I knocked about the coast in previous
to owning a yacht. Having been in subsequent years managing
partner in four ketches, I became acquainted with the men, the
vessels, the nature of their occupation, the profits they made,
and the losses to which they were subjected; therefore, may
fairly claim to speak with some degree of authority upon these
points. It is true that it is many years ago, when the trade they
were doing was extremtly profitable, and steamer opposition but
little known. In those palmy days a careful master had every


chance of speedily becoming sole owner of his craft —an
opportunity which was embraced by more than one. In those
days there was plenty of wheat, wool, and copper to carry ; and
good rates for freights. Places never dreamt of as ports were
opened up by the masters’ pluck and enterprise; tortuous passages
in shallow water, through sand spits and flats, were explored and
utilised ; and this pioneer fleet of vessels conferred considerable
benefit upon the colony before the days of railways and steamers,
bringing cargoes for shipment to the home and other markets.
Many a time and oft have I watched these craft with pride and
pleasure when I met them, either in the “White Cloud” or the
“Zephyr,” bowling along in gulf or river on their passages.
There was scarcely any of them who did not know the yachts,
and a cheery greeting was usually exchanged. Those were the
days of high wages as well as good profits, and employer and
employed were both rewarded for their labor. Not only were
they benefited, but the ship-builders, sail-makers, shipwrights,
painters, <fec., &c., were kept constantly employed through their
success, as it paid to keep them in good order. Several of these
vessels were built at the Port. Some were high-class craft, and
some were not. The latter have by this time generally disap-
peared ; some of the former are still to the fore.
But what a change the last twenty years has wrought. Out-
ports opened, railroads made to them, steamers piling to all the
profitable places at rates for freight against which it is impossi-
ble for a sailing vessel to contend, and often not even profitable
for the steamers. Year by year the coaster of old is being driven
out of its trade, to seek a living where it can. Well, in many
instances this has been justifiable—not, perhaps, in all. The
coaster cannot hope to retain a monopoly of a profitable trade
more than others. Nevertheless, it is allowable to feel regret
that those who have borne the brunt of first efforts in a new land
are now reduced to a hard battle for a living. Many of them are-
engaged in carrying stone for flux to Port Pirie, a class of cargo
that must necessarily wear the vessel out sooner than the old
class, and it is, I hear, carried at a rate that barely covers out-
goings, and would not nearly cover these if any mishap occurred
entailing extra outlay. Many of the early ketches that came to-
South Australia were built on the Huon River and elsewhere in


Tasmania, and splendid specimens of strength and faithful
workmanship they were, and indeed are, for most of them are
still running and in good order. They reflect the greatest credit
upon their builders, whose names I do not know, or would
certainly mention* them. No doubt they have excellent timber
for such craft in Tasmania, but the timber being good is only
one element in their construction—the work is good all round.
It is probably not generally known that there are still 26
schooners and 53 ketches in the coasting trade—l quote from the
copy of the official register appearing in M r. Sawtell’s useful N autical
Almanack for 1899 ; these are exclusive of the barges and wood
cutters that chiefly trade to Port Wakefield and intermediate
coasting places. There is a considerable fleet of these, and some
of them carry large cargoes. It will, therefore, be seen, that it
still remains an important industry, employing many hundreds
of men. In the course of conversation, I have heard it asserted
that the coasters think themselves suffering under some degree
of injustice, as they allege they are quite unrepresented on the
Marine Board ; that often matters arise affecting their interests
which if they could make known to a warden skilled as a
coaster, it would be brought before the other members of the
Board, and the grievance rectified or removed. As this i s
bordering on political matters I shall express no opinion upon it
one way or another, and, indeed, I am not in a position to do so,
even if inclined, because the statement would require investiga-
tion before I could say whether it is, or is not, well founded. I
simply mention the fact of having heard it, and there leave it.
It is useless denying that men interested in, or accustomed to
steamers have a kind of contempt for sailing vessels, and their
rights, and this contempt is in many instances responded to by
the masters and crews of sailing ships by positive dislike of
steamers, and the haughtiness of some of their masters. Both
feelings are unjust and unreasonable, but, like many other
prejudices, it will take time to remove them. Ido not know
that I am altogether free from something akin to the feeling
myself, although to say I dislike steamers would be too strong a
term to use, but, in common with nine out of ten of old sailors,
I share the admiration felt for a well-handled frigate, clipper-
ship, or smart coaster. Is there at the present day a steamer


afloat—naval or mercantile: —the description of which would
awaken the sentiments the following lines in “ Admirals All,”
by Henry Newbolt, cause us to feel ;
It was morning in St. Helens, in the great and gallant days,
And the sea beneath the sun glittered wide,
When the frigate set her courses all a-shimmer in the haze,
And she hauled her cable home, and took the tide.
She’d a right fighting company, three hundred men and more,
Nine and forty guns in tackle running free,
And they cheered her from the shore for her colors at the fore—
When the bold “ Menelaus” put to sea.
She’d a right fighting company, &e.
Admiration of the power, speed, enormous strength, and’
safety of the magnificent steamers of the present day may be
evoked, but the splendid skill exhibited by Britain’s sons all
over the world in handling the beautiful, shapely sailing
craft of past years is perhaps in danger of going for ever. It
may be a sentimental, as opposed to a practical and utilitarian
view, but I am not prepared to admit that it is wholly im-
practical. lam not at all sure that Great Britain’s supremacy
on the ocean was not mainly owing to the gallant tars her sailing
ships of the Navy and her mercantile fleets produced. God
grant they may prove as supreme behind their iron walls as
behind their wooden ones. I am not doubting their courage.
That they will retain, whether as good sailors as those of the
past or not. lam only venturing the view that the old style
taught sailorising that steamers give little opportunity of gain-
ing. The following lines, dedicated to the “ Sailor of the Sail ”
by Mr. T. F. Day, aptly confirm these views :
I sing the Sailor of the Sail, breed of the oaken heart
Who drew the world together, and spread our race apart,
Whose conquests are the measure of thrice the ocean’s girth,
Whose trophies are the nations that necklace half the earth.
Lord of the Bunt and Gasket, and Master of the Yard,
To whom no land was distant, to whom no sea was barred.
Beneath no stone or trophy, beneath no minster tower
Lie those who gave her Empire, who stretched her arm to power ;
Below those markless pathways, where commerce shapes the trail.
Unsung, unrung, forgotten, sleeps the Sailor of the Sail.


The whole volume, “Songs of Sea and Sail,” is well worth
obtaining, especially by seafaring men. It would be a poor sailor
that would not feel it move his heart a little. The author is, I
believe, an American. It will probably be many years before the
coastingcraft of any country will be wholly converted into steamers.
The fine sailing ships of the ocean may be doomed to disappear; if
so, the sailor’s art will have to be learnt from coasters. For this
reason alone they are worthy of our good wishes. When in Port
Lincoln Harbor I had the opportunity of seeing many of our local
vessels going to and from the quarries there for the stone they
take to Port Pirie for flux. There are two quarries that supply
this stone in Port Lincoln Harbor. I saw how hardly the coasters’
crews worked to make this trade pay, and ray old feeling of regard
for them was awakened; it is in consequence that this small tribute
of respect is penned. The work is hard, and the weather often
very rough, tantalizingly calm, or oppressively hot, and the
responsibility and care upon the masters is very great. Still, so
long as a living can be obtained, it is a manly, independent, and
useful one. South Australia has no reason to be ashamed of her
coastal craft.


THE
jTijaff in tß[Qfcrs .?
Though the cloud-wrack fly
O’er the wind-swept sky,
And the seas on our quarter swirl;
Though it threaten ill.
We’ve the well to fill,
Or ever our sails we furl.
—Lyell Dunne.
During our cruise we met with a number of the pretty fishing
•cutters that chiefly keep Adelaide supplied with fish. The great
majority of these have wells in them, into which the fish are at
once transferred as caught, and thus kept alive and fresh for
market. Little do we think, as we enjoy a whiting, schnapper,
snook, or red mullet, &c., that it may have been brought from
the Sir Joseph Banks’Group in Spencer’s Gulf, or far away down
Investigator Straits near the Althorpes, or from Backstairs
Passage. The extent of sea some of these vessels cover to obtain
catches is astonishing. One of these cutters was at Port Lincoln,
afterwards at the Islands near Reevesby, subsequently at Edith-
burg, and then at Stansbury, whilst we were at these places
respectively, and it is only by determined energy and constant
alacrity that the industry can be made a paying one. I think it
would probably be too strong a word to say it is a precarious
one, because 1 am informed that in favorable seasons the men
engaged in it do fairly well; but long-continued bad weather,
such as we had in September and October of this year, is a very
serious matter for them. Some of the finest vessels carry four
hands, so that they can have watch and watch; and the work
goes on continuously. These have generally been old yachts.
The “ Canowie,” the “Zephyr,” the “ Haidee,” the “Enchan-
tress,” the “Mischief,” and latterly the late Sir Wm. Clarke’s fine
cutter, the “Janet,” have all been noted yachts in their time;
and now they are the means of earning a livelihood for a lot of


worthy men. The above by no means exhausts the list of old
yachts in such service, but the names of the others do not occur
to ray memory as I write. The late Sir Thomas Elder s “ Edith,
which, it may be remembered, was built by Sir Jas. Fergusson
when Governor of South Australia, was also a fishing-cutter.
She was wrecked some years ago.
The question of bait is a difficult one. It is, of course, mainly
obtained by the net; but a master of a cutter told me it often
paid him better to purchase small fry for bait from fishermen who
reside on shore, and use only open boats along the coast, catching
whiting, garfish, tommy roughs, &c. There are some of these at
nearly all the ports on the Peninsula where the steamers call,
who send their catches to market by them. I have heard of a
cutter sailing as many as eighty miles to cast its net in a par-
ticular place for a bait supply. In days gone by the cutters in
Backstairs Passage ran into Eastern Cove for mackerel—capital
bait for schnapper. Of course, these were only obtainable at a
certain season of the year. These beautiful fish (mackerel) are
seldom or never seen in the Adelaide market, the reason being, I
am told, that they will not keep long. Those caught at Eastern
Cove are larger and flatter than any I saw in England in 1880-1,
At Weymouth, in the latter year, I caught a good number, but
they werenotto becorapared in size to those I secured at Kangaroo
Island. I always had the latter cooked in the manner generally
adopted in the Mother Country, viz., on buttered writing-paper
placed in a dish, fish and paper well buttered, and thoroughly
well peppered, and then placed in the oven. My guests invari-
ably enjoyed them. Tommy roughs done this way are also very
good.
Although the industry can scarcely be described as a pre-
carious one, as I have previously observed, still, as compared with
many other places, the quantity of fish obtainable is often very
scanty, and this accounts for the uncertainty of the supply to the
Adelaide market. That wholesome, toothsome fish, the schnapper,
is a most uncertain quantity—sometimes in vast numbers and
so voracious that they will bite anything, at others not a fish can
be secured. Probably the most reliable of all is the whiting, as
it is so widely distributed, the finest being caught in Spencer


"Gulf. The Wallaroo fishermen have established quite a reputa-
tion for the size and quality of this fish they send to market. I
have partaken of some delicious whiting in Spencer Gulf.
Schnapper frequent rocky headlands, reefs, rocks, and rocky
bottom—generally in deep water—sometimes in very deep water.
It is no joke to pull up a 10 or 12-lb. schnapper through 30
fathoms of water, or 180 feet. The whiting is to be found in
almost every shallow bay and inlet along the coast where sand
is interspersed with sufficient marine growth and seaweed to
maintain them. The gar, another healthy fish, is by no means
always to be secured. They run to a very large size about
the Sir Joseph Banks’ Group, and still larger, I believe, more to
the westward. To my mind the schnapper, whiting, flounder, red
mullet, and gar are the five best salt-water fish in South Australia.
The bream—also a beautiful fish—is caught where fresh water and
salt are combined; generally where a fresh-water stream empties
itself into the sea. After these the next best is, I think, the
tommy rough, or native herring—a fish not to be despised by any
means. lam quite aware that some people would place snook
and trevally higher on the list, but neither of these, or the so-
called salmon trout (the latter fish against which I am strongly
prejudiced) is, to my mind, equal to those mentioned, and I speak
after upwards of thirty summers’ experience of catching and
eating some of them.
To enable the supply of the best sorts to be at all continuous
it means thorough hard work even in fine weather, as such
distances have to be sailed; in rough weather it is trying to the
men and to their craft, and when compelled to shelter, as they
often are, or the fish are so scarce as they have been lately, it is
profitless work. It is, therefore, not to be wondered at that the
Adelaide fish market is irregularly supplied; and the prices
comparatively high. So scarce were fish in the early part of
October this year that the local fisherman at Stansbury obtained
ss. 6d, per dozen for whiting for the market. No better proof
of the bad weather we had to endure in our cruise could be
given. I have heard the opinion expressed that one or two
steam trawlers with huge wells in them would improve the
supply of fish to the market I am doubtful about this—as it is a


Tin’i.rkftti easily glutted. It is often stated that South Australians
eat too little fish, and too much meat, and that if they consumed
more of the former, and more vegetables and fruit, and less meat
they would be healthier. Unless the taste of the people alters in
this respect —so that a greater demand arises—there may remain
little encouragement for such an outlay as these steamers would
entail. Steam is now utilized from nearly all, if not all, the
main ports for sending the catches to market, It is only when
a strong fair wind affords the opportunity that the cutters run
to Port Adelaide or Glenelg. I could not help admiring the
pluck of the crews of several of these (the old “ Zephyr” amongst
them) that were running up the straits during the N. West
gale we were riding out, with two anchors down, in Sturt Bay,
under Sandy Point. I have already mentioned that there were
six fishing cutters sheltering there at the same time, each of
which was painted white, and each alow and aloft looking as
pretty and well kept as if they were pleasure yachts, reflecting
the greatest credit upon their owners. It was a very pleasant
sight to an old yachtsman, as their graceful bows present a
striking contrast to the long, ugly, schooner-shaped ones of the
cutter-yachts of the present age. I daresay the latter have all
the advantages claimed for them—they undoubtedly do away
with the dangerously long bowsprits of the past —but the less
said about their beauty the better. It must be remembered
that I am one of a generation that saw the old “ Alarm ” (when
she was a dandy-rigged cutter), the “ Arrow” and the “Lulworth”
cutters, built. I believe I am correct in saying that the “ Arrow ”
is some 110 tons yacht measurement, and that she won so
many prizes that these when scattered cover every available
inch of her deck room, but I must not get on this theme, for, as
the lawyers say, it is not (juite “ relevant to the issue.
If the supply of ordinary fish is difficult of attainment on our
coast, still more so is the obtaining of the oyster. For many
years these were sent to Adelaide from Coffin Bay and Port
Lincoln, and although large they were very good. Now, how-
ever, it is only by judicious shepherding of the beds at both these
places that they can be made available for future dredging.
There was not an oyster cutter at Port Lincoln during our stay,


and I missed the pretty sight they presented when getting under-
way to go to their day’s work, or in returning from it. I knew
a number of those employed in the industry, and have had many
a pleasant crack with them when cruising in Port Lincoln
waters. At that time I think there must have been quite a
score of boats engaged in dredging there and sending the oysters
to Adelaide, per the s.s. “ Ferret.” The price they usually
obtained was =£l per bag, and three bags was considered a good
day’s work. This sum looks like the possibility of earning nearly
£2O per week. Possibly this was done occasionally, but there
are many days when no dredging can be done—when it is calm
or when it is blowing a gale of wind—and then the season only
lasts for a certain number of months. Considering the hard
nature of the work of constantly pulling up two or three heavy
dredges, and being probably wet through all day, with the wear and
tear of gear and sails, the sum charged was not unreasonable. I
believe many of the cutters are trying for fresh grounds higher
up Spencer Gulf, about Point Lowly and its neighborhood, but so
far, I fear, with little success. For a time they obtained a scanty
supply from Louth Bay and its vicinity, but this ground had to
be abandoned as unpayable. A good many of the oystermen
have, lam told, since engaged in other occupations. The last
time I met them as a fleet was in Port Vincent, in Gulf St.
Vincent. They were then trying the coast from Ardrossan,
Black Point, and Port Vincent, but here again they could find
no payable ground. May they soon discover one superior to
anything yet known in the colony. When paying a tribute of
respect to the excellent coasting craft of our colony, T could not
withhold a similar expression of regard to its worthy fishing
fleet.
Vardon it Pritchard, Printers, Adelaide.


3 1508 00972221


