

AN UNHEEDED
WARNING.
By Captain John Strachan, J.P.
Price 6d.
COPYRIGHT.




Your failthfully,
John Strachan, J.P.


An Unheeded Warning .
A danger foretold which has now
come but is not yet passed.
THE JAPANESE, THE CHINESE, THE GERMANS,
AND THE EMPTY NORTH.
BY
CAPTAIN JOHN STRACHAN, J.P.
Sidney :
I). S. Ford, Printer, 729 George-st, Haymarket
1914


The President and Members
of the
Burns Annibersan Club.
yjV Y Friends and “Brother Scots,” whose pledge of loyalty and
>JL£ devotion to the Constitution, King and Crown, of Great Britain,
is the strongest proof that in your ranks will be found no
degenerates or traitors. That you are nobly striving to
emulate the race from which you sprung, the grand auld Scottish
Covenanters, who fought and died to gain for us, their descendants,,
the blessings of liberty and justice we enjoy to-day —none daring to
make us afraid. To you, therefore, I have much pleasure in pre-
senting my humble effort to warn the Nation of a danger —which has
now come, but xs not yet past, “Although mine was as a voice crying
in the wilderness,” very few indeed took heed of the warning. But
thanks be to God, the nation was not caught altogether unprepared,
and our Allies have proved staunch, true and generous, more particu-
larly our faithful Ally the Japanese, whose highly honourable conduct
should make their traducers in Australia hang their heads in shame.
While the spirit dp our race is as of yore, and the Empire’s sons
as vigorous, virile and strong to-day as their sires before them to
maintain the honour of our Flag and the integrity of the Empire,
the struggle will be long, and the strain on our resources great, but
we will emerge gloriously triumphant, a great united and closely
consolidated Empire —that will as hitherto continue to prove in the
future as in the pasf, a guide, protector and friend to the oppressed,
and a blessing to the human race.
Then let us pray that come it may,
And come it will for a’h that;
When man to man the world o’er,
Shall brothers be for a’h that.
To you then my friends and Brither Scots I dedicate this Lecture —
but dinna be ower critical.
JOHN STRACHAN, J.P.


An Unheeded Warning.
A Lecture delivered by Captain Strachan at the Albert Hall, Brisbane,
June , 1909, Royal Society's House, Sydney , February , 1913, and
the Burns Anniversary Club, 1914.
JAPAN.
PART I.
HE) ordinary citizen must have observed the persistence with
I) which sections of the Press endeavour to excite in the public
gngß mind hostility and contempt towards the people of a great and
2asS2* progressive nation, who to-day are the Empire’s most faithful
and trusted allies. It is not the Press alone who are guilty of
gross misrepresentation in regard to Japan and the Japanese, fop
some travellers after a flying visit to the East pose on their return
as authorities on international and Eastern affairs. They furnish
highly sensational articles to the Press on the subject of the Yellow
Peril, and a few have gone far to expose their own ignorance in
lecturing to public audiences about the Japs in the Pacific, the
Commonwealth’s danger, and other mjatters on which their ideas are-
of the crudest. In addressing these audiences, the bulk of whom
have no previous knowledge, much harm is done in creating a
distrust of our allies, and directing public attention to dangers which
in fact have no foundation, thus clouding their vision to a very real
danger already in our midst.
That Australia is menaced by a grave and close danger I admit.
We are living and dreaming in a fool’s Paradise, and I much fear
we shall be pudely awakened when the dhys of calamity come.
Public opinion in an off-hand, careless fashion shows there is a hazy
idea of this danger afloat; it is variously attributed to the Chinese,
the Japanese, the Germans or the empty North, and the general
want of population. To place the situation fairly before the public
is my present object.


This evening I shall endeavour to reveal facts as they have come
under my own observation, faithfully and without bias.
As Japan is even now) a pountry but little known I shall try
to give a brief sketch of its history from the earliest times unto
the present day, thus enabling my hearers to form a truer estimate
of Japan and fhe Japanese than they can possibly do from the
columns of the Press or by listening to florid addresses from im-
perfectly informed individuals.
China as a danger is still somewhat remote, but will be duly*,
■dealt with though at best all in connection therewith is mere con-
jecture.
When dealing with Germany, I shall go back to 1870, placing
calmly and dispassionately before you events as they have occurred
and as they have come under my notice in order of time.
Japan whose early history is shrouded in the mists of a remote
antiquity from whence they came, and from whom they descended
is all so much guess work, but it is believed that the earliest
settlers were rovers from Malaysia, Borneo and Siam, together with
Phillipines, Chinese and Coreans. These descended on the Loo
Choos and Southern shores of Japan just as centuries later, the
Angles, Saxons and Danes made their descent on the British Isles,
and there settled in distinct tribes, until the year 660 8.C., when
Jimmu Tenno overcame the various tribes, subdued the Ainos, art
aboriginal race of savages inhabiting the Northern Islands. He
■established his power and annexed the title of Mikado (Emperor),
built his capital at Osrtka near the present Kioto in the Inland Sea
and gave his subjects a code of laws and a strong settled government.
With Jimmu Tenno begins the authentic history of Japan and
under his descendants the people unaided by outside influence
steadily advanced in civilization and prosperity until B.C. 97, when
the Emperor Sijun, surnamed the Civilizer, labourer to promote the
welfare of his subjects. He it was who brought about the splendid
system of irrigation in vogue to this day, and he also inaugurated
a new military system.
During the year 203 A.D., the Emperor Regent, Jongu Kogo,
subdued Corea and thereafter a large Corean migration began, but
it was not until 552 A.D. that a company of doctors, diviners,
astronomers and mathematicians came from Corea and took up
their residence at the Japanese Court, bringing with them a band of
Buddhist missionaries. These introduced the civilization of Central
Asia with its arts, sciences, letters, literature and the Buddhist re-
ligion-all of which had been hitherto unknown in the Japanese
Empire, thus changing the character and history of Japan for ever.
In less than fifty years after the introduction of letters the whole
laws of the country were codified and framed in writing, and a new
.and more rigid system of official grading constituted.. The whole
Empire was resurveyed the boundaries of the provinces more
accurately fixed, but for the next five centuries the power of the
Mikado declined as the power of the great nobles increased, and
Japan was distracted by rivalries and contentions in the provinces


until the Mikado finally became, a mere puppet in the hands of the
great nobles who were each bent on securing their own aggrandizement
and increasing their power.
This led to centuries of civil war, until at last the reigning
Mikado, no longer able to bear the strain, decided to appoint a civil
ruler with a view to putting an end to internal anarchy and strife.
Thus Yoritomo, the son of Minomoto, noble by a peasant mother,
was chosen and given the title of Shogoon or Civil Ruler. He was
an able, heroic man who quickly established his power over the
whole empire and reduced the rebellious nobles to submission,
absorbing at the same time all the real powers of government, and
leaving the Mikado only his hereditary rank, dignity and character.
This was in A.D. 1184. Thenceforth until the revolution of 1868
the Shoguns were the real rulers of Japan though the Mikado remained
the true source of power. ?
The rule of Yoritomo lasted fifteen years. He was succeeded in
the Shogunate by a member of the Hojo family, who for over a
century —until 1333 —maintained order and tranquillity in Japan.
Literature, science and art were encouraged; splendid temples were
•erected; the military spirit was kept alive among the people and
military tactics improved. Thus did the empire attain to a high
state of civilization unaided by foreign influences or example.
In 1274, Kublai Khan, the Tartar conqueror of China, sent an
expedition to subdue Japan, but these invaders were routed by the
Japanese. In 1281, Kublai Khan sent a more formidable fleet
and army which whs a/lso opposed with desperate valour by the
Japanese, and violent storms sweeping the seas at the time, the*
whole of his great armament of over one hundred thousand men was
destroyed. Since then no foreign power has attempted to invade
Japan.
We now draw near to the time when Christianity gained a footing
in the country. Japan was first made known to Europeans in the
thirteenth century by Mqrco Polo, the great Venetian traveller; but
Christianity was not heard of in Japan until the sixteenth century,
when two young Japanese for some cause were condemned to commit
Hari Kari, their love of life overcoming their sense of honour and
they fled their country, going first to Shanghai in China and thence
to Macao. Here they were kindly received and protected by the
Portuguese missionaries, whom they told that their country wa*
rich in gold, silver and precious stones, advanced in arts and manu-
factures, and possessed great cities and magnificent temples. Is it
therefore any cause for wonder that these priests dreamed of a second
Peru to be subdued and conquered by the Portuguese as easily as)
Mexico and Peru had been overcome by Spain. Be that as it may,
the Portuguese lost no time in fitting out a great and imposing
expedition and sailed for Japan.
This expedition arrived at its destination —Nagasaki —during the
year 1542, and was followed in 1549 by St. Francis Xavier “the
Apostle of the Indies.” All were well received and kindly treated.
They were allowed to teach and preach the Christian religion to the


people. They made paany converts, even among the most powerful
nobles.
So rapidly did Christianity spread among the Japanese that in
1582 an embassy was sent to Rome to assure the Pope of the sub-
mission of the Japanese Christians.
In the year 1598, the Dutch paid their first visit to Japan and
were also well received, notwithstanding the bitter opposition of the
Portuguese, and in 1609 the port Hirado was granted to them as a
trading port. Here they built a factory and were granted important
privileges.
It was during this time that the first Englishman landed in Japan,
but alas, he came not in a British ship manned by a stout English,
crew. It was on the 19th of April, 1600, that the Dutch merchant
ship Rope shattered, tempest-tossed and weatherbeaten —little better
than a wreck —cast anchor in Oita Harbour in the province of Bungo..
She had been two years at sea, doubled the Cape of Good Hope,
lost both her consorts and a goodly portion of her crew. Below lay
nineteen helpless invalids, while on deck were six scarvy-stricken
skeletons, with just enough vitality left to handle the ropes and
bring the ship |tjo anchor. These were under the command of an
Englishman, William Adams, ptilot or sailing master in the service
of the Dutch.
The tidings of the new arrivals and their grievous plight reached
the Daimio or Prince of Bungo, whose orders were to receive the-
survivors with humanity, hot to keep them in safe custody. Death
was the penalty for entering Japan without permission, and it can
be well understood that these disease-stricken, tempest-tossed mariners
were in no fit state to advance with colours flying and cannons roar-
ing out in salute, thereafter to enter into negotiations for peaceful
and friendly intercourse.
The Portuguese and Spanish Jesuits urged the Japanese to
inflict the deatn penalty on the Englishman, also the Dutch interlopers,
and heretics, and under the guise of friends they practised every
Jesuitical trick and machination for entrapping the British sailor.
His sterling honesty, however, was proof against every art and device
of his enemies. He was sent to Osaka, which he describes as a city
as great as London, with a castle .marvellous, large and strong. Here
he was brought before the reigning Shogun, the great and mighty
lyeyasu —a keen judge of character.
The frank, fearless demeanour of the English master mariner
created a strong, favourable and lasting impression in the mind of
that mighty potentate, but the Jesuits were then in the height of their
power and a force to be reckoned with. As I have already remarked,
many of the great nobles and vast numbers of the people had been
converted to the Christian faith, whose priests were the interpreters
during a long conversation between the Shogun and his English
prisoner.
In the bluff, British seaman, the Japanese monarch saw before him
a man of altogether different type to the Portuguese, who had


hitherto represented European humanity within his realms. Therefore,
■until the agitation raised by these priests had time to die out, lyeyasu
deemed it prudent to send Adams back to his companions with the
.assurance that their lives would be safe.
After a time, Adams was recalled to the Court of the Shogun,
to whom he proved a useful and faithful retainer. He built a ship
•of eighty tons for the Imperial service, and the Shogun coming to
inspect, liked it well.
He also instructed tho Prince in all the sciences familiar to a,
mariner of his rime—navigation, geometry and mathematics, and in
many ways gained the high esteem of Prince and people, he himself
in turn learning to respect the little Japanese who at first had seemed
■so strange and despicable.
“The Japanners,” he said : “are brave men and stout seamen.”
{This was three centuries ago.)
Step by step the poor shipwrecked English mariner ingratiated
himself into the good graces of his Prince and the people until he
became a feudal lord over a Japanese village, with a hundred re-
tainers. At this period he took unto himself a high bred Samurai
maiden to wife. But he had left a wife and family behind him in
old England, who, to his great grief of heart and conscience could
never know he was still alive. With a view to relieving this anxiety,
Adams w r rote letter after letter, until at last one of his epistles!
reached the offices of the East India Company, then only about ten
years in existence. It was addressed to “my unknown friends and
■countrymen.” It came from the unknown island empire on whose
waters no English ship had yet sailed.
Our forefathers being men prompt of action, it was not long ere
the good ship Clove, John Saris, Master, left the Downs, carrying
a letter from King James the First to the Emperor of Japan, prof-
fering the friendship of England and seeking the amity of his far-
distant brother sovereign and on interchange of commodities to their
mutual advantage, and promising a hearty welcome to any Japanese
who should undertake to visit Great Britain and its dependencies.
The ship arrived safely, Saris was well received, and Adams
who was absent at the time was sent for. Saris was a man of good
family —at a time when family counted for much and feudalism was
still strong in England, —thus, so far as can be gathered, he did not
meet his humbler brother Englishman who was of the people, and a
man who had raised himself by his own exertions, with that heartiness
and goodwill which was to have been expected from one Britisher to
another, but rather seems to have regarded Adams with unnecessary
suspicion. Yet Will Adams appears to have acted loyally towards
.Saris, who wrote home that Will was half a japanner whom he sus-
pected was in the pay of the Dutch. Adams had taken him to Osaka,
introduced him to his Prince and obtained permission for the English
to trade all over the Empire, and on Saris’ departure the Shogun
sent a letter to King James in which he wrote, “Though separated


by ten thousand leagues o'f clouds and waves, our territories are as
it were close together.”
Saris, after much haggling, agreed to pay Adams £IOO a year to
represent the East India Company in Japan. This money was never
paid, as the Company sent no more ships. The failure of Britain’s
first venture in Japan may be attributed to the turbulence and want
of tact on the part of John Saris. Adams never saw English shores
again. He died four years after his friend and patron, lyeyasu, and
was buried at the side of his Japanese wife at the village of Herm-
Mura.
Thus began and ended British intercourse with Japan —an inter-
course not to be renewed until over two centuries had rolled away,,
but it is worthy of thought as to what would have been the result'
had the East India Company made a better selection of the man sent
in command on a voyage so important, and on the success of which
so much depended. Whatever the character of Saris may have been,
there is ample proof that in William Adams the British race was
fairly represented by an honest, fearless and straightforward sea-
man —a brave and gallant Englishman.
With the departure of the good ship Clove and her master, John
Saris, the whole trade of Japan was left in the hands of the Dutch
and Portuguese, between whom there existed a bitter trade rivalry
accentuated by fierce bigotry and religious hatred. Each lost no
opportunity of exciting the suspicion of the Japanese against the other,
and at last the Dutch succeeded in covincing these people of the
dangerous character of their Portuguese rivals.
The Japanese were told the story of the Spanish conquests of
Mexico and Peru, with all the sordid details of the Spaniards 11
treachery and brutality in those lands, and finally it was whispered
that the Portuguese and Spaniards were plotting to overthrow the
Government and seize Japan. That such a plot ever existed is denied,
but the arogance and overbearing insolence and pride of some of
the priests went far as to prove the truth of it at the time. The
Government became thoroughly alarmed and issued an edict that by
a given date all the Portuguese should leave Japan, while the native
Christians were commanded to abjure Christianity and return to the
religion of their fathers. <
The Portuguese and native Christians refused to obey, and there-
after begad a series of cruel and bloody persecutions which ended
in the total expulsion ! of the Portuguese, and Christianity was seem-
ingly stamped put in Japan.
The Empire was now for all practical purposes apain closed to the
outside world.
True, the Dutch, who had been moved from Hirado to the island
of Deshina where twice yearly on the steps by the water-side they
burned the image of the Virgin Mary and trampled on the Cross as a
proof of their bona-fides, and to show their contempt for the religion
of their late rivals.


The Dutch made no attempt to interfere with the religion of the
country but devoted all their energy to developing a profitable trade.
Cooped up on the small island of Deshina, guarded on every side,,
and surrounded by spies, they kept open the Whole foreign intercourse
for over two centuries, during which time there was much internal
activity and much disturbance between the loyal supporters of the
Mikado and the supporters of the Shogun.
The educated classes had never ceased to consider the Mikado
as the only legitimate sovereign of Japan, and consequently regarded
the Shogun in the light of a usurper. Moreover, the Shoguns
favoured Buddhism, whereas the Mikado supported the ancient
Shintoism.
There were many risings, but all were rigorously suppressed until
1852, when a ship belonging to the U.S.A. having been wrecked on
the Japanese coast and the mariners treated with great harshness, the
President of the United States sent an expedition under the command
of Commodore Matthew C. Perry to negotiate a treaty of commerce
and friendship between Japan and America.
After delivering the President’s letter to the Japanese authorities,,
the D.S. Squadron sailed for China, but returned in 1854 when Perry
succeeded in negotiating a treaty with the Shogun. The same year
the English concluded a treaty with the Shogun whereby the ports
of Nagasaki and Hakodadi were open to commerce. Other nations
followed, but it was not until 1874 that the trade of Japan was free
to the whole civilized world.
The action of the Shogun in concluding treaties was considered a
usurpation of the Makado’s authority, which was resented by the
nation as a violation of the traditional policy of non-intercourse with
foreigners, and the country resounded with the cry of “Honour the
Mikado, expel the barbarians”!
The southern princes, more particularly the mighty Prince Satsum’a,
together with the Chosin, Tosa and Hizeu clans warmly espoused the
Mikado’s cause. In obedience to the Mikado Prince Nogato fired on
the ships of Great Britain, France, Holland and the United States.
These Pow r ers acted promptly and a combined fleet captured that
port after a severe bombardment in 1864, compelling the Japanese
to pay an indemnity of three million dollars, besides showing how
powerful were the foreigners and the superiority of European arma-
ments. This made the Japanese more careful in their conduct.
The Shogun died in 1858 and was succeeded by the usurper li,
but he being assasinated in the streets of Yedo on March 23rd, iB6O,
the Mikado’s party increased rapidly in power ’and numbers. From
this time until 1867 there was more or less severe fighting through-
out the Empire, when at last defeated and a fugitive the last of the
Shoguns surrendered to the Imperial forces, making his submission to
the Mikado and being permitted to retire into private life.
The Mikado's authority as it existed prior to 1184 A.D. Avas now
once more restored. The abolition of the Shogunate and the restora-
tion of the Mikado ended the history of Old Japan.


JAPAN.
PART II.
We will now endeavour to follow the history of New Japan from
1868 until the present day.
The whole of the treaties entered into by the Shogun with the
representatives of foreign nations were frankly acknowledged by the
Mikado’s government; these fn turn recognised the Mikado as the
legitimate ruler of the Empire. Thus the foundations were laid for
the cordial relations which until recently existed between Japan and
the nations of Christendom. Foreign ideas and customs were rapidly
adopted, students sent to the United States, England, Germany,
France and other European countries, to study political economy,
medicine, engineering, ship-building, art and military and
every other branch of science and mechanics. So that the whole
character of Japanese civilisation has undergone a total change. All
that is best in European civilisation has been adopted and in some
cases improved upon; thus in the short space of half a century Japan
has attained to a deservedly high place among the nations.
In 1888 they fought and defeated the Chinese, but owing to the
action of Germany, France and Russia were unable to reap the fruits
of their victory. The Japanese although flushed with victory took
the interference of the three great European powers with surprising
equanimity, thereby for a time avoiding conflict with either until
goaded into hostilities by Russia whose aggressive policy in the East
was encouraged by the Germans to such an extent as to induce the
Government of Great Britain and Japan to enter into an aggressive
and defensive alliance.
The treaty with Great Britain, which at the time caused much
adverse comment among the more aggressive European powers,
secured Japan from 1 a flank attack by Germany or the United States
whom at that time it was thought Japan had cause for apprehension.
Being thus /eft free to deal with Russia whom they attacked
simultaneously with the declaration of war —a w r ar so recent as to
require no description here —and the rapid mobilisation of the troops,
their valour, patriotism and .devotion in their country’s cause, together
with their heroism and noble self-sacrifice, presents a grand object
lesson to the youth and manhood of Australia, who instead of sneer-
ing at the little Japanners would do well to emulate their patriotism
and desperate valour in defence of their country and their country’s
flag.
When after deeds pf heroic daring the Japanese had defeated
the Russian forces on land, and practically annihilated their fleet at
sea, certain powers in Europe became troublesome and were onljj)
prevented from taking a hand in the game by the Anglo-Japanese
Alliance and from fear of the British fleet.
At this time the emissaries of Germany were fomenting
trouble for ,the Japanese in that great conglomerate mass of humanity—


the United States of America, where the Japanese (who were U.S.
citizens) were insulted and even murdered by lawless foreigners along
the western seaboard. In Canifornia children were prevented from
attending the same schools as the offspring of other citizens of
foreign birth.
And this was happening to the people of a high-spirited nation,
flushed with their victory |p ver Russia —that great power which for
half a century had been the dread of Europe, and more especially
Great Britain. What action did Japan take to avenge these murders
and cruel insults? Did they send a fleet to destroy and level to the
dust the great cities on the Western coast of the United States? No.
The government of Japan appealed to the Federal Government to see
that justice equal and even-handed should be (meted out to their people,
although it was with difficulty that their own people in Japan were
restrained as tale after tale of cruelty, insult and the murder of their
kith and kin by the people of a nation claiming to be Christian were
cabled across hire Pacific.
And when Great Britain, fearing a world-wide and devastating
war proposed that the President of these United States should act as
mediator and arbitrator between themselves and Russia with the
view to ending a war in which Japan had been everywhere victorious,
they in deference to the wish of their ally, Great Britain, agreed to
what was intended to be an honourable settlement. Personally I do
not think Japan had a fair deal. They received no cash indemnity
but retained most of the hard won Provinces.
When later Corea which from 203 A.D. they had held in suzerainty
was annexed to the Empire, to prevent foreign complications, a hue
and cry was raised about the grasping ambition of an Asiatic nation,
and certain third-rate politicians and newspapers in Australia made
capital out of what was only a natural sequence of the war, and the
land hunger evinced by one of the Continental powers of Europe.
From 1868 until to-day, Japan has been and is likely to continue
the fast, true and loyal friend of Great Britain—the most faithful and
least exacting ally save one that the British Empire has ever possessed
—the solitary exception being He Who ruleth the destinies of men
and nations. He has in times past proved the Friend in time of need,
neither asking for nor receiving subsidy save .such as may nave been
offered by grateful hearts.
The Japanese have also been accused of want of commercial
probity, but until recent years Japan was not a commercial nation.
Graded into eight classes, the trader ranked only two degrees above
the coolie, being looked on with but little resepct by the litterateur or
scientist. They were held in contempt by the Samurai or fighting
class, but since 1868, Japanese students have studied commercial
economics as a science and now Japan bids fair to become one of the
great commercial nations whose merchants are endeavouring to copy
in all things the British —even to that probity which has in the pafet
made the word of a British merchant his bond. So that with the
•growth of New Japan we may let this accusation sink among the things
that were but are not now.


Ladies and gentlemen —From Japan we have nothing to fear —but
much to hope for. Becase the day may not be far distant when our
very existence as a nation may depend on che loyalty of the Japanese-
to the British Alliance. I for one have no fear. Japan will not
falter neither will these little Japanners prove untrue. It is true that
as a nation, as a people, they are small in stature, and to some may
appear insignificant, but w)as it not Dr. Watt, who on hearing a
lady inquire ‘‘ls that Dr. Watt —that Mee mite of a manV' promptly
replied, “If I could reach from Pole to Pole and grasp the ocean in
my span, yet I’d be measured by my soul. The mind’s the standard
of the man.”
In my opinion these little Japanners tower as high above their
traducer in patriotism, love of country and devotion to their country’s
flag, as Mount Olympus above the plain.
CHINA.
We now turn to the Chinese, whose vast Empire is the oldest now
existing on the face of the earth and whose teeming population of
over four hundred millions has been likened unto a sleeping giant,
whom, when the great awakening comes, Australia will have cause to
fear. Separated as it has been from the rest of mankind, China has a
history distinctly its own, unconnected with that of other nations.
Great empires have successfully risen and flourished for a time, then
fallen into decay and disappeared, but China has remained without
change for at least five thousand years; its civilisation has existed
from time immemorial; porcelain vessels, with Chinese mottoes upon
them, have been discovered in the tombs in ancient Egypt, and a're
believed to have been imported from China by kings who reigned
before Moses.
China and its institutions have outlived everything elso in the
world. From ancient Egypt to Greece and Rome, Assyria, Babylonia,
Media, Persia, together with Israel and Judaea —these have all risen,
flourished, decayed, and, all but the last, died. But China, probably
more ancient than any of them, has ,remained the same until the present
day, when the time of the Giant’s awakening has come. True, after
the long slumber, China is still somewhat lethargic, or, in what may
be termed the yawning stage, but as sure as the sun shines in the
heavens there will be a real awakening fraught with potentialities of
stupendous importance to the human race, so great and absorbing as
to overwhelm the national and commercial life of Europe. Herein
lies Australia’s danger from the Asiatic races of China and Mongolia.
’The danger of attack by hostile Chinese fleets and armies is yet re-
mote and pudh a possibility need cause little apprehension to the people
and statesmen of the Commonwealth.
'But we are menaced b’y a real 'and very grave danger from China —
a danger I know not how we, living as we do in a state of smujg


complaisance engendered mainly through a feeling of false security,
ignorance, and pride, are to avert. Because, just as soon as the
internal turmoil, which at present disturbs the peace of the Chinese
Empire, cools down and a stabler government is established on a
sound and firm basis, western capital and western ideas, together
with up-to-date machinery and experts will be introduced, and in
the very near future China will become the greatest manufacturing
nation the world has ever seen. Under the guidance of foreigners
its vast, almost inexhaustible mineral resources will be won from the
bowels of the earth; the coal measures known to exist will be fully
and energetically developed, at a cost so small as to preclude the
possibility of either European or Australian competition; woollen,
cotton and other factories will be established and worked with all
the patient industry for which the Chinese are proverbial.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is not the vices, neither is it any aggres-
ive, warlike spirit of the Chinese we have to fear, but it is their
magnificent virtues. In their cotton, woollen and other mills, an
operative’s wages will range from two pence to sixpence a day; in
coal and other mines a miner will work long hours at from venpence
to two shillings per day; while, in the foundaries and shipbuilding
yards, skilled mechanics will be content with a daily wage of from
two to three shillings and think their lot a happy one. I need say
no more on this subject. I have given you a problem to think over
and to solve for yourselves. Should you succeed in arriving at a'
satisfactory solution, you will be more fortunate than I.
GERMANY.
We now turn to Germany and the Germans, against whom, it has,,
been said, that I am actuated by a bitter animosity. Nothing can
be more untrue. I have no hatred nor animosity against any section
of the human race and most certainly not against individuals, whatever
their nationality may be. To Germany and the Germans I owe a
deep debt of gratitude, for much of the knowledge which I have,
during the course of a long and adventurous life, imperfectly acquired
has been gleaned from the deep research and erudition of such men
as Spiegel, Huag, Westergaard, Von Bunsin and, more recently,
Professor Max Muller—those great Orientalists who have cleared away
the mists of the past and enabled the student to follow the seven
great streams from their primitive homes in Iran Vaejo to the plains
of Hindoostan or the Forest of Germany and the British Isles. It is
men such as these who made the German name loved and respected
throughout the civilised world.
But, alas, the scene has changed, since 1870, when France,
humbled but not subdued, paved the way for the consolidation of the
Germanic States into the great German Empire, and the mistaken
ambition of German statesmen for empire building and colonial ex


pansion. The character of Germany and the Germans has changed.
'No longer do we look to them for light and learning, but to-day
their every action is viewed with suspicion and mistrust by the nations
of the whole earth.
Although Germany became a consolidated whole in 1870, it was
mot until 1873 that the glamour of empire building and colonial ex-
piansion took a firm hold on the minds of German statesmen. At that
time it was not thought possible to break down the might of England
and seize British possessions. It was believed the Latin States of
South America would fall an easy prey —these being mostly in a state
■of chronic rebellion and internal unrest, it was thought little protest
would be raised in Europe against German annexation. Thus, when
the garrisons were finally withdrawn from France and the army re-
duced to a peaceful footing, whole regiments were disbanded and
thrown loose upon the country where every trade and indstry was in
a complete state of stagnation. It was to relieve this that the Germanic
host began to pour into Argentina, Paraguay, and the Empire of
Brazil. In the last named Bahia was selected as the most suitable
.and whole regiments of German soldiers and their families settled
there. At the same time there wap a lesser migration to the United
States of America and Australia, but this was not encouraged, as
it was then believed that such emigrants would be lost to the Father-
land. Be that as it may, the Germans were well received and wel-
comed as valuable assets in these sparcely settled lands, where, as a
.result of their frugality and persevering industry most of
them prospered and were held in high esteem by the peoples among
whom they had chosen to cast in their lot.
I will now endeavour succinctly to follow the various Teutonic
streams in different parts of the world as German emigration has
spread practically over the whole earth, and in nearly every instance,
their settlement has been in countries alien in race and language. Is
it therefore any cause for wonder that, in these new lands, the Germans
formed distinct settlements, where, retaining their own customs and the
language of their Fatherland, they have remained a more or less
distinct people from those by whom they are surrounded, and thus a
source of danger.
It was not until 1889 that the civilised world awakened to this
fact. The first real alarm note was sounded when the Empire of
Brazil was dissolved by the abdication of Dom Pedro the Second,
.and the Proclamation of the Republic of the United States of Brazil.
I think lam correct in saying that Dom Pedro had not left the Port
and the Constitution —which contained only five Articles —had not
been published before the new government was startled by the news
that fifty-two thousand German settlers were in arms in Bahia and
had issued a Proclamation declaring Bahia a German colony. The
Government were aghast. In their distress they appealed to the Presi-
dent of the United States of America, who acted promptly, ack-
nowledging the Republic as the Government Of Brazil and despatched
the U.S. Fleet, such as it was, to Bahia. At the same time the
'German Ambassador was notified that the U.S.A. Government were


prepared to maintain the principles of the Monroe doctrine, that any
attempt on the part of Germany to acquire territory on the American-
continent would be considered a casus belli by the Government of
U.S.A. The Germans withdrew their pretensions and the rising quietly
fizzled out. But, therby, a bitter animosity between the Germans and
Americans was engendered, as will be presently shown. The im-
mediate result of this check to German ambition was a more vigorous
stream of German immigrants into the British possessions, notably
Australia—which will be dealt with later.
Ladies and gentlemen, most -of you remember the Cuban rebellion
and the blowing up of the United States’ warship The Maine, for
which the Spaniards were blamed, and which was the direct cause of
the Spanish-American War. The Maine has been recently raised, towed
to sea and sunk in deep water —this, for State reasons, was deemed
necessary, but it will suffice to say that no American blames the
Spaniard to-day.
With the declaration of war against Spain by the United States,
the German animosity was plainly evinced, and but for the firm
attitude of the Government of Great Britain the fleet of Germany
would have been ranged alongside that of Spain. Unable to declare
war openly, the Germans were forced to have recourse to what has
only one name —treachery. The one factory for the manufacture of
smokeless gunpowder in the United States was blown up, not by
Spaniards. Following this, a plot was discovered “hatched in
Chicago” to blow up the locks of the canals and so dislocate traffic
with the great lakes. Fifty Germans were captured in the very act
and from these important information was obtained, with the result
that seventeen hundred were given just ten hours to clear out of the
country. The German Ambassador made an attempt to remonstrate
and was told curtly to hold his peace; that if he did not there were
twice seventeen hundred Germans who would not be given one hour
to clear the country, that they were fleeing and would be allowed to
flee if the Ambassador was discreet. The temper of the American
people was aroused by such treachery and to propitiate them certain
German citizens subscribed sufficient funds and offered to build a
battleship for the Government. I have forgotten whether the offer
was accepted or not. But I do know that these same Germans have
quite recently been writing to the Fatherland suggesting that Germans
naturalized in tne U.S.A. be placed on the same footing as Germans
naturalised in the British Empire, and that for diplomatic reasons
their application has been refused.
The discovery and frustration of this plot practically put a stop to
the Germans attempting further mischief on the mainland of the
United States during the war. But they were about to try a somewhat
bolder coup in Cavite Bay, Manilla, where Admiral Dewey, in com-
mand of an almost obsolete fleet, was sent to conquer the Spaniards
in the Phillipine Islands. Here he had to meet a fleet equal, if not
superior, to his owjn in a well fortified harbour. Imagine his con-
sternation when he found a German fleet of modern construction and
vastly superior to that under his command awaiting him. There was


but one British warship present —H.M.S. Condor. Those among you
who have been following events as they occur will recollect the
German tactics at that time; how, during the action, they did much
to disconcert the Americans, until at last Admiral Dewey told them
if they wanted tp .fight they had better begin or stop molesting him.
They had a stronger fleet than he, but, nevertheless, he preferred a
straight out battle to the tactics they were pursuing. This was an
ultimatum to the German Admiral Drexel, who withdrew his fleet,
with the result that the Spanish fleet was destroyed. But when the
time came to attack the forts, to Dewey’s chagrin he found a German
warship anchored abreast of every fort and all cleared for action.
A short consultation with the Captain of the British cruiser, and the
Condor , under a full head of steam, left the Bay and sped, as only
a British warship can speed when duty calls, towards Hongkong. One
can i magine the anxiety of the American Admiral as, with his fleet
anchored out of range. of the forts it was his duty to engage, he saw
between himself and them the battle fleet of a nation with whom his
country was not at war, but who, he felt, were only awaiting a
pretext to join forces with the enemy. One can well understand with
what impatience Admiral Dewey paced the quarter deck of his flag-
ship, and the daily councils of war, together with the suspense as to
what would be the action of the British Admiral and their chances
should the Germans decide to attack before the British fleet could
come, I think it was on the fourth day when the Americans described
what appeared to be a mass of white foam to seaward. This proved
to be the Condor returning, and, behind her, looming large came
-H.M.S. Powerful followed by the British fleet. As the warships
'entered the bay with bulwarks down and decks cleared for action
they steamed alongside the Americans. After a consultation with
Dewey and some little delay to permit his warships to muster and the
Captains to receive their instructions, the British Admiral laid the
Powerful within speaking distance alongside the German Admiral
Drexel’s ship and shortly after each of the Germans was covered by
a British, man-o-war.
I know not what words were uttered by the British Admiral to
Admiral Drexel, but can well imagine them. However the German
fleet was soon under weigh and steaming to the anchorage allotted
to them by the British, who anchored between them and the Americans,
thus permitting Admiral Dewey to approach and attack the forts with
success, and the Phillipines became a possession of the U.S.A.
I d£> not know what view you may take of this episode of
British history, but to me, although bloodless, it appeals as a most
brilliant victory. When the news was cabled to America, such a thrill
ran throughout the length and breadth of the. United States as has
rarely, if ever, oeen surpassed, so that to-day the name of H.M.S.
Powerful is and will ever continue to be a household word. It was
this act that raised the prestige of Britain and British statesmen to
the high standard we hold to-day in the esteem of the whole American
people, more particularly such as clan lay claim to. Anglo-Saxon
descent.


It may have been gratitude or it may have been the confidence
inspired by the British fleet at Manilla that induced the President to
•suggest a comprehensive and permanent alliance between Great
Britain and the United States.
SOUTH WEST AFRICA
We now turn to South West Africa where shortly after annexation
it was proposed to compel the natives to 'pay taxes sufficient to cover
the expenses of the government, and also add some hing to the revenue
of the Fatherland. Thus, as soon as the Government felt they were
in sufficient strength to enforce payment, collectors were sent out to
gather what is known as the Hut Tax. In other words, the unfortunate
natives were called upon to pay to the people who had stolen their
country a tax to be permitted to breathe the free air of heaven in
their own native land. To intensify matters the German tax-gatherers
used great harshness towards a brave race whose hearts burned within
them at the cruelty and many indignities to which they and their
women and children were subjected by the barbarous Tuetohs.
The Hereros flew to arms, but what chance was there for the
undisciplined natives against the trained veterans of Germany.. They
were driven from their homes and gradually forced back into the
desert beyond the reach of water. In fact, every waterhole was
surrounded by the troops of a Christian nation with the result that
to-day one hundred and twenty-eight thousand skeletons of men,
women and children lie bleaching on the plain, and the rebellion—
if such it can with propriety be called—stamped out, there being no
natives left alive to rebel. The British Consular Reports will throw
more light on this incident should any be curious to study further this
phase of German official character.
GERMANS IN AUSTRALIA.
I have so often called the attention of the Australian public to the
Germans in the Pacific, that it would be mere repetition to refer to
it again this evening.
We now turn to the Germans in our own midst. Here we have
two distinct classes, viz. those old settlers and their descendants who,
leaving their native land sixty, seventy or eighty years ago to escape
the poverty of the land and tyranny of their respective governments,
found here in Australia a higher civilization and a freedom such as
even in their wildest dreams must to many have seemed impossible
of attainment. Settling in the various States in distinct groups, they
grew and prospered and were held in high esteem for those essentially
German virtues—industry, piety, frugality and respect for the laws
and institutions of the land of their adoption. Thus it was believed
(and I think to some extent the belief has been realized) that in these
settlers Australia had acquired a valuable asset, that through inter-
marriage and from other causes such as education and environment,
it was only a matter of time when they and their descendents, for


getting the traditions of the Fatherland, would become true and
loyal subjects of the British Empire and Crown. But, with the
creation of the German Empire, new ambitions grew, more particu-
larly after the failures tb which your attention has been already
directed, and the acquisition of islands and territory in the Pacific
Ocean. From then until to-day the eagle’s eyes have been greedily
fixed on Australia. Shipload after shipload of trained men has been
dumped on our shores. These were, up to about twelve years ago,
kept in touch with the Fatherland by Drummers who visited German
settlements and German farm houses in the country and by German
clubs in the cities. But about twelve years ago an incident happened
which induced the German Emperor to take a bold step. He passed
an ordinance under which any German subject residing within the
British Dominions, notwithstanding the fact that such subject had
deserted his native land to escape conscription, if he had succeeded
in attainnig a position whereby his influence could benefit trade or
enhance German prestige, his offence would be forgiven conditionally
on his recording his name in the books opened for that purpose at
the offices of the German Consulates in the various States or Colonies
within the British Dominions. That should any such deserter desire to
return to Germany he could do so provided he received fro the
Consul a letter stating the particulars of his position, etc. This on
presentation to a bureau established in Berlin would enable the
bearer to be restored to all his rights of citizenship within the German
Empire; although at the time he might be possessed of papers of
British naturalisation, there would be no bar to his restitution of
the rights of German citizenship. British naturalisation is not
recognised in Germany and naturalisation in Australia, while it con-
fers all the privileges of a natural born Briton, entails none of the
Briton’s responsibilities on the alien. Moreover, with exception of
the United States, Germany does not recognise the right of any nation
to naturalise German subjects.
I.a gree with those jurists who contend that it is an inherent right
that every man untainted with crime shall be at liberty to choose where
he shall dwell and under what government he shall be governed;
that immediately an alien receives papers of naturalisation he also
received a new political birth which should completely sever every tie
and obligation which previously bound him to the land of his natural
birth. Great Britain and the United States recognise this, but Ger-
many does not —hence the danger to Australia from the vast number
of aliens domiciled in our midst. To them naturalisation means no
more than the right to enjoy all the privileges of British subjects,
but should danger come, with their removal just three miles from
the land their responsibility ceases. In fact a move from one State
to another is sufficient to relieve such alien from his obligations to
the British Crown.
We now return to the subject before us. The German Emperor
and his people in Australia. The success of the German drummers
was such as to induce the Emperor to go further, thus some eight or
nine years ago the Consul-General received instructions to visit the


w&ole of the German settlements in Australia on behalf of the. Emperor.
He was to impress' upon the German settlers and their descendants
that it was their duty to remain stedfast in their loyalty to the German
Fatherland. And quite recently a German official visited the Queens-
land settlers anct said that he was the bearer of a direct message
from the Emperor to his people settled in Australia, and that it was
their Emperor’s desire, that while under the British Flag they would
conduct themselves as good citizens they were not to forget their daty
to the Fatherland, and were to teach their children the language of
the Fatherland because the day was not far distant when the Father-
land would (.wane them. He went from settlement to settlement preach-*
ing treason and sedition—l can call it by no other names. But no
statesman could be found with courage sufficient to lay him by the
heels, and only one newspaper was bold enough to call attention to
his utterances, although the result is that in Queensland alone there
are to-day not less than twenty thousand armed men ready to rise at
call of the German Emperor. How many of such as these are
scattered over tne Commonwealth is hard to compute, but I think
at a tair estimate they may be calculated at not less than eighty
thousand men, all trained to the use of and in possession of firearms.
But as Burns sang
“The best laid schemes of mice and men
Gang aft agley,”
so may the schemes of the war party in Germany. Given another
half century of peaceful development in Australia, these Same Germans
who to-day undoubtedly menace our safety and security, will through
environment, intermarriage and the influence of a higher civilisation
have fused in with us, and instead of endangering, will help to
strengthen and add virility to our national life. God grant it mav
be so.
Yet it behoves us as a people to take precautions to prevent a
surprise, should war eventuate through the strained relations existing
between Germany and Great Britain. We want an Arms Act whereby
every person desirous of carrying arms shall be required to secure a
license and become registered, so that the possession without such
license would render the possessor liaole to fine or imprisonment,
i his wmuld enable the authorities on the first sign of danger to take
aCtion - . _ _ I
ffiThis is no idle dream, neither is it a mere chimera of a fanciful
mind, for to me those beautiful lines of Longfellow
In the world’s broad field of battle,
In the bivouac of life,
Be not like dumb driven cattle,
Be a hero in the strife.
have a deep: meaning. True, we cannot all be heroes, but there is
no reason Why we should be “dumb, driven cattle,"
It is also imperative that Australia should maintain a standing
army of no less than 50,000 well-trained men, to stiffen the volunteer


and irregular forces, in the event of war, History proves that
irregulars are not equal exigencies of modern war. Neither is it
possible for Militia or volunteers to acquire the firmness necessary to
resist regular forces, a firmness which cajn only be attained by
constant service, and strict discipline. For these reasons and others
I strongly advocate the formation and maintenance of an effective
standing army in this Commonwealth.
THE EMPTY NORTH.
We now turn to the empty North. Here Professor MacMillan
Brown in the Sydney Morning Herald of July 27th, has somewhat
anticipated me. The learned professor says:
“I mentioned the Japanese menace against the Northern Ter-
ritory, so often commented upon by Australian journals. The usual,
reply was an incredulous smile or a burst of laughter. The
smallest foreign element in Java is the Japanese: and in the other
islands it is still smaller. If Japan meant ultimate mischief for
Northern Australia, sho would flood, not New Caledonia, but Timor,
with her subjects and spies: and Timor, as belonging partly to
Holland, partly to Portugal, and not very effectively occupied by
either might easily be taken, if trouble arose in Europe. But with
Java, Saigon, and the Phillipines in the hands of friendly powers,
and India, Singapore, and Hongkong in the hands of England, what
chance would Japan have of keeping, even if she seized, the North-
ern Territory? Being a temperate zone power, she could no more
effectively occupy it than England.
The real danger lies in quite another direction. One of the
first steps that Germany would take if her war party succeeded in
embroiling her in hvar with England or France, would, it is
generally acknowledged, be to seize Holland and Belgium. If she
succeeded in retaining Holland, Java would fall into her hands,
andt hereafter there would be no peace for Australia and her
unoccupied Northern Territory. When she seized it (and she would
have no difficulty in manufacturing a pretext for doing so), she
could fill it with Javanese, who would soon flood it with population,
and begin to grope their way southwards. The anti-militarists,
especially if backed up by the minimum-of-work ideals of the left
wing of the Labour party, would soon find themselves as truly slaves
as the Javanese would be. It is true that most of the Dutch here
vigorously declare that no odier European Power than Holland will
ever possess Java. But that is based on the certainty that the
independence of Holland is essential to England s safety, as the
independence of Belgium is essential to that of h ranee. If Aus-
tralians have any foresight, or any regard for their future freedom,
they will do their utmost to help Britain in preventing the seizure


of Holland. But I may add that when this subject came up in
Dutch company there was a sceptical smile over the capacity as
well as the desire of Australia to defend herself; and pressed for
an explanation, they generally broke into merriment over the ideals
of the Australian Labour party, and many of the methods it proposes
to attain them. There is evidently wealth of amused criticism of
Australian in other languages than our own. It is a great mis-
fortune that we seldom or never hear it or read it.”
Thus far the Professor, who is absolutely correct regarding the
danger by which Australia is menaced and the source from whence the
danger will come, but he has not considered by what means such
danger can best be guarded against or repelled. For this I tender
Professor MacMillan Brown my thanks, as it has left to me the task
of putting before you —and through you, the Government and people of
Australia, the only means by which the safety of the North can be
effectually assured against foreign absorption or invasion. At the
same time permit me to say that I in no way endorse the sneers in
which the learned Professor and his Dutch friends indulge at the
expense of the Government, who have at least tried and are trying to
do something. That their efforts are foredoomed to failure I have
not the slightest doubt. Had another Government been in power,
could they, while the temper of the Australian people continues as it
is to-day have done better, or would they have had the courage to have
essayed as much. I know not. I have had some personal experience
of both, and as an Imperialist and a straight-out British Liberal
Conservative in whose mind that absurd word “Democrat” has a
meaning little understood by the man in the street. I say, that while
the Commonwealth Departments are controlled as at present, it is
matterless which party is in power. What is wanted is a radical
change in Australian sentiment —an awakening of the people to a truer
sense of their danger andfa more sane idea of their responsibilities to
God, the King, and the Empire, than at present permeates our nation.
Then, and not till then, will Australian statesmen perhaps realize
wherein lies our danger —and look to the only source from which
help and bafety can come —India.
It is from India and India alone that we can draw a strong and
loyal population suited to fill up the vast empty spaces of ihe North.
I do not mean the effeminate Hindoo from the plains of Bengal, but
there are in the Punjab and other parts of Northern and Central
India thousands of men who have faithfully served the British Raj —-
pensioners who with their' families could be brought into the Northern
Territory anti settled there in communal villages in suitable
locations. In these people we should have a law-abiding race, trained
to arms, loyal to the Empire and the Flag under which for over
twenty years each family head had served. Superior in every way
to the scum of Southern Europe whom it has been suggested should be
utilised to people the North, these men would not only prove an in-
vincible first line ,of defence but their advent would send a thrill of
fervent loyalty and devotion throughout the length and breadth of our


great Indian Empire, such as would stamp out the smouldering flies
of sedition which the emissaries of Germany have been for yeats
past insidiously endeavouring to ,fan into flame.
Ladies and gentlemen, who is there among you who has not
heard the dolorous cry —“Peace hath its victories as well as vVar r
and in such the Empire will continue. I say that the greatest calamity
that can. befall a warlike nation is a long and protracted peace. This
Empire lof ours has been built up and must be maintained by the blood,
brain, bone and sinew of the Empire’s sons; that since the British
nation became seized with the ultra-humanitarian craze and a policy of
peace at any price, the Empire’s arch enemy (Germany) has been
advancing by leaps and bounds. I say that the British men and
women of to-day are becoming afraid to hear the truth.
Now what does all this portend? Simply, that if within the next
five years British statesmen do not pluck up heart of grace sufficient
to declare war against Germany, in less than ten years the British
Empire as an Empire is doomed. That the British Isles will ever
be allowed to fall under German control I do not for a moment
believe; all Europe and the United States would rise in arms to
prevent such utter humiliation. But if as the price of an ignoble
peace Germany demanded, and they will demand, the cession of the
whole of Australia, not one finger in Europe would be raised in
protest.
With the alien horde already in our midst in arms, the cities in
darkness, the water supply suddenly, cut off, what chance would
Australia have of maintaining her independence until the of
help from Japan? None. Remember. Bahia and also rememoer
when the days of calamity come that you have been well and faithfully
warned.
Oh, Lord our God, arise:
Scatter our enemies
And make them fall:
Confound their politics,
Frustrate their hellish tricks.
On Thee our hopes we fix,
God save us all.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by D, S, Ford, 729 George-st., Sydney
