

PiPTH PPrrft
ANALYSES,
I.— Analysis of a Narrative of a Voyage to the Pacific and
Beering's Strait, to co-operate ivith the Polar Expeditions;
performed in his Majesty’s Ship Blossom, under the Command
of Captain F. W. Beechey, R.N., F.R.S., &c., in the years
1825, 26, 27, and 28. By W. Ainsworth, Esq.
His Majesty’s ship Blossom was sent out by his Majesty’s go-
vernment, with a special commission to prosecute researches on
the practicability of a north-west passage, and being destined for
a long voyage, through seas of different characters, and in very
opposite climates, was consequently more fitted up with a view of
administering to the necessities and comforts of the officers and
men, and providing for the safety of the vessel, than prepared for
the slow and lengthened labours of science, or the nicety of ob-
servation and experiment.
The instructions, however, given to Captain Beechey by the
Board of Admiralty, in addition to the co-operation to be given
to the polar expedition, directed him to make geographical ob-
servations, of much interest, on the doubtful existence of some
islands in the South Pacific, to survey the group of the Society
Islands, to direct his course to the Navigators’ Islands, and to
afford every assistance to the naturalist of the expedition in making
collections illustrative of his branch of research.
The additions made to our knowledge of the South Pacific and
other seas, with their coasts and islands, by this expedition, will
be best given in the shape of a succinct narrative, or an analysis
of Captain Beechey’s published work ; and we shall afterwards
give a general idea of the results of the observations and experi-
ments made during the voyage, which, from their variety, number,
and exactness, reflect the greatest credit on the science, industry,
and perseverance of Captain Beechey, and the officers under his
command.
On the 19th of May, 1825, the vessel weighed from Spithead,
steering out ot the Channel with a fair wind. On the 30th of the


same month, it was ascertained that a reef of rocks, named the
Eight Stones, did not exist in the situation which for a number of
years they have occupied in our charts. From Cape Finisterre to
Point Naga the error in the direction S. 33° W. was not less than
ninety miles. The position of the island of Fernanda Noronha
was found, on the 26th of June, to be eighteen miles eastward of
the position given in the East India Directory.
On the 11th of July they arrived at Rio Janeiro, where they
remained until the 13th of August, on which day they sailed for
the Pacific. During their stay they measured the height of the
Peak of Corcovado, a mass of granite overlooking the placid
waters of Bota-Fogo ; and after checking these by observations
repeated three years afterwards, the height, by trigonometrical
measurement, was found to be 2306 feet in the first instance, and
in the second. In making Cape Horn, on September 16,
a current drifted the ship fifty miles to the northward in the twenty-
four hours. On the 26th of September they were fifty leagues
west of Cape Pillar *. With regard to this navigation, Captain
Beechey says, in his nautical remarks appended to the narrative,
f X concur in opinion with Cook, Perouse, Ivrusenstern, and
* others, in thinking there is no necessity whatever for going far to
‘ the southward: and I should recommend always standing on
‘ that tack which gained most longitude, without paying any re-
‘ gard to latitude further than taking care to keep south (say a
‘ degree) of Cape Horn/
On the 6th of October they made the island of Mocha, on the
coast of Chili. This island, once celebrated as a resort of the
buccaneers, and thickly peopled, was found deserted by Captain
Strong in 1690, and appears to have remained uninhabited ever
since.° On the Bth of the same month they anchored at Talca-
huana.
In the survey of the Bay of Conception, a shoal was discoveied
by Lieutenant Belcher on the Penco side. It was also necessary
to make some alterations in the position of the Belen Bank, from
the manner in which it is laid down in the Spanish charts ; and
the shoal said to occur off the sandy point of Quinquina does not
at present exist.
The Blossom put to sea on the 24th, anchored three days
afterwards at Valparaiso, and on the 29th took a final leave of
the coast.
The island of Salas y Gomez, which was determined to be in
latitude 26° 27' 46" S., and longitude 105° 20', has the appearance
of three rocks. Its longest direction is N.W. and S.E., and its
extent something less than half a mile in length, and a fifth of a
* Captain Beechey’s text differs here from his nautical remarks by fifty leagues.


mile in width, —much less than has been stated. The surface
was covered with rugged stones, of a dark brown colour, except
where used as roosting places for the sea-fowl ; and from some
observations, it seems probable that the island is of volcanic
origin.
Between Salas y Gomez and Easter Island, they passed near the
situation of an island named Washington and Coffin, reported to
have been discovered by an American ship, but without perceiving
any traces of it, though within four leagues of the spot, with a per-
fectly clear sky and horizon.
On the 17th of November they w 7 ere off Easter Island. Cap-
tain Beechey is inclined to the opinion that this is the island upon
which Davis had so nearly lost his vessel; and, considering the
rapid current that exists in the vicinity of the Galapagos, and
which extends throughout the trade-wind, though with diminished
force, the error in that navigator’s reckoning he does not think
more than might have happened to any dull-sailing vessel circum-
stanced as his was. The Blossom, in passing from the meridian
of Juan Fernandez to Easter Island, was set 270 miles to the west-
ward in eighteen days. Easter Island is 2000 miles from the
coast of Chili, and 1500 from the nearest inhabited island, Pitcairn
Island excepted, which has been peopled by Europeans. The
geographical description of the island given by Mr. Berniget, who
was engineer to the Astrolabe, was found to be perfectly accurate*.
The population Captain Beechey estimates at about 1200. The
natives tattoo themselves, so as to have the appearance of wearing
breeches. Most of them go naked, though some wear the maro,
which is made either of fine Indian cloth of a reddish colour, of
a wild kind of parsley, or of a species of sea-weed. The straw
hats mentioned by Cook and Ea Perouse appeared to be no
longer in use. Captain Beechey thinks that the idea of there
being a community of property among the islanders is extremely
improbable. The interview of our navigators with them was
very unfortunate, and terminated in a serious and unpleasant
dispute.
Captain Beechey remarks, that those gigantic busts of stone
which once existed on various parts of the island, of which Captain
Cook found only two remaining, while Kotzebue ‘found nothing
more than a square pedestal in their place, have now altogether
disappeared, and that a few heaps of rubbish only occupy a spot
where it is doubtful whether one of the busts was erected or not.
Pitcairn Island, he observes, affords a curious example of a race
of men settling upon an island, erecting stone images upon its
* r^ie highest part of it is 1200 feet, and in clear weather it may be seen at
twelve or fourteen leagues distance.


heights, and either becoming extinct, or having abandoned it 5
and some circumstances connected with Easter Island occur in
favour of the presumption that the same thing may also have taken
place there. The most remarkable of these lacts is, that the pre-
sent generation is so nearly allied in language and customs to many
islanders in the South Sea, as to leave no doubt of their having
migrated from some of them ; and yet in none of these places are
there images of such extraordinary dimensions, or, indeed, in any
way resembling them. The Easter Islanders have, besides, small
wooden deities, similar to those worshipped by the inhabitants of
the other islands just mentioned.
On the 28lh of November the Blossom reached Ducie’s Island.
Iti s a coral rock, oval, with a lagoon in the centre, tenanted only
by birds : the highest trees do not rise more than twenty-six feet
above the level of the sea. It is situated in latitude 24° 40' S.,
and longitude 124° 45'. The water was so clear over the coral,
that the bottom could be distinctly seen when no soundings could
be had with thirty fathoms of line. At seven miles distance, the
island ceased to be visible from the deck.
On the 3d of December the ship reached Henderson’s or Eliza-
beth Island, in latitude 24° 2!', and longitude 128° 18' W. This
is of a peculiar formation, very few instances of which are known
—viz., dead coral, more or less porous, elevated in a flat surface,
probably by volcanic agency, to the height of eighty feet. It is
five miles in length, one in breadth, and thickly covered with shrubs,
which make it difficult to climb. It was named Henderson’s
Island by the commander of the Hercules, of Calcutta, though
first visited by the crew of me Essex, an American whaler, two of
whom landed on it after the loss of their ship, and were subse-
quently taken off by an English whaler, who heard of their fate at
Valparaiso.
On the 4th of December the expedition arrived at Pitcairn
Island. The mutiny on board the Bounty ; the terrible fate of
the surviving mutineers, who sought refuge on this island, which
exhibits traces of former inhabitants, and which presents great
variety of soil and aspect, and is, further, abundantly provided
with fish, fowl, and vegetables; the reform of Adams and his
companion, and the patriarchal colony that rose under their care,
are admirably related by Captain Beechey, but are foreign to our
present purpose of strict geographical inquiry ; and we will there-
fore content ourselves with stating that the island is about seven
miles in circumference, surrounded by cliff’s, or rocky projections,
off which lie scattered numerous fragments of rock, rising, like
so many black pinnacles, amid the surf, which, on all sides, rolls
in upon the shore; and that its highest point was found to be
1109 feet above the level of the sea. The population, from the


• by accident .... White
Died a natural death
1
1
14
3
3
6 —1 went
The original settlers, therefore, found on the island]
["
away.
5
The" children of the white settlers (the men of colour]
I 10
10
22
15
2
0
1
0
Present population ..,
36
30
= 66
period of its first establishment to the time of Captain Beechey’s
visit, varied as follows :
Males. Females.
The first settlers consisted of {Su r rf (oSteoni) ®
15 12=37
Of these were killed in quar-j 6 q
rels between the whites > Coloure q '.*.* 6 0
and blacks .#•••••••••• j
On the 23d of December the Blossom reached Oeno Island,
in latitude 24° 01' S., and longitude 130° 40' W. This island is
a coral formation—inclosing a lagoon with a small island in the
centre, deep water all around, and a heavy surf. It is uninha-
bited, and was named Oeno Island after a whale ship, whose
master supposed that it had not before been seen 5 but the dis-
covery belongs to Captain Henderson, of the Hercules.
Crescent Island, which they reached on the 27th of the same
month, is in latitude 23° 20', or 23° 17' S. by another observation,
and in longitude 134° 33' W. It is an oblong, three miles and
a half in length, one and a half in width; and consists of a strip
of coral about a hundred yards or less in width, having the sea on
one side and a lagoon on the other. Its general height is two feet
above the water. The soil, where highest, reaches just six feet
above the sea, —and the tops of the trees are twenty feet higher.
About forty natives were seen on this small spot: they were tall
and well made, —tattooed, with thick black hair and beards.
Three square stone huts, about six feet high, and sheds, some
open on one side only, and others on both, were seen ; but no
cultivation could be discerned, nor any fiuit-trees, which could
have furnished subsistence.
On the 29th of December they reached the Gambler Islands.
This group was discovered by the ship Duff, on a missionary
voyage, in 1797, and named by Mr. Wilson, her commander.


It consists of five large islands and several smaller ones, all
situated in a lagoon formed by a reef of coral, into which
the Blossom effected a passage over a portion of the reef
which dipped beneath the water, with five, seven, and eight
fathoms, gradually deepening it to twenty-five fathoms. The
largest island is about six miles in length, and rises into two peaks
elevated 1428 feet above the level of the sea. These peaks, which
were called after the Duff, are inform of wedges, and maybe
seen at a distance of fourteen or fifteen leagues. The island on
which they occur Captain Beechey named after the first lieutenant,
Peard Island; and the others in succession, Belcher, Wainright,
Elson, Collie, and Marsh, after the other officers, and the lagoon,
in which the ship was anchored, after herself. The islands appear
to have been subjected to volcanic action, though not recently;
and the account given of their geological structure, as extracted
from Mr. Collie’s Journal, gives details exactly similar to those
presented by the older plutonic rocks in our own latitudes.
The population may be estimated at about 1000; and the
account given by Captain Beechey of their appearance, manners,
dress, and occupations, of their mode of preserving the dead, and
of their instruments of chase, warfare, and other utensils, presents
many interesting features.
The Gambier Islands acquire considerable importance from the
fact of their being the only station at present known (Pitcairn
Island excepted) in a distance of 4000 miles between Otaheite
and the coast of Chili, where a supply of good w'ater can be pro-
cured. Two great streams from Mount Duff supplied the boats
faster than it could be got off. Captain Beechey observed the
old custom of taking possession of this group by hoisting the
English ensign on the shore ; and sowed several useful seeds, in
the hope of their proving advantageous to the natives. At the S.W.
extremity of these islands are several small sandy islands, over
which the sea breaks heavily, so that they are lost amidst the foam.
They were named the Wolfe Islands, from one of the midshipmen
of the Blossom.
Lord Hood’s Island, which Captain Beechey reached on the
14th of January, 1826, is in latitude 21° 30' S. and longitude
135° 33' W.: and consists of an assemblage of small islets rising
from a chain of coral even with, or a little above the water’s edge.
Upon these grow a variety of evergreen-trees thickly set, and
presenting an inviting appearance; but the surf forbade all attempts
at landing. It appears, however, that the islets are not now
inhabited, as Krusenstern reports them to have been, and as the
appearance of a square stone hut was sufficient to prove. This
coral rock, w hich was discovered by Mr. Wilson, m the ship Duff,
is 11 2 miles in length and 4*7 miles in width, in a north and south


direction, and, like almost all the coral islands, contains a lagoon,
and is steep on all sides.
The island of Clermont-Tonnerre, which was visited on the
18th of January, is ten miles in length, but very narrow, par-
ticularly at the extremities. It is of the same formation as Lord
Hood’s Island, but more elevated, and abounds with cocoa-nut
trees. With the exception of a few breaks in the southern shore,
by which the sea, when high, at times communicates with the
lagoon, it is altogether above water. The lagoon has several small
islands in it, and the shores all round are steep and abound with
fish. The ship here encountered an unusually formidable water-
spout, of which Captain Beechey gives an animated description,
accompanied by a sketch of its appearance in three different
stages of its progress. Captain Duperrey, in his voyage round the
world, in the Coquille, visited this island, and, supposing it to be
a new discovery, named it Clermont-Tonnerre, after the late
French minister of marine. Captain Beechey seems, however,
decided in his opinion that it was before discovered by the ship
Minerva. The inhabitants are not above 200, and among them
there was a great diversity of complexion. They were exceedingly
shy, and the surf would not allow the Blossom’s boats to land :
latitude 18° 33' 42" S., and longitude 136° 01' 32" W.
Serle Island, the next visited, on January 21, is seven miles and
a half in length, in a N.W. direction, and two miles and a quarter
in width in its broadest part; —its latitude is 18° 16'01"5., and
longitude 137° 00'45" W. It is a low strip of coral formation,
and has several clumps of trees, which have been mistaken by some
navigators for hillocks. The population altogether cannot exceed
100, and they resemble the inhabitants of Clermont-Tonnerre or
Minerva island.
Whitsunday Island, discovered by Captain Wallis in 1767, is
situated in latitude 19° 23'5., and longitude 138° 36'W., and
forty miles to the westward of the place assigned to it by that
navigator. A landing was effected here on January 23, and
several huts were observed, with well-beaten pathways, and reser-
voirs for fresh water cut eighteen inches into the coral; but no
inhabitants were seen. The island is a mile and a half in length,
and not four miles, as stated by Captain Wallis, steep all round,
of coral formation, well wooded, and contains a lagoon.
The same evening they bore up for Queen Charlotte’s Island,
also discovered by Captain Wallis, in latitude 19° 17' S., and
longitude 138° 42' W. The coral here had so grown up that no
lagoon could be perceived in the centre, and not a single specimen
was to be seen of the numerous cocoa-nut trees found by Captain
Wallis.
Lagoon Island, visited on January 24, in latitude 18° 43' 19"


S., and longitude 138° 47' 13" W., is three miles in length, in a
W, by S. direction, and a mile and a quarter in width. Two
cocoa-nut trees in the centre of the island, which, Captain Cook
observed, had the appearance of flags, are still waving; and,
altogether, the island preserves the appearances described by that
great navigator. The inhabitants of Lagoon Island, with whom
the Blossom had some communication, were honest and friendly,
forming a striking exception to the general character of the natives
of Polynesia.
Thrum-cap Island, discovered and so named by Captain Cook,
is of coral formation, three-quarters of a mile in length, well
wooded, and steep all round; but no lagoon could be perceived.
Bougainville gave this island the name of Les Landers , in conse-
quence of the men whom he saw on it being armed with long
spears; —they were most probably visitors from Lagoon Island,
as no inhabitants were now seen. Its latitude is 18° 30' S., and
longitude 139° 08' W. The Blossom was]: off it on the afternoon
of the 24th, but the surf prevented the boats landing.
Egmont Island, Captain Wallis’s second discovery, is steep like
most other coral islands, and well wooded, with cocoa-nut and
pandanus-trees. The men were armed in the same manner as the
Lagoon Islanders ; were friendly, and bartered freely for iron. It
was examined on the 25th of January, but without landing.
Barrow Island, situated in latitude 20° 45' S., and longitude
4° 07' W. of Gambier, or 139° 03'W. of Greenwich, was Captain
Beechey’s first discovery, on the 26th of January. It is a mile
and three-quarters in length from north to south, and a mile and
three-tenths in width ; it consists of a narrow strip of land, of an
oval form, not more than 200 yards wide in any part, well wooded,
with three large pits under the trees, containing several tons of
fresh water. It has a lagoon in its centre, which the colour of the
water indicated to be of no great depth. Traces, apparently of
Europeans, were observed on this island; but they were after-
wards found to be the relics of the brief residence on these shores
of some natives of the Chain Islands who had lost their way.
On the 2d of February the ship reached Captain Edwards’
Carysfoot Island. It is a strip of coral so low that the sea washes
into the lagoon in several places. Vegetation is scanty, but there
are no dangers near the island. It is in latitude 20° 44' S., and
longitude 138° 22'.
The lagoon of Osnaburgh Island of Carteret, the next island
visited, on the 3d of February, and which Captain Beechey pro-
poses to call the island of Osnaburgh and Matilda, was entered by
a channel sufficiently wide and deep for a vessel of the|class of the
Blossom. The remains of a shipwreck, supposed of the Matilda
whaler, lost in 1792, were found on this island. It is fourteen


miles long, with many trees, but no cocoa-nut or other fruit-trees.
It has never, apparently, been inhabited, and the birds were con-
sequently so tame as to allow themselves to be lifted from their
nests ; while fish w r ere taken as easily by sticks and boat-hooks as
by lines. Latitude 21° 53' 03'' S., and longitude 138° 59' 34".
To the south of this island another small island was examined,
three miles and three-quarters in length by three in width, its form
nearly an oblong, with the southern side much curved. The
lagoon in the centre was deep, its boundary very low and narrow,
and in places it overflowed. Captain Beechey gave this island the
name of Cockburn Island. Latitude 22° 12'25"5., and longitude
138° 39' 53" W.
The next island visited was the Lagoon Island of Captain Bligh.
This is inhabited ; the natives are darker than those of Cook’s
Lagoon Island,—nearly naked, with their hair tied in a knot on
the top of the head, and provided with stones, clubs, and spears.
No landing was effected on this island, which is in latitude 21°
37' 41" S,, and longitude 140° 37' 58", and is larger than as ex-
hibited on Arrowsmith’s charts.
Byam Martin’s Island, discovered by Captain Beechey, is in
latitude 19° 40' 22" S., and longitude 140° 22' 28" W. It is an
oval of three miles and three-quarters in diameter, of coral forma-
tion, and has a lagoon and productions very similar to the other
islands recently described.
Gloucester Island, in latitude 19° 07' S,, and longitude 140° 37'
W., was found to differ very materially in its present form and
extent from the descriptions given by its discoverer, Captain
Wallis. At the south-east angle of the Island they noticed a morai
built of stones, but there were no inhabitants upon the shore.
In latitude 18° 04' S., and longitude 140° 51' W., Captain
Beechey visited Bow Island, discovered, in 1768, by Bougainville,
and seen the following year by Captain Cook, who gave it its pre-
sent name, from the resemblance which its shape was supposed to
have to a bow. It is of coral formation, thirty miles long, and, at
an average, five broad, well-wooded on the weather side, but
scantily on the other, where it is so low that the sea, in places,
washes into the lagoon. The Blossom, having navigated with
considerable difficulty, and some danger, through a channel in the
coral reef, was enabled to anchor in the lagoon. The strip of
low T land inclosing the lagoon is nearly seventy miles in extent, and
the part that is dry is about a quarter of a mile in width. The
lagoon is studded with coral knolls. This island is thinly inha-
bited, the natives not amounting to more than 100 souls. It is
remarkable as having been visited for its pearl fishery, and an
English brig was there at this time for the purpose, having hired
divers from Chain Island, Water was procured in abundance,


and of tolerable quality, by digging holes through the sand into
the coral rock.
The islands visited between Bow Island (which they quitted on
the 20th February) and Otaheite were all of the same nature and
formation as those already described, and furnished no additional
information beyond the correct determination of their size and
position. Among the number are two which were previously
unknown; the largest of these, which Mas also the most extensive
of their discoveries in the archipelago, Captain Beechey named
Melville Island ; and the other Croker Island; but the narrative
contains no details of the appearance of these inlands. Those
whose position was determined were as follows :
Lat. South. Long, of Greenwich.
Moller Island . . . 17° 44/ . . 140° 35'
Resolution Island . 17 22 .. 141 23
Cumberland Island . . 19 10 . . 141 10
Prince William Henry Island,! .
or Lostange » . J * '
m [Dawahaidy . . . 18 18 . . 142 06
fivo groups| Maracan ' _ .u5B . . US OS
Doubtful Island . , 17 19 .. 142 22
Melville Island . . . 17 34 . . 142 39
Bird Island . . . 17 48 . . 143 04
Croker Island . . 17 26 . . 143 23
Maitea Island . . 17 53 . . 148 00
The discoveries of Cook and Wallis in the track followed by
Captain Beechey are relatively correctly placed ; but those of the
latter are as much as forty miles in error in longitude, and several
miles in latitude, which has occasioned two of them to be mis-
taken for each other by Bellinghausen, and one to be considered
as a new discovery by Captain Duperrey; but Captain Beechey
considers that there can be no doubt but that this navigator’s
Lostange Island is the same as Wallis’s Prince William Henry’s
Island.
Of the thirty-two islands visited in succession, only twelve were
inhabited, including Pitcairn Island; and the amount of the popu-
lation altogether, Captain Beechey supposes, cannot possibly ex-
ceed 3100 souls, of which 1000 belong to the Gambier Islands,
1260 to Easter Island, leaving 840 persons only to occupy the
other thirty.
Captain Beechey thinks that there is a great diversity of fea-
tures and complexion between the natives inhabiting the volcanic
islands and those of the coral formations—the former being a
taller and fairer race. This, he remarks, may be referred to a
difference of food, habits, and comfort; the former having to seek
a daily subsistence upon the reefs, exposed to a burning sun, and


to the painful glare of a white coral beach ; while the others enjoy
plentifully the produce of the earth, repose beneath the genial
shade of palm or bread-fruit trees, and pass a life of compara-
tive ease and luxury.
In approaching Otaheite, the mountains were seen at the dis-
tance of ninety miles, making their height, on a rough computa-
tion, to be 7000 feet; and the island of Maitea was found to be
1432 feet above the sea.
As Captain Beechey wished to prepare his ship and recruit the
sailors at Otaheite, previous to his journey northward, he repaired
thither after the examination of the archipelago, and anchored, on
the 18th of March, in the outer harbour of Soanoa, about four
miles westward of Matavai Bay, in Otaheite ; but as the details
connected with the stay of the Blossom at these islands do not
present us with any facts of immediate interest to geography, w-e
shall not dwell upon this part of the narrative.
On the 26th of April, the ship left the island mentioned above,
and reached the low island ofTetharoa, in latitude 17° 02' S., and
longitude 149° 30' W., the w T atering-place of the Otaheitans.
On the 20th of May, the Blossom came to anchor at Honoruru,
the principal port of the Sandwich Islands. On the Ist of June
they hauled into Oneehow, the westernmost island of the Sand-
wich group, in latitude 21° 32'N., and longitude 160° 23'W.,
where Vancouver anchored. This island is famous for its yams,
fruit, and mats.
On leaving this island, Captain Beechey shaped his course for
Karnschatka, in doing which he deviated from the tracks of both
Cook and Clarke, passing to the eastward of Bird Island, and
gaining the latitude of 27" N., and on the 28th of June anchoring
off the town of Petrapaulski, in latitude 33° 00' N., and longitude
201° 16' W. On the Ist of July they weighed anchor again, but
only succeeded in getting out of the harbour on the 3th. On the
10th, Beering’s Island was close upon them. Its latitude was
determined to be 53° 22' N., and longitude 194° 00' W. On the
17th, they off St. Lawrence’s Island, when they had commu-
nication with the natives, who came off in baidars ; and on the
19th of July they saw the island of King, which is described as
small, but high and rugged.
Captain Beechey examined the Diomede Islands, which were
seen from the mast-head at fifty miles distance, and found them
to be three in number, as first advanced by Captain Cook, and
since put in doubt by Kotzebue, who mentions a fourth, probably
East Cape. Captain Beechey named the eastern one Fairway
Rock, latitude 63° 38' N., and longitude 168° 43' W. To the
centre one he left its original name of Krusenstern, latitude
63° 46' N., and longitude 168° 55' W.; and the north-western is


named Ratmanoff, and is in latitude 65° 51' N., and longitude
169° 63' W.
After doubling Cape Prince of Wales, they were becalmed in
Schismareff inlet. This broad sheet of water extends inland in an
E.S.E. direction, and is backed by distant mountains. Saritcheff
Island lies immediately before the opening, which is ten miles
wide.
From this inlet they sailed northward, the coast being low and
swampy, with small lakes inland; and entered Kotzebue Sound on
the 22nd of July, naming a deep inlet on its northern shore,
which had escaped Kotzebue’s observation, Hotham Inlet, after-
wards examined by Mr. Elson. As the object of the expedition
was now to afford every assistance in their power to tleir coun-
trymen engaged in exploring the arctic lands and seas, Captain
Beechey proceeded directly to Chamisso Island, the point of
rendezvous, which they reached on the 25th July, 1826 five days
only after the appointed time, —subsequently examining the coast
for a considerable distance to the N.E. in the Blosson, and in
the ship’s barge, which attained a western longitude of 56° 21' at
Point Barrow. The expedition was unsuccessful in obtaining
any information of the proceedings of Captain Sir Join Franklin
in their first visit to the polar seas, and equally so on tleir return
to the same latitude in the following year. The privations and
suffering to which the crew of the ship were exposed diring their
arduous navigation, reflect the highest credit on their chiracters as
sailors; and a careful and accurate examination of the coast was
made under circumstances which demanded great foritude and
perseverance. The results of this examination we shall low point
out, beginning at Kotzebue Sound, in which the Bhssom was
anchored on several different occasions. Cape Espeiberg, its
north-west extremity, is in latitude 66° 34' N., and longitude
163° 36'W. It is a narrow strip of land, on which are some
high sand-hills, and a great many poles are placed erec upon it.
The sea penetrates to the southward of this cape, but tie entrance
is closed by a bar which stretches all along the coast, extending
to the inlet w'hich Captain Kotzebue meditated to explore in
baidars, and was very sanguine that it would lead to some great
inland discovery. The extreme shallowness of the waterprevented
the examination of this inlet by the gig of the Blossmi. The
whole of the coast here is swampy, low, and intersectel by lakes
and rivers. The rounded hills which bound the horizm of the
sound to the northward branch off inland at this poht; and a
distant range, of a totally different character, rises ovei the vast
plain that extends to Cape Espenberg, and forms the wlole of the
western side of Kotzebue Sound. The land on the south side of
the Bay of Good Hope is higher, more rocky, and of a bolder


character than the opposite shore, though it still resembles it in
its swampy covering, and in the occurrence of lakes wherever the
land is flat. Cape Deceit, so named by Kotzebue, is a bold
promontory with a conspicuous rock off it. It appears to be
composed of compact limestone, in large angular blocks. To the
east of Cape Deceit are two bays, each with a river, having bars
across their entrances. The first promontory eastward appears
to be composed of limestone ; on the second they met with slaty
limestone, talcaceous slate, and alum slate. The extent of
Spafareif bay is about three miles, when it separates into a num-
ber of small branches communicating with several lakes. The
coast of this part of the sound was found covered with a deep
swampy moss. A range of hills extends eastward to Escholtz Bay,
which terminates in a river about a mile and a half in width,
and broken, at the time it was visited, into narrow and intricate
channels by banks—some dry, and others only partly so. The
shore around is flat, broken by several lakes, with cliffs princi-
pally formed of diluvial clay ; and Captain Beechey has satisfac-
torily shown, that the bones which the naturalists of Kotzebue’s
expedition believed to have been incased in ice, were embedded
in this clay. From Elephant Point westward to the neck of
Choris Peninsula, the shore is difficult of access on account of
long muddy flats extending into the bay, and, in some places, dry
at low water, a quarter of a mile from the beach. The land
about this part of the sound is generally characterised by rounded
hills, from about six hundred to a thousand feet above the sea,
with small lakes and rivers. Its surface is rent into deep furrows,
which, until a very late period in the summer, are filled with
water, and being covered with a thick swampy moss, or with long
grass or bushes, it is extremely tedious to traverse it on foot.
Chamisso Island, the highest part of which is 231 feet above the
sea, is steep, except to the eastward, where it ends in a low sandy
point, upon which are the remains of some Esquimaux habitations.
It has the same swampy covering as the land before described,
from which, until late in the summer, several streams descend,
and are very convenient for procuring water. Detached from
Chamisso there is a steep rock, which was named Puffin Island,
from the quantity of those birds which built upon its projecting
crags. It is composed of mouldering granite, which has broken
away in such a manner that the remaining part assumes the form
of a tower.
North of Chamisso Island is Hotham Inlet. It is of consider-
able width, and extends thirty or forty miles in a broad sheet of
water, which, at some distance up, was fresh. The entrance of
this inlet was so shallow that the barge could not enter. There is a
shoal off the entrance, and in the middle of the channel there were


only five feet water at half flood. The shoal extends eight miles
off the land, and is very dangerous, as the soundings give very short
warning of its proximity. Cape Krusenstern is a low tongue of
land, intersected by lakes, lying at the foot of a high cluster of
hills, not in any way remarkable. The coast here takes an abrupt
turn to the northward, and the current sets strong against the
bend. To the north, plains extend from the hills to the sea,
composed of elastic bog earth, intersected by small streams, on the
edges of which the buttercup, poppy, blue bell, pedicularis, vacci-
nium, saxifrage, and some cruciform plants, throve well. In
other parts, however, the vegetation was stinted, and consisted only
of lichens and mosses. Cape Mulgrave of Captain Cook is a
range of hills, which terminate in a plain intersected by lakes near
the beach, and probably not observed by that navigator. The next
cape northward was named Cape Thomson. It is a bold promon-
tory, 450 feet in height, and marked with differently coloured strata.
A cape close to this has been named Cape Ricord, by the Rus-
sians. Low land was observed stretching out from Cape Thom-
son to the W.N.W., as far as the eye could reach : Captain
Beechey named it Point Hope. The farthest land in sight to
the northward answered to Cape Lisburn of Captain Cook. The
mountain above the cape attained a height of 850 feet above the
sea. The basis of this mountain was limestone, with beds of flinty
slate. There was little soil in the valley, and the stones were
covered with a thick swampy moss. The land here turns to the
eastward towards a cape, which w'as named Beaufort. The land
northward was low and swampy, covered with moss and long grass.
Cape Beaufort is situated in the depth of a great bay, formed be-
tween Cape Lisburn and Icy Cape, and is the last point where
the hills come close down to the sea, by reason of the coast
line curving to the northward, while the range of hills continues
its former direction.
The Cape is composed of sandstone traversed by narrow seams
of coal, and from these sandstone hills there is an uniform ascent
to the rugged mountains of limestone and flint at Cape Lisburn ;
the range is, however, broken by extensive valleys, intersected by
lakes and rivers. Icy Cape, the farthest point reached by Cook,
is very low, and has a large lake at the back of it, which receives
the water of a considerable river, and communicates with the sea
through a narrow channel much encumbered with shoals. The
main land on both sides of Icy Cape, from Wainright Inlet on
one side to Cape Beaufort on the other, is flat and covered with
swampy moss. It presents a line of low mud cliffs, between which
and a shingly beach that everywhere forms the coast line, there is
a succession of narrow lakes capable of being navigated by baidars
or small boats. The farthest tongue of land which Mr. Elson


reached in the Blossom’s barge was named Point Barrow.—lt
lies 126 miles to the north-east of Icy Cape, and is only 146 miles
from the extreme of Captain Franklin’s discoveries, in his progress
westward from the Mackenzie River. The bay, which appeared
to be formed to the eastward of this point, was named Elson’s
Bay. To the nearest conspicuous object to the southward of
Point Barrow Captain Beechey gave the name of Smyth ; and
other points and inlets to the southward are also named. A chain
of sandy islands, lying some distance from the mainland off Cape
Franklin, were called Sea-horse Island ; and beyond, a bay, formed
by the junction of this chain of islands with the mainland, was
called Peard Bay. The land from Cape Smyth, which was about
forty-five feet in height, slopes gradually down to Barrow Point,
which is very low. Thus, by the expedition of the Blossom’s
barge, about seventy miles have been added to the geography of
the polar regions ; and the distance between Captain Franklin’s
discoveries and those of the Blossom has been brought within so
small a compass as to leave very little room for further speculation
on the northern limits of the continent of America. The actual
distance left unexplored is reduced to 146 miles ; and there is
much reason, Captain Beechey says, to believe, from the state of
the sea about Point Barrow, and along that part of the coast which
was explored by Captain Franklin, that the navigation of the re-
maining portion of unknown coast, in boats, is by no means a
hopeless project.
In his voyage in the ensuing year in these seas, and on his
return to the southward, Captain Beechey discovered Port Cla-
rence and Grantley Harbour. To the southward of Cape Prince
of Wales, the coast trends to the east and assumes a totally dif-
ferent character to that which leads to Schismareff Inlet, being
bounded by steep rocky cliffs and broken by deep valleys, while
the other is low and swampy ground. To a bold promontory,
which advances into the sea beyond this, the name of York was
given ; to the eastward of which is a low spot of land projecting
about ten miles from the coast, forming a right angle, and having
a channel about two miles wide between its extremity and the
northern shore, which is the entrance to Port Clarence. At the
north-east angle of this harbour is an opening leading into Grant-
ley harbour, which is ten miles in length by two and a quarter in
width, with an almost uniform depth of two and a half and three
fathoms water, beyond which there is a strait, in all probability
communicating with a large inland lake. To the points at the
entrance of Port Clarence, Captain Beechey gave the names of
Spencer and Jackson.
Captain Beechey weighed anchor from Kotzebue Sound on the
13th of October, 1826; and, passing Cape Krusenstern, and sue-


cessively King Island and the group of St, Paul’s, sailed through
the strait westward of Oonemak, which is nine miles andl a half
across. On the sth of November he made the high land of New
Albion, passed the promontory of Punta de los Reyos, and, on the
Bth, arrived at San Francisco. Previous to the departure of the
Blossom for Monterey, a land expedition, consisting of Messrs.
Collie, Marsh, and Evans, was made to that port, which was very
productive to the collections of natural history.
The Blossom left Monterey for the Sandwich Islands on the sth
of January, 1827, and on the passage searched unsuccessfully for
those islands that were marked near the route, rounding-to every
night when near the position of any one, that it might not be passed
unobserved, and making sail on a parallel of latitude during the
day. In this manner Henderson’s and Cooper’s Islands were
sought for, besides several others said to lie near them, and also a
group in the latitude of l6° N., and longitude between 130° and
133° W.; but nothing was seen even there of them, nor any of the
usual indications of land ; so that if these islands exist, they must
be in some other parallel than that assigned to them in the Ame-
rican ‘ Geographical Table ’ for 1825.
On the 26th of January the Blossom anchored in the harbour
of Honoruru; and, after a stay of thirty-nine days, put to sea
again. On the 25th of March the island of Assumption was
passed. Arrowsmith has incorrectly placed the Mangs on the
south side of Assumption, as, by the astronomical bearings of the
Blossom, they are situated N. 27° 7' 30" W. (true) from the
south-east end of that island, and are in latitude 19° 57' 02" N.
They consist of three high rocks, lying in a south-easterly direction.
Captain Beechey did not observe the rocks discovered by Freycinet
in latitude 19° 32' N., and which he supposed to be the Mangs:
if both latitudes are correct, he must have passed within four miles
of them.
A contrary wind, which rendered it necessary to beat through
the channel between the Bashee Islands and Botel Tabago Xima,
afforded an opportunity of connecting these islands trigonometri-
cally, and of obtaining transit bearings when in intermediate sta-
tions between them ; and from these observations, compared with
the chart of Captain Horsburgh, the latter appeared to be con-
structed with great care and accuracy.
Captain Beechey was anxious, on leaving Macao, where he
arrived on the 10th of April, to explore the sea to the eastward of
Loo Choo. He was, however, prevented doing so by variable
winds and contrary currents, and was obliged to steer directly to
the latter place.
During his stay at Loo Choo, Captain Beechey completed the
survey of the port of the town of Nepa, or Papa Ching, which


he does not consider to be the capital of Loo Choo, but rather a
town situated upon a hill, and surrounded by a wall, called by the
natives Shui, or Shoodi: its extent could not, however, be ascer-
tained, from the dense foliage by which it was surrounded.
The officers of the Blossom made several excursions into the
interior, visiting the public cemeteries, a temple of Budh, and
some cotton manufactories. Captain Beechey mentions sweet
potatoes, millet, wheat, Indian corn, rice, potatoes, cabbages,
barley, sugar-cane, pease, tea-shrubs, taro, tobacco, capsicums,
cucumbers, cocoa-nuts, carrots, lettuces, onions, plantains, pome-
granates, and oranges, as growing on Loo Choo, The narrative
contains some interesting details upon the natives, which make us
feel grieved that the expedition was not prepared with linguists, to
clear up some doubtful points in the history and character of this
singular people.
The Blossom sailed from Loo Choo on the 25th of May, 1827 ;
and on the 6th June passed upon the spot where the Island of Dis-
appointment is placed in the latest charts, without seeing laud.
On the Bth they reached the Bonin Islands, which are all small,
but remarkable. The central island was named Kater, and the
largest in the cluster Peel. This island has a good port, to which
Captain Beechey gave the name of Port Lloyd. In this island,
almost every valley has a stream of water ; and the mountains are
clothed with trees, among which the Areca oleracea and fan-palms
were conspicuous. There are several sandy bays, in which
green turtle are sometimes so numerous that they hide the colour
of the shore. The sea yields an abundance of fish : sharks also
abound, and are very voracious. These islands are subject to
earthquakes, and have every appearance of being of volcanic
origin. A large bay at the north-east angle of Peel Island, was
named Fitton Bay. Captain Beechey controverts the propriety
of the name of Bonin-Sima being given to these islands, which
do not agree with the account given of them by Abel Remusat
and Klaproth, taken from Japanese documents, but correspond
more nearly with the Yslas del Arzobispo, described many years
ago in the i Navigation Especulativa y Pratica,’ published at
Manilla. Keempfer’s description of the islands of Bonin-Sima
may, however, be safely referred to the Archbishop’s Isles. The
group consists of three clusters of islands, lying nearly N. by E.,
and extending from the latitude of 27° 44' 35'' to 26° 30' N., be-
yond which was the utmost limit of their view to the southward.
The northern cluster was named Parry Islands. The middle clus-
ter consists of three, of which Peel’s Island is the largest. This
group is nine miles and a quarter in length, and is divided by two
channels, so narrow, that they can only be seen when abreast
of them, and are not navigable by shipping. The northern island


was named Stapleton, and the centre Buckland. At the south-
west angle is a bay, with good anchorage, which was called
Walker’s Bay. The southern cluster visited by Mr. Coffin in
1823, in a whaler, was named Baily Islands,
Captain Beechey, having now spent so much time in low lati-
tudes, was obliged again to steer to the inhospitable seas of the
North ; but as we have already embodied the results of this second
journey, we shall not dwell upon the difficulties and dangers with
which this navigation was attended. In the month of October,
1827, he was on his return ; and on the 29th anchored at Monterey.
He remained at this harbour until the l?thof November, and then
sailed for San Francisco. The Blossom afterwards put into San
Bias and Mazatlem, taking the opportunity of examining the Tres
Marias and Isabella Islands, an account of which is inserted in
the nautical remarks. On the 29th of March, 1828, after several
delays, they crossed the equator in 99° 40' W., and arrived at
Valparaiso on the 29th of April. On the 23d of May they arrived
at Coquimbo, from which port they finally put to sea on their way
to Brazil, passed the meridian of Cape Horn on the 30th of June,
and arrived at Rio Janeiro on the 21st of July. After a passage
of forty-nine days they arrived at Spithead ; and, on the 12th of
October, the ship was paid oft at Woolwich.
Hydrography. —That part of Hydrography which would
more particularly come under the observation of a nautical expedi-
tion, would be the natural history of the sea ; and we may perhaps
notice the observations made on the direction and intensity of cur-
rents as the most interesting of this class. In the passage from
Teneriffe to Rio Janeiro, from June to July, it appears that the
N.E. trades propelled the waters, in a S.W. by W. direction, at
the average rate (and it is to be remarked, that all the rates given
are averages) of eleven and a half miles per diem ; and the S.E.
trades to the W.N.W. with double the velocity, or twenty-two
and a half miles per day ; and that in the intermediate space,
where light variable winds prevailed, a strong current was ob-
served, running in a contrary direction to both these, at the rate
of thirteen miles per day. Humboldt, Sir Erasmus Gower, and
others, who have given the rate of the current in the Atlantic be-
tween the tropics, have limited its motion to eight and ten miles
a day. It was Captain Beechey’s intention to have given a table
of currents in the Appendix, but this was omitted for want of
space. In the South Pacific Ocean, about the parallel of 27°,
the currents averaged nine miles a day ; and nearer the equator, i. e.
from 18° S. to 4° N., including the meridian of Otaheite 16°, five
miles per day. Nearer the coast of South America, between the
parallels of 8° N. and 19° S., about the meridian of 103° W., it
was further increased to twenty-eight miles a day.


In both oceans there appears to be, on the whole, a north-
easterly current between the trade winds. In the Atlantic it was
found to average thirteen miles a day; and in the Pacific, twenty-
tluee miles a day. In the vicinity ot the Gallapagos, however,
there is an exception to this remark, as the current there appears
always to run to the westward, and with considerable rapidity.
The rates of the currents in both oceans are materially different
in different meridians: those in the Atlantic increasing with west-
erly longitudes, and those in the Pacific, on the contrary, decreas-
ing—the former attaining its maximum near the Gulf of Mexico,
the latter near the Gallapagos. They are also affected by the
westerly monsoons.
Questions connected with the saltness of the ocean, which may
be obtained by its specific gravity, are also ot much hydrographical
interest. It has been supposed, that, with the exception of certain
gulfs, into which large fresh-water rivers emptied themselves,
the saltness of the ocean diminishes towards the poles ; but the
experiments of Bladh, reduced by Kirwan to the temperature of
16 , do not justify this opinion, which is further not supported by
the researches of De Humboldt. Captain Beechey has appended
a table of experiments to his narrative, in which the specific gra-
vity of the surface of the sea, reduced to the temperature of 60°,
and corrected for the error of the hydrometer, is given for every
second degree of latitude. From these tables, it Avould appear
that the specific gravity is at its maximum between the tropics,
-—that it increases to about 40° N, lat., —and then again dimi-
nishes. In the South Atlantic, the specific gravity of the sea-
water was also found to be less in the highest latitudes ; and the
same results were obtained from the observations of 1825 and
1828. In the Pacific Ocean, where the experiments ranged from
the equator to 71° N. latitude, and from the equator to 88° S.
latitude, the results are still more striking j and accord remarkably
with those obtained by Drs. Marcett and Traill, and Captains
Scoresby and Ross. No experiments are recorded on the com-
parative saltness of the surface and the deep water.
Meteorology.— r l he meteorological researches are con-
fined to observations on the aurora borealis, and on the pressure,
temperature, and humidity of the atmosphere. The expedition
had frequent opportunities of observing the aurora borealis in
the autumns of 1826 and of 1827. From the 25th of August,
on which day it is remarkable that in both years it made its
first appearance, until the 9th of October, about the time of
the departure of the Blossom from the northern regions, in
both years this beautiful meteor was visible every night that was
clear, or when the clouds were thin and elevated : it never
appeared in wet weather. In 1826, when the weather was settled,


the aurora generally began in the W.N.W. and passed over to
the N.E. until a certain period, after which it as regularly com-
menced in the N.E. and passed to the N.W.; whilst in 1827 the
appearances of the meteor were as uncertain as the season was
boisterous and changeable. The period when this change in the
course of the light took place coincided very nearly with that of
the equinox. The meteor was uniform in making its appearance
always in the northern hemisphere, and generally in the form of
elliptical arches from 3° to 7° of altitude, nearly parallel with the
magnetic equator. The arches, when formed, in general remained
nearly stationary, and gave out coruscations, which streamed
towards the zenith. These observations agree with those of Mr.
Dalton, who always found a similar coincidence when the arches
were complete. The light was decidedly seen between a fleecy,
cloud-like substance and the earth. The proofs of this meteor
belonging to the regions of our atmosphere were strengthened by
different appearances of the meteor, and may be considered as
completely established by the observations of Captains Franklin
and Parry. The aurora was never attended by any noise, nor was
any disturbance of the needle observed. It must be remarked,
that Eater’s compass was the only instrument observed, and then
on board the ship only, Mr. Collie, the surgeon of the Blossom,
has advanced an ingenious hypothesis on the nature of the aurora.
It is probable that the new discoveries which are daily enriching
science in electro-magnetism will remove many of the doubts
which prevail on the nature and origin of this interesting meteor.
The Barometrical observations include researches on the horary
oscillations, and on the mean altitude of the column of mercury at
different parallels. The instrument used was an iron cistern
marine barometer, of Jones’s make: neutral point, 30.102;
capacity, temperature, 52. It was suspended in Captain
Beechey’s fore cabin, and, with the exception of the first five
months, registered every three hours. The diurnal variations are
thus also contained in these researches. It has been supposed,
that while the irregular oscillations appear almost null at the
equator, and increase in extent towards the poles, the regular
oscillations would appear to follow a contrary law, and diminish
in extent towards the poles. The extent of the vibration of the
column of mercury between the tropics was observed by Captain
Beechey to be, in the North Atlantic, .038 ; in the South Atlantic,
or between the equator and the tropic of Capricorn, to be .067 ;
and the amount of the horary oscillations between both tropics
was, for 3 a.m. —026, for 9 A.m. + 019, noon + 011, 3 p.m.—
030, 9 p.m. + 014, and for midnight -f Oil. The mean vibra-
tion or extent from maximum to minimum, between the tropics,
was, for the North Pacific, .059, and for the South Pacific,


.027; and the mean periodical oscillation for 3 a.m.
6 a.m.
necessary to dwell upon the dates given for the mean altitude of
the barometer in different latitudes : as compared with one another
the results are useful; but the true height of the column of mer-
cury in any given place can only be obtained from the annual
mean, which, at the level of the sea and at the same temperature, is
everywhere pretty nearly the same. The highest range of the ba-
rometer in the polar regions observed by Captain Sir E. Parry
was 3086, which it attained in Melville Island, on the 27th of
April, 1820; and Captain Beechey observed the barometer at
3032 in Kotzebue Sound, on September Ist, 1826.
The tables of the observed temperature and humidity of the air
in different parallels, and which have been used in the correction
of errors, are minute, and extremely useful for reference.
The practical application of observations on the temperature of
the sea have, as far as we know, been only twofold. The cele-
brated Franklin first fixed the attention of natural philosophers on
the phenomena which are presented in the temperature of the
ocean above shallows, and his remarks have since been verified by
De Humboldt. Captain Beechey mentions in his narrative some
remarkable cases where changes in the temperature of the surface
of the sea were forerunners of shifts of wind, which he thinks they
preceded, even before any change in the temperature of the air.
The observations on the temperature of the surface of the sea in
the Appendix of Captain Beechey’s work were made every four
hours, by plunging a thermometer into a bucket of sea water
immediately it was drawn up, and they are compared with the
mean of bi-horal observations on the temperature of the air. The
mean only of the daily observations being given, we cannot ascer-
tain how far they verify Peron’s notions on the variations between
mid-day and midnight, and the relation of these to the temperature
of the ambient air at the same period ; but the observations on the
temperature of the surface of the sea, compared with that of the
atmosphere, appear to demonstrate that, in the same situation, the
former is greater than the latter, and, consequently, that the law
in hydrography is correct, which establishes that the mean term of
the temperature of the waters of the ocean at their surface, and
far from the continents, is greater than that of the atmosphere
with which the waters are in contact. This is more particularly
true with regard to the equatorial and inter-tropical regions, as also
to seas distant from land, for exceptions were met with in Kot-
zebue Sound and in other places. Observations on the temperature
of the sea at different depths are perhaps of still greater interest,
both on account of the difficulty attendant on experiments of that


character, of the discussions which are yet involved in the results
of former experiments, and of the light which they assist in throw-
ing on the temperature of the globe and the theory of the earth.
The observations made during the expedition of the Blossom were
with self-registering thermometers, at various depths, from 50 to
more than 700 fathoms; and in all cases it appears that the tem-
perature diminishes with the depth to a certain distance, when it
begins to increase again, or at least remains stationary ; and this
depth appears to vary from 300 to 500 fathoms. The experiments
at depths beyond this were too few to allow of any satisfactory
results; but it appears, as in the experiments of the Russian
expedition recorded by Lentz, that below 400 fathoms the tem-
perature was nearly stationary. The difference of temperature
between the surface and a depth of 700 fathoms, as observed by
Captain Wauchope, in H.M.S. Euryene, amounted to 31°.
There are several experiments made by Captain Beechey, in
which the difference amounted to 35°, 36°, and 37°, and in one
case to 39°-5 ; this was at a depth of 400 fathoms. At 784
fathoms in the North Pacific, the difference was 36°.8 ; and in
the same place, at 600 fathoms, 37° ; at 760 fathoms, the diffe-
rence was 35°.5 ; and in the same place, at 375 fathoms, 35°.
In the South Atlantic, at a depth of 854 fathoms, the difference
was only 10°.4.
M agnetism. —The observations on terrestrial magnetism were
on the dip of the magnetic needle, on the intensity of the magnetic
force, and on the variation of the compass with Barlow’s plate
attached. The dips were observed with the same instrument
which had been used at Melville Island: it had two common
needles, and another with a moveable weight, fitted up on Pro-
fessor Mayer’s principle. No. 1 was used solely for observations
on the magnetic intensity, and its poles consequently were never re-
versed ; while No. 2 and Mayer’s were employed for dips, and had
their poles changed at each observation. The horizontal needle
was suspended in a stirrup by a fine silk, in an octagon wooden
box, furnished with a graduated wooden circle on the inside, and
covered with a glass top, in which there was fitted a contrivance
for moving the needle out of the magnetic meridian. Until the
arrival of the ship at Woahoo, the stay at each place was 100 short,
and Captain Beechey’s time was too much occupied with astrono-
mical observations, and with the business of surveys, for him to
give the necessary attention to these delicate observations ; but
after that period the observations were regularly made. Unfortu-
nately for the completion of the series upon the magnetic intensity,
the needles used for that purpose became corroded upon the pas-
sage from Loo Choo to Petropaulski, by which their magnetic
power was much diminished ; and as the amount of the change


could not be ascertained, Captain Beechey thought it advisable not
to introduce the observations into the published tables. T. he fol-
lowing table will present the result of the observations on dips :
Lat. N. Long. W. Mean dip. N.
70° 31' 160° 30' 81° 63'
66 12 161 46 77 39
Eerham 69 58
1826 N.W. America
Ch amis so Island
England . . . Egham
Petropaulski
San Francisco .
53 01 201 15 64 02.3
37 48 122 24 62 35.2
Macao . . . 22 12 246 28 29 57.5
Woahoo . . 21 18 158 00 40 33
LooChoo . . . 26 12 232 18 35 01.7
Acapulco ' • 16 50 99 51 38 58
The observations on the horizontal needle confirm the generally
received law, that the intensity of the magnetic force increases as
we proceed from the equator to the poles, though the ratio of that
increase, as resulting from former experiments, is rather greater
than is indicated by the experiments of Captain Beechey. The
intensity of the magnetic force, which is in proportion to the
square of the number of vibrations made in a given time, is also
added to the table of observations, both in its observed and com-
puted ratios.
The observations on the variation of the compass were made
with Barlow’s plate attached; the local deviation of the needle
was ascertained by swinging the ship at bpithead, and the po-
sition of the plate determined by the directions which accompanied
it. In 1827, it became necessary to alter the position of the
plate a little, on account of a different distribution of the iron in
the ship. This was done pursuant to experiments made at Petro-
paulski. These observations, exceedingly minute and numerous,
are of the greatest interest to terrestrial magnetism, and, compared
with Professor Hansteen’s chart of the variations and dip of the
needle, furnish additional proof of the accuracy which this branch
of science is now attaining. A table is appended, containing the
variation of the compass from observations made on shore at dif-
ferent parts of the globe, principally with two of Kater s compasses,
the errors of which were 8° 58' and 2° 18' respectively.
Physical Geography.— Physical Geography, in addition
to the history of the mountains, plains, and valleys, or the con-
trasted configurations of the earth’s surface, embraces Geographical
Zoology and Geographical Botany; but as the natural history of
this voyage is to be published in separate volumes, and as the
geographical distribution of the plants or animals can only be con-
nected with an accurate knowledge of the species met with in dif-
ferent places, we must defer any detailed account of these i esults
until the materials furnished by the scientific labours of the


naturalists and officers attached to the expedition are placed at our
disposal.
1 here are, however, some points of importance to Physical
Geogiaphy noticed in the narrative, which it would be improper
to pass over. We allude more particularly to the information given
of the character and formation ot the coral islands which are scat-
tered over the great Southern Pacific Ocean, and which appear to
be daily forming new abodes for the roving tribes of those archi-
pelagoes. Ihe observations of Captain Beechey on this subject,
illustrated by excellent engravings and diagrams, are of great in-
terest. We shall first briefly notice these observations, and then
consider the general views which result from them.
Poister, and other naturalists, have imagined that the polypi of
the corals build upwards to a certain height, raising their habita-
tion within a little of the surface ol the sea, which gradually throws
shells, weeds, sand, small bits of coral, and other things, on the tops
of these coral rocks, at last fairly raising them out of the water ;
but Captain Beechey makes the important observation, that it is
the abrupt descent of the external margin which causes the sea to
break upon it, and prevents these strips being inundated, and the
loose sands, divested of any loose materials, heaped upon them,
aie rarely elevated more than two feet above the level of the sea.
Ihose parts of the strip which are beyond the reach of the waves
are no longer inhabited by the animals that reared them, but have
their cells filled with hard, calcareous matter, and present a brown,
rugged appearance. The width of the plain, or strips of dead
coral, which came under Captain Beechey’s observation, in no
instance exceeded half a mile, from the usual wash of the sea to
the edge of the lagoon, and in general were only about three or
four hundred yards. Beyond these limits, on the lagoon side in
particular, where the coral was less mutilated by the waves, there
was frequently a ledge two or three feet under water at high tides,
and thirty to forty yards in width ; after which the sides of the
island descended rapidly, apparently by a succession of inclined
ledges, formed by numerous columns united at their capitals with
spaces between them, in which the sounding lead descended se-
veral fathoms. Ihe islands slope on both sides by an almost im -
perceptible inclination to the first ledge. The entrances to the
lagoons generally occur on the leeward side, though they are
sometimes situated on a side that runs in the direction of the
wind, as at Bow Island. All the points or angles of these islands
descend into the sea with less abruptness than the sides, and with
more regularity. Ihe wedge-shaped spaces that the meeting of
the two sides would form in the lagoon is filled up by the ledges
being broader there, in such places, as well as in the narrow
pait of the lake, the polypi are in greater numbers ; they appear


to rise to the surface in the form of a truncated cone, and then
their progress being stopped, they work laterally ; so that if several
of them were near each other, they would unite and form a shelf
similar to that which exists round the margin of some of the
lagoons. Some of the lagoons which the Blossom entered were
from twenty to thirty-eight fathoms in depth. A fact, however,
in contradiction to Captain Beechey’s opinion, has been previously
mentioned by Chamisso ; nor were there wanting surmises of what
perhaps this navigator has the credit of proving satisfactorily—
that the wall of coral which encircles these islands is so narrow
and perfect, that they have been improperly designated as groups
or chains of islands, in consequence of the wall being broken by
channels into the lagoon ; for, on examination, the chain is found
continuous under water, and as in all probability it will in time
reach the surface, and become dry, the whole of the group may
generally be considered as one island.
We may remark that the observations of Captain Beechey, while
they correspond w ith those of the French naturalists in many points,
do not favour the hypothesis of former navigators, that the saxi-
genous polypi raise their habitations gradually from a small base,
always spreading more in proportion as the structure grows higher :
an hypothesis which is objectionable on many grounds.
There can now be no doubt, from the situation of these coral
islands with respect to each other, as they often form rows, their
union in several places in large groups, and their total absence in
other parts of the same seas, that the polypi have founded their
buildings on shoals of the sea, or on the tops of mountains lying
underwater; but it is quite incorrect to suppose, with Messrs.
Quoy and Gaimard, that there are no islands of any extent con-
stantly inhabited by man, which are entirely formed of corals, —or,
that, far from raising from the depths of the ocean perpendicular
walls, these animals form only layers or crusts of a few fathoms
thickness. And it is equally impossible to grant to all these ani-
malcules one common impulse, or, as Captain Flinders has it, an
instinctive foresight to shelter their habitations from the impetuosity
of the winds, by forming constantly high walls and reefs to the
windward : a circumstance, the explanation of which we think
might easily be sought in physical causes alone. For if the lateral
movements of the polypi, or their natural tendency to horizontal
construction, happens to be impeded in any one direction, they
will gain vertically what they lose horizontally; and the resistance
being equal on the same side, the true horizontal extent will be
everywhere the same, and a wall will be formed : while, in an
opposite direction, the same circumstances not being in existence,
the constructions of the polypi will extend horizontally as well as
vertically, and consequently will not rise with the same degree of
rapidity as those which are erected to the windward; and hence


would result an appearance as if this windward bulwark had really
been erected by the ‘ instinctive foresight ’ of the animalcule. If
the opinion we have thus hazarded be correct, it is evident that, in
different situations, there will be coral rocks, exhibiting very different
characters; and thus, from the charts given of the coral islands
which lie in the Indian and Chinese seas, in the regions of the six
months’ monsoons, it may be inferred that every side is equally
advanced in formation. Chamisso says, that the larger species of
coral insects, which form blocks measuring several fathoms in
thickness, seem to prefer the violent surf on the external edge of
the reef; which, with the obstacles opposed to the continuation of
their life in the middle of a broad reef, by the amassing of shells
and fragments of coral, easily account for the outer edge of the
reef first approaching the surface ; and the same circumstances must
also contribute to the circular character of these reefs, or groups of
reefs. Whether those islands, which have greater length than
breadth, are opposed in their greatest extent to the winds and
waves, appears to depend on the size and arrangement of their
submarine supports. The arguments of Quoy and Gaimard, who
say that the species which form the most considerable banks, such
as the Meandrinae, certain Caryophylleae, and especially the
Astreas, require the influence of light to perfect them, and conse-
quently cannot be developed at a depth of from ten to twelve hun-
dred feet, are only applicable to those species; and if the species
of the genus Astrea are alone capable of covering immense extents
of surface, and do not commence their operations at a greater
depth than twenty-five or thirty feet, why may not the branched
madrepores, which do live at considerable depths, have formed the
platform for their reception, just as we see the marine algae dis-
tributed in different zones or depths of the sea * ?
In the uncultivated tracts of our latitude, vegetation generally
commences by the appearance of pulverulent lichens, which are
succeeded by foliaceous plants of a more perfect organization, by
mosses, and finally, varying with the soil and situation, by mono-
cotyledonous or dicotyledonous plants, which gradually make their
appearance; but the coral islands of the Pacific, not adapted to
support plants requiring a depth of soil, often first afford a basis
to high trees provided with fibrous roots, as the Pisonia, Cordia
Sebastiana, Morinda citrifolia, and Pandanus odoratissimus,
which, at a distance, give to these small islands the form of a hill.
The loose dry stones of the first ridge are penetrated by the hard
roots of the Tifano, which expands its branches into a tall, spread-
ing tree, and is attended by the fragrant Suriana, and the sweet-
scented Tourneforlia, in the shelter of whose foliage the Achy-
ranthus and Lepidium seem to thrive the best. Beyond the first
* Captain Beechey informed Mr. Lyell, that in Ducies Island, W. Long. 120°, he
ascertained that the corals were growing at the depth of one hundred and eighty
feet.—Lyell’s Geology, p. 130.
218
Captain Becchey's Voyage.


high and stony ridge, the hardy Scaevola extends in creeping roots
and procumbent verdure towards the sea, throwing its succulent
leaves round the sharp coral stones. The gradual developernent
of vegetation, and succession of species and families, on these
virgin islands, would form a subject for investigation of very con-
siderable interest.
It is well known that Bory St. Vincent attempted a classification
or geographical distribution of seas, founded upon their natural
productions and natural phenomena. A system of this kind, when
applied to mediterranean waters, assumed a still greater interest
from the new light which it threw upon the changes which animal
and vegetable forms undergo, from changes in the physical cha-
racters of the medium in which they live, and which promised
to open a new field for speculation to geologists. In the wide
ocean, however, where the marine productions were few, and those
sometimes not well characterized, it was necessary to have recourse
to the geographical distribution of the birds and animals that fre-
quented its waters and coasts, as the vegetation of mediterranean
shores lent its evidence in tracing affinity or dissimilarity between
seas separated by slight geographical distances. In the narrative
of Captain Beechey’s voyage we find many facts of interest in a
study of this kind, the most remarkable of which we shall briefly
enumerate. As the Blossom approached the Falkland Islands
from Rio Janeiro, some penguins were seen upon the water in
latitude 47° S., at a distance of 340 miles from the nearest land, —
a fact which either proves the common opinion, that this species
never strays far from land, to be an error, or that some unknown
land exists in the vicinity. Off the river Plate, they fell in with
the dusky albatross (Diomedia fuliginosa), which on reaching the
latitude of 51° S. quitted them; but on rounding the Cape, and
regaining the same parallel of 51° S. on the opposite side, the
same bird again came round, and accompanied the ship up the
Chili coast. The pintados were their constant attendants the
whole way. In the Bay of Conception, shags were observed
sometimes to fly in an unbroken line of two miles and more in length.
The pintados deserted the ship the day after they had left the
coast of Chili. In the lagoons of the coral reefs, abundance of
beautifully coloured fish, of the genera Chaetodon Sparus and
Gymnothorax, were observed. Echini were not abundant, but
Aphroditse, Halothuriag, Asteriae, &c.
The shell-fish belonged to our own genera. Helix, (?) area,
ostrea, carduum, turbo, venus, cyprea, voluta, harpa, haliotis,
patella, are among those enumerated.
In this dangerous Archipelago birds are seldom fallacious indi-
cators of land. They range about forty miles from the islands,
and consist principally of black and white tern. 'To the W.N.VV.


Rio de Janeiro ..
Corcovado
2308
Barometer. .
1825
55
55
2296
Ditto
1828
59
59
2306
Trig. m. ...
1825
55
59
2306
Ditto
1828
55
Sugar-loaf
1285
Ditto
1825
55
55
1299
Ditto
1828
Conception
. N. Pap. Bio Bio. ..
789.6
Ditto
55
Observatory
78
Dip of the sea.
Pitcairn Island .. .
Peak on it
1046.5
Trig. m.
Gambier Island..
j Highest Peak of Mt.'
\ Duff
| 1247.9
Ditto.
55
Ship Rock
441.1
Ditto.
of Sandwich Islands, they first observed the albatross. Captain
King, on his passage to Kamtschatka, first met these birds within
twenty miles of the same spot. In the same latitudes, the species of
fiying fish was changed. In 33° N. the first birds of the northern
regions were met with. These were the Procellaria puffinus. The
tropical birds accompanied them as far as 36° N. In 35° N. the
sea became covered with beroes, nereis, and other molluscous ani-
mals, and small Crustacea. Captain Beechey says that the vicinity
of the St. Lawrence Islands, in Beering’s Straits, is always indi-
cated by the crested auk (T/ca crestatella). The dredge off this
island furnished specimens of genera which exist in great abun-
dance on our coasts. The same remark is applicable to the vege-
tation of the shores of Beering’s Straits and Kotzebue’s Sound,
and this is nowhere more remarkable than in Cape Espenberg.
We notice these few facts, furnished by Captain Beechey’s
voyage, not to prove that the respective position of any place on
the globe has any exact and positive relation with its aquatic or
terrestrial productions. But although these do not stop at such or
such an arch of the sphere, and we cannot perhaps quote a single
animal or vegetable which first makes its appearance at such or
such a degree of latitude or longitude ; yet all natural productions
have their zones more or less large and sinuous ; and with the
progress of science, we shall find the manner in which the prin-
cipal marine and littoral productions are distributed over the
immensity of the waters will enable us to obtain grounds for the
most natural divisions of their surface.
The altitudes obtained by barometrical or trigonometrical ob-
servations attach themselves peculiarly to physical geography, as
illustrating the height of continents, of mountain chains, and of
culminating points, which, however, are more often objects of
curiosity than of scientific interest. The barometrical measure-
ments were computed according to Mr. Daniell’s method ; and
the heights ascertained at sea were with sextants, patent log-bases,
and astronomical bearings.


Miatea Peak on it 1432.3 Trig. m.
Beering’s Strait.. Cape Lisburn 849 Dip of the sea.
Kotzebue Sound. , Chamisso Island .... 231 Ditto.
„ jHiUN.of Spatarlefj
Society Islands . . a ' f 404.1 Trig. m.
San Francisco .. . Angel Island 900.7 Barometer.
~ Deviation (Balbones) 378.3 Trig. m.
„ Yerba Buena Island 513.8 Ditto.
{Hill at Yerba Buena{ 407 3 Ditto .
” ( Cove J
Island of Assunip-1 of the Cone 20 06 Ditto .
tion, Ladrones. J
Botel Tobago Xiraa Peak at W. Angle . . 1817 Base at sea.
„ Peak at N.E. Angle exceeded this altitude by
about 30 feet.
Loo Choo Onnodake Mount ... 1089 Trig. m.
Abbey Point 98.4 Dip of the horizon.
nuucj i uiat •.*•••• wj
~ Knmi Head 99.8 Ditto.
Petropaulski .... { 7374 Trig, m,
fAvatcha Mountain, j ! i ‘l(Tng. °P eration on
” (N. by E. of the town 1 1149 *6 J s^ore>
Cape Lisburn. . . . Flint Station 849.3 Dip of the horizon.
Kotzebue Sound ,{ Hi “° f Spafa ™ f } 616 Ditto.
~ Chamisso Island .... 231 Ditto.
Port Clarence .. . High Snowy Mountain 2596 Trig. m.
San Bias Commandant's House 141 Dip of the horizon.
„ San Juan Paps {g23o} m *
Calima Mount 1200.3 Ditto.
Fossil Bones.—The supposed discovery of fossil bones im-
bedded in the ice of Escholtz Bay, in West Georgia, had excited
much interest among naturalists, both on account of the antiquity
which it gave to ice formations, and the light which such a dis-
covery was calculated to throw on the state of the climate of the
arctic regions at the time when they were thickly inhabited by
genera of the largest quadrupeds. But (as before observed) the
visit of the Blossom to these shores has demonstrated that the
supposed ice formation is only a casing occurring on the face of
a cliff, of from twenty to eighty feet in height, and rising inland
to a rounded range of hills, between four and five hundred feet
above the sea. The geognostic structure of these cliff’s is a
bluish-coloured mud or clay, corresponding in character to our


diluvium; and the glacial facing, which was easily cut through,
appeared to Captain Beechey to be occasioned either by the
snow being banked up against the cliff or collected in its hollows
in the winter, and converted into ice in the summer by partial
thawings and freezings, or by the constant flow of water during
the summer over the edges of the cliffs, on which, when con-
verted into ice, the sun’s rays operate less forcibly than on other
parts. At Blossom Cape, in Kotzebue Bay, the ice, instead
of merely forming a shield to the cliff, was imbedded in the in-
dentations along its edges, filling them up nearly even wdth the
point.
The bones found in this deposit of mud and gravel belonged to
the elephant, the urns, the deer, and the horse. Some of the tusks
examined by Professor Buckland possessed the same double cur-
vature as the tusks of the great elephant in the museum at Peters-
burgh, from the icy cliff at the mouth of the Lena, in Siberia.
The head of the musk-ox, brought home with the fossil bones, Pro-
fessor Buckland says, cannot be considered as fossil. The horns
of the deer w'ere similar to those found in the diluvium of England ;
but there were also the cervical vertebras of an unknown animal,
and which must have differed essentially from any that now inhabit
the polar regions of the northern hemisphere.
lI. —A Narrative of a Visit to the Court of Sinde, fyc. By James
Burnes, Surgeon to the Residency at Bhooj. Bombay. 1829.
Edinburgh. 1831. By W. Ainsworth, Esq.
gIND, or Sinde, extends on both sides of the river Indus, called
by the Hindoos Sindh, which thus gives its name to the coun-
try. It resembles Egypt in the overflowing of the river, in its cli-
mate, in some degree in its soil, and also in being confined on one
side by a ridge of mountains, and on the other by a desert. Being
of classical celebrity, it has long attracted the attention of geogra-
phers ; but from the opposition offered to research by the preju-
dices of its oriental possessors, and the predatory habits of its
Nomadic tribes, it has remained until very lately quite unexplored.
The view’s of Napoleon, however, on our Indian possessions, first
pointed out the necessity of a better acquaintance with a country
which forms their western barrier ; and we are indebted to the im-
pulse given by these precautionary measures for Colonel Potlin-
ger’s account of Sinde, and his subsequent exploration, with
Captain Christie, of Belochistan, and a part of Persia. The final
occupation of Cutch by the British troops in 1819, further brought
our government in connexion with Sinde ; and after an unsuccessful
