

Lo lohn {?]
ANALYSES
OF
PLANTAIN MEAL
AND OF
THREE SAMPLES OF AUSTRALIAN WINE.
BY
MURRAY THOMSON,
LATE ASSISTANT IN THE LABORATORY OF THE INDUSTRIAL MUSEUM
OF SCOTLAND.
From the Transactions of the Edinburgh Botanical Society, Vol. 5 .
EDINBURGH:
PRINTED BY NEILL AND COMPANY.
MDCCCLVIII


ANALYSES, &C.
Analysis of Plantain Meal. *
It has often been suggested that the plantain and banana,
the fruit of the Musa paradisiaca and Musa sapieniurn,
should form an article of export from our West Indian
colonies, but hitherto this has not been accomplished, at
least, to any extent, chiefly from the difficulty of preserving
the flavour of the fruit. This difficulty, however, does not
hold when the plantain or banana are to be used as articles
of diet in the form of flour or meal. The plantain is an im-
portant article of diet; and as there is not as yet any pub-
lished analysis of it, at least, so far as I am aware, I have,
at the suggestion of Professor Gr. Wilson, analyzed a sample
of plantain, ground into flour or meal, sent to him by W,
W. Anderson, Esq. of Jamaica.
According to Mr P. L. Simmonds, in bis Commercial
Productions of the Vegetable Kingdom, “ This meal is pre-
pared by stripping off the husk of the plantain, slicing the
core, and drying it in the sun, and when thoroughly dry
powdering and sifting it,” “In that state,” he says, “it is
called by the creoles of the West Indies 1 Conquin Tay.’ It
has a fragrant odour, acquired in drying, resembling fresh
bay or tea. The sample I operated on possessed this tea
odour in a remarkable degree. In colour it is;whitish-gray,
not unlike Scotch oat-meal, but in much finer powder. It
has a sweetish taste and partially dissolves in the mouth.
When treated with cold Water it is little acted on, but in
boiling water it rapidly dissolves, and on being strained and
cooled, the solution consolidates into a grayish-brown jelly.
I should here remark that, as far as appearance goes, the jelly
♦ Read before the Botanical Society of Edinburgh, January 1857,


given by the plantain meal is inferior to that given by arrow-
root when treated in the same manner, but possibly a little
more attention to the manufacture of the meal would improve
this. It has been remarked in reference to plantain meal,
that cooking it in iron vessels colours it very much. The
specimen I examined gives a colour when some of it is
stirred up with dilute solutions of sesquichloride of iron, but
certainly not more so than the meal of wheat or oats when
similarly treated.”
The following short details of the analysis may not prove
uninteresting:—
The amount of nitrogen was determined by Peligot’s modi-
fication of Will and Yarentrapp's process. It was twice
estimated, and a mean struck between the two determina-
tions. The number was 0 - 31 per cent, of nitrogen. This
number, when multiplied in the usual way by 6 - 5, gives the
amount of the albuminous or plastic constituents amounting
to 2'ol per cent. Simmonds, in the work above quoted, gives
the amount of nitrogen as 088, and of plastic constituents
as 5‘45. This result is certainly too high, yet it may to
some extent be accounted for by the difference of samples
operated on. As noticed above, cold water acts very little on
this substance, sufficiently, however, to dissolve out all the
gum, sugar, and salts. These were therefore determined by
washing a known quantity of the meal with cold water on a
filter, the accumulated washings were evaporated down in
the water bath to perfect dryness, weighed, and the residue
digested in ordinary spirit of wine. This dissolves out the
sugar, leaving the gum and salts.
The spirituous solution of sugar when concentrated was
quite sweet. The sugar was represented by the loss of weight
the gummy residue had suffered by digestion in spirit after
being dried and weighed. This gave 2’40 per cent, of sugar.
The gummy residue was then completely incinerated, and
gave 064 per cent, of soluble salts, which, deducted from the
weight of the residue, gives 4 - 42 per cent, of gum. The
total ash of the meal was 0 - 92 per cent.
This process for separating gum, sugar, and salts, answers
very well for such a substance as plantain-meal, and gives
good results.


The starch was determined in the usual way by washing
a known quantity of the meal in a fine muslin bag, until the
washings gave no more colour with tincture of iodine. The
method followed for drying the starch is worth notice.
It should be collected on a weighed filter, and at first left to
dry by simple exposure to the air, in which, after being well
dried, it is put in the water bath, and more fully desiccated.
If put at once in the water-bath when newly washed, it
passes into a pasty mass, out of which it is very difficult
to drive the last traces of moisture, but if treated as above,
it remains as a powder, and is easily rendered quite dry.
The starch amounted to 71 - 60 per cent. What was left
in the muslin bag, representing cellulose, was also dried and
weighed, when it gave 5 - 99 per cent.
It is perhaps worth noticing that the liquor from which
the starch deposited had a very pleasant odour, reminding
one of raspberry juice. When a portion of this fluid was
boiled, it gave, as might have been expected, flakes of albu-
minous matter.
The results of the analysis, stated in 100 parts, are as fol-
lows :
Water, ...... 1233
Starch, ...... 71'CO
Gum, ...... 4-42
Sugar, ...... 2-40
Cellulose, . . . . . 5 99
Plastic constituents, as albumen, . 2 01
Oil, 0-50
Soluble Salts, ..... 0-64
99-89
Total Ash per cent. 0’92.
It would thus appear that plantain meal is to some extent
richer in blood-forming principles than arrowroot and such
substances. Also, as far as I can ascertain, it contains less
water, containing therefore more nutritious matter, bulk for
bulk, than these others. And, if we add to their qualities, its
agreeable flavour, this substance must be regarded as equal-
ling in nutritious value the most highly prized among the
farinaceous aliments, although very much inferior to the
meal of wheat or oats.


Analyses of Three Australian Wines.
Australia has in many ways proved a fruitful source of
rare natural productions. Besides being a vast gold field,
it also seems likely to become an extensive vineyard, so that
wine may probably be sent home in large quantities.
Through the kindness of W. Campbell, Esq., three samples
of Australian wine were sent to Professor Wilson, who has
kindly permitted me to examine them chemically, and to
bring the results before this Society.
These samples of wine were labelled, “ Mi taro, 1855
“ Frontignac, 1854 “ Casignan, 1864/’ The dates, I pre-
sume, refer to the vintage. It is to be regretted that the
quantities sent (about 6 fluid-ounces each) did not admit
of a more extended examination. However, the results of
this investigation, carried as far as possible, may not be with-
out interest.
No. 1, Mitaro. —This sample in colour resembled port
wine, and was pronounced by a connoisseur to be pleasant
in taste, but rather sweet, and its bouquet good. It was dis-
tinctly acid to test paper, from the presence of a trace of free
acetic acid, as was afterwards ascertained.
The amount of alcohol in the wine was first determined,
and for this purpose an attempt was made to do so by a
process detailed in Normandy’s Commercial Analysis,
page 592, but it w r as unsuccessful, as there was an undoubted
retention of alcohol on the part of a large precipitate, pro-
duced by the sub-acetate of lead used in the process. Re-
course accordingly was had to distillation, which answers
very well if the condensation be good.
Two fluid ounces of the wine in this case were distilled,
the distillate measured 1J fluid ounces, and was of sp. gr.
977 at 69°. This is equivalent to 15 per cent, of alcohol.
But as the 1J oz. corresponds to 2 oz. of wine, that difference
had to be allowed for, and the amount of alcohol was thus
reduced to 11'30 per cent.
The residue left in the retort was tested for sugar and
tartrate of potash in the following manner:—the residue
was boiled with some well-washed animal charcoal, but the
colour was only partially removed by this; it was, however, de


colorized enough to try the bile test for sugar, when that sub-
stance was found to be present in the wine in distinct quantity.
The remainder of the residue was dried up and burned, and
the charred mass treated with dilute hydrochloric acid, when
distinct effervescence ensued; therefore a vegetable acid, such
as racemic or tartaric acid—most probably the latter—must
have been present in the unbumt wine as a tartrate. This
carbonate could not have existed in the wine, as that was, as
before mentioned, distinctly acid ; a condition of matters, I
need not remark, incompatible with the existence of a car-
bonate undecomposed. The acid solution of the charred
residue was tested for alkalies; potash only was found. A fresh
portion of the wine was evaporated, charred, and acted on by
dilute nitric acid ; none of the heavy metals w r ere present.
Hydrosulphuret of ammonia produced a trifling precipitate,
which was proved to be phosphate of lime, and, probably,
also of magnesia, as lime and magnesia w r ere both present.
Besides these substances, sulphuric acid and chlorine were
detected.
Mitaro wine contains IT3O per cent, of alcohol; also sugar
and tartrate of potash in small quantity, and traces of phos-
phate of lime and magnesia, lime and magnesia in some
other form of combination, acetic and sulphuric acids, and
chlorine.
No. 2, Frontignac. —The colour of this sample w r as pale
brown, like sherry wine; pronounced to be a fine wine, having
a fine bouquet, but rather sweet. It also was acid to test
paper, and from the same cause.
The analysis of this wine was performed in precisely the
same manner as in No. 1 ; therefore, a mere statement of the
results will suffice.
Three fluid ounces of the wine were distilled —2| oz. came
over. Its sp. gr. was 971 @ 60°=20 per cent.; but the error
before alluded to being corrected, gave only 16-00 per cent,
of alcohol. The residue in the retort in this wine gave
abundant evidence of sugar, even to the extent that the
decolorized solution gave crystals of sugar on standing.
Tartrate of potash also is present, and likewise tartrate of
soda.
Frontignac wine contains 16 - 00 per cent, of alcohol; also


sugar, tartrates of potash, of soda, and traces of lime and
magnesia, acetic acid, and chlorine.
No. 3, Casignan. —ln regard to colour it is, like Mitaro,
port coloured ; pronounced a good wine, bouquet good, but
also rather sweet; acid to test paper, proceeding from the
same cause as the others.
Casignan wine contains 18 per cent, of alcohol, and, besides
sugar, tartrates of potash and soda, traces of lime, magnesia,
and a little of these in combination with phosphoric acid ;
also traces of acetic, sulphuric acids, and chlorine.
It may be concluded that these wines are pure and good,
although not so strong or so full-bodied as the wines
supplied from Spain, and the other wine countries. Their
poverty in bouquet may be accounted for by their compa-
rative youth, being at most only 3 years old. Their all being
acid may be explained by the circumstance, that the
sample bottles were not tightly closed. But on the whole,
these wines are beyond the average of many wines sent to
the British markets,both as regards purityand strength. The
cultivation of the vine, and the wine manufacture, will no
doubt be carried on extensively in Australia.
These analyses were made in Professor Wilson’s labora-
tory, to whom I take this opportunity of returning thanks
for his great kindness.
In reference to Mr Thomson’s analyses, Mr Charles Law-
son, jun., sent a specimen of Australian wine, accompanied
by the following note: —
“ The accompaning specimen of Australian wine was im-
ported in 1855 ; the cost, delivered in London, about 9s. 6d.
to 10s. per gallon. Supposed to be made originally from
Rhine grapes taken out to Australia ; but with the view of
suiting the British taste by an approximation to dry sherry,
it lias been highly brandied, and possibly there is also a
slight admixture from the White Cape produce. All this,
however, was done in the colony. There can be little doubt
that Australia can produce good wine. It would be well
that it was exported pure, at all events not manufactured
with other growths. It is possible that a larger per-centage
of brandy must be added to make it stand the voyage.”
