

OTHFp
Sib
Hnbrew Cameron
AS I KNEW HIM
WILLIAM HEWITSON
o
04
o>


,
. ■■■ ■ ' , ■ ' .
■ . ■ v
.
'■ ■
■
■


With the compliments of the Friends
of Dr. Cameron, who published these
tributes.


REV. A. CAMERON, 8.A., LL.D.


ANDREW CAMERON
AS I KNEW HIM
®ljm JEentorial tributes
TO THE
REV. ANDREW CAMERON, 8.A.. LL.D.
WILLIAM HEWITSON
PUBLISHED FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION BY A FEW OF
DR. CAMERON’S FRIENDS




INTRODUCTORY WORD.
/IjVN Tuesday, the 19th instant, I received word through the
telephone that my old friend, Dr. Cameron, had fallen in
Manchester Street, Christchurch, on his way to a meeting of
the University Senate, and had died immediately. He had been
spending the week-end with his second daughter and her hus-
band in Rangiora. It had been a time of peace and great happi-
ness, His cup ran over. He left by the train on Tuesday morn-
ing for Christchurch, and on the way he remarked to an old
Anderson’s Bay boy whom he met at one of the wayside stations,
that he was feeling quite well. In less than half an hour he had
left us. There was no sadness of farewell when he embarked.
The Editor of the Evening Star asked me to write an ap-
preciation of my friend for his columns the next day. The
Clerk of the Presbytery of Dunedin, an old friend of Dr.
Cameron, who arranged the funeral services, appointed me to
give the address at the service in Anderson’s Bay Church; and
thereafter it fell to my lot, as the Master of Knox College, to
conduct and to speak at the Memorial Service in Ross Chapel.
As several persons have asked for copies of these addresses, it
occurred to some of Dr. Cameron’s friends that they might
combine and publish them for private circulation. To the ad-
dresses there have been added some photographs; one of Dr.
Cameron as a minister, the other as Chancellor of the University.
The remaining photographs group naturally enough around
religion and education, the two great interests of his life.
Many people have thought that Dr. Cameron in appearance
resembled David Livingstone. In spirit he certainly did. When
I went to speak at his farewell meeting at Anderson’s Bay, I
thought he was like the Village Preacher in “ The Deserted
Village.” When his oldest daughter, Helen, now a missionary
in China, cabled home to her mother after hearing of her father’s
death, she said: —“ Read ‘ Bonnie Briar Bush,’ first chapter— ‘ A
Lad o’ Pairts.’ ” Old readers of lan Maclaren will still remember
that the chapter contains the story of one who by gathering
money and in other ways was always helping some “ lad o’
pairts ” to get an education otherwise impossible to him. As
long as the Dominie lived the grass did not grow on the path
that led from the parish to the University. The parallel was a
happy inspiration of Mrs. Wilkinson, a true daughter of her
father after the spirit.


Emerson has said: —“ There is no choice of words for him
who clearly sees the truth. That provides him with the best word.”
In the same way when a portrait painter has once caught his
subject, the only thing he can vary is the size of his picture or
its setting, the portrait always remains essentially the same.
These tributes, addressed to different persons, inevitably!
contain a good deal of repetition; but if the character delineation!
be true the repetition will perhaps be forgiven by those who?
cared for Dr. Cameron; it may help to impress the characteristic;
features of the well-loved face. That these pictures by pen andi
by camera may do something to cheer the hearts of Dr.!
Cameron’s friends, and to inspire some young men with his!
spirit of service for God and man, is the earnest hope of those;
who send them out.
Wm. Hewitson.
The Lodge,
Knox College,
Dunedin.
30th May, 1925.


THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH, ANDERSON’S BAY
DR. CAMERON’S ONLY PARISH
THE OLD MANSE, ANDERSON’S BAY


; z
c o
E H
; <
c o
c o
C CO
C 73
«<
t a
c o
K >
C ft!
t a
C 73
- J
' 3
c o
c o
7 73
s z
; <
c S
t a
E h
S
e a
0 73
t a
c a
c a
6 a
!S
CO
ax
co
sz
2g
C Q
2 Z
& a
- a
C 0
& a
o x
E h


®lj£ ®ribut£ of an ©lb jfrimb.
The Evening Star, May 20, 1925.
tET me call him Andrew Cameron. The newspaper calls him
the Rev. Dr. Cameron, 8.A., and so he was; but let me call
him Andrew Cameron. He was an ex-Moderator of the General
Assembly of his Church; from the beginning to the end of his
long pastorate he was a member of the Theological Hall Com-
mittee, and for most of the time either its secretary or chairman;
he was the Chancellor of the University of Otago; a senator of
the University of New Zealand; the originator of Knox College;
one of the founders of the Presbyterian Social Service Associa-
tion in the Dominion, with its Glendining Home for the young
at one end of the town, and its Ross Home for the old at the
other; a member of the John McGlashan Board of Governors.
Yes; he was all that, and much else. But to me he was much
more than all that; he was my friend Cameron—patient, stead-
fast, true; one who added sunshine to daylight on life’s bright
days, and on its dark and cloudy ones set the rainbow in the
cloud by his understanding speech and silence, and by his rooted
faith. Andrew Cameron had the gift of sympathy and of
silence. A thing committed to him in confidence was like a stone
dropped into the irrecoverable depths of the sea. What he was
in the shadows only those who knew can say.
It was not his way to use titles nor to magnify his office.
In the telephone list he is not Dr. Cameron, nor is he the Chan-
cellor of the University. Except where it would be plainly
wrong or an affectation to lay aside his titles, he did not use
them. He was too respectful and too sensible to think lightly
of his University office, or of the honorary degree Edinburgh
conferred upon him. As a matter of fact, his honours and
offices gave him very real pleasure, but he was not always look-
ing for an occasion to wear his gown and hood. Some would
say he carried that sort of thing too far. Perhaps he did; per-
haps in some ways he was not sufficiently attentive to form and
style. Sometimes he vexed me, and then he would be penitent
and say I was right; but sometimes he laughed, and did not
mend. I know it was the other side of his passion for reality,
his determination to be rather than to seem.


In any of his characteristics in which he did not strike the
perfect balance, in any case in which he did not comply with the
old Greek’s standard: “ Nothing too much,” it always seemed
to me that it was more true of him than of almost any man 1 1
have known—
“ E’en his failings leaned to virtue’s side.”
We are bidden to love our neighbour as ourselves. Andrew
Cameron exceeded; he loved him more. In freedom from the
love of self I have not met his rival. Huxley, when a compara-
tively young man, wrote in his journal: . . to set aln
example of abstinence from petty personal controversies, and of
toleration for everything but lying; to be indifferent as to whether
the work is recognized as mine or not, so long as it is done—are
these my aims?” Andrew Cameron must have set such aims
before him when he was quite young, and his friends would say
he fully realized them. In the rough-and-tumble of this world
he may have received some wounds, but he never kept them
open, never inflamed them; and in the high, pure air where his
soul habitually dwelt the wounds always completely healed.
What patience he had, not only with wicked but also with
unreasonable men—often a more troublesome class. He sought
peace and ensued it. He did it always; he did it sometimes
when I thought he ought to have girded on the sword; but that
was not his way. War was to him a strange work. He probably
knew Milton’s line containing a great truth, though it was Satan
who spoke it:
Who overcomes
By force hath overcome but half his foe.
He knew there is a beatitude upon meekness, and in the
Bible, which he read every day, he had learned “ A soft tongue
breaketh the bone.” I have seen him win over an unfriendly
person who was a possible foe, because he was not easily pro-
voked. Occasionally he met a “ thrawn ” person with whom he
could do nothing.
It must not be thought that his peaceableness was pliabilityl
for he could be unbending. Here and there, as we companiec
together along life’s way, I have known him resist all my argu-
ments and entreaties and go his own way. He has left me
standing and looking after him with a respect untroubled and ar
affection undimmed. His soft invincibility and his invincible
softness gave him great power in some of life’s difficult situations;
I have heard it said sometimes that he was unduly under the
influence of particular persons, but I know the judgment was
quite wrong. Speaking generally he was too shrewd to be mis-
led, and he was too independent and honest to go where he could


not see. Although we often took counsel together, on some
important occasions we never conferred; we showed confidence
in each other by not confiding. At times every man must bear
his own burden.
As an administrator of the University I thought him strictly
impartial. Some may have thought he inclined unduly in a
particular direction, but what he did he did deliberately, in ac-
cordance with a policy which surveyed the University as a whole
and which took a long view. I think his policy was sound. I
know the place on the road where we stood to finish a conversa-
tion about the Medical School. After much searching of heart
and many waverings he left me with the determination to wait
upon a certain gentleman and ask for £2,000. That gift was
the foundation stone of the new Medical School. I believe if
the late Professor J. H. Scott were still with us he would tell us
that Andrew Cameron sowed the seed of the Travelling Medical
Scholarship. He had a remarkable faculty for sowing a seed,
and, then, like a good husbandman, watching it, watering it, and
with patience waiting for it. Perhaps it is the blindness of a
friend's partiality, but I thought he combined academic experience
(he was educated in Otago, Scotland, and Germany), vision,
practical power, and quiet persistency in a greater degree than
any of us who were associated with him. One of his old college
friends said to me when I was a stranger here: “ You watch
Andrew Cameron; he is a halting speaker, but he always knows
where he is going.” I did watch him, and always found him
going upwards to Hill Clear, where the views are spacious. For
the movements with which he was connected
“ He looked into the future far as human eye could see.”
Oh, Andrew Cameron, great was thy faith in God and man, and
it came to pass.
For many years his mind was exercised by the competing
claims of his congregation and of his outside public work. We
often discussed the subject. No work ever had a hold on his
mind and heart that was in the least comparable with the hold
the ministry of the Word and of the Sacraments in Anderson’s
Bay had upon him. After he had resigned his pastorate he told
me he would like to withdraw from the University, and give the
rest of his life to the P.S.S.A., to the care of little children and
old people who have outlived their friends. I staved off his
threatened resignation more than once, but one night late he rang
me up and said: “ I have retired from the University, and posted
the letter. I did not consult you because I knew what you would
say.” There was some glee in his tone as of one who had at
last relieved himself of a great burden and had outmanoeuvred


me. We circumvented him, however. His old colleague in this
church, the late Mr. W. S. Fitzgerald, and his loyal friends tithe
office-bearers, the University Professors, and Councillors, ratified
to the situation, and the resignation was withdrawn. Agaiin,
when he was leaving on a visit to China and Japan, he tenderced
his resignation; but that was a course dictated by respect ffor
himself and for the Council, and the resignation was not accepteed.
When he suddenly died he was still Chancellor of the Universiiity
of Otago, and lam glad. Church and school, religion, with iits
fruit in social service, and education were the two great passioans
of Andrew Cameron’s heart, and his life would have been inn-
complete without either. lam glad he did not resign from eithier
sphere of service, but waited until God himself relieved him «of
all his work here, and said to him as He welcomed him: “ Wtell
done, good and faithful servant.”
There was one thing he did do resolutely, and that was to giwe
some time to play and work with 1 his family when they wetre
young. He ceased going out every night to meetings or with-
drawing to his study. His reward has been rich, for his horme
was his kingdom, and the only rule of his kingdom was lowe.
Andrew Cameron had an attractiveness for young people, sorme
of whom were his best friends. There was in him a strong and
unquenchable element of the boy, and it was in him to the veiry
end.
I must draw aside the veil reverently just a little to reve;al
the inner life of Andrew Cameron with his God. Not to know
this is not to know Andrew Cameron. I got glimpses of it on
our walks and on our holidays in this and other lands. I knew
the little pocket Bible he carried at such times. I see him still
reading it in private places; I see him with his closed eyes. That
secret life was the spring from which flowed all his works, and
to that secret life all his acts were brought for judgment. :I
knew that he once gave up some studies he was pursuing pri-
vately lest an unworthy ambition should creep into his heart and
corrupt his motives. A few hours after he died I gathered with
his family for worship. His Bible opened at a place containing
a piece of paper, on which there were these lines, evidently
written when he was in the East:—
There is no good of life but love, but love!
What else looks good is some shade flung from love;
Love gilds it, gives it worth.
Be warned by m,e, never you cheat yourself one instant.
Love, give love, and leave the rest.
—R. Browning.
Let me be tender when I touch
The meanest name to Jesus dear,
Lest my rude hands inflict a wound
Where Jesus’ mercy dropped a tear.


I
I
r -
1 . >
w
CO
<
■ §
CO
§
X
w
m
co
u
ft!
■ ,r ‘i
t! w
s
. o
# ffi
. CO
• , CO
O
i :
/|| s
I


REV. DR. CAMERON
CHANCELLOR OF THE UNIVERSITY OF OTAGO


Again the Bible opened at another sheet of paper containing
a list of passages from the Psalms copied in his handwriting and
headed “ Plope in God.” The opening and closing passages on
the list are:—
Hope thou in God. I shall yet praise Him.
They that fear thee shall see me and be glad.
Because I have hoped in thy word.
Thou art my hiding place and my shield;
1 hope in Thy Word.
That Bible and those verses from a modern singer and from
the hymn book of the ancient church tell all there is to be told
of the soul of my friend in this world and the next.


Jin JUtosa Mtfrmb at i\it Jfmural Hrrfrta tit tljr
(ftlmrrlj, JUteaatt’a lag—2lst jKajj, 1923.
JjTjJE have come together to think for a little while about: the
'Wfi*' character of our friend, Dr. Andrew Cameron, to thank
God for his life and work, and to pray that He may give us
strength to walk a little more closely in his steps. Then we shall
go and lay reverently away the earthly house of this tabernacle
in which he lived for 70 years, and from wjhich he suddenly
departed on Tuesday last to enter into occupation of a building
of God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens.
The cemetery on the hilltop is a fitting place for the burial
of our friend’s body, for there one can see the sun rise over: the
city and the sea, the great and wide sea, with its far horizons
bounded only by the sky—all an emblem of his life.
Dr. Cameron was connected with us by different ties. With
some of us it was the tie of Church fellowship and Church work,
with others it was the tie of educational administration; hut
there was one bond by which he was united to us all and that
was friendship. He was the friend of us all. Our lives and
activities lie apart, our paths seldom cross, but here at the grave
of Dr. Cameron we all meet as one group bound by the same
tie of love and gratitude to him. To be able to say “He was
my friend ” has been one of the greatest privileges of our lives.
He had very little of this world to give us, so he gavei us
himself—his time, his strength, his mind, his heart; he gave: us
the truth and the power by which he lived and worked. To the
full limit of his strength and for as many hours as there is light
by which man may see to work, he gave us himself. He was-on
the way to serve us, carrying in his hand the bag containing his
papers, when the strength and the light both failed. He died
giving himself for us and the work he loved. That was just
like the charity of Christ his Master who, having nothing else
to give, gave us His love and His life.
As it is fitting that Dr. Cameron should sleep on the hilltop
overlooking the city and the sea, so it is fitting that here we
should gather to give thanks for his life and work. Here was
his home, where his children were born and grew to manhood
and womanhood; here he ministered in the Word and the Sacra-
ments —God’s mysteries. Like the minstrel of the sky he was
true to the kindred points of heaven and home. Home and


heaven were the only places where his spirit dwelt. There he
derived his strength to go out and do his work in the world, and
thither he returned when wearied in body and soul, for rest and
renewal.
Dr. Cameron was a very reticent man, but more than once he
drew aside the veil and let me see his life in his home and in the
Holy Place. Over his home the spirit of love and peace sat
visibly brooding, and nothing ever frighted it away. In the Holy
Place the sounds that broke the silence were reverence and trust.
To me, his most characteristic address to the Deity was “ O God,
Most Holy.” Years ago he read and re-read Dale’s lectures on
the Atonement, and later he studied with care Denney’s volume
on “ The Christian Doctrine of Reconciliation.” The last book
he borrowed from me was McLeod Campbell on the Atonement,
one of the classics of Scottish theology, and I noticed that he
subsequently bought a copy for himself.
The depth and dignity of his character was due to his feel-
ing of awe in the presence of the holiness of God. There seemed
no limit to his charity for human weakness and his patience with
perversity; but during the years, I can recall several cases where
he recoiled strongly from what he thought was unrepented sin.
His was a holy charity.
Though a sense of demerit made him stand afar off from
God, a deep and undisturbed faith in God’s goodness and love
caused him to draw near as His child. He had in the presence
of life’s confusions, its obstructing difficulties, and its unending
tasks, an unquestioning faith in God, which to me was often at
once an inspiration and a rebuke. Recently we talked about
some friends whose special work is beset with very great diffi-
culties and discouragements; its future lies in impenetrable
darkness. After talking for a while he said, “ There is nothing
for them to do but trust in God and go ahead boldly, as if the
way were clear.” I know that his many plans and projects were
thought out as, like David, he sat before the Lord. There he
first discussed his schemes before he took counsel with intimate
friends, or spoke in committee rooms. It was from that secret
conference that he came out day after day to try humbly to do
in the Church and the University what he believed was the will
and work of God.
He has gone to his last conference, a long one, and for us
there is nothing left to do now blit to seek the places where he
saw his visions and found his strength, and then go into the
city—with its churches, with its homes for the fatherless child-
ren and the friendless old, and with its schools and colleges for
training the young and strong to work for God and man —and
carry on the work he started.


A snow-storm once drove the boat of Cuthbert on to the
coast of Fife. “ The snow closes the road along the shore,”
moaned his comrades; “ the storm bars our way over the sea.”
“ There is still the way of heaven that lies open,” said Cuthbert,
“Trust in God,” said Dr. Cameron, “and go forward boldly.”
It will not do to divide his exhortation into two parts.
To this church Mr. Cameron came a young man of nearly
30; he left it a comparatively old man of 65, old by the calendar,
old in body, but not in mind and in heart. Those who knew
him well knew that he had a boy’s heart, a boy’s playfulness,
and he had them to the end. He had a young man’s courage
and the venturesomeness of a young man’s faith. He was not
like the old, afraid of that which is high. For him was fulfilled
the words and prayer of one who said: “ The last'thoughts of a
heart that loves Thee are like the last deepest, ruddiest rays of
the setting sun. Thou has willed, O my God, that life should
be beautiful even to the end. Make me to grow and keep my
green, and climb like the plant that lifts its head to Thee for the
last time before it drops its seed and dies.”


Jbt JU&ms Mtfrmb in Eoaa Cfrapd, litm* (Wkpc
on jKarmnp, jHap 24tlj, 1925.
Iff DESIRE to speak to you all, but especially to the students,
w about the life of Dr. Andrew Cameron, as an example and
an inspiration. I do not wish this to be a service of unrelieved
gloom, but rather a challenge to duty and a source of strength
and comfort. At the end of the service we shall not stand to
listen to the Dead March with its searching strains of sorrow,
but we shall sit to hear the more soothing music of Mendelssohn
to which our memories will fit the familiar words:—
O rest in the Lord,
Wait patiently for Him,
And He shall give thee thy heart’s desires.
Commit thy way unto Him,
And trust in Him;
And fret not thyself because of evil doers.
O rest in the Lord,
Wait patiently for Him.
We have not draped our chapel with black, the symbol of
woe, but upon our communion table we have placed a bowl of
chrysanthemums, golden flowers, and autumn leaves which,
though they suggest that our life is frail and transitory, are yet
ruddy and beautiful, even in dying. We know that though they
be cut down and wither, next year they will bloom again. I could
wish that from our pulpit where Dr. Cameron preached the first
sermon in this chapel, we had hung a wreath of laurel leaves:
for he has won laurels, even glory and honour. He asked life of
Thee and Thou gavest it him, even length of days for ever and
ever.
I remember at this time that there is a letter of Dean Church
in which he speaks of “ the loose things that are said—often in
kindness and love —of those beyond the grave.” God helping
me I shall say no loose things to-day, I shall say no word con-
cerning Dr. Cameron that is not for me at least strictly true.
I remember at this time, too, the familiar instruction of Crom-
well to the painter, “ Paint me, warts and all.” In trying to
sketch Dr. Cameron I shall paint no warts; for, as I knew him,
there was none to paint. There may have been some slight want
of symmetry, some slight absence of perfect balance in Dr.
Cameron’s character, due to excess of some good qualities, but
there were no warts.


Let me illustrate what I mean. Unselfishness is a great and
not too common virtue, but it is possible to be merciful to one’s
neighbour and unjust to oneself, to the embarrassment of one’s
friends.
When Huxley was a young man he proposed certain aimsi
to himself which I quoted the other day: “To set an examplei
of abstinence from petty, personal controversies, and of tolera-
tion of everything but lying; to be indifferent as to whether the
work is recognized as mine or not so long as it is done.” These
aims I believe Dr. Cameron realized fully. I did not quote
Huxley’s first aim, namely: “To smite all humbugs however'
big.” That will seem to most of us the proper and necessary;
way to deal with humbugs, and other evil things, but it was noti
Dr. Cameron’s way. He did not smite anybody or anything.!
He was not given to reproof and rebuke. To adapt some familiar
words:—
He never found fault with you, never implied
Your wrong by his right.”
In his relations with men in private and in public he was a
pacifist, strong and invincible. He had never read in the Scrip-
tures “ I am not come to send peace on the earth but a sword.”
You perhaps think he was lacking in courage or compliant with
evil. Both suggestions are preposterous. He had another way
of dealing with wrongdoing. He overcame evil with good, he
heaped coals of fire on one’s head. I know what I say, for he
did it to me again and again, and yet again.
It is a divine precept “ Let not thy left hand know what thy
right doeth.” Dr, Cameron read that passage every day in his
Bible and every day he acted on it, but of the complementary
passage, “ Let your light shine before men that they may see
your good works,” he had never heard. Publicity he disliked
intensely and he was at pains to avoid it.
You may think, as I did sometimes, that there was a want
of perfect balance in his goodness, but I am sure there were no i
warts. Let us carry that with us as the general impression of •
his life and now turn to examine it in a little more detail.
He was born in Paisley, near Glasgow, and came to Otago !
when he was a child of eight. His native country and his i
adopted land contributed largely to his character. He loved i
them both, and also Dunedin, the only city in New Zealand
where he lived, with the deep steady passion of his quiet heart, i
It would not be easy to say whether he was more of a Scot than ;
a New Zealander, or more of a New Zealander than a Scot.


Some time after their arrival in New Zealand Dr. Cameron’s
parents settled in Sawyers Bay, and his father opened a bakery
business there. The boy Andrew, when he was ten, carried
bread twice a week into Port Chalmers, and on Saturdays he
made four trips. He used to say that he thought nothing in the
world was so heavy as a basket of fresh bread. He was engaged
for about six years in this occupation, and he thought that the
practice of remembering his sales without making a memorandum
of them did something to train his memory, which for facts and
incidents was unusually good. As boy and youth he learned to
ride and drive a horse, row a boat and swim a stream. He had
a boy’s love of games, and was always fond of watching sports.
At the University he played cricket and played it well. Later
he played bowls and golf. As a youth he enjoyed a dance and
used to go to one every week. When he was a student in Ger-
many he followed for a time the custom of the country and drank
light lager beer, but thinking that it led sometimes to grossness
in pleasure, he gave it up and became an abstainer.
After some time he began to study in the afternoons and
passed the matriculation examination when he was 20 —rather a
late age. He was awarded a church scholarship, and in later life
was so convinced of the importance of scholarships that he in-
duced his father to found the Cameron-Muir, named after his
father and mother. In discussing that foundation with me re-
cently he strongly maintained that the amount of the scholarships
now given is altogether inadequate. One of the things he thought
necessary for the proper equipment of Knox College was a num-
ber of endowed scholarships open to competition by all faculties.
At the University he studied Latin, Chemistry, Physics, and
Zoology, he took his B.A. degree and won a senior scholarship
in Zoology. Two University professors of whom he spoke fre-
quently were Professors Shand and Sale. I have often said that
one could judge the power and industry of a student in Latin
by the way in which he spoke of Professor Sale, a strong per-
sonality, and a strict teacher and examiner. Of his kindness and
his teaching Mr. Cameron always spoke in the warmest terms.
After graduation he entered the Theological Hall and studied
under Dr. Salmond, of whose lucid and inspiring teaching he
carried grateful memories all his days. He thien went to Edin-
burgh for three years to the Theological Hall of the United
Presbyterian Church, and also spent two summers in Germany,
one at Jena and the other at Leipsig. We who are so eager to
get done with our studies and get at our work should note that
Dr. Cameron had a course of some eight or nine years in pre-
paration for his ministry, and that without that experience he
could not have done the work that fell to him later as an educa-


tional administrator. He was one of the very few ministers
of my acquaintance who read his Hebrew Bible regularly and
with ease. If some of us who are looking forward to teaching
and preaching were not so impatient to get through our period
of study, and could give a year to post-graduate work, we might
make our classics and our Hebrew, as Phillips Brooks did, a ready
and valuable instrument, instead of an inconvenient and awkward
tool, soon to be laid aside for good. We might begin to learln
to speak and write our own English tongue, with clearness, force,
and beauty, a lifelong and difficult task, and one as it seems to
me far more important than learning to read the classics and
Hebrew, important as they are. I have a haunting fear that some
of us will close our period of study knowing only that man has
a body, and not having heard that he has also a mind and soul,
which are sometimes normal and not always pathological. II
know how difficult, how practically impossible it is made, mis-
takenly made, as I think, for even the most eager of us to follow
Sir William Osier’s advice: “ The modern scientific man, to keep
his mind sweet, should be saturated with the Bible and Platb,
with Shakespeare and Milton.” Yes, gentlemen, this medical pro-
fessor of world-fame says “ saturated with the Bible.” The
Bible and Plato and Shakespeare and Milton may not be neces-
sary to the making of a practitioner, but they are essential to the
making of a man. And the supreme task of a University should
be to make a man.
Dr. Cameron did not allow his education to close with his
university course; neither should we. He visited in later years
Berlin, Cambridge, and Edinburgh, and several of the great
universities of America. After he was 65 he started to learn
French, and acquired a fair reading knowledge of the language;
and he kept up his German. In the last talk I had with him in
the Lodge after our Anzac Day service, he was speaking about
two books he was reading and a point in Hebrew scholarship
that had interested him for years. He was reading and learning
to the end.
Not long after his return to New Zealand he was called to
the Church in Anderson’s Bay when he was 30 years of age, and
the next year he was married. In the Anderson’s Bay parish
he remained for over 35 years until he retired at the age of 6:5.
I shall speak of him as a minister directly: let me now refer to
his public work outside his congregation.
Happy in his home and in his Church, Dr. Cameron might
have confined his activities to his congregation. In every church,
however small, a man can find enough work to keep him busy,
and some congregations are very exacting with their minister.
Anderson’s Bay people, however, were well led by men like Mr.




o
o
<
h
0
fc
0
H
w
01
w
>
z
a
w
j
■o
z
<
D£
a
<
D
a
a
a
e-


W. S. Fitzgerald and Mr. W. Somerville, and they gave him the
opportunity for outside service. But sometimes where there is
the opportunity, public-spiritedness is wanting. It would be hard
to find more intense selfishness than that which is occasionally
shown by happily married young people. Fortunately, Mrs.
Cameron was, and always has been, as unselfish as her husband.
She made his work possible, and he soon found his way on to
church and educational committees. For years he served as
chairman of the local school committee, for a short time on the
High Schools Board, for 31 years on the Council of the Uni-
versity of Otago, and for 13 years as its Chancellor, for 23
years on the Senate of the University of New Zealand. The
Education Board is the only public educational body, so far as
I know, on which he did not serve.
I have spoken to you students on other occasions about
public spirit and public service. The best form of public service
is the efficient, industrious, and conscientious practice of our
profession. I feel, however, that full public-spiritedness demands
more than this; it demands activity outside the sphere in which
we earn our living, and also service that is without fee or reward.
How completely Dr. Cameron answered to my idea of public
spirit and service is shown by the recital of his activities, which
were all honorary.
He was an originator and an administrator. It is not always
possible to say with whom a particular scheme originated; often
it has been in the mind of more than one person. There is no
doubt, however, that the idea of a Presbyterian tutorial and
residential college, open to all faculties and all denominations,
originated with Dr. Cameron. He secured the site by putting in
an application for it in his own name, and to his persuasiveness
and persistency, this College owes its existence more than to the
effort of any other man. I think it was he that suggested a third
and a fourth professorship for the Theological Hall. The work
of caring for orphan or neglected children by our Church was
actually begun by two deaconesses in their own home, but at the
time he was dreaming and talking of social service by the Church.
How many of the developments of the Presbyterian Social Ser-
vice Association are due to him, I cannot say. I third: he sowed
the seed out of which the Glendining Home for children grew,
and the seed out of which the Ross Home for the aged grew.
In each case he sowed the seed in good and honest hearts, and
it brought forth abundantly. It was, I believe, from his sugges-
tion that the Travelling Medical Scholarship came. In our Theo-
logical Hall we have had men without academic status of ability
and more real learning than some who have degrees. For the
men who came late in life to their studies the difficulty of taking


a degree was the conditions of matriculation. For years; Dr.
Cameron worked quietly in the Senate to get those conditions
changed.
After a long conversation in my study one day about Uni-
versity policy, we stood to finish our talk at the end of Knox
Street. When he left me, after much searching of heart and
many waverings, he decided to call upon a certain gentleman land
ask for a gift of £2,000 for a new medical school building. Tfhat
gift, the first, was the real foundation stone of the new Medical
School. No one recognizes more generously than the Dean and
the Medical Faculty all that the late Chancellor did for the
Medical School,
To balance the claims of consolidation and of expansion in
a University where there are limited resources is a matteit of
great difficulty. Dr. Cameron carefully thought out and dis-
cussed a policy for himself and followed it, though he knew it
exposed him to the suspicion of partiality. A clergyman and an
arts man, he gave for a considerable time the preponderating
weight of his influence and activity to the development df a
science school. Would it be easy to find a man in a science
school big enough to do a similar thing for a divinity school ?
One of tfie dangers of a University Councillor is that he may
degenerate into the advocate of a faculty or of a school, and not
be an administrator of the University as a whole. In my judg-
ment, that danger the late Chancellor always and completely
escaped. If it be difficult for a man to rise above the dominance
of a school and look at the interests of the University as a whole,
how difficult it is for an ardent educationist to care for the
fatherless young and the friendless old with a zeal equal to
that he has for education, how difficult it is for a social service
enthusiast to work for the University. How few of us have Dr.
Cameron’s capacious heart and fruitful mind.
“ Where there is no vision the people perish.” Vision is
essential to life. Some are short-sighted and fail to see beyond
the present. Others lack breadth of vision; they do not see the
implication and relations of a subject. Others lack in penetra-
tion ; they fail to see into the heart of a man or of a movement;
they are detained by externals of manner or speech, and by the
incidental; they do not see the spiritual, the invisible. That was
the subject on which I spoke to you last Sunday. To-day I pre-
sent to you Dr. Cameron, who failed in none of these ways. He
was a man of great prevision, of wide horizons, and he saw the
inwardness of movements. He saw Him Who is invisible, too,
and so endured to the end.


Dr. Cameron’s vision was one of the chief sources of his
power as an administrator. A second source was the perfect
disinterestedness of his service. Disinterestedness is a virtue
that means not only freedom from the love of money, but also
freedom from a passion for power and prestige. Some men who
care nothing for money are avaricious of place and glory. In
every sense of the word, Dr. Cameron was disinterested; he
sought not his own. The University Council at one time, know-
ing that he was a poor man, and feeling that it was not desirable
that he should give so much service to the University gratuit-
ously, considered the possibility of providing him with an
honorarium. Some day there may be in our University, as there
is in English, Canadian, and American Universities, a salaried
head. It does not seem right that the headship of a University
should be open only to the man of private means. It is a big
question, involving important legal and constitutional points.
The one way in which the Council felt it could offer an honor-
arium Dr. Cameron promptly and finally declined. Only once
during all the years he held office did I hear him refer to the
financial aspect of the position, and then it was to express regret
that he was unable to discharge the social duties and to offer the
hospitality to visitors that naturally attaches to the office of
Chancellor. Whatever loss or privation the conditions of his
office brought him, his complete disinterestedness certainly won
for him the unquestioning confidence and deep respect of his
fellow-councillors. Without these there can be no great leader-
ship of men.
This is your time, young men, for making friends, and in
College you have an unrivalled opportunity of doing it. Two
or three days before he died, three Knox men —two doctors and
a minister—happened to meet in a small town where Dr. Cameron
was staying. “ The friendship of these men,” said he, “is an
instance of the great value of the college life.” His experience
of lodgings as a student strengthened his purpose to have a
College which should not be confined to students of one faculty,
or to students of our own Church. For this he toiled for years.
Let me urge you again, as I have so often done, to make'some
friends in your own faculty, and, for the sake of the breadth
and richness of your life, some friends in other faculties and
belonging to other Churches.
Dr. Cameron was to me a great friend. It was a friendship
nourished and strengthened by years of conversation, of common
work, of many joys and some sicknesses that came to each of us,
and of some sorrows.


Let me tell you two characteristics of Dr. Cameron that are
the essentials of a great friend: confidence and reticence. They
are opposite and contradictory qualities, but both are essential
to great friendship. Dr. Cameron opened his heart to me about
the deepest things of life, his love, his sorrows, his God. Com-
munications that are confined to work and games and td the
affairs of other persons are a mere skimming of the surface of
life; they are not the confidences of friendship. But there must
also be reticence, as well as confidence. Reticence is an essential
condition of respect for oneself and for one’s friend. There were
personal matters of which both of us knew, but of which neither
spoke. There were important matters of public business which
we never discussed until they were over. We showed confidence
in each other by not confiding. Will you let me say herei that
Dr. Cameron’s great power of keeping silence is a vital qualifica-
tion for men who are looking forward to law, to medicine, or to
the Church. Things told in confidence should never be com-
municated to any other even as strictly private, but they spme-
times are. Like Charles Kingsley, Dr. Cameron, while his family
was young, never allowed parish gossip at his table.
The most fundamental thing in Dr. Cameron’s life and work
was that he was a minister of the Word and of the Sacraments
of God. He often talked about giving up all his outside activities
and confining himself to that work. After a long walk we stood
one rainy night years ago under a verandah in Stuart Street,
and he poured out his heart on the subject. Several times in
recent years he playfully reproached me that I had restrained
him from his purpose of giving up University work. When I
went out to speak at his farewell meeting at Anderson’s Bay], the
subject that was in my mind was Goldsmith’s picture of one he
called “ the Village Preacher,” between whom and Dr. Cameron
there is an obvious parallel; they made religion lovable. To the
preacher Goldsmith gives only four lines of description out of 56.
Here they are:—
At church with meek and unaffected grace,
His looks adorned the venerable place;
Truth from his lips prevailed with double sway,
And fools, who came to scoff, remained to pray.
Truth as it came from the Village Preacher was doubly
re-enforced by his life and personality, and it was thus made
effective. This was true of Dr. Cameron. Behind and
through the words his people felt the man. He was what would
be called an expository and experimental preacher. He con-
stantly and carefully studied the Scripture, and then he spoke
the truth he found there as he had tested it in his own life. The
physical act of speaking was often difficult for him. He had bad


s
»■■ ■
fl
if
* i
I
4 M»iiiiitii
fP 1 H
p-
A i
■
lilPi
g jg • ■ ■
■ ■ a Jill: • . fl
wF'. -.
" '■
*«&**»
L
■MIlBiilhMIBili
BiMI
i i
p &£
s1 J|
KNOX COLLEGE


■


a good many operations on his throat and nose, and once he was
silent for a whole year, during a good part of which he did not
speak even in private. It was that, not slowness of perception
or want of vocabulary, that helped to make him a hesitating
speaker. Further, he was a man of deep but strongly controlled
feeling. Occasionally, however, his emotions broke loose, and
then he spoke freely and movingly.
All the rest of Goldsmith’s picture is taken up with the
village preacher’s life out of the pulpit; his relations with chil-
dren, with those who were dismayed by sorrow, guilt, and pain,
with those who talked and laughed by his hospitable fireside. In
his relations with all of them he had one and only one object:—
• - . In his duty prompt at every call,
He watched and wept, he prayed and felt for all
And, as a bird each fond endearment tries,
To tempt its new-fledged offspring to the skies,
He tried each art, reproved each dull delay,
Allured to brighter worlds, and led the way.
Such was the ministry of the Rev. Andrew Cameron at Ander-
son’s Bay. In his playful and in his serious moods he had but
one end—to win men for Jesus Christ. He allured men to good-
ness. I used to think that proportionally to its size Anderson’s
Bay sent more young persons into the service of God than any
other congregation in our Church.
The inner secret of his life was his life of prayer. He kept
a list of names of those for whom he regularly prayed, and he
told me he saw them one after another join the Church. I know
that like David he sat before the Lord and there matured his
schemes for social service and the University. He was a man
engrossed in many and important duties, but his real life was
hid with Christ in God.
All his serious thoughts had rest in heaven.
These are not the cant phrases of a clergyman. I know
what I say, and I say, if we are able to receive it, this was the
source of Dr. Cameron’s goodness and of his great and unselfish
services—his life was hid with Christ in God.
Such was Dr. Andrew Cameron as I knew him—a man of
broad and genial humanity, an earnest student, a man of long
and wide vision, of great self-sacrifice in the service of God and
man, a friend affectionate, true, and strong, and above all, a
humble, devoted follower of Jesus Christ. I do not believe that
either his life and work or our friendship has ended.
The face will shine
Upon me, while I muse alone;
And that dear voice, I once have known
Still speak to me, of me, and mine.


To those of us who loved him it is not yet given to add, bbut this,
please God, we shall be able to do some day:—
Yet less of sorrow lives in me
For days of happy commune dead;
Less yearning for the friendship fled,
Than some strong bond which is to be.
Almighty God, our Heavenly Father, fromi
whom all good gifts do come, we give Thee thanks f
for the life of Thy servant, our friend. We thank ■
Thee for what he said and did, but especially for 1
what he was and now is.
We pray for Thy grace that we may humbly 1 ,
follow him as he followed Thee. By all Thy mercies \
and especially at this time by this Thy great mercy
to us, the gift of Thy servant’s life and friendship, \
may we be led to present ourselves to Thee as a
living sacrifice, holy, acceptable in Thy sight, which
is our reasonable service.
In Christ’s name we ask it. Amen.


Coulls Somerville Wilkie Ltd.
Printers a publishers
DUNEDIN


