

AUSTRALASIAN ASSOCIATION FOR THE
ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCE,
Hobart, Tasmania,
JANUARY 'B, 1892.
PROCEEDINGS OF SECTIONS.
Section
Anthropology.
9. —ANEITYUM, NEW HEBRIDES.
REV. J. LAWRIE.




ty 3355
Section O-.
9.—ANEITYUM, NEW HEBRIDES.
By REV. J. LAWRIE.
Birth and Childhood.
There is much rejoicing at the birth of a boy, but comparative
silence at the birth of a girl. the islanders were
heathen, infanticide of female children occasionally took place
by simply leaving them to die in the bush. The nearest
male relative has the privilege of naming the child, if a boy,
and the same with the nearest female relative, if the child is
a girl. The child is suckled for about two years, A feast of
food is usually given when the child (especially if a boy) is
weaned. Deformed or sickly children are just allowed to
grow up as best they may ; nothing special is done to them, or
for them. Mother carries the child on her side, across the
haunches. Children are not, as a rule, well disciplined by
their parents, but Christian parents try to teach their children
to read the scriptures. Female children are not now betrothed
when young.
Maturity.
Females are mature at about 14 years of age, males from
16 to 18 years.
Circumcision
Is not now practised on Aneityum, but in former times the
ceremony was performed by the man or sorcerer whose office
it was by hereditary right. It was done when the lad was from
seven to ten years of age, with a bamboo knife. It was said
by the natives to increase the stature and improve the
physique of the individual. Food was always cooked by
others and brought to the lad during recovery, which might
be from one to three months. On complete recovery a
special fowl, lobster, or other fish was cooked and given to the
lad to eat. On this being received he was welcomed into the
tribe with great shouting and rejoicing—and had afterwards
the privilege of wearing his private member in a pocket or
wrapper of grass or other prepared material, whereas before
that he went about completely nude.


Marriage
Is usually arranged for by chiefs or heads of tribes. The
girl does not pass into charge of the husband until she reaches
maturity (or puberty). A feast is made when the formal
marriage takes place. They usually married within the tribe,
although not in blood relationship, yet the children of a
brother and sister may marry, while the children of two
sisters were looked on as brothers and sisters. Polygamy
was common in pre-christian days. In war, the tribes acted
in a body and had a common interest. Leading coast head-
lands usually divided the island into districts, of which there
were six, each governed by a high chief; also two inland
chiefs, who were in some measure subsidiary to the shore
chiefs—these were often at war with each other. Widows
were always strangled by the son, if old enough, or the
nearest relative. The widows wished this, as they would, if
allowed to live, have been disgraced and chided by the dead
man’s friends; also the belief that they would live together
hereafter.
In heathen days the wife was to all intents and purposes
the slave of the husband ; the words for wife, slave, or servant
are interchangeable.
Children inherited parents’ land equally, according to
common consent. Orphans are cared for by uncles or aunts.
Married women help in plantation work and cooking the
food, &c.
The Tribe (partly answered in last).
The office of chief is hereditary ; it passes from father to
son, or nephew or nearest male relative; only on rare occa-
sions have there been female chiefs. A chief was frequently
a supposed disease-maker, and therefore feared and obeyed in
matters relating to food and war. The tribal council con-
sisted of the head men of each village or hamlet under the
jurisdiction of each high chief. All infractions of tribal law
were discussed, and punished by the arms being bound and
the culprit left for several hours to the public gaze, also by
his getting growing food uprooted to feed the council; but
in heathen days club law was the rule rather than the excep-
tion. Quarrels about land and women were the leading
causes of offence.
Social and Domestic.
Natural bent posts are put in the ground and made to
meet over a ridgepole at the top, then bound together by


means of vines, closed all round except at one end, which
serves as door, window, and chimney. The hut is covered
with thatch made from sugar-cane leaves sown on to long
reeds, or thatch in some cases made by plaiting cocoanut
leaves, and then covering with long reeds, with the grassy
ends hanging over.
Ground is cultivated with digging stick or iron crowbar
four feet long, and all the earth pulverised by hand. Taro
is plentiful, and is grown in swampy land ; yams are less
plentiful, and are grown in soft soil; bananas, sugar-cane,
breadfruit, and chestnuts are plentiful. Food is usually cooked
in earth ovens by means of heated stones.
In pre-christian days the corded hair and ear ornaments
were the same as on Tanna. Women were always well
clothed by means of pandanus leaf skirts, even when heathen.
Wizards.
The power of the sorcerer is supposed to descend from
father to son in the same family. He was supposed to obtain
his magic power by constant devotion to the service of the
gods or “Natmases;” these were unseen spirits. These
men were held in great fear and veneration by the native
community ; their power was equally on the side of good and
evil, by bringing rain or driving it away, or by causing sickness
or driving sickness away ; also supposed to have the remark-
able power of making thunder and lightning, causing hurri-
canes, &c., also of making the different kinds of food to
grow, as well as giving or withholding the fish in the sea.
These men used to prepare (and also eat) the greater portion
of the food given by the natives to propitiate the spirits or
“ Natmases.”
Another class prepared sacred earth for young men
wherewith to bewitch young women whom they wished to
seduce. This was composed of a piece of wood, a piece of
banana leaf, and a lizard, burnt to charcoal and put into a
section of bamboo, to be kept till wanted.
Death.
In nearly all cases of the death of leading men the cause
of death was set down to sorcery by the burning of some
remains of food of which the deceased had eaten (called
“ nehken ”), such as the skin of a banana or the chewings of
sugar cane. This was, as a rule, carefully kept by the eater


until lie got the opportunity of burning it himself, lest an
enemy should get it and carry it to the disease-maker or
sacred-man. In heathen days the dead body was decorated
with strips of native cloth tied round the body to bind the
arms and legs; a stone was tied to the feet, and, after the face
had been painted with red clay, the body was carried to the
edge of the reef and thrown into the sea. Only the highest
chiefs were buried on land ; in that case the head was left
above ground, and female mourners watched the body until
the skin, &c. on skull was decomposed, which was duly kept
in a cave or in the sacred grove. During this time the spirit
of the chief was fed by small quantities of food being placed
in a basket and hung on a branch of some tree near by. In
ordinary cases of burying in the sea a fire was lit on the
beach so that the spirit of the departed might come and warm
himself if he felt so inclined.
A case was recorded of a savage who killed, cooked, and
ate his own child, so depraved had the people become. Men
killed in war were always cooked and eaten. Cannibalism
was a common practice.
Spirit World.
Many Natmases or spirits were worshipped ; these were
appealed to and propitiated by small offerings of food, hung
in small baskets on the branches of trees or laid on the top
of sacred stones where certain of these spirits were supposed
to have their habitation. Departed chiefs were named in
their appeals or prayers for rain, &c., but the great spirit or
Natmas was Inhugaraig; he w r as most feared, and common
people scarcely dared pronounce the name audibly. The
tradition is that this great Natmas went out to sea to fish on
the leaf of a tree which grows here, having no mid-rib, called
by the natives “ Nesiaig,” his fish hook got entangled, and
on drawing in his line he found a mountain peak attached
to the hook. He sat thereon, and drew up the whole island,
and afterwads set man there, which, as far as can be learned,
are the progenitors of the present inhabitants.
May this not have some connection with the story of the
Flood and the receding of the waters?* The sun and moon
were considered to be husband and wife, and the moon was
especially honoured by offerings of food, also by songs and
dances in her praise. There was another class of spirits
called Inpotheth ; these were a set of mischievous imps, or,
as 1 suppose, shadows of branches cast on the path on moon-


Ethi
Ero
Eseij
Emanowan
Ekman
light nights; these take the place of ghosts in British
phraseology; The stone idols which were said to he inhabited
by the spirits were unhewn, usually of a round or oval shape,
with a smooth waterworn surface as if picked up on the
beach or in the brooks ; others were rude, rough, and large
stones mostly without any carving. The entrance to the
spirit world was the crater of an extinct volcano at the
western extremity of the island, in the direction of the sun-
setting. Their heaven, or good place of after-abode, was a
sensual feast, with plenty of food to eat; their hell, or bad
place of after-abode, was a scanty supply of bad food of the
most loathsome description. The good and bad people were the
liberal and the mean contributors of food at feasts, in honour
of the Natiuases.
“ Inhugaraig ” did not actually create the island, but ho
found it. In the order of Natmases, or spirits, he seems to
have been the special “ Sun ” god, as implied by his other
name “ Nagesegaaretha.” “ Moitikitiki ” was the great rain
god. All the elements in the heavens, the foods on earth,
and the ills the human body is heir to had their special
Natmases, and these spirits were represented by rude uncarved
sacred stones, the more important ones only being in the pos-
session of the specially sacred men. These spirits were said
to have the power of both helping and injuring men, also of
keeping back or bringing disease; to them was also ascribed
the power of giving success in war; failure or misfortune
implied the displeasure of the Natmas towards the individual
or tribe by a non-compliance with some rule, or a stingy
contribution of food to some feast; hence the poor natives
were living in fear and bondage all their days.
Philology
Numerals.
The fifth number is turned into “ nekman,” which means a
whole hand, then the sixth number is expressed by the phrase
a hand and one = seven, a hand and two = eight, and so on to
two hands and a toe = eleven, up to two hands, a foot and a
toe = sixteen, when twenty is reached a greater number is
expressed by an indefinite phrase as “ many,” “ a great many,”


“a very great many.” Now-a-days the English numerals
are known and used by the Aneityamese.
Nouns, with exceedingly few exceptions, begin with N, or
In; the plural of these nouns are usually expressed by dropping
the n or in.
The personal pronouns have four numbers, namely, singular,
dual, trial, plural. The first person of the dual, the trial, and
the plural has also an inclusive and exclusive form. The
masculine and feminine gender of the personal pronouns are
the same.
Nominative, Singular.
1 Ainyak I.
2 Aiek Thou or you.
3 Aien He or she.
Dual.
j | Akaijan We two (inclusive) you and I.
( Aijumran... We two (exclusive) he or she and 1.
2 Aijanran ... You two.
3 Aran They two.
Trial.
j f Akataij We three (inclusive) you two and I.
Aijumtaij... We three (exclusive) they two and I.
2 Aijantaij ... You three.
3 Ahtaij They three.
Plural (including four and upwards).
j f Akaija We all (inclusive).
( Aijama We all (exclusive),
2 Aijana You all (you four or more).
3 Ara They all.
Objective, Singular.
1 Nyak Me.
2 Euc Thee or you.
3 Y 7 in Him or her.
Objective, Plural.
j f Caija Us all (inclusive).
( Caina ... Us all (exclusive).
2 Cana You all.
3 Ra Them all.
Possessive, Singular,
1 Unyak My or mine.
2 Unyum Thy or thine or yours,
3 0un......... His or hers.


Plural.
j \ Uja Our (inclusive).
(Unyinia... Our (exclusive).
2 Unyimia... Your.
3 Ura Their.
Dual.
j \ Intan atga akaijan We two walk (inclusive).
\ Ecran atga aijumran We two walk (exclusive)
2 Ekan atga aijauran You two walk.
3 Eran atga aran They two walk.
Trial.
j ( Ehtaij atga akataij We three walk (inclusive).
\ Ehtaij atga aijumtaij We three walk (exclusive).
2 Ehtaij atga aijantaij You three walk.
3 Ehtaij atga ahtaij They three walk.
The possessive pronoun is often an affix to a noun, as—
-1 Etma-k My father.
2 Etma-m Thy father.
3 Etma-n His or her lather.
1 Nikina-k.... My hand.
2 Nikrna-m... Thy hand,
3 Nikma-n His or her hand.
The verb has three tenses —present, past, future. The
pronoun follows the verb.
Singular.
1 Ek atga ainyak I walk.
2 Na atga aiek You walk.
3 Et atga aien He or she walks.
Plural
j f Inter atga akaija
\ Ecra atga aijama
2 Eka atga aijana..
3 Era atga ara
Same with—
Ek apan ainyak.
Na apan aiek....
Et apan aien ....
Past Tense,
We walk (inclusive)
We walk (exclusive)
You walk.
They walk.
I go.
You went.
He or she went.
Singular.
1 K.is atga ainyak
2 As atga aiek ....
3 Is atga aien ....
I walked.
You walked.
He or she walked,


Plural.
. ( Intis atga akaija We walked (inclusive).
1 \ Ecris atga aijama We walked (exclusive).
2 Akis atga aijana You walked.
3 Eris atga ara They walked.
Future Tense, Singular.
1 Ekpu atga amyak I will walk.
2 Napu atga aiek. You will walk.
3 Etpu atga aien He or she will walk.
Imperative Mood, Singular.
1 Ekmu atga ainyak Let me walk, or I will walk
2 Namu atga aiek Walk thou.
3 Etmu atga aien Let him walk.
Present Tense.
1 Ek atgei yin ainyak I kill him.
2 Na atgei yin aiek You kill him.
3 Et atgei yin aien He kills him.
Past Tense.
1 Kis atgei yin I killed kim.
2 As atgei yin You killed him.
3 Is atgei yin He killed him.
Man
Woman
Head (his head)
(my head)
Hair of head ...
Eye (his eye)
(my eye).
Nose
Tongue
Ear (his ear)
Hand (his hand)
Thumb
Foot (his foot)
Bones
Blood
Fire .
Water
Sun ...
Moon
Natimi.
Intakita.
Nithjin in.
Nithjinik.
Numri nithjinin.
Nesganimtan.
Nesganimtak.
Inginthjin.
N aman.
Intikgan.
Nikman.
Nupsikman nimeth.
(the elder finger).
Nethoon.
. Niji ethoon.
. Injairan.
. Incop.
Inwai,
. Nagesega.
, Inmohoa,


Father (my father)
... Etmak.
Mother (my mother) ...
Hisek.
Son
Inhal oun (atamaig).
Daughter
... Inhal oun (atahaig).
Brother (my)
... Etoak or Etwak.
Sister (my)
... Natahaigirak,
Cousin
... Inraimu.
[Jncle
Matan,
Aunt
Risen (same as mother).
The
Verbs.
Give (me)
... , Alupai (nyak).
Take (you)
... Leh (aiek).
Make or do
... Ago.
Bear
... Apos.
Burn
.. Cas (or to burn Atnamuth).
See
Almoi,
Hear
... Atahaijaig.
Simple Sentence.
ik Dr. Fraser, Ekaihenc
Dear Dr. Fraser, I com-
yai encainyak um ika etmu
passionate you, and express
acis yi alwai nauritai unyum
the desire that Jehovah
a Jehovah va nimaihpas
may bless your labours to
yin.
his own glory.
WILLIAM GRAHAME, JUN.,
ACTING GOVERNMENT PRINTER, TASMANIA,


kJ u f'i
3 1508 00665936 6
