

ANGLING IN
AUSTRALIA
and Elsewhere
HOWARD JOSELAND


ANGLING IN AUSTRALIA
and Elsewhere


Sam's Pool, Snowy River.
From a water-colour by the author.


ANGLING in AUSTRALIA
AND ELSEWHERE
HOWARD JOSELAND
ART IN AUSTRALIA LIMITED
24 Bond Street, Sydney


PREFACE
SOME of the material in this book has
already appeared in "The Fishing
Gazette" (London), the "Town and
Country Journal," and "The Pastoralists'
Review" (Sydney). I have to thank Mr. R.
B. Marston of the first named journal, and
the Editors and Proprietors of the two
Sydney journals, for permission to reprint.
Messrs. G. A. Hills and J. E. Paterson, and
Dr. Fourness Barrington have been good
enough to lend me some photographs for
reproduction, and acknowledgement has
been made below the print in each case.
The remaining photographs, illustrations in
colour, and the verse in this book are my
own.
All except one of the blocks have been
made by Messrs. Bacon <Sc Co., Sydney. The
book has been wholly set up and printed by
Messrs. Arthur McQuitty &. Co., Sydney,
Australia.
H. JOSELAND,
Wahroonga, N.S.W.
1921.


9^»" * " ?
jbl
Bill 11 IB iii i' ililir ' I I i r' ii 11 ill *
* iHHF ■■
BHr' |Hr|B|||^^|
** , # , J ■
1 '" Z~- ~*
" v • fffpi -fpf
Photo by
Q A. Hill
The Author, 1913


CONTENTS
Chapter
Preface
Introduction ... .3
Ringbarked - - - 15
II The Trout of Merritt's Gorge - - 16
111 Trout and their habits - - 20
An Invitation - - - 24
IV Weather, Seasons and Time - 25
V Flies - - - - - 29
VI Casting the Fly - - - - 35
VII Working the Fly - - 41
The Big Badga - - - - 43
VIII The Rod 45
The Laughing Eu-e-cumbene - - 49
IX Dry Flies- - - - 50
X Reels and Nets - - - - 53
XI Minnow and Bait Fishing - - 56
XII Indigenous Fish and Fly fishing tor
Perch - - - - 58
XIII Salt water fish - - - 65
XIV Float fishing - - - - 70
XV Tackle Making—Rods - - - 74
XVI Fly Tying - - - - 80
XVII Rods and Tackle for salt water fishing 86
The Monarch - - - - 88
XVIII England revisited - - 90
A Summer Day - - - - 99
The Christmas Moon ... iqi
An Angler's Day - - - - 111
XIX Angler's Birds - - - - 115
XX Where to fish, and outfit required - 120


ILLUSTRATIONS
Sam's Pool, Snowy River, near Dalgety.
Below the rocks is a lovely slow eddy, where, on favourable
occasions, nice "rainbows" dimple the water. Under the near bank
one or two "brownies" lazily suck in flies. The opposite bank is
disappointing; the distance shows the scene of many an anxious
tussle under the bank. I have endeavoured to convey my impression
of a Monaro summer day. ... Frontispiece
The Author-1913 - - - - P. VI
Four-pounders.
From the upper Queanbeyan, our "rainbows" vary very much in
markings, resembling "steelheads," "cut throats" and typical
"rainbows," but they were all derived from the same ova sent
originally to New Zealand. All fish from the still pools are well
conditioned and the flesh a deep salmon colour. Opp. p. 10
Perch (Bass).
A catch and photo by J. E. Paterson, from the Wollondilly; the
heaviest was lbs. - - - p. 10
Gloucester River.
A likely corner for perch. - - - p. 11
Russell's Flat, Eu-e-cumbene River.
Russell's flat; just after I sketched this I rose a good "fario"
at the head of this pool, but left him there. - - p. 16
Dead Horse Gully.
Snowy River. A view on the way to Sapling flat; the river is
about 50 yards wide here. - - - - p. 24
Harrington River.
A beautiful perch stream. - - - - p. 25
Merritt's Gorge, Snowy River.
So named by the "inner brotherhood" in memory of a most
hospitable and generous friend to anglers. - - p. 25
Murrumbidgee River.
Butlers' Gully, near Cooma. Alf Rose is seen fishing; his father
first put trout in the Snowy at Dalgety. - - - p. 25
Flies.
Efforts of my own. » - - - - p. 3o
Goodradigbee River.
Near Burrinjuck reservoir. A perfect trout stream, shaded by
casuarinas (she-oak). - - - - - p. 38
Goobragandra River.
A tributary of the Tumut. - - - P« 39


ILLUSTRATIONS (Cont.)
T uross River.
A photo by Dr. F. Barrington. A famous rainbow, "Nosey bob,"
lived near here. A mate of mine, Captain Corner, tackled him
with a 15/- salmon cast, but omitted to test his real line. "Nosey"
annexed the salmon cast. - - - - p. 39
Ribbony-gum, Big Badja.
Big Badja; probably a corruption of badger, from the indigenous
animal. The gum so-called because it sheds its bark in long ribbons.
I took some fine "rainbows" from this pool many years before it
became a popular resort. - - - - p. 39
Buckley's Crossing.
The old cattle crossing en route from Victoria to N.S.W. in the
distance. I saw my first Snowy River trout in the pool on the left
and have landed many a fish from all parts of the water in view.
Thredbo River.
Near the junction with the Snowy. Spencer, a well-known and
much-liked shepherd and Kosciusco guide, lived across the stream.
P. 54
Upper Queanbeyan River.
A typical pool surrounded with scrub, through which wallabies
push their way to drink; resembles the Big Badja and Tuross. A
"rainbow" of lbs. was caught in a similar pool. - p. 55
Junction of Wullzvye with Snowy River.
Scene of "The inscrutable trout of Wullwye." - - p. 55
Tumut River.
Talbingo; a fine stream, but below this spot of too low an altitude
for trout; from here upwards more favourable. - - P. 7°
The Author beach fishing. - - - - P- 7 1
Under the Casuarinas. - - - . p. 71
Rod and Tackle.
Among the many knots used, those shown I consider the best
and simplest. Many anglers simply tie their float to the line above
and below the cork. - - - - - p. 86
Fly tying by hand.
To tie very small flies a vice and hackle holder are necessary.
P- 87
The Afterglow.
Verses illustrated by the Author. - - . p. 102
Ludlow Castle.
On the borders of England and Wales. The River Teme, haunt
of trout and grayling, which skirts the town, winds through
enchanting valleys. - - - - - p. 103


INTRODUCTION.
THIS book was commenced during a trip from Sydney to
England in 1907, when I revisited my birthplace, the
town of Worcester. In addition to my desire to interest
and be of service to fellow-anglers, one object in its comple-
tion has been that of correcting humorously misleading
accounts of our Australian fishing which have appeared in
works by two most renowned anglers. These men were so
highly esteemed by the angling world, and have contributed
so largely to the pleasure of members of our fraternity, that
my appreciation of them as sportsmen forbids my saying
more than that it is evident that they were entirely
misinformed.
Although there is much in my book from which its readers
may differ, on one point I believe Australian anglers will
agree about it —viz., that it is a fair indication of what fishing
the average keen angler, who has to make his living by his
profession or business, may obtain in the Commonwealth.
English friends may possibly be envious of my holidays
on the Snowy and other scattered rivers of New South
Wales, extending over a period of twenty years. True, I
have made no sensational bags, the best, among the trout,
being an occasional ten brace of fish averaging about lb.,
the heaviest being rarely over 3 lbs. weight. About 10 per
cent, of blank days, the very occasional discomfort of a hot
dust storm, and not one wholly wet day, have left an impres-
sion on my memory of sunny skies, and the exhilarating air
of the district of the Monaro trout waters.
Here is, within a few ounces, a record of a fortnight on
the Upper Queanbeyan and Murrumbidgee in 1906: —


November ist: i l / 2 , iy 2 , iY lbs.
„ 2nd: seven fish from Y 4 to 3 lbs. and three under
¥A lb-
3rd: iy 4 , 1 y 2 , iy 2 , 2, 2*4, 3, 3 and 4 lbs.
„ 4th: seven fish i l / 2 to 2 lbs.
„ sth: five fish i l / 2 to 2 lbs.
„ 6th: y, 2 lbs.
„ 7th: x / 2 , lbs. (large fish broke away).
„ Bth: eight fish y 2 to Ya lb. (four returned).
„ 9th: three under 10 ozs. returned.
10th: y 2 , 1 lb.
~ nth: twelve y 2 to 2 lbs.
13th: six, y 2 to 1y 2 lbs.
All the fish caught were rainbow trout.
On November sth it snowed and the next two days were
cold. Flies used were: Red wasp, Irish lake, green hopper,
stone fly, Hoffland's, coachman, governor, tea-tree and
coch-y-bonddu—the last two doing most execution.
That the most frequented waters do not yield trout in the
same quantities or weight as during the first few years after
1900 (about the commencement of our trout fishing), is not
to be wondered at, especially where all the fishing is free
and in a country too vast to protect adequately. Some
streams have been almost fished out by greedy men, some
of whom even go so far as to take barrels and salt down
almost every fish they catch.
Still, in spite of unsportsmanlike killing of fish, there are,
comparatively, so few anglers on our rivers, that a vigorous
man, especially if he leave the beaten tracks, will be able to
command fair trouting for many years to come, and it is
hoped that in time the Government may see fit to preserve
more efficiently so valuable an asset.
The all-round angler has ample opportunity in New South
Wales. When the Monaro or New England plains and
mountains are too distant, he may leave alone their dry,
sunny air and sparkling streams and in a few hours revel
in the balmy winds of the sea coast, refresh himself by
wading in the wavelets lapping the shores, or dodge the
tumble and tossing of the breakers. In a boat he may rest
on the quiet waters of our inlets or wrestle with the game
fish of our estuaries. If he is interested in the flora and


fauna, Australia presents a wealth beautiful and curious ; a
never-ending source of pleasure to those who use their eyes
and ears.
The spring months are prolific with graceful and bright
flowers. The boronias, flannel flowers, sprengelia, harden-
bergias, yellow pea-flowers and lobelias are only an indica-
tion of a rich variety to be found on our coast. Inland there
is the tea-tree bush with snow-white blossom, jewelled with
emerald, black, and brown beetles; orange wasps, and many
delicate insects. On the plains are daisies, vetches, Monaro
primroses, and blue star flowers like little flecks of sky peep-
ing through the grass, and the modest pink crowsfoot
delicately suffuses favoured places.
are no old ruins of medieval buildings and few
historic associations, but the Monaro plains, with their
picturesque groups of granite boulders, remind one of
Stonehenge.
The literature of Angling in Australia is almost an
unknown quantity, but the books of Isaak Walton and Sir
Edward Grey are in spirit applicable to the country. The
Father of angling, Isaak Walton, wrote The Compleat
Angler during the period in which the Cavaliers and Round-
heads were cracking each other's skulls in the neighbourhood
of my native town. Under the shade of Powick Bridge, a
medieval structure, and the scene of one of the fiercest
fights, I have caught trout, roach and chub. The combatants,
under conditions of the period, were almost as remote from
Walton, fishing on his beloved Dove, as we are from
European nations at war. Walton has been accused by some
of his enemies as "not risking his skin," but he had, when
he wrote his book, already lived sixty years of honourable
citizenship, and therefore he was justly entitled to take
pleasure as he liked, especially as it gave offence to no man.
His recreation doubtless contributed to his living happily to
the ripe age of ninety, and his book, now a classic, written
in the year 1653, has since delighted anglers as no other
book on angling has done.
When the might of the British Empire was menaced and
the fate of Australia in the balance, the author of the most
charming work on Fly Fishing since Walton's time—Sir


Edward Grey—whenever he got the chance, ran down to his
favourite Hampshire streams, where he skilfully cast a fly
on the peaceful and refreshing waters. Of him, Gladstone
is reported to have said: "Edward Grey might do anything
in politics, but he prefers to go a-fishing." Sir Edward has
fulfilled his own words in his book on Fly Fishing—the
Introduction to which is full of high ideals—where he says:
"If work be worthy or noble, the greatest satisfaction of life
is to be found in doing it well; the exercise of his highest
powers or qualities is the glory of man's being, and the
discovery or development of them by use transcends all
pleasure"; to which no comment need here be made, except
that the reading of the two works above alluded to is quite
worth while, being instructive in the Art of Fishing, and
appealing to the best sides of ourselves. Both of these
Anglers reveal their companionship with the works of
nature; the murmuring streams, songs of birds, and beauty
of flowers of rural England. Those of us who enjoyed the
same delights, treasure the memory of days by trout waters,
shady lanes and open moors, the tramping to and fro through
the picturesque old towns and the charm of the old villages
with their gay cottage gardens. The finding of the first
daffodils, primroses, and violets, on the banks of some brook,
was an annual event ever fresh.
In Australia the shade of the manna gums and river oaks
calls us no less than the piping of the grey thrush, the mellow
call of the honey-eaters, and flute note of magpie and shrike.
The first gleam of sunlight glorifying the grey trees on the
distant hills or on the ridges towering over our camp by the
rivers, the deep quiet pools where the big fish swim around
and the rapids, where more vigorous young "rainbows"
snatch our flies, haunt us in our dreams, urging us on the
first opportunity to get our rods out and "go a-angling."


GREY THRUSH.
Oh grey thrush! where have I heard you calling?
In an upland near the stream side;
Your voice mingling with the waters falling,
Neath the foliage where you hide.
Oh grey thrush! where have I heard you calling?
In the wind-bent scrub by the seaside,
Whilst the fishermen their nets are hauling,
Aiv ay in the lazy slack tide.
Oh grey thrush! zvhere have I heard you calling?
By my flower garden bed side,
My listening ear, sweet notes enthralling
With your mating song in spring tide.
Oh grey thrush! I've sometimes heard you tuning
Your notes subdued, in the woodside,
Whilst to your young fledglings softly crooning,
As lovers' voices in moontide.
Oh grey thrush! your calling's not quite singing,
Like throstles on earth's other side;
But grey thrush! it's sweet, to my heart bringing
Fond memories at eventide.


CHAPTER I.
REMINISCENT.
The angler of artistic temperament, who revels in the
contemplation of Nature's fairest scenes, finds a charm in
Trouting, its associations and reminiscences, not realised in
any other sport. What prize so coveted by the angler, from
his school days onwards, as the trout? What fish is found
in such diverse waters, almost all over the world; from the
little rill that tinkle-tinkles half concealed between luxurious
banks of herbage, to the strongly flowing river; from the
tree-enshrined and weed-grown fish pond, to the mountain-
bound loch; from glacier-fed streams of icy regions, to the
water-courses of Australia's sunny plains?
Never shall I forget landing my first troutling, a pretty
little chap of some eight inches long; nor my satisfaction
when, on receiving a holiday letter from my school mate
saying that he had caught his first trout, I found that I had
forestalled him by a day! Though forty years ago, and on
the other side of the world, I could point out the nook now,
as I could almost any other spot where I have since grassed
a spotted beauty. It was in the spring time of an English
Midland county and I had walked five miles to try my luck.
The locality was half garden, half woodland, in which was
a little pool just under an old flood gate, over which the
water glided, except what little squirted through the cracks
in the woodwork. Out of the pool the little brook ran over
pebbles to hide under bushes overhanging the verdure-clad
banks; then on past meadows bright with yellow cowslips,
daffodils and buttercups, and through dells decked with
primroses, bluebells and anemones. There was shade, I
remember, over the pool, of some oak or sycamore, and the
sun came glinting between the delicate spring leaves on to
the rich green grass, in spots and dashes with a mellowness
that to my recollection of early days seems peculiarly
English. I had read that no man could call himself an
angler till he had caught a trout; so I felt that I had taken
an important step in life.
My first lesson in angling, when I had caught a gudgeon,
at Pixham Ferry, on the Severn, had been under the guid-
ance of an uncle ; I had also caught roach, dace, chub and


perch, and had snared jack and eels, but what were the best
of them to my new treasure ? Back at school, my chum and
I laid schemes, how we would lure on a day-boy to let us
fish in his father's preserves on the Chess, where on bird-
nesting bent, we had seen "monsters," with faintly moving
tails and fins, lying in pebbly shallows. Luckily for us the
boy was a dunce, so we got at him with bribes of prompting
in class —which was done, by the way, by my chum, he being
smaller than I and better able to dodge the master's gaze;
besides, I was a bit of a dunce myself. So one holiday,
having provided ourselves with brandlings and a few
caddis worms out of the mill stream which flowed through
our school grounds, we set out with rods and creels filled
with tackle and lunch.
Away we went, through grass paddocks and cornfields,
passing hayricks and farms till at last we crossed the crown
of the hill which separated us from our valley in which the
"Loud-water" stream ran. Then over a stone wall, down
the hill again past a fir copse on the right, and a rabbit warren
green with nettles and on to the flat beyond, and so through
a grove of trees to the stone bridge over the stream. This
was the boundary line: below were forbidden waters, but
how we longed to try them where they broadened out into
a lakelet. The half-dozen trout lying under the bridge must
be left, so we wandered on through pine groves and wild
flowers by the stream, cautiously peering for signs of the
prey.
Fishing in the likely spots, we soon had fish of two pounds
weight. One monster we could not catch, so, boy-like, we
pelted him with stones. He was afterwards landed by the
dunce, with a small fly, and weighed eight pounds!
We returned with a nice basketful of fish, and took them
to the school tuck-shop in the village, kept by a motherly
dame, who cooked them for us next day; and we sneaked
out of bounds, risking all penalties, and feasted right royally
in a back parlour at 3 p.m.
We had other days' fishing on that stream, but at last, one
day when they would not bite, we took to snaring the trout
in a manner which, for the sake of our Australian fisheries,
I will not disclose. It was great fun we thought then, but
it proved to be disastrous, for we were henceforth forbidden


to fish there again. However, we did so with much fear
and trembling, and were caught by the "gammy"—his
wretched little terrier nearly found the trout we had hidden
under a bush. It was on one of those excursions that the
kingfisher flew screeching out of a hole in the bank, and to
our joy we had found a much coveted nest; but we broke
the only egg getting it out!
Then, when school days were over, on every favourable
occasion I would tramp miles through country lanes and
woods, by hedgerows of hazel and blackthorn, or through
hop yards, to some secluded brook rippling by stony beaches,
tearing in rapids over miniature waterfalls, or at rest in deep,
quiet stretches. The streams were mostly too overgrown to
cast a fly on, so I would lead the bait into the eddies or under
bushes, or spin a minnow near an overhanging bank or past
an old log; sometimes dapping with a daddy longlegs or
house fly, I would land a brace or two and be quite content.
But what had the most fascination for me, where it was
possible, was fly fishing—with its fine tackle and delusive
feathered flies, the skilful manipulation of the flies into the
spots where the trout were lying; then the rise and play of
the fish, and the suspense lest the cobweb-like tackle should
give way; and always the satisfaction when at last the prize
was safely stowed away in a basket of freshly plucked grass!
And such was trouting in the English Midlands that each
outing was associated with some old manor house, mediaeval
castle or ancient parish church with its ivy-clad tower, toned
by ages of Nature's painting, and backed with the spring
green, summer or more varied autumn tints of lofty elm,
sturdy oak, sycamore or ash; a foreground of cottage
gardens, bright with lilac, roses, hollyhocks, and a wealth of
other familiar blossoms.
I would lunch at a picturesque old inn, its straw-thatched
roof overhanging black oak timber framing and whitewashed
plastered walls. Usually the fare was of home-cured ham
and fried eggs, perhaps served in an oak-panelled room
richly coloured by age, and with rafters hung with bacon
sides; and the amber-coloured cider, how it was relished! I
recall the villages of Mathon, Cradley, Suckley and Leigh,
all on the same stream (to which in turn each gives its name)
and which flows into the River Teme in the valley below


- j|Hp ,,, : f,
B| ' * ' |J
K MM i^KL
/^K
Four pounders— facing.
Perch.


4-
W, • { ■ -■■■*- -|lfc
B b&^
R| :% *P
R& ?&$&& » I
ZmffJ/'. fajp 'fHfnr < r
YjUsy* **' SJ
Gloucester River.


those beautiful Malvern Hills, celebrated for their pure air
and purest waters.
Memory wanders on to quaint old Ludlow—one of the
places that seemed to have been finished three hundred years
ago—famed for possessing the ruins of one of the finest of
old castles, founded by the Normans, enlarged by the Tudors,
and still further during the reign of good Queen Bess. On
the borders of England and Wales, almost encircled by the
River Teme which is crossed by two quaint mediaeval
bridges, it had formed a strong fortress to keep the Welsh
out of England, and was the scene of many a bloody fight.
From its parapets little pleasantries of molten lead and
jagged boulders dropped on invading foes. Good sport I
have had with trout and grayling in the Teme and Ledwyche
nearby, landing some ten or twelve brace of the rich, golden-
tinted trout of the smaller stream.
There rises also before me in visions of the a
glorious chestnut tree, far famed for hundreds of years,
nourished by the Darenth below the bridge at Farningham.
From the meadow waters lower down, one Easter, I took
some good trout, casting down stream contrary to all
orthodox methods.
When I left England in 1886, in search of health, I was
attracted to New Zealand by accounts of trout fishing in the
neighbourhood of Christchurch. As chance had it, however,
I landed in Auckland, but at that time a local hatchery had
only recently been established and it was not till some six
years later that acclimatisation in the Waikato district proved
successful enough to admit of angling in the rivers there.
The second season, on a holiday from Sydney, I fished at
Oxford, near Okaroire. It took eight days from Sydney
then, including the steamer trip to Auckland and train
journey of 100 miles to Oxford. Arriving too late to fish
that night, I was in time, however, to see five fine rainbows
brought in by the hotel-keeper, the heaviest, about 7 lbs.
weight, making my largest trout of 2% lbs. caught in
England, seem diminutive.
The next morning my host drove me three miles to one
of the three adjacent rivers, a clear stream of about six
yards wide, running so strong that it was only possible to
wade it in places and to cross it at long intervals.


A brother angler in Auckland had advised me to use a
brown Devon minnow or a natural sand fish on an Archer
spinner, flies at that time not having been very successful.
Whilst taking stock of the water I thought I detected
something amid stream, half substance and half shadow,
something alive, with movement, a brownish streak over two
feet long. It lay in the play of sunlight dancing through the
shade of an overhanging bush. Could it be a monster trout ?
I looked intently, but I was not the only observer: the
shadowy substance was watching me also. It moved away
uneasily but returned to position, steadied itself and lay
there in that provoking and watchful attitude that trout so
often assume when alarmed; next it was gone like the
shadow of a swiftly flying bird. I tested my tackle and
wondered what it would feel like, and what I would do if
I hooked such a fish.
Trembling with excitement, I made my first cast in a
strong-running pool at a bend just above. At once I was
into a large fish. Down stream he went, jagging and fight-
ing, tearing yards of line off the whirring reel, whilst I did
my best to follow him, passing my rod over bushes and
round tree-stems, not knowing where he was leading me to.
Soon he came to the tail of his pool and there we fought it
out, I wondering all the time how I was to land him, the
banks being high, bushes in the way and the water strong
and deep. On the other side was a shelving beach, the only
possible spot to favour me, and there presently I had him
floating on his side, a good six-pound fish. I was at my
wit's end what to do next. There appeared to be no place
to cross, so I determined to try and work him down stream,
negotiating more obstacles. All at once my line slacked and
I beheld his lordship float away free again.
Shortly after, my Devon found another fish, but all I knew
was a long screech of the reel and a fish bolting down
through pools and shallows, then a sort of tangle up between
a frantic thing and a hopeless density of bushes; such a
splashing and tugging, and I so helplessly placed that it
came as a relief when the line slackened. I sadly reeled up
my line and moved on. But better luck was in store, a five-
pounder came to my net, and later a brace, making up 10 lbs.
in all; not a bad day's sport for those times, counting the


fish that had played with me also. The next day, using the
Archer and natural sand-fish, I struck several large fish, but
went home with an empty creel.
What has since developed of this fishing has become
world renowned, but it was pleasant enough to wade typical
trout streams in a new land to me, where the river-ways
were full of the gladness of fresh foliage, albeit that the
cabbage-tree palm, flax, and manuka took the place of alders,
willows and hawthorn. The undulating volcanic country
surrounding, though unattractive, was clothed in places
with what might have been, from its resemblance, the
English bracken fern.
But this was not my first experience of trouting overseas.
Five years previously I had run over to Launceston, Tas-
mania, to try the rivers there. They were all in flood so I
went down to Hobart, thence to Macquarie Plains, passing
up the valley of the lovely Derwent with its luxuriant hop
yards, and on to the Ouse forty miles by coach. The rivers
were out of order there also, but I landed at that spot my
first trout in Austral waters, a y±-lb. Salmo Fario, which
succumbed to a red-tipped governor after refusing a soldier
palmer. A friend joined me later, and we camped at an
English-looking inn. Round about were grassy meadows,
with ox-eyed daisies and hedgerows of wild roses, inter-
sected with glittering streamlets lapping the red roots of
pollard willows.
But there were other things, strange to me; paddocks
eaten bare by rabbits, log fences through which snakes some-
times crawled; one day walking through grass I caught a
black snake in my landing net. New Zealand presented no
such diversions as these. We visited neighbouring station
houses and fed plentifully of luscious strawberries and rasp-
berries from gardens that recalled my native Midland
county.
The Devon minnow and Archer were chiefly the order of
the day there. The Ouse yielded a few three-pounders and
the little Dee some nice fish that required six to scale that
weight. Then we varied the fish diet with an occasional
hopper, alder, or other artificial fly, which latter they did not
take kindly to. The time of year was November, and the
days were pleasant and warm, but the evenings too cool for


loafing in the open air. There it was that our experience of
horse flesh was somewhat adventurous, for having been let
down by an animal that was groggy at the knees we bar-
gained for the use of a staunch-looking steed, the owner of
which started us off with the remark that "it was a pity the
horse was blind."
But as these trips were too few and far between, and
took up too much time, I was only too glad to take a hint
from Mr. Brodie, Secretary of the New South Wales
Fisheries Department in 1900, to try our recently stocked
rivers. And so began my association with the Snowy, a
river unexcelled in its charms and attractions to the trout
fisherman; one of the oldest of creation's works. Its
characteristics, unique and fascinating, have drawn me
irresistibly each summer since my first acquaintance with
it, as the Dove drew Isaak Walton. May it be carefully
treasured and kept undefiled for the recreation of those who
toil in dusty cities!
In the following pages it will be found that I am dealing
chiefly with New South Wales, and Sydney as a centre.
Victoria is the only other State in Australia that has success-
fully acclimatised trout, which are there to be found in
waters adjacent to the southern borders of N.S.W. My
notes in connection with salt water fishing are applicable to
most of the coastal waters of Australia, but Queensland and
West Australia present fields of which I have had no
experience.


RINGBARKED.
Old tree, some years ago,
I saw you flourish by the stream
Whose waters idly flow:
So long ago, it seems a dream!
You then were in your prime,
Seedling and sapling days had passed
Down avenues of time,
E'er tardy white man came at last.
Year after year you grew,
In winter storm, through summer heat.
Birds to your branches flew,
Whilst flowers blossomed at your feet.
Then listened kangaroos
To sighs your leaves and breezes made;
You welcomed wallaroos
For generations 'neath your shade.
The timid waterfowl
Swam unmolested your domain,
The dingo's dismal howl
You heard; an echo howled again.
Your branches gleaming white,
In strong and graceful bend did hold
Your leaves out to the light.
In sunset glow they turned to gold.
But now, alas! you stand
With gaunt and naked arm in air,
You seem to raise a hand
In futile, agonised despair.
On every stilly eve,
With misty twilight's hovering,
A requiem, believe,
A kindly magpie comes to sing.
Yet in your place shall come
New trees which flowers and fruit adorn
Fair children find a home,
Where smiling gardens greet the morn


CHAPTER 11.
THE TROUT OF MERRITT'S GORGE.
To enjoy the river's romance and study its secrets to the
utmost, one must necessarily separate oneself temporarily
from one's companions.
A brother angler remarked to me when discussing com-
petitions, that they were not attractive to him, he would
rather get away from the crowd and wander quietly beside
the course of a river, fish a little and rest a little in some
shady spot, where he could watch or listen to some sweet-
noted bird or study some animal or insect new to him; then
fish again and so spend the time in the river valley among
the entrancing gems of Nature. The very essence of the
charm of angling to many, is the rest from the competitive
element which enters so fully into their daily lives.
Many a time I have hidden to watch a duck dart here and
there after midges, or tend its brood; or, in the quietness of
the bush, have seen a platypus playing with its mate or
quietly feeding in some still pool or running stream.
Often have I been deceived by these quaint creatures into
thinking some old sodden log was floating and bobbing over
the stones and have looked for further signs of a coming
fresh, when all at once the seemingly lifeless object has
ducked its head, rounded its back and disappeared. Occa-
sionally, in the short twilight, I have seen the quaint wallaby
come down cautiously from the neighbouring scrub to drink,
or at other times a dingo or fox look suspiciously round and
then at the scent of danger scamper off to shelter. And if
at the end of the day I have had a brace or two of handsome
fish, which moreover happened to be the best shown in
friendly rivalry for the day's catch, my cup of happiness
has been full.
Record breaking in the way of numbers and weight cannot
be the aim of the true angler. My most treasured incidents
of fishing have rarely been associated with the largest bags.
One such incident, enshrined in memory of early days, was
the capture of that pound trout, which fell to the lure of a
Hearder's plano-convex minnow. Long time had he
sheltered under that tangled bush overhanging the little
gravelly run below the bend of a Herefordshire stream,


' 1


where the violets and daffodils grew. He had fattened on
the insects that had fallen from the blackberry and alder
bushes. His neighbours rarely attained the weight of half
a pound, so when the plump golden pride of the stream was
coaxed ashore, an indelible record was made which it is
pleasant to revive.
Then there was the trout of Merritt's Gorge. Her ances-
tors traced their pedigree back to the ice ages of North
America, and for centuries they had gambolled and frisked,
generation after generation, in the streams from the sun-
melted glaciers of California which send down waters laden
with milk-tinted sediment through their awe-inspiring rocky
gorges. In these latter days their ova had been transplanted
to New Zealand, where after transformation into full-grown
fish, their ova in turn endured the vicissitudes of further
travel and were hatched out in Austral waters near Sydney.
The little fingerling of many years back had developed and
sported in the big pool to which it had worked its way, where
nearby a shepherdess watched her sheep on the rugged
granite Monaro mountain close by.
For eight summers I had searched the river for such a
prize, till at last one day I with companions ventured into the
Gorge. We were camping at our old spot at the mouth of
the Gorge, but had resolved to explore. With a local resi-
dent acting as our guide, we tramped up hillside sheep tracks,
over knobs of rotten rock, through stunted prickly shrubs.
Below the river roared and foamed through cramped chan-
nels, boulder strewn, and confined by towering cliffs of grey
granite propping up the ranges soaring above and behind.
Down steep tracks to sandy patches by the water we went;
then round a big pool fit for the finest salmon or trout that
ever swam, and after lunch rested in shade cast in the
glorious sunshine by sheltering rocks.
Here a local angler appeared and told us rumours of
large fish over the next ridge, so we followed his guidance
and came to wilder water and another large pool. Under
the shade of gums on the river strand we found the remains
of a camp of the first men who had, the previous summer,
tried to pass through the Gorge in a canoe, but had been
compelled to transport most of the way, over the mountain
spurs.


Whilst examining the river I saw evidence of a trout feed-
ing; a fish to top the weight of any that had been landed
with a fly in that district. The rings were far off, so I had
to wait until they approached near enough to enable me to
get my fly within them. I could see no fly over the water,
so concluded that the fish was feeding on food eddying round
just under the surface. Many flies I tried—governor,
palmers, and some of my own devices, but I might as well
have cast on the shore.
I rested, changed my position, cast from new standpoints,
but all to no effect, so in despair went away to my com-
panions who were making a nice bag of fish on grass-
hoppers. Should I own defeat with the fly and impale a
common hopper on a hook? To see the other men filling
their baskets was more than human nature could endure, so
I sneaked away and in secrecy captured a plump hopper.
Almost hoping the trout would spurn the seductive bait I
cast out into the pool, with hand ready to cope with a rush-
ing fish. As the seconds passed there was no response, how-
ever; with some small satisfaction I cleaned the hook, and,
seeking better luck elsewhere, moved down stream; but I
could not forget that fish, and was drawn back again to the
fascinating pool.
One more try I would have, so a new fly was pressed into
service, one of peacock body, black hackle and grey wings.
Throwing caution away, I stepped out boldly over some
submerged rocks to gain a more open position and made a
cast. There was no rise, only a surge in the water like the
swirl made by the recovery of an oar stroke. I felt my line
tightened and carried away. Out and out towards the open
stream, where there were sunken rocks, went the fish, and I
trembled lest they should be my undoing. But finding strange
water, back the fish came as I reeled in the slack as fast as
possible; off at right angles and then down she plunged with
strong, steady pull, coming round the pool under overhang-
ing rocks. But I took no liberties and gave plenty of time,
knowing that the Snowy River was fairly free of snags and
weeds. At last the runs were shorter and the line came in
foot by foot. Just as I was getting the net ready my host
appeared among the scrub, enquiring what luck I had. I
replied by holding up the flopping monster: the heaviest


fish ever caught in that district which I had searched for
eight years.
The fishing was practically over for the day, but my host
made me go up the Gorge half a mile to see the big falls and
try another good pool. My mate came down the stream with
an awesome story of black snakes and roaring water. I
picked up another fish, making our total seven and
a half brace of no light weight. We clambered up a short
cut, almost a precipice, and over a spur; when the rapids and
stream tearing into camp pool came in sight they appeared
almost a mere ripple compared to what we had left over the
hills.
That was one of my good days.


CHAPTER 111.
TROUT AND THEIR HABITS.
In wet fly fishing there is more in enthusiasm and knowing
where to fish than in being highly expert at casting, or par-
ticular in selecting flies. One develops what has been aptly
termed an eye for the water when searching for fish— i.e., an
intuition, brought about by experience, of almost the precise
haunts of the fish; this intuition is all-important in all
fishing.
The habits of various kinds of trout differ considerably;
even though transplanted to new surroundings they still
maintain their individual ways. Of the acclimatised species
in Australian waters, Loch Leven, Brown Trout (Salmo
Fario), and Rainbow (S. Irideus), the last is the most
voracious and vigorous, and therefore may be looked for in
the swift water, if they inhabit the same river. All river
trout seem to dislike moving home, so that unless they are
captured, destroyed, or driven away by drought, they often
haunt the same spots year after year.
They are of roving disposition in still water, there being
no flow in any set direction bearing food to them, though
some particular feature, such as sunken rock or tree trunk,
may be made use of as a sallying point or shelter. Almost
at any time, in summer weather, walking along the banks of
the Snowy at Dalgety and Jindabyne, one may see Brown
Trout and Loch Levens swimming slowly round and round
the side eddies, or up and down under the banks of the quiet
stretches. If you want to get the largest of these fish, you
must cast in such waters and use your subtlest arts. In the
evenings, if it be warm, they work into the shallows and
side runs towards the banks. The smaller fish, of half a
pound to a pound, are generally taken from ripples running
over pebbles.
In still waters such as the Upper Queanbeyan, Tuross, or
Big Badja, which contain only rainbows, and are normally
nothing more than a chain of water holes, there is little to
indicate the most likely place for rises. Till one knows the
water well or has located fish by their rings, one had better
cast anywhere possible, especially in clear water in or near
patches of weeds, though at dusk trout may be often traced


poking among weeds on the margins of the pools looking for
frogs.
On lakes or large still pools one sometimes sees a line of
scum and refuse slowly moving under the varying airs.
There, fish food will probably gather. I have seen trout
rising in such places, with no evidence of fish elsewhere.
Especially do I remember such an incident on Lake Louise,
in Canada.
On quiet water, too, it is proverbial that trout "take"
where it is ruffled by a breeze. It has only been my fortune
to experience that once or twice, when it was accounted for
by the proximity of large overhanging willows from which
grubs, insects, and flies were blown.
Doubtless, therefore, trout come up to feed in breeze-
ruffled water because they expect to find insects beaten down
on to the surface. There are only two things that govern
their position—feeding and spawning; therefore one should
observe the likeliest places in which their food is to be found,
whether worms, shrimps, frogs, larvae, etc., submerged—or
grubs, spiders, flies, hoppers, beetles, etc., above the water.
Sandy open stretches with low and bare banks are always
barren of fish, and so, as a rule, are long reaches of even-
running rapid water, where the bottom stones are small and
much of a size; but where the river flows deep and curling
on one side, and shallow on the other, one may find fish on
either side according to the weather conditions, as trout
having their haunts in the deeps may venture out into the
shallows when flies are about.
Where you see trees, shrubs, thistles and weeds on the
river banks, there will be insect life, and trout waiting for
a chance of a tit-bit falling therefrom. I have sometimes
explored new water away from the haunts of man, expecting
to have exceptionally good sport because it had not been
frequented, and I have returned to civilisation with empty
creel, there to save a "duck" at last, for the reason that the
river banks grew more luxuriant herbage and trout in their
wandering moods had stayed there.
Watch the stream where it converges towards a narrow
channel, then below the channel where it broadens out into
a pool; look for the eddying water at the sides. You should
find fish in the narrowest part of the side eddy, right close


to the strong water as it enters the run or pool. Now look
again at the centre of the run of water and follow it down
the pool. After a little experience you will detect a place,
it may be a few or many yards down, according to the size
of the pool, where there is a sort of sub-eddying, and change
of flow, often caused by sunken boulders. You may always
expect to touch a rainbow as your fly reaches this particular
location. Below this the stream takes up its course again
in quieter and more even run, the fish food being distributed
and lessened there.
Frequently I have seen novices walk deliberately into the
side of an eddy because there the strong current appeared to
be somewhat arrested and therefore afforded comfortable
standing: then they fished out into water where the fish did
not lie, all the time the fish being at their feet. Twice in one
day I saw this happen on the Murrumbidgee, near Cooma,
and tried to get the novice to take advice.
In the first instance the fly was dropped accidentally near
the angler and was seized at once. In the second, the angler
stuck to his error for half an hour; in the meantime I had
taken two fish under the opposite bank and had then moved
on and taken three more fish from a pool above. I returned
to find my man had crossed over and was fishing under the
bank where I had been. I cast where he had previously
stood, and, to his amazement, hooked and landed a 2-lb.
rainbow.
Where the water is broken up by boulders or other
obstacles, trout lie in their shelter just out of the stream;
often above a boulder in what appears to be the full strength
of the current, but which is really a pocket. A favourite
habitat of trout is among small boulders over which a steady
stream runs, covering the stones with about a foot of water.
Fish carefully both the near and far side of the stream,
keeping well back in the former case.
When in flood or spate, the course of water changes and
brings into range new feeding grounds, therefore, provided
the water is at all fishable, cast very close to the banks, and
if there are back waters or incoming streams, some of which
may be clear, approach these very cautiously and cast a long
line; trout always seem to be more wary when out of their
usual beats.


Casting in speculation on long, still river pools is uninter-
esting work. Sometimes, however, one may see fish rising in
such places; if so, they are generally roving. Try and find
which way they are travelling, and cast a little ahead of
them, remembering they seldom move more than two or
three feet out of their way to pick up a fly, so that you must
be fairly accurate. Rainbows seldom rise when the water
is at all coloured by a fresh, except perhaps in the back-
waters after sundown.


AN INVITATION.
"Honey scent o' grasses,
Whence do yon beckon?"
"We hail from the valley
You must come, we reckon.
See again the great cliffs
Guarding our domain,
Hanging in the sunshine,
Mystic in the rain.
Hear the soft wind swishing
Through the she-oaks tall,
Greens and greys and russet,
Blending through them all.
Push your way through ivy,
Gay with yellow flowers;
Delve beneath the scarlet
Erithrina bowers.
Wade the winding streamlet,
Glittering in the sun,
Lazing in a clear pool,
Tinkling in a run.
See the soft-eyed cattle
Grazing o'er the farm,
Laugh at big frill lizards
Scuttling out of harm.
Come, then, to our valley,
Leaving city dust;
Bring our old companions—
You must come, you must!"


saPawir., , .
Hr
Dead Horse Gully, Snowy River.


mmmmmmmmvamrmM* <&' ***'
wmmT ' jj> - Jpw'
Barrington River.


.. ; , V '- , ■
< J»V\ • £**.
*'' K - - iCsC*
Bp - • _
-r^r- 8 ■Bfc~ * 3^"
Merritt's Gorge, Snowy River.


Murrumbidgee River.


CHAPTER IV.
It ain't no use to grumble and complain;
It's jest as cheap and easy to rejoice;
When God sorts out the weather and sends rain,
W'y, rain's my choice.
—JAMES WHITCOMB RILEY.
WEATHER, SEASONS, AND TIME.
The practice of using the floating or dry fly has somewhat
modified theories as to fishing weather, because it has been
found that this style of fishing will sometimes fill a creel
when other methods are next to useless. Brought up in
England in the belief that one might as well cast a fly on
a road as fish for trout in an easterly or northerly wind, I
was somewhat surprised on a recent visit to hear a friend of
the dry fly cult argue that a rise to a dry fly depended to a
considerable extent on whether the wind were favourable
or otherwise for putting the fly on the water in its most
alluring manner —that is, dropping it upstream over the fish.
Subsequently I found that under seemingly adverse con-
ditions it was indeed possible to fill a bag by floating the fly.
The weather influences on Angling in Australia have not
yet been sufficiently studied to enable anyone to speak with
definite authority, therefore in giving my own experience I
feel that there are many gaps to be filled up. The most
favourable wind in the Monaro appears to be the prevailing
westerly and north-westerly. Unfortunately, to a great
extent the Snowy flows with this wind; it is only here and
there that the river changes its course so as to admit of
this being a fair up-stream wind. Southerly, to which
quarter the wind usually veers for a day or so about every
ten days, is decidedly adverse. Yet on occasions, during a
very cold snap, with the wind in the south, but with the water
low and clear, the fish rise well.
Often in the evenings a strong sea breeze from north-east
comes up in the Monaro from the coast 40 miles away, bring-
ing billows of cloud-mists over the coast range, and moisture
seems to permeate the air in the track of the breeze. It
blows so strongly at times that the water is much ruffled, and
good casting becomes difficult. So badly do some anglers


regard this wind that they pack up their rods on its advent,
maintaining that it puts the fish "down" at once.
Without doubt the effect of the sea breeze is instantane-
ous and disastrous; the water becomes uninteresting, the
ripples and pools assuming an equally monotonous appear-
ance—wind-smitten and grey. I have proved, however, that
it is not always absolutely fatal to trout-fishing any more
than a southerly wind is to salt-water fishing, and after
sundown, though in a strong sea breeze, I have known trout
rise in a most abandoned manner.
The reason of this appears to be that whilst the moisture-
laden air of the sea breeze sends the day insects to shelter,
it does not affect the late evening and night insects, which
are so fashioned that they resist the night dews.
Rainy weather is so much the exception on our trout
streams in the season that it need hardly be taken into
account. During holiday experiences on the Monaro I have
never known a wholly wet day.
As compared with the British Isles this is truly a remark-
able record, worthy of note. Are there many countries
where one can almost depend on a genial, warm and bracing
climate to invite one to go out lightly clad, or to camp in dry,
exhilarating air, and sleep roofless, except for the star-
gemmed sky?
The average Monaro summer temperature ranges from
about 65 to 80 degrees in the shade, with an occasional
colder or hotter day.
With a high temperature, a strong northerly wind usually
blows, in some districts bringing clouds of dust so thick that
during occasional gusts, when standing in the river bed, it
has been impossible to see the banks ten yards away. Still,
on such days I have often found the fish feeding well, and
if one only puts up with the discomfort a good bag may
reward.
One November I fished the Queanbeyan in a sleet shower
and caught six fine trout. In the afternoon came a thick
snow storm which covered the ground with a carpet for half
an hour. The fish would not rise after the colder tempera-
ture had chilled the water.
Many of our Monaro streams are snow fed, most of the
year, from the Australian Alps. Snow rarely, in fact,


entirely disappears from these mountains of six or seven
thousand feet in height. This accounts for the fact that
streams from these ranges are seldom in a condition to be
fished till the bulk of the snow has melted.
On the first of November (the opening of our season),
the Snowy, Gungahlene, Euecumbene, Thredbo, Goodradig-
bee, Mowamba, Yarrangobilly, Tumut, and others are often
too high for good fishing results. In December and January
they approach their summer level, and from February till
the close of the season (April 15th) are usually at their
lowest. October and November are the most favourable
for such still rivers as the Tuross, Big Badja and Upper
Queanbeyan; there is no reason why such rivers should not
be open to fishing from October Ist. Rainbows—the only
trout in them—have usually fully recovered from spawning
by that date.
Rainbow trout in still rivers are very capricious feeders.
One day, bright and warm, they would not rise till sundown,
at which time they became ravenous, and I then caught good
fish so long as I could see. Some days they would only rise
before sunrise, whilst the mists were still on the water;
other days, all the morning, and not at all in the afternoons
and evenings, and this, as far as I was able to observe, with-
out any distinct relation to the weather or flies. One can
usually depend on getting a brace or two in the twilight, but
that lasts only about half an hour. I have caught trout with
a wet fly in bright moonlight, but it is unsatisfactory fishing,
as one really has to depend upon feeling rather than seeing.
The best hour to fish depends very much upon the food
available at a particular locality. During about three
months—December to February—grasshoppers are very
plentiful, especially in plain country. The fish gorge them-
selves with them. The hopper is, in fact, to the Australian
trout what the May fly is to the English fish, only more of a
perpetual feast. If one waits till the sun is well up over
the horizon and then walks along the river bank, where
herbage is favourable, hoppers will scurry out and many
will fall into the water and can easily be picked out. Trout
know this condition, so they, too, wait till the sun is up and
the air is warm, when the hoppers liven up; then the trout
leave their secluded haunts and commence to rove under the


banks or select some favouring current from which to pick
up food as it drops into the water. Hoppers are never so
much in evidence in the afternoon.
Tea-tree bushes, when in flower, attract beetles and black
and orange wasps, which also only rouse themselves in the
warmest hours of the day. At such times, fish under those
bushes overhanging the water. In rocky country there are
but few hoppers; one will find the trouts' food to consist
chiefly of spiders, diverse beetles, the larvae of the caddis
(sedge) fly, and dragon fly. Running water contains a supply
of food fairly regularly, if not plentifully, which accounts
for the fact that trout appear to be on the feed much more
frequently in rough water than in the quieter places where
food is not constantly carried.
It may be safely asserted, I think, that trout never rise,
at least in our streams, unless there is food for them on the
top of, or just over the water, but it does not necessarily
follow that they will rise because there is an abundance of
fly about. They may have something more appetising in the
water, or may be. satiated with previous feeding. The
"wanton sportiveness" of trout is only a poetic hallucination.
From close observation when they are jumping, I have come
to the conclusion that they are then feeding on the "caviare,"
the "no see-ums" of the American Indians—tiny duns or
midges, almost invisible to the eye.


CHAPTER V.
FLIES.
"The jealous trout that low did lie
Rose to the well-dissembled fly."
—SIR HENRY WOTTON.
I approach this subject with some degree of diffidence,
not because I do not feel sure of my ground, but because I
recognise that there are many other grounds equally as sure
as mine. The last three words of the above quotation apply
not only to the form and colour of the fly, but to the manner
in which it is presented to the fish.
All experienced anglers will agree that the latter proposi-
tion is the real essential, for, given the most lifelike
imitation, it is as naught unless you know how to use it.
Take two anglers: one has selected an indifferent fly at
random, but has a knowledge of the habits of trout and can
cast a long and accurate line making his fly fall softly.
Another has the most seductive fly and casts indifferently.
The former will score best; therefore, if one man excels
over others, the secret, generally speaking, is not so much
in the fly he uses as his angling qualifications. Neverthe-
less, the odd trick falls to the angler who observes every
little detail; then it is that a knowledge of entomology is
advantageous, enabling the angler to enjoy refinement in
the sport unknown to his more casual fellow-angler.
Not the least important qualifications of anglers are faith
and perseverance. Supposing you fish with a fly you have
no faith in, you cast carelessly, flopping your line down any-
how, not searching out likely spots if they give you trouble
to reach; you have no enthusiasm, and probably fill your
pipe, sit down with very little interest in fishing, and wonder
why you left home. Your fly is not on the water half the
time, you distrust it, and once having become discontented,
you are hard to please, and try fly after fly but do not give
any of them a fair show.
On the other hand, you may have had a good day with, or
a fancy for, a particular fly, and you start feeling that it is
the fly. You mount it carefully on your best cast, and
because you feel that the trout favour it as much as you do,


you drop it tenderly; you crawl through river reeds, tea-
tree, over slippery rocks and through deep water that makes
you gasp, you hang out over dark pools clutching some
tree limb in the most risky position, just to demonstrate what
an irresistible fly it is, and so you fish many of the spots
that have been missed by others, and withal the fly is cun-
ningly placed and the action of the natural fly well
dissembled; so you gather up unconsidered treasure.
One instance more notable than others comes to my mind
Two anglers set out one day, both using a "Joseland's
favourite." Up to lunch time one had caught twice as many
as the other. After lunch the less successful went across
the river, and finding some trout feeding on very small flies,
changed his fly to a small black gnat. This proved to be
too small to firmly hold the fish, so a medium size coch-y-
-bonddu was substituted and excellent sport resulted in nine
brace of nice fish. As the anglers approached in the even-
ing, the successful man of the morning was seen to be fishing
only intermittently and half heartedly. On their meeting
again on the same side of the river and comparing notes, the
man with nine brace asked the other what luck he had had;
the reply was, "No luck, I lost your fly and could do no good.
I put on a coch-y-bonddu, but they would not look at it."
"Why, that's the fly I have been using all the afternoon!"
was the rejoinder.
Returning from a trip, I met a brother angler who, whilst
showing me his book, remarked that a particular fly was
no good. I had found that fly very good. Thus, much
depends upon whether you believe in a fly or not.
In Australia "the fly on the water" is very little indication
of what to mount. There is rarely a marked rise of
ephemeridae, excepting extremely small duns, 100 small to be
of use. One sees occasionally, about December, a fly
resembling an English May fly, which has been named the
"Great Red Spinner"; lam not sure whether it is an imago
or sub-imago, that is, one of the ephemeridae in its first
or second stage after development from the pupa. One of
our best known and most beautiful of the ephemeridae I
have named the "Black Spinner"; but our trout's larder is
most cosmopolitan and appears to consist of any living insect
that it can swallow. I have found in trout, pieces of stick,
tea-tree blossom and willow leaves.


-
t '' . !
j0k *
1


One of the most killing flies is the "Bredbo," and this, I
think, may lay claim to being the first artificial locally made
fly. The original was tried at Jindabyne about 1896, by
Mr. C. R. Burnside and Dr. A. J. Brady, who with myself
may be said to be among the pioneers of fly fishing for
trout in New South Wales. It was, however, not generally
recognised that our trout would take the artificial fly freely
till about five years later. In those days the few anglers who
visited or resided on the streams used little else but the
natural grasshopper.
From the first, however, I generally used to attach an
artificial fly as a dropper, but not for three years did I ever
hook a fish on it. The fly then taken was one of my own
making, I at once took off the hopper and put on another
artificial fly as a tail fly and at almost the next cast was into
another trout. From that time I do not think I have ever
caught a trout on a hopper. Then by studying the food of
the fish more closely I began to look about for likely insects
to imitate, and hit upon sundry hoppers, beetles, and wasps,
which have been enlarged upon from time to time; the
spinners and ephemeridae being the result of studying Mr.
Halford's Dry Fly Entomology.
The flies of my own fancy which I can recommend, many
of which are in common use, I give herewith, as they may
not always be available to my readers. Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6
and 9in the list are my patterns. The method of dressing
flies is described later.
TABLE OF FLIES.
1. "JOSELAND'S FAVOURITE" (wet fly).
Body: Buff seal's fur, ribbed with gold twist.
Hackle: Dark claret.
Legs (tail) : Pig's bristles dyed claret.
Wings: Light speckled turkey.
Under wings: Yellow, tipped with black.
2. "AUSTRAL" (wet fly).
Body: Hare's fur, ribbed silver twist.
Hackle: Light brown.
Tail: Light red fibres.
Wings: Light turkey.
Under wings: Kingfisher blue.


3. "BROWN ANT" (wet or dry).
Body. Seal's or 'possum's fur.
Hackle: Reddish brown.
4. HOPPER HACKLE (wet or dry).
Body: Raffia grass over kapok.
Hackle: Partridge.
Under hackle : Golden pheasant (or yellow hackle)
Tail: Claret bristles.
5. CLARET HACKLE (wet or dry).
Body : Claret fur.
Hackle : Black and white (badger).
6. ORANGE WASP (wet or dry).
Body : Black fur, tipped with orange,
Hackle: Dyed orange.
Wings : Orange hackle tip.
Head : Black ostrich.
7. GREAT RED SPINNER (wet fly).
Body: Light red fur.
Hackle: Red.
Wings: Grizzled hackle, dyed red.
Tail: Red fibres.
8. BLACK SPINNER (wet fly).
Body: Mulberry floss silk, ribbed with quill of
peacock herl.
Hackle: Black.
Wings: Grizzled hackle tips.
Tail: Stripped fibre of peacock herl
9. TUROSS (wet or dry).
Body: Grey-green fur.
Hackle: Cinnamon.
Wings: Buff orpington.
No. 4, in various sizes and dressed wet or dry, is killing
on almost all occasions and is the one fly that should always
be in the book.


The above have been made by Hardy, of Alnwick, and
Ogden of Cheltenham.
My book also contains the following flies:—
"Expert," dressed as claret and mallard, but with red
tip and very dark claret fur body and hackle; size 6-8.
Large and small Coch-y-bonddu, various palmer's and
Hoffland's fancy, tea-tree, Ogden's invicta, and a few small
quills and sedges, to which may be added spent May flies,
coachman, governor, march brown, if one must indulge in
a few needless luxuries.
I would recommend, however, the inclusion of a few
standard small salmon and Irish lake flies.
A gingdr palmer with silver tinsel is very useful, wet or
dry.
There is much that is illogical in divers theories on flies:
One man is a stickler for exact imitation in colour and form,
forgetting that no fly was ever hatched with a barbed steel
appendage. Another dry fly man calmly mutilates grass-
hopper flies, having them dressed as ephemeridae, or a third
makes some trivial change such as cutting off a few fibres.
When making up a cast of flies for wet fly fishing select so
that you may have a change of colour, a "hopper hackle,"
for instance, for a dropper or upper fly, and an "expert" for
the tail fly. I seldom use two flies, usually only one. Experi-
ence teaches that the tail fly is generally taken in preference
to the dropper; there are often compensations, such as less
liability of entanglement, in using only one fly.
It has been during the short evening rise, after a hot
summer's day in which the rivers have appeared lifeless,
and in the late afternoon rise, on the still glides at Easter
time, that I have been at fault in my selection of flies. I
am fairly sure that tiny duns have been answerable for the
commotion of the fish in the water; and I have been most
successful then with small quills and sedges.
Since writing the above, I witnessed an extraordinary
rise of duns (ephemeridae), on the 7th and Bth of Novem-
ber. In the middle of the first day clouds of small duns
hatched out on the Murrumbidgee and were wafted along
by the breeze. The rapid water over which they passed,how-
ever, was barren of trout, as a fresh had, I feel sure, driven
the rainbows to the deep eddies at the head of the pools.


In one of the eddies the following evening, after a hot day,
and as soon as the water was overshadowed through the
sun disappearing behind a hill, larger duns, with grey bodies,
emerged mysteriously in clouds from the water, and at once
a number of trout broke the surface, chiefly with tails
showing. The fact that they would not take my counter-
feit till it had sunk, indicated that they were feeding on the
pupae as they rose to the surface before emerging in the
beautiful fairy forms of the sub-imago, or first state of their
flying existence. A collection of these flies would have re-
vealed many types synonymous with those of the English
rivers.
A year later fishing in the same water, the reason for the
rise of duns in this particular spot was very apparent; a
very low river had left a bed of water weeds exposed,
whilst around was chiefly sand and mud. The pupae of the
duns had existed in the mud gathered round the weeds.
At this time, too, after all day fishing water that appeared
to hold but little life, and with only a half-hearted rise or
two, the day promised to be blank, save for the pleasure we
had derived from watching graceful bee-eaters sail down
to pick an occasional butterfly out of the air round the wil-
lows under which we had rested. The sea breeze beat heavily
upon the last pool we reached, fished by all the township,
and here, marvellous to relate, in a few minutes, we rose
fish after fish and accounted for five fine rainbows before
darkness came on.


CHAPTER VI.
CASTING THE ELY.
"Now deftly drop a fly beneath that tea-tree bush,
Intently watch it float, you" 11 surely get a rise.
Ah! now a rainbow sees it, takes it with a rush!
Steady as he plunges! You've got him! What a prize."
To those who have used rods from their boyhood upwards,
the awkwardness of many novices who take up the sport
late in life is hard to understand. Some, however, show
themselves apt from the first; after a little practice, all they
need to make themselves good fly fishers is the added
knowledge of trout lore. Love of rural nature must almost
be a passion before one can become really proficient in the
sport, as I have already endeavoured to show.
I remember reading in some book on Golf, the recom-
mendation, that after trying a few strokes, the beginner
should take his clubs and spend days swinging them so as
to get used to handling them. This advice might well be
adopted in the case of learning to use a rod, either for fly
work, spinning or beach casting. So much depends on wrist
work that unless one has mastered the control of the rod by
the wrist, one cannot become an adept at fly casting.
The rod must be grasped firmly with the hand, the thumb
extending up the handle, and as a preliminary, using the
wrist only at first, the rod should be waved or sprung verti-
cally, horizontally and diagonally, so as to cast in every con-
ceivable direction, making the rod work or bend to its utmost.
Never fear breaking it, a rod that would break under wrist
action alone is better broken.
Next, one should use the forearm from the elbow, com-
bined with the wrist action; stretching out with the whole
arm, in addition, is only necessary if desiring to reach the
greatest distance possible. If you watch any good fly fisher
make a long cast, it may seem that he is casting with his
whole arm, whereas he is using the arm chiefly to get dis-
tance, the impetus to the line being the forced spring of the
rod caused by the action of the wrist and fore arm.
The question of the best kind of rod to use is gone into in
a later chapter, but an equally important item, the line, must


be briefly discussed before actual practice is commenced.
Assuming that an ordinary ten foot greenheart or cane
rod is being used, attach a reel of about two and a half
inches in diameter to the butt, with the handle to the left, not
to the right. (It is just as well to get into the most handy
way of using it at once.)
As an experiment, pass a line of thin thread through the
rings and about twice the length of the rod beyond; then try
to cast it straight in front. It will be almost impossible, show-
ing at once that a light line is useless; therefore do not com-
mence with too light a line, it will only disappoint.
If you can beg a length of old plaited silk oiled line from
a friend who knows the right weight, use this in preference
to a new line. The length of line to begin casting with
should be about 30 feet. To the running line tie a couple
of yards of strong gut cast, with a medium sized fly at the
end of the gut. Now to show you what you must not do when
fishing, try and crack the line as a whip. In order to do so,
you must return the line sharply in the opposite direction to
which it has been cast, before the line has become fully
extended.
Convince yourself how the error of cracking is accom-
plished and then try and cast so as to avoid it. You will find
that the line must extend behind, not quite to its fullest,
before making the forward cast and before imparting the
full strength you desire.
Keep the line in play or life, that is, no part must be dead,
or without movement. This point is the most important in
retrieving either for the backward or forward cast, and
whether you practise on grass or water, always see that
there is no slack in the line; therefore, for that purpose either
raise the rod point or draw in a little line through the rings
with the left hand (this can only be done in retrieving the
forward cast) before imparting spring to the rod necessary
to throw the line backwards. For the forward cast, bring
the rod slowly forward about a yard, then force it. It is
slackness of the line in retrieving that causes so many
failures, and the consequent loss of many an opportunity on
the streams.
It is very important to note that the rod, in the back cast,
should extend back but a little beyond the vertical, and the
forward cast should have expended all its force when the


rod is at about an angle of 45 degrees, though it may be low-
ered to the horizontal, following the drop of the line, in
order to let the fly fall softly.
The reel line should be oiled plaited silk, forty yards long,
with thirty yards of backing of thin, strong thread. The
weight of the reel line should depend partly on the strength
of the rod or the particular class of fishing in view, but for
ordinary fly work a No. 2, or 3 trout line, level or tapered,
should be procured.
A double tapered line is heavy in the middle and fine at
both ends, weight in the centre being necessary in order to
enable one to drive into wind, or for long distances.
Learning to cast with both right and left hand is advo-
cated by some, but one rarely finds the necessity for this,
provided that one can cast back-handed with the right, i.e.,
bring the rod across the body to the left and throw to the
right. This, if well and accurately done, is a pretty accom-
plishment and very useful.
Shooting the line is a fairly modern innovation. For this
purpose the line must be greased with mutton or deer fat.
A length of line is drawn off the reel and held in the left hand,
or some of it may trail on the ground or water. When the
line during the impetus of the forward cast is pulling, the
slack portion is released enabling the loose line to shoot
through the rings.
Dry fly anglers invariably shoot a few feet and it is advan-
tageous on almost all occasions, especially when there is not
room for a free back cast. If the line is going out too
quickly, causing the cast to be falling too heavily, the defect
may be remedied by letting out a little slack, whilst if the
cast is not falling fast enough, or has a tendency to hang in
the air, or to be carried upwards by the wind, it may be
brought down by pulling in the line a foot or so.
A word of caution is necessary in regard to shooting the
line. In actual fishing it may be over-done, and through an
excess of line being off the reel, the line may tangle, or not
being absolutely free to run, may result in a jerk or stop in
the event of a strong fish bolting; or in a long cast, a fish,
when struck, especially a rainbow, may rush in so fast that
one has perforce to gather in line by hand. Many a fish has
regained its liberty under these conditions; therefore, it is


important to manipulate the slack so that one can readily
maintain command of the line with the reel. This is one of
the advantages of learning to wind the reel with the left
hand whilst holding the rod with the right.
When fishing in a very strong following wind, it is not
necessary, and sometimes impossible, to make a back cast.
The line is rolled over from side to side with a sharp lift
and arched forward sweep of the rod.
When casting against a strong wind, keep the rod low
with a side or back-hand cast, and shoot a yard or two.
In order to get well under bushes on an opposite bank,
cast deliberately and slowly, especially in the forward cast,
giving the fly time to drop gradually, or it will fall too high
and catch in the branches.
One should not let much of the reel line touch the
water in short casting up stream in a fair current; if done,
it will probably mean a slack and clumsy lump of line on the
water which it will be difficult to recover quickly enough to
strike efficiently or cast again cleanly at once in case of a
sudden rise; also because with a slack line you cannot imitate,
with the dropper, the action of a fly bobbing on the water —a
deadly bit of manoeuvring.
Until fairly master of the rod and line, it is well to cast
down, and across, stream, with the wind at your back if
possible. You are able thus to command a fairly long line
and to reach the fish without scaring them, more easily than
if you attempt to put the fly over them up stream. Keep out
of sight as much as you can by stalking the fish from behind
any favouring shelter. Try to keep a straight line without
drag on it, i.e., do not hold or pull the fly against the current
so as to cause the water to ruffle. In order to do this you
must not drop the rod too far at the finish of the cast; keep
a little in hand to gradually follow the movement of the fly,
pay out line with the current, thus following the fly down
without drag to where a fish may lie. There are exceptions
to this rule of avoiding drag, which I allude to later on under
"Working the Fly." When one has become proficient,
up-stream casting may be adopted.
When fishing in quiet, deep water under bushes, drop the
fly close to the bush; if you are behind the bush, never mind
about looking to see where the fly falls, but be sure that


jjjjl
Vt: -" " '■■■-■*F^' : '■■/■
Goodradigbee River.


Goobragandra River.


Photo by Dr. Barrington.
Tuross River.


A Ribbony Gum, Big Badja.
«*


your tackle is working well, for a good fish may rush you,
and if anything should catch, a break may occur, and the
air become clouded with your invectives.
Although I am averse to grasshopper fishing, it is inter-
esting to note that trout will often take the natural insect
in full sight of the angler, whilst they generally refuse the
artificial fly under similar conditions. The artificial,
accompanied by suspicious circumstances, such as the
unusual sight of an angler or his tackle, seems to alarm
them.
Why then, it may be asked, should the fly at any time be
preferred by anglers to the natural bait? To my mind it is,
firstly, that it gives considerable satisfaction that it has been
possible, by art, to produce the semblance of a fly which
deceives the fish, especially if the fly be of one's own make;
and one of the refinements of the sport is to acquire the
art of fly dressing. Next there is the pleasure of the pretti-
ness of the well-filled book of dainty flies, of the storing
up of well-used and successful flies for future comparisons,
discussions and remembrances.
All these features contrast favourably with the trouble
and time occupied in searching for the natural bait, perhaps
at a time, too, when fish are rising fast during a short
period only. In the course of a day, the artificial fly may
be made to cover far more water than that which could be
fished with the more frail, real insect. Finally, with grass-
hoppers, any unskilled person can catch our trout, and no
true sportsman desires to be classed with them.
Just as in other sports, experts have different styles, so
the novice at fly-casting may develop his own, always pro-
vided that he observes one absolutely unalterable rule, viz.,
that he must learn to use his wrist to force the spring out
of the rod. Beginners often will persist in swinging the rod
with the whole arm in a complete semicircle, the rod almost
touching the water behind and in front; although they may
have some success when trout are plentiful, they cannot get
out a long line, and I have never known them consistently to
make good bags. Generally speaking, the necessity for fine
casting and fine tackle is not so great on our Australian
waters as in England, rainbows being more voracious, and
less fished over here than there, and also because the natural


food of the fish does not consist to anything like the same
extent of such dainty and delicate insects. Grasshoppers,
beetles, wasps, dragon flies, and moths, which constitute
their chief surface food, have a habit of flopping on the
water in a most undignified and emphatic manner, as though
to advertise their presence. Still, the best bags, in the long
run, go to the best fisherman, and if for no other reason,
the pleasure of qualifying in all the niceties of the art should
be sufficient to lead any would-be angler to try and excel so
as to feel at home on any waters in the world, should
occasion give the chance to sample some of them; therefore,
cultivate the use of fine tackle and delicate action.
One word as to hooking your fish. In nearly all fishing
the action implied by the term "striking" is misleading One
should simply raise the rod sufficiently to feel if the fish
has taken the fly or bait; if so, on occasion it may be
advisable to use a little more pressure to drive the hook home,
though usually the fish will do that in its resistance. More
fish are lost through striking hard than by just feeling if
the fish has made contact. If not hooked, cast immediately
where you think the fish is. A trout, especially a rainbow,
will sometimes come three or four times, but be sure not to
pester the fish; if it shows shyness, give the place another
trial after a good rest.
Remember, the best kind of hook is a sharp one, so look
constantly at the point. In stony and rocky country, where
a long cast is required, one is apt unconsciously to let the
fly touch the stones in the back cast, which may break off the
barb. Anglers have often pointed out to me the inferior
quality of hooks, when really their careless casting has been
to blame.


CHAPTER VII.—WORKING THE FLY.
As a general rule, especially when fishing for Salmo fario
or S. levenensis in quiet water (and they are seldom
found in the rough water of our streams), also for rainbows
in still water, I let the fly fall and lie on the water as
naturally as possible, preferring to cast frequently rather
than to draw the fly along the surface, or through the water.
Brown and Loch Leven trout, undoubtedly are generally
scared by any unnatural movement, and to try it is only to
court failure. Should you see a fish roaming in quiet water
and you fail to attract, wait till it has moved away; if not
frightened, it will almost certainly come back after it has
done the round of its swim, usually in the course of a minute
or so. Having marked its circuit cast your fly and float it,
if possible, in the course you think that fish will take; wait
absolutely still (calmly if possible) and very probably you
will have the satisfaction of seeing your quarry deliberately
approach, its great lips open, and your fly disappear. This
is one of the most trying moments to an angler. The tempta-
tion will be to strike hard and quickly. Don't do that; but
strike deliberately, raising the rod point without undue
haste, and be prepared for a rush, your reel line being well
under control. I have lost good fish through impetuosity at
such a time.
When casting on smooth glides above the top of rapids
and anywhere your experience teaches you trout are likely
to have their haunts, observe the rule to float your fly with
no resistance. In all trout fishing in quiet waters, this
practice is so recognised as to have become almost an axiom.
Yet there are exceptions, and the relating of three notable
experiences, among others, will give a hint which may save
your returning with an empty creel.
Fishing for rainbows on the Upper Queanbeyan in
November, 1905, a local angler accompanied me one morning,
and grassed only one fish to my six. My explanation to
him was that he had worked or dragged his fly, whilst I
had floated mine naturally. The next morning we each
adopted similar tactics respectively; the results were
reversed.
One day when fishing, on the Snowy, also for rainbows,
I had only taken one fish in four hours from water which,


I felt sure, was fairly stocked. As an experiment I put on a
salmon fly at the tail. I cast across the stream and worked
the fly rapidly; I at once rose a fish which chased the fly,
and at the third cast was hooked. To my surprise the fish
had taken the dropper, which I had left on, a red palmer with
gold twist. Immediately after I took three more fish in the
same way, all on the dropper. I have repeated the experi-
ment other days with a like result. It was the change of
method and not of flv that took the trick on these occasions.
Yet why is the small dropper taken instead of the salmon
fly ? Either because it comes into view first or the fish takes
it for an insect being chased by a small fish and is excited
into snatching it first.
Rather remarkably, an old angling friend of mine, whom
I had not seen for many years, and who in the meantime
had fished a good deal in America, proceeded to reveal to
me a tip, viz., that he had repeatedly had an experience
which proved to be exactly similar to that just related and
which I had proved about the same time in another part of
the world. I often wonder if the Blagdon Lake trout, in
England, would appreciate this manoeuvre!
Some local Monaro anglers always use large flies, sunk
and drawn, and thus take large fish in the Big Badja, Tuross,
Queanbeyan, and similar still streams. This, however, to
my mind, is not the most artistic or pleasant fishing and I
never would adopt it except occasionally when the fish
cannot be attracted by orthodox fly fishing. The fly, in
these instances, is evidently taken for some water insect or
small fish.
The use of spinning head fly has unfortunately too firm
a hold in N.S.W. Like most spinning, it tends to destroy
immature fish and disturbs the water for other anglers.
To me it seems unnecessary and can in no wise compare
with fly fishing.
Fishing in the quiet bend of the river just above Jindabyne
one morning, when a stiff, warm northerly wind was blow-
ing, I floated a huge palmer of black, yellow and orange on
the'dancing wavelets. I was just about to give up when
up came a nice rainbow and hooked on. I cast again but
the fly lay sodden on the water. Nothing happened till I
began to retrieve the line when up came another trout. By


adopting the same plan again and working the fly a little
I rose seven and went back to the hotel with four nice fish.
It was difficult to induce a fish to look at a fly on this water
in other conditions.
THE BIG BADGA.
Oh! stream of many moods,
Older than thought can span,
You flowed through these old woods
Ere birth of man.
Quenching the thirst of birds,
Badger and wallaby,
Timid kangaroo herds
Mercifully.
Drowning the sleet and snow,
Ruffing under a breeze,
Mirroring sunset glow,
Mimicking trees.
Halting in rock-bound pool,
Sleeping in summer heat,
Seeking your rest in cool,
Shady retreat.
Swelled by the fall of rain,
Merry you raced along
Shallows that sang again
A soothing song.
You rose on grassy mead,
Creeping over the bank;
Bending the slender reed
Or herbage rank.


Foaming o'er boulder bed,
Leaping a cliff of rock,
Roaring through gorge ahead
Like thunder-shock.
Hiding 'neath bushes green,
Sparkling in summer light,
Dancing in silver sheen
Of pale moonlight.
Now you harbour the fish,
Showing a rainbow gleam;
Fulfil my utmost wish,
An angler's dream!


CHAPTER VIII.—THE ROD.
The chief consideration, apart from expense, is the most
useful length and weight; in both of these points constant
modification has taken place during recent years, till at the
present time it seems that the best makers have arrived at
perfection.
For inexpensive rods of some durability, nothing can excel
greenheart, though probably some of our own timbers, care-
fully selected, such as Australian spotted gum, ironbark,
and grey gum, which I have experimented with, may
approach it.
Greenheart for first-class rods has many adherents. In
point of resilience and casting power, when new it is good.
One drawback to its use in Australia is that our hot and
variable climate is apt to play all sorts of pranks with it.
I have never seen a greenheart rod keep its shape for more
than a season or two, under these trying conditions; there-
fore, if one wants a straight rod it would be necessary to
renew every two or three years.
Greenheart has a reputation for breaking off short; when
a fracture occurs, it will nearly always be found that the
cause is a cross or waved grain, which should have been
discovered in the shop and the rod rejected.
All rods are liable to break off at the ferrule, the reason
being that the working of the rod breaks the varnish at the
junction of the wood and metal and allows the damp to
enter, or that water gets down the ferrule and soaks into
the wood behind the varnish, thus causing rot. To guard
against this, varnish these places with best carriage copal
varnish occasionally.
If out of shape, rods should have the rings stripped off
and then be fitted together as straight as possible and re-
ringed. A rod may be made almost as good as new in this
way, though its lost spring cannot be entirely restored.
In these days of tournament casting, one aspect of the
rod is too much overlooked, i.e., the yielding quality when
playing a fish.
Notwithstanding the reduced weight and length of modern
rods, there is a tendency to make them stiff so as to obtain
more power, and in dry fly fishing, rapidity of action, so
as to dry the fly quickly.


Some of these modern rods (I refer chiefly to built cane),
are altogether too hard on fine tackle and the line leaves the
rod top at an angle instead of a gradual bow, when even a fair
fish is pulling hard. The rod does not respond sufficiently to
the strain on it; it feels too harsh and one does not experience
the same pleasure as when it is well bowed in graceful
continuation with the line.
Rod and tackle should be a shade too light rather than
too powerful for the occasion. This is one of the secrets
of exacting the fullest gratification out of the sport, in all
branches of rod fishing.
When selecting a built cane rod, look at the fittings. If
first-class, they are generally a guarantee that the maker has
not wasted inferior material and workmanship on it.
Occasionally well built and sound cane may be found in a
cheap rod; in fact, a friend of mine says that one of his
best rods cost only 15/- originally, but it was re-ringed,
re-ferruled, and bound more closely by himself.
I, for years, had a prejudice against steel-centred rods.
It appeared to me that the addition of metal must add
unnecessary weight, whilst the amount of steel was so small
that it was stiffened by the cane, rather than that it stiffened
the cane. However, opinions differ so much on this subject,
that I will pursue it no further than to state my experience.
Using an Allcock's first-quality steel-centre built cane,
which cost about six pounds, and with only half an hour's
preliminary practice with it, I scored highest in delicacy and
accuracy in a competition of the N.S.W. Rod Fishers'
Society, in 1908. With the same rod Mr. C. F. Lindeman
won the first long-distance tournament ever held in Australia.
As we were both inexperienced in competition work, I attri-
bute our success greatly to the beautiful working of the rod.
While in England, in 1907, a friend asked me to try his
"Hardy's Perfection," two-joint, steel-centre built cane rod.
It was 10ft. long, and for trout fishing quite fascinated me.
A rod of this type, with or without steel centre, I consider
suitable for our average trout fishing.
That these "Perfection" rods are capable of sustaining
great strain is proved by the fact that one I selected for the
late Mr. A. E. D'Arcy, used in one of the record catches of
trout from a river running into Lake Taupo, N.Z., landed


many rainbows averaging 9lbs. and up to 21 lbs. weight.
The rod was sound and straight and quite good throughout
after this performance.
One great disadvantage of a steel-centred is that it cannot
be spliced. I have spliced plain built cane tops quite
successfully.
It may be urged that the length of a two-joint rod is
objectionable in travelling, but my experience has been that
this so-called drawback is rather a safeguard, inasmuch as
the rod has to be specially looked after and generally finds
an unusually safe place in train, coach or motor.
One learns better to appreciate good rods after making a
few one's self.
If funds are limited, spend the extra cost of steel centred
over plain built cane, in a superior line or reel. Specially
built tournament, whether English or American make, are
seldom ideal fishing rods. Some of my inexperienced friends
have handicapped themselves with second-hand heavy
tournament rods; dear at any price for pleasurable sport.
When selecting a rod, it is always best to obtain the advice
of an accomplished and experienced angler. Do not be
content with an examination in the shop, but take two or
three rods and try each with a suitable line. It is astonishing
what unsuspected faults are discovered thus. Listen for any
click as it bends and feel for any looseness of fittings and
trace the cause.
Snake rings, after long trial, I have abandoned; they are
apt to jamb the line in the acute V which they form with
the rod. Strong upright rings are preferable, so are also the
oval eyes fitted into snake rings, with which many firms
now mount their best rods. The eye at rod tip and first
ring from the reel are best lined with agate.
Most high-quality English rods are fitted with some
description of lock joint. The best American rods usually
have plain suction joints and I really cannot see the necessity
for any other, providing that the ferrule and counter fit
accurately. It is difficult to obtain in Australia first-class
ferrules of the size required if repairing or making a rod;
therefore, in the latter case, a plain splice is perhaps prefer-
able. It can be fixed almost as quickly as a ferrule joint,


and, where one has one's rod together for many days, is less
trouble and is always easy to undo, whereas ferrules some-
times stick and may ruin a rod. Of course, this joint can
only apply to a solid wood rod. It is more fully described in
the chapter on Rod Making.
One of my companions took a beautiful little 502. 9ft.
greenheart rod to the Snowy, but found it wanting on such
a stream.
There are, however, a few pretty little streamlets in our
high altitudes, feeding the bigger rivers. They invite one
to wander beside their courses away up the valleys into
unfrequented country. Here, lightly accoutred with fairy
wand, one could imagine one's self on some Devonshire
Moorland beck; but as our Fisheries authorities in their
wisdom have made one standard of 10 inches for our many
rivers, the 40Z. troutlings plentiful therein, live on undis-
turbed except by cormorants, fish hawks and poachers.


THE LAUGHING EU-E-CUMBENE,
Thou wanderer! Thou busy, laughing stream!
Born of the winter snows, by tempests blown,
Which stir thy springs to life, like childhood's dream
Visioning larger worlds, as yet unknown.
Thy bubbling springs send tiny singing rills
To coyly hide in verdant, marshy ground;
They intermingle on the plains, where hills
Of mellow blue and foliage soft surround.
Thy gathered strength invades the mountain gorge,
Chanting with louder voice a joyous strain;
Thou roarest o'er rough rocks, as when a forge
Sets coals aglow and scatters golden rain.
Like wine, thy waters sparkle in a pool,
And swirl through gutters cut in rugged reef;
Sliding, with smoothed, face, o'er pebbles cool,
Where light and shadow play in strong relief.
In hollows deep, where dredges sought for gold,
And scattered rounded shingle stones, high heaped;
Where disappointed men, thy wealth untold
Of beauty, never saw, but left unreaped,
Thy quiet waters halt as though in pain.
With sorrow stricken mien pass slowly by;
Then quickening, they hasten on again;
Revived, they glisten 'neath a summer sky.
With turn and loop, thou wend'st through tussock plain,
With leap and ripple, 'neath a mountain, glide.
Oh, may thy waters purity retain!
Again I long to wander by thy side!
Oh! may thy charms for aye unsullied be,
So men, oppressed by cares of city strife,
May in thy presence find relief, and see
Pleasures that strew the quiet paths of life.


CHAPTER IX.—DRY FLY.
So far I have been dealing with what I may describe as
the ordinary fly rod, one that is most suitable for our fishing,
which may be likened to the North of England and Scotch
fishing, in contradistinction to the South of England chalk
stream dry fly fishing. We have no dry fly rivers of the
English type, such as the Test, in Australia, though many
of our streams have quiet waters where the dry fly
enthusiast may ply his craft.
A rod for dry fly work must be built more stiffly than the
ordinary fly rod, and as quick movement backwards and
forwards is necessary to dry the fly in the air, more bindings
should be put on to counteract the extra strain. The
increased stiffness in build means extra weight and less
yielding quality, which I have already objected to in general
work, though the essence of dry fly fishing in relation to this
should not be overlooked.
The dry fly purist as he has been somewhat facetiously
termed (extremist would be a better word) may be deemed
by some fastidious in his taste. But it is really all a question
of degree; he regards the wet or sunk fly angler somewhat
in the same light in which the wet fly man regards one who
fishes with artificial minnow or natural bait, and anglers of
the sink or swim (wet fly) methods are apt to compare the
efficacy of their methods with those of the dry fly fisherman.
The latter declines all comparisons and simply urges that he
does not want to catch a quantity of fish, but that his sole
object is to mark down the finest fish of the stream to try
his skill on. With considerable justification, he claims that
he thus preserves the smaller and immature fish. As he
usually deals with the largest fish, his rod responds to their
play in proportion, therefore, as the more supple rod bends
to the smaller average of fish which necessarily come to the
wet fly fisherman.
The purist's creed is to wait for the fish to rise before he
begins to cast, and he finds as much pleasure in his own
particular practice as he wants. He is generally, too, a man
of a fair amount of leisure, who has fishing facilities at his
command and so can choose his weather. The purist, how-
ever, does not monopolise all the dry fly work. Many of
the disciples of the art who have to make the best of their


less favourable opportunities bring their lore and intuition
regarding the habits of trout into play; if trout rings are
absent, owing to dearth of natural flies, they cunningly
dissemble with the floating artificial to such purpose as to
cause an occasional fish to rise.
Taken to its ultimate issue, is this not, after all, the very
highest skill to which fly fishing can be carried? Whether
that be so or not, I know from my own experience on English
streams, that there is an intense fascination in floating a fly
over likely water and watching it sail along. The pleasure
culminating in the event of a pair of lips suddenly appearing
and the sucking under of the fly. It is more absorbing than
paying attention to the rising fish only, and is often the only
way to make a bag. One must be more alert to strike at the
right moment on these particular occasions than on any
other.
Dry fly work in Australia is easier than in England, where
the atmosphere is often so moist that much trouble has to
be taken in drying, oiling, and changing the fly to make it
float. The climate of our trout stream country is so dry and
the atmosphere usually so warm that in an average cast,
especially if a long one, the fly is bereft of moisture so that
it often floats without any special effort or application of
oil. Provided one selects a good "floater," the troublesome
oiling process is therefore unnecessary.
Medium and large red palmers or a coch-y-bonddu dressed
with double hackles on hooks No. 3 to 7 are the safest flies
to carry for both rainbow and brown trout dry fly work.
A few ginger and other quills dressed on nothing less than
O hooks are useful at times, especially just at sundown;
but I remember I once had great success among the brown
trout, one bright morning, with a stubby little fly with a
thick, black body, black hackle and brown wing, perhaps a
Welshman's button.
Sir Edward Grey says, "It is better to throw and float
the wrong fly really well than to bungle the right one"; and
the most expert dry fly angler I know says, "Give me any
fly you like so long as it will float." The best brown trout
I have caught took a huge floater made of the colours of the
Belgian flag!


Both in wet and dry fly work, when approaching a fish
from below, I never like to drop the fly right in front of the
fish, but rather a little to one side and about level with its
head, so that the gut is not so much in evidence.


CHAPTER X.—REELS AND NETS.
An exhaustive criticism on the divers makes of reels is
unnecessary; the principles guiding the selection (apart
from workmanship) are summed up in the general concensus
of opinion that the fly rod reel, when filled with line, should
be in proportion to the weight of the rod. It should balance
the rod, resting across the finger at about nine inches above
the reel seat. If it be too heavy, the tip of the rod will have
its weight apparently diminished, being overbalanced, and
therefore it will lose some of its driving power; if too light,
it will leave the rod top heavy, slower of action and tiresome
to wield.
For our climate, wooden Nottingham check reels are risky;
if used they should be well varnished or oiled inside and out,
but provided that one is lucky enough to obtain wood that
will not warp, one has a good, useful article, but it must be
fitted with a line guard. Two and a half to three and a half
inches are the mo„st useful sizes.
A great advantage of these reels is that they can be used
for almost any description of rod fishing, whether fly work,
spinning, beach casting, or boat fishing. The centre pin
Nottingham is the best; it costs from ten to twenty shillings.
Having been victimised, however, on one or two occasions,
through the wooden spool jambing, I advocate metal reels,
and among inexpensive reels one cannot go wrong in select-
ing a good plain bronzed brass reel known as the
"London" pattern. In no reel should the spool be less than
one inch clear width inside; I favour one inch and a quarter.
I have one of the best reels made, three and a quarter inches
diameter with three-quarter spool; but unless one winds in
carefully, the line is apt to pile up on one side or other and
fall over, causing a jamb. The frequency of this is a con-
stant source of annoyance; sometimes the line is injured
before it can be got to work properly again. The maker
has improved this pattern by increasing the width of the
spool; a regulating check has some slight advantage.
Hardy's No. 2 Silex is suitable both for fly fishing, spinning
and beach casting; for the latter, a specially strong spool is
necessary.
A trout reel should be well filled with line. This may be
regulated with the backing.


The Multiplier with crank handle is not likely to come into
favour for our fly fishing, especially when shooting the line
is adopted, as there is some risk of entanglement of line and
handle; besides in forcing one's way through thick shrub, the
projecting crank is more likely to catch than the simple,
close-fitting handle of the English pattern. Multiplying gear,
however, is often most desirable in tackling our fierce-
fighting rainbow trout in order to keep a tight line. One
has always to be on the look-out for a dash back right up
to the angler, at all times difficult to cope with. Our rainbows
often run out from 20 to 30 yards of line. I have had to
follow a 1 y 2 lb. fish for 100 yards.
Be cautious how you select a reel of metal combined with
vulcanite. If it takes your fancy, see that the vulcanite is
well protected, or it is liable to break.
With these guiding principles for fly reels I leave the
angler to follow his own judgment, adding the final warning
not to be led into purchasing something new and expensive
unless it is simple in action and has very marked advantages.
I have very decided opinion as to landing nets suitable
for Australia. After many years' experience, I have come
to the conclusion that nothing can come up to the Carter
folding net. For our fishing, however, it should be specially
made more strongly than usual.
The requirements are that the net and handle when
extended, should be strong enough to be used as a wading
staff, and also easily carried so as to give but little obstruc-
tion in getting through bushes. The staff may be from two
feet six to three feet four inches long up to the knuckle
joint, according to one's height, and of stiff bamboo or other
suitable wood, shod with brass. Above the knuckle joint
may be a further length of about Bin. of staff, on the top
of which should be a screw or other joint so that the net
can be detached for packing. The net ring is best of strong
bent wood.
With this arrangement a useful wading staff is formed
which, when folded, can be slipped into a ring or strap
provided on the creel, or if a bag be used, it can be simply
hooked over the bag strap. No separate metal hook should
be placed on the staff for attachment; in rough country or
rivers it is not sufficiently secure. With the simple tongued


Near Buckley's Crossing.


«r t* , . . * yh *» 7—f ; - fife
Thredbo River.


- 1 1'
Upper Queanbeyan River.


K|
• jm
4.
Snowy and Wullwye.


arrangement formed by the folding of the staff, it must be
lifted very high before it will fall out of its place, an event
which seldom happens in actual work. A wide joint admits
of the two halves of the net hanging close and straight,
whereas a narrow joint forces them apart at an angle
causing one or other to entangle in one's legs.
A telescopic net is obviously of no use for wading, though
otherwise it is the best procurable.
Carrying a spare rod-top in a net handle is a bad practice,
as the inside may get damp and so ruin the top.
A bag is more convenient than a creel for travelling,
taking up less room. Also it lies flatter to the side. On
occasions it is really useful in helping to keep rain off when
sheltering under our scant tree foliage.
Avoid rubber bags in a hot climate; fish will not keep in
such close, strong-smelling material.
The best bag is one of two or three absolutely separate
compartments hooked on to snap eyes on the strap —one
large one for fish, one smaller for tackle, and perhaps one for
lunch. Each can then be separately washed and easily turned
inside out for cleaning.


CHAPTER XI.—MINNOW AND BAIT FISHING.
It has always been my endeavour, ever since it was proved
that our trout would take the artificial fly, to discourage the
use of any other lure. I think I may justly claim, through
my example and teaching of many of my friends on the
Monaro, and the prominent part I took in forming the Rod
Fishers' Society of New South Wales, that I did more, in
the early days of our trout fishing, to popularise the art of
fly fishing in Australia than any other angler.
My chief object was that anglers should learn the delightful
sport so that they in turn would be anxious to preserve and
protect the fish until at least the rivers were well stocked.
In proportions to our numbers, I do not think that any
country has fewer anglers who use minnows and baits.
Worming, as practised in the Old Country, is practically
unknown here, partly because the rivers are not suitable and
worms not so easily obtainable; also because worming has
become so much a term of derision that no member of any
of our Angling Clubs would like to be associated with it.
I do not favour grasshopper fishing because I cannot help
classing those who indulge in it as wanting in the desire and
enthusiasm to acquire the more artistic, fascinating, and,
when mastered, usually more successful method of fly
fishing. Yet when one considers that but few of us can
snatch more than a couple of weeks away to the rivers each
year, it is not surprising that the desire to feel a good fish
on a rod does lead to the seductive grasshopper being used,
should the fly not yield satisfactory results.
When, however, anglers who can take fish with a fly
resort to bait fishing in order to capture an unnecessary
number of fish, or adopt any other method so that they
can make unnecessarily large bags, then righteous anger is
aroused in the breast of the true sportsman. Though not
likely to modify these views, I own that they may not appear
to all to be reasonable, especially when one considers similar
methods practised in the Old Country and actually advocated
by some of the best sportsmen there. I allude to "creeper"
(natural stone fly) and worm fishing. But when told, as
we have been time after time, by some who are visiting the
rivers that the fish will not take the artificial fly, and that it
is useless to use anything but the hopper or ground bait, we


know from experience that the information is not correct.
Provided that the water is in suitable condition, and weather
not too unfavourable, our trout will always rise to the fly,
properly presented, at some time of the day or other. Under
these circumstances, I think it unnecessary to enter into
details as to how to bait a hook, or to fish a stream with
worm or hopper.
Artificial minnow fishing does require considerable skill
and some special tackle. The rod should be stiffer, the line
thinner, and reel free running. Standard minnows are the
brown Devon, about one inch and a half long, and the
Phantom in many varieties. Above all these, the fly spoon
about half an inch long; is the handiest and easiest to carry
and use. It has a single hook and is not so likely to injure
or kill immature fish. I use this, however, only when fishing
for the pot, on such occasions as when camping, owing to
weather conditions, the fish are not rising to the fly. It can
be cast with the fly rod as in fly fishing, but more time should
be given in the back cast.
Real minnows or suitable small fish are not easily obtain-
able in our trout streams, so that Archer tackle or the like,
i.e., mounts for live or dead baits, are useless. If any of my
readers want a good, simple minnow, I recommend the
Piano-Convex from Hearder Bros., of Plymouth. They do
equally well for fresh or salt water.
Since writing the above I had occasion to use a Devon
as the water was too dirty for fly fishing. After running
about 30 fine fish and only hooking three, I concluded some-
thing was wrong, and on close observation I attributed the
failure to the hard metal fans, warding off the fish from
the hooks. I remedied this by cutting off the fans, removing
the two treble hooks from the split ring in the centre and
inserting a half moon-shaped piece of very thin pliable tin
from the inside of a tobacco box, through the split ring,
giving the necessary twist to cause the minnow to spin.
Having removed the original fans it was then possible to
fix two flying single hooks to lie against the head of the
minnow, attached to the trace about two inches above the
minnow. The light tin fans usually collapsed when a fish
struck and the single hooks also did their work well. I think
this rig much preferable to that of the ordinary Devon.


CHAPTER XII.—INDIGENOUS FISH AND FLY
FISHING FOR PERCH (BASS).
Before proceeding to give hints on fly fishing for Perch
it is necessary to allude to three or four indigenous fresh
water fish which will take the fly. I briefly mention the
so-called Barramundi, of Queensland, a Giant Perch. It is
reputed to be an extremely game fish, attains the length of
two or three feet and is of high quality as a food fish. Having
no experience of this fish myself, I can only rely on the
observation of a friend who has caught them. He bears out
the above description and adds that the climate where they
are caught is often such that it is almost impossible to see on
account of perspiration running into one's eyes! Salmon or
Mahseer tackle should be used. These fish possibly might,
with advantage, be introduced into New South Wales.
The fresh water Herring, Mr. David Stead states,
"abounds in all the rivers which flow into the waters of the
east coast of Australia; with the exception, perhaps, of those
in the North of Queensland." "It is a beautiful little fish
when fresh, being, with the exception of a narrow greenish
strip along the back, of a uniform silvery colour. It attains
a length of about 9 inches." The average length is about
7 inches; with three small flies it is possible to hook as many
fish at a cast or they may be caught with bait. The scales
are very silvery and large. Along the belly is a row of
hard, saw-like scales, arranged as a sheath for protection.
This may be the reason for their being able to hold their
own against Bass, which will not allow young trout to live
with them. Herrings are easily cleaned and make a delicious
fry, or may be boiled in vinegar, which softens the bones.
The Australian Grayling, according to Mr. Stead, "is a
fine little fish, both from its value as a food, or viewed as a
purely sporting fish. In Tasmania, where it is common, it
is known by a multiplicity of names. By ichthyologists, fol-
lowing the classification of Cuvier, it would be referred to
the Salmonidse, the adipose dorsal fin being well marked."
In the rivers of New South Wales it can hardly be stated
to be common. In fact, it appears to be rare; I have never
seen it caught.


PERCH (BASS)—PERCALATES FLUVIATILIS.
It was the late Mr. Dannevig, I am told, who first officially
declared this fish to be distinct from the Estuary Perch. I
believe I am right in saying that it was chiefly owing to the
observation of Mr. C. F. Lindeman, one of our most ardent
and skilful anglers, that led to the question of a difference
being raised.
The two fish appear occasionally to overlap in the brackish
tidal waters of our rivers; but the Colonorum will seldom
rise to the fly, nor will it take, as far as I know, any artificial
bait. Our perch somewhat resembles the English perch in
shape, but is of a dull olive tint, the scales towards the belly
becoming light and silvery yellow. Though not by any
means as handsome or sporting a fish as the rainbow trout,
as an edible fish, when in its best condition and matured,
it is deemed by many to be superior, and is, in fact, one of
the few fish I would angle for with the object of providing
a special sop to the appetite! Owing to its habit of haunting
the shade of fallen logs or overhanging banks and rocks and
the like, which are plentiful in most of our coastal streams,
it does not afford such sport for delicate tackle as is derived
from the trout; but it is decidedly a game fish. Seeing that
perch are obtainable within two or three hours of Sydney,
and more plentifully up and down our coastal districts, the
recent development of artificial fly fishing for them has
popularised the sport.
Though the coastal midsummer heat is rather trying, in
the late summer the rivers are beautiful and the climate all
that is to be desired. Many of the streams are typical of
trout waters, where one feels the charms and delights of the
associations of trout fishing. The South Coast scenery
reminds one of the best of Wales or Devonshire, whilst the
palms and other luxuriant growth are almost tropical. Here
it is a pleasure to wander, even should fishing be a secondary
consideration. The North Coast is just as entrancing, the
upper reaches of such rivers as the Manning, Hastings,
Barrington and Macleay resembling the best of trout streams.
Early morning and late evening are considered most favour-
able times for fishing for perch though, as a matter of fact,
my best fish happen to have been taken in the afternoon.


Perch have a decided objection to sunlight, so that in bright
weather one may expect to rise fish chiefly in a spot where a
branch or log casts a shadow, even though in open water.
One should try every shady shelter, no matter how narrow
or close inshore; draw quickly over sunken branches and
logs and take chances of being snagged. It will often be
found that perch have refuges three or four feet under the
banks among roots of trees. They seldom rise to the fly from
the bottom of water more than three feet deep.
The beginner may at first find it not easy to rise the fish
with a fly; he may have better luck with spoon, minnow,
spinning fly or halcyon. Until he has abandoned all these,
however, and adopted the fly only, he has not come into
the full pleasure of perch fishing. The fly is the lure par
excellence; it is much to be regretted that any other method
should have any serious attention or encouragement except-
ing in chronically dirty waters. I speak not only from a
sporting point of view, but as advocating the most successful
method, excepting (at times) bait fishing, which does not
come into my consideration.
Rainy weather is favourable if the wind be right, and a
hot north wind, which blows the insects on to the water,
sets the fish moving; but glaring weather, when the water
seems lifeless, I do not like—days which seem uninteresting,
monotonous and unsympathetic; such come to all anglers.
Perch do not feed on the top of the water after the manner
of trout, for the reason that they disdain the small flies so
attractive to trout, excepting when they are very young; then
they will rise to white ants and such like delicacies.
The big ones rise generously at the artificial fly, like a flash,
making the water boil, though seldom showing their heads
above water. A perch which rises once and misses the fly
will almost always come again repeatedly, and if apparently
put down, may often be captured by the ruse of trying a
quite different fly.
Many of our anglers advocate a large fly for a large fish,
using large salmon flies—Jock Scott, Durham Ranger and
the like. A smaller fly has its advantages, say small salmon
or sea trout size, inasmuch as it is more easily cast and
placed in odd nooks. Provided one can bring the fly under
the notice of the fish, that is sufficient; the only reason for


using an abnormally large fly, say three inches long, is that it
may more readily attract attention. With that object also,
especially if the water be discoloured, it is sometimes best to
sink the fly a little, but remember that it should then be
drawn or set in motion and must be kept moving.
The flies I use are mostly of my own make, for it is no
uncommon occurrence to lose half a dozen in a day's fishing,
if one fishes the likely spots which endanger one's tackle.
A large Peveril of the Peak, large palmers, turkey wings
and red or black body; black and red body bound with tinsel
and claret hackle with wings of mallard and pheasant tippet,
all make good flies. One of the best is of brown and black
'possum's or seal's fur, body ribbed with silver twist, black
hackle and black wings. An all-green fly kills well at times.
The angler may use his own fancy; he will probably con-
clude, after a little experience, that buying salmon flies is
an expensive game, and that as good and effective flies can
be made at home.
The recent innovation of American methods of fishing
for Bass, viz., with short casting rods and reels and spinning
baits, does not appeal to me, nor is it as killing as the fly.
If one must depart from the use of the fly, owing to
conditions of the water, the pleasantest and most successful
substitute I have found to be an inch fly spoon. This has
only a single hook and can be cast as a fly or sunk, with the
addition of a little lead, and so used deep.
Of artificial minnows, the Devon is undoubtedly one of
the best, but the usual pattern with the multiplicity of treble
hooks is a clumsy, unsportsmanlike creation. A better
pattern is that with only one treble hook at the tail.
The perch rod should be stiffer than the trout rod, so as to
hold the fish hard and away from snags, etc. The cast need
only be five feet and should be stout trout size. One must
always be prepared to cope with a large, strong fish, up to
four or five pounds weight, though an average of a pound
would be a fair day's take. Fish under half a pound should
be returned to the water.
The habits and movements of our perch are not yet fully
known. I have caught them in heavy roe in October,
November, March and April; whilst from August to
December I have taken them in excellent condition free


from roe. In the Barnett and Barrington I found, in
November, that they had young roe, about two months
formed; in the Hastings they were in good condition in
April. In the Shoalhaven and other rivers, perch may be
caught in the head tidal waters with a spoon and fly at the
same time and in the same water that bream, a salt water
fish, bite at prawns.
A close season for perch in New South Wales, urged for
many years by the New South Wales Rod Fishers' Society,
has now been proclaimed. Whether this closure is at the
right period or not, is viewed variously by anglers who have
the best interest of the sport at heart. Some hold that
September is the best season for the fly, and that in many
rivers the fish are in good condition then, but the season
does not open till November i.
October is one of the pleasantest months of the year,
corresponding as it does to June in England. Nature has
awakened fully to the influence of the sun's warmth, and
though it would be inappropriate to describe our season as
leafy October, the feeling of approaching summer, with all
its delightful associations of birds and flowers, which call
us to the country, is in the air.
A difficulty is that in our vast region of New South
Wales, conditions which exist in one district or river cannot
apply appropriately to all, and with the present scant means
of supervision available, it is impossible to differentiate
between districts as is desirable. Yet it is questionable
whether, from an economic point of view, it would not be
better to open both the trout and bass season a month earlier.
For, after all, the game fish are an asset to be profited by
here, as in other countries; the tourist traffic and commer-
cialism incidental to the sport of angling should be con-
sidered, provided the fish are sufficiently protected.
The estuary perch is considered by some authorities to
be a distinct fish from the fresh water perch, and has been
named percolates conolorum; others hold that the fish
are identical, though varying according to environment.
There certainly is a distinct difference in shape and in feed-
ing habits; one should substitute live prawns for artificial
baits if one would take perch from salt or brackish water.


Macquarie or Black Perch belong chiefly to the western
waters flowing into the Darling, though it is also found in
the upper waters of the Nepean and other rivers. It does
not attain the maximum size of P. fluviatilis. It is a bottom
feeder, though it will occasionally take a well-sunk Halcyon,
and very rarely a trout fly on the surface. It cannot be
classed as a game fish, though as a table fish is hardly to be
excelled. Some of these fish were introduced into the Snowy
River near Dalgety by Mr. D. G. Stead, at the instance of
Mr. Alf. Rose, in the year 1911, an experiment which will
be watched with interest. Many doubt the wisdom of the
move, seeing that even though they may not be antagonistic
to the trout, they probably will decrease the food supply,
and thus tend to diminish the average weight of the former,
though on the other hand the trout may feed on the young
perch. These perch will not attract the tourist anglers, and
as there are scarcely any residents on this portion of the
river their introduction seems unnecessary.
The Golden Perch or Yellow-belly is a fine edible
fish found only in streams running inland from the coastal
range. It runs up to about six or eight pounds weight oc-
casionally, averaging perhaps IYz lbs. This fish and the
Murray cod find their way to the shops, being netted by pro-
fessional fishermen.
Murray Cod is a western water fish of the perch family;
a fine table fish, weighing occasionally 100 lbs. and more.
This and the golden perch are found in the same waters;
many of the inland streams and billabongs (overflows from
rivers) teem with them. They have great recuperative
power after droughts, and may be caught with almost any
kind of grub, worm, insect, or meat and the like. They will
take an artificial metal bait or spoon, and put up a heavy
fight on a rod. The usual weight is only a few pounds.
The Trout Cod Mr. Stead places as a species distinct from
the Murray cod. It is a handsome fish resembling a well-
grown Leven trout in colour, but heavier in build.
The above four fish are highly esteemed as table fish.
Strangely enough, the two latter fish do not feed well
when the water is low and clear; in fact, they almost seem


to disappear. As soon as a flood comes they reappear and
bite freely, and are to be caught readily by means of short
lines on improvised rods or otherwise set along the banks.
Inland waters become restocked after drought in a most
mysterious manner.
Mullet. —The fish of this name found in many of our
fresh water rivers, especially on the North Coast, is said
to be the young of the Sea Mullet. It seldom appears to
exceed two or three pounds in fresh water, where it is
known as the Hard-gut Mullet. After migrating to the
sea it attains a weight of over ten pounds. In fresh water
it may be caught with worms or dough, and if a favourable
spot be ground baited, a large number of the shoal may be
taken. They are hard fighters and excellent sport. I do
not speak from my own experience of these last five fish.
Other of our fresh water fish are insignificant from an
angler's standpoint, and need not be mentioned.


CHAPTER XIII. SALT WATER FISH.
The all-round angler who has the opportunity finds a
perfect Paradise in parts of Australia—New South Wales
in particular—and moreover at a cost much below that ob-
taining in other countries.
On our coast line of 700 miles are to be found as game
fish, both large and small, as on any other shore. Whiting,
Flounder, Tarwhine, Bream, Tailer, Snapper, Blackfish,
Garfish, Mullet, Rock Cod, Flathead, Jewfish, Trevally,
Groper, Mackerel, Sharks, Rays, and others of diverse names
are all available in their times and places. Big game fish
such as Tunny, Spanish Mackerel, Kingfish, Bonito, Barra-
couta, Sword Fish are captured in inlets and harbours within
comparatively easy distance of Sydney, whilst north and
south are many virgin waters for the rod man.
Though sport with one fish or another may be had all
the year round, the best months are December to May.
BEACH FSHING.
The playing of a native Salmon ( Arripis Trutta ) on
light tackle in the breakers caused by a lively north-easter
breeze is most enjoyable sport. A fish of six to eight pounds
weight on a trout rod with spinning top, fine silk line, and
single gut casts, will tax all the angler's resources. On the
beach they are usually caught with prawn or fish bait, whilst
in the estuaries they may be taken with spoons or spinners
from a launch, and if fine tackle be used, and a medium
length rod, better sport may be derived than by using heavy
tackle and a short rod. On the beach with such tackle as I
use, I have frequently had to fight a salmon for an hour
or more, following the fish for half a mile or so, with the
salt waves breaking and swishing round my legs, whilst the
quarry was working in and out, sometimes shaking its head
on the top of a breaker one hundred and fifty yards away.
That it is comparatively worthless when caught is com-
pensated for by the pluckiness of the struggle it puts up.
Tailer may be caught in similar manner, up to about
10 lbs., but beware lest the razor-like jaws cut the tackle
through. To prevent this some anglers sheathe the line with
thin lead for a few inches above the hook or thread it


through quills. This fish when cooked is quite rich, but as
it does not keep well in hot weather, it is not considered a
good table fish. Fish bait, spoons, and spinners are re-
quired.
The Jewfish is another fish of uncertain size. It may
pick up one's bait when beach or estuary fishing at any time,
especially on moonlight nights. When they are known to
be about it is well to have at least 300 yards of strong line
on the reel, and even then one may take charge and make
straight towards the South Pole, with perhaps 60 lbs. weight
or more to back up its almost irresistible rush. One is lucky
if the fish is under 35 lbs., giving a chance to bring him to
shore successfully. A lump of mullet or other fish, prawns,
or a live mullet about 6in. long, make good baits.
A great number of Jewfish are caught in the Hawkesbury,
Shoalhaven, and other estuaries. They are not a choice
table fish, and are best cooked in steaks.
Sea Bream, also known as Black bream, and Silver
bream, averaging about ip 2 lbs. and up to over four pounds,
on fine tackle, give pretty sport, and are a handsome and
good edible fish.
For the beach fish, one should search out the deep holes
formed by a wash-out in the sand, and also the deep water
where the waves break over a bank. If one has the chance,
guide or cast the bait into an undertow and pay out line
at every pull of the waves.
Bream fishing on the beaches at night, especially at the
narrow entrances to salt water lakes, lagoons, or rivers,
usually affords the best fishing, dark nights or a young
moon and rising tides being perhaps the most favourable.
See that your tackle is in good trim before setting out, your
reel oiled and running freely, sinker about 1% oz., and line
sound and free from any knots and kinks. It is annoying to
have to give up when fish are hungry. One such occa-
sion I remember. One Easter four of us started out about
8 p.m. and stationed ourselves at intervals along the shore,
just where the tide was making along a narrow channel to-
wards the river bar. After a time we began to feel the fish,
the man furthest away getting them first, then the second,
and so on. Two of the party got their tackle mixed up and
had to give in. At one time when casting over the channel


to the far edge, where the sand was being churned up, our
prawn was seized at every cast, and finally we finished with
forty-four bream weighing fully eighty pounds. The moon
rose as we were leaving off. Bream baits are prawns,
worms, mullet, garfish, pippies, lobster and crabs.
Tarwhine resemble bream, and are fished for in similar
manner. On the North Coast they run to two or three
pounds' weight, and are esteemed more highly than the black
bream as an article of food.
Sand Whiting fishing is nice sport when they are plen-
tiful. Occasionally they run up to two or three pounds
weight, and then are very plucky and stubborn fighters; a
fair average is lb. Tackle may be as for bream. Some
prefer a short single-handed rod and light multiplying reel,
quite suitable for the calmer water which they frequent.
Baits are pippies and beach worms (both easily obtainable
on many of our beaches), also sand worms and prawns.
Trumpeter Whiting seldom exceed four ounces. They
have shorter heads than sand whiting, and are marked with
dark blotches. Use baits as for sand whiting. Small whit-
ing give no sport on a rod, but are quite good fun on a light
handline.
To catch beach worms, take a piece of fish or meat and
swish it about in receding shallow wavelets. The worms
pop their scaly heads out feeling for the bait. Mark the
spot and hold the bait over same as the next wave recedes,
when if careful one may induce the worm to take hold.
Now is the time to seize the head with the fingers or bent
pliers, but it requires practice to ensure success. Small ones
12 inches or so may be whipped out easily, but a five-footer
requires some coaxing. Pippies are shellfish which come
to the surface of the sand, or may be found a few inches
below it at about half-tide. One has usually to go a mile
or two away from frequented places to get them.
Barracoota and Hairtails are of the same family, and
are both fishes of prey and have keen teeth, necessitating
wire traces. The former are often found in Sydney Har-
bour, the latter, however, being occasional visitors only. At
Jerusalem Bay, Cowan Creek, they were fairly plentiful in
1914. They are a weird fish, looking, when first caught,


like a brightly burnished sword, and as they often approach
the floating bait vertically and slowly, their gradual appear-
ance is most uncanny. When landed in the boat they will
snap at anything, so beware.
Groper and Drummer.— The former are heavily-built
fish attaining a weight of thirty pounds and more. For the
rodman one of a tenth of that weight requires some handling.
A stout bamboo pole and very strong line and hook must
be used, and when the fish takes hold it is a matter of "pull
devil, pull baker." Groper live under overhanging rocks
in the estuaries and on the coast. Baits are crabs and cun-
jevoi, a species of sea anemone, found on the rocks at low
tide.
The Drummer has similar habits, but is more like a
blackfish and, like that fish, is fond of the rock cabbage.
It does not run as large as the Groper.
Trevally are somewhat like bream in their habits, and
are caught on the beaches and in the harbours with the
same baits. A two-pounder puts up a very dogged fight.
They run up to seven or eight pounds.
Flathead, chiefly found in the estuaries; when over four
or five pounds give fair sport on a rod. I have caught them
over nine pounds, but they reach 15 lbs. and more occa-
sionally. They will often take a spinning bait; other baits
as for bream.
LEDGERING AND DRIFTING.
Comparatively little real "ledgering" is done by anglers
in New South Wales; why, it is difficult to understand, see-
ing that so many waters are suitable. I have only met two
or three men who are keen enough to make a success of it.
As in other branches of the sport, there are many details to
be observed in order to gain a satisfactory result. A know-
ledge of the habits and haunts of fish, change of tides, pro-
per kellicking of boats, patience and quietness, are essential.
Two men are enough and three too many, unless they are
all first-class anglers and well mated; otherwise, there will
be too much restlessness, both in selecting position of boat
and in the boat itself. The boat must be kept steady, tightly
moored with two ropes, one on shore and another well out


from the bows, in such a position that the tide takes the bait
into the position one wishes to fish. As a general guide
one may select the edge of the eddies forming below points
round which the tide runs, and a change must be made with
the tide. Possibly at the change no eddy may form on the
other side of the point, and l another position must be sought.
The young flood is generally the best.
Two men can easily manage four rods unless the sport be
very furious. A ioft. rod is suitable, such as is used on the
beach; the sinker is i oz. or more according to the tide, and
a yard of gut below it. One No. i.o hook for bream, jew-
fish, &c., or two smaller hooks if whiting are about and the
bottom sandy and clean, though hooks of course should be
varied according to circumstances. A line of plaited or
twisted undressed silk, say 60 yards No. 16 silk twist on a
strong backing of not less than 100 yards, should be wound
on a reel of centre pin Nottingham type, 3m. in diameter.
Each man should have a net and be independent of the
other in outfit, so that no time be lost should the fish come
suddenly on the bite, as they frequently do with a change
of tide. The tackle described above is suitable for drifting,
though a short single-handed casting rod and multiplying
gear may be preferred, especially as smaller fish are usually
taken on a drift, such as whiting, flounder, and flathead.
Don't take out a mate who has not perfect command of his
rod in casting, or who persists in swinging heavy lumps of
lead on a handline or wants to move because you are catch-
ing fish and he is not.


CHAPTER XIV. FLOAT FISHING.
Many are the degrees between the float watcher and the
dry fly purist, yet there are niceties in the art of the former
which, if skilfully attended to, bring it into some relation-
ship with the latter, so that it is not uncommon to find the
trout fishermen unusually keen and successful in both of
these branches of angling.
Some of us who have indulged in English roach, chub, and
bream fishing, with quill float, fine tackle and stiff bamboo
rod, find a resemblance in the methods here adopted to take
blackfish, with this exception, that the latter demand stronger
tackle, the English fish not comparing with the Australian in
regard to fighting qualifications.
Blackfish (Ludrick, Vic.), though till late years some-
what despised, chiefly on account of their strong flavour
and smell, have now become facile princeps as a sporting
fish for the floatist. The change of opinion has been brought
about chiefly by the discovery that the strong flavour is en-
tirely eliminated if the skin and backbone are removed, the
sides being filletted. In cleaning, the head and belly should
be cut off, the knife passed down on each side of the back
fin and the skin torn off. This treatment is particularly
advisable, as frequently the flesh is pierced by soft white
parasites.
The haunts of this fish contribute to its popularity, for it
may be located as high as the tidal waters follow the es-
tuaries, as well as on the sea coast, and from its habits of
keeping close to the shore is easily reached with an ordinary
rod. It is gregarious in habit, moving from one feeding
ground to another, according to the condition of the tide.
During winter months it is to be found near the entrance to
the inlets. It appears to return in numbers to the upper
waters about October, in such places as the Hawkesbury,
Middle Harbour, and Cowan Creek, where the larger fish
remain till May. Small fish and an odd large one may be
taken in any of their haunts all the year round. They are
seldom caught on full tides, but bite freely from half tide,
through the ebb till the first hour of the flow, especially at
neap-tides; thus they fill up a gap when other fish do not
feed well.


i * %. * ■ JiyBafcJL:Jes - ■ ftrfpr . TT >* *&$%■
Tumut River


|P*! >, - > " • » . v
The Author beach fishing.
Under the Casuarinas.


The most popular bait is a fine green weed, a kind of
sea grass, which grows on piles or piers round wharves, also
a bright green weed known as cabbage which grows on the
rocks. Occasionally they bite well at prawns and cunjevoi.
In the estuaries where the tide strikes against the rocks
bordering a hole varying from six to twelve feet deep or
more, and swirls along forming eddies between boulders, is
favourite water; or on the coast in clear deeps along the
rocky nooks or even in the foam as it swirls round an ob-
stacle.
For estuary waters I prefer a stiff light bamboo rod, tip
well over the float so that with a short tight line one may
quickly feel the fish should the float be taken under. Ang-
lers miss fish after fish through using short and pliant rods,
necessitating a lot of slack line and hard striking. The
float should be a porcupine quill passed through a small
pear-shaped cork, which should slip off so as to thread the
line through, in place of the usual quill collar.
It is handy to have a few separate corks, so that an ad-
ditional one or two may be slipped on should more lead
be required in strong current. Two or three feet of gut-
cast are required, fine near the hook, which should be about
No. 3, strong, fine, and sharp.
Place a shot or two a couple of inches above the hook.
If higher, the fish may lift the bait without indicating a bite
on the float. In good humour, blackfish bite eagerly; at
other times, especially at slack water, they need a lot of
pampering. Never make the weed drag against tide and so
look unnatural to the fish. This in fact is most important
in all bait fishing. An angler's motto should be "no resist-
ance" ; that is, all baits should be allowed to swim with the
tide, or, as in ledgering, lie perfectly still on the b&ttom.
Green weed' should be put on so as to hide the hook;
remember that it floats up when in the water. Take a thin
piece about 3 inches long, lay it along the hook so that half
an inch hangs below it; wind it two or three times above the
eye, then down and over the front of the hook and over the
barb two or three times. If too tight it will not spread in
the water, and if too loose it will be taken off without the
fish being hooked, therefore adopt the happy medium.


Another method of fishing is required on the coast, or
where it is necessary to fish far off. Then a stiffish casting
rod, say ioft., and weighted running float are used, the
tackle being heavier and stronger.
In the clear water of the harbours near rocks, black fish
will take bread on the surface, with a vigorous dash, in a
similar manner to which perch take the fly. With a float
weighted so that it may be cast and a couple of feet of gut
beyond, bait with a small piece of tough bread. Use a No. 4
hook, and let the bait float. Large fish frequently succumb
to this lure. It is well to have weed handy in case they pre-
fer it.
At such spots as the weed flats at Cowan, they become
scattered when the tide is up, and may be seen with their
noses stirring up the mud like bulging trout. As soon as
the flats are becoming exposed the fish congregate where the
shallow water runs into deep. Here the boat should be
kellicked, bow and stern along the shore, and the float thrown
well out, the bait a foot or so from the bottom and allowed
to follow the stream. A landing net is very necessary; on
the coast a very long handle is needed.
Garfish and Mullet.— For both these fish it will be
found best to use a small sharp hook, bound with silk and
wax to the gut as it is very important to hide completely
the metal in a ball of paste about the size of a pea.
Blackfish and mullet are ideal for the "contemplative
man"; he may fish from the shore or tie up his boat along-
side the rocks or weeds in some quiet spot shaded by the
overhanging gum trees and watch the change of light and
shade as the sun wanes. In the late autumn the evenings
are usually calm and clear, and wonderful reflections of sky
and shore are cast in the quiet bends. Sandflies and mos-
quitoes, troublesome in the summer, are now quiescent.
Occasionally trevally, flathead, and the troublesome,
though toothsome leather jacket, will take either weed or
paste, and I have augmented my basket at times with a
black bream or two on the latter.
Float fishing for black bream with prawns requires much
skill and knowledge of the habits of the fish. In the early
winter the fish often are found feeding along the shores of


the Hawkesbury, Shoalhaven, and such places. A rod not
less than 15 feet should be used and fine gut casts with but
little sinker. Plenty of berley is needed, of such consistency
that it will sink and gradually break up. The bait is cast
well out up stream and allowed to sink gradually and follow
the tide; no float is used. Berley is a ground bait made of
bran, pollard, and old herring or other strong-smelling stuff.
The reel and gear must be strong and in good running
order, for fish up to 3 or 4 lbs. may be hooked, and then it
is a tussle to keep them out of the rocks and oyster shells.
Many anglers use no float for this style of fishing, but de-
pend upon feeling the bites. The young flood and full tide
are best.
Black bream fishing in the estuaries is to salt water angling
as trout fishing is to the fresh water angler. It is an art in it-
self and well worth special study, not only for the rod, but
for hand lining. The angler who wishes to become an adept
at the latter should get an old hand to initiate him into the
mysteries; much quietness, observance, self restraint and
patience are absolutely necessary. Clumsiness and impetu-
osity are fatal to success.
GAME FISH.
Fishing for game fish has caught on in New South Wales
and doubtless will attract many Australians and visitors in
the near future. Tunny, Spanish mackerel, kingfish, and
swordfish, visit our estuaries in numbers late in the summer,
and may be taken by trolling a garfish. Very few artificial
baits are much good.
Short, strong rods are used, cutty hunk lines, and specially
built reels. This tackle can be now obtained in Sydney or
New Zealand.
At Port Stephens boatmen cater for this sport, and in
Sydney Harbour, Broken Bay, and National Park, at times
fair sport may be had.
About Easter shoals of kingfish invade the upper water
of Cowan Creek, and may be seen leaping and dashing
among shoals of garfish they have followed. I have never
succeeded in getting them to look at an artificial spinner.
Fresh or live garfish should be tried. The water is most
ideal. I have no doubt but that it will someday prove a
favourite resort for sport of this kind.


CHAPTER XV. TACKLE MAKING-RODS.
To those who are of a mechanical turn of mind the winter
months may be well occupied in making and repairing rods,
nets, reels, tying flies, and doing odds and ends incidental
to the sport.
Even if this work be not taken up seriously, it is good
to dabble in, in order to gain some knowledge of how to do
a little repairing in an emergency, and so save a few hours
when on the stream. It has often been my pleasure to re-
ferrule or splice a rod for a mate when in trouble, through
some accident, or to tie a fly to a particular pattern. There
are neither skilled rod-builders nor fly-tiers in Australia,
though simple repairs may be managed after a fashion.
Experimenting with timbers for rod fishing, I have used
imported greenheart and lancewood as well as native iron-
bark, blackbutt, spotted gum, mountain ash, and other
woods. Of these greenheart is the easiest to work and, if of
good quality and straight in the grain, is the most reliable.
Blackbutt makes good lower and middle joints, but should
not be used for tops, being too brittle and subject to worm
holes. It is steely and light, and works up prettily. Iron-
bark also is suitable for lower and middle joints; even for
stout tops, and would probably do well for "game fish" rods.
The best and one of the most easily obtainable of our timbers
is spotted gum, equally suitable for sea or fly rods. An un-
limited supply is available, but it requires careful selection
and seasoning. The last three timbers are of the eucalyptus
family.
Mountain ash is light and whippy; if steamed would make
good net frames. When possible, it is, of course, best to
split the timbers for joints, but provided the grain, on care-
ful examination, be found to be straight, no harm can be
done if sawn parallel with the fibre. Any pieces with short
cross grain or a knot must be discarded or used only for the
butt.
Two of my rods I managed to rough out of spotted gum in
nine feet lengths without a flaw, these I afterwards cut in
two, giving 5 feet for the top and 4 feet for the lower joint
to which I attached a twenty-inch handle.


Some amateurs turn the lower two joints in a lathe, and
this is possible, at least to cut them down to approximately
the correct dimension. I prefer, however, to adopt the pro-
fessional method of working down by plane, leaving an inch
or so at one end for cutting off after shaping. Do not hold
the wood against an end stop, but drill two holes at right
angles at the butt end and pass this over a wire nail driven
in the bench; then plane from the fixed end; the joint may
buckle and break if worked the opposite way. Use a six
inch plane for finishing and keep it very sharp.
Some experience is required in different woods to deter-
mine the proper thickness, and here book rule can only be
taken to be approximate, as each piece of timber varies in
elasticity. It is best therefore to fit the joints roughly to-
gether with splices or ferrules from time to time as the work
proceeds. Be very careful when fining down, one false step
or undue haste may ruin the rod in a second.
Another very important point to observe is that few
timbers, Australian particularly, bend equally in each
direction; if you hold the tip against some point where it
can be revolved and bend the rod and turn it completely
round in the hand, you will observe that the bend takes
different forms at almost each movement. Now comes the
fine work, reducing the rod by a little here and there to
counteract uneven bending; it will be almost impossible to
make it exactly even. You must determine the best side for
the rings, and this really can only be settled finally by tem-
porarily fitting on the reel rings and line and a good deal of
trial casting and bending.
In shaping down the joints, first work them square,
diminish them as required, it may be from half an inch to
one-eighth in ten feet. Carefully test with calipers every
few inches to see that the sides of the square are equal. In
doing all this, watch any warp in the timber; if the grain will
admit, cut out the warp in the early stages. A grain running
completely across, in length not more than three inches, may
be strengthened by binding, but it is best avoided. If on
planing one way, parts of the wood pick up or tear, the
planing must be reversed at that particular spot. When the
joints have been worked down to square, bend the pin (a


wire nail with the head off will do) over to an angle of
45 degrees. Slip the pin through the holes in the butt, lay-
ing the joint anglewise along the bench, and with the small
steel plane work the angles off gradually, so as to reduce
the square to an octagon. Observe the eight faces in doing
this, and see that they are of equal widths and their faces
equally diminished and tapered throughout.
From the octagon, convert to a round, either with the
plane or a glass scraper. Finish off with medium and fine
glass paper, and finally give as much polish as you can
with wood shavings.
I have lately adopted the plan of leaving the lower two
joints octagonal, the angles being just sandpapered off.
Rounding may be done with steel scrapers cut to desired
size with round files. Should the joints, in spite of all care,
develop warps, they may be taken out to some extent by
heating before a fire.
Get on a thin coat of oil or varnish as quickly as possible,
put the rod together and hang it up from the tip. Two or
three coats should be applied, rubbing down with fine glass
paper between each coat, before the fittings are permanently
fixed and two or three coats after, well coating at bindings.
Use only best elastic carriage varnish, keeping it air-tight
except what little is poured out to use. Do not touch the
rod after varnishing between each coat till dry, as the
natural grease of the hand will delay setting. Should the
varnish become at all thick, thin down with a little turpen-
tine.
A splice makes a very much better jointing than a ferrule
for a fly rod, especially for the upper joints. It enables one
to put a little more bulk into the wood, and so at the same
time ensure a trifle lighter rod and more even action than if
a metal ferrule be used. This can be easily proved by ex-
perimenting first with the splice alone, and then slipping
over the splice a ferrule approximating the size which would
be required. It is most interesting to note what a remarkable
difference the ferrule makes. The rod is at once top heavy
and far too pliant; it would be necessary to considerably
increase the stiffness and bulk of the lower joint to counter-
act this.


Should it be decided to adopt a splice, the ends must be
cut diagonally as true as possible, about three or three and
a half inches long, fitted with the small plane, and finished
off by rubbing down on a sheet of fine glass paper laid level
on a hard flat surface. Put the joints together overlapping
about a quarter of an inch at each end. Cut off the overlap
and round off and finish with sandpaper. This will give a
slightly increased thickness and strength at the splice to
counteract any tendency otherwise. The splice will thus be
slightly oval in section.
Of course it will be seen that the delicate ends of the
splice are likely to be injured, therefore it is advisable to
drill two holes in a piece of wood a little larger and longer
than the splice, with funnel shaped mouths, as a guard. Sew
this into the end of the rod case so that it may not be lost.
This is a good tip for any rod stops.
Many spliced rods have bands of metal bound on at the
thick end of the splice to take the thin end of the other joint.
These may be made out of ordinary ferrules, cut wedge
shape. Wrap the splice, when putting the rod together, with
medium waxed silk, rubbing a little wax on the flat surface of
the joints. Bind with long spiral wrappings from end to end
of splice first, then proceed to bind more closely, not neces-
sarily very evenly. It takes very little more time than put-
ting ferrules together, and has one advantage that there is
no sticking, whereas with ferrules it is desirable to loosen
them every day.
There are three ways of finishing the butt, one is to work
it on the bottom joint, which is more handy in a three joint
than a two joint rod. Another is to work the bottom joint
to the full length desired and drill the centre out of corks
with a sharpened ferrule, and fit the corks carefully with
sand paper, filing and sandpapering to the desired shape;
the third and easiest way is to attach the butt with ferrules.
For practical purposes this is the handiest, as the butt or
reel seat may be then carried detached in one's bag, thus
shortening the rest of the rod. Also the butt may be fitted
with a ferrule at each end and reel fitting adjustable, so
arranged that it may be reversible with different sized fer-
rules at each end, fitting two rods. A wood or rubber button


may be fitted to either ferrule. Ferrules and cork handles
may be attached with Page's glue or heated resin. Choose
dry, hot weather for this work if possible, or well dry and
shrink the end of the joint over a fire before fixing the fer-
rule which also should be well heated. A pin should never
be driven in through the ferrule of a fly rod. Ferrules may
be of various lock fast patterns, but if good plain suction
ferrules are obtainable, truly fitted, they are much the easiest
to fix and seldom give any trouble. If not having split ends
they may be easily cut so with a file. The reel rings should
not be more than one inch diameter for ordinary rods. Fit
the rod with agate bridge rings for the first ring, and agate
tip ring, the remainder being either oval-eyed snake rings
or upright. Snake rings are likely to result in a jam in
the V they form on the rod. Bind the rings on with waxed
silk. For method of binding see page of details.
Be very neat in the binding, jamming the silk close with
some hard substance, such as a knife handle; roll it over
and over till well flattened out. Be careful not to fray the
silk. Use one-third beeswax and two-third shoemaker's
wax melted together.
A fly rod should be bound with silk from top to butt,
the bindings being graduated from y 2 inch apart at top to
about 2 inches apart at the butt, though it should be noted
that if the thicker joints are sound fewer bindings are ad-
visable. The binding, however, must be a matter of judg-
ment, always remembering that the object is to prevent a
fracture in cross grain of the wood, and not to stiffen the
rod. In fact, silk bindings do not permanently stiffen rods at
all, but add weight, and therefore tend to make the rod more
pliant. It stands to reason the more weight is applied to
a rod, the less power of resilience the wood can exert.
Three turns round at most are enough for the top bind-
ings. The silk should be slipped under the previous turn
at the finish, pulled tight, and cut off neatly. The varnish
must be depended upon to fix the bindings. White silk
used without wax becomes transparent when varnished.
Fly rods should have rings spaced approximately as fol-
lows:—The first ring five inches below tip, and each suc-
ceeding ring one inch more than previous one. Beach cast-


ing and boat rods should have as few rings as possible and
of porcelain or agate, especially for top and butt ring. Spac-
ing may be twice as far apart as to fly rods.
As a guide the dimensions of a beach casting rod of
spotted gum may be as follows:—Length, 10 feet; bottom
joint, five-eighth inch at butt, diminishing to three-sixteenth
at tip. This will cast \ x / 2 oz. lead and bait combined. A fly
rod of the same length should taper from about inch to
one-tenth. It should be remembered that the suppleness of
the rod must be determined by the weight it is desired to
cast, and that to obtain the pleasantest results, the propor-
tion of bend of the rod by its efficacy to play the fish, must
be considered equally with the casting power of the rod.


CHAPTER XVI-FLY TYING.
In fly-making one must adopt a considerable amount of
conventionality. The highest art of the decorative designer
is not to copy nature closely, but to adapt its forms and
colours for his own use. So it should be with fly-making.
The beginner nearly always starts out to show old hands
how much better he can make flies—so much nearer to
the natural object, and he worries round to find new
materials, and strives to make exact copies of insects of all
shapes and sizes. He generally ends in making grotesque
monstrosities.
It is doubtless quite possible to imitate nature more
closely than the ordinary artificial fly does, by using such
materials as rubber for the body, gauze for wings and fine
wire for legs. But an artificial fly must serve more require-
ments than that of looking like a fly. It must be light so
that it will fall softly on the water if required, the body
must be easily and cheaply made, the legs must possess
the quality of retaining their shape and position though
pliant, the wings must have sufficient toughness to stand
hard usage, and the whole must resist becoming sodden. It
must be capable of holding enough air to keep the hook
and the whole fly from sinking too quickly, and, on occasion,
to float. The colours must be fast, preferably natural
colours.
Years of experiments by thousands of anglers have pro-
duced nothing better than feathers for wings and legs. But
one never sees an insect with a bunch of legs all round
his body. Natural flies' wings are mostly semi-transparent.
Bodies are never enveloped in bushy, curly hair and tinsel,
nor is a natural fly ever provided with a large single metal
eye, or yet a protruding steel back bone. Thus it will be
seen that the ordinary artificial fly, if examined critically,
is not very like the real insect but is only a conventional
representation. Nature having endowed trout with the
spirit of inquisitiveness and the power of digesting any kind
of insect, they will mouth and test almost anything in the
water having the semblance of food. One has only to cater
for this trait in the making of a tempting bait for trout.


One typically conventional fly is tied in a manner known as
"buzz," that is, an insect such as a beetle, which, on account
of its weight, has to move its wings rapidly, as the propeller
of an aeroplane, in contra distinction to a May fly or dun
which, being lighter in build, moves its wings much more
slowly. This "buzz" is represented by a well-known hackle
fly such as the coch-y-bonddu (meaning, in Welsh, red with
a black butt), and, really, the effect produced may seem more
natural to the trout than a winged fly, especially when one
considers that the fish doubtless often sees the fly approach-
ing. This, I am satisfied, occurs from the fact that it is
not uncommon for a trout to leap out of the water and
take the artificial fly in the air or immediately it touches
the water, though no fish may have been seen near the
surface, showing that the trout has moved up in the water
anticipating the alighting of the fly.
I proved the sharp-sightedness of fish once, experimenting
with mullet. Having previously seen them taking white
ants off the salt water, I cast a fine line and small fly
towards them. Before the fly had got within three yards
of them they all scattered, and this happened so repeatedly
that I was convinced they were scared at the sight of the
gut. Now a fly-tied "buzz" would on its approach to the
water appear more natural to the fish than a fly with
stationary wings. This is then an artistic and conventional
treatment of a buzzing fly.
There is another matter of interest in relation to fly-tying.
It is well-known that one of Nature's provisions, a cruel
one it may seem to us, is that wounded or disabled things
in insect, bird or animal life are often pounced upon by
their own or other kind and killed. I have sometimes seen
an artificial fly taken in preference to a natural fly, and
it has occurred to me that the reason has been that the
artificial has presented itself to the fish as a disabled insect
and more easily caught, or as arousing curiosity through it
not appearing quite natural. The "spent gnat" (wrongly
so termed) is really an intentional representation of a
disabled fly.
Nondescript or fancy flies are often more natural than
one imagines. I have frequently made up a fancy fly and
afterwards discovered a natural insect like it.


There are sundry devices for fly and tackle making of
which one should beware; many of them are devices of the
devil, calculated only to induce one to waste money which
would be much better spent in an extra trip or so. The most
useful parts of an angler's outfit are a small half-round file,
small pointed scissors, and "Fishing Gazette" pliers. If
points of these are ground finer and a flatted metal ring or
wire slipped tightly on the handles, an impromptu vice to
hold the hook is formed. After placing the hook, slip on
the ring, the hook may be held firmly by jamming the ring
slightly diagonally. The screwdriver handle can then be
wedged in a block of wood. Unless you are making very
small dry flies, however, and they are best bought, such aids
are unnecessary, and fingers and thumb should suffice.
The illustrations are large so as to be clear, and directions
are as follows:
FLY ON GUT.
1. Rub wax on the shank of the hook and on the tying
silk to keep body from slipping round.
2. Hold the hook in left hand by the bend, place the gut —
rolled as shown —along the straight of the hook, the gut
having been bitten slightly to give it a better hold.
3. Commence about an eighth of an inch from the top
and whip silk down the hook, tie in tail, then hitch silk
between gut and hook so that it will not untwist when it
is laid on the table.
4. Prepare hackle by cutting and stripping as shown. Un-
hitch silk, tie in hackle securely and hitch silk.
5. Prepare body material, seal fur, etc., by rubbing a small
portion between palms of the hand. Unhitch silk and
spin in with the body; wrap round and up hook to
within about % inch of top. Fasten with one or two
turns and half hitch.
6. Take body hackle, tied in at tail, and wind up over
body, then tie in.
7. Tie in second hackle firmly, then wind hackle closely
round a few times, hold back hackle with left hand, take


hold of hackle spine with right hand, pinching it with
finger nails close up to hook. Take three or four turns
of silk with left hand, then change hands and make
fastening by passing silk through a loop of itself, and
finish off with three loops.
8. Take feather for wings, cut out portion as in sketch; if
not naturally even, work it as square as possible be-
tween thumbs and fingers, divide in centre with point of
scissors, re-knit feather by rubbing edges together so
as to make wings fairly even; double over wings and
place on hook with right hand.
9. Nip firmly with thumb and finger of left hand. Pass
silk round butt of wing feathers; close on butt and silk
with finger and thumb and hold tight, pull silk down
firmly, wrap round two or three times and fasten with
three loops. Varnish head and leave to dry. The fly
described, if tied all brown or with a grey-green body,
will represent a caddis fly or sedge.
If tying fly on eyed hook a short piece of gut tied in (see
2) is useful as a wedge to be cut off when the fly is finished,
but a half hitch at the end of each tying section will do as
a substitute.
The simplest fly, such as the coch-y-bonddu is made of
processes 1, 5 and 7, the dubbing being two or three peacock
herls instead of fur. Substitute for or addition to hackle,
may be gold or silver tinsel.
A hackle fly has no wings.
A quill has a body of the centre of a large feather fibre
scraped clean, such as that from a peacock herl. A quill has
three tails, a thin body and hackle with or without wings.
The more delicate flies are dressed in this manner and re-
present the ephemeridae, i.e., flies which emerge from
lavae or nymphs as they rise to the surface of the water after
many years' life in the mud. A day or two after hatching
into may flies or duns, they again change from the first stage
sub-imago, to imago or spinners, by shedding their skin and
wings, etc. After they have laid their eggs in the water,
they become "spent," and artificials are very killing if
dressed to represent that condition —that is with wings
spread out.


For years past I have experimented with wings and have
found that the best wing for a spinner is a clear, shiny, small
hackle tip, those known as blue or grizzled being the most
natural. Use right and left feathers in this case.
In addition to the ephemeridae, the flies most useful to
anglers in Australia are Hymenoptera, i.e., wasp-waisted
flies, such as ants and wasps, from which I have taken the
"orange wasp"; "Trichoptera" or caddis fly; "Coleoptera,"
beetles, such as the "tea-tree"; "Orthoptera," grass-hoppers,
such as "bredbo," "hopper hackle," "Joseland's fancy," etc.
Those who wish to pursue further the fascinating study
of entomology in relation to angling, are referred to such
charming works as Halford's Entomology and West's
Natural Trout Fly and its Imitation. For more elabora-
tion of fly dressing, refer to McClelland's Fly Dressers'
Cabinet.
Sufficient directions have been given here, coupled with
description of material to enable an apt scholar to work out
any description of trout or perch fly for himself.
To make a neat fly it is imperative to have fine tying silk,
which is easiest procured by unravelling and using a strand
of fine sewing silk. Flies must be tied firmly or they will
come to pieces, so that the utmost strain, short of breaking,
must be applied.
An indication of materials is as follows:
Body. —Fur of seal, possum and hare; wool, quill, raffia
grass, &c.
Wings. —Starling, gill bird, bustard, land rail, domestic
fowl, hackles, golden pheasant crest, mallard, runner
duck, wild duck, teal, turkey.
Hackles. —Neck feathers of domestic fowls, all colours;
partridge breast, land rail, golden pheasant, gill bird,
starling.
Wax.— As described for rod binding, or resin dissolved
in turpentine and kept in a lead tube as moist water
colours are.
Local anglers will doubtless be able, as they gain experi-
ence, to add to this list:—
Wet flies are tied with wings set so that they will easily
enter the water and have less hackle than dry flies.
Flies may be made dry or floating by using long tails,
extra hackle feathers, and wings put on upright by passing


the silk or hackle between them crossways; but some have
a light quill body in place of fur.
To make a spent fly, tie somewhat scantily with long
hackle, then press the hackle flat and bind crossways with
silk, or tie in hackle tips in like manner, or tie an ordinary
hackle and cut out superfluous hackles on top and under-
neath.
To make a floating palmer, prepare the hackles as at 4, but
do not strip either side. Tie in the thick end of the hackle
at the eye of the hook, with the butt down the bend. Wind
towards the bend as closely as possible, holding the tip of
the hackle. Tie up rather lightly, then with thumb and finger
nails sqeeze hackle up to eye; next, tie in two more evenly
matched hackles as before. Tie in body fur and intertwine
with silk, and wind down shank and fasten. Now take the
two hackles by the tips together, and wind down shank and
fasten off. Do not cut off the tips, they help to float the
fly.
The body fur may be almost any colour, black, claret, or
yellow for preference. After completing the formation of
the fly, prick out the fur a little. This will tend to make the
fly fall more softly and to keep it afloat. Flies tied thus on
different sized hooks are the most useful dry flies that can
be made, and a Chinaman's feather duster will furnish a
season's hackles.


CHAPTER XVII. RODS AND TACKLE FOR
SALT WATER FISHING.
To be properly equipped, the angler should have the fol-
lowing rods:—One of light, stiff cane 14 feet, changeable
to about 1 oft. 6in. by means of a separate butt with reversible
handle, for shore fishing. One stronger split cane or green-
heart, Bft. to lift, long for beach fishing, Hardy's Murdoch
being ideal; or a much less expensive greenheart costing
say 30/- will answer.
Also a heavy one-joint rod of greenheart, spotted gum
or built cane, with detachable butt for big game fish, about
7ft. total length. For boat fishing any of the shorter rods
may be used.
I have a most useful general rod which I converted from
a 12ft. split cane fly rod. To the top and middle joint I
have fitted a short butt. This makes an excellent light and
powerful fly rod. The lower two joints with a short top
form a beach rod, and the middle joint with short top and
short butt are handy for boat work. A combination rod of
this description is ideal for general work in Australia.
For light work in smooth water the single handed cast-
ing rod does good work, but in a rough break and where an
occasional large fish may hook on, the longer rods are better
tools.
Any free running reel of the Nottingham centre pin type
if kept in good order and well oiled is suitable; preferably
without guard, so that an over run may be more easily
negotiated. Some anglers find it difficult to cast from a re-
volving reel, therefore prefer the Malloch, on which the
drum is turned round crosswise when discharging the line.
Many American multiplying reels are good and have
"pros and cons," which comparison with the simple non-
multiplying will reveal, but they have one advantage that
a controlling drag can be fitted to regulate the pull in pounds.
A dressed Lincoln line is one of the best and most re-
liable on the market. Linen threads make good lines.
Some dressings rot lines. A good dressing may be made
of two parts of Stockholm tar, one of raw linseed oil, and
one of paraffin wax melted together and applied hot.


0 6 Ji
J / ro 7"/£ Qt/r ro wo/n O |
TIN A7( YN< YV — ' 5
\ \ / W//VO B DOWN 3HANK AT C >A Jf
\ I J /1/VO PULL A TIGHT
1 I 0 THRQU^^m
J be <">-—lj
31 7W0 W/4V5 TO JOIN GUT = 3a
fil JA 5WCt
553 — — f§
r =?] Cf r /?e/rt t/v£ = Tf|
555 —aA ■% a
0£A f PE!fCH f I~ies ||g
FLOAT% rZX_ \ ,
I -n^X 7 " - C U
CROUT FLIES ■ FOR TINY FUES
(_) THE "ONLY" BAG ; v J|j
[ EACH PART DETACHABLE FOI? WASHINQ
\ //*7»
Rods and Tackle.


y "v'
body hackle
over
Three HJ:
• HOW TO TIE A FLY BY HAND •


Silk twists of varying thicknesses cast well, but do not
last, especially if not dried after using. Gut lines have
recently come into favour. America sends us some first-
class enamelled salt water lines. For beach work the reel
should contain at least two hundred yards.
The sinkers I use are boat shape leads, with a lead tag
at the end, which I bore and turn up. Thus there is no
hole to get filled up with sand as in the ordinary sinkers,
and if one does not want to use it as a running sinker the
holes can be pinched together after the line has been
threaded. A weight of from one to two ounces will usually
be found sufficient, with the weight of the bait added.
If there is plenty of room it is inmaterial whether one
uses the side swing or overhead cast, but one should culti-
vate the latter so as not to interfere with other anglers
where there are a number at work together.
Here it may be of interest to note that the first beach
casting off the reel from New South Wales beaches was
done by H. B. Joseland, T. Owen and myself about 1900, at
Tuggerah Lakes entrance. We used cheap greenheart rods
and Nottingham reels, costing about five shillings, and silk
twists. The sport we had then was just as good as I have
ever had since with tackle costing ten times as much.
In some countries a float is used in the breakers, and
though I have never seen it adopted here, for tailer and
salmon, I think it would be worth trying.
On an incoming tide a cast of thirty to forty yards will
usually suffice to get on to bream. Jew fish, tailer and sal-
mon generally lie a little further out. With an ebb tide one
requires a longer cast. Look out for undertows, and work
your bait so that it is carried out with the current. I like
mine to travel; some men like to anchor their bait.
New South Wales is rich in beautiful beaches—quite safe
to fish off—as the tide rises slowly, on an average about
four feet in six hours. A medium north-east break is good
for beach fishing; a westerly off the land makes a calm sea
with but little break to stir up food, so fish keep out.


THE MONARCH.
Do you remember, Sam, one summer day
Tramping o'er rolling plain and rocky knolls,
Leaving the township and following calls
Dame Nature made us, to hasten away?
Under the clear sky, inhaling the breeze
(Winds of Monaro bring youth to our cheeks)
We carried our rods, not brassies and cleeks;
Do you remember the scent of the trees?
'Neath the rough slopes, there the stream sparkled bright,
Rushing and gurgling and singing with joy,
Laughing at play like a boisterous boy;
There seemed no wrong on earth, ail things seemed right.
You wandered down the stream, I went above,
We met at our lunch, comparing our bags;
Mine was so nice and plump, yours limp as rags;
Fickle Dame Fortune had shown you no love.
You bade me fish where you'd fished all the morn;
I couldn't go wrong; why, they rushed at my fly!
And they scattered at yours; oh, goodness knows why!
How my reel sang as the line off was torn.
Do you remember, how late in the day,
When you were ahead and perched on a rock,
You nearly fell in; a trout caused a shock
With a splash at your feet, whilst I far away.
Played him in fear at the end of my line.
We laughed! how we laughed! the fish took a rise
Out of you, my dear Sam; it was a surprise.
Yes. your luck was out, the Dame smiled on mine.


Do you remember, Jose, one summer day,
When Nature was sweet as a merry young lass,
The flowers were nodding amid the long grass,
And wild birds were piping—melodious lay.
How, where Boloko joins the big river,
We crawled o'er the reefs with perilous tread,
Or cast underneath the bushes instead,
For trout that sought flies (or perhaps rabbit's liver) ?
At lunchtime you drew a sprat from your creel,
A queer little fish whose spots had gone wrong;
I, in mock modesty, uttered no song
But just lay "the Monarch" alongside your reel.


CHAPTER XVIII. ENGLAND REVISITED.
Rip Van Winkle's experiences, awaking after twenty
years, seemed to me as a boy to be supernatural. A visit
to England after a longer period, if not supernatural is
strange indeed, not devoid of sorrow as well as pleasure.
To find some old friends utterly changed, out of touch and
hardly to be recognised, others away in the happy hunting
grounds, is as depressing as dreary, cloudy weather. To
find a few mellowed only, and some come to full vigour of
man and womanhood, brings a glow over one as of the warm,
bright sunshine of Australia.
And so it was with the old fishing haunts where I had
graduated in the sport. The old school tuck shop, on the
banks of a Hertfordshire stream, where we cooked the
poached trout, had given place to a terrace in a new suburb
whose station had displaced the home of my rival school
artist of forty years ago. The sleepy hollow was trans-
formed into a London suburb. How small the old mill
stream looked, abound which so many recollections of
adventures had clustered. Nearby was the old copse, where
I was caught by the game-keeper just as I had robbed (un-
known to him) the wild duck's nest, and just at hand, by a
strange coincidence, the same owner of the farm, not walk-
ing sturdily, but carried in his trap, was following the hay-
makers. Near where my chum and I had caught several
perch from the canal, was an extensive disused gravel pit
filled with water, which an unfortunate cockney angler told
me was his club water. Fine roach fishing I remember not
so far away at Harefield Mills and pike fishing close at hand,
within two or three miles of the scene of my exploits on
the Chess.
By motor, as many haunts on Worcerstershire and Here-
fordshire streams were passed in one afternoon as had taken
me years to explore; but a few days' fishing on these and on
Devonshire and Welsh streams enabled me to renew my
acquaintance with them and enjoy the miniature beauties
of little rivers, and to study the wealth of wild flowers and
charms in a few yards of English hedgerows, which the
average motorist passes by.


The first day on the Monnow we returned all the trout-
lings as being undersized, but to our surprise, in the even-
ing found that in comparison to those brought in we had
been discarding fair fish, for that stream; our next day's
bag was declared a good one.
In some preserved water near Brecon the May flies were
dancing fairy flights over their erstwhile abode, enticing the
trout to relieve them of the degradation of becoming spent
gnats, though many trout became spent in my basket; one
greedy little chap was so gorged that, unhooked, he came
rolling over and over down a stickle and so into my net.
Some delightful days spent with companions on Welsh
streams, and the Lugg and Usk. The latter, though yielding
insignificant trout, taught me more about dry fly fishing.
Let not my Australian friends think the foregoing typical
of the best fishing in England. The best is very good, and
may be compared to anything our streams can yield, but is
not easily obtainable.
But what of the other side of fishing! The thrushes sang
in choruses everywhere, the cuckoo called the real call, not
the parody cry of the Australian representatives. Dozens
of larks soared from Devonshire meadows filling the air
with their trills. The cottage gardens bloomed as they have
done for hundreds of years with roses, tiger lilies, fox-
gloves, scented geraniums, mignonette and a lot of other
marvels of the Creator.
"One looked all rose trees, and another wore
A close set robe of jasmine sown with stars;
This had a rosy sea of gilliflowers
About it; this a milky way on earth,
Like visions in the northern dreamer's heavens,
A lily avenue climbing to the door;
One, almost to the martin haunted eaves,
A summer burial deep in hollyhocks:
Each its own charm." — TENNYSON.
The Devonshire beach trees outclassed all others, includ-
ing oaks and elms, for grace, but all foliage vied in making
the English country side the most beautiful on earth.


It was quaint to see the average attempt at surf fishing
on the English coast in 1907. Out of a dozen anglers, where
I fished for bass, only one or two had an idea of the game
and tackle required. One man cast with check on, which
grew feebler and feebler, hour by hour, and day after day,
till it "floated away into silence."
I stayed a night at Nepigon on my return through Canada.
This was once among the best of Canadian waters, but the
angler must have several days at his disposal to visit the
upper waters in a canoe with guides and outfit.
A fair number of fish were rising in the fine river near
the town, which only after several hours' delay I found was
free fishing, so that I had but little time to wet a line and land
a wee representative of Salmo Salvelinus, formerly known
as Salmo Fontinalis.
With Canada's rivers, lakes and dashing mountain streams
I was charmed. Beautiful views one sees from the iron
road, pools and dark pines mellowed by evening light, like
one sees in pictures, and just as calm and still.
There are streamlets with transparent moss green and
amber waters, gem-like in purity, leaping under the bridges
and viaducts and joining the turmoil of the milky Frazer
River flowing between brown, grey and red capped crags
down in the gorges.
Along the river the eye catches patches of rich salmon
colour on wooden frames; these are the fish split open and
out in the sun to dry, and nearby is a fisherman methodi-
cally scooping, scooping, scooping with a large hand net,
and occasionally, very occasionally lifting a struggling
salmon from eddying waters behind jutting rocks.
There are harmonies of grey, pearl and pink in the clouds,
waters, and flowers of Lake Superior to contrast with
awesome mountain peaks of the Rockies and Selkirks.
On close inspection of this feast of beauty one renews ac-
quaintance with old friends, for familiar flowers grow wild,
such as gaillardias, columbines, michaelmas daisies and
golden rod, whilst the quaint "Indian pipe" reminds one of
an Australian orchid.
Jack pines, maples and spreading poplars fill the forests,
the last named bearing the legend, doubtless of French


origin, that the sighing and shivering of the leaves of this
tree originated when the wood was used for The Cross.
Space of the prairies, space of the mountains, impress and
fascinate one, but not more so than the cordial goodwill
and open heartedness of the people, especially towards
Australians.
The average tourist does not fish at Banff, and if he did,
unless things are changed, he would not catch much. Pos-
sibly it does not pay to cater for anglers, else why are not
the beautiful rivers there well stocked? In answer to en-
quiries as to fishing, I was referred to the head porter at
the hotel, of whom, with a certain amount of angling "side"
I asked what fly to use. His reply before an extensive
audience was somewhat disconcerting: "Oh, I use raw
beef!" came out very pat. Strange to say, I came across
a similar recommendation from a guide in a book of thirty
years before; so that it must be a standard diet in Canada.
Nevertheless, both at Banff and the head of the lake at
Laggen, I grassed a few of the beautiful native trout
and white fish, finding a small Farlow's March brown as
good as raw beef.
Next, Duncans, where the Cowichan River is so clear that
one can hardly see the water, gave me an afternoon's excel-
lent fishing, if not many fish, for one has to make one's self
almost as invisible as the water is. The Indians were setting
a kind of wickerwork trap in the shallows between the pools
in anticipation of the annual fresh, when the salmon and
trout "run" to Cowichan Lake.
The hotel at Duncans on the Cowichan is a restful place,
set in a pretty little garden, and it has the advantage, as in
many C.P.R. hotels, but denied to most Australian hotels,
of having its bar secluded.
Cowichan Bay, a few miles away, is like the Hawkesbury
River, near Sydney. At a quiet hotel at the bay I spent a
day or two. The Indians fish for salmon from canoes and
light boats, trolling a large spoon bait on a stout hand-line
held over the arm as they paddle. I went out at daybreak,
a beautiful rosy haze clothing the water with mystery. The
Indians could be heard paddling their craft to the best water
a mile or two away, just on the edge of the bank formed by


the debris from the river. The tide was making as the sun-
shine strengthened and lifted the mist. The Indians could
then be seen, twenty or thirty of them, paddling backwards
and forwards; occasionally one would stop to haul in a
salmon, bash it on the head, and throw it in the boat like
any old fish. Round about, a fish occasionally rose and
rolled on the surface like a porpoise. Whilst watching one
old warrior hauling in a fish, the while laughing at me with
my rod and tackle, I had a run, and in time duly landed my
first salmon, almost 18 lbs. weight. Two forty-pounders
were landed that morning, and one boy's bag was eleven
salmon before 9 a.m. I was offered the standard price, 50
cents, for mine; but preferred to give it to a tattered old
Scotchman, who was so astonished that I did not want any-
thing in return, that he went down the road still muttering
to himself about it.
On returning to Wahroonga, Sydney, in October, apart
from the home coming, what delighted me most was the
marvellously fresh atmosphere and sunshine, so clear that
it seemed almost artificial. The Australian blue sea and
yellow sands eclipsed anything I had seen elsewhere. Truly,
one is privileged to live in such a beauty spot as Sydney, and
as a jumping-off place for sport for the angler it ranks
high.
My friends told me that the first Fly Fishing Tournament
in Australia was about to be held. On my way out to the
event at Centennial Park, a few days later, I heard for the
first time in Sydney an English lark. That is the pleasantest
recollection I have of a casting tournament; all others in
connection therewith may fade from my memory without
regret. The competitive element is quite foreign to my
ideas of angling as a recreation from exactions of business.
"HAUDREY."
Haudrey's lot had been cast in a charming valley near one
of the most delightful of old Herefordshire villages.
My friend, who rented a mile of the fishing, costing
seventy pounds per annum, was rightly rapturous about the
rich woodland scenery. Nature could hardly have made a
stream more fitting to its surroundings. Its volume was


respectable, and it was busy all the way through green
meadows, under trees and bushes, making runs and stickles,
slow and fast, eddying at bends, and now gathering up its
weight as though to burst away the weirs and flood gates,
placed to divert its force for the use of mills since mediaeval
times; or to afford depths in which trout appeared to lie
year in and year out, for the sole object of at least one
annual good feed of "May flies," after which they would re-
tire to private life for eleven months or so.
The village of "A." consisted chiefly of a few picturesque
cottages of weather stained bricks and alternate black oak
framing and white plaster, and the ancient stone church with
its square tower, clock face, simple traceried and mullioned
windows, old oak roof showing its massive timbers, and old
rude screen cunningly carved and framed by some forgotten
craftsman of five hundred years ago.
The vicarage, an unpretentious quiet building of Georgian
date, nestled nearby, almost under the shade of the church
tower.
The parson had the right—religiously guarded—of fishing
some hundred yards of bye stream which fed the mill.
Trim cut hedges, rich pasture meadows, and here and
there a shapely sycamore or oak bordered the well kept
straight highway, which, from the little standpoint of the
incident itself, seemed to have been expressly made for the
landlord's neat little dog-cart, sent to convey us to the
ancient inn. This was situated directly on the road, and
close to the aged and massive stone bridge over the trout
stream. Brightly coloured flower gardens fronted all the
cottages, to make up the lack of which the inn cultivated
climbing roses and yellow jasmine.
The inn was so well kept that it might have been a private
shooting box, and the landlady a very model to suit the sur-
roundings. At the back of the inn rose a steep hill, on which,
half-way up, was a large bowling green, formed by cutting
into the hill and banking up in front. Its long disuse was
evident by the condition of the grass, but that it had been
formed centuries ago was shown by the size of the old fir
trees growing on its border, if not by the date of the archi-


tecture of the inn. Its attraction now was the lovely view
across the valley.
Immediately in front were the inn orchard and kitchen
garden, backed by the rich colouring of the old buildings;
further on between the trees, one caught a glimpse of the
well defined hedgerows of the road, and the silver stream
flowing under the double arches of the quaint old hump-
backed bridge, then the river again; over the bridge, and
beyond to the left, beautiful lawns and garden foliage of
the local manor house. The valley stretched a quarter of a
mile on either side of the stream, all green with pasturage
and foliage, and right facing, to back the whole, was a
lovely range of wooded hills. In all the pride of English
scenery, the most beautiful of its kind on earth, there were
few such jewels as this. Some may say, "what has this to
do with fishing?" It has all to do with fishing. The true
angler is a lover of nature, whether its appreciation be con-
scious or undefined to him.
"Haudrey" had chosen a more secluded but none the less
beautiful haunt, and to reach it we had to drive some three
miles over a round-about country road to another bridge
higher up the stream.
We had been granted a day's fishing on this preserve/and,
of course, we had to use flies only, and dry flies at that;
therefore the little bag of red worms I found dangling from
my friend's coat button must have been a pure accident,
whether for his or my benefit I never discovered.
I must confess to some comfort, however, when unable
to rise a fish in spite of a garrulous game-keeper's advice,
I discovered on an overhanging bush a glittering silver
Devon minnow. Knowing that trout in that stream fed
only on dry flies, I reasoned that perhaps it had been placed
there as ap ornament, so gave it to the keeper for his infant
to play with.
Leaving this melancholy scene I moved to other waters,
whilst the keeper of trout and dry flies interspersing his
conversation with the whole details of his family history,
and the brilliant virtues of himself, set on a background of
the blackness of his relatives, revealed to me the secret of
the brook—the haunt of "Haudrey." "We wants to get 'im


out, sir, 'e drives away the other fish, 'e lies in a pool above
the bridge, sir." Taking me there, he continued: " 'E's under
this 'ere bank or under that over'angin' tree and 'e's a monster
full two pound. 'E's been there two years, sir, and 'is Lord-
ship nor no one else can't catch 'im; there 'e is, sir, under that
there tree, just as I was a sayin"; and, sure enough, "e"' was
distinctly visible, lying motionless in an eddy, head down
stream.
The bank was high and treacherous above him, and a
straight cast impossible.
With humble feelings that if neither his Lordship nor
anyone else could deceive him, it was presumptuous of me,
from Australia, to make the attempt, but that it would be no
disgrace if I failed, I sought a safe footing on the bank
behind the tree and cast a yellow dun. Though it fell light
the position was not good; my second venture placed the fly
so that it floated into the monarch's sight. I saw my trout
slowly and deliberately back under the fly, then rise lazily—
the dun disappeared.
Almost trembling, I struck; the fly did not come back, but
instead the line cut the water in the direction of the main
stream.
My garrulous friend burst forth into a perfect torrent of
comments, and a lady standing on the bridge below told my
companion that I had hold of a large fish. Though, feeling
that my reputation was at stake, my greatest trouble at the
time was to calm the keeper sufficiently to enable him to use
the net rationally, and I had continually to check him in his
essays to dash the net at the fish. Finally I ordered him to
quietly hold it under water whilst gradually I coaxed my fish
out of the stream, and led him round with the eddy and so
over the net.
"That's the big fish, sir," said the keeper when he had
him safely lying on the grass. "I'm glad 'is Lordship didn't
get 'im, I don't take no account of 'is Lordship, sir, 'e can't
fish." Of course this last remark was a clencher, so 1
sordidly exchanged half a crown for "Haudrey." But why
"Haudrey ?" It was thus:—Rewarded for our virtue of the
previous day in that we went to the church, we had received
from the Vicarage, an invitation to tea. —Not being sure,


from the signature, whether it came from the rector or his
wife, we consulted the maid at the inn, who, after reference
to the landlady, vouchsafed the information that the initials
were those of the rector's wife, "Haudrey Hemma." As a
fitting commemoration of the event we therefore christened
the handsome lady trout, as it proved to be, "Haudrey."


A SUMMER DAY.
'Tis summer noon, and o'er the dull red earth.
Of wind-swept hill crest of Monaro's downs,
In the calm air, hovers shimmering heat;
On distant mountain chain of Crackenback,
So softly blending in horizon far,
The drifted snow lies nestling pure and white,
And 'neath kind summer's melting touch, distils
Life-giving drops as bright as diamonds.
Scarcely the ripening stalks of grass now move,
Faint purple tinted on the nearer slopes,
Or straw-like seeming where wild barley grows;
Whilst mingled, as though thrown by spirit hands
In glee, here sparsely, plentifully there,
Rivalling heaven's blue, are sweet star flowers,
Beautiful and frail, braving fierce heat;
But the evening primrose droops and fades,
Till the night tempered air its form revives,
On river verge the willow pennants hang,
Nor stirs a leaf, nor through them sighs a breeze.
The water still and smooth, with polished face
Reflects the rocks, the trees, in perfect form;
The live translucent falls are coloured bright
With amethyst, brown sand, and greenery,
And ever-changing rainbow tints of spray.
There in the Snowy River's ample stream
Irideus shelters 'neath a jutting rock
Which hides him from the sight of enemies;
Whilst, sucking in the doomed and drowned flies,
The lazy brown trout round slow eddies swims.
On wooded hillside, gums show green and red
And gold, as sunshine permeates their leaves.
The red bark glows on crooked, wind-bent bole
And twisted branch. Within a shadow scant
Of stunted trees, where in the far-off days
The kangaroo and wallaby held sway,
Meek, silent sheep pant for the cool sea breeze.
When soft winds blow from out the sultry North,
They saturate the air with the warm scent


Of Eucalyptus leaves and festooned bark;
Of modest blooms of plains, and flowering shrubs,
The great sun, on the unjust and the just
Doth shine; so noxious weeds do flourish in
Its heat, and to extenuate their faults,
Contribute beauty to the summer scene.
Sorrel, with rusty red, clothes barren ground;
Briars, their fragrance give, and roses pink;
Thistles, brave purple flowers some, yellow others;
But yet one, all dwarfed and clothed
With spiteful spikes and thorny leaves and flowers.
Shows pretty blue throughout from stem to bud.
What sounds fill midday heat and zephyr warmf
Cicadas drum in cadence shrill; hoppers
With intermittent turn their fiddles scrape;
Hawks loudly call from mate to mate. The birds
To drowsy rest have gone in sheltered nooks,
And insects, undisturbed, but faintly hum!
The glad sound of Snoivy's running water
For ever dominates the heated air.


THE CHRISTMAS MOON.
A little tent, set on a strand of clean granite sand traceried
with roots of the trees which spread overhead; in front of
the tent soft green grass, and a few tufts of rushes fringe
the broad, quiet water of the river pool. On the far side,
tea-tree bushes overhang the water, casting dark shadows,
and further on are sombre river pines, through which the
Christmas moon shows golden as she rises through the net-
work of branches.
Only a little while before, in the darkness of the back-
ground towards the rugged hills behind, intensified by the
light of our camp fire, a pair of gleaming gems, almost
startling in their brightness and seeming isolation, had
mysteriously and silently appeared. Presently, however,
they moved slightly, and assumed, as it seemed to us, a
look of innocent inquiry. Then the rock wallaby, owner
of the glistening eyes, resumed its nocturnal wanderings,
and left me and my companion alone; though had we eyes
to see, other timorous creatures of the bush may have been
revealed.
The "wanes of air," as they played up and down the
mouth of the gorge, brought alternately sounds of the busy
rapids at the foot of the pool, or the swish and the roar of
the Snowy River, as its cataracts tore past granite boulders
above us.
Our evening meal over, we burnt the unused fragments,
for it is sacrilegious to disfigure such spots with camp litter.
Then, when the moon had flooded the vale with silver light,
and turned the cloudlets above into swan's-down, we took
our rods and made our way up the river strand, over
bleached flood wood and rocky spurs, till we reached a jut-
ting point where the water slowly carried flecks of white
foam circling round an eddy.
The moonlight danced in streaks and patches on the dark
waters, where, out in the middle of the river a lively stream
curled and swirled, then died away into the still pool. Whilst
we intently watched, presently trout rings circled and circled
till they, too, merged into the mosaic of the moon's reflected
light.


No response had come to our flies in this water during the
daytime, and, indeed, the circles were too remote to reach;
but a break in the eddy near by encouraged us to throw a
fly. At once a strain on my line showed that I had not cast
in vain, for soon a fario was lifted in the net. Another cast
or two was responded to more vigorously, the song of the
reel telling us that a rainbow had been hooked. The brace
was all we wanted for our breakfast, so we returned to our
tent and lay down on beds of soft manuka branches, with
the scent of candle bark from the camp fire to bring on
drowsy rest and sleep.
Now and again a curlew uttered its weird, searching call
in the quiet air, and once the wind sported with us during
the night. Mustering a little extra vigour, it brought noises
of the cataract down the valley loudly to our ears. Alarmed
at the prospect of a freshet from Kosciusco's snow-tipped
heights, and only half-a wake, we gazed on the wavelets en-
croaching up to our door; gradually it dawned on us, how-
ever, that the wavelets were only of dry sand, on which
quivered shadows of the sparse gum-tree branches above.
To wake in the night and gaze on the labyrinth of light
and shade, cast by Christmas moon, was almost as delightful
as to sleep. To wake in the clean, crisp Monaro air as the
sun rose was as a draught from the fountain of life to the
oblivion of the vanished night.
Familiar notes of the thrush brought recollections of many
happy fishing days, for the grey thrush is an angler's com-
panion on many gully-streams and river-ways of Australia.
As the day grew, noisy parrots flew across the river, showing
their bright blue and crimson feathers against the sombre
tones of the forest. Honeyeaters of olive-green and yellow
were actively searching for their food; wattle-birds called
like English cock pheasants; and from the dry hill slopes
came the lovely mellow notes of the Australian magpie.
The blue smoke of our fire curled up through the branches
in the free air as we prepared our breakfast. Our meal over,
we parted for a morning's fishing—one to try the rough,
unfished waters in the rocky gorge, the other to work down
the gentler ripples below, where the river throws off streams
round islets, or winds past undulating shores and level


JUST IN THE AFTERGLOW, TI!A'.' DUB!' US U iHT,
BETWEEN THF. CLOSE OF DAY,ANT BIRTH Of N< HT, ® e *
WHEN ZEPHYRS SOFTLY BLOW,AND SOFTER BLOW**. .
AND ROSE TINTS SOFTLY GLCNCfAND SOFTER
WHEN K ON RISE PALES THE LIGHT WITH PAtllD BEAM,
AN I 00'ATERO EDDY NEATH AFA DING GLEAM
WHEM*hi)NS* AND*!"!PINNERS 7 FRAIL ALL ALL ABOUT, :
AND IN THEIR FLIGHT ENTICE A LUSTY TP" UT, !•? '
WHICH SEIZES ON ITS TREY WITH SUDDEN SWIRL*,* '
THAT LEAVES EXTENDING RING AND WATLPWHIRLR
THEN FALLS MY"G!NGER FLOATING OUJUj
AND PRAYERFULLY I BID MY HEART BE. STILL, *f
• 9- r-, , , *. , r . 1
WHEN COMES A SMASH, I HURL AWORD-NOT LAMB!
THREE POUNDER LOST, AN ESTIMATE, BY SAM.
"A
C - U
HOWARD TO S ELAND TALGLTY* TAN - 1917*


-«v ' ' **s, s#j
- . ' " - _ - ' , ' 4
. ■ Jvtti'p.ii-
■ ... . :: • •; - HT :■ - r" ,
Ludlow Castle


shingle beds. Where the water lingered in a quiet stretch
between rapids, a wild duck fluttered away, disturbed by my
approach, but the island, chosen for its brood rearing, was
too overgrown, and I too busy with other things, to search
out its nest.
In one pool a loud rise behind me brought anticipation of
bigger game; preparing for a fight, I cast into the disturbed
water. Just at that moment silently appeared, on the other
side of the stream, a floating object like a piece of brown
wood, then suddenly it rounded its back and dived. It was
not the first time I had been deceived by a platypus.
Brushing against the soft-branched tea-tree bushes, now
decked in summer's enrichment of May-like blossom, the
hum of insects broke into louder tones. Some beetles fell
into the stream, to make repasts for expectant trout basking
near. A bracken-clock counterfeit deceived many a fish,
and in the course of the morning my creel began to assume
a fair weight; but apart from the catching of fish, the joy of
wading knee-deep in smooth, broad glides of a clean,
murmuring river in the glorious, exhilarating air, dropping
a fly far and near, left no room for any other feeling than
that of pure, simple pleasure.
The sun was past its highest before I had covered a half-
mile of river, and I was loth to leave a stream, the peer of
which I have never seen in my wanderings; but it was
pleasant to retrace the river-bends under the shade of the
graceful manna gums, to thread the mazes of the manuka
bushes and bright-berried dwarf kurrajong, to scent the
Scotch sweet-briar growing only too wildly.
My little friends, the dottrels tripped along the skirts
They, as usual, appeared to have lost something, and stopped
occasionally to think where they had left it. And now I
remember an incident which showed their sagacity. Shelter-
ing from a rainstorm one day, a friend and I became
interested in the movements of one of these little birds,
running fussily backwards and forwards across a shingle
bed between a shallow pool and the river. After a time one
of the stones appeared to us to be moving, but in reality it
was a fluffy little ball, so like its surroundings in colour as


to be hardly discernible. The little mother was still busy
gathering her chicks and gradually inducing them to move
shorewards when we left. The following day the scene was
changed; a fresh had come down in the night, and the
shingles were under water, but we thought the little chicks
were safe.
As I regained camp, my companion descended the foot-
hills from an opposite direction, and hastened to show me
his catch. One a fine fish, indeed, and others well above the
legal weight. He had spent the morning, he said, dodging
round and sliding down granite boulders, and had narrowly
escaped sporting with the fish in the tumbling waters.
These he had caught were nothing to some he had seen.
Then, in my turn, I surprised him with the nice even lot I
turned out of my creel, and so we were two contented
anglers, each satisfied with his own and pleased with each
other's baskets, as old mates should be.
Whilst relating our experiences of the morning and com-
paring notes, we set the billy boiling, and, after a late lunch,
packed up our kit in good time for the coach, which came
rumbling over the bed of a dry water-way. Up and down
dale, through washed-out watercourses, over perilous-look-
ing banks, and into storm ruts we went, till we emerged
into the plain country.
Far and near the sun was setting the landscape aglow
with rosy tints. Sheep moved lazily out of our way as we
passed under the shelter-willows at the spring. Magpies
piped their evening tunes on the still air, and now and then
faint sounds of running water came from among the
boulders and bushes of the river's winding course. The
painting of the landscape in the closing day was a constant
transformation scene—rose madders, purples and warm
greys on plains and wooded uplands, the ranges behind
deepening into richer and darker tones, whilst stars faintly
bespangled the blue overhead. The clatter of the horses'
feet rung out as we crossed the bridge over the river which
had called us so irresistibly for many summers.
As we approached the hospitable hotel, a red fire kindled
among the trees on the ranges and spread upwards and out-
wards till it topped the dark trunks and branches. Up it


rose, leaving the earth in a full rich golden ball, tinting the
hills with streaks of mellow light, and driving the stars in
modesty to hide from its beauty. From fire to gold, from
gold to silver, a lantern hung in the heavens—the glorious
Christmas moon.
PERCH FISHING.
From my window I watched for the first signs of the day
that we had planned and waited for. A day to be spent
perch fishing, away from the grime and striving of city life.
Grey dawn was displacing the light of the late moon,
now fast paling into insignificance. White mists completely
hid the meadow land, from which could be heard the lowing
of dairy herds. The only signs of verdure were an isolated
tree or two and the dark line of the river oaks, except that
close at hand, in the rambling garden, were straggling rose
bushes, honeysuckle, a few old-fashioned flowers, and in
the hotel yard, a coral tree, which, whilst throwing off its
yellowy autumn leaves, was budding forth bunches of bright
scarlet flowers.
As soon as the sun rose, tinting the distant hills and rocky
crags, a Jacky Winter called, "Peter, Peter, Peter!" and
fluttered after a belated night fly; then soldier birds an-
nounced their advent in the coral tree, by their musical
though somewhat aggressive note, and proved their relation-
ship to the honey-eaters by diving their bills into the scarlet
blossom. A pair of pee-wits beat the air softly, with the
characteristic flutter of their wings, the while calling cheerily
to each other; a little blue wren hopped merrily on the yard
rails.
The mists broke up and wreathed and eddied about in the
warm, bright morning under the influence of a gentle breeze,
which carried along with it the distant murmur of the sea;
and so the day was ushered in.
After breakfast we were driven up the valley, leaving the
more-frequented waters to others. We were trying new
"hunting grounds'" a brother angler had put us on to, and
already, apart from the prospects of the sport, we were
content with the beauty of the surroundings and the pure
air laden with the honey scent of the flowering grasses.


Here was a bit of Wales; rough stone walls taking their
undulating courses over green knolls and slopes, bracken
fern and rich pasturage; there were the crags of the English
Wye Valley; over against a sheltering "chine" tropical
palms reared their heads, and here and there, farms with
herds of Illawarra cattle feeding on maize husks or meadow
grass. The stream wandered its irregular course through
the valley, doubling back on itself now and again, but rarely
visible through the dense foliage. As a venture we struck
into the stream a few miles above the township, and found
ideal water indeed; alternate rapids, stickles, and steady
pools. We little cared that it had been fished by the local
people for years, and we smiled in the knowledge that the
magic fly wand had seldom been waved over it.
A farmer, knowing no other lures but grubs, worms and
frogs, looked on with amazement at what appeared to be
insane proceedings on our part, venturing the remark that
"we wanted grubs, and, any way, we ought to go lower
down stream; the creek was no good thereabouts." But
the "no good" water had a fascination for us, so, out of a
spirit of inquiry, not unmingled with the security of superior
knowledge, we wandered slowly on a mile or two till the
stream, dropping in cascades from the mountains above,
hurried its busy waters too fast to allow it to form pools.
Our baskets, however, began to assume a fair weight, for
on the way up, from under banks overhung with bushes,
from out entanglements of rocks and sunken trees, from the
purer and cleaner waters, fish after fish had dashed, and
with rapid swirl seized our flies. Not only had we numbers,
but a "run" above the general average in weight.
At noon the billy was boiled, and on a soft green bank we
rested for the mid-day meal. Retracing our steps, we picked
up two or three brace more of good fish, till, satisfied with
our success, we left the stream and took short cuts home.
The sports of the township turned out to see our eight and
a half brace averaging lbs., and pondered over the "new
chum" game of catching fish with feathers.


THE INSCRUTABLE TROUT OF WULLWYE.
Wullwye Creek first came under my ken when I was in
full vigour of manhood, since when some twenty years have
passed into dreamland. Twenty times has its junction
with the superb Snowy River met my eager gaze on the first
day of as many "honeymoons," for such my angling mates
term our renewed loves of the most fascinating river in
Australia. The creek rises not far from Adaminaby, 3,500
feet above sea level; but it rises only thence when its rugged
rock-strewn bed is invaded by winter snow, or summer
storms sweep its desolate track. Normally, its waters trickle
for a few miles only, over level spreads of granite and sand,
bordered by plains or arid gorges.
Each Christmas for many years has a shout of joy gone
up as we have caught a glimpse of the weeping willows
marking the end of its 30-mile course.
Though noted for its trout, seldom have trout invaded
it for more than about two hundred yards, and then only
when a spate in the Snowy has backed up its waters. Across
its miniature delta, in the far, far distance, most days, one
may see patches of snow drift, set like jewels in the crown
of the Crackenback Range. The main river is over a
hundred yards wide here, and on the other side are rounded
tea-tree bushes, earth cliffs and undulating Dartmoor-like
ridges and hillocks, till they abruptly terminate in the low
hills of Barney's Range, seven miles away. In the river at
summer level, and with the most glorious sunshine of a
perfect Australian day, one may wade from side to side on
a bed of soft granite sand, knee deep in pure temperate
water, thanking God for life and all things beautiful on
earth, such as one wonders if even heaven can eclipse.
There are barbed-wire entanglements to be negotiated
between the road and the river, but these are compensated
for sometimes by a sight of little blue campanulas, as dear
to us as the blue bells of our native English woods. This
year, before reaching the water, one had to wade through a
deep band of small ox-eyed daisies, green herbs and brown
flowered rushes. But lam anticipating; the tale of wonders
must not commence here.


A learned judge, "Tom major," claims to have deceived
the first Wullwye trout, but that cannot be, because, in 1903,
"Tom minor" caught his first trout here, making him "all
of a tremble"; and I had had the river to myself for the
previous three years, and had put the lesser Tom on to my
favourite spot.
The judge, however, wading from the other side, did
catch the first large Wullwye trout, some lbs. or more,
a salmo fario. A few days after, a beautiful Loch Leven
succumbed to an approach by a "hackle hopper" from the
same stance, and my bag for that afternoon consisted of one
3-lb. Loch Leven, one Loch Leven, one 2*4-lb. fario,
one i-lb. fario and a rainbow. An odd prize or two
rewarded other rods from year to year, but till about 1917
Wullwye trout remained a mystery.
Well do I remember one moonlight night being amazed to
see huge trout scooting wildly backwards and forwards over
a sand bank, just covered with shallow water, between the
creek mouth and a rock amid stream. One leviathan I hooked
and played for a brief minute; my friends put this down to
hallucination, but it was true, as you will see.
Occasionally we had seen trout feeding in the daytime
on the sand banks, but regarded them as belonging to the
unattainable.
One summer day, Bert and I strolled leisurely in the
kindly sunshine the half-mile or so from the township, to
spend a lazy morning. The river was in perfect order, and
there at Wullwye, were a dozen fine trout feeding up and
down in the shallows. In the clear water we could see every
movement. Now and again one would make a great splash
as it seized its prey where a little streamlet dipped over a
bank into the river. Bert, with his usual modesty and
unselfishness, insisted on my trying my luck.
Carefully wading to within casting distance, I dropped
one fly after another over the fish, but no response. At last I
attached to my cast a small floating "Welshman's button."
Then we had the satisfaction of seeing an inquisitive fish
investigate and finally sample the fly. During the next hour
I rose seven, hooked four and landed three good farios.
The next morning I was rewarded with a three-pounder.


Later, Hep, one of the inner brotherhood, approaching
from the middle of the river, landed three more. One
morning, teaching my boy Jack how to cast, I told him to
drop the fly about a yard above a rock in the river off
Wullwye. He made a good shot, and as the fly swept down
to the rock, plop went a "brownie," which in due time
adorned his basket.
But now come the crowning events.
Sam and I took our turn, with others, of going out for
the day together in the last week of 1920. I went down
stream to "Sam's pool," arranging to meet him for lunch
at Wullwye. It was one of those most exhilarating morn-
ings when all the world, including myself, seemed young,
and I was a boy again, whistling, singing, wading and cast-
ing. True, I only got one fish, but that was not the only one
I rose, and I was so pleased with the sport that I hesitated
to leave. However, I joined Sam and found him boiling
the billy, somewhat late, I regret, for, on hearing me com-
ing, he shouted out, "Hurry up and just come and look at
these fish; I've been waiting for you." There, sure enough,
were about a dozen Wullyites swimming up and down;
occasionally one would sail right down to our feet and have
a look at us—like the trout of one's dreams.
Sam said, "Have a go; I can't rise them," so I put on
a large home-made floating palmer and dropped it over a
good fish. Up he came and filled his mouth with feathers;
but no luck for me; he escaped the hook. I missed him
again and then he sulked. I thought of an old fly that had
adorned my fishing hat for two years which had proved fatal
on the Badja, so I dropped it in front of "his nibs." He
took no notice as it sank a few inches on to the sand, but on
my retrieving he rushed it and fastened—No. 1. "Now,
Sam," I said, "it's your turn; sink your fly and draw it"—
result, a lovely two-pound brownie.
"Your turn next," said Sam, and I repeated that perform-
ance. Well, we took turn and turn till Sam had four
brownies averaging two pounds, and I had five rainbows
and one brownie averaging one and a half pounds, and all
between 2.30 and 4.30 p.m. One of mine was got with a
dry fly from a rise and long cast in the river. How we
laughed that afternoon 1


The river rose and fell owing to thunderstorms during
the next few days, so things were only middling. When
the water had cleared, Sam and I were drawn again to the
same spot. There, about three rod lengths away, one of
the "family" was poised at the bottom of about nine inches
of water, faintly waving his fins and assuming an indifferent
if not insolent attitude. I said, "It's no use, Sam; you
won't get him"; but Sam attempted the improbable, casting
time after time over him. Without any apparent movement
on the part of the trout, and at about the twentieth cast,
suddenly he bestirred himself, for Sam's hook was in him.
I said, "You must have hooked him foul." However, foul
or no, he was so well hooked in the lip that in due course he
came to the net.
Next morning we were at the try sting place again, and
there was another of the "family" swimming up and down
his beat, a sort of gutter in the sand. I rose him once, and
a second time with an "invicta," ineffectually. Then he
came down and had a look at me. I kept perfectly still,
and he again took up his favourite position where the stream
trickled over a sand bar. I cast over that fish at least fifty
times, and finally he rose and took the fly, as Sam's had
done without doubt. He, too, joined the "great majority."
Sam went back to lunch. I followed a little later with one
of iY\ lbs. and another 2 lbs. 7ozs., both farios. Sam fol-
lowed suit the next day with one of 2 lbs. 6 1 / 2 ozs.
Yet another event. The river rose slightly. Hep and I
explored the opposite bank of the river. Hep called out,
"Just look at those fish,"' and there at the mouth of Wullywe
150 yards away were half a dozen big trout rushing about,
half out of the water, chasing food, and looking like small
black divers. We hurried back to lunch and to get my
camera, so that I might send a photo, to Mr. Marston. Six
of us went up to see the sight. To our disgust, Wullywe
was vomiting thick mud, brought about by a thunderstorm.
A few days later an odd member or two of the family re-
turned in quest of their seductive diet, which we found to be
tadpoles, but never a one would look at our flies, cocked,
dry, damp, wet, spent, sunk, or drawn. And all the time
the Austral sun was shining.


AN ANGLER'S DAY.
Far in the distant west, when dies the night,
The moonlight pales before the morn's grey light;
Soon sunrise tints the tops of distant hills,
A faint wind wafts the sounds of murm'ring rills.
As grows the dawn, which ushers glorious day,
The birds, bestirring, show their plumage gay.
From thicket near and hillside more remote,
Magpie and thrush sing with harmonious note.
The blue of camp fire's smoke floats lazily
And mingles with the crisp air mazily.
Down by the river, stay awhile and gaze
On magic scenes, revealed by lifting haze;
The ripples sparkle, glides in sunlight gleam,
Dark shows the pool still hidden from its beam.
Now, where foam flecked the eddy swirls around,
Or slowly moves, there comes a welcome sound
Of feeding trout, which to the surface rise,
And, dimple oft, as pass the floating flies.
Low bends the angler and with cautious tread
Wades silently the stony river bed.
His rod waves to and fro; the silken line
Drops craftily a feather fly so fine.
A moment passes, just a moment spent
In anxious, breathless pause and look intent.
The water's surface breaks! the hook is fast!
Oh! merrily sings out the reel at last!
Swiftly the line's torn off, coil after coil,
The fish seeks rocks round which rough waters boil.
Strongly he fights down in the rushing tide,
Next leaping high, shows his resplendent side,
Turns in the air and tries a cunning fall;
The angler dips his rod or loses all.
Now bending wand proclaims the risk is o'er,
Hard fights the fish to reach the furthest shore;
With sudden turn, back through the pool he flies,
His fetter, slackened, 'neath the water lies.
More free he tries to break by leap on leap,
Then with strong plunge sounds in the water deep.
Full of resource, his liberty would gain,
But bores, and jags, and twangs the line in vain;


Waning in strength, but game and still untamed,
One desperate dash for freedom yet is aimed;
Leaving his native haunts through quickening glide
To roaring rapid is opposed his side,
His weight swept down towards fast nearing falls,
This danger new the angler now appalls.
With rod held high he follows on apace
O'er rugged strand the river's course to trace.
Then sulks the fish beneath a reef again,
Yet slowly yields to the rod's steady strain,
Turns on his side and floats into the shore;
His rainbow gleam shall grace the stream no more!
Good fortune early thus attends our way
Sealing a promise fair of perfect day.
Warm blows the wind, soft cloudlets screen the sun
Earnest of heavy creels ere day be done.
The stubborn tea-tree bush with blossoms white
Attracts the summer insects' busy flight.
Beetles with gem-like wings of gorgeous green,
Some painted modest brown and black, are seen.
Bees, flies and wasps to steal the honey come,
Filling the balmy air with drowsy hum.
Whilst the pale dun which many months has spent
In river bed, seeks lighter element;
Dances in air, and for a short span flies,
Ensures his kind, completes his life, then dies.
In startled flight a hopper hits the stream,
And passes where a trout with sudden gleam
Snatches his prey; then, ghost-like, disappears,
Or spurns the food when he the object ncars.
O'er stickle, glide and pool the angler's cast
With varying success ere noon be passed.
Beneath a manna gum or willozu shade
Each angler shows the catch his skill has made,
Relates how this one gamely fought, how' yet
Another tamely yielded to the net.
Their notes compared they seek repast and rest,
Smoke soothing weed; their being soon refreshed
Wakens to nature's call of earth and sky.
Soaring upon the air hawks' hunting cry.
A duck from shady nook in silence leads


Her young and timid brood to waving reeds,
Among the stems they dart with action quick
From slender leaves the hatching insects pick.
Scared by some fancied foe they dive in fright,
To draw the danger off the bird shams flight,
And quacks and quacks, then falters on the wing,
Trying by every art false scent to bring.
A flight of plovers from yon shingle bed
With shrilly call wheel and fly overhead.
Nearby from underneath a boulder creeps
A sinuous lizard, with alertness peeps,
Silently crawls its victim to espy.
Darts out its tongue and seizes on a fly.
Behind the barren slopes and o'er their crest,
Grey sombre tones appear from out the west,
In bold relief the stunted white gums' bark
Stands out in gleam of sun against the dark
Of glowing storm. The nearing thunders crash
And rumble overhead. The lightning's flash
Darts from the clouds earthward in zig-zag track,
Whilst awe-inspiring calm of air, and wrack
Of clouds, by silent winds fast whirled on high,
Spread out mysterious dread afar and nigh.
Faintly at first the wind sounds its advance
Then louder grows, dead leaves begin to dance
Along the ground; long shreds of bark are rent
From off the trees, whose branches down are bent;
Some limbs from trunks to their decay are hurled
To join dead trees like ghosts of nether world.
See o'er the plains thick clouds of dust arise,
Driven in gusts from earth towards the skies.
Now hailstones glint, then spatter on the rocks
And in the water splash; an echo mocks
The tempest's fury, swells the hiss of rain,
To startled sheep throws back the sound again.
The locusts' call is hushed, and every bird
Seems dead or gone, so little have they stirred.
In sheltered nooks the ground is white with hail
And all around the rain has formed a veil
Through which now grey and misty shadows form,
And gather strength as passes on the storm.


Ah, call of bird returning sun to greet;
And smell of earth refreshed with rain, how sweet!
Each thirsty bush a thousand crystals deck,
Petals of tea-tree bloom the water's fleck.
The briar rose pleads with an enriched perfume
In expiation of a threatened doom.
Over the stream white sedge flies rise in cloud,
Whilst swifts and swallows, with quick flight endowed,
Circle and glide the insects to pursue,
And on the wing warble and twitter too.
Within the channels through the jagged reef,
And 'neath the willows green with slender leaf,
Where'er the water undermines a bank,
Or slowly wanders through the herbage rank,
In nooks protected from the evening sun,
In silent pools or near a rippling run,
The trout alert seeks food of various kind,
Some drowned by storm, some water nymph enshrined
In wondrous garment; they to surface rise
Transformed from crawling things to dainty flies.
The hungry fish liven the pools with splash
And widening rings, or from the depths up flash
And with quick turn ephemeral food secure,
Whilst some, deceived, fall to the angler's lure.
The sun sinks, and a flush of yellow light
The summit clothes of every lofty height,
Transforms the foliage with golden glow
In startling contrast to the shades below,
Where night creeps on, and wraps in mystery
The form of every rock and bush or tree.
As lower drops the sun behind the hills,
A scene of fantasy the vision fills;
Above the shadowed earth the evening sky
Holds fast our sight in wondering ecstacy,
Seeming as though a beauteous world unknown,
To draw us from this troubled earth were shown.
In alternating tints the fair scene fades,
Purples and rose blend with the night's dim shades.
A twilight brief and calm succeeds the sun,
With full content the angler's day is done.


CHAPTER XIX.—ANGLERS' BIRDS.
Nearly all the Anglers I know are bird lovers, their sport
makes them familiar with the habits and haunts of birds;
so much so that they come to regard them as existing for
their special edification and enjoyment.
Strange enough, few of our women folk take more than
a passing interest in wild birds; I do not know more than
one or two who could name half a dozen birds from their
notes. Many men are equally unfortunate; for surely it is
unfortunate for anyone to be indifferent to even one of the
many pleasures Nature has provided for us. And so I con-
sider that Anglers are especially privileged to "inherit" the
world of bird life, or, at least, to claim close association
with many of the birds that frequent our quiet or running
waters.
Having broken out into verse (of what merit I will leave
my fellow-anglers to judge) in appreciation of the grey
thrush, and knowing that, of all birds, none is dearer to the
bird-lover, I would only add one item of interest. A friend
of mine at Wahroonga has so tamed thrushes that they feed
out of his hand. Their favourite diet is cheese and, if it be
not forthcoming early, the birds call loudly at the verandah
door. One day a thrush, mistaking a pat of butter on the
tea-table for cheese, flew on to the tray and dug its beak
into the butter.
One learns from year to year matters new with regard to
birds. Only a few months ago a fellow-angler revealed to
me that what I took to be notes of two or three birds, were
really those of a lyre bird mocking. We were fishing at
Cowan and in a gully, a couple of hundred yards away, the
lyre bird was calling, as my friend said, "with thrush notes,
clearer than a thrush's"; then the flute of the butcher bird,
and the feeble and comical imitation of the kookaburra and
other songsters. In many quiet gullies round the water-
ways of Sydney lyre birds can often be heard calling
"chuck, chuck" continuously. Only in the breeding season
does the lyre bird whistle with true mating note. In the
early morning the song is rapturous, clear, and mellow; like
no other bird song that I know, and worth while seeking
out.


What an angry fuss the willy-wagtail makes if one hap-
pens to cast a fly near its beautifully neat nest, usually in
the fork of a she-oak branch overhanging some fresh water
pool. The scolding is accompanied with fluttering and
swagger and a motion as though it were pivoted on wire
like a child's toy. In gentler moods he calls himself a
"sweet, pretty little creature" and to impress one the more,
repeats the self flattery at night.
The perky little blue wren, more like an English tom-tit
flian a jenny wren, twitters away in the underground, but
does not haunt the streams so much as our gardens. One
nested in a creeper opposite my breakfast-room window and
the cock bird astonished us one morning by persistently
pecking at and fluttering up and down against the glass.
We opened the window and put out crumbs, with no effect.
When the window was shut the little chap returned and
recommenced its capers. This continued every morning for
four months. We concluded that, in pugnacious mood, and
fancying it a rival, the bird was fighting his own reflection.
The tea tree and briar bushes bordering the Snowy are
haunts of many interesting birds. Foremost perhaps is the
white-fronted chat, of social habits; for in companies they
flit from bush to bush accompanied with little chirps. When
I first went to Dalgety I was able to identify a stranger
to the district, the English goldfinch. Now, in the spring it
would seem that nearly every sweet briar bush has its little
nest; not so neat and compact as those in England, but more
open, suiting the climate. The cheerful song is quite an
acquisition and livens up the bush solitude. During the
last vear or two I have seen a few goldfinches at Wahroonga.
They can be identified by their undulating flight as well as
by their canary-like song and the black, white and crimson
marking on their heads.
In and out of the shapely tea tree bushes, on the river
banks, moves a meek little honey-eater, calling "chick-up"
and favouring us with a few delightful, mellow notes, but
as though too busy to waste time on us. Its little, round
nest contains eggs of a pinkish-white crowned with reddish
spots.
But for song, no Australian bird, to my mind, can warble
so sweetly as the rufus-breasted whistler. Its notes


resemble those of the nightingale, but are too broken to
rival that immortal songster's. These beautiful birds come
into full song and abound about the first week in October,
but I heard a female warbling a subdued ditty in late
August. I remember when camping at "The Narrows" on
the Shoalhaven in early October, there was a full choral
performance all day long. The golden-breasted whistler,
a no less beautiful bird, warbles not quite so fully as the
"rufus," though at Mt. Wilson I heard and saw one with
glorious and powerful notes.
Starlings I noticed first in the Monaro some eighteen
years ago, about the time rabbits came there. The present
comparative scarcity of grasshoppers on the river banks, I
attribute to the rabbits having eaten out certain thistles then
growing on the banks which attracted hoppers, and the
starlings having destroyed their eggs. Starlings in hundreds
roost in the briar bushes and, at sundown, may be seen in
long flights, making for their roosts. It is strange to see
them all, one after the other, rising or swerving over an
imaginary object, just as sheep jump over some fancied
obstacle.
One of the handsomest of our birds is the bee-eater,
rarely plentiful in the Monaro, but always conspicuous, on
account of its striking plumage—reddish wings, green back
and black tail with two extended spine feathers. The bird
perches on high branches from which it gracefully swoops
on its victims, not necessarily bees. It builds in holes in
the banks and somewhat resembles a kingfisher.
The blue kingfisher is not common on the Snowy, but
often flashes past, over perch streams and salt water rivers.
Halcyon sanctus or "Summer bird," belies his name, for not
only does he eschew fish diet, but like the giant kingfisher
(laughing jackass) nests in holes in trees and trades on
the reputation of other favourites as a harbinger of spring.
A wee pet of the angler and frequent companion is the busy
little dottrel, flitting and running along the sandy margins
of the water and picking up flies, both dry and wet; they
have never been known to be as complimentary as a swallow
which picked up one of my floating flies, rather to my
chagrin. It was the occasion of an extra good long and
straight cast, aimed at a likely spot for a good fish and I


had no wish for my fly to emulate the aspirations of an
aeroplane. Swallows are confiding little chaps and some-
times perch on one's rod.
Parrots have their favourite haunts. We always reckon
on finding some in a certain scrub. The most gorgeous is
the crimson parrot of rich red and blue, the latter being on
the wings and tail. A fine, wholesome-looking coloured
bird and not too shy. For confiding birds none, I think,
compares with the quaint gang-gangs; grey birds with pink
heads. They go about in companies, crowding up together
on a branch and caressing each other as though love-making.
They will allow one to stroke them with a rod without
showing alarm.
Whilst on the Goodradigbee I came across a number of
the huge handsome black cockatoos in the she-oaks, and a
friend at Wee Jasper told me that at night he had occasion-
ally heard a weird owl that made unearthly screeches like a
child being tortured.
On the Barrington, flitting among the scarlet Callistemon
flowers, overhanging the water, one sees beautiful little blood
birds, as scarlet as arterial blood. But for their movement,
one might take them for blossoms. These birds are among
the spring arrivals in my garden, their favourite hunting
places being turpentine trees when in flower.
Spine-bills, too, are my constant visitors, hovering like
humming birds about a common red fuchsia, the sprays
of which almost touch my breakfast-room window.
Black duck and wood duck, the latter really geese, are
too rare on our trout streams. Shags are too plentiful. One
called a "sinker" is most uncanny. It sinks all its body
except its neck and head, which looks like a snake about to
strike. It is a very wary bird, has a very sharp pointed
beak and evidently stabs its victim, which accounts for trout
being sometimes found with a wound on one side only.
There are many other aquatic birds to be seen, but one
must not omit to mention the graceful blue crane that in
its flight floats along like a whiff of blue smoke on the
breeze.
Huge white-bellied sea eagles often come sailing over us
when fishing in the estuaries. Their call, though harsh, is
not unmusical. But the king of all birds is the wedged-tailed


eagle, commonly known as the eagle-hawk. He is indeed a
noble bird, the largest eagle in the world; not so heavy as
the American eagle, but with a wider spread of wings.
The pallid cuckoos arrive in September. Their cry is a
monotonous cadence, commencing with the lowest note,
rising to a shrill treble. On the Goodradigbee I have heard
this varied by little turns at the end of each note. One
spring a couple of cuckoos persistently fled to a Virginia-
creeper on the wall of my house. I could not think what
they were after, till I discovered that they were taking
caterpillars. In a few days they had cleared away all the
pests.
The pretty little bronze cuckoo has a shrill, pathetic
whistle, which is kept up for hours at a time, and is often
heard on the banks of our rivers.
A tragedy in a lark's family once came under our notice.
We found a parent bird dead and hanging by some horse-
hair, left on a fence where a horse had been rubbing himself.
As I write I imagine I hear the soft fluttering of the wings
of the pee-wit and see elegant honey-eaters with rich green
and yellow plumage, but I must leave these and other birds
for the further contemplation of those who have eyes to
see and ears to hear.
No angler who has a love for nature should be without a
copy of An Australian Bird Book, by Leach. The coloured
plates are so true that one can readily identify birds thereby.


CHAPTER XX.
WHERE TO FISH AND OUTFIT REQUIRED.
A stranger arriving at Sydney on fishing bent should
visit the Tourist Department and obtain information as to
locality, travelling and accommodation. For the benefit of
those who may not have this opportunity, I give the follow-
ing outline:—
NORTH OF SYDNEY
(r —river, s.w. —salt water, c—camp, h—hotel, m—miles.)
MACLEAY R, AT KEMPSEY, 313 m, good h, good perch a
few miles above town, estuary perch at Smithtown. South
West Rocks at mouth of river good s.w. fishing.
PORT MACQUARIE, HASTINGS R., 282 m. via Wauchope,
fair h. Bream fishing from breakwater, beaches or boat.
Excellent blackfish off seawall, wharves and rocks. Flat-
head and whiting, etc., in season (October to June) drifting
and otherwise. Outside fishing possible. Cabbage for black-
fish plentiful at Flagstaff Point; no weed locally; worms
and pippies about two miles on beach, and at shop in
township.
Above Wauchope good fly fishing for perch, also in
Pappinbarra Creek. Motors and boats obtainable.
Very large perch in Lake Innis near town, but hard
to get.
LAURITON, via Kendall, s.w., motor miles, fair h.
HARRINGTON, by motor from Coopernook, 250 m., good
fishing and fair h., s.w.
TUNCURRY, motor from Taree, 235 m.; fishing similar
to Port Macquarie; Sloman's Hotel, good.
PORT STEPHENS, motor from Newcastle. The best resort
for game fish in winter. Mixed s.w. fishing in summer.
WINGHAM, 228 m. Between this town and Gloucester, a
distance of 36 miles, are the Gloucester River, Barrington,
Manning and Dingo Creeks, perch streams. Wingham is
on the Manning where it is tidal. The following stations
are close to the river: Charity Creek, Mt. George, Bundook
and Bulliak. Train leaves Wingham at 9.4 a.m., returning
from these stations early—too early in the afternoon. The
rivers are alternate pools and rapids, and have seldom, if
ever, been fished with the fly. Write to Fulton's Hotel,


Wingham, for information. The scenery is beautiful; river
flats and high, tree-clad hills.
GLOUCESTER, 192 m., fair perch fishing. By motor or
buggy one can reach the same rivers as from Wingham—
in addition, the Little Manning, Bowman and Barnard.
Good h.
The Paterson, Williams and Karua Rivers are crossed
on the way from Maitland to Gloucester, and afford fair
perch fishing.
WYONG CREEK occasionally yields good perch with fly,
and mullet with worm, also bream and blackfish.
TUGGERAH LAKES AND NORA HEAD, reached from Wyong.
Well known s.w. fishing at entrance and beaches, very
popular.
GOSFORD for Wamberal, Terrigal and Avoca, the last
having one of the best run hotels. S.w. fishing on beaches
and from rocks and lakes. Well-known resorts.
NEPEAN, at Penrith, Richmond, Mulgoa, Menangle for
perch; much fished.
FROM SYDNEY, SOUTH
NATIONAL PARK, perch fishing, indifferent, permit
required from Trust.
ALBION PARK, perch, fair h.
BERRY, perch, fair h. The streams at these three above
places have been over-fished.
JERRY BAILEY, 7 miles from Berry at entrance of Shoal-
haven River. Good s.w. fishing and good camping grounds.
GREENWELL POINT, S.W., inlet and beaches, fair h.
NOWRA, 94 m. Terminus for further South Coast, good
h. Shoalhaven R., s.w. below and above bridge, down to
Greenwell Point and up to Burrier. At latter can be caught
perch with fly, and bream with bait at the head of tidal
water. Fine camping ground fourteen miles above bridge.
Subject to spate.
SUSSEX INLET, 20 miles from Nowra, s.w. r. and beaches,
fishing variable, boarding house.
MILTON. Conjola and Burrill lakes and beaches few
miles away. Cork's Hotel. Millard for boats; s.w. Small
perch streams in district.


BATEMAN'S BAY, S.W. fishing in river and on beaches few
miles away. Up river near Nelligen, perch in Kurrawong
Creek.
BODALLA, excellent h. Tuross r., fresh and s.w.; very
good perch up river; beaches about six miles away.
NAROOMA, fair h., very good s.w. inlet and beaches.
BERMAGUI, port; nice quiet place, s.w., fair h., r. and
beaches.
BROGA R. alongside road many miles before reaching
Bega from North. Very pretty stream; should be good fly
fishing for perch, c.
BEGA, seven miles down Bega River to port of Tathra,
where there is fair h. and s.w. fishing from rocks, wharf
and beaches, and river, also perch streams near.
BEMBOKA, fresh water stream comes over Brown Mt.,
trout in upper reaches.
NIMITYBELL, McDonald R., four miles away, few trout.
COOMA, 270 m., centre for Monaro trout stream. Badja
and Tuross about 30 miles away by car; altitude about
3500 ft.; fine rainbow trout; camp or farms. Murrumbidgee
R., 5 to 20 miles, fair trout fishing when water clear.
Euecumbene R. 40 m. via Adaminaby, altitude 3500 ft., also
Murrumbidgee 10 m., and Black Creek and other small
streams in district, fair h.
DALGETY, 32 m. from Cooma, Snowy R., good water,
subject to flood, comfortable h., rainbow and brown trout.
JINDABYNE, 35 m., fair h., Snowy R., good trout but shy.
THE CREEL, 40 m. from Cooma, Thredbo and Snowy, fine
water, comfortable h., rainbow and brown trout, much
fished.
HOTEL KOSCIUSKO and Betts' Camp, up mountain for
Snowy, Spencer's Creek, etc., rainbows, altitude about
4000 ft., good trout.
Mowamba, Jacob's and Gungarlin streams in this district
have rainbow trout; c.
TUMUT district. Tumut R., fine stream, good rainbows
in upper reaches above Talbingo, where there is a comfort-
able hotel. At Yarrangobilly Caves House, trout, good
stream. Goobragandra and Buddong, trout, 10 miles and
more above Tumut, much fished, c.


Happy Jack Creek is upper waters of Tumut, c. Gilmore
Creek in district, nice little trout stream.
KIANDRA, "four mile" and "nine mile" dams containing
probably finest rainbows in the State. Small streams in
district, head of Euecumbene. Fair h. and c.
TARANA DISTRICT. The Duckmaloi, Fish River, Aber-
crombie and Campbell's Rivers, trout, fair fishing at times,
much fished.
QUEANBEYAN, V., above Captain's Flat, reached from
Bungendore by car, used to hold good rainbows, but has
suffered from drought; farm and c.
NEW ENGLAND. Many good trout streams not much
known to tourists.
For further information apply to—
J. E. Paterson,
Hon. Sec. N.S.W. Rod Fishers' Society,
Sports Club, Hunter Street,
CLOTHES
For outfit, one's clothes should be suitable for extremes
when on the trout streams. Woollens should always be
worn; an undervest, a good stout flannel shirt with pockets,
Donegal or similar tweed knickers, underpants and thick
stockings and strong boots constitute a suitable wardrobe
for hot weather. A light grey cotton coat with good pockets
adds little weight and helps to temper the heat of the sun.
A light, wide-brimmed felt hat is essential. A sweater
should be available for cold weather, together with a warm
tweed suit. A good oilskin is necessary for rain and cold
and to put under one's bed if camping. Few men wear
waders except in the coldest waters or as a precaution
against snakes, for which purpose leggings are useful, but
I usually put on an extra pair of old stockings from which
I have removed the feet. These, if brought over the boot,
also help to keep out sand.
One generally sees a snake or two during a fortnight's
holiday. They are "black," "tiger" and "brown," the last
being the most dangerous, but during my twenty years'
fishing I have never heard of an angler being bitten. The
poison of an Australian snake passes down a groove on
the outside of the fang and is, therefore, almost certain to


be harmless should the bite be through thick clothes. One
should be cautious with the hands. I put my hand on a
snake once when pulling myself up a bank and on another
day shook something off my leg which my mate following
said was a tiger snake. I have killed a fair number of the
Eve-beguiling serpents, but I regard the vermin in the
same way as some juvenile friends of mine who used to
go out hunting snakes. When asked by their anxious
mother why they indulged in such a pastime, they said, "Oh,
mother, we love it because no matter how many we see
each one gives us a fresh fright." Snakes are plentiful in
the higher altitudes, possibly because such locality is less
frequented. Mosquitoes and sand flies are unknown on
trout streams but small flies are very worrysome at times.
When one is camping, for an hour just about sunrise blow-
flies are troublesome. They are, in fact, our greatest pests
and will blow anything, blankets and rugs especially, so one
requires a mosquito net for safes and tent flaps.
For salt water fishing many adopt the clothing outlined
above, summer and winter. They wade in knickers and
stockings as in fresh water. Others prefer shorts. Walk-
ing about on the wet cold beaches, I am reluctantly com-
pelled, at my age of three score years, to grant that it is not
quite the best way to ward off the rheumatic fiend, but
wading in Monaro waters in the usual summer weather has
more than once driven sciatica away, though, possibly, the
change to the dry climate has been chiefly responsible for
the benefit.
TACKLE
So many men have asked my advice about tackle that at
the risk of repeating myself I here mention my idea of a
moderate and reasonable outfit which the angler may elab-
orate as he gains experience.
For Trout and Perch Fly-fishing.
Split-cane or green heart rod, not more than ioft. long.
Metal reel, about 2y 2 inches diameter.
Line, double taper oiled silk, medium weight.
Casts, half a dozen, 6 or 9 ft. tapered down to 3.x for
trout.
Casts, half a dozen, 3ft., strong level gut for perch.


Flies: Trout—Hopperhackle, Invicta, Coch-y-bonddu.
Perch—Peveril of the Peak, Hornet, Heckham Peckham.
Landing net. Mutton fat for line. Fishing bag.
For Beach, Boat and Float.
Rod, split-cane or greenheart, ioft. 6in. (general rod).
Reel, Nottingham, about three inches diameter, without
guard.
Line, Barbour's thread, about 300 yards.
Sinkers, about one and a quarter ounce and sheet lead
for light sinkers.
Casts, 3ft. strong gut or Jap gut.
Hooks, 1.0 and one size larger and smaller, small for
blackfish, etc.
Blackfish weighted floats and quills.
Landing net with long and short handles. Bag.
My split-cane general rod, which is ideal for this work,
with rod handle fixed horizontally, weighted at tip with eight
oz., bends as follows: From horizontal line down to rod,
at end of first joint 1% inches, at end of second joint
inches, at tip 3 feet 3 inches, vertical measurement. If you
are making your own rod set this out on a wall and work
to it. You may prefer it a little stiffer.
Before closing this book I shall best serve my angling
friends by briefly bringing information up to date.
Trout fishing is, unfortunately, at present not as good
as it was prior to the season 1918-19. This is almost en-
tirely due to the visitation of cormorants to our streams,
where they congregated owing to inland waters having
greatly diminished through an exceptionally severe drought.
No such destruction has occurred previously since the
acclimatization of trout some thirty years ago, and it may be
a lifetime before a similar catastrophe happens. Copious
rains and heavy floods in the interior have left vast lakes,
swamps and well-filled rivers. Fish, yabbies and aquatic
insects mysteriously populate the erstwhile dry water-
courses with amazing rapidity, enticing water fowl to their
more accustomed haunts.
During the last two seasons cormorants were a rarity on
the trout streams. I saw a plentiful supply of troutlings


and a fair number of fish about the legal length (10 inches)
and I know where I could cast a fly for a few two-pounders
not in vain. A few good bags were made from the unfre-
quented upper waters of some rivers, the rainbows scaling
from two to seven pounds. It seems, too, that what fish
escaped were thoroughly scared and would not readily feed
on the surface of the waters.
The New South Wales Fisheries Department, with the
assistance of the New South Wales Rod Fishers' Society,
which gave 100,000 ova, distributed something approaching
200,000 fry last year, and this year it is the intention to
put out about three times as many.
In comparison with other countries, excepting in the ex-
perimental stage, under the direction of Mr. Frank Farnell,
the stocking of our rivers has not been liberal enough. Our
Governments fail to realise how attractive and remunerative
(possibly indirectly) our upland districts might be made
with a little more judicious expenditure, such as obtains in
Tasmania and New Zealand. The waters of the Monaro,
New England and Guy Fawkes districts of 3000 ft. altitude
and over are a most valuable asset and each should have
its hatchery. Wonders have been done with our unsuitably
situated hatchery at Prospect (on the hot plains near Sydney)
but nursery ponds on the Thredbo have been abandoned
for some reason not satisfactorily explained. The Fisheries
Department does not lack officers full of enthusiasm, but
they are handicapped for want of more sympathetic treat-
ment by those who hold the purse strings.
Even with the scant resources available, if anglers will
deny themselves a little and take only light toll of the
streams, trout fishing should recover in two or three years.
But if my bags are to be small, I look forward to by
no means the least satisfying aspect of the sport, good com-
panionship and the freedom of the countryside and charm
of running waters.
In fishing for perch one may have to go further afield,
but means of access are easy and there are plenty of
virgin waters that have never yet floated an artificial fly.
It is to the salt water that we must look, however, for the
greatest future development in angling. When I consider
that only about twenty-five years ago I was the only Sydney


angler who consistently used a rod and was subject to much
good-natured chaff therefor, the popular hold rod fishing
has since taken is indeed remarkable. Hundreds of anglers
now ply their rods at week-ends, from ocean rocks and
beaches, but few, strangely enough, do any ledgering from
boats, hand-lining still claiming many adherents.
Dr. Cox, who in July 1910 gave the Rod Fishers an
account of his and Mr. Merewether's fishing for game fish
off Tweed Heads, has many followers, and I think that the
near future will make Australia famous in this respect. In
all this salt water angling there will be great advance, both
in method and number of disciples. As an illustration of
possibilities in this direction I relate recent experiences at
Port Macquarie, which I pick out as one of similar happen-
ings possible in many other places. A night journey of
280 miles by train, then motor 12 miles, arriving at our
destination for breakfast. We engaged a boat for £1 a week,
doing our own pulling. Twenty minutes' rowing sufficed
to land us on the north side of the harbour. There we
walked about a mile and gathered pippies (shell fish) out
of the sand; enough to last three or four days. Through
the rising tide we fished for and landed some nice bream
and a whiting or two, returning to the township on the fall-
ing tide. Other days we fished inside the entrance from a
boat, kellicking so as to cast into the deep holes and eddies.
As the tide came in later during the week, giving us a longer
ebb, we fished off the sea-wall or wharves for blackfish,
and sometimes, with a low tide and calm sea, off the end
of the wall and adjoining beach for bream.
Blackfish up to a couple of pounds were plentiful and
gave excellent sport for hours at a time. Bream on the
beaches were biting well and two friends who devoted all
their time to this sport brought in every day half-a-dozen to
three dozen fine fish.
The time of the year, late June, was the most unfavourable
for inside fishing, yet during a fortnight we brought in
several nice bags of bream, whiting and flathead, quite
enough to satisfy us.
At night large numbers of bream are caught off the sea-
wall, local anglers using long bamboo poles, strong lines


and mullet bait with crane-like action! One man, fishing
for market, landed 150 which he sold for £9. We went
down to the sea-wall to see what was doing one night and
found the hero of the big catch hand-lining for jewfish.
After fish having taken two or three mullet baits, he at last
hooked a "jewie" of about 60 lbs. There was a terrific
commotion in the water, as our friend gave him no line
but just hung on. Eventually the fish broke away. My mate
tried his luck the next night, using half a large blackfish for
bait. The result was a strong snapper line twice broken.
In addition to the sport indicated, in favourable weather
one can troll for big game fish or fish for snapper and groper
outside the bar, and for those who like it, drifting up the
river in the season, with worms for bait, will account for
good hauls of flathead and whiting. The tides are strong
and good stern and bow kellicks are essential to keep the
boat steady when ledgering. Sound limbs and alertness are
needed to pull against the ebb rushing out to sea.
The river came down brown and fresh from the uplands
whilst we were there, to mingle with the clean, clear living
waters of the sea, and led our thoughts from the shore and
the sands and the waves to its windings through mangroves
and reed-bordered riverway; on through dairy farms and
green meadows and under rich eugenia trees; on among
ferns and dense tropical foliage sheltering great perch; then,
leaping and tumbling down hillsides and rocks of the moun-
tain "where the eagles drink," and so at last to the uplands
holding its pools and shallows and rapids and brawling
rivulets in which swim the replica of the first troutling
I caught under the flood-gate of the little English brook.
Between these events are the incidents set down herein,
nothing wonderful or sensational, just the ordinary fish-
ing of an ordinary mortal, related to carry on the purpose
aimed at when I initiated the N.S.W. Rod Fishers' Society,
viz., to be of some service to my fellow-anglers, not only
in the enjoyment of my favourite pastime, but by leading
them to appreciate more fully the beautiful associations of
the sport of angling.
[THE END.]


Wholly set up
and printed in Australia
Arthur McQuitty & Co.
451 a Kent St.,
Sydney.
