

Anglo Boer War
1899-1902
and
St. Klida’s Shcare therein
By
Outpost




PREFACE.
In submitting this brief account of the Boer War, and St.
Kilda’s share therein, to the patriotic public, the writer does so
in the full confidence that they will find it a correct outline of
the principal events which happened in South Africa, and the
result they had on Australasia, together with a faithful record
of the part our own seaside city played in demonstrating to the
civilised world how deeply the love of motherland is imbedded
in the hearts of those who have made this sunny clime the land
of their adoption, as well as of those Australian born; and as
such “ Outpost ” launches it out to win its way.


Anglo-Boer War , 1899-1902.
The war in South Africa, although it was only on a small
scale as regards the number of Boers who took part some
50 or 60,000, roughly estimated —was of a very far-reaching
character, on account of the political principles underlying the
cause of it, and the extent over which it ranged, owing to the
knowledge of the country which they possessed. Its value,
however, to the British Empire cannot be over-estimated,
showing, as it did, to the nations of the world the solidity of
the Empire, as evinced by the spontaneity with which even the
remotest parts hastened to offer assistance if required. Our
Island Continent was conspicuous in its patriotism, and in that
spirit I have taken upon myself the task of writing a very brief
outline of the Boer War in South Africa as it affected Victoria,
Australia, and, more particularly, the inhabitants of the City
of St. Kilda. Ido not intend to enter into the whole merits
of the cause of the strife in the light of the present day, or
what led up to it. At the same time, as I find that even now
there are a great number in my own immediate circle who do
not know the reason why the war took place, I will tell it briefly.
For a great number of years previously, Britons, Germans,
Americans, and Frenchmen were groaning under the iron rules
and laws of the Boers, although it was, for the most part,
British enterprise which had opened up the country. They
had no option but to submit, and, as they were denied the
franchise, had no hand in making the laws. The Transvaal
Government would give them no redress ; England, therefore,
having a suzerainty over the Transvaal, was applied to in a
petition signed by 21,000 British subjects, and a little later by
5,000 more. This was in April, 1899, the petitions merely
asking for enquiries into the condition under which they had
to live. Enquiries were made, and negotiations commenced
between Lord Milner, on behalf of British subjects, and Presi-
dent Kruger, on behalf of the Transvaal Republic. A great
deal of time was spent in diplomatic letters and conferences,


which, in the end, proved abortive, President Kruger declining
to yield one iota ; and, as a matter of fact, he had the president
and secretary of the South African League arrested for conven-
ing a meeting of residents in Johannesburg for the purpose of
ventilating their grievances, and, by moral suasion, try to
obtain some alteration of conditions which had become by that
time almost intolerable, the last straw being the unjustifiable
shooting of an Englishman, named Edgar, by a Boer policeman.
Negotiations were carried on between Lord Milner, the High
Commissioner, and President Kruger for several months, Lord
Milner using every means in his power to prevent recourse to
arms, assuring the Boers over and over again that England did
not want to interfere in the government of the Transvaal in
any way, and, as far as the matter of the franchise was con-
cerned, would be satisfied if British subjects of five years’
residence were given voting power. President Kruger declined
to allow that, and gave his final ultimatum as follows:
Ist. Two years’ residence before being naturalised.
2nd. Five years afterwards to be given the franchise if, ai
the expiration of that time, the persons applying be worth real
property valued at £l5O per annum, or an income of £2OO per
year.
3rd. Forswear the country from which they came, if they
desire to obtain rights and privileges as burgesses.
4th. Swear allegiance to the Transvaal Kepublic, and fight
for it if called upon to do so.
sth. lo stop massing troops on the frontier, and to withdraw
all troops already there.
6th. Land no more troops in any South African port.
With the condition that this ultimatum be agreed to by 3
o’clock on October 11th, 1899, otherwise it will be taken and
considered as an act of war.


The British Government, on receipt of this ultimatum, con-
sidered that peace was impossible, and simply acknowledged the
commun i cat i o n.
Shortly afterwards it was denied by the Transvaal Govern-
ment that England had any right to a suzerainty over the
Transvaal, and it was easily seen that was underlying all the
conferences that had taken place. The throwing off of Eng-
land’s yoke, as it was called.
At this time the Prime Minister, Mr. Balfour, speaking at
a meeting of the Primrose League, said that Great Britain s
capacity to defend her colonial possessions was equal to her
will.
Mr. Chamberlain, speaking in Parliament, said that four
times during the last fifteen years the aggression and intrigues
of the Boers had almost occasioned war, and this imposed a
military expenditure of half a million annually, and the mis-
government of the Transvaal was like a festering sore, poison-
ing the atmosphere of South Africa.
No reply by England to the “ Final Ultimatum ” of the
Boer President being forthcoming, the Bioers, who had every-
thing in readiness, commenced to march on Newcastle
(the British having abandoned it) ; and the British Govern-
ment, finding that all attempts to avert the war were
useless, and having tried every possible means to settle
tlie question amicably, decided that all that could be done
in honour to the British flag was done, and announced that
England would take steps to compel a settlement on the lines
proposed by the British High Commissioner, Lord Milner.
President Kruger used every means in his power to get other
nations to side with the Boers, without success, not because
they were unwilling, but simply because they were afraid,
knowing well that England is still Mistress of the Seas, and still
able to breed
The Boys of the Bull-dog breed.
Who guard old England’s shores.


Still, even as far back as May, 1899, the Paris “ Journal des
Debats,” condemned Kruger’s obstinacy in not redressing the
E blunders’ grievances.
It was soon ascertained that for several years past the
Boers had been preparing for the struggle now at hand, and it
was proved that, by way of Delagoa Bay alone, they had suc-
ceeded, unknown to the British, in importing 119,000 rifles,
6,-100 revolvers, and 398 tons of ammunition, and an unknown
quantity of heavy armament, pom-poms, etc. It will thus be
seen it was the intention of the Transvaal Government bo pro-
voke a breach with England in some way; and, indeed, so
daring and insolent in their demands had the Boers become that
some of them would decline to sell you (being a Britisher) a
cabbage until you learned to ask for it in their own language
(a lady who had spent some years in South Africa vouches for
the accuracy of this statement), while their treatment of the
Kaffirs (the rightful owners) was simply abominable, a Kaffir
being always compelled to walk into the gutter when passing a
Boer on the sidepath.
The cablegrams, meetings, conferences were only a pretext
on the part of the Transvaal Government to gain time, so as to
get their positions more secure. Men from Pretoria were sent
to Johannesburg to man the cannon there, regiments of Boers
had assembled at Yolksrad, and on the railway to Johannes-
burg, several squadrons, under Cronje, camped near the
frontier, close to Mafeking, in British Bechuanaland, and
Kruger had seized the best gold mines in Johannesburg on
October 6th, five dajs before the time given in which to reply
to his ultimatum, showing that he had no intention of
yielding to the reasonable demands of the Uitlanders, “ for,”
said he, “ the British bullets will fall harmless, as in the
Jameson raid.”
All this found England in a state of the utmost unprepared-
ness, the War Office not having even a map of the Transvaal
in its possession ; but, so transparent were the pretexts and


ROBERTSON, R. P. N., Killed at Middle
Kraal, May 29th, 1901. Aged 29 Years.


intrigues for gaining time by the Transvaal Government, that
the English Government decided to make a show of strength.
This it could not do with the troops already there, so orders
were given for mobilisation. It was decided to send 40,000
from England, and orders were given for the British forces at
Cape Town to hold themselves in readiness ; and, of course,
volunteers from all parts of South Africa were accepted, as it
was felt that
Who would bo free, themselves must strike the blow.
Colonel Baden-Powell was sent to Buluwayo to drill the
.volunteers, who, with a few hundred regulars, were all he had
to depend on for the defence of the town. And right good use
he made of the material at hand, as the sequel will show.
Sir George White arrived at Cape Town on October bth,
made all possible haste to Natal, and took up his quarters in
Ladysmith. On his leaving Cape Town, he was bombarded
from all quarters with the cry. “ Remember Majuba 1”
October Ist, General Sir Redvers Buller was appointed
Commander-in-Chief, took leave of the Queen on the 6th, and
sailed for South Africa on the 14th.
A detachment of New South Wales Lancers (which had been
sent to London about a year before this) volunteered for South
Africa, and sailed for Cape Town on October 11th. Their
departure from London was made the occasion of a great
demonstration in favour of Australia by the Londoners, as they
marched down to the docks headed by the Grenadier Guards
Band, and escorted by fully 40,000 people.
Canada offered to send 1,000 picked men. The offer was
accepted. Then followed Queensland, New Zealand, Victoria,
New South Wales, South Australia, and Tasmania, all vying
with each other to get the opportunity of upholding


BRITISH SUPREMACY IN SOUTH AFRICA,
thus showing the nations of the world that the colonies are
partners,” and not mere dependencies, ready to break off
when ripe.
All felt assured that England would not allow the sword to be
drawn without good cause, and Australians determined, as far
as they were able, they would not allow it to be sheathed
without honour. The fact that the English Parliament con-
sidered it impossible to accept the outrageous demands of the
Transvaal Government, and had decided that it could not with-
draw or modify any of its all too reasonable demands, coupled
with the fact that her Gracious Majesty Queen Victoria had
agreed with her Ministers that war was inevitable, was enough
for Australians, so they determined, like the gallant Six
Hundred, that it was not for them to reason why, but, at
the first opportunity offering, take up arms in the defence of
the Empire. So great, therefore, was the desire to help the
Motherland that men poured in from all quarters of the great
Empire of which we form no insignificant a part, and by such
spontaneous action the foreign nations and Briton’s enemies
were staggered.
The English Government vainly hoped that with such splcn-'
did offers from all parts of the Empire, and the great show of
strength, the Boers might see that business was intended, and
even at the eleventh hour withdraw the ultimatum ; but it was
all to no purpose. The Boers were getting more exacting in
their demands every day, and, knowing that France, Germany,
and particularly Russia, would delight in seeing old England
humbled, they hoped in some way to draw the other powers in.
and so find the British Empire weakened ; but they reckoned
without tire jolly tars and England’s greyhounds, which were
tugging at the leash to have a slap at any, no matter who it
was, that dared to tread on the British Lion's tail. While I
write this 1 can almost fancy I hear someone singing in the
distance —-
’Twas in Trafalgar’s Bay
The gallant fosmen lay ;
Each heart was bounding then.


For on this day, April 23rd, 1805, exactly a century ago, on
St. George’s Day, when the gallant Nelson was beating up to
Gibraltar against head winds, and the greatest combined fleet
the world has ever seen was sweeping the Atlantic, it truly
seemed as if the star of England was about to set in deepest
gloom.
But, after following the French and Spanish fleets to the
West Indies, and finding they had retraced their steps, he, too,
returned to England, and they met at fl raf algar, w hei e
Nelson not only defeated, but destroyed them; and it was
there he used the memorable words which have been rever-
berating for now one hundred years, “ England expects eveiy
man to do his duty,” and they will continue to be England s
watchwords wherever and as long as the English language is
spoken.
This victory left England in the position of mistress of the
seas, and she has held that position ever since. That is the
reason the other powers did not help the Boers —“ fear, not
“ love,” of England, thinly disguised, although the motto
of our Empire is “ the open door, wherein all nations may
enter free, and trade therein; still, they are all jealous of
England, while she on her part rather enjoys
HER SPLENDID ISOLATION.
As the day appointed in the Kruger Ultimatum drew near,
namely, October 11th, that being the last day for the British
Government to agree to the terms therein, it was seen that
neither power expected peace, for both British and Boers were
gradually trying to improve their position in case of war.
The Boers kept marching through Natal, and occupied
several towns en route, which had been abandoned by the
British as not worth holding until reinforcements arrived.


General White, on his part, stationed all his available troops
at Glencoe and Ladysmith, and commenced to throw up
entrenchments around Ladysmith, as he rightly conjectured the
Boers would endeavour to take it. He had up to this time only
some 10,000 men, but was hourly expecting reinforcements.
The Boers had assembled in great numbers around Ladysmith,
ready to commence the bombardment of the city. They had
several batteries of artillery, two siege guns, and a.bout 18,000
men.
During the three or four months previous to actual hostilities
being commenced, a great wave of patriotic feeling was spread-
ing over the Australian colonies, and large sums of money were
given to form a Patriotic Fund, many thousands of pounds
being handed to the Mayor of Melbourne for that purpose, and
St, Kilda contributed handsomely to the fund. Demonstra-
tions on a large scale were projected to enable those who had
no large sums to give to throw in their mite, and show their
patriotism by so doing.
A strong committee was formed under the presidency of the
Mayor of St. Kilda.
Executive Committee ;
Misses Peers and Steven, Messrs. F. Chamberlin, J. Chesters.
A. W. Clapham, J. Davis, W. Jenkins, H. M. Knox, and J. M. A.
Spottiswood.
Musical Committee :
Miss Atchison, Mrs. Davidson, Messrs. G. H. Andrews, H. A.
Kahn, L. Weichard, and A. Drakard.
Musical Director : Mr. Charles Truelove.
Treasurer, the Mayor ; Sub-Treasurer, E. M. Crouch :
Organising Secretary, 11. S. Walpole; Hon. Secretary, J. N
Browne.


A monster demonstration was organised for the Town Hall
and grounds, and a brilliant success was the result, as was also
another held at “ Rippon Lea,” the residence of the late Sir
Frederick Sargood, and kindly lent by him for the occasion.
Several hundred pounds were netted by these entertainments,
and the Patriotic Fund augmented thereby. But certainly the
most novel mode of collecting for the fund was the vast number
of Bovs’ and Girls’ Brigades, dressed in all sorts of fantistic uni -
forms, with kerosene tins for drums, and tin-whistles for fifes.
But the financial result was good in all cases, the donations
being from one halfpenny to half a sovereign, and it showed
that the patriotic spirit had permeated even to the youngest
members of the household. The Patriotic Committee enter-
tained a vast number of the St. Kilda Brigades in the City
Hall, and the singing of the patriotic songs was something to
remember.
The patriotic feeling was still rolling and gathering strength,
and so great was the enthusiasm of the people that the
Government decided to take the names of men —“ sons of the
Empire ” —who desired to go ; and a little later, when the war
had actually commenced, and England, or British arms, suffered
defeat under Buller, the enthusiasm culminated in a mighty
wave, which reached the farthest point of our Island Continent.
When England with the Boers war waged,
And news was flash’d to Austral’s shores;
At Ladysmith, where battle raged.
The British had to yield to Boers.
Oft and again had Buller failed
The place to succour or relieve;
Then squadrons from old England sail’d,
The nation’s honour to retrieve.
’Twas then Australian blood got warm.
With Empire’s cause they’d cast their lot;
They’d go the Tugela’s heights to storm,
From British shield wipe out the blot.


The native races, the Swazis and the Basutos, offered to
fight for England, but their offer was declined, as the British
Government would not fight blacks against whites, the fibers
being a white race. The offer of the Victorian Government
having, therefore, been accepted, as soon as it became known,
the head-quarters staff was besieged with offers of assistance in
men and horses ; but it was decided to send infantry, and the
necessary number being forthcoming twice over, it was decided
to send only those most physically fit, broken or bad teeth
being considered a bar to selection. So it will be easily seen
that when Australia offered help, the men were to be almost
without spot or blemish, not wasters, loafers, or criminals, but
the flower of the land. A very great number were sorely dis-
appointed at not being accepted, but they were told that later
on they would have a chance if more were required, those
accepted for the present being men who understood drill, and
had some knowledge of field exercises
On the 28th of October, 1899, the first Victorian Contin-
gent sailed lor South Africa. It was estimated that fully a
quarter of a million went to see them off, the streets being
Lned all the way from the city to the Port, where lay the giant
Medic, ready to sail the moment the brave fellows went on
boaid. Many, very many, who went to give them cheers of
encoui agement got choked in the effort. Of course, everyone
vas proud of the fine fedows, and glad to know that the lie
was that day given 10 the vile slander that Australians would
be willing to cut the painter from old England. Still, there
veie many sad partings, relatives and friends alike trying for
the last word or look.
When hands are linked that dread to part.
And heart is met by throbbing heart,
Oh, bitter, bitter is the smart
Of them that bid farewell!
St. Kilda was represented in the first contingent by some
strapping fellows, and many good wishes went with them, and
the day they sailed was then known as “Empire Day.” Lord


Brassey was Governor of Victoria at that time, and Sir George
Turner Premier of the Colony of Victoria. He afterwards
stood for St. Kilda in the Federal Parliament, and was elected
the first Commonwealth Treasurer. News from South Africa
kept filtering through, and it was, on the whole, not favourable
to the British. Large shipments of rifles and ammunition
were being smuggled in from Germany, and in many ways the
sympathy was on the side of the Boers; but all this troubled
England very little, and she stood to her guns, as she had ever
done before, trusting in God and doing the right. She asked
nothing for her subjects in South Africa but what she was will-
ing to concede to any foreigner, no matter where he came
from ; and in Australia, our part of the British Empire, a Boer,
or anyone else, can enjoy all the rights and privileges of British
subjects almost as soon as they land here, without any bond
whatever, or compulsion to fight for Australia except they
think proper.
On October the 12th, 1899, Baden-Powell, who had left Bulu-
wayo, and gone to Mafeking, sent the women and children
to Kimberley for safety, as he expected an attack on Mafeking,
He had not long to wait, as the Boers, under Cronje, attacked
tne town, and were twice repulsed ; but immediately after
Mafeking was isolated from the world. How Baden-Powell
and his handful of men defended that town against the fierce
and continued attacks made upon it by Cronje, Elloff, Snyman,
and others will ever remain as a monument of British endur-
ance, skill, strategy, and pluck. For two hundred and ten
days they defended the town, knowing little, if anything, how
things were going on outside all the time ; and with the know-
ledge that in a few days more the last food would be served
out, with small hope of relief from the outside, their position
was a most unenviable one. In the meantime, several attacks
were made on British positions at Kimberley, Glencoe, and
Ladysmith, all being repulsed; and on the 15th of October
Kimberley was isolated, and remained so until the 15th
day of February, 1900—124 days besieged. But the Boers


seemed to be frightened to make a vigorous assault, and
although several engagements had taken place, notably at
Glencoe, the Boers getting the worst, still the British had their
losses, and some of them very heavy, for they were led into
ambushes, and suffered accordingly.
Her Majesty Queen Victoria, even thus early in the struggle,
did not forget her loyal subjects, for she sent the following
message to them :
MESSAGE FROM THE QUEEN.
My heart bleeds for those dreadful losses, although my
troops are successful.
Please convey to my soldiers my heartfelt sympathy with
them in the hardships and dangers they are undergoing,
and my admiration for the gallantry they have shown once
more.
General Buller arrived at Cape Town on October 31st, and
found Ladysmith in a state of siege. He at once commenced to
take steps to relieve it, but found the task a severe one. A
few days before he arrived, on October 27th, at the battle of
Elands Laagte, Sir George White recovered or recaptured the
Maxim guns taken by the Boers in the “ Jameson raid at
Krugersdorp, on January Ist, 1896, at which there was great
rejoicing among the troops
The New South Wales Lancers arrived on November the 7th,
1899, and, in recognition of the earnest desire to let the Aus-
tralians have as much fighting as possible, they were sent to
De Aar, to be ready to help to raise the siege of Kimberley, as
it was still isolated; and the first Victorian Contingent having
arrived a few days after, they were also sent to De Aar, 500
miles north of Cape Town. The appearance and efficiency of
the Victorians were highly praised, but it was evident they
must have horses; so Colonel Hoad took them in hand, and
soon had them mounted. Some had to learn to ride, but this
comes easy to Australians.


WHELAN, JOHN, 5th Contingent, Killed at Wakker
stroom, December 16th, 1901. Aged 23 Years.


Of course, at this time most interest was centred in Lady-
smith, the crossing of the Tugela being a hard task, and several
attempts to cross it were attended with reverses and great loss
of life to the British. It was in one of these efforts that Lieu-
tenant Roberts, only son of Lord Roberts, got fatally wounded.
Lieutenant-Colonel Long had abandoned the battery, most of
the gunners being killed; Lieutenant Roberts tried to recap-
ture 'them, and paid forfeit with his life. Ladysmith was still
holding out bravely. The bombardment, which had ceased for
a while, recommenced on November the 11th, and General
Dullers efforts to relieve it w-ere all in vain, although he deter-
mined to personally direct the movements for its relief. Now
and then news was received from within the city, generally
favourable, but anxious, as provisions were running short, and
the Boers, with their siege guns, getting closer, and doing more
damage accordingly. The guns which Sir George White had
with him in Ladysmith were not of sufficient range, and it will
be remembered how the British had a Long Tom sent from
H.M. warship “ Terrible.” Capt. Scott, of that ship, invented a
gun-carriage to convey it there. The “ Powerful,” which was
at Cape Town, sent two also ; and with what splendid result, as
they soon silenced the siege guns which the Boers had been
using with such deadly effect. The “ Avgus ” war correspon-
dent, Mr. Donald Macdonald, arrived in Ladysmith on October
24th, and his vivid descriptions of the harrowing scenes within
the walls aie, no doubt, still fresh in the memories of the
readers of the “ Argus.”
Sir Redvers Duller having failed repeatedly to cross the
Tugela or relieve Ladysmith, Lord Roberts, the hero of Can-
dahar, was ordered to South Africa to take the supreme com-
mand on December the 18th. This was a severe trial to Lord
Roberts, as it was only the day before he had cabled to him the
death of his only son on the banks of the Tugela. But
although he had a duty to himself, he, being a true soldier,
put his duty to his Queen and country first, and did not mur-
mur or falter, but at once commenced to make preparations


for his departure. The nation's—or, rather, the Empire's—hope
was in him, and the send-off he got was something to be
remembered. Lord Kitchener of Khartoum was appointed his
chief of staff, so he sailed from India and joined him. The
British army knew they then had men at the helm who had
seen active service, and who had risen from the ranks to the
highest obtainable position by British pluck and skill. They
also knew that both Lord Roberts, the Comander-in-Chief, and
Lord Kitchener were strict disciplinarians ; and yet Lord
Roberts, at all events, was as tender-hearted as a child, and if
men did their duty they had nothing to fear.
On the arrival of Lord Roberts from London, he at once saw
that an effort to relieve Mafeking, Kimberley, and Ladysmith
must be made witiiout delay, for up to that time the Boers had
partial successes, owing to their knowledge of the country, and
some fearful carnage befell some of the British troops, notably
those at Magersfontein, where the gallant men of the Black
Watch were, owing to a mistake, almost annihilated. A good
deal of fighting had been done, and a few 7 killed on both sides,
now and then, but whenever it came to a charge with fixed
bayonets the Boers fled or retired, according to the strength of
the pursuit.
The Australian colonies were as enthusiastic as ever, and
each decided to send a second contingent, so on the 13th day
of January, 1900, the
SECOND VICTORIAN CONTINGENT
sailed in the good ship “ Euryalus ” for the seat of war. It has
been a matter of wonder to many how such a number of Aus-
tralians were willing to offer their lives for service to their
Queen when the strife wars so far removed from this sunny land
of ours; and, as a matter of course, the people: in thousands
flocked to say good-bye to the brave lads. The language,
unexpressed, of those thousands was, no doubt—-


May you dwell beneath the shadow
Of His wings wher’er you go,
That our thoughts and prayers are with you,
You will ever surely know;
For the love is tried and proven
That will keep your memory green,
Though the broad seas roll between us,
And the long years intervene.
When the soft breeze nestles round us.
At the closing of the day.
You’ll be thinking, oh! how often,
Of the homeland far away;
And you’ll hear the dear home voices,
In the wind’s familiar strain.
Saying, softly, “ God be with you
Till the day we meet again.”
Clarrie Davies.
Long before this the first Australian regiments had tasted
fire, and stood the test, as their forefathers had done, with their
faces to the foe, thus giving the lie to their detractors, who
said that, at the approach of an enemy, they would soon show
their backs. Unstinted praise was meted out to them for
valour shown in a number of engagements.
There being no sign of the Boers yielding, and their scouting
and skirmishing being so much in advance of the British,
thoughtful minds here began to consider whether, if we were
sending any more men, would it not be better to send back-
blockers, bushmen who would be able, owing to their close
attention to nature and their bush life, to meet the Boers at
their own game, and make the finest scouts the Empire pos-
sessed ; and as the Lieutenant-Governor, Sir John Madden, said
when the send-off was proceeding ; “ You are going, above all
other objects in this war, as scouts—mien who have to use all
that wit, knowledge, intelligence, and resource which you pos-
sess in such abundance to find out that knowledge and informa
tion for those who command our armies which it seems others'
are unable to do, and which will deal a more deadly blow than


any shots you could possibly fire. We look on you as our
‘ special contribution ’ to this war (the Victorian Government
sent this, the third Contingent, free of expense to the Mother-
land'), and we will watch your doings with anxious hearts and
bated breath.”
In the meantime a change of Government had taken place
in Victoria. Lord Brassey had sailed for England, and the
Acting-Governor, Sir John Madden, became the Queen's repre-
sentative for a time, and Mr. A. M'Lean Premier. Great
interest was, therefore, shown in the men of the “ Third Con-
tingent,” or Australian Bushmen, as they were called, who
swarmed into the Barracks from all parts of the bush to get
their names on the list. The number offered doubled those
required. Men who up to this time would,
With ringing cheer and stockwhip crack,
Their cattle muster, brand, and count;
’Midst clatt’ring hoofs, and press, and rack.
Then much depended on their mount.
Now the stockwhip was discarded
For the bayonet and the rifle—-
Transformation just regarded
By the bushmen quite a trifle.
The bugle call took Jackey’s place.
Clarion-like, both shrill and clear.
To horse! to arms! ye Austral race,
Australian Bushmen have no fear.
Although coming from the bush, where there is not supposed
to be anything wrong wilh men, they were all subjected to a
severe medical test, and for very flimsy reasons many were dis-
carded, but told to turn up for the next contingent, as, no
doubt, more bushmen would be sent later on. They were then
all tested at riding and jumping, at which, of course, they wer e
at home, and then they were tested at shooting, and finally sent


to Langwarrin Military Camp to learn to drill as troops, all this
emphasising the fact that, if any were sent, the flower of the
land it must be.
To Langwarrin Camp all had to go,
Some drill to learn, and horses train,
The seeds of discipline to sow,
And fit them for the long campaign.
Officers were sent down to coach and drill them, both as
infantry and mounted men, but they found their task compara-
tively easy, and were simply astounded with the intelligence
shown both by men and horses. They stayed at Langwarrin
for several weeks. While there squatters sent some splendid
animals to mount them on, as a free contribution.
Some ladies, who had no relations going to the war.
sent all manner of comforts to them, knitted socks,
guernseys, etc., etc., and all vied with each other in
doing something for the “ Boys.” No day in camp passed
without some being visited and feasted, but on Sundays the
camp was alive and crowded with visitors. On one Sunday
over sixty St. Kilda people visited the camp, and invited a
number of the “ Boys ” to a sumptuous repast, the last the}’
had for many a day. I mention this to show that the whole
of the people were patriotic, and desired to show their approval
in some way, as all could not go to the war themselves. And
the people of St. Kilda were especially enthusiastic. The
former contingents marched from the Barracks through the
streets, but the Bushmen, fully equipped, rode all the way from
Langwarrin, via Cheltenham, the whole of the distance being
bright with colour, streamers, flags, banners, and flowers,
wreaths, festoons, and painted expressions or mottoes, such as
“ God Speed the Bushmen !” “ God be with you till we meet
again!” and the like; while Union Jacks, Irish colours, Stars
and Stripes, and our own Australian devices were to be seen on
every side, as far along the road as the eye could reach.


The Bushmen were rather astounded to see on one verandah
some of their old friends from the bush come to say good-bye
to them, viz., kangaroo, wallaby, and opossum, looking down on
them in sadness as they marched away to the home of the lion
and the springbok. Many a weary hour had been lightened
in the backblocks by chasing those marsupial animals, and it
was fitting that they should be one of the last familiar objects
the Bushmen saw in the land which gave them birth. Every
device or piece of bunting spoke volumes of sentiment, all
STREWN IN THE PATH OF GLORY,
along which rode the boys for over twelve miles, through count-
less crowds, one triumphal march, witnessing many stirring
scenes.
When they reached Brighton, a halt was made, where the
mayor and councillors and citizens had assembled to do them
honour, and from a large platform the mayor, Councillor Stone,
addressed them, and wished them God-speed and safe return,
saying: “We applaud your action, and feel quite satisfied you
will do Victoria credit.” Passing on to the Ellsternwick portion
of Caulfield, where the mayor and councillors had been waiting,
along with the children of the schools and the Caulfield Cadets,
another halt was made, and the Mayor of Caulfield (Cr. R, L.
Phillips) also addressed them, and said all had confidence in
them, and were proud of them. As soon as they reached St.
Kilda, the Town Clerk, Mr. J. N. Browne, saluted Captain
Dobbin, and addressed a few words to him and other officers
and men, wishing them all sorts of good luck and a triumphant
return. They then took a detour from the main street, along
Blessington and Barkly streets, and so spoiled the St. Ki’da
send-off.
The reason given for leaving the main street was the slipperi-
ness of the blocks for horses, but when the next contingent
was flooded out at Langwarrin it came through St. Kilda at


night, and galloped up the slippery blocks as if to have a good
practice for the Spion Kops of South Africa. No gingerbread
about bushmen. Fortunately for the credit of our city, the
nine Bushmen who had been old St. Kilda boys were given a
fine send-off in the City Hall on the Thursday before, and
presented with a silver-mounted pipe and tobacco pouch each,
and entertained afterwards in the mayor's parlour. (So, as far as
the residents of St. Kilda were concerned, all was done that could
be done under the circumstances. They then rode through the
park to the Barracks, where they were addressed by Sir John
Madden, who said, among other things:
We know that, in whatever position you are placed, you will
nobly do your duty, and, when facing the foe, will stand firm as a
rock while there is a man left of you. You know the trust we
repose in you, and we know that the pride with which we look
upon you will be redeemed at your hands.
The Premier, Mr. M'Lean, also addressed them, and said :
I thank you, on behalf of the colony of Victoria, for the signal
service you are rendering the colony by demonstrating to the whole
of the civilised world that Victoria’s sons are in every way worthy
of the great race from which they have descended.
The Bushmen were formed four deep on horseback, and
began their last march in Victoria, from the Barracks over
Prince’s Bridge, up Swanston-street, along Collins-street, and
away to Port Melbourne, every yard of the streets being
crowded, Indian tile being the only way the Bushmen could get
along. Everybody was proud of them, and wanted to give
them a handshake, a handkerchief, cigar, or a drink, and the
lady who got even a brass button in return was made proud for
life.
The Port was reached at last, and the whole of the three
hundred and twenty-three horses were shipped in one hour and
four minutes, thus establishing a record. The performance of
the Second Contingent was considered good, but it remained for


the “ Bushmen ” to establish a record. Very soon afterwards
the time for leaving drew near, and there w r ere very few of
the many thousands assembled who cared to say good-bye, the
hope expressed being —
Not good-bye, oh! not good-bye,
W© will only say “ So long.”
Splendid best done, you will cry,
Home, for home in triumph song.
Watchful ©yes will b© on you,
Eager readers of your deeds ;
Bushmen Scouts, from Austral due,
“ God be with you ” in your need.
Then, when peace is quite restor’d,
And wise counsels do prevail.
With light step you’ll spring on board,
Homeward, joyous, you will sail.
Welcome back to Austral arms,
Warm welcome we’ll keep green;
God will keep you safe from harm,
True to country, true to Queen.
There were many sad scenes witnessed on board the good
ship “ Euryalus ” and on the pier that day. Loved faces
impressed on the hearts and memories, pride and joy, mingled
with sorrow and sadness, knowing that when home would be
reached there would be empty chairs in many homes, some of
them, alas! never to be tilled by the same manly forms again.
But while these thoughts welled up from sorrowing hearts, the
whistle sounded for the ship to be cleared, and the last word
had to be said, and in many instances not a word was spoken -
too great the sorrow for words.
Ah! who can paint the briny tear
We shed when forced to sever;
To part for months, perhaps for year's.
To part perhaps for ever.


ROLLS, W. A. , Died at Potchsfstroom, May 29th,
1902. Aged 29 Years.


Tlie “ Eurvalus ” soon let go her moorings, and the living
freight of men and horses sailed away, taking with them the
best wishes of the people of Victoria for their safety and vic-
torious return. The First and Second Contingents had by this
time shown that Australians oould hold their own with others
from any part of the British Empire; and on all occasions
when they met the enemy they gave a good account of them-
selves. So when Lord Roberts saw what metal they were made
of, he decided that they were just the sort of men to go up
north, and as soon as the Victorian Bushmen arrived at Cape
Town they were sent round to Biera, a port almost unknown
up to that time; but in sending them, and also some of the
contingents from the other colonies, he knew what he was
doing, as they would be a strong factor in relieving Mafeking.
The troops suffered great hardships on the journey, and a great
many of the horses died.
On arrival at Biera they formed a camp, which was their
first base camp, at Mirandellas, 320 miles from Biera, to which
they travelled by rail, and then they marched to Buluwayo,
280 miles. They marched through Umtali. The distance from
Biera to Mafeking is 1,140 miles. By the arrival of regiments
from other Australian colonies, the number was increased to
1,100, and they were to be joined by other Australians, so as
to make up 2,500, which, with 2,500 Imperial troops, were
intended to operate, under General Lord Carrington, for the
lelief of Mafeking from the north, and Sir A. Hunter from
the south.
And so confident was Lord Roberts of the success of his plan
of campaign that he ventured the opinion that Mafeking would
by this means be relieved about the middle of May. So, as
soon as all was ready, the troops with Colonel Mahon, under Sir
A. Hunter, moved from the south, and the Australians from the
north, under Lord Carrington, proceeded by forced marches
and with very light kits. But the Boers, who up to this time
were very brave as far as bombarding at a safe distance was con


cerned, did not remain to be trapped between two fires. So
when the troops under Colonel Mahon arrived the opposition
had disappeared, and they entered the town shortly afterwards.
Karri Davies, an Australian, it is believed, was the first to
enter. The siege, which lasted 218 days, was then raised. To
describe the rejoicings in all parts of the British Empire on
its announcement would fill a large volume.
Baden-Powell’s mother was serenaded by a great multitude
in Hvde Park, where she resided. Demonstrations of great
magnitude were carried out, and thanksgiving services held
throughout the Empire. Colonel Baden-Powell was, as a
matter of course, promoted to be Major-General.
Her Majesty sent messages to the troops and people in Matc-
hing, and specially warm thanks to Colonel Baden-Powell.
The Australians in all the colonies lost their reason for a
time, and the Empire’s foundations were shaken to the centre.
St. Kilda held a great demonstration at night. A monster
procession, preceded by a band, started from the railway
station, Fitzroy-street, and, headed by the Mayor, Town Clerk,
and Corporation Officers, marched to the Town Hall, where a
magnificent patriotic demonstration was kept up to a late hour.
A few of the gayer spirits then adjourned to the Tradesmen’s
Club, where the rejoicings were all gone over again.
In other parts the war was still raging. A portion of the
Australians was sent into the Kindarst district, travelling 500
miles, in order to stamp out the rebellion which had broken
out there. This they successfully accomplished, and by so
doing the Generals could see of what stuff they were made.
Colonel Pole-Carew, speaking of some of their manoeuvres,
said :
You Australian Bushmen have learnt a.s much in a few drills as
would have taken fifteen years to knock into a cavalry regiment in
England.


This is a bit strong, but it is only one of the many speeches
made in reference to the intelligence and fighting qualities of
the Australians.
The S.A. papers reported that the Imperial troops “ are full
of admiration of the qiiickness in mastering the ‘ lay of the
country ’ shown by the Australians, and splendid individual
capacity for fighting/’
TESTIMONY OF FREE STATE BOERS.
The Australians are very popular, capable men, homely, like
ourselves, well mounted, and have great fighting qualities.
THE LONDON “ TIMES.”
The distinction which the Australians have earned in the
many engagements in which they have participated is a distinct
proof of the value of Colonial troops.
It is, therefore, no wonder that the War Office asked for
more. So the fourth, or “ Imperial Bushmen,” were got ready,
this Contingent at the sole expense of the Imperial authorities.
They formed the largest regiment yet sent, numbering 630.
and sailed on May 2nd, 1900, in the steamship ‘‘ Victorian,”
their send-off being a repetition of the same fervid enthusiasm
as the preceding Contingents. Lieutenant-Colonel Kelly went
in charge of them, and good work they did under his command ;
in fact, each Contingent, as soon as they got to work, seemed
to be able to add fresh lustre to the deeds already accomplished
by Australians.
God speed you in your country’s cause,
For which you willing risk your life;
In future’s womb, we trust, new laws
Will peace secure, and stop all strife.
Meanwhile, Lord Roberts was busy working out plans for
further successes, and in them the relief of Kimberley was
included. The Australians at Belmont, Orange River, and
Modder River got orders to join the Kimberley relief columns,
and with rapid movements the British army proceeded ; and so


quickly were the movements accomplished that the inhabitants
did not know succour was at hand until within one hour of
their liberation. When relieved, they were almost delirious
with joy. And again Queen Victoria sent a message congratu-
lating the troops on their bravery, and the inhabitants of
Kimberley on upholding
BRITISH PRESTIGE AND SUPREMACY.
In other parts the Boers were still busy, and, instead of being
more willing to come to terms, they boasted that they would
sweep the British into the sea.” The leaders were still obsti-
nate, notwithstanding the fact that wherever the Britishers met
them in close quarters they lost the day. President Kruger, in
one of his tirades against British rule, said that the expense of
the war “ would stagger humanity.”
And truly it seemed likely enough, as the cost of the army
in South Africa up to that time was simply enormous. How-
ever, the Commander-in-Chief was determined to see it through
as quickly as possible, so he kept the troops moving on, as it is
called since, on his “ ever-victorious ” march. General Buller
kept plugging away to get Ladysmith relieved, and, as the
Boers were kept well informed as to what Lord Roberts was
doing, they began to make preparations to evacuate Lady-
smith ; so at last the task of General Buller was made easy,
and, crossing the Tugela, he found the Boers gone, and soon
after entered Ladysmith. So, after being besieged for four
months with an overwhelming force of Boers, it was relieved
on March Ist, 1900. General Buller and Sir George White
then met, and General Sir George White’s first words were
those of a true soldier—■
“ THANK GOD WE KEPT THE FLAG FLYING.”
Public rejoicings and thanksgivings were held all over the
British Empire at the relief of Ladysmith. At one time
General Buller had no less than eighty-three guns directed at


the Boers at the Tugela, and the Boers had the flooding of
Ladysmith in contemplation, and had got 1,500 Kaffirs at work
with that object in view; but they had to abandon it, finding it
was impossible.
The Orange Free Staters having thrown in their lot with the
Boers, Lord Roberts then directed his attention to their capital,
namely, Bloemfontein, and marching on, with some little slioav
of opposition, he reached that place on the 13th of March. The
following cablegram to Her Majesty Queen Victoria speaks for
itself, and shows that Lord Roberts, successful as he was, did
not at any time take the credit to himself, but was simply an
instrument in the Almighty’s hands;
To Her Most Gracious Majesty.
By the help of God, and the bravery of your Majesty’s
soldiers, I have taken possession of Bloemfontein, and
hoisted the British flag over the Presidency, which has been
vacated ” by Mr. Steyn, the late President of the Orange
Free State. The Mayor of Bloemfontein met me two miles
out from the town, and presented me with the keys of the
public offices.
The inhabitants gave the troops a cordial welcome. All
quiet.—ROBERTS.
The Free State was, therefore, annexed to the British pos-
sessions in South Africa. The late President said he would
recapture it with In a week. It is now four years, and that
promise is not yet fulfilled.
The Boers, however, were not yet conquered, and fought stub-
bornly, mostly at long range, to try and stem the tide of vic-
tory which was following Lord Roberts’ footsteps. General
French began by this time to attract attention by his fin© body
of cavalry, and his daring fights ended mostly in his favour.
And seeing what can yet be done by Australian troopers and
British cavalry shows plainly that the overwhelming influence
of a vast hurricane of mounted men remains to-day what it was
in the days of Napoleon and Wellington. The great movement


by Lord Roberts to bring that great Boer leader, Cronje, to bay
was now put into execution, and, by almost inspired skill, he
was able to overtake and surround him at Koedoes Rand Gully,
Paardeberg. Cronje asked for an armistice for 24 hours, but
the answer came prompt, and to the point:
Not on© minute. Surrender or fight.
Cronje: W© will fight to death.
And they fought until the gully was a shamble. They then
surrendered on February 27th, the anniversary of Majuba. So
Majuba was avenged, and General Cronje was sent to St.
Helena, a prisoner of war. Again the rapidity with which
Lord Roberts used and moved the British paralysed the Boers.
The Free Staters, in other parts, were, however, as trouble-
some as ever, and battles were fought at Ladybrand, Colesberg,
Betteulie, Aliwal North, Winburg, and a great many other
places, numbers being killed on both sides. Wepner was
besieged for ten clays, but was relieved shortly afterwards.
There was certainly no rest for the British troops, as the Boers,
under De La Rey, De Wet, and others, continued to make
British progress very slow by their being able to traverse the
country so quickly, knowing every inch of the places they
travelled through.
Turning again to the Transvaal, Johannesburg was occupied
by the British without much opposition. It is the most impor-
tant town in the Transvaal. It was founded in 1886, and
stands 5,600 feet above sea level. At that time the population
was (within a radius of three miles) 102,100 ; to-day it is pro-
bably double that. Some splendid buildings have been erected.
The population is much mixed, but the language spoken is
mostly English. Taken on May 30th, 1900. British troops,
including Australians, of course, were honoured by being
marched through the large towns whenever they were relieved.
Pretoria was founded in 1855, and is the capital. It is rather
a sleepy little town, with a population of about 12,000. It was


taken possession of by the British on June sth, 1900. Pre-
toria had made preparations for a two years’ siege, but the
Hero of Kandahar was left out in that calculation. Relieving
two besieged places in two or three days is a grand record.
The Australians were kept at it night and day, under various
Generals, their horsemanship being put to severe tests in fol-
lowing after the Boers, and the best possible use was made of
them in capturing mules, sheep, cattle, and horses, as many as
12,000 at one time being taken. The British Tommies and
the Australians got on together famously, both on the battle-
field and in camp.
EXTRACT FKOM LETTER PROM THE PRONT.
Ihe English sold lei's think we are perfect wonders in the way
we do our riding and shooting, but they Eav© a great contempt
tor their own mounted infantry. On several occasions Tommy
has lost himself, and we have to go out and find him. They
wander out cf camp into the scrub, and cannot find their way back.
Several of the Yeomanry were sent out on a patrol, and they lost
themselves. They came to a farm, and asked their way to our
camp. The Boer took them to a laager, where they were stripped,
and their arms and horses taken from them. They were then sent
back with a note from the Boer Commander, saying they were use-
less there, and he could take them any time he wanted them.
For months at a stretch the Australians did not sleep under
a tent. Many of them contracted sickness, from which they
never recovered. Even some of those who returned will have
rheumatics, etc., for the rest of their lives. But one of the worst
things they had to do was when they had orders to hum the
farmhouses.
EXTRACT FROM LETTER FROM THE FRONT.
What we are doing now goes against the grain of all our fellows
burning the houses, and turning the women and children out
on the veldt. This is not overdrawn in the slightest, as I have
myself, on more than on© occasion, given my rations to the women
and children, and plenty others have done the same. There is
not another body of men more willing and ©aerer to fight than we
ate, but we cannot fight women and children. We have just
petitioned Lord Roberts, through our officers, to excuse the Aus-
tralian Bushmen from so doing.


The Australians took almost a boyish delight in getting even
with the Boers, but not in burning their homes. Of course, the
burning of houses was only resorted to as a last extremity, and
after repeated warnings against treachery by Lord Roberts.
The Boers had so often shown a flag of truce, and Avhen the
British approached under it, they found traps prepared for
them, and a great number of them were shot in this way. As
soon, however, as possible after a house was burned, the inmates
were escorted by the British to a refugee camp, and were well
cared for there, although the old saying, “ All is fair in love
or war,” would be the motto of any other nation except Eng-
land.
The horses taken over to South Africa were all done up by
this time, or what was left of them, as on many occasions the
Boers shot most of the horses, notably at Roster’s River and
Elands River, where nearly all the horses were stampeded or
shot.
Very many of the letters from our boys stated that it looked
often as if the British Generals did not want the war over too
soon, as opportunities were lost repeatedly of gaining a victory.
An instance :
EXTRACT FROM LETTER FROM THE FRONT.
We were out under Generals Paget and Plummer, and caught up
to Commander Irasmus and his men. He asked for an armistice
for ten days, which was granted. When the ten days were up
lie did not surrender, but cleared out in the night. We galloped
after him for nine miles, but only succeeded in engaging his rear-
guard, which, however, would not stand—the old tale; and our
horses were too done up to follow them further.
General after General, however, spoke so well of the work of
the Australians that the War Office asked for further reinforce-
ments from Australia. In fact, it had almost become a neces-
sity to do so, as the First and Second Contingents had served
the required term, and most of them were so fagged that they


KNOX, EDWIN, Victorian Bushmen, Died at
Wonderboom, February 26th, 1901. Aged 24 years.


wanted to get back ; and, to keep up the strength of the
mounted men,
THE fifth and sixth contingents were
ENROLLED.
No trouble whatever was experienced in getting the men,
although this time we were to send 1,000, and 4,000 offered.
Like those who preceded them, they were a fine lot of men,
and got a good send-off in the “ Orient,” although the novelty
had worn off a good deal, as a matter of course, because as soon
as one Contingent went away arrangements were commenced to
get more ready. On their departure on February 15th, 1901,
in the “ Orient,” Major-General Downes addressed them thus :
Men of the Fifth and Sixth Contingents, when addressing the
other Contingents I asked them to emulate the deeds of the British
army; but your brother Australians have done so well that I only
ask you to emulate them, who have already nobly fought and bled
for the cause of their country, and honour of the flag. And I
trust, with Lord Roberts, you will be like heroes on the battlefield,
and gentlemen everywhere. So, once more—
To thousand men we bade farewell,
Secure in them our honour dwelt;
In years to com© their deeds we’d, tell,
’Mong kopje, spruit, and tangl’d veldt.
The war had by this time resolved itself into guerilla warfare,
which might last for a very long time ; and, as a matter of
fact, the Br itish authorities reckoned it would do so, and were
preparing accordingly by taking over large farms from the
Boers, giving them receipts for same, and taking out and
putting in crops for future use, purchasing cattle, etc.
Three Australians whom the writer knew were in charge of
these Imperial Government farms, one as Inspector-General,
and the other two as assistant inspectors.


EXTRACT FROM ASSISTANT INSPECTOR’S LETTER.
“ I have got a position which just suits me, viz., manager and
assistant inspector of the Imperial Government farms. The inspec-
tor-geiie al is an Australian, from Ballarat. I have already put
• u 300 of potatoes, 0.5 acres of mealies, and a splendid lot of
regetab.es. I also send 351 b. of butter and 150 gallons of milk
every day to the hospitals for sick soldiers. I have four white men
and fifty-three natives on the farm, so have got my hands full. I
still belong to the Victorian Bushmen’s Corps as well. I enclose
some photos of myself and the hands, and, although I like the work
here, I will go home with my comrades when going/’
It will thus be seen that the knowledge- of bush life and
farming which the Bushmen’s Contingent possessed was turned
to account by the Supply Department of the Imperial Govern-
ment at Pretoria.
From the extent and character of the country, it was reason-
able to infer that the war would be prolonged, more particu-
larly as the Boers were still very strong, and were at home on
the veldt and its fastnesses, and their Generals, with limpet
tenacity, clung to their positions, and were indignant at the
mention of making peace. They sent ambassadors to Europe,
and Kruger himself announced his intention of going, hoping
to enlist the active interference of other powers; but in vain.
In the meantime ■ they kept active, and made numbers of
descents on garrisons and undefended places. The next place
'of consequence to tackle was Rustenberg, 80- miles from
Mafeking. They concentrated most of their strength there,
and the garrison was small compared with the invading force.
The Boers would have been very jubilant if they could have
captured it, but some of the Australians were there, and with
them, in command, the Hero of Mafeking, Major-General Badeu-
Powell. For six weeks the small garrison held out, and, after
several attempts to relieve them, General lan, Hamilton suc-
ceeded in doing so, much to Lord Roberts’ satisfaction, as he
was beginning to be anxious for its safety, and of the troops
inside. The Australians were proud of being under Mafeking’s


hero,' and had every confidence in him to stand the siege. The
result shows that the confidence was not misplaced, and proves
the truth of the old adage that nothing succeeds like success.
After the relief of Rustenberg, South African artists hit on
the happy idea of painting on the beautiful silver leaves of
trees which grow there the names of places which had been
besieged, and sold them to the Australians. For instance, on
some were the following:
Mafeking, isolated 12/10/99.
Relieved by Col. Mahon, 17/5/00. 218 days besieged.
Out of compliment to Col. Mahon, they painted the Irish sham-
rock on this one :
Kimberley, isolated 15/10/99; relieved by General French 15/2/00.
124 days besieged. British flag.
Rustenberg, isolated 27/7/99; relieved by General lan Hamilton.
42 days besieged.
And a number of other devices, such as the English rose ; flags,
past (Boers), present (Union Jack).
The work on them was most artistically done, and they form
a most interesting record of the most notable events in the
South African war.
Attempts were made to isolate both Kimberley and Rusten-
berg again, but they proved futile. By this time a great num-
ber of the rank and file of the Boers began to see the useless-
ness of holding out, and numbers surrendered voluntarily, while
the British Generals compelled others to surrender. General
Prinslow and 1,000 men surrendered to General Sir A. Hunter
but there were still many thousands, under De Wet and De La
Rey and others, who were doing all they could to fan the flame
and harass the British wherever they could manage to do so :
and, as they had opportunities for getting horses which the
British had not, they were enabled to get away when sore


pressed. But finding ns opportunity, as they thought, of cap-
turing a small garrison of Australians and Britishers at a camp
at Elands River, they surprised it, and surrounded it. Some
verses by George E. Evans describe it so eminently that I give
the words:
ELANDS RIVER.
It was on the fourth of August, as five hundred of us lay
In the camp at Elands River, came a shell from De La Rey.
We were dreaming of home faces,
Of the old familiar places,
And the gum-trees, and the sunny plains five thousand miles away.
But the challenge woke and found us,
With four thousand rifles round us,
And Death stood laughing at us, at the breaking of the day.
We got the Maxims going, and the field gun into place,
She stilled the growling of a Krupp upon our southern face;
Round the crimson ring of battle
Swiftly rang the deadly rattle
As our rifles searched the foie lines with a desperate menace.
Who would wish himself away,
Fighting in our ranks that day,
For the glory of Australia and the honour of the race.
They called us to surrender, and they let their cannon lag.
They offered us our freedom for the striking of the flag;
Army stores were there in mounds.
Worth one hundred thousand pounds,
And we lay, battered, round them, behind trenclp and sconce, and
crag.
But we sent the answer in,
They could take what they could win,
We hadn’t come five thousand miles to fly the coward’s rag.
We saw the guns of Carrington come on and fall away.
We saw the ranks of Kitchener across the kopje grey;
For the sun was shining then
Upon twenty thousand men,
And we laughed, because we knew, in spite of hell-fire and delay.
On Australia’s page forever
We had written Elands River,
We had written it forever and a day!


STEWART, LESLIE, Killed at
Witpoort, July 11th, 1901, Aged 19 Years.


Elands River was relieved by troops under Lord Kitchener,
and they took 300 prisoners to mark their success. It was
ascertained that the Boers had fired 1,800 shells into the camp
during the 12 days of siege.
President Kruger sailed for Europe on October 20th, with
the intention of stirring the dying embers of discontent against
England; but thought of those ocean greyhounds again made
them (the other powers) think of the old fable of the moth
and the candle, so they let sleeping dogs lie.
Important changes were made at this time at the War Office.
Lord Roberts had decided to go to England, leaving Kitchener
in command, as the war was, to all intents and purposes, about
to come to a termination, and he was appointed to succeed
Lord Wolseley at the War Office. Lord Wolseley, before retir-
ing, paid a great compliment to the Australians by saying:
No troops bad done better service thon the colonial troops.
Lord Roberts, on taking leave of them, said :
The magnificent spirit and fighting qualities displayed have called
forth the admiration cf all your associates in arms. I am proud of
your exemplary record in South Africa. You were heroes on the
battlefield, and gentlemen everywhere. You have proved your-
selves gallant and capable soldiers. I consider it a great honour
to have such men under me, and I will never forget the noble work
done by the colonial troops in all branches of the service.
The High Commissioner, Lord Milner, speaking of the Aus-
tralians, said that he had remarked the entire absence of dis-
content, although they had trekked a distance of 2,900 miles,
while their courage was undeniable.
This testimony is all the more precious, when, as a matter
of fact, we know many times they were short of rations, and
had to go without many a meal, sometimes having flour and
water only ; and their clothes were tattered and torn to rags
by the thorny scrub through which they had to ride oftentimes


in pursuit of the enemy, with their legs bleeding. For a long
time they rarely got a night’s rest, as they travelled a good
deal in the night time as well as the day. Of course, a great
number had to go to the hospital. Flesh and blood could only
stand a certain amount, and to us here it is satisfactory to
know that there were very few, if any, shamming; but, all the
same, to give an instance of how they suffered, I quote from a
letter from the front:
We got to Pretoria for a spell last week. We were completely
knocked up. Out of my squadron (A) only fifteen were able to
take the field. Ninety-five strong we were when we left Victoria.
It will thus be seen that we have reason to be proud of the
powers of endurance of our boys, as well as their fighting quali-
ties. On some of their marches they came across many objects
of interest. They were at Watervaal several times. That is the
place where the English prisoners were kept inside of barbed
wire, which was so close, as one writer says, that you could
hardly put your fingers through; and they also were on the
spot where Lo Bengulo, the great native chief, made his last
stand, and submitted to England’s rule.
The Australian colonies had for some time been pushing the
federation of the colonies question to the front, and, of course,
great use was made of the war to show that union is strength,
and it was decided to submit the question to the electors. So
a poll was taken, and resulted in a large majority being in
favour of Federation. All the colonies joined the Common-
wealth. New Zealand was asked to throw in her lot also, but
declined, for the present at all events.
On January 20th, 1901, a cable arrived announcing the
serious illness of Queen Victoria, and on the 22nd another
announcing her death. Her long and just reign had endeared
her to all her subjects, and other powers also mourned her loss.
Lord Roberts, on arriving in England from South Africa, had
an audience with her, and could tell her that, although peace
was not yet established, to all intents and purposes the war
was over.


The sorrow for her death was keenly felt by her army in
South Africa. One, writing from the front, said
The good old Queen has crossed the bar at last. How the troops
would have liked to see her live to the end of the war! Pretoria
was in mourning; all the shops were draped in black for three days.
We went to the memorial service; it was beautifully rendered.
Her son, the then Prince of Wales, ascended the throne,
taking the’ title “ Edward the Seventh.” So the army com-
menced to serve under a King. Shortly after his accession to
the throne, it was decided to send Prince George of Wales to
Australia to open the Commonwealth Parliament. He arrived
in the “ Ophir ” on May the 6th, and the first Commonwealth
Parliament was opened on the 9th day of May, 1901.
The visit of the heir apparent to the throne to Australia was
made a time of great rejoicing, and very little business was
done for over a week. A number of the returned soldiers took
part in the proceedings, and the rifle clubs of the colony of
Victoria took a prominent part in lining the streets.
The war, up to this time, had cost England £50,000,000, and
was still being carried on at great expense, as troops worn out
had to be replaced by more being sent out from England, and
mounted men from the colonies were eagerly sought for. Those
returning to Victoria, having served the term of one year for
which they volunteered, were given very warm send-offs at
Cape Town, and each one was presented with a souvenir card
by the Mayor of Cape Town. The card was beautifully
designed in gold and colour, with the official stamp in the
corner, and the names of the places where they fought the prin-
cipal battles printed on it, with the following address, at the
bottom :


To the Officers, Non-Commissioned Officers, and Men of Her
Majesty’s Volunteer Forces of Australia, Tasmania, and New
Zealand, —
Cape Town joins with the Em pi re in feelings of heartfelt thanks
for the signal services which Her Majesty’s citizen soldiers have
rendered in upholding the Imperial authority in South Africa. The
Empire is justly proud of the gallant conduct of the volunteer forces
during the engagements throughout the campaign, and Cape Town
congratulates the volunteers upon the consummation of a service
which has resulted in the consolidation of the Empire, and which
has cemented the ties of affection between the colonies and the
mother country. The citizens of Cape Town wish you a prosperous
voyage and a happy home-coming, where our hearts will join in the
rejoicing welcomes which await you.
J. O'REILLY, Mayor.
Belmont, Enslin, Modder River, Kimberley, Paardeberg, Bloem-
fontein, Surrender Hill, Wepner, Talana, Elandslaagte, Pieter’s
Hill, Ladysmith, Johannesburg, Pretoria, ‘ Machdodorp, Mafeking,
etc., etc.'
But although the big battles were over, there were thousands
of Boers still in the field, and the Australians, being, of course,
the men pre-eminently suited for the guerilla warfare now car-
ried on, the War Office asked for more men, and could do with
ten thousand if they could be obtained. So again the call, “To
arms, Australia,” was made, and answered as promptly as
before. Australia being now a Commonwealth,
THE SEVENTH AND EIGHTH CONTINGENTS
were sent out under its auspices, the offers of men far exceeding
the number decided upon as sufficient to send, showing grati-
fyingly to the Empire, and correspondingly depressingly to her
enemies, that our patriotism was not of an ephemeral character,
but as lasting, we believe, as the grand old flag that has braved,
a thousand years the battle and the breeze. Like the preceding
Contingents, these also got under way with a good send-off, and
a well-founded hope that
Their comrades they would emulate.
Unsullied they’d keep Austral fame ;
They’d fight for Commonwealth and State,
On glory’s scroll they’d trace their name.


GOUDIE, LAWRENCE, 5th Contingent, Killed
at Wilmansrust, June 12th, 1901. Aged, 21 Years.


The Fifth Contingent, which had arrived at South Africa on
the Bth of March, like the others which had preceded them,
went at once to the front, and had tasted fire on several occa-
sions; but on the 12th day of June, 1901, when two hundred
and fifty of them were camped at Wolmaranrust, they were
surprised by a party of Boers, and nineteen men were killed,
thirty-six wounded, and all the rest made prisoners, before they
realised how it was done. It was all over in about five minutes.
There was blame somewhere, no doubt. It is possible they were
lulled into false security. Probably the outpost duty was neg-
lected, thinking that danger was remote. If so, they were
most forcibly disillusionised, and paid the penalty. They, how-
ever, had ample chances of getting even with their foes, as
afterwards, when they rejoined their comrades and got their
full strength, they put in some splendid work, notably at
Rhenoster Kop, Ermelo, Middle Kraal, H’Lobana, Waggon
Drift, Bethel, and in many other engagements ; in fact, so much
so that General Lord Kitchener, when addressing them on their
leaving, said that they had done more hard work, both in fight-
ing and trekking, than any of the other Contingents during the
arduous campaign ; and Lord Kitchener was so very chary of
gi\ ing praise that this meant a good deal, coming from a
General who would have no drones in his command. The
Wolmaranrust disaster was, however, the greatest blow that
Australia got during the three years her gallant sons were at
the front.
President Kruger, who was in Europe at this time, said the
war must continue. But, although the Boers yet in the field
continued to give a lot of trouble, the British troops followed
them up so close that, one by one, the Generals announced that
they would come to terms or surrender. Still, they died very
haia, and wanted such terms from England as were not possible
to be entertained. A truce was obtained, however, and a con-
ference of delegates from all the commandos met at Veremi-
ging, on the Vaal River. They took a couple of weeks to come
to a conclusion, and on Saturday, June Ist, 1902, at half-past


ten p.m.j a vote was taken, and resulted in fifty-four being
agreeable to England’s terms, and six against.
PEACE
was therefore concluded, and signed at Pretoria, the capital, by
Lords Milner and Kitchener on behalf of England, and by
Generals Botha, De La Key, and De Wet on behalf of the
Boers.
And although Queen Victoria did not live to hear of peace
being proclaimed, Lord Kitchener had the pleasure, when reply-
ing to a cable from the King congratulating him on the suc-
cessful termination to his labours, of announcing to her son,
King Edward the Seventh, that the peace agreement was signed
before His Majesty’s Coronation; so that when that great event
took place England was once more at peace with all the nations
of the world; and although she conquered the Transvaal
Kepublic and the Orange Free State, in South Africa, at vast
cost in blood and treasure, she made terms with her vanquished
foe liberal beyond precedent in the annals of warfare, actually
giving three millions of pounds to re-establish her enemies in
their homes which had been destroyed. It is to be hoped that
England's chivalry, which fights and suffers for a noble ideal,
will not be overlaid by the spirit of her evil genius, which
might cause her to listen temporarily to the counsels of men
prompted by the meanest and most selfish motives.
AUSTRALIAN HORSES.
In the South African war horses from Australia were eagerlv
sought after. Besides the ones sent with the troops, many
thousands were bought here and sent over. Rudyard Kipling
himself sent a cable to the War Office, saying: “ Insist on
large supply of horses from Australia, as a dearth of horses is
approaching.”
In some of the first Contingents the horses were very fine
animals, many of them being their owners’ favourites, and pre


sented by the owners to the Patriotic Committee. The writer
knew of a lady, Miss Rose Watt, of Gisborne, who gave her
favourite steed to the Bushmen’s Corps, and on the day of
embarkation she came from the country to say good-bye to her
horse, “ Victor.” Another gentleman, Mr. T. Hull, of T'oon-
gabbie, also gave his best horse, “ Dick,” to his boundary-rider,
who was going to the war with the Bushmen ; and after he was
shot, and the rider had to take another horse, he wrote from
the front as follows :
How I miss poor Dick I cannot tell you. It was a great pity he
ever came here. I would like to meet the Boer that shot him;
he would get scant mercy from me.
This was the horse which, when in camp at Langwarrin, gal-
loped seven miles, and jumped safely a barbed-wire fence at the
end of the gallop. Instances like the above could be greatly
multiplied, and I feel sure that the Australian people will be
glad to know that a magnificent monument was unveiled at
Port Elizabeth, in South Africa, in recognition of the services
of the gallant animals which perished in the war, 1899-1902.
It consists of a monster rook, with a life-sized horse on top
of it, fully equipped, with his rider, a trooper, holding him a
bucket of water to drink. Out of the great rock run three
streams of water into a stone trough, for thirsty animals to
drink. The inscription is as follows:
The “greatness ” of a nation consists not so much in the number
of its people, or the extent of its territory, as in the extent and
“justice” of its “compassion.”—Erected by public subscription.
It will thus be seen that Australian horses were greatly
valued as a means to an end in the S.A. war, and owners of
valuable horses will be highly gratified to know that their
splendid gifts of horses were so much appreciated. About
110,000 were sent from Australia altogether.
Lest We Forget.
Every Contingent which left here for South Africa had in it
men from St. Kilda, born or reared in it, and the inhabitants


of the seaside city were full of patriotism arid love for the
Motherland, and for anyone who showed themselves true sons
of the British Empire. Therefore, when the first news of the
death of a St. Kilda soldier reached here, a committee was at
once formed to get up a fund for erecting a memorial to his
memory. Edwin Knox, of the Victorian Bushmen’s Corps-
known in South Africa as the Fighting Third—was the first from
St. Kilda to meet with an untimely end, and a committee, con-
sisting of the following gentlemen, went energetically to work,
and in a very short time collected enough to erect an ornamen-
tal, as Avell as useful, drinking fountain in his honour :—Messrs.
A. Apps, Sept. Wilson, V. Kelly, W. Dummett, J. M. A. Spottis-
wood, R. W. Rolfe, A. E. Fowler. T. J. Watts, and A. W. Clap-
ham. Mr. E. W. M. Crouch acted as honorary architect.
The unveiling ceremony took place on a Sunday afternoon by
the Mayor of St. Kilda, Councillor Edward O’Donnell. Sir
George Turner and Mr. W. H. Williams, M.L.A., addressed the
large crowd of people assembled to witness the ceremony. The
“ Last Post ” was excellently sounded by Master Claude Apps,
which added much to the impressiveness of the occasion, after
which the Mayoress, Mrs. E. O’Donnell, with a key specially
made for the purpose, and which was presented to her, turned
the water on to the fountain, and thus provided a long-felt want
in the part of St. Kilda where it is erected, namely, at the
corner of Fifzroy-street and Beaconsfield-parade. The St. Kilda
cadets attended in large numbers, and also a number of the
St, Kilda volunteer artillery. The committee is deserving of
much praise for the promptness with which the work was taken
in hand, the initiative being taken 15 months before peace was
proclaimed, and the citizens, acting on the principle that he who.
gives quickly gives twice, assisted the committee greatly.
Shortly afterwards some other St. Kilda boys fell in the war,
which was, to the surprise of everyone, still raging, and the
mayor promised that when peace would be restored steps would
be taken to erect a memorial in honour of all who went to
South Africa, thus admitting


LANGLEY, M, A., Killed at Frederiksstad,
sth January, 1991. Aged 22 Years,


How great the debt was owed, to those who fought, as well as
those who fell.
For various reasons, the matter was delayed, but at length a
meeting was called by his Worship the Mayor, and a strong
committee formed, consisting of the following ladies and
gentlemen:-—-Councillors H. F. Barnet and J. H. Pittard, R. G.
M‘C'utcheon, M.L.A., Messrs. G. W. Orr, Sep. Wilson, W. A.
Robertson, J. C. Whelan, A. W. Clapham, Cecil Stewart, H. M.
Knox, A. E. Fowler, T. H. Evans, Mrs. C. Stewart and Mrs.
M‘Dermot, Messrs. A. Apps, J. Delany, Major Holden, W. A.
T, Lind, E. O’Donnell (Mayor), Hon. Treasurer. J. N. Browne,
Chas. Truelove, Hon. Secretaries.
About this time, however, a change was made in the Mayor-
ship of the St. Kilda Council. The Mayor, Cr. E. O’Donnell,
who started the movement, retired, and Councillor Pittard was
elected. Councillor O'Donnell still retained the office of trea-
surer to the fund, and did not relax his efforts for the further-
ance of the movement in the slightest, and the new Mayor
threw his whole influence into it also, leaving nothing undone
to further the object in view. A change was also made in the
representation of St. Kilda in the Legislative Assembly, Mr. R.
G. M'Cutcheon having defeated Mr. W. H. Williams. Many
and diversified were the means adopted for raising the neces-
sary funds, as it was felt by all that St. Kilda ought to erect
something worthy of the occasion and city. The most success-
ful, however, was a grand garden fete held in the Town Hall
and grounds, which was opened by Sir George Sydenham
Clark, Governor of \ ictoria. Too much praise cannot be given,
to the ladies and gentlemen who so readily gave their services
gi atuitously, resulting, as they did, in obtaining a very sub-
stantial sum for the object. The next best was a monster
carnival promoted by the St. Kilda Tradesmen’s Club, the
members of which rose to a man for the occasion, and the
result exceeded the most sanguine expectations; in fact, these
two entertainments placed the Memorial Committee in the posi-
tion of being able to at once proceed with the work, with


funds provided sufficient to defray all the estimated outlay.
Designs were therefore called for, and that of Mr. Arthur
F.1.A.Y., was accepted, his being the most original.
The committee being of opinion that the memorial should
be different from any others erected elsewhere, and also be of
Australian manufacture, tenders were called for, and that of the
Mitcham Tesselated Tile Co. accepted. It is constructed in
brick, covered by fiance work. The supporting angles are
formed to represent the trunks of gum-trees, branching out
into leaves and cones under the main cornice, and the roots
are shown on a bold projection above the base. Above the
main cornice is a cross of a deep golden colour, which stands
out clearly from the green tone of the general mass of work.
One panel shows the names of the seven soldiers from St. Kilda
who died, and a suitable inscription. Two other panels'show
the names of the 58 who fought the Empire’s battles and
returned. On the fourth panel is the figure of a soldier, made
from a clay model by Mr. Douglas Richardson, a«a old St. Kilda
boy, and one who has risen to the highest point in his pro-
fession. The figure faces the sea, and is looking straight across
the ocean to the scene of his comrades’ labours in South Africa.
He is dressed in Australian khaki. The execution of this figure
speaks volumes for the competency of the Mitcham company to
carry out work second to none in the Empire. The work was
the cause of grave anxiety, but indomitable perseverance and
skilful workmen have succeeded in producing a perfect figure,
of which all Australian natives may be justly proud; and the
company which produced it may well point with pride to the
correctness of the outlines and successful shading of this, their
masterpiece in Australian manufacture. Above the main
column is a wrought-iron pillar, supported by brackets,
enriched with shields ; and under the golden cross rests a
finely-executed wreath on each panel; and it cannot be too
strongly emphasised that the whole of the work was done in
the State of Victoria. To Mr. Arthur Peck, the honorary
architect, lasting credit is due, the monument itself bearing


witness for all time, we trust, of his ability to design and carry
out artistic work, unique in its conception. He has thus added
unconsciously another laurel to the intelligence of the Aus-
tralian native, he himself being an honoured and gifted mem-
ber.
The site chosen by the committee on which to erect the
monument is on the place known as the Alfred-square, facing
the sea.
The City Council of St. Kilda, comprised of the follow-
ing gentlemen, J. H. Pittard, J.P. (Mayor' Councillors S.
Jacoby, J. Stedeford, G. Connibere, F. G. Hughes, E. O’Donnell,
H. F. Barnet, G. H. Billson, H. B. Gibbs, met the committee’s
wishes in every way, and kindly granted the site asked for.
By so doing they have the satisfaction of knowing that they
have very materially assisted the committee in accomplishing
their desire, viz., to place in the most conspicuous and fitting
place possible an imperishable record in memory of the
patriotism which prompted so many St. Kilda lads to offer
their lives in the defence of the old flag, and spared to return
triumphant ; while to the relatives of the fallen it is a great
satisfaction to know that the St. Kilda people have so worthily
marked their appreciation of the patriotism displayed, and
though
The ocean deep between them lies,
In hallow’d spots their boys now sleep;
The restless waves and changing skies,
In storms and calm their vigils keep.
Kind friends a monument now raise,
To which they look with joy and pride,
On which the multitude will gaze.
For life they gave, for country died.
u Dulce et decorum est pro patria mori.”


It may not be out of place here to say that the Guild of
Loyal 11 omen of South Africa request that if any visitors to
their country should come across any soldier’s grave in need of
care, no matter in what part, they will attend to it, if notified
to the president or hon. secretary Central Colonial Committee
GuiJd of Loyal Women, at Cape Town or Pretoria, Mrs.
Georgina Freer, President : Miss Margaret Pillard, Hon. Sec-
retary. This is also a source of great satisfaction to the
i elatives, who are denied the melancholy satisfaction of tending
the graves themselves, owing to the distance away.
By foreign hands their humble graves adorned.
By strangers honoured, and by strangers mourned.
The erection of the monument having been completed, the
committee decided to ask the State Governor, Sir Reginald
Talbot, to unveil it, which he at once consented to do, account-
ing it an honour to be asked to perform such an agreeable as
well as important, a ceremony. So an effort was made to make
the function worthy of the occasion, and as impressive as pos-
sible to the people.
UNVEILING OF THE ST. HILDA SOLDIERS’ MEMORIAL.
The day chosen for this demonstration was Sunday, March
Uth, 1900, at 3.30 in the afternoon. The day was one specially
typical of Australia. The sky was blue, and a little cloud
flitted now and then across the sun; the breeze a gentle
zephyr from the south, sent, as it were, to temper the heat of
the sun, which even in March is still powerful. As far as the
eye could reach rolled the dark and deep blue ocean. Craft of
all kinds sailed upon its bosom. In the offing might be seen
an ocean greyhound coming to a safe anchorage once more
after facing the dangers of the deep. Fishing smacks were to
oe seen on every hand. White-winged pleasure yachts rolled
lazily about, their sails flapping idly to and fro for want of
wind; and even the tiny rowing skiff was fully represented on
the waters, the rippling of which could faintly be heard from
t e square. A good display of bunting from the houses and




flag masts helped considerably to enliven the scene, and added
a charm to the ceremony; while the trams, fully loaded with
those who were anxious to do honour to the occasion, arrived
with unfailing regularity, and the whole presented a picture
worthy of the painter’s pencil, the pen failing to describe what
a pencil alone can depict. So lovely, so peaceful, so beautiful,
that one was forced to exclaim: “ Wonderful are Thy
works, and that my soul knoweth right well!” Barriers
were erected round the monument, and from a large
platform in the front of it his Excellency was to address the
people. A large number of military officers attended to receive
him, including the Minister of Defence, Colonel M‘Cay, and the
State Military Commandant, Colonel Ricardo. The Sixth Aus-
tralian Regiment, two hundred and eighty strong, provided the
guard of honour. They arrived first, preceded by their band,
eight buglers of which were to play the “ Last Post ” after the
unveiling. Next to arrive was the St. Kilda Boys’ Naval
Brigade, under Captain Le Plastrier and Lieutenants Bertram
and Welch, their band playing in right good style the soul-stir-
ring song, " The Death of Nelson.” They took up a position at
the rear to receive and salute the Governor on arrival. The
united choirs of All Saints, Trinity, and Christ’s Church
attended to sing the “ Old Hundredth ” and “ God Save the
King.”
The Mayor of St. Kilda and the Councillors, accompanied by
the Town Clerk, Mr, J. N. Browne, R. G. M’Cutcheon, M.L.A.,
and other representative gentlemen, waited at the entrance to
the square to receive his Excellency. The relatives of the
fallen soldiers and the wives of the Councillors occupied a
position to the left front, the choirs to the right front, and the
guard of honour, with band, right in front. A number nf
returned soldiers attended also.
The St. Kilda City Band marched from Balaclava station to
the pavilion on the Esplanade, and played suitable music for
half an hour before and after the ceremony. The whole of the
preparations for the ceremony were on a very lavish scale, and


were carried out without the slightest hitch of any kind.
Thirty-one mounted and foot policemen, under Sergeant Roger-
son. attended, and kept perfect order all the afternoon.
Punctually to time his Excellency arrived, escorted by the
Melbourne Cavalry, and, after having been introduced to the
Mayor and Councillors, he inspected the Boys’ Brigade and
Australian Regiment. He then, with his staff and the Coun-
cillors, ascended the platform. His Worship the Mayor, Coun-
cillor J. H. Pittard, then addressed the people, giving a. short
history of the movement for the erection of the memorial, why
it was delayed so long, giving Cr. O’Donnell the credit for start-
ing it, and expressing great pleasure at its fulfilment. He
then introduced his Excellency, who said :
I consider it, as an old soldier, a great privilege and honour to
be allowed to take part in this most interesting event. We have
all to meet death—the great enemy —sooner or later, and, I say,
happy should be the relatives of those who have no meet death in
the battlefield, that their dear ones died soldiers’ deaths. It must
be a great consolation to those left to know that the glorious death
of a soldier was the portion of the representatives who faced the
foe on behalf of the ones left at home. This memorial will not
serve only to mark these heroes, but also as a constant reminder
to the future generations. I feel as certain as lam standing
here that, if ever the Empire is threatened—l will not say in
danger—those who follow us will be ready and glad to lay
down their lives for their country. They will rally round this
glorious old flag, that represents liberty, prosperity, and progress,
and will show that they are worthy of the great Anglo-Saxon race,
which has done so much for the world, and will prove themselves
citizens of the greatest Empire the world has ever seen, and worthy
of the trust imposed upon them.
The Union Jacks entwined round the figure on the monu-
ment were then unloosed by his Excellency, and the buglers of
the A.I.R. blew the Last Post, ’ the soldier’s good-night, good-
night.
It was simply grand, and grandly played. If, as is asserted
by some, the spirits of the departed hold communication


with the relatives here upon earth, may we not hope that the
spirits of the brave lads whose bodies are under the veldt
were awakened by the mighty bugle sound of the “ Last Post,”
wafted over the ocean to the S.A. veldt, and brought them to
witness the great ceremony enacted to their memory, and in
their honour? But, if so, from henceforth
May their rest be never failing,
For their hearts were ever true.
And, perchance, their spirits hover as we sing;
May their name be golden written,
Keep their memory staunch with you,
As man, as friend, as brother, each was king.
The Mayoress, Mrs. Pittard, then stepped forward and turned
the water on to the two fountains at the base, and for the many
thousands who throng the Esplanade every summer a priceless
boon is provided, and the committee has earned the deepest
gratitude for providing commemoration, ornamentation, and
usefulness combined.
All accounts for the work were paid for before the day of
unveiling, and, having a few pounds over, the committee
handed them to the St. Kilda City Council to effect some
improvements, in the shape of rockeries, on the square, which
up to this time lacked all ornamentation.
NAMES OF SOLDIERS WHO FELL.
Corporal R. P. N. Robertson, killed in auction at Middle
Kraal, May 29th, 1901, aged 29.
Trooper Laurence Goudie, killed in action at Wilmaranrust,
June 12th, 1901, aged 21.
Trooper Edwin Knox, died at Winderboom, February 26th,
1901, aged 24.
Trooper M. A. Langley, killed in action at Frederikstad,
January sth, 1901, aged 22.


Trooper Leslie Stewart, killed in action at Witpoort, July
nth, 1901, aged 19.
Trooper John Whelan, killed in action near Walkerstroom,
December 16th, 1901, aged 23.
Trooper W. A. Rolls, died at Potcherstroom, May 29th, 1902,
aged 29.
Every possible effort was made by the Town Clerk, Mr. John
N. Browne, to find the names of St. Kilda boys who went to the
war. He wrote to the Defence Department, he consulted
returned soldiers, and inserted advertisements in both the daily
papers, so that no name might be omitted ; but, notwithstand -
ing all, the writer finds that several were omitted, through
their own or their relatives’ fault entirely. This the committee
sincerely regret, and their names will be found in this little
history, as far as known up to the present, which is all that
can now be done.
With the unveiling of the memorial the work of the com-
mittee came to a close. They are extremely thankful for all
the assistance given them in the laudable undertaking. St.
Kilda lads did their duty when they volunteered for the war,
and the commitlee determined St. Kilda should not be behind
in doing its duty to the memory, and in the honour, of the boys
who fought for King, Queen, and Country.
The monuments will be object lessons to the boys of the
rising generation, showing that England’s necessity was Aus-
tralia s opportunity, and will also show foreigners, when they
look at them, that we not only approve of their patriotism,, but
also erect memorials to demonstrate it for all time.
Names of St. Kilda boys who offered their services to the
Empire, and returned after successfully accomplishing their
mission, numbering seventy:—.


ST. KILDA SOLDIERS' MEMORIAL.


Colonel L. F. Clark.
Major T. M. MTnerney.
Captain R. W. Howe.
Lieutenants :
J. Allen.
H. 0. Appleby.
C. J. K. Boyd.
J. Campbell,
H. A. Enabling.
B. O’Loghlin.
J. E. Power.
W. P. Pritchett.
Sergeant-Major:
R. Boyes.
Saddler Sergeant:
J. F. Thomas.
Troopers:
P. J. Allan.
D. Anderson.
W. Anderson.
A. Ashley.
R. Burns.
T. Burke.
E. Bridgeland.
P. Booth.
W. Cox.
J. C. Cowden.
W. Cowden.
Geo. Crowle.
H. Christie.
J. F. Deegan.
T. S. Delany.
W. J. Edington.
A. Gordon.
J. Gardiner.
J. A. Hadden.
W. Henderson.
M. Hawker.
L. Hutchinson.
Sergeants :
D. H. Dare.
F. Krcrouse.
A. H. Newell.
H. Paul.
F. Shaw.
R. W. Waugh.
Corporals:
H. H. Hutchinson.
E. C. Jesse.
C. J. Stewart.
Lance-Corporals :
R. C. Bradley.
T. Holt.
W. Leishman.
H. R. Morris.
H. V. Mays.
J. Macartney.
G. Mullen.
L. L. Mullen.
C. A. Mullen.
F. L. Newell.
S. Parrott.
R. Pommeroy.
T. J. Putt.
F. Raleigh.
J. C. Ross.
P. Sinclair.
S. Smith.
W. Short.
Guy Smith.
Chas. G. Stewart.
S. Tompsitt.
Wm. Thomas.
T. Thomson.
H. T. Wells.
G. M. Wells.
D. H. Willan.
RIFLE CLUBS.
The South African war is responsible for arousing in the
minds of Australians their defenceless position, and the out-
come of that war is the new arm of defence which sprung un
in the shape of the rifle clubs, civilian or citizen soldiers. No


less than 22,000 men since then have learned the use of the
rule, moie or less, and although some, owing to the expense or
other causes, keep dropping out, others come in, and thus an
ever-increasing arm of defence is fostered and sustained. On
one of the many trips to other ranges which the St. Kilda Rifle
Club' —which numbered one time over 100 strong'- —took with a
view of improving their shooting, they had the good fortune to
come across a South African hero in the person of Mr. Brooks,
who, along with Major Babtie and Captain Congreve, succeeded
in carrying Lord Roberts’ son, Lieutenant Roberts, out from
the gun wheels to a place of safety. It will be remembered
that the guns were abandoned by Colonel Long at Colenso, on
the banks of the Tugela, and, in trying to rescue them, Lieu-
tenant Roberts was fatally wounded. Mr. Brooks was awarded
the D. 5.0., and Lieutenant Roberts’ friends presented him with
a gold medal, suitably inscribed, for his bravery on that occa-
sion. There is no doubt the rifle clubs are a distinct gain to
the defence of our country.
The Metropolitan Rifle Clubs' Association, formed to
encourage rifle shooting, presented a challenge shield to be com-
peted for, and the St. Kilda club had the honour orf winning
it right out from all the competing clubs, numbering over
twenty, of ten men each, which proves that the raw material
is here in great abundance, to be taken advantage of. In the
Boer War very young boys, old men, and even women eighty
years of age handled the rifle with good effect in defence of
their hearths and homes. So it behoves the Defence Depart-
ment to encourage rifle shooting as much as possible. Lord
Roberts has more than once said that, had the British troops
been more efficient with the rifle, the Boer War would not have
lasted nearly so long as it did.
CADETS.
Another arm of our defence is the splendid body of cadets
which we are now fostering in our State of Victoria. St. Kilda,
the writer believes, was the first to start a cadet corps, at the
Brighton-road State School, under the late Mr. John Hadfieid.
It will be readily admitted that Colonel Hoad is a credit-
able, sample of a successful military officer, and not so many
years ago he was to be seen training the cadets at that school,
and he trained them so well that they won the “ Sargood
Shield ” from all-comers. Old boys of that school will remem-
ber with what pride they marched from Sir Frederick Sar-
good’s to the residence of the head teacher, and serenaded
him, the united fife and drum bands playing “ See the Con-
quering Heroes Come ” all the way.


No less than 24 of the cadets who learned their drill at the
Brighton-road State School went to fight the Empire’s battles
in the South African war, and a marble tablet has been erected
in the school with all their names thereon —<“ the roll of
honour.”
The cadets were simply a revelation to the foreign military
officers who attended the Review at the Commonwealth cele-
brations at Flernington.
And the rifle clubs and cadets should be something to think
of by foreigners should any of them venture to try, as Kruger
tried—but without success—to drive the Britishers into the sea.
For are we not all Britishers now, one people, one destiny—
no Australians, New Zealanders, or Canadians, but “ Sons of the
Empire,” the greatest ever known or seen?
And now my little brochure is nearing the end. In it I have
tried to narrate, as near as possible, what actually occurred, as
far as I, who was not with the army, could ascertain from well
authenticated sources. I have not attempted military details;
that I leave to others better qualified than I, and, no doubt,
such a history is being compiled at the War Office; but, as
history compiled there will not give local history, I have tried
to make good the want. It may seem to some that I have
unduly praised or embellished the doings of the Australians in
a foreign land, or ascribed to them fighting qualities that they
do not possess. To such I answer, I have only culled some of
the many speeches made in their praise by the Generals under
whom they fought, and who should be the best judges ; but
when we find Lord Roberts addressing them thus:
t or months together, under fierce heat, biting cold, and pouring
ram, you my comrades—have fought without halting, bivouacked
without shelter, continued marching with clothes in rags, boots
without soles, endured suffering without murmuring, and, in fact,
acted up to the highest standard of the British army. While your
conspicuous kindness and humanity to your enemies, and your good
behaviour in towns, caused the army to be as highly respected
as it must henceforth be greatly feared in South Africa, you have
made it unique in the annals of war.
Or, later still, Lord Kitchener saying to them on leaving :
I lose you with the greatest regret, and will always remember
with gratitude the good work done in the arduous campaign.


And still another testimony, being an extract from a special
letter to a relative of one of the fallen from the Mayor of Cape
Town :
W© are grateful for the splendid help given by the gallant sons
of Australia, and I am proud to be able to tell you that in no
case, no matter how great the conflict or how tight the corner,
did they ever waver in their duty.
sceptical indeed must be the man who could, even for a fleeting
moment, deprive the “ boys ” of the meed of praise so freely
given, and so justly earned.
It has been said that war is the sport of kings, but we know
it brings desolation to the homes, and devastation in its train
wherever it goes. Still, as the flag under which we live gives
civil and religious liberty to all, freedom of action to everyone
beneath its shadow, be he foreigner or Britisher, I trust this
little pamphlet will awaken, and help to ever keep awake, the
true spirit of patriotism in the sons of Australia, by placing on
record the deeds of their comrades, brothers, or fathers for
emulation, so that, should the time ever come when the
shores of this our sunny land should be invaded by a foe to
English rule, Australian-born boys will be found behind the
guns, standing shoulder to shoulder with the sons of the
Empire, and with the help of the Great Ruler of all, ever keep
the old flag flying. But after having done all this, when it
comes to the last scene, whether on the battlefield or in the
security of their own fireside, looking back over their past lives,
they w dl be led to exclaim, with the great South African
Empire builder,
CECIL RHODES,
So Little Done, so Much to Do.
Let the watchword of Australia, then, henceforth be “ defence,”
To guard and well protect our shores from all who would molest.
Our land it is unequalled, and our love for it intense;
Defence, then, not Defiance, and to God we leave the rest.
OUTPOST.
F. Q. Dixon, Printer, 257 High Street, St. Kilda.




