

ANIMATED PHOTOGRAPHY
THE A B C OF THE
CINEMATOGRAPH
THE “AMATEUR PHOTOGRAPHER” LIBRARY.
No. 14.
CELIL M. HEPWORTH


The “ N. & G.” Kinematographic Instruments.
(PRELIMINARY ANNOUNCEMENT.)
From the earliest days of “Animated Photography” we have been
steadily working at overcoming the many difficulties which barred the way to
perfect results. Far from rushing into the market with immature ideas, we
have continued studying the scientific principles involved, determined, in
spite of numerous inducements, not to.offer to the public anything not quite
up to our own standard. This Isystem of absolute attention to the slightest
details, which has secured the world-wide recognition of the “N. and G.”
Cameras as the best in the market, has been applied quite as rigorously to our
Kinematographic Instruments, which will be found in every way worthy
to rank with the former.
We are happy to announce that we have now overcome all the main difficul-
ties to our satisfaction, and that we are rapidly making Stock of
A COMPLETE SET OF APPARATUS
which will enable the
finest ordinary Photoi
as steady as Lanteri
1. THE “N. &
For any Syst'
guaranteed.
2. THE “N. &
**Y
lm
B
j d
RERF
.AS
NE.
or
&
fJB
uge
G.”
Negatives as perfect as the
es as bright and practically
Absolute Registration
CAMERA.
Will take any Lens, and is as portable and easily worked as a half-plate
Hand Camera.
Both Instruments are Ready. Particulars on Application.
3. THE “ N. & G.” PRINTING MACHINE.
Very simple in construction and use. It allows automatically for the varying
shrinkage of the Negative Film, and thus solves one of the causes which have
hitherto prevented perfect results.
4. THE “ N. & G.” LANTERN AND PROJECTOR.
Built, like all the above, on entirely new lines. By our new method of feeding
the Film the objectionable flicker of previous machines has been overcome.
5. THE “N. & G.” DEVELOPING PLANT, DEVELOPERS, AND
INSTRUCTIONS.
Rendering Kinematography as simple as any other kind of Photographic
Work.
These three items are Nearly Ready for the Market. Particulars will be sent as
soon as issued.
NEWMAN & GUARDIA, Ltd.,
90 & 92, Shaftesbury Avenue, L^ Klrv ' nMK’


Paul’sflnimatonraphe
The only English Animated Photograph Machine with an
ESTABLISHED REPUTATION.
RECORD: Exhibited continuously for a year at the A lhambra, London ;
and in all important Provincial Towns. £12,000 worth of Machines and
Films sold, with universal satisfaction. See Press Notices and Testimonials,
on application. Two years' Improvements in construction.
PRICES:
Mechanism complete, with
Lens of any focus,
for Lantern Attachment,
£lO.
1
Complete on Folding
Tripod, with Lantern, Arc
Lamp or Jet, as shown,
£l5.
Adaptedfor use as a Camera
at a small charge.
100 fftlm o
(including Jubilee),
from all parts of the world,
the finest ever taken,
at 30s. each.
Complete show of Films can be run at one setting.
No wear on Films. Patent con-
tinuous feed, obviating strain.
Simple, quick, accurate adjustment.
Durable as a Steam-Engine.
Accurate as a Chronometer.
Does not touch picture surface.
Working: parts open and accessible.
No flickering or unsteadiness.
Lenses interchangeable in a second.
Utmost portability and convenience.
CANNOT CAUSE FIRE! CONTAINS EVERY IMPROVEMENT POSSIBLE.
R. W. PAUL) 44, Hatton Garden, LONDON, E.C.
Factories: 114-15, Great Saffron Hill, and 36, Leather Lane.
Telegrams: ’’Calibrate." Contractor to TOlar ©ffice anfc Hfcmiraltie


ULE ORIGINAL
Animated Photographs -
BIRT ACRES’ patented SYSTEM,
ADVANTAGES
The Films are Automatically Re-wound,
thus Avoiding all Danger .
New Safety Arrangement (Patent applied
for), by which Fire is impossibiem
The SPROCKETS not being JERKED forward,
there is no Noise and no Vibration ,
consequently no Chance of Machine
Sticking or GETTING OUT OF ORDER.
WRITE FOR LIST OF ENGLISH FILMS.
Perforations to Standard Edison Gauge.
• --------
NORTHERN PHOTOGRAPHIC WORKS, m.
Telegrams: DA DM FT IMlwau Station:
“ FILMS,” Barnet DMlllwU I ■ HIGH BARNET.


ANIMATED PHOTOGRAPHY
THE
NORTHERN PHOTOGRAPHIC WORKS,
Under the PERSONAL DIRECTION of MR. BIRT ACRES,
Ltd.
Are NOW READY to Undertake
PRINTING & DEVELOPMENT
FILMS,
THE SUPPLY OF
TRANSPARENT SENSITIVE FILM
™ PRINTING,
EXTRA RAPID f ° r NEGATIVES
ACCURATELY cut to width—any length to
300 FT. WITHOUT JOIN.
PERFORATED OR UNPERFORATED TO STANDARD EDISON GAUGE.
• ■ * hi in in w m 111 i« a\ ai ui in m » >
Write for Particulars .
NORTHERN PHOTOGRAPHIC WORKS, m.
rweorams; RADMCT Railway Station :
FILMS,” Barnet. DA KIM t. I ■ HIGH BARNET.


DALLMEYER LENSES
HAVE TAKEN HIGHEST AWARDS WHEREVER EXHIBITED.
Royal Photographic Society’s Medal, 1897.
SPECIAL LENSES FOR ANIMATOGRAPHS.
Projecting Lenses, 2-inch Eq. Focus, working at f/2, 3E3 15 O
„ u 3-inch „ ~ f/2-2, <£s IO O
“B" Lenses for taking the Negatives.
2-inch Eq. Focus, working at f/4, £2 00. With Iris, 'J's. 6d. extra.
NEW UNIVERSAL LENS.
The Stigmatic, Series 11. f/6.
Suitable for every purpose.
The EQUIVALENTof FOUR LENSES
at the PRICE of ONE.
Each Lens will give perfect definition with full
aperture to the extreme corners of the plate it is
scheduled to cover; with smaller stops it will
cover at least two sizes larger, giving perfect
sharpness all over the plate, and thus becoming
a wide-angle lens of the highest excellence.
Either combination may be used separately,
giving foci of about ij and 2 times the length of
that of the lens when used intact. The advan-
tage of thus being' able to choose the best point
of view, irrespective of distance, will be at once
apparent to the artistic worker.
Eleven Sizes now Ready, 3£ to 18 incites Focus.
Lantern Objectives &
Condensers
PRICES
Of the Finest Quality only.
AND PARTICULARS ON APPLICATION.
Double
and
Triple.
Fully Illustrated Catalogue Post Free.
J. fl. DAhliPYEft, Ltd.,
OPTICAL MANUFACTORY,
25, Newman St.,
Oxford St.,
LONDON, W.


ANIMATED
PHOTOGRAPHY
THE A B C OF THE
CINEMATOGRAPH
A SIMPLE AND THOROUGH GUIDE TO
THE PROJECTION OF LIVING PHOTOGRAPHS, WITH
NOTES ON THE PRODUCTION OF
CINEMATOGRAPH NEGATIVES
BY
CECIL M. HEPWORTH
[The Amateur Photographer’s Library, No. 14.]
ifirokitt
HAZELL, WATSON, & VINEY, Ld.
i, CREED LANE, LUDGATE HILL, E.C.
1897


Ross’ Lenses
For the STUDIO, the FIELD,
PROCESS WORK,
CINEMATOGRAPH
PROJECTION, etc, etc.
ROSS-ZEISS ... _
CONVERTIBLE ANASTIGMATS,
Consisting of SINGLE LENSES, f/i2*s. DOUBLETS, f ,6*2.
SETS for every purpose.
These are undoubtedly the finest Single Lenses yet produced, both for Rapidity
and flatness of field. r J
ROSS-GOERZ . . .
DOUBLE ANASTIGMATS.
These deservedly popular Lenses.have already had an immense sale. Thev are
THE VERY ACME OF PERFECTION. y
FILM*PLATE CAMERAS.
ROSS-HEPWORTH
. . . ARC LAMPS
are specially suitable for
CINEMATOGRAPH PROJECTION,
RHEOSTATS, Etc.
Full Particulars and Illustrated Pamphlet Free.
STUDIO CAMERAS,
STANDS, etc.
New Catalogue now ready.
Q Limited,
. . Manufacturing Opticians.
111, NEW BOND STREET, LONDON,
ESTABLISHED 1830.


CONTENTS.
CHAP - PAGE
Introductory ... . . . . 1
I. Cinematograph Pictures 6
11. The Optical System 12
111. The Mechanical System 18
IV. Intermittent Mechanism 23
V. Continuous Mechanism 37
VI. The Shutter 52
VII. Illuminants: The Limelight 50
VIII. The Electric Arc Light 65
IX. Combination of Lantern and Cinematograph . 7;i
X. Precautions against Danger ... .79
XI. Hints and Cautions: Care of Cinefilms, etc. . 83
XII. Cinematographic Cameras 89
XIII. On taking Animated Photographs . . .04
XIV. Developing, Printing, etc. . ... 09
XV. Conclusion 105
b




ANIMATED PHOTOGRAPHY.
INTRODUCTORY.
INTERESTING as is the history of the cinematograph,
and instructive as the contemplation of its development
from its early prototype —the zoetrope—l do not propose to
dilate upon this branch of the subject in the present instance.
The object of this little book is not in any sense historical;
its aim is merely to put in convenient form the salient
features of cinematography as at present understood.
With this end in view it will only be necessary, by way
of introduction, to briefly trace the development of the
machine from the crude toy in which it found its earliest
conception, or rather, to hint at a few of the successive
stages by which* it arrived at its present degree of develop-
ment. The zoetrope, in its simplest form, consisted of a
disc of card, upon which were painted, at regular intervals
around its periphery, a number of consecutive images of
one figure, representing it in various phases of one con-
tinuous movement, each image being slightly more pro-
gressed than its immediate predecessor.
Below each picture was a narrow slit cut through the
card, and the manner of using the toy was to hold it up
facing a mirror, and twirl it upon a pin passed through its
centre. The drawings were then viewed through the slits
from the back, as reflected in the looking-glass, and the
figures, although stationary as a whole, appeared to have
movement to their limbs as the disc was twirled.
A quaint parody of natural movements in truth it was
that was enacted by the little figures; for the artist,
1


having little else to guide him, drew largely upon his own
fertile imagination for his ideas of the analysis of motion,
and the result, when synthesised in the instrument, was
often extremely grotesque. Nevertheless, there was a
certain fascination about the jumping figures which induced
many to attempt to apply the device to the optical lantern.
It was soon found, however, that the very small amount of
light which the slits in the shutter-disc would transmit to
the screen was far too meagre, especially as these slits had
to be made considerably smaller than before, in order to
give the sharper definition demanded by the exigencies of
the magnification to which they were subjected.
But one of these experimenters adopted a different basis
for his experiments, and in his choreutoscope, as he called
their result, was embodied a principle without which none
of the cinematographs of the present day would be of
any use
In this little instrument, which, by the way, was small
enough for the slide-stage of an ordinary lantern, the
pictures were arranged on a flat strip, which an ingenious
escapement mechanism was made to pass through the
lantern in a series of jerks with a pause between each.
The pictures were supported on a travelling brass strip,
having a notch below each; and an eccentric beneath,
as it turned, shifted it forward one step in a revolution.
Immediately in front of the pictures was a little shutter
which descended and cut off the light at each movement,
and immediately reopened again as soon as the picture had
come to rest. Thus in this instrument of strange name was
the embryo of the modern cinematograph; and although
the patronymic has not been inherited, the tendency to high-
flown nomenclature certainly has, and the names assumed
by the present-day machines would make even the inventor
of the choreutoscope tremble.
When instantaneous photography became an accomplished
fact, several workers turned their attention to the production
of successive photographs representing the movements of
various objects in different phases. Most of the photographs
were taken for the purpose of scientific investigation,
wherein these analyses of movements were, as may be sup-
posed, very valuable. One of the most notable productions


of its kind was the famous “Trotting Horse,” taken by
Muybridge, of California, in which, by the employment of
a large number of separate photographic cameras arranged
side by side, successive photographs of a horse in different
phases of movement were made as the beast passed along
the course in front of the cameras, and automatically re-
leased the shutter of each as he passed. Although those
series photographs were taken at far too long intervals of
time between each to be of practical value for after syn-
thesis and viewing as one animated pictui-e, Mr. Muybridge
did produce series photographs with this object, and even
succeeded in projecting them for the illustration of his
lectures on the subject.
As may be ..supposed, the battery of separate cameras,
each with a separate shutter capable of being released at
intervals, was soon discarded in favour of the far more
convenient arrangement by which one camera was made
to impress successive images on a rapidly moving plate
or series of plates passed behind the lens, the rotary
shutter transmitting a flash of light to each as it came
into position. Such a camera was that invented by
Anschutz, whereby the series photographs were taken far
more perfectly and at much shorter intervals. The
synthesis of these series photographs by means of the
zoetrope, or “ wheel of life,” followed as a matter of
course, and‘that little instrument blossomed out again into
public favour to a certain extent when fed with photo-
lithographs from the camera of Anschutz. By means of
a glorified zoetrope, which he called the Living Wonder,
Anschutz succeeded in electrifying the whole world for
a few days with the marvellously life-like reproductions
of natural movements. In this instrument the photo-
graphic transparencies on glass were arranged around the
periphery of a large wheel revolving behind a lens through
which the pictures were viewed. There was no shutter,
but its place was taken by a most ingenious arrange-
ment, by whose aid a brilliant electric spark from an
induction machine was made to illuminate each little
picture precisely as it came into position.
More than one experimenter attempted to adapt this
at that time marvellous machine to lantern projection,


but the electric spark upon a sufficiently brilliant scale
was impracticable—indeed, impossible—and no other con-
trivance could take its place, so the result was nothing but
failure.
The next remarkable achievement was the Edison
kinetoscope, which was simply a modification of the Living
Wonder, suggested by the late improvement in photo-
graphy, by which really satisfactory photographs upon a
flexible support could be produced by the aid of trans-
parent celluloid. Edison used a rotating shutter, with a
very narrow slit in it, in place of the electric spark, and
as his pictures were very much smaller he found adequate
illumination in an incandescent electric lamp placed im-
mediately under the film picture. By the use of celluloid,
and by confining himself to very small pictures, he was
able to produce an almost incredible number in a given
space of time, and to continue to produce them at this
rate until there were enough to record a complete little
episode. Thus in the kinetoscope there were forty feet
of film accommodating no less than six hundred little photo-
graphs, arranged one above the other, and measuring one
inch broad by about five-eighths high.
In the meantime other experimenters were at work
upon the same idea, notably an Englishman, Mr. Birt Acres,
who was successful in making series photographs some
years ago. He actually exhibited an early form of cine-
matograph of his own design, before the Photographic
Society of Great Britain, as early as January 1895.
With these wonderfully perfect series photographs of
Edison’s at their command, it is no wonder that before very
long other inventors succeeded in producing a machine by
which they could be projected upon a lantern screen. It
was not, however, until they turned their attention to the
revival of the almost forgotten intermittent motion as used
in Beale’s choreutoscope, that any practical result was pos-
sible. Then it became merely a matter of the mechanical
contrivance by which the desired result should be obtained,
and at that point the various experimenters diverged and
struck out, each a line of his own; and it is upon that
point that the last word has at the present time not yet
been spoken.


It was soon found that Edison’s series photographs—
perfect as they were in many ways—could be much im-
proved upon for projection work. Their chief sin was a
density that no light could satisfactorily pierce ; and directly
the later workers learned to take the pictures for them-
selves, they were relegated to disuse. They were taken
with a rapidity which is found unnecessary, and the forty
exposures per second has now been reduced to nearer
twenty, and often less, in a similar time.
Having thus scantily paved the way for a consideration
of the projection machine of the present day, it is pro-
posed to call in review, not the instruments themselves—
for a dealer’s catalogue will do that—but the various
mechanical principles which they represent. It was feared
that completeness could hardly be hoped for in the present
state of the art, when fresh machines embodying fresh
principles are of almost every-day occurrence, and so it was
decided to confine the descriptions to those instruments
that have come under the author’s personal knowledge,
and many of which he has himself used.


CHAPTER I.
CINEMA TO GRA PH PICTURES.
"TTTHEN the Edison kinetoscope was introduced, a cer-
VV tain set of dimensions for the little pictures was
arbitrarily selected and closely adhered to, in order that the
subjects might be interchangeable in the instruments. And
the vast majority of the inventors who turned their
attention to the projection on a lantern screen of these
living photographs which had attracted so much notice,
naturally selected for their earlier experiments the series
photographs, as they might be called, which were ready to
their hands. To make and use a camera for actually
taking these series photographs was a task that very few
attempted: it was so much easier to procure the excellent
pictures that had already been produced for use in the
kinetoscope, and to then construct a suitable instrument for
their projection upon the screen.
And so it came about that the arbitrary measurements
which had been selected by Edison were perpetuated in
the earlier cinematographs. It was soon seen, however,
that the Edison pictures, though wonderfully perfect for
the purpose for which they were originally intended, were
in very many respects unsuitable for projection. In the
first place they were exceedingly dense. Photographic
density within reasonable limits was no detriment in a
kinetoscope, for the brilliant little incandescent lamp, by
whose light the picture was viewed, was quite sufficient to
illuminate a fairly thick transparency ; but the case was
entirely different when it came to projecting these little
transparencies upon the lantern screen. For in a cinema-
tograph there are many things which militate against


brilliancy of a projected picture; and even now, wlien
many of the earlier difficulties have been successfully over-
come, with the most perfected instruments there is never
so much light that a little more would not be a decided
advantage.
The fact that the Edison pictures were far too dense to
be satisfactorily projected was recognised in the very early
days of cinematography, and it was not long before this
part of the question began to receive the attention that it
deserved; but by that time several projection machines
had been evolved from the workshops of the earlier experi-
menters, and in these the Edison standard had been adopted.
Naturally enough, therefore, when these earlier experi-
menters began to make their own films, they adhered to
the style to which they had become accustomed. Thus the
old Edison kinetoscope standard is the standard of the
present day. »
But in the course of the endeavours which were con-
stantly being made to overcome the inherent faults of
cinematography—flickering of the light, and, more especi-
ally in the early days, unsteadiness of the picture upon the
screen—the idea naturally suggested itself that if it were
not necessary to magnify the pictures to such an extreme
extent in order to procure a fair-sized image, the unsteadi-
ness would be very considerably reduced. One or two
inventors therefore broke away from the beaten track of
Edison standardism, and commenced to make the series
pictures on a scale which would bring them more on a level
with an ordinary lantern slide. Undoubtedly the finest
results that have yet been obtained have been arrived at
by this means, but there are many disadvantages which
must be placed to its account.
To make these series photographs three inches across
instead of one inch, as hitherto, means, of course, each
picture being nine times the size of those previously used,
and that the original outlay for sensitive film would be
nine times as much as would suffice under the older condi-
tions. That alone is a very heavy consideration, for even
as matters stand under the usual conditions it costs about
£1 to buy sufficient film for one negative of average
size, and then a similar outlay for the positive; and when


this expense is added to all the others that are incidental,
and due allowance is made for unavoidable waste, the idea
of multiplying the sum by nine suggests the thought that
cinematography is out of the question for any but million-
aires. Then again, eighty feet of wet and light-sensitive
film—about the average length at the present time—is,
as it is, somewhat unwieldy to handle in the darkroom.
The idea of handling two hundred and forty feet of such
material suggests visions of profanity that is abhorrent to
the mind of the religiously disposed. As a further evidence
against the use of large pictures, it may be mentioned
that the mechanical difficulties of moving such a mass of
material with the necessary intermittent motion through
the projection machine are very much greater than where
the smaller strip is concerned.
And so, in spite of the undeniable advantages of the
system, the use of large pictures has not come into general
favour, and the Edison dimensions may be taken as a
standard to which there are no more than the usual number
of dissentients. According to this system, the size of each
little picture of a series is one inch broad by five-eighths of
an inch high. They are printed by photography upon a
strip of sensitised celluloid film, and their arrangement is
such that they are one on the top of the other—not side
by side—and there is no appreciable space between one
little picture and the next. •
To pass a strip of sensitive celluloid behind a lens, and
by means of a rotary shutter to make a number of photo-
graphic exposures upon it at regular intervals, would not
appear to present much difficulty; but to re-pass that
strip in a similar manner through a lantern, and to un-
cover it exactly as each little image takes up its position
behind the lens so that the pictures are thrown upon the
screen in a series of flashes, presents much greater difficul-
ties. It is conceivable that no skill or accuracy in the
construction of the mechanism would infallibly ensure the
equal feeding of the film through the instrument so exactly
that each little picture should always be precisely behind
the lens at the moment that the shutter opened. The
slight variations in the sizes of rollers which are bound to
fjllow upon variations in temperature would be quite


sufficient to derange the mechanism and ultimately throw
the pictures completely out of place, even if the film itself
did not constantly vary in length.
This difficulty as to the registration of the pictures—the
exact superposition of one picture precisely over the place
immediately before occupied by its predecessor—is over-
come by notching the film a certain number of times for
each picture, and providing upon the rollers by which it
is drawn forward corresponding pegs to engage with the
notches.
Here again a standard has been established that is more
or less generally adhered to. In the kinetoscope the
picture strips were one and three-eighths inches broad, and,
the one-inch picture being printed in the middle, there was
an unoccupied space of three-sixteenths of an inch on either
side. In this space there were a number of cushion-shaped
perforations through the film, and these were about a
square sixteenth of an inch in size, so that there was a
strip of unperforated film an eighth of an inch broad outside
the perforations.
With one notable exception all the inventors of the
instruments for the projection of the living photographs
who adhered to the Edison standard for the size of the
pictures also copied the system of perforation : thus we
find that nearly all the commercial films of the present day
are perforated with a row of holes down either side ; these
holes vary a little in size, though they are approximately
that which has been quoted; they vary in shape some-
what also, some being square, some oblong, and some
cushion-shaped. None of these slight variations are suffi-
cient to make the film pictures uninterchangeable on most
of the machines at present in use. The pictures are always
approximately the same height, and there are invariably
four holes on either side of the film to each picture.
I have said that the pictures on films supplied by different
makers vary slightly in height, and it follows, therefore,
that there must be also a slight difference in the distance
apart of the perforations, seeing that there are always four
holes to a picture. Thus, if you hold up to the light, one
over the other, two films by different makers, you will rarely
find that the rows of holes will exactly correspond for more


than a short distance. Sometimes the difference is noticeable
in a couple of inches; in others, the holes may seem to
correspond for a foot or more.
The films are drawn forward in the apparatus by means
of a cylinder, or cylinders, having a row of little pegs on
the surface near either extremity which engage with these
perforations. So long as only a dozen or so of these pegs
engage with the film at one time, the slight variations in
the spaces between the holes will not give much trouble.
It is when the cylinder is of large diameter and the film
passes a considerable distance around it, or when there are
FIG. 1.
FIG. 2.
two toothed cylinders and the film is stretched tightly
between them, that the trouble arises from this want of
uniformity. Under these circumstances a film that does
not fit rapidly gets torn, and a film that is much torn is
useless.
A single variant from the Edison standard of perforation
has been mentioned as being specially notable. This was
one of the very first instruments to be introduced, but, unlike
most of its near contemporaries, is still one of the very
best machines that there is. Although the same dimensions
of picture and the same size of film are used in this machine,
the system of perforation is different. The plan adopted is


to pierce one round hole on either side of each picture, and
as this hole is always in exactly the same position with
reference to the picture, one of the adjustments necessary
in machines on the Edison system is satisfactorily dispensed
with.
The illustrations on the opposite page represent a few
inches of picture film according to these two principal systems.
That on the right (fig. 2) shows the manner of perforation of a
“one-hole” film, and that on the left (fig. 1) the system
used in all other machines except, of course, those designed
for pictures of larger size. This last is called the Edison
“ four-hole ” system ; and although, as has been already
pointed out, there are considerable variations from the
original model, they are not of sufficient magnitude to
render the varying films unsuitable for most of the Edison
standard machines at present on the market.
I


CHAPTER II.
THE OPTICAL SYSTEM.
TO Lim who contemplates the manipulation of a cine-
matograph, either for pleasure or profit or any other
reason, a thorough knowledge of the principles on which
the living photographs are based, and of the various
mechanical devices by which the results are sought to be
brought about, is of the utmost value. It will, first of all,
be no inconsiderable help to him in the choice of an instru-
ment, and that is a most important point; for there is a
-wonderful array of instruments to choose from, and they
vary through all degrees of efficiency from the most
abominable of “St. Vituscopes”—as it has been suggested
that all cinematographs should be generally called—to the
nearest approach to perfection that has at present been
obtained. And secondly, such a knowledge will be of the
greatest service to him, not only in enabling him to so
manipulate the apparatus that it is exhibited to the highest
of its efficiency, but it will also give him the power of
locating faults whenever they occur—as they are bound
to do occasionally—and very possibly of remedying the
derangement with as little delay as possible.
A knowledge, too, of the optical principle and the mechani-
cal arrangements of the cinematograph will give the operator
confidence in his instrument; and confidence, as every
public entertainer knows full well, is one of the first attributes
of success. It is difficult to think of any likely plight for
the lanternist more miserable than to be operating before
a large audience an instrument with whose characteristics
and peculiarities he is quite unfamiliar. He is filled with
misgiving regarding its behaviour: he does not trust his


apparatus, and he is all the time miserably conscious that
should anything go wrong, as he feels vaguely may happen
at any moment, he is utterly powerless to put it right.
No apology, therefore, is, I think, needed for the space
which it is proposed to devote to a full consideration of,
first, the general principles of cinematographic projection,
and, second, the various mechanical devices that have from
time to time been brought forward by which this principle
is more or less perfectly carried out.
In order the more readily to comprehend the optical
arrangements by which the moving photographs are pro-
jected upon the lantern screen, let us glance for a moment
at a diagram of an ordinary optical lantern system. For
it must be remembered that the lantern portion of a
cinematograph differs only in one small particular from the
FIG 3.
arrangements of the older instrument which is so familiar
to all of us as the optical or magic lantern.
The diagram which I have re-drawn for this page must
be more than familiar to the majority of my readers, for
it has appeared over and over again in various periodicals
and in all the text-books on the lantern ; but it is included
here for the sake of completeness, and in order to refresh
the memories of such as may be not sufficiently familiar
with the interior economy of an ordinary optical lantern
that they can altogether dispense with a short description
before proceeding to a consideration of the cinematograph.
In the diagram before you (fig. 3) l represents the source
of light whose chief characteristics should always be the
maximum of brilliancy with the minimum of size. In
other words, the light should be the most brilliant that it


is possible to obtain, but its luininous area must be small.
The nearer it approaches the beau ideal of an Euclidean
point the better will be the resultant picture in all respects
From the source of light the rays spread out in all
directions, within the limits of its illuminating angle, fol-
lowing, of course, the “ law of inverse squares,” by which
its intensity diminishes as the square of the distance, c is
the condenser usually formed of two plano-convex lenses
placed with their convex sides almost in contact with one
another. Their diameter should be just a little larger than
the longest diagonal, or diameter of the transparency,
T, whose image is to be projected upon the screen, o is
the projecting lens, or objective placed at such a distance
from the slide that the image of the latter is correctly
focussed upon the distant screen in front of it: that is to
say, that the slide is placed at one of its conjugate foci
while the screen is at the other. The objective itself
occupies the position of one of the conjugate foci of the
condenser, so that all the rays of light, as rendered conver-
gent by the latter, are able to pass through it. As the
source of light, l, must naturally be placed at the other
conjugate focus of the condenser, it follows that its position
behind the lens not only depends upon the focal length of
the condenser, but also upon that of the objective; also,
with every variation of the distance of the screen in front
of the projecting lens, the distance of the slide behind it
must be correspondingly varied, for they are placed at the
respective conjugate foci of the lens. jßut the slide is not
moved, because its proper position is close up to the con-
denser ; therefore the front lens must be altered in distance
from the condenser and slide in order to obtain variations
in focus. And that means that the position of the light
must also be correspondingly altered in order to maintain
the balance that is necessary to perfect results.
I have said that the slide should be placed close up to
the condenser. The usual size for a lantern condenser is
four inches in diameter, because that is a little larger than
the diagonal measurement for the largest lantern-slide open-
ing that is ever used at the present time. If the trans-
parency, t, were not close up to the condenser, but some
little distance away from it, it would intersect the cone


of light rays at a point where they would be insufficiently
spread out to embrace the whole of the slide opening; the
corners of the pictures would therefore be cut off by shadow.
But if the condenser were larger, it would then be right to
place the slide at some distance from it, so that the cone
of rays might be intersected at a point where they were
sufficiently condensed to pass through the opening; other-
wise the light upon the screen would be unduly attenuated,
on account of the fact that only a portion of it would be
able to find its way through the slide.
In practice the advantages of using a larger condenser
are not apparent, except in those cases where it is necessary
to use so powerful a source of light that it is impracticable
to place it at the usual distance from the glass, for fear of
damage from the intense heat: for where the source of
light must on this account be removed to a greater distance
from the condenser, that lens must necessarily be of longer*
focus ; and as the source of light is farther away, and the
condenser still of the same diameter, the proportion of light
rays which it would collect would be very much smaller,
because the intensity of the light diminishes as the square
of the distance from its source. Hence we are no better
off than with a less powerful light at a smaller distance.
In this case it is advisable to use a condenser of larger
diameter, so as to embrace a larger angle with reference
to the position of the light, and to place it at such a
distance behind the slide that the latter cuts the cone of
rays at the most advantageous point.
It might therefore be supposed that where we have a
very small-sized slide to deal with, it would only be
necessary to reduce the size of every other part of the
apparatus in due proportion. And so it would, were it
possible to do so. But it is not possible to reduce the size
of the source of light without impairing its brilliancy, and
then only to a limited extent. As it is, our only available
light sources are too large in luminous area to be really
satisfactory, and for cinematographs they are larger than
for ordinary lantern work, for so much more illumination
is demanded of them.
Hence the almost universal practice is to employ <a
light source and condensing lens of the usual lantern


FIG. 4.


pattern in a cinematograph, and to push the tiny picture
that has to be.projected so far along the cone of rays that
the light can pass almost entirely through it, and with as
little loss around the edges as may be. A front lens of
proportionately short focus must of course be used in
connection with this small transparency, or the image upon
the screen would be very small indeed.
So much, then, for the slight difference between the
optical system of an ordinary lantern and that of a cine-
matograph. Now let us consider the latter a little more
fully.
In the diagram upon the opposite page (fig.* 4) I have
endeavoured to plan out in simple form the essential portions
of a complete cinematograph in such a manner that it
may be easily comprehended. All details have been omitted,
and only those portions included as ai'e absolutely necessary
to the elucidation of the principle upon which all living
photographic apparatus are constructed.
First as to the optical arragements. As in the preceding
diagram, l is the source of light, and c the condenser,
whose duty it is to collect the divergent rays from the
lamp and squeeze them together, as it were, and so cause
them to converge upon the projecting lens, o. The trans-
parency, t, instead of being close up to the condenser, where
it would take in but a very small proportion of the avail-
able light, on account of its comparatively small size, has
been moved much farther forward, and in this position it
embraces nearly the whole bundle of rays. That is all.
The rest of the arrangement is simply a mechanical de-
vice for changing the little pictures with the necessary
rapidity.
2


CHAPTER III.
THE MECHANICAL SYSTEM.
rpHERE are two great classes into which all the prac-
JL tical cinematographs of the present day may be roughly
separated. In the one class are all those instruments in
which the necessary intermittent motion of the film is
applied to it through the medium of intermittently moving
mechanism; in the other, the motion of the mechanical
contrivance is continuous or, at all events, reciprocal, and
its action upon one portion of the film is such that inter-
mittent motion is applied to it.
It is in the former class that we must look to find the
majority of the recognised instruments, and we may as
well, therefore, deal with this, the larger class, first. But
it must not be supposed that the greater merit necessarily
rests with the instruments that are to be found therein.
As a matter of fact, machines that have met with very
great favour are to be found under either category.
As a preliminary to the following consideration of some
of the various methods that have from time to time been
devised to meet the requirements of cinematography, let
me briefly call to mind the circumstances under which the
living photographs are produced, and review the difficulties
that have to be met and overcome.
We have, then, a strip of celluloid, one and three-eighths
inches wide, and, say, seventy-five feet in length. It is
coated with a film of gelatine—the vehicle which carries
the photographic impression. The photograph takes the
form of a series of little pictures, an inch broad and five-
eighths high, printed one just over the other, and quite
close together. There are about twelve hundred of these


little pictures, and they are all very similar to one another,
yet each one is slightly different from all the rest—that
is to say, they each represent the same scene, but each
presents a slightly different phase. They are the result of
a photographic analysis of a series of movements, as it
were. Properly synthesised, they will reproduce those
movements exactly as they were originally.
To synthesise these little pictures so as to reproduce
these movements as they originally appeared, it is necessary
to view them in as rapid succession as that in which they
were produced—say, fifteen in a second. The change from
one picture to the next must be so quickly accomplished
that it is indiscernible to the eye, and each picture must
drop absolutely into the same place as that but an instant
before occupied by its predecessor. Moreover, the change
from one picture to the next —seeing that it cannot be
accomplished instantaneously—must be covered by a period
of darkness, otherwise, by the phenomenon known as “ per-
sistence of vision,” the impression received by the retina
while the picture is moving will remain over into the period
of rest, and give a blurred appearance to the picture.
If the reader will refer back again to the diagram of
the cinematograph system on page 16, it will be seen that,
robbed of all its unessential accessories, the cinematograph
is really a comparatively simple instrument after all. It
consists merely of a mechanical movement, whose object it
is to pass the photographic film forward past the lens
system intermittently, moving it exactly one picture’s
breadth at each jerk; and a shutter, by which the light
is cut off during those periods of movement, but is allowed
free passage all the while the picture is still.
To begin at the beginning, A is the spool on which the
picture film is wound. In many of the most modern
machines this spool is done away with, its place being taken
by a peg, which forms an axle on which is placed the roll
of film. Where the film is drawn down in jerks—as it
always is, unless there be a special contrivance to feed it
continuously—this method has the advantage of presenting
as little inertia as possible to the intermittent tugs. A
spool of metal or other material must necessarily have
inertia, which has to be continually overcome, and thus


a considerable strain is put upon the film ; while if the spool
run very freely, it is liable to spin faster than the film is
required, and thus the danger of entanglement is introduced.
On the other hand, where the film is of great length, or
where there are a number of films joined together, it is not
practicable to put so large a coil unsupported upon a peg,
and the spool becomes a necessity.
For this reason, there is great preference, in my opinion,
for machines in which there is a continuous feed of film,
and the intermittent motion only communicated to a few
inches of the film instead of constantly tugging at the
whole supply. In the imaginary machine now under
consideration I have provided for this by means of the
drum, b.
This drum, or barrel, is technically called a “sprocket
wheel.” It is a cylinder, generally of brass, and hollow or
solid according to taste, bearing on its surface, near either
end, a row of pegs, or sprockets, which engage with the
perforation of the film, and thus ensures the exact amount
of “feed” required. As there are four perforations on
either side of each picture—it is called the “ four-hole ”
system—it follows that the number of teeth on either side
of any sprocket wheel must be some multiple of four in
order that at each revolution it may draw forward or feed
the pictures integrally. Thus, a sprocket wheel having
twenty-four teeth at either end will feed forward no more
or less than six pictures for each completed revolution. It
would be technically called a “six-picture wheel.”
In the diagram now under consideration, there are two
sprocket wheels, and each are of “ six-picture ” capacity.
It follows that if both revolve at precisely the same rate,
a piece of film may be passed first around one and then on
to the other ; and whatever capacity the loop of film between
them may originally have, it will always remain constant
until the end. But to proceed.
The film passes about half way round the sprocket wheel,
b, with which it is held in contact by the pressure roller,
having grooves cut in it to make room for the teeth of
the cylinder. Thence it passes in an unrestricted loop to
the projection point, where it is held sufficiently tightly
between two pressure plates, which serve to keep it flat and


at the correct focal distance from the objective, o. Aftei
that, it is taken up by another sprocket wheel, similar to
the first except in one respect, presently to be explained,
and thence it goes to a receiving spool, G.
And now for the difference between those two sprocket
wheels. The upper one, b, is merely to feed the film
forward continuously, so as to relieve the spool of the
intermittent tugging. It therefore turns continuously.
The other cylinder has a more important work to perform.
To its share falls the duty of imparting the necessary
intermittent motion to the film; therefore it is so con-
nected with the mechanism that it turns in a series of
jerks—six to each complete revolution—so that exactly one
picture, no more and no less, is pulled through at each jerk.
The two sprocket wheels revolve at exactly the same rate,
in spite of the difference in their manner of revolving.
That is to say, each completes a revolution at the same
instant, and, of course in each case, six pictures are passed
through the instrument for each revolution. Thus the
loop, h, between the picture point and the feeding sprocket,
always remains of constant capacity : it simply rises and
falls as one sprocket wheel gains a little on the other for
a moment and then halts until the balance is restored.
In the diagram the sprocket, E, is at rest, and the
picture is therefore stationary at the little window, T. The
sprocket, b, is still moving, of course, but it is merely
feeding forward enough film—augmenting the loop, h, —
to be ready for the next jerk—the next change of picture.
There is no other obstruction to the light, which therefore
follows the direction of the dotted lines, and reproduces the
little picture which happens to be at the window, T, im-
mensely enlarged upon the screen.
It has been said that at the instant that this little picture
is moved forward and its place taken by the next one of the
series, the light must be shut off so that the movement is
not apparent on the screen. This is accomplished by the
shutter, i, which, being double acting, as it were, makes but
half a revolution to each picture. The form of this shutter
is not very clear from the drawing. It really consists of a
flat strip of metal, say, nine inches long by one inch broad.
This is divided into three equal lengths, and the end pieces


bent up at right angles to the middle part, so as to form a
letter U (see fig. 16, “ Cylindrical shutter”). The middle
of the centre portion is attached to a pivot, and the U is
placed horizontally. It is the end of this pivot which can
be seen in the diagram, and the turned-up edges are shown
as thick black lines. In various makes of instruments the
shutter takes various forms, but it is generally either of
this pattern or of the shape of a fan or segment of a disc.
In the present case the shutter revolves three times for
every turn of the sprocket wheels. At every half revolution
the light is cut off, and the little picture changed from one
to the next.
This outline description is applicable in most particulars
to all the cinematographs that belong to this first great
class —those which have a sprocket wheel that moves inter-
mittently and thus imparts the necessary intermittent
motion to the film. It is in the manner by which this
intermittent motion is applied to the sprocket wheel that
the various machines of this class differ from one another,
and the various mechanical movements —or at all events, a
few that are fairly representative—-will be dealt with in the
next chapter. Then there will still remain that class of
instruments in which the intermittent motion is derived by
the film direct from continuously or reciprocally moving
mechanism without the intervention of any jerkily actuated
contrivances whatever. This class of instruments will
receive due attention in a later chapter.


CHAPTER IV.
INTERMITTENT MECHANISM.
IT has been said that a very large proportion of the
living photograph machines] that have up to the
present been invented may be classed together under one
category—instruments in which the necessary jerky motion
of the film is accomplished by drawing it forward through
the medium of an intermittently rotating sprocket wheel.
And I have pointed out that in the large number of machines
that depend xipon this principle, there are several different
methods by which this intermittent movement is imparted
to the sprocket wheel. It is upon these different methods
of changing the continuous motion of the handle into the
intermittent movement of the toothed cylinder that the
claims to letters patent rest—more or less insecurely. It
is obvious that it would not be possible to secure a valid
patent upon the general principle of the cinematograph,
though, of course, our delightfully obliging Patent Office
would willingly grant you full “ protection ”-r-if you paid
for it—without having the least intention of helping you
in any way if some one else jumped your claim. They would
just as gladly grant you letters patent for a cinematograph
as they would for the steam engine or the tea kettle or
anything else you might like to “ humbly pray ” for, pro-
vided you paid the necessary fees in advance. But the
patent would not be worth the paper it was printed upon.
It is hoped that these simple descriptions of some of the
better known contrivances by which the intermittent motion
is applied to the sprocket wheel may not only prove in-
structive to those interested in cinematography, but may
also be a useful guide to possible buyers in enabling them


to make intelligent choice between the thousand and one
instruments with which they are confronted, all of which
claim to be perfection and to have “complete absence of
that flickering and unsteadiness that are so noticeable in
other machines.”
The “Maltese Cross” Movement.
This is one of the simplest movements that has ever
been devised for this purpose, though not on that account
necessarily the best; indeed, it is very far from being the
FIG. 5.
best, unless the machine is remai'kably well made. In all
these things nearly everything depends upon the workman-
ship ; but the remark is perhaps more true of some than of
others, and this certainly belongs to the former class.
The sketch (fig. 5) represents, in very diagrammatic
fashion, the two principal wheels out of a cinematograph.
As in all the other similar diagrams in this book, the wheel
which moves intermittently is shaded, while that which has
continuous motion is left blank. The upper, or shaded, wheel
is in this case connected directly with the sprocket wheel,
which is of the size to accommodate four pictures. The lower
wheel is geared to the handle by which the instrument


is operated, and is designed to turn at the rate of about
fifteen revolutions per second—about the average speed at
which living photographs are exhibited : for every complete
revolution of this wheel draws one picture through the in-
strument, because it gives to the “ maltese cross ” wheel, and
therefore to the sprocket wheel, a quarter turn every time.
The details of the movement will, I think, be fairly
apparent from the drawing. When the mechanism is in
the phase shown in the diagram, the “ maltese cross ” or
“star ” wheel is at rest; and not only that, but it is tightly
locked, so that no influence of inertia or gravity or anything
else is able to move it. This locking of the sprocket wheel
during its stationary periods is one of the most important
points of a cinematograph with intermittently moving
mechanism; for if the cylinder simply came to rest of its
own accord, so to speak, in the intervals between its periods
of activity, with no special device for locking it fast in
position, its inertia, or the weight of the film hanging from
it, would be certain to drag it forward to a certain extent,
and the extra movement would always be an uncertain
quantity, and tend to very great unsteadiness of the pro-
jected picture.
In all these “star-wheel” movements the locking device
is extremely simple, but it is liable to derangement after
the instrument has been in use for a short time ; for a little
wear—to which it is particularly liable—means a consider-
able amount of shake. As will be immediately apparent,
the locking of the star wheel is secured by the smooth rim
of the wheel, k, pressing with sufficient tightness against
the properly curved edge of the maltese cross. At one
point on the periphery of the circular wheel there is a
piece bitten out, as it were, of just sufficient size to release
the edge of the maltese cross for a moment and allow it to
make a quarter turn. This is accomplished by the peg, l,
engaging in the radial slot between the arms of the cross.
It slips into the slot which is proximate to it at the
moment that the bitten out portion comes half under the
cross and releases it from the grasp of the wheel, k. The
maltese cross wheel can only make one quarter turn at
each complete revolution of the smooth wheel, and can only
make it at the proper speed, for it is as tightly held in its


period of motion by the little peg, L, as, in its time of rest,
it is locked by the rim of the smooth wheel.
Of course due provision is made in the instrument for
the lens to be covered by a shutter during the period of
motion of the sprocket wheel.
It will be seen that this method of changing the con-
tinuous motion of the wheel, K, into the intermittent
motion required in the sprocket wheel is one that has the
advantage of extreme simplicity. But as I have said,
the wear between the two edges that are in contact is
considerable, as may be easily understood when it is re-
membered at what tremendous speed the wheel, k, revolves.
When the two surfaces become, by wear, only slightly
separated, a large amount of shake is introduced, with the
inevitable result of causing unsteadiness of the picture on
the screen.
Moreover, the sudden entrance of the peg into the radial
slot, and, again, the equally sudden coming together of the
edges of the two wheels when the one is brought to rest
after one of its periods of movement, cause a loud tapping
noise, which, occurring so many times in a second, develops
into a sound that can only be described as very loud. I
have heard machines built upon this principle emit a noise
that one may modestly liken to a burglar alarm—resisting
the obvious temptation to adopt a Hotchkiss gun as a
simile.
But both of these objections may be to a very great
extent overcome by good workmanship. If both wheels
be made of suitable steel, the wear may be so far reduced
that the efficient life of the instrument will be prolonged
to a quite sufficient extent; while if the whole movement
be made upon a comparatively small scale, and the curves
really accurately worked out, the noise may be so far
reduced that the machine may bear favourable comparison
with many others in this respect also.
The “Double Star Wheel” Movement.
This is an amplification of the same principle—the
Genever clutch—although, I believe, it is of earlier origin.
Imagine the maltese cross movement, which has just been


described, to be duplicated—that is to say, two maltese
crosses, one on either side of the central smooth wheel;
the result of turning that central wheel will then be, of
course, to impart intermittent motion to each of the star
wheels alternately. Supposing each to be connected with
a “ four-picture ” sprocket wheel, a piece of film might
be stretched between the two, and
the loop would be alternately
loosened and tightened and at the
same time passed forward a step
at each turn of the central wheel.
But if there were two pieces bitten
out of the central wheel instead of
one, and a peg in each, there
would be two impulses imparted to
each sprocket at every revolution;
and if the pegs were opposite to one
another, the impulses would occur
simultaneously in the two star
wheels. Then the film stretched
across the two sprockets would
always be stretched with equal
tension, and would be passed for-
ward, one picture’s breadth at a
time, at every half revolution of the
central wheel.
In most of the machines con-
structed upon this principle the
maltese cross is doubled in capacity,
and therefore loses its characteristic
appearance; and it is, of course,
used in connection with an “ eight-
picture ” sprocket wheel.
FIG. 6.
The arrangement is shown in simple diagrammatic form
in fig. 6, where e and e are the upper and nether
star wheels respectively, to which are attached the feeding
and receiving sprocket wheels, k is the central smooth
wheel which firmly locks both star wheels in their periods
of rest, and ll are the actuating pegs by which they
are moved round one-eightli of a turn, when the cut away
portions come round and free them from restraint,


Naturally the objections which were urged against the
single star wheel device last mentioned are doubled in the
arrangement under present consideration, and, equally
naturally, both objections may to a very great extent be
overcome by good workmanship and careful attention to
the causes of the trouble.
There is another objection to this duplex arrangement
in which the film passes over two sprocket wheels moving
simultaneously, which is, perhaps, less easily overcome;
and that rests upon the fact, on which stress has already
been laid (see p. 9), that the distance between the per-
forations in films of different make is liable to considerable
variation. If a film of exact Edison gauge fit over the
two sprocket wheels in such a manner that it is stretched
between them, neither too tightly nor too loosely, it is
obvious that over the same pair of wheels, similarly adjusted,
a film of longer or shorter perforation would either hang
loosely, so as to give a wobbly picture, or it would be so
tightly stretched as to be in danger of being torn to shreds.
In the actual machines built upon this principle, I believe
it is customary to so adjust the mechanism that all films
will hang more or less loosely between the wheels, and are
held steady by two pressure plates, as in the machine
sketched on page 16. By that arrangement, of course, the
two sprocket wheels are no better than dne—in spite of
the proverb; indeed, they are rather wtrse, because of
the objections already cited. It were far tetter to employ
one sprocket moving intermittently and one running con-
tinuously to feed it with film, for by that means the
detrimental intermittent tugging on the spool is entirely
avoided.
There are other modifications of the “ star-wheel ” move-
ment besides the two already described, some having “ five
pictures ” and some six per revolution, and so on; but
enough has been said to indicate the principle.
The “ Pawl and Ratchet ” Movement.
It might appear at first sight that the simplest method
of transforming continuous rotary motion into the inter-
mittent movement required in cinematographs would be by


means of a pawl actuated by a crank operating on a
ratchet wheel. The method is certainly simple, and, if the
movement had to be made fifteen times per minute instead
of per second, would probably leave nothing to be desired.
But as it does not of itself provide any means of locking
the ratchet wheel between the thrusts of the pawl, it will
be seen that, as these thrusts occur so frequently and so
FIG. 7.
swiftly, the ratchet wheel would be carried forward after
each by its own momentum, and the steadiness of the picture
would become a very uncertain quantity.
With pawl and ratchet movements, therefore, it is neces-
sary to combine an independent locking device for holding
the sprocket wheel stationary between the impulses.
All necessary requirements are admirably -met in one
excellent machine, which is made upon this principle, and
whose movement is roughly outlined in the sketch above


(fig. 7). In the sketch those portions are, as usual, shaded
which have intermittent motion, while those whose motion
is continuous or reciprocal are left white.
At the upper part of the drawing the wheel, k, turns
continuously at a speed of fifteen revolutions per second
or thereabouts, for at every turn one little picture is ex-
hibited and changed. This wheel acts the part of a crank
or eccentric, and imparts reciprocating motion to the wheel,
00, by the instrumentality of the rod, l. The wheel, E, is a
double ratchet wheel, free to revolve above the disk, o o,
and is in direct communication with a “ six-picture ”
sprocket wheel behind. It is made of ebonite, and is all
in one piece. Leaving the upper pawl, N, out of the
question for the present, it will be seen that every to-and-
fro movement of the disk, as it is pushed and pulled by the
rod, k, will cause the pawl, M, to engage in a fresh tooth
of the ratchet wheel, and so force it round one-sixth of a
revolution, provided it is prevented from turning in the
opposite direction and thus setting up a to-and-fro move-
ment like that of the plate on which it rests.
The pressure of the film-holding pads on the sprocket
wheel is sufficient to prevent this return action of the
I’atchet; and so, if momentum could be ignored, the move-
ment as so far described would be complete. But at the
high rate of speed at which these things must work, it is
necessary to provide a checking device, so that the mechanism
shall not be carried forward farther than the required
extent. In the instrument under consideration this neces-
sity is provided for by means of a second ratchet wheel,
with teeth facing in the reverse direction, and another
pawl, n.
The working of the movement is as follows : —Suppose the
mechanism to be in the phase shown in the drawing; the
wheel, E, is turning in the direction indicated by the arrow,
and it will soon begin to pull the rod, X, upwards. Thus
the disk or pawl plate, o o, is caused to revolve to a certain
extent in the direction of the hands of a clock, and as it
carries with it the pawl, m, that reaches, by the end of the
stroke, another tooth of the ratchet wheel, which is all this
time held immovable by the other pawl, n. But just
before the end of the stroke, and before the pawl, m, has


passed the fresh tooth of the ratchet wheel, the peg, p,
also carried on the pawl plate, is brought into contact with
the locking pawl, n, which it lifts out of the groove in the
smaller ratchet wheel. Then the rod, L, begins to descend
again; the pawl plate, 00, revolves in the opposite direc-
tion ; the pawl, m, abuts against the fresh tooth of the larger
ratchet wheel, and forces it round one-sixth of a revolution.
That is the end of its stroke, and at that instant the locking
pawl, N, being no longer held up by the peg, p, which has
retreated, slips into the fresh groove of the smaller ratchet
wheel and locks the whole thing, bringing the mechanism
again into the phase indicated in the drawing.
The “ Ratchet and Pawl Spring Escapement.”
Suppose a ratchet wheel to be loosely placed upon a
spindle, so that it is free to turn upon it; then suppose i,t
to be attached to the spindle by means of a spiral spring
wound upon the latter, so that the spindle will turn to a
certain extent even when the wheel is held stationary by a
pawl, and in doing so, of course, winds up the spring; then,
when the pawl is lifted from the teeth of the ratchet wheel,
that wheel will fly round rapidly until the spring is un-
wound again as before.
This is the principle of the movement of one of the
successful cinematographs. It is shown diagrammatically
in fig. 8, where the shaded portion represents, as
before, that part of the mechanism which derives
intermittent motion from the continuously moving parts
which are shown blank. In this diagram, K and E
are respectively two ratchet wheels, each of six teeth, but
the teeth of one are turned in the opposite direction to
those of the other. The inner one, k, is connected directly
with the spindle, and it is turned continuously, for it is in
actual connection with the handle of the instrument. The
other one, E, fits loosely upon the same spindle, to which
it is joined by means of a spiral spring, not shown in the
sketch, one end of which is fastened to the spindle, while
the other is attached to the wheel, E.
The two ratchet wheels would turn together upon the
spindle as if they were one piece, were it not for the pawl, n ;


but this engages firmly with one of the teeth of the larger
wheel, and as the smaller one is turned, therefore the
spring upon the spindle tightens up and increases the
tendency of the larger ratchet wheel to turn as soon as it is
released by the pawl. This release is periodically accom-
plished in the manner which will be plain from the diagram.
Attached to the pawl is a contact plate extended above the
larger ratchet wheel to rest against the teeth of the smaller.
As this latter turns continuously, it acts the part of a cam,
and pushes back the pawl six times in every revolution.
As soon as the pawl looses its hold upon it, the larger
FIG. 8.
ratchet wheel spins round by virtue of the coiled spring
one-sixth of a turn. By that time the six-sided cam has
ceased to lift the pawl, which therefore drops back into
place, and, catching in the next tooth of the ratchet wheel,
brings it to rest again.
The sprocket wheel is attached to the larger ratchet
wheel directly; so that derives the necessary intermittent
motion by means of a singularly compact piece of mechanism
direct from the continuously turning spindle upon which it
is mounted. It may be thought a weak point in this
principle that the mechanism constructed upon it must be
very liable to wear, especially owing to the continuously
recurring collisions between the teeth of the ratchet wheel


and the edge of the pawl. But where these parts are made
of steel—as they certainly should be—this wear is not very
rapid; and even when it does occur, it is not of a nature
to interfere with the working of the instrument until the
teeth are worn down to a very considerable extent. It
simply means that as the instrument gets old the wheel
will turn a little farther round than it used to, but the
amount of escapement will still be a sixth of a revolution
every time. The picture will appear a little higher or a
little lower on the screen than it would if the teeth were
not at all worn away; but that is a very easy matter to
compensate, for all machines are necessarily fitted with an
adjustment for this error.
The “ Broken Screw ” Movement.
I
One of the first things that a mechanic has to learn
when he is set to work at the lathe is how to cut a screw
thread by hand. The “work” to be operated upon is
placed between the lathe centres, and turned up true. To
cut the screw thread upon it, a tool, called a comb or
“ chaser,” is pressed against it as it turns, and at the same
time slowly moved along in the direction of its length.
This “ chaser ” is like a rack cut on the end of a piece of
steel—simply a series of grooves cut in a peculiar manner.
Naturally, if the forward motion of the tool be regular and
duly proportioned in speed to the rate at which the work
is turning, the teeth will cut into the material with the
result of forming around it a screw thread. It is not a
very easy thing to do, and the earlier results of the work-
man are always more or less “wobbly,” as he himself
would technically term them.
Suppose a “ wobbly,” or “ drunken,” thread of this kind
to be purposely cut upon a cylinder, and that the screw
thus formed be rotated in contact with the edge of a
tangent wheel; the slow, rotary motion which would thus
be imparted by the former to the latter would then be
alternately slow and fast if the screw be turned regularly.
And if the screw be so very “ drunken ” that it is only
progressive at one portion of its circumference, and at all
3


others it is simply so many parallel grooves cut around the
cylinder at right angles to its length, the tangent wheel
would receive no motion at all when this portion of the
screw is in engagement with it, but would only turn when
the progressive portion of the thread comes round: in
other words, the motion which it would derive from the
screw would be intermittent.
That is the outline of a principle that has been adapted
to cinematograph construction. As may be supposed, the
original idea of a “ drunken ” screw and tangent wheel of
FIG. 9.
the pattern which might be imagined from this description
had to be considerably modified to suit the exigencies of so
exacting a piece of mechanism as a cinematograph. The
form which the movement generally takes is described in
the diagram (fig 9). The thick tangent wheel, with the
screw grooves cut in its hollow rim, has given place to a
circular disc with a few slots cut at regular intervals in its
edge. In the present case the wheel has eight such slots,
for it is designed to actuate an “ eight-picture ” sprocket
wheel, and these slots are, for convenience sake, cut into
eight circular holes pierced in the disk.


In the same way the worm wheel has been subjected
to similar modification. The “ pitch ” of the screw—the
distance from one thread to another—is equal to the
distance between the slots on the tangent wheel, and only
one complete convolution of the worm is retained, all the
rest being dispensed with. The thread takes a peculiar
form, too, and the diameter of the screw is very large.
In the diagram, k is the screw, and it will be seen to
be more like a spool or reel than what is generally under-
stood as a screw. It is like a barrel with a broad rim at
either end, but at one side the rim breaks away from one
end and crosses over to the other, and then, continuing
parallel to the ends of the barrel, forms the other rim.
It continues round the barrel as a parallel rim until it gets
opposite that point where it broke away from the other
side, and at this point it comes to an abrupt termination.
In the same way, the other rim only commences at the
point where, at its other extremity, it joins the rim
opposite.
I am afraid that this is not a very clear description, but
then, this “broken screw” is not at all an easy thing to
describe. I hope the drawing will make the matter clearer.
The worm, k, is continuously turning at the rate of
one revolution per picture. For the greater part of its
revolution the two parallel rims are inserted in two proxi-
mate slots'on the tangent wheel, and thus hold it firmly
locked and immovable. When that part of the worm
comes round at which the thread crosses from one extremity
to the other, one parallel rim comes to an abrupt end, and.
thus leaves the tangent wheel at the mercy of the other
The other immediately crosses over in a curved, inclined
plane to the opposite end of the cylinder, and, in doing so,
of course carries with it the edge of the tangent wheel,
which is thus turned upon its axis to the extent of one-
eighth of a revolution—equivalent to one picture’s length
of the sprocket wheel. Directly this movement is com-
pleted, and the worm, having crossed from one side to the
other of the cylinder, becomes parallel again, the other
parallel edge inserts itself into a fresh slot on the rim of
the tangent wheel, and so it continues as long as the worm
wheel continues to revolve.


This “broken screw” method involves an excellent prin-
ciple for the transformation of continuous into intermittent
motion for cinematograph purposes, but as usual it has its
disadvantages. These are found in the great mechanical
difficulties to be met with in the making of that irregular
screw with the necessary precision, and in accurately shaping
and bevelling the slots into which the worm fits. The
result is, that the movement is either an expensive one to
make, or it is so inefficient that it is extremely noisy, and
does not, withal, yield satisfactory results.
As in so many other cases, the whole question resolves
itself into one of good or bad workmanship. If the
mechanism be really well worked out and accurately accom-
plished, the instrument may give results which could hardly
be beaten by any of its rivals. If, on the other hand, the
mechanism be inefficiently carried out, the results will be
bad in every way. But that is true of every mechanical
device that has ever been applied to the requirements of
cinematography.


CHAPTER V.
CONTINUOUS MECHANISM.
AND now we come to the second great class of instru-
ments for the projection of the living photographs
upon the lantern screen. Hitherto those have only been
considered in which the intermittent motion of the film
is imparted to it directly by the intervention of mechanism
which moves intermittently. But it was mentioned at the
time that there is also another great category of machines
in which the motion of every portion of the mechanism was
either continuous or reciprocal, while, at the same time, the
film was made to leap forward with the necessary jerky
motion.
Strangely enough, both the pioneer machines in this class
are of French design. The English people do not appear
to have grasped the fact that the film may be made to
move in the desired series of jerks by mechanism whose
motion is not intermittent. Now there are several instru-
ments which may be included in this class, but many of
them are copies of either one or the other of the systems
presently to be described.
The “ Claw ” Movement.
In an earlier chapter reference was made to the “ one-
hole ” system of film perforation that had been adopted
and the method of punching the holes in the film was
described and illustrated. The numerous perforations in
the Edison, or “ four-hole," system were, it will be
remembered, for the purpose of giving to the picture
strip a firm grasp upon the rollers by which it was


hauled through the instrument, and the rollers were fitted
with a corresponding number of pegs to engage in the
perforations. Where a system is found in which those
numerous perforations are absent, it may be moderately
safely concluded that the toothed rollers, or “sprocket
wheels,” are absent also.
According to the “ one-hole ” system of perforation (see
fig. 2) there is one small hole on either side of each picture.
In the cinematograph for which the pictures are intended,
a little claw with two nails, as it were, grasps the film by
means of those two holes into which it inserts itself; draws
it down the required distance, and then withdraws; jumps
up, to the next pair of holes, and pulls the film down another
picture’s length, and so on.
It might not, at first sight, appear that this is a very
good system by which to impart to the film the intermittent
motion that is so necessary for the purpose in view. It
might seem that to obtain the required reciprocating
motion of the little claw would involve the employment of
some very complex mechanism; and that, supposing the
movement to be satisfactorily obtained, the effect upon the
film would not be such as to yield a very steady picture
upon the screen, while it would be particularly liable to
tear the pellicle.
These objections are easily disposed of. It is easy to
make the pegs of the reciprocating “ daw ” to fit the holes
in the film so accurately that they are even less liable to
tear the film than the sprocket wheel movements that have
already been described, while the movements of the pellicle
are, in the well-made instruments, so perfectly unrestrained
and easy that only the minimum of strain is applied to it
by the intermittent tugs of the little claw. As to the
mechanism by which the motion is obtained, it is perhaps
rather more complex than many of those that have been
alluded to, but of that the reader will have an oppor-
tunity of judging from the appended description. In the
instruments under consideration the workmanship is so
perfect, and every detail so excellently carried out and
beautifully made, that the machinery runs as smoothly as
if it were of the simplest description. And as to the
steadiness of the picture upon the screen, and the general


excellence of the results, it is quite unnecessary to speak,
for the instrument has already earned for itself so world-
wide a reputation.
The mechanical principle involved in this, what I have
called the “ claw,” movement is very difficult to describe
F IG . 10.
—a fact that may perhaps be ascribed to the somewhat
unusually complex nature of the mechanism. Imagine
either a cam or a crank so arranged as to impart to a
sliding frame an up-and-down motion with every turn of
the shaft, the frame being so fitted with guide rods and
bearings that it can only move in this one plane. Then
suppose that upon the same shaft is fitted another cam,


working at right angles to the former, and at alternate
periods. In the frame which moves up and down at the
instance of the first-mentioned cam let there be a smaller
sliding frame capable of movement at right angles to it;
then, if this latter frame be arranged so that it is actuated
by the second cam, it will move around the sides of a
square or oblong. In a sense, the circle will have been
squared, for the circular movement of the shaft will have
been transformed into such a movement of the little frame
that it will describe a square in its passage.
All of which I can hardly hope is understandable as it
is. Perhaps with the aid of a diagram (fig. 10) I shall be
able to make my meaning clearer. In the drawing, a
is the main shaft of the instrument, which is turned at the
necessary rate—say, fifteen revolutions per second, for one
picture is changed at every turn—by means of a handle,
to which it is connected by gear wheels to give it the
necessary speed, b is a crank by which up-and-down
motion is communicated to the frame carrying the pins
or “claw,” which is restricted absolutely to this up-and-
down path by the guide rods, c and c, running in guides
which are not shown in the drawing. This frame carries
a short tube, in which the rod, G, is free to move to and fro,
that is to say, in a direction at right angles to that in
which the frame moves. At the right-hand end of this
rod, as you look at the sketch, is a little block of steel,
which fits into the groove cut in the periphery of a large
wheel, seen edgewise, as it were, at D. This wheel is
pivoted on the same shaft as that which bears the crank,
and obviously, if that groove were simply turned true on
its edge, it would communciate no sort of motion to the
little block of steel, g ; and the claw, E (only one pin of
which is visible in the sketch), would simply travel up and
down under the influence of the crank.
But the groove on the wheel, D, is not straight. At
two places on the circumference of the wheel it bends : one
bend shifts it from one side of the edge of the wheel to the
other, as shown in the drawing; and the other bend—on
the opposite side of the wheel—shifts it back again. So it
will be seen that the little block, g, being free to move
from right to left, and vice versd, gets that motion imparted


to it from this erratic groove, for in that groove its head is
always buried.
Now I think it will be plain what effect the combination
of those two motions must have upon the little pegs or
“ claw," E. This claw gets an up-and-down motion or
“ stroke ” of about five-eighths of an inch from the crank,
and at the end of each stroke —at the “ dead centres,” as
it were—it gets a very rapid in-and-out motion from the
twisted groove of the big wheel, an in push just after the
up stroke, and an out pull after the down stroke.
The thick black vertical line towards the left-hand side
of the sketch represents the film as seen from the edge.
It passes between the usual guides to keep it at the focal
point, and these are cut away at the position marked h,
in a little window from which the picture is projected by
the lens system upon the screen. Some perpendicular
dotted lines crossing it at regular intervals indicate the
position of the perforations—one on either side of each
little picture.
It will be apparent that when the instrument is in the
phase shown in the drawing, the claw is inserted in one
pair of perforations and the little picture is in its proper
position at the window, h. The shaft, a, is designed to be
turned in the direction of the hands of a clock, if viewed
from the end shown at the left-hand side: that is to say,
looking at the instrument as it is shown in the sketch, the
upper edge of the shaft and wheels is supposed to be
turning towards you.
As the crank, b, is evidently at its lowest point, con-
tinued movement must necessarily tend to raise it. But
with respect to the frame, c, the crank is at its dead centre
at present; and before any movement of the latter would
have apparent effect upon the frame, the wheel, D, will have
come into such a position that the rod, G, will have been
withdrawn by the twisted groove on the circumference of
the wheel, and the claw will have been made to release its
hold upon the film. Therefore, as the frame carrying the
claw rises up under the influence of the crank, the film
will be left motionless, for there will be no influence tending
to disturb its position as held and clamped between the
guides which keep it in the projection plane.


Then, as soon as the little claw reaches the top of its
stroke, and thereby comes exactly opposite another pair of
perforations, it comes to rest owing to the crank having
reached the dead centre, and at the same time the twisted
groove on the big wheel slips back again into its former
position, pushes the claw forward into the holes in the film,
ready to drag it down one picture’s length as soon as the
crank begins to descend.
So it will be seen that the movement is not so very com-
plex after all. It has very many great advantages. The
machine runs as quietly as any machine on the market,
but that is chiefly owing to the excellence of the work-
manship, which has already been mentioned. As a little
consideration will make evident, the movement of the film
is admirable, for the intermittent motion is not suddenly
applied to it, and it does not stop with a sudden jerk, as in
some of the movements that have been described. The
jerk begins gradually, reaches its greatest speed at the
middle of the stroke, and then its coming to rest is also
gradual. Also, the film does not rely upon the pressure of
the guide plates to arrest its motion at the end of the
periods of movement, for the little claw ends its downward
stroke before it is withdrawn from the holes in the film.
That is probably the chief reason of the wonderful steadiness
which is always noticeable with this machine.
To refer once more to the diagram (fig. 10), it should be
mentioned that the shutter, whose duty it is to cover up the
window at all those times when the film is moving, is shown
at F. It is in the form of a spread fan, and is mounted on
the main shaft. As the sketch represents the instrument
at one of the periods when the film is at rest, the shutter
is in such a position that it does not interfere with the pro-
jection of the picture upon the screen. As soon as the
crank bearing the little claw has made its upward stroke,
and the claw has been inserted in the film again, preparatory
to pulling it down with it, the shutter will come between
the lens and the picture aperture, so that the picture on
the screen is covered with a moment of darkness while the
film moves the required distance to bring a fresh phase of
the animated photograph into position.


The “Spring-Claw” Movement.
Quite lately there has been introduced a modification of
the “ claw ” principle, by which the mechanism is much
simplified, and the instrument can therefore be made at a
lower cost. In this instrument the motion applied to the
claw by the mechanism is simply an up-and-down motion.
The teeth of the claw are curved downwards, as shown in
F IG . 11.
the sketch (fig. 11), and it is hinged and set against a very
weak spring, so that slight pressure is sufficient to force it
backwards. At the beginning of each downward movement
the little claw slips into the two holes in the film which are
immediately opposite it. It draws the film down to the
full extent of its stroke, which is of course the required
distance to make the new photograph exactly take the
place of its predecessor, and then the upward stroke begins.


As the film is somewhat firmly held between the “pressure
plates ” it is easier for the little claw to “ sit back,” as it were,
on its haunches, or rather springs, than to force the film up
again with it. Accordingly, it does so, and does not come
forward again until it reaches the top of its stroke and
finds another pair of holes ready for it. The movement
is extremely simple; and as the instrument that I saw
was decidedly well made—which I have already said is
perhaps the most important thing of all—it certainly
worked remarkably well. Moreover, the teeth of the claw
being sufficiently small, the instrument will work equally
well with the “ one-hole ” or “ four-hole ” pictures, which, it
is easy to see, is a strong point in its favour.
The “ Dog ” Movement.
It is an easy transition from a movement whose chief
characteristic is a kind of feline “ claw ” to that which I
have called the “ dog ” movement, from the fact that the
film receives its intermittent motion from an eccentric very
like the “ dog ”on a turning lathe. It has been said that
these instruments of continuously moving mechanism are
chiefly represented by two great systems, and the “ cat’s-
claw ” and the “ dog ” movements are the ones that I had
in my mind’s eye. Both, as has also been remarked, hail
originally from France—indeed, rumour has it that on the
Continent the two systems lead a veritable cat-and-dog
kind of existence, so to speak, as they greedily contend with
one another for the dainty bone of public recognition or
popularity.
First let me describe, for the benefit of those who may
happen not to know, just what is meant by the “dog” of
a turning lathe. It consists of a solid metal wheel with a
long peg projecting from its face near the edge. As the
lathe turns, this peg revolves around the centre like a planet
around the sun. Its object is to impart the necessary
rotary motion to the “ work ” which is set between the
lathe centres, and to this end it abuts against a carrier or
artificial projection upon the work.
Suppose you hold a strip of “ kinefilm ” in contact with a
“dog” while the lathe is in motion; the dog, as it turns,


will inflict a series of taps upon the surface of the film,
imparting a kind of alternate pull-and-let-go motion to
its ends. Now, arrange a sprocket wheel at one side of
the dog in such a manner that, turning slowly, it will
draw the film along to the extent of one picture at every
revolution of the lathe centre. The sprocket wheel turns
continuously, and draws the film continuously, but as it
F IG . 12.
has to pass over the eccentric “ dog,” the continuous motion
is turned into intermittent jerks. Every time the dog has
a tug at it, as it were, it moves forward suddenly to the
required distance, and then remains at rest, while the dog
retires for a time, and the sprocket wheel steadily draws in
the slack that it has caused in the film.
That is the principle of the “ dog ” movement, and it has
the merit of extreme simplicity, as may be imagined.
Fig. 12 shows the arrangement in diagrammatic form as


applied to the requirements of cinematography. At H are
the pressure plates, whose duty it is to hold the film at
the projection point, at the correct focal distance from the
objective lens; and they are, of course, pierced with an
opening of the usual size to form a window, through which
the light gains access to the picture, and passes through it
to the screen. Then it passes under the eccentric, e, which,
as will be seen, is close to the edge of a wheel rather larger
than the sprocket wheel, and whose direction of revolution
is indicated by the arrow. Thence it passes around the
“ five-picture ” sprocket wheel, which, turning continuously,
draws it steadily forward. The rest, little as it is, consists
merely of accessories. Thus pis a pressure roller requisite
to hold the film in sufficiently intimate contact with the
sprocket wheel; and cis a scraper, whose duty it is to
dissolve that connection when it has gone on long enough
to serve the required purpose, and to peel off the film and
start it on its journey to the receiving basket or spool, as
the case may be.
In the drawing, the sprocket wheel and the eccentric are
connected together by gear wheels, the larger one five
times the size of the other; and these are indicated in the
sketch by dotted circles. By this arrangement the “dog”
is forced to make five attacks upon the film for every one
revolution of the sprocket wheel—or once for each picture.
Upon the size and position of this “ dog,” with reference to
the sprocket wheel and the pressure plates, from between
which the film is fed to it, the speed with which one
picture is changed to the next entirely depends. In an
instrument with which I have often worked, and which gives
very satisfactory results in my hands, the proportions and
positions of the various parts are very much as shown in
the sketch, and with this arrangement the change from one
picture to the next occupies half the time thatfit is stationary :
that is to say, of the total time occupied in the showing of
an animated photograph with this machine, rather less
than one-third is taken up by the movement of the film
while it is stationary, and its image is being projected upon
the screen for the remaining two-thirds. In another
machine worked upon the same principle, but rather dif-
ferently carried out, the period of movement bears to that


of rest a relation of one in six. With such a machine
the size of the shutter may be very much reduced, with the
result that the picture on the screen is much more brilliant,
while the flickering of the light is considerably diminished.
But, on the other hand, it stands to reason that where the
change has to be made in such a much shorter time, the film
must necessarily move much faster, and the change from
rapid motion to actual rest much more abrupt. Conse-
quently, whatever liability there is in the slower machine
to tear or damage the film must be very much increased.
I must say, however, that in the course of a pretty long
experience with an instrument built on the principle I
have indicated, I do not find it at all more liable to damage
the pellicle than the majority of others. But this question
of the liability of the films to damage under differing con-
ditions is one of great importance, for their cost is a very
serious item in the general bill of expenditure, and it may
well be left for consideration in a more favourable place.
The “ Epicycloid al ” Movement.
Here is quite a different principle applied to the re-
quirements of cinematography. In the machines built
upon this new principle we find a sprocket wheel which not
only revolves continuously upon its own axis, but at the
same time waltzes bodily around a fixed point at some little
distance from its centre. That is to say, its manner of
revolution is very much like that of a planet around its
sun, except that its orbit is so much restricted that there
would not be room for a centre luminary, no matter how
small it might be. The manner in which this motion is
obtained will be apparent from the drawing (fig. 13). As
will be seen, the drum has a small cog-wheel on its axis
which gears into another stationary one on the main
axis of the instrument. As the wheel attached to the
toothed cylinder is forced to revolve around the stationary
wheel, it receives an independent rotary motion therefrom.
A little consideration will reveal the effect which this
complex motion must have upon the film drawn by the
sprocket wheel. Remember that the drum is turning on
its axis in the same direction as that with which it revolves


around the fixed point. The supply of film is from above,
and when the sprocket wheel is both turning and descend-
ing, the two movements are combined to draw down the
film at double pace. But when the opposite state of affairs
is in progress, when the sprocket wheel, although still
turning on its own axis, is rising or approaching the supply
of film, the two actions exactly counteract one another, and
the film at the window remains stationary: in fact, the
FIG. 13.
sprocket wheel simply rolls upwards along the loop of film,
and does not move it. It is a movement which is extremely
pretty to watch, and, complex as it may seem at first sight,
it is really quite simple, and even if it were not so, the
results which it yields are such as to justify considerable
trouble in arriving at them.
In the drawing (fig. 13), a is a disc mounted on the end
of the spindle, b, and it carries eccentrically the sprocket
wheel, D, which is capable of revolving on the spindle, c.


On the end of the bearing on which spindle b revolves
is a stationary gear wheel, E, and another gear wheel, F, is
fixed to the sprocket wheel, d, the two being geared to-
gether by an intermediate wheel, G.
The “Intermittent Grip” Movement.
Here again we are introduced to quite a different
F IG . 14.
principle; and although, so far as I am aware, instruments
based upon it are not on the general market, yet it is
responsible for one of the most successful cinematographs
that has yet been exhibited.
When you turn an ordinary roller mangle—only as an
amateur, of course—the material which you place between
the rollers is drawn through them steadily as you turn.
But if the greater part of the surface of those rollers were
4


broken away, the stuff would only be gripped and drawn
through when two unbroken portions came opposite one
another—a state of things which would occur regularly,
and naturally result in transmitting an intermittent move-
ment to the material between them. It would move
forward a step at a time, and each step would be equal.
In the diagram (fig. 14), the two rollers of a cine-
matograph on this principle are represented. Their sur-
face is cut away all round in each case, except a portion
corresponding as exactly as possible to the dimensions of
one picture on the film between them. This film has no
perforations, and as it is practically impossible to so gauge the
exact length of a picture—and that has been shown to be a
variable quantity, depending on weather and other things—
a regulating device has to be provided. The necessary re-
gulation is accomplished by hand, as the picture is watched
on the screen, by means of causing the little cheek on one
roller to lag very slightly behind the other: that is to
say, the roller is turned on its spindle very slightly while it,
spindle and all, is rapidly revolving.
The manner in which this seemingly difficult feat is
accomplished is very ingenious, but need not be entered
into here. The effect of causing one cheek to turn slightly
behind the other is to lessen the extent of the grip they
give to the film, therefore less of it is drawn through at a
time. Much of the beauty of the projected picture depends
upon the readiness and skill of him who has charge of the
regulating device; and even in the most favourable cases the
picture is seen to slowly rise and fall to a small extent on the
screen. Beyond that, the projected photograph is remark-
ably steady.
Although by far the larger number of present-day in-
struments belong to the former of the two categories, into
which, as I have said, they can all be divided—that is to
say, they depend upon intermittently moving mechanism
to give the necessary intermittent motion to the film—and,
as has also been said, one class cannot claim any
superiority over the other, for there are good instruments
in each, there appears to be a growing tendency in favour
of the latter class. For my part, I cannot help thinking
the best machines of the future will be found among those


with the continuous mechanism; but up to the present
writing it would not be fair to say that they have any
demonstrable advantage over their more jerky brothers,
and in point of numbers they are certainly in the minority.
However, that is nothing, for there are many machines on
the market which are thoroughly bad, and therefore need
not be counted.


CHAPTER VI.
THE SHUTTER.
TT may safely be said that upon no part 'of the cine-
imnnm^ ogra if^ does S o much diversit y of opinion exist as
pon the shutter Some people contend that the lens
should be absolutely covered during every instant that the
him behind it is m motion ; others go so far as to say
that there is no need for any shutter at all. Some seek a
middle course by making the shutter of some translucent
material, such as semi-opaque celluloid of a ground-glass
sIZZ? nC V 1 a / 6W krge holes in an °P a qne
shutter, while others, again, favour a number of small ones
ihen some carry it a step farther, and introduce perforated
zinc or wire gauze in their efforts to minimise the flicker
without destroying the brilliancy of the effect upon the
l’SriV f T I 6 S ° me , ar , e K in favour of segment shutters,
like that shown in hg. 15 ; while others like the cut-away
cylinder pattern, as in fig. 16. Some serrate the edges;
some don t Many like it in front of the lens, while many
moie say it should be behind, and many more still put
it between the film and the condenser. And so each one
goes his own way, which is different from all the others
"ut is one common attribute of all classes of shutter
i no shutter—one tie which binds all systems together
in an indissoluble bond of brotherhood; and that is, that
each and every description of kind or shape or place or
absence of shutter is positively the only one that gives the
m ZZ U X 8 ’ aaC ? y ltS aid “ the flicker so noticeable in
most machines, ’ etc., etc.
as l unh J^ 88e d onlookers and recorder, may
attempt to analyse the various claims to excellence of the


different devices that have been brought forward to solve
this important question of the shutter. Important it
certainly is, for it is to the shutter that all the blame of
the flicker must be laid, and also a considerable portion of
the loss of light, which is such a serious matter to the
cinematograph.
Undoubtedly the best way to reduce the flicker in the
cinematograph as at present constructed—and it is a con-
summation devoutly to be wished, as every one will admit—
is to reduce its period to the least possible extent: that
is to say, to so arrange the shutter that it covers the lens
for as short a time as possible in comparison with the
period for which the light is allowed unimpeded progress.
F IG . 15.
F IG . 16.
But as—theoretically, at all events—the shutter must
cover the lens at all such times as the film is in motion,
ancl only leave it uncovered when the picture is at rest,
we soon reach an unalterable limit, although the limit is
fixed at different points in the different systems of inter-
mittent motion.
And then the question naturally arises, having reduced
the shutter to its smallest possible area, consistent with
the necessity of keeping the lens covered at all such times as
the film is in motion, is there any other means by which
the painful flickering can be further reduced or altogether
obviated ? As has already been hinted, that is a question
which would be answered differently by different individuals.


For a long time I was at a loss to account for this great
diversity of opinion on what appeared to be a simple
question, and one that could be easily settled by experi-
ment ; but I have recently been making a few experiments
with a view to satisfying myself upon the point, yet have
only succeeded in shaking my original conviction that, to
secure the best all-round results, an opaque shutter was
necessary, without being able to form any fresh opinion as
to what really is the best form of shutter. It appears to
me that the reason for all this diversity of opinion is this :
different forms of shutter are suitable for different classes
of picture.
It is granted that the shutter is the cause of the flicker
which every cinematograph experimenter is trying to get
rid of. In the machine with which I made the few trials
that I have spoken of, the period of darkness is about one-
third the duration of that of light: that is to say, that
the shutter—which is of the fan pattern—is a segment
occupying 120° of the circle; in other words, it is a shutter
of about the average duration, and therefore gives the
average amount of flicker.
The flicker was particularly noticeable in one picture,
which, as may be supposed, represented a mass of light
with very little dark contrast. It is the pictures with the
large clear white spaces that show the flicker to the
greatest extent. The experiment was first tried of re-
moving the shutter altogether, with highly satisfactory
results: that is to say, that the flicker was altogether
done away with ; and although there were vertical lines—
technically called “rain”—above and below every clearly
defined patch of dark shadow on the picture, these were so
very faint as to be negligible. Then a picture subject
was chosen in which there was one brilliant light patch in
vivid contrast to a very dark background. The effect of
projecting this film without a shutter can only be described
as truly horrible. The light patch was drawn out into a
vertical white band spreading right over the background,
and indeed entirely blotting it out above and below.
Ordinary pictures, neither of a very light description, nor
of this highly contrasted kind, took up a position midway
between these extremes, but in almost every case the faults


introduced by the removal of the shutter were great enough
to more than counterbalance the gain in the absence of
flicker. In an ordinary street scene, for instance, each
moving figure would be seen to be followed about wherever
it moved by a storm of “rain,” as if directed by an
avenging providence in retribution for its jerky gait.
The appearance is not natural—although many a man who
has left his umbrella at home on a showery day will be
ready to swear that the rain does follow him about in this
manner. _ .
Then it was sought to overcome the difficulty by splitting
the difference. A shutter of translucent material was
placed in the position of the opaque one, and it was sup-
posed that this would allow a large quantity of light to
reach the screen in the intervals between the pictures, and
thus do away with the flicker, while it would so obliterate
detail by dispersion of the light as to make the “rain”
effect invisible. In reality the dispersion of the light is
such that it illuminates the whole room in a series of flashes,
which, blending into one another by “ persistence of vision,”
give the effect of a lantern show in a room that is not
properly darkened. The screen is illuminated between the
pictures by a period of semi-light in place of the period of
darkness that would obtain if an opaque shutter were
employed. Consequently the flicker is very much reduced,
but, owing to that “ persistence of vision ” which makes
animated photographs possible, the impression of light upon
the retina stays there through the succeeding picture, and
fogs it with a flood of grey mist that blocks out all the
brilliancy. In my opinion, at all events, the last state is
worse than the first: the fog is more objectionable than
the flicker.
Another method is to pierce the shutter with one or two
holes, so that a few rays of light get through to break the
period of darkness. By this plan the flicker is undoubtedly
reduced, and the picture gains proportionately in brightness.
With the majority of films the result is a decided improve-
ment, and in the considerable number that I have tried
under these conditions, I have not found one that had
such extensive defects introduced by it that it must be
regarded as undesirable. In certain trying cases, as, for


instance, in that of a dancer with a very white dress, there
is a tiresome repetition of the main points of the picture
above and below the correct position—one, indeed, for each
perforation in the shutter; but unless the perforations be
unduly large, this “ mirage ” effect is not sufficiently pro-
nounced to be really objectionable.
So, it will be seen, the whole question resolves itself into
the statement that certain films admit of a different degree
of perforation without involving the introduction of a
detrimental amount of “ghost,” or blur, or other faults.
As it is hardly feasible to alter the degree of permeability
for every film that is passed through the machine, the
simplest plan is to hit upon a fair average and stick to it.
After the experiments that I have hinted at, and as a
result, I decided upon cutting four slits in my shutter,
each occupying about 7° or 8° of arc, and equidistant from
one another; and I have seen no cause to regret the decision.
It must not be supposed for a moment, however, that I
have any idea of presuming such a shutter is best: but it
has proved so in my hands, and, possibly, it may serve as
some slight guide to other experimenters. The shutter
using the word to convey the impression that a period of
darkness or semi-darkness is introduced to cover the change
from one little picture to the next—is undoubtedly the
cause of flicker; and as it is only reasonable to suppose
that experimenters will never rest until flicker has been
abolished in connection with cinematography, it is pretty
safe to say that in the instrument of the future the shutter
will not be found. Beyond that mild prophecy it would
be but rash to venture.
There is one little matter closely connected with the
shutter which it would be well to mention before leaving
the subject, and that is the question of vibration : not the
vibration of the picture in its frame on the screen—for that
is merely a matter of good films and good workmanship in
the instrument; but vibration of the whole machine, picture
frame and all, by which the whole projected image is seen
to vibrate on the screen quite independently of, and added
to, its own inherent unsteadiness. This is almost always
caused by the shutter, and exhibits itself in lack of defini-
tion, or “fuzziness,” on the screen. When the living


photograph has the appearance of a photographic product
of a Salonic disciple of Astigmatism, it is only natural in
the uninitiated to blame the objective lens with which the
picture is projected. In many cases, however, the fault is
not with the lens at all, but simply with the vibration
of the image. A fan-shaped shutter, with its axis parallel
to the optical axis of the instrument, may not be truly
counterbalanced—and it is wonderful how little preponder-
ence on one side will cause a great deal of vibration when
the shutter is rapidly turned; and this communicates a
small lateral shake to the whole machine, or possibly to
the front lens only, and draws the detail of the projected
picture into lateral lines, so that it looks as if it were out
F IG . 17.
of focus. Or a cylindrical shutter may act in the same
way—though it is not so liable to the fault; and as its
axis is at right angles to that of the instrument, it causes
it to shake up and down, and the definition is distorted
vertically. The remedy is, of course, to remove the shutter,
and carefully counterbalance it, or file it away, until, when
accurately poised, it will remain in any position without
showing the least tendency to revolve.
It may be taken almost as an axiom that, no matter
what description of shutter is used, it should be as light
as possible. Yery thin alluminium, cut away wherever
possible to reduce the weight, but, of course, accurately
counterbalanced, is perhaps the best material to use.


Many an instrument that gives unsatisfactory results now
might be immensely improved by detaching its present
shutter, and replacing it with one of thin alluminium or
even of paper,—and paper will make a very good shutter,
for the centrifugal force will keep it straight and rigid
when in use.
Fig. 17 shows the form of shutter that I have found
to work excellently. It is cut out of thin sheet alluminium,
and the openings are arranged in such a manner that an
equivalent amount of material is removed at the openings
on either side, and no attached counterweight is necessary.
It weighs but an ounce or so, and does not in any way
affect the steadiness of the picture. I merely mention it
in the hope that the hint may possibly be of use to others
who possess machines in which the vibration caused by the
shutter interferes with the good definition of the projected
picture.


CHAPTER VII.
ILLUMINANTS: THE LIMELIGHT.
A SHORT consideration of the conditions under which
the living photographs are projected upon a lantern
screen will speedily reveal the fact that it is by no means
easy to obtain a sufficiently brilliant light to exhibit them
properly except upon a very small scale. The optical
arrangements of a cinematograph are rather more like
those of a lantern microscope than those which obtain in an
ordinary lantern, and everybody knows how difficult, indeed
impossible, it is to secure adequate illumination for that
instrument except for very small pictures. For living
photograph projection the conditions are, of course, not
anything like so stringent as those which must be faced
before an exhibition with the projection microscope can
be undertaken, but they are far more exacting than those
which pertain to the ordinary lantern.
In the first place the degree of magnification of a
cinematograph picture is about nine times that of an
ordinary lantern picture; and although an attempt is made
to concentrate the same amount of light on the smaller
slide, that can never be successfully accomplished unless,
indeed, our opticians turn their attention successfully to
the construction of a special condenser for cinematograph
work. There is, then, a considerable loss of light, on ac-
count of the small size of the picture and the great extent
to which it has to be magnified. That is loss No. 1. Then
there is the shutter. The amount of light which this cuts
off varies very considerably in machines on different systems,
as has already been explained ; for some shutters keep the
lens covered during just as long periods as those in which


it is open, while others only cover it a sixth of this time,
and even then allow part of the light to pass through. The
merits and demerits of the different schemes of shutters have
already been discussed. Let it be granted that the shutter
on an average cuts off a third of the light which would
otherwise reach the screen. That is loss No. 2. And the
third account on which loss of light inevitably occurs is the
fact that celluloid is not so transparent as glass.
But difficulties, they say, were made to be overcome.
By the careful choice of suitable lenses—condensers and
objectives carefully selected and wedded to one another in
view of the special conditions under which they have to
work—one source of loss can be considerably minimised.
Again, by so arranging the mechanism that the period of
rest of the film is very considerably longer than the time
in which it is moving, so that it is only necessary for the
shutter to obscure the light for a comparatively short
period ; and even by piercing the shutter, and rendering
it translucent, so that while it covers the lens it does not
altogether shut off the light, difficulty No. 2 assumes its
smallest propoi'tions. And as to the transparency of the
films, that is a matter which is under the control of two
bodies. There is the maker of the celluloid, and he has
already made his product remarkably transparent; and
there is the photographer, who is beginning to learn the
great importance of transparency and the non-necessity
of more than quite a small degree of density, but he does
not always live up to his convictions. However, wonderful
improvements have been made in this respect during the
last few months, and there is every reason to suppose that
in a short time commercial cinematographic films will be
as good in their way as the best lantern slides on the
market.
To quote another proverb, “ Every cloud has a silver
lining.” And the gloom which has been cast, literally and
figuratively, over the art of cinematography by the
difficulties that the light in the lantern has to encounter
before it reaches the sheet, shows us its silver lining in the
good service it has done, and is still doing, to the art of
lantern projection generally. Only to mention one instance,
because it happens to come under the special domain of


this chapter, the difficulties of securing adequate illumination
for cinematographs has led to remarkable improvements
in the manufacture of limelight apparatus, which cannot
fail to be a lasting benefit to lanternists of all denomina-
tions long after cinematography has had its day.
It does not come within the scope of this very unpre-
tending little manual to give instructions in the use of the
limelight, and hints for its manipulation in connection with
the cinematograph. The manner of employing it for the
projection of the living photographs differs in no way from
its use for ordinary lantern work, and full particulars and
directions are to be found in any good text-book on the
lantern. But as there will possibly be many lovers of
the lantern who have hitherto been content with a specimen
of the oil-lit variety, and who may now be desirous of
adding a few cinematogi-aph pictures to their collection,,l
may just make two suggestions for their benefit.
In the first place, if they be thinking of attaching a
cinematograph to their present oil-light lantern, let me say
at once, don’t. Neither oil, acetylene, nor incandescent
gaslight are of any practical use with a cinematograph.
Not only is each very far from being brilliant enough, but
the luminous area is in each case far too large. In the
second place, if a consideration of possible danger in
connection \vith the limelight deter you from its use, put
that consideration behind you: the danger does not exist.
That is speaking, of course, of the limelight in its up-to-date
form. In the old days of gas bags and home-made oxygen,
danger there was, as was abundantly and most unfortunately
proved. Also in the early days of the compressed gas
system there were a few accidents, but these were almost
all traced to their source, and the cause removed. Ido not
think that with modern oxy-hydrogen apparatus the veriest
bungler could negotiate an explosion even if he tried. One
cannot say that of any kind of oil lantern, and acetylene
must also stand aside for the present until it has been
brought to a greater pitch of perfection.
But one thing must be borne in mind in connection with
cinematographs and danger, and that is the extreme
inflammability of the film pictures. The celluloid may
take fire, and easily, too, from the concentrated heat from


the lime or arc light focussed upon it by the condenser, or
it may become accidentally ignited by a spark from a
match, or from the carbon points in the case of the electric
light, or more easily still by a piece of incandescent lime
dropping from the jet.
And so systems of lantern illumination which are per-
fectly safe in connection with ordinary lantern projection
become at once invested with a certain amount of danger
when'contemplated in conjunction with a cinematograph.
Thus the excellent and convenient oxy-ether light may be
regarded, when used properly and under proper conditions,
as a safe means of lantern illumination; but it has just
sufficient element of uncertainty about it to make a care-
ful operator shun it where the living photographs are
concerned.
But although this is not the place to enter into details
of limelight manipulation, it is an eminently suitable one
in which to call attention to recent improvements in lime-
light apparatus that tend to make it more efficient for
cinematograph purposes. One of these is undoubtedly the
new “ F.B. ” high-power jet that I have tested very
thoroughly, and with which I am very much pleased.
As regards the actual jet itself, it is merely a further
improvement on lines that have already been laid down,
but the improvement is very marked. It has a large
mixing chamber of good construction, by which the gases
are very thoroughly mixed before reaching the nozzle.
The result is that an immensely powerful light can be
secured with a complete absence of noise. The maker of
this jet does not follow the too prevalent fashion of quoting
most exaggerated estimates of the candle power that it is
supposed to emit; but I have tested it competitively against
the electric arc, and find that even against this light—
consuming a moderately small current—it is able to hold
its own without difficulty. With a larger current of twelve
to fifteen amperes it is, of course, beaten; and, under any
circumstances, the limelight can never be so efficient as
the electric light for optical projection, on account of the
much larger size of its luminous area.
One of the points on which many good lantern illumin-
ants fail when applied to the cinematograph is this ; the


vibration, which is, so far, more or less an inseparable
attribute of all these instruments, induces a sympathetic
vibration in the all too flimsy support of the light source.
Thus a limelight jet—especially when it is fitted with the
large and therefore heavy mixing chamber that is essential
to the best results—will “wiggle” terribly on its frail
supporting pin, which is usually placed right at the back,
as if specially designed to further such a result. Animated
photographs are already far too prone to flicker under the
best of circumstances, as no one will, I think, be inclined
to dispute, and this unsteadiness of the light only makes
matters very much worse. Indeed, it is probable that in
many cases much of the flicker that is attributed to the
FIG. 18.
fault of the machine is, in reality, due to the unsteadiness
of the limelight jet.
In the jet that I have just described (fig. 18) the
designer has made a daring departure from the code of
unwritten laws of jet construction, which are too often
regarded as being as unalterable as those of the Medes and
Persians. This departure has been made in the interests
of the cinematograph, and affords another instance of the
gratitude that is due from the ordinary lanternists to that
instrument for the introduction of improvements in lighting
apparatus of which he is bound to reap a large share of the
benefit.
The improvement consists in replacing the usual tin tray
by a solid base of sheet brass ; of shifting the pin from the
back to the centre of the jet so that the weight which it
has to support is more evenly distributed instead of being


all at one side ; of making this pin about four times as
thick as it would be under the older regime , and of replacing
the horrible set screw for clamping the jet to the pin by a
special grip that holds it absolutely firmly. A secondary
advantage accrues from this new form of clamping device,
and that is that the operation of centring the light—most
important to be done accurately where cinematographs are
concerned—is much facilitated ; for when the vice is slightly
slackened, the collar slides smoothly over the pin, under the
influence of a little pressure, in the required direction, and
can be easily brought into position, when a touch of the
clamping screw fixes it there immovably.
A good limelight jet, for cinematograph work, should
have an ample mixing chamber, and be capable of yielding
an intensely brilliant light without hissing or roaring. It
should be so firmly clamped and supported in the lantern
that it is impossible for it to vibrate, and the device by
which it is centred in the optical system should be capable
of accurate adjustment. The taps upon the jet should be
smooth working, and may with advantage be of the fine
adjustment variety, while a “ Pringle cut-off ” will be found
of great benefit where the light has to be constantly
extinguished and relighted.


CHAPTER VIII.
THE ELECTRIC ARC LIGHT.
ONE of the lasting benefits for which the lanternist of
the future will be to a great extent indebted to the
boom in living photographs is the popularisation of the
electric arc light for lantern work. In the earlier days of
cinematography, when the mechanism was poor and the
films poorer still, the arc light was a positive necessity, for
by no other means could sufficient illumination be secured
to meet the exacting conditions under which alone the
animated photographs were possible. And where electricity
was a sine qud non , operators who had hitherto fought shy
of the new illuminant because they did not understand it
were obliged to pocket their prejudices, and the result
naturally was .a number of converts to electricity for
lanterns.
In the same way the objections of hall owners and others
to the tapping of their mains for the benefit of the lan-
ternist were soon overruled when it came to be a case of
“it I will have, or you will have none”—meaning living
photographs ; and it is only to be supposed that when
once the lanternists and their like became familiar with
the light, its many superiorities over any other form of
illuminant for the purpose would speedily win for itself
a place in their hearts.
Nowadays the cinematograph has been so much im-
proved that the electric light is no longer a necessity ; but
it is still, and always will be, a very great advantage. Not
only is it far brighter than any other available illuminant,
besides being quite as steady, and more convenient, reliable
and efficient, but the extremely small size of the luminous
5


area make it, optically speaking, much more perfect for
projection work than any other. Unfortunately for its
good fame, it occasionally gets handled by utterly incom-
petent and, indeed, foolish persons, and the idea has there-
fore very naturally gained credence among those who, by
lack of knowledge, are unable to distinguish between a bad
instrument and a good one in incompetent hands, that the
light is unsatisfactory. And this deplorable result is also
contributed to by the fact that ill-designed lamps are
sometimes used, and, as may be supposed, yield a light
which is unsteady and inefficient in every way. It is as
obviously unfair to judge the system by such cases as it
would be to condemn the limelight because an obsolete
oxy-calcium (spirit) jet gives a poor and unsatisfactory
light.
The increasing popularity which the electric light is
daily gaining for cinematography, and the ever-increasing
facilities for its use in places where but yesterday the
necessary current was unobtainable, is sufficient excuse for
a short chapter concerning it.
First as to the lamp —sometimes called a regulator—by
which the electric current is converted into light. This is
merely a device for holding the two carbons a certain
distance apart, so that the electric current in jumping the
gap between them shall develop sufficient heat to make
their extremities glow with a brilliant incandescence. The
effect of the heat upon the carbon is precisely the same as
that of the oxy-hydrogen jet upon the lime—it makes it
brilliantly white-hot; hence the light, and it causes it to
gradually consume away. In the case of the lime, the
supply has to be renewed as the substance is vapourised—
which is easiest accomplished by turning the cylinder of
lime round so that a new portion is presented to the action
of the jet. And in the case of the carbons, their consump-
tion is compensated for by “ feeding ” them closer together
as they burn away.
In some of the earlier limelight jets a clockwork
arrangement was attached, whose duty it was to turn the
lime. In the same way, automatic regulators are obtain-
able by which the carbons of an arc lamp are brought
together as they are consumed. As the “feeding” of the


carbons by hand is no more arduous than the periodical
turning of the lime, a “ hand-feed ” lamp is almost uni-
versally employed.
In an arc lamp working on the continuous current —as
opposed to the “ alternating ” current, which will be men-
tioned presently—the two carbons consume at an unequal
rate. That which is connected with the “ positive ” supply
wire burns away at twice the rate of the “ negative ”
carbon. It is usual to compensate for this by making the
one of twice the sectional area of the other, so that they
burn at equal rates—an arrangement that has other
advantages, in that a better light is obtained by the use of
a positive carbon that is lai*ger than the negative.
In reality the light from the electric arc has three
distinct sources. First, there is the glow from the “ arc ”
itself—the stream of electricity across the space between <
the carbon points. This is of a purple hue, and is very
faint compared to the others, and may be disregarded.
Next in point of brilliancy is the glow from the incandescent
tip of the negative carbon. It is a factor in the total
illumination, but only a small one. By far the most
brilliant of the three is the blaze of light which finds its
source at the point of the positive carbon. At the end of
this point a little hollow or “ crater ” is formed, and it is
from the interior of this crater that the vast majority of
the light streams.
With a view to inducing this little “ crater ” to always
form quite in the centre of the end of the positive carbon,
it is usual to employ a rod of hard carbon with a central
core of softer material. This larger or “cored” carbon is
placed in the upper arm or carbon holder of the lamp ; and
with this arrangement, as may be supposed, practically all
the light from the lamp is directed downwards, and forms
a luminous area all around the smaller carbon rod. That
is just what is required for ordinary illumination purposes,
but for optical work all the light is wanted at one side.
To gain this end the upper (positive, cored) carbon is not
placed exactly over its neighbour in the same straight line,
but is drawn slightly behind it. The effect is to force the
crater, which always forms opposite the nearest point of
the negative carbon, to take up a position towards the front


of the rod ; and from here all its light is directed forwards,
but still with a somewhat downward tendency. Then the
whole arrangement, lamp and all, is tilted backwards about
15°, and thus the light issues in exactly the required
direction.
I have said that the stream of electricity jumps across the
space between the carbon points; it does this by virtue of
the intensely heated carbon vapour which pervades that
space, and which, being a partial conductor, makes the
passage of the current across it possible. Before the light
is started there is no such conducting vapour, and no light
can be obtained until the presence of the vapour is secured.
It is obtained by allowing the carbons to touch one another
for a moment when the current is switched on, and then
immediately separating them. The point of contact being
insufficient to allow the large current of electricity to pass
freely, some particles of carbon become intensely heated,
give off the necessary vapour, and directly the points are
separated the light is established. In technical parlance,
this momentary touching of the carbons is called “ striking
the arc,” and in practice a mere moment is sufficient. Owing
to the absence of electric' resistance between the carbons
when they are in contact, the flow of current at that
moment is very large. Therefore the contact should be
made and broken as rapidly as possible, or the electrical
arrangements may be seriously disturbed, and the supply
possibly cut off altogether for the time being.
It is not proposed to enter here into the details of the
electric conditions which must be observed in this connection,
for that is a large subject, and has been fully treated else-
where.* Sufficient will it be to give a few general directions
for connecting up and operating an arc light in a lantern
or cinematograph.
Electricity is usually supplied at an E.M.F. (electro-
motive force) of a hundred volts. That is its j^ressure, —
regard it as the pressure on the gas supply to a limelight
jet. You will have to reduce that to about forty-five or
fifty volts by means of a “ resistance,” —regard that 'as the
regulator which reduces the pressure of the gas as it issues
* “ The Electric Arc Light for Lantern Projection.” By Cecil M
Hepworth. Published by Messrs. Boss, Ltd,


from the cylinders. A resistance usually consists of a
length of wire made from a metallic alloy, such as German-
silver, which, offering a considerable resistance to the flow
of the electricity, causes it to expend part of its power
in heat which goes to raise the temperature of the wire.
The resistance, or “rheostat,” must be duly proportioned
to the work which it has to perform— i.e., to the number of
volts which it has to absorb and to the quantity of electricity
which it must allow to pass. It will not vary according
to the demand as a gas regulator will; but it may be pro-
cured in an adjustable form, so that the supply can be varied
to a certain extent.
Of the electricity at the reduced pressure of forty-five
or fifty volts you will require a current of from five to
twenty amperes, according to the amount of light you will
require. A fair average is fifteen amperes, at which you
will getja light more than twice as brilliant as that afforded
by the very best limelight jet. Regard this current as
the flo w or stream of gas required to produce the required
light—not as its capacity as so many square feet. It is
not practicable to measure the capacity of electricity, and so
the flow or current is measured instead, and enumerated in
amperes.
If you tell an electrician at the hall where you propose
to use electricity for cinematograph work that you require
a current of fifteen amperes, he will put up the necessary
wires, or “ leads,” to supply you with that quantity. He
will also tell you the voltage of the supply, and you must
bring resistance accordingly. If he should inform you, in
response to the question which you must not forget to ask,
that the current is alternating , you may renounce all hope
of getting a really satisfactory light ; indeed, if you succeed
in beating the hest possible limelight you may be well
satisfied. In the alternating arc two carbons of equal
size are used, for a quasi crater forms on each. The light
is distributed in all directions, so that you do not get any-
thing like its full intensity; and it keeps up a constant
humming noise all the time, though possibly that is not
much objection where a cinematograph is concerned.
Moreover, the light is very much inclined to vary con-
siderably from minute to minute in point of brilliancy.


The last-mentioned objections are much reduced by the
use of the newly introduced “eccentrical” carbons (in-
vented by my father, T. C. Hepworth), in which the core
of soft material is placed to one side in each carbon, having
F IG . 19.
the result of causing the crater in each case to form towards
that«ide.
In the case of the continuous current it is necessary to
ascertain which of the leads is positive and which negative
—which may be done by means of a “ pole tester ” —and


to connect them to the lamp accordingly ; the former to
the upper carbon holder, and the later to the lower. But
between one wire and the lamp—it does not matter which
—the resistance must be introduced. It is as if, after con-
necting the leads direct to the terminals of the lamp, one
of the wires be broken and joined again by means of the
resistance, so that the electricity is forced to pass through
the latter on its way to or from the lamp. An ammeter
( i.e ., an “ ampere-meter,” somewhat equivalent to a pres-
sure gauge in limelight work) may also be included in a
similar manner: that is to say, by breaking a wire and
connecting the broken ends one to either terminal, so that
the current is bound to pass through the instrument, if so
desired.
The diagram (fig. 19) shows the arrangement of the
wires and their connections. Great care must be exercised
that no two wires are allowed to touch one another'
except where the covering or insulation is undisturbed, or
the electricity may find a short cut across the place of
contact, and, by operating the safety “ cut-out ” that the
electrician will have inserted in the circuit, cut off the
supply of current. The same -remark applies to metallic
portions of the lamp or resistance. A “ short circuit ” is
sometimes made by a metallic tool, such as a screwdriver,
slipping between two portions of a lamp, or other electrical
instrument, between which there is electrical stress, and
thereby providing the short cut of which the current is
always ready to avail itself.
At the same time, you need have no fear of summary
electrocution or of even painful “ shocks.” The shock from
a hundred volt alternating circuit is perfectly bearable,
though it is a little startling when you receive it unex-
pectedly. Where continuous current of the same voltage
is concerned, the “shock” is scarcely noticeable. It is a
different matter in the case of two hundred volts, but even
then there is no actual danger. In this last case, to form
part of the circuit yourself is certainly undesirable, for the
sensation is by no means pleasant. Therefore avoid too
close a familiarity: it will not breed contempt by any
means —quite the reverse.
It has been said that the electric lamp is merely a


device for holding the two carbons in due relation to one
another, and for feeding them together as they are
consumed away. If you come to that, the limelight jet is
merely a device for holding a piece of lime and directing
upon it a stream of mixed gases. In both cases the
description is a very meagre one in respect to the elaborated
instruments that are alone capable of yielding the best
results.
A good electric lamp for cinematograph work should
have the following characteristics. Hand-feed lamps are
alluded to, for, generally speaking, automatic regulators
are liable to be considerably deranged by the vibration of
the instrument. It is very little trouble to attend to a
good hand-feed lamp, and it is certain in its action. All
automatic devices are more or less uncertain, and are
therefore not so desirable as the simpler instrument, which
requires occasional attention, but is reliable. The lamp
should be of solid construction, or the sympathetic vibration
of the carbon holders will give unsteadiness to the projected
light. The feed of the carbons should be either equal, and
the carbon rods duly proportioned in diameter to burn
equally, or the upper or positive carbon, being of the same
size as its neighbour, should be fed towards it at double its
rate. There should be an independent device for raising
and lowering the luminous centre without interfering with
the relative adjustment of the carbon points, in order to
compensate for possible variations in their rate of burning.
Lastly, the backward displacement of the upper carbon
with respect to the lower should be adjustable; and it is
certainly preferable that that adjustment may be made, if
necessary, while the lamp is in action, for it is often
desirable to alter it during the progress of a show. The
feed of the carbons should be slow, so that their distance
may always be adjusted to a nicety with ease—a matter of
importance; and a “ quick-strike ” device, though not by
any means a necessity, is a convenience, especially when,
as sometimes in cinematography, the light has to be
extinguished and relighted constantly.


CHAPTER IX.
COMBINATION OF LANTERN AND CINEMATOGRAPH.
A LIVING photograph show, from the showman’s
point of view, is a very difficult thing to manage
properly. Every good entertainer likes his performance
to go off smoothly and evenly, and without a hitch or pause,
from end to end. But the longest animated photograph
comes to an end in time, and that very abruptly; and then
the question arises, Avhat is to be done in the interval
before a new one can be got ready ?
There are several alternatives to choose between. You
may continue to turn the handle of the machine after the
film lias run through, and half blind the audience with the
flickering, brilliant white disc. That is the most inartistic
alternative of all, and the one invariably patronised by the
last-rate showman. By his works ye shall know him ;
and that flickering, palpitating disc denotes the born fool
among lanternists. This alternative has several dis-
advantages. In the first place, it makes the audience
cross, which is the worst thing that can happen to an
entertainer. Secondly, it makes them forget the beauties
of the last picture, no matter how good its quality was.
Thirdly, it renders them unable to appreciate the beauties
of the next, because their eyes are spoilt for the time being
by the irritating glare.
Another plan is to cap the lens just before the picture
comes to an end, and thus leave the hall in total dark-
ness. It is a shade better than the other, but still it is
very bad. It leaves the people with nothing to do, which
is bad. It likewise gives them time to think, which they
are much better without. Be your pictures the best that
have ever been exhibited, there will be plenty of fault to


find with them by people who have nothing better to do;
and a certain gentleman, whose name it would be indecorous
to mention, is even cleverer at finding mischievous employ-
ment for a large audience than for a single pair of hands.
Possibly it pays him better.
A better plan is to have the lights of the hall turned
up between each picture, but that invariably gives trouble.
I have been to several halls where the tap on the gas
main was right outside and had no by-pass. It does not
require an active imagination to conjure up delightful
visions of the lively “ goings-on ” which ensue when the
female hall-keeper is put in charge of such a tap, with
instructions to turn up the lights at the end of each
picture (to which end she is to be notified with a bell),
and to turn them down again in half a minute. Besides,
the effect upon the audience is not good, even if you have
electric lights and turn them on and off yourself, for the
picture will not look so brilliant after the interval of
light, and the “mischief still” objection may be still
objected.
There are two more principal alternatives. One is to
fasten all the films together in one length, and show them
continuously without a break. You will require to be
moderately rich in films, seeing that about sixty will be
wanted to fill up an hour; and when the show is over, you
will have the satisfaction of knowing that you have spoilt
some excellent pictures by having too many of them.
Undoubtedly the best plan is to show one or two lantern
slides between each animated photograph. The still picture
is a great relief to the eyes and a thorough rest after the
always more or less tiring living photograph. Its good
qualities do not show up the imperfections of the animated
picture when its turn comes, for the two things are so
distinct and different that they are not mentally compared.
And further, and most important of all, it gives the enter-
tainer the opportunity of stringing his pictures together,
to a certain extent; of making one follow after another
with an attempt at natural sequence, which, if properly
carried out, will do more to create a good impression in
the minds of the audience than the most excellent photo-
graphs in the world shown higgledy-piggledy.


This being thus, it would only leave this little booklet
unnecessarily incomplete were not consideration to be given
to the various means of accomplishing the required result,
and an attempt to see which is best, and at the same time
most economical.
In one of the earliest cinematographs to be introduced —
indeed, I think it was the very first to be shown in England
—an attachment was fitted by which the light could be
diverted by a mirror from the original instrument, and made
to pass through a second, but precisely similar, optical
arrangement, and thus to project upon the screen a title
slide or other device while a new animated picture was
being prepared. As the secondary lantern was only avail-
able for slides about an inch across—the size of the cinemato-
graph pictures—its use was limited. In a later machine
of a different make, a somewhat similar idea was carried
out in this way. Above the cinematograph proper was
reared a vertical lantern of the usual design, and of a size
to accommodate pictures of the standard lantern size.
When it was desired to exhibit a living photograph, the
mirror of the vertical attachment was pulled out so that
the light could pass freely through the cinematograph, but
was diverted through an ordinary slide at the end of the
film by merely replacing the reflector
So much f@r the vertical attachment plan, which has
much to recommend it. Here is another device which
can be easily adapted with little trouble to most of the
commercial cinematographs of the present day. Arrange
the mechanical part of the instrument, together with its
front lens, in such a manner that it can be swivelled out of
the light (not intended in a slang sense) the moment the
film has run through. Upon the same swivel let there be
a board carrying a lantern objective of such a focal length
that the image of the projected lantern slide will be of
equivalent size to that of the animated photograph with
the objective attached to the instrument.
I have used the arrangement hinted at—and, indeed,
always use it—and find it quite as satisfactory as the more
bulky and less economical biunial lantern that appears
to be the most satisfactory alternative. For the benefit of
others who may wish to construct the attachment for their


own use, the diagram of the arrangement may be of use.
The sketch (fig. 20) represents a plan view of the chief
parts of the complete instrument. The actual cinematograph
(meaning the mechanism and the short-focus projection lens),
instead of being mounted direct upon the same baseboard
as the lantern proper, is attached to a secondary base, b,
of somewhat peculiar shape, and attached to the projecting
lantern base by the bolt, g. Beside the cinematograph,
and on the same level, but inclined to it at an angle of
about 60°, is an upright supporting the ordinary lantern
F IG . 20.
objective, o. The arrangement and measurement of the
parts are such that when the base, B, is swung round upon
the bolt, o, as centre, until the lantern objective is exactly
opposite the condenser and slide, it will be at the right
distance from them to yield a clear disc on the screen, if
the light has been properly centred for the cinematograph.
That is to say, the ordinary lantern objective, when in
position, is at the same distance from the condenser as
the cinematograph objective, when that is in position.
A moment’s reflection will show that this is the state
of things required in order to obtain the desired residt.


For when the lens, o, is in the position to project upon
the screen the image of the slide, s, which is of standard
size, it must be distant from it approximately its own focal
length. Let us suppose that to be nine inches ; in order to
get a cinematograph picture of the same diameter upon the
screen we must use a front lens of three-inch focus, for the
diameter of a cinematograph slide is one-third that of an
ordinary lantern slide. And with a front lens of this
description, to obtain the best results it is necessary that it
should be distant from the condenser —if of the diameter
for standard lantern slides—by three times its focal length.
Now, in order to avoid the flickering white disc, as it is
most desirable to do, it is almost necessary to attach to the
end of the picture film a few inches of opaque blank film.
If you have not such a thing at your disposal, paint out
the last dozen photographs on the film with some opaque
black varnish. It is far better to sacrifice a moment’s
animation (of the photograph) than to spoil its whole
appearance by letting the clear disc be seen. Then, the
moment you see this darkness come over the screen, cap
the lens; stop turning the handle; slip the slide in the
lantern—it should have been previously placed in one
partition of a to-and-fro carrier ; swing the other lens, also
capped, into position, and remove the cap—and there you
are. Then yofi will have plenty of time to change your
film and plenty of light to do it by, but no heat to
damage it.
To those who prefer the biunial lantern method —and it
has many points in its favour —and who use the electric
light, a simple and economical trick that I accidentally
lighted upon a short time since may be of use. Let both
electric lamps—which, by the way, must be of the hand-
feed variety—be connected up through one resistance (see
p. 70): that is to say, branch one of the “leads”—say,
the positive —and attach one branch to the positive terminal
of each lamp. Carry the negative wire to the resistance,
and from that branch it to the two remaining terminals
of the two lamps. You would naturally suppose that the
current would divide and actuate both lamps to a less
extent than if it had only one to look after; but it is not
so. Bring the carbons of one lamp together, so that it


lights up. It burns, of course, as if the other did not exist,
for the electricity cannot pass across the still separated
carbons. Now, “ strike the arc ”in the other lamp, and
immediately the first one will go out, quietly, and without
a protest. Light up No. 1, and No. 2 goes out again ; and
if the lamps befitted with quick-striking devices, the change
of light from one to the other will appear to be truly
instantaneous. Moreover, the maximum current available
may be consumed in each lamp, for they are never alight
together even for an instant.
This method never fails, and it affords a very convenient
plan for the operator who uses a biunial lantern for the
exhibition of animated photographs and lantern slides
alternately. Both lamps are always kept switched on while
the entertainment lasts; indeed, switches are not necessary.
Suppose the lamp to be burning in the lower lantern, to
which the cinematograph is attached, and the film to be
running through the instrument; then, the moment the
film comes to an end—it is, of course, provided with the
necessary blank piece at the extremity—the operator, who
has his hand on the “ striking ” gear of the upper lamp,
gives it the necessary movement, and instantly the upper
lantern lights up and reveals the slide upon the screen,
while the light in the lower one as instantly dies out.


CHAPTER X
PRECAUTIONS AGAINST DANGER.
THERE has been more than one terrible cinematograph
scare. No need to advert to the horrible catastrophe
that befell the unfortunates at a Parisian bazaar in the
spring of the present year. The frightful calamity made
far too deep an impression upon the whole civilised world
for any to have forgotten it. It was caused by careless-
ness or crass ignorance. The cinematograph itself had
little share in it, except, perhaps, that the highly inflam-
mable films must have added considerably to the conflagration
which followed the first outburst, and very likely turned
what might have been—though it is not very probable—
an extinguishable blaze into a conflagration that no avail-
able aid could quench.
As I have said, the terrible fire was in this case due to
a cause entirely distinct from the cinematograph, which only
stepped in afterwards, and added its quota to the general
blaze. An ether saturator appears to have been the imme-
diate cause, or, rather, the wicked carelessness with which
it was used. It is reported that one operator refilled the
saturator with the inflammable fluid while another struck
a match for him to see by ! But though the share which
the cinematograph proper had in the catastrophe was but
a secondary one, the general public have grown to bracket
together cinematographs and danger so securely that it
will take years of immunity to sever the connection.
It would be idle to deny the fact that there is a certain
amount of danger connected with the cinematograph in
careless or incompetent hands. Some there are, I know,
who deny its existence altogether in this connection; but


it will generally be found, upon inquiry, that these persons
are interested in the sale of cinematographs or films or other
accessories. It is a most short-sighted policy, and is sure
to recoil on the heads of its originators sooner or later,
apart from the moral aspect of the question. And when
it is remembered that the inevitable relaxation of pre-
cautions, which follows upon the assurance from high places
that there is no danger, jeopardises hundreds of human
lives, the matter becomes something more than one of sharp
business practice.
But Ido not wish to be an alarmist. It seems to me
to be both a wiser and better plan to call attention to the
sources of possible danger, so that they may be duly guarded,
than to altogether pooh-pooh their existence in spite of the
several accidents that have already been accredited to the
cinematograph. The danger, I believe, is little or nothing
where the just ordinary precautions are taken ; but that
it does exist to a certain extent, when such precautions are
altogether ignored, should be a matter of common know-
ledge. To deny it is just as idle as to chronicle the con-
viction that there is no risk connected with a paraffin
lamp, even when of the very cheap variety, partly filled
with low-flashing oil, and placed on the edge of a rickety
table in a room full of children; or to say that coal gas is
an absolutely dangerless commodity, when we have daily
evidence that directly a leak occurs, people will go and
look for it with a lighted candle. These are fairly parallel
cases. With paraffin and gas, accidents are occurring
every day, and will continue to occur, so long as people will
ignore the fact that certain conditions should be observed
in their use. There is no more danger connected with a
cinematograph than with a paraffin lamp or a gas bracket;
but if it be used carelessly, and without any regard to the
conditions of safety, an accident is sure to follow sooner or
later, and when it does it is likely to be serious.
The sources of possible danger, other than those con-
nected with any optical lantern, are these: the light rays
from the lantern are brought nearly to a focus by the
condenser upon the celluloid film bearing the picture. The
heat rays are condensed at the same time and from any
available source of light which is brilliant enough for


cinematograph projection; the condensed heat is powerful
enough to fire the film in about half a minute or even less.
Should the distance of the jet from the condenser have
become accidentally shifted, so that the heat rays are
actually focussed on the film, it will be fired almost instan-
taneously. In the majority of instruments the pressure
plates surrounding the picture point, whose duty it is to
retain the film flat at the focal distance from the objective,
are quite sufficient to extinguish the fire before it can
spread to the film spools; but if the film happen to be a
rather more than usually inflammable sample, the spurt
of flame may shoot up and thus ignite the free film above,
when there will be more trouble in extinguishing it. The
precautions against this accident are twofold. The film
may be held between metal pressure plates of sufficient
solidity to extinguish the flame by cooling should one be
started by the heat from the lamp, and an alum trough
should be used to lessen the chance of the film taking fire
from this cause. An “alum trough” is a cell composed
of two thick glass plates about an inch apart, and packed
at the three sides so as to make a water-tight box. It
is intended to be filled with a solution of alum in water,
and placed between the condenser and the film, so that the
rays from the former have to pass through the fluid before
reaching the latter. The effect is to shut out all the heat
rays and allow only those of light to pass through. In
practice it is found that pure water answers the purpose
quite as well, and if used in this manner will obviate all
chances of fire. This simple safety device should never
be omitted from the kit of the public entertainer with
animated photographs.
The other source of possible danger in connection with
cinematograph performances rests with the mass of very
inflammable matter represented by the heap of celluloid
which is usually allowed to accumulate in a basket or box,
or on the floor. It is all very well to say that nearly every
good machine is nowadays fitted with a winding spool to
receive the film as it leaves the instrument. Nine operators
out of ten will have nothing to do with such attachments.
These winding arrangements usually give a deal of trouble,
and they invariably cause delay in the exhibition of films,
6


for they rather more than double the routine that has to
be gone through between each picture. The attachment of
the end of the film to the receiving spool before commencing
to exhibit it is the most “finniky” job the operator has
to face, and the knowledge that an expectant audience
is impatiently waiting for him to finish is pretty certain
to make it take him longer than it otherwise would.
But all chance of danger in this connection can be
entirely circumvented without resorting to the somewhat
unsatisfactory plan of attempting to re-spool the film as it
leaves the apparatus. Let it be received in an ample bag
hanging direct from the film outlet of the instrument, or in
a box entirely closed in except the small opening necessary
for its reception.
So much for the alleged dangers of cinematography.
The situation may be summed up by saying that it is
unwise to blink the fact that, when the instrument is placed
in utterly incompetent hands, danger certainly does exist;
but when ordinary precautions are taken, danger, humanly
speaking, is non-existent. By ordinary precautions I do
not mean the kind of tiling which is sometimes insisted
upon by the London County Council: lam alluding to the
simple precautions that are naturally suggested by common
sense and a little practical knowledge of the circumstances
of the case. That august body appears to be without the
former commodity, and to have a rooted objection to calling
in the aid of the latter.


CHAPTER XI.
HINTS AND CAUTIONS: CARE OF CINEFILMS , ETC.
IN a previous chapter the great importance to the success
of an entex-tainment of keeping an audience con-
tinuously amused was mentioned, and it was shown how
the general merit of an entire show depends even more on
a careful attention to the little details than on the excellence
and number of the animated pictures presented; and this
applies not merely to the professional entertainer, but
quite as much to the amateur whose aspirations do not soar
beyond the desire to amuse and interest a “ few friends.”
Remember, an audience is a thing of ideas. Keep it
always and continuously entertained and interested; give
it no time to notice and remember the many faults in your
pictures; do not distract its attention by pauses and
evident uncertainties ; and lastly, but by no means leastly,
never be tempted to surfeit it with too many animated
photographs. It is said that a successful chef is careful
to send to table only so much of his best dishes that the
guests do not get quite as much as they would like. It is
a good example to follow ; and another leaf may be taken
out of his cookery book by judiciously varying the nature
of the successive courses so that one dish serves by
contrast to accentuate the good points of the next. And
it will be found that good lantern slides, artfully inter-
mingled, will serve excellently as hors d’ceuvres, appetisers,
pick-me-ups, and post-prandial coffee.
The good effect of a living photograph show can be im-
mensely enhanced by as far as possible stringing the pictures
together into little sets or episodes. Group the pictures


together—wherein you will be greatly helped by the power to
introduce lantern slides, for of these there is always a greater
variety to choose from—so that one insensibly leads up
to another. This is not difficult if the pictures be studied
and care and thought devoted to them; and, when well
done, the result justifies any amount of trouble. If a real
incident be not to hand on which to string the slides, let
an imaginary one be sought. It does not require very
great imaginative ability—the “ argument ” being there—
to construct a “plot” on which to hang it. The transitions
between the subjects being thus made easy for the audience,
it does not suffer from the weariness which is the in-
evitable result of watching a herd of heterogeneous pictures
—no matter how excellent—jumbled together without
rhyme or reason. By attention to these and like details
a good entertainer can make a. series of very indifferent
photographs “go down ” with his audience so successfully
that its individual constituents will go home in the full
belief that the pictures were thoroughly good, and the show
a most interesting one—all except a few knowing ones.
But let the pictures be the best that have ever been pro-
duced, and show them badly, with a “ white disc ” between
each, and a few pauses, and “stage waits,” and dead
silences, and total darkness, and the audience will be tired
and discontented, and go home and swear the pictures were
the worst they had ever seen —except the few knowing
ones; and serve you right, too !
One very excellent plan by which the trying pauses and
waits can be avoided is to join a number of films together
in one continuous length, and wind upon one big spool.
Between each picture there should be six or eight inches
of blank film, so that the audience does not get a foretaste
of the joy to come before there is time to stop turning the
handle or introduce a lantern slide.
It is not by any means a difficult matter to join celluloid
films, provided that one important detail be properly
attended to. That is, to so cut the film before joining it
that the picture or space in which the join occurs shall
be a whole picture’s breadth ; otherwise, when the second
animated photograph comes to be projected on the screen,
it will be found to be displaced, with respect to the mask


of the instrument, and probably the photograph will appear
cut in half and the halves transposed. To see the people
in the picture bisected at the waist and their legs walking
about on their heads may be a grotesque sight, but it is
not pretty or desirable. When a piece of blank celluloid
is joined between two subjects, the same care must be taken
that the introduced piece be of the exact length to embrace
a number—it does not matter how many—of complete
pictures, no more and no less. This is ascertained by
counting the number of holes between the end of one
subject and the beginning of the next, reckoning from the
division line in each case: if the number of holes—supposing
the “ four-hole ” system to be in use—is four, or any multiple
of four, the join has been made correctly; if not, another
attempt must be made.
Two pieces of celluloid can be joined together by painting
the surfaces to come in contact with a convenient solvent
of celluloid, and then pressing them together until they
adhere. A space of a quarter of an inch is ample to make
a thoroughly strong joint in celluloid film, and after a little
practice it will be found that a joint with half that amount
of lap or even less can be made perfectly satisfactorily.
It is necessary to remove the gelatine coating from the
surface of one of the films to be joined for this distance from
its edge, for a satisfactory junction can only be effected
when celluloid comes in contact with celluloid.
Suppose that a film has been accidentally torn, and it
is desired to join the broken edges. The tear, we will
suppose, has occurred across the centre of one of the little
photographs. Let us treat one end first. Cut away with
a sharp penknife or a pair of scissors the remaining
portion of that picture flush with its edge; the film then
comes to an end exactly at the end of one of the little
photographs. Cut the torn end off the other portion of
the film square in the same manner, but leave this time
a “ turning ” of an eighth of an inch beyond the end of a
complete picture. With a penknife scrape away the gelatine
from the surface of this extra portion, so that the photo-
graph ends, as in the former case, exactly at the end of
one of the little pictures, but there is a small projecting
tongue of clear celluloid beyond it.


With a small camel’s-hair brush paint a thin layer of
“ solution ” upon the tongue of clear celluloid and upon
a corresponding portion of the back of the other piece of
film to which it is to be joined. Without undue haste, and
yet without wasting time, bring the two surfaces together;
see that all holes which overlap are in exact correspondence ;
see also that there are four holes to each picture, including
the one in which there is the join, and, being satisfied on
these points, press the two surfaces as tightly together
as you can, and in a few seconds they will be found to
have adhered perfectly. ,
The mode of procedure when two films 'have to be joined
together is just the same, except that care has to be taken
that the progression of the picture is in the same direction
in both cases. In taking an animated photograph, in the
first place, the film is passed through the camera from
above to below, and the image being, as in all cameras,
inverted, the progression of a series photograph is always
from head to feet, as it were—that is to say, if you hold
up a strip of picture film in your hands so that the
pictures are right way up, the earliest picture of the
series will be at the top. It is never necessary, therefore,
to follow out the progressive movements of the figures in
a picture of this sort in order to see which is the beginning
of the film. Draw the film through your hands so that
all the figures pass feet foremost, and when you get to the
end you will have reached the beginning—with apologies
for the apparent paradox.
It will often be found when joining together two films
of different design that the perforations will not in each
case occupy exactly the same relative position with
regard to the pictures. In joining them up you must seek
a compromise and keep as nearly as possible to the re-
quired exactly four holes. As one subject changes to
another on the screen, the second will of course be dis-
placed slightly, either up or down; but that is quickly
compensated by a slight alteration of the adjustable mask
with which all “ four-hole ” machines are fitted. With
the “ one-hole ” system of perforation this difficulty will
not appear, because the position of the holes with regard
to the pictures is always constant, and machines which


belong to this class are not fitted, therefore, with the
adjustable mask.
The “ solution ” or “ film cement ” with which the
joints of films are effected is either a solution of celluloid
and, possibly, one or two other substances, in a solvent
such as acetone or amyl, acetate, or else the latter chemical
used alone. Personally, I far prefer the acetate of amyl
unalloyed rather than any of the gluey concoctions that
are sometimes sold for this purpose, for I find it not only
much cleaner to use and much quicker in drying, but,
being perfectly mobile, there is little of the tendency for
the surfaces to slide one over the other when pressure
is applied, which gives trouble with the more slimy
cement. Probably, however, it is quite a matter of taste.
With regard to the progression of the pictures, it is
only necessary to place the film in the instrument in such
a manner that the picture is upside down in the lantern
(which, of course, is essential), and turn the handle so
that it is drawn through from the top downwards, to
ensure that the pictures shall be shown in their proper
order. With some machines it is possible to work the
mechanism backwards if desired ; and with certain films,
shown ct la “ Alice through the Looking Glass,” the effect
is extremely funny. It is a variation of the usual order
of things which, if confined to once in an evening, is sure
to raise a laugh.
When winding up the films after exhibition, see that
they are placed upon the spool or other winding device
feet upwards. If you pick up the middle portion from a
heap of loose film—as you are sure to do, for the extremi-
ties have a simply wonderful knack of burying themselves —
observe which way the feet of the people in the little
pictures point, and then haul in the film in that direction,
hand over hand, like so much rope, until you come to the
end. That will be the end of the picture, in point of time,
and that extremity must therefore be placed on the spool
first. Attend to this, and the films will always be ready
for use when required, and correctly wound.
The films should always be placed in the instrument
coated side towards the light, as in the case of ordinary
lantern slides. Some instrument makers, with badly


designed machines, in which there are rubbing pads on this
side, will tell you to turn the film the other way. Perhaps
you had better do it when using one of these machines,
or the gelatine will get terribly scratched; but if any
lettering be visible on the picture, or it represent any
well-known place, its topsy-turvydom will be very much
apparent.
These longitudinal scratches on the film are a trouble-
some fault, giving the appearance of a heavy shower of
rain to the projected picture, and it is one that was more
or less inherent to all the early machines, in spite of the
elaborate pads of soft velvet with which it was attempted
to combat it. One ingenious theory, which may have some
truth in it, supposes that the rubbing of the warm film
against the pads the first time it passes through the
instrument induces frictional electricity, which invests it
with the power to pick up and attach to itself all specks of
dust and grit with which it may afterwards come in contact.
Certain it is that the film does in a most curious manner
catch up an immense quantity of dust, despite the most
carefully conceived precautions ; and it is easy to see how in
course of time the softest velvet would become choked with
the grit, and form a veritable scraper to abrade the surface
of the gelatine. So, in the latest machines, all rubbing pads
and rollers and sprocket wheels and everything else with
which the film ever comes in contact are hollowed, so that
the surface of the film, both back and front, never touches
any portion of the instrument except at the edges beyond
the confines of the picture, where the perforations are.


CHAPTER XII.
CINEMATOGRAPHIC CAMERAS.
IT will naturally be supposed that the instrument by
which the series photographs for the production of
animated pictures are made resembles the projection instru-
ment in many particulars. In many respects—indeed, in
most—the two instruments are alike; so much so that
in very many instances the one piece of mechanism serves
indifferently for either purpose, though it is usual to make
slight modifications—presently to be described —in order
the more perfectly to fit it for the different conditions under
which it is required to work.
The differences between a cinematograph for projection
and one for tjie making of the series photographs are,
optically, precisely those between an ordinary camera and
a lantern, while, mechanically, the differences are far less
marked. In a camera for the analysis of movement by
photography —for that is what it comes to—the conditions
are these : first, it is necessary to have the optical system,
which consists merely of a suitable lens and a light-tight
box in which to enclose the whole instrument—simply a
camera; and, secondly, there must be the necessary
mechanical device for moving the film to a fresh position
after each photograph is taken, working in connection with
a shutter which uncovers the lens at the moment that the
film is stationary behind it.
In short, the instrument for taking these animated
photographs is merely the simplest form of pocket camera
fitted with a glorified roll holder. ' Imagine a pocket kodak
built on a smaller scale and fitted with a lens capable of
giving a fully exposed picture with a shorter exposure;


suppose the roll holder with which it is fitted to have a
capacity for, say, twelve hundred exposures, and to work so
rapidly by means of one handle that these can all be made
in the space of one minute, —and then you have a cinemato-
graph camera. We talk about making “shots” with a
kodak, and as it is fitted for a dozen shots without
reloading, it may fairly be likened to a magazine rifle.
Then, if that be so, the cinematographic camera can only
be likened to a Nordenfeldt or Hotchkiss gun, for it will
rain a perfect shower of exposures in the time that the
simpler instrument will require for a single shot. Both
are deadly weapons in the hands of a good marksman, but
where one slays its thousands, the other slaughters its tens
of thousands. But here, you will probably say, are evidences
of the jawbone of an ass, and so to business.
One of the most important factors in good instantaneous
photography is always the shutter, and so it is only
natural to suppose that the shutter is an important detail
in the cinematographic camera. It is one of the chief
points of difference between a camera for taking the living
photographs and the projector with which they are ultim-
ately reproduced. In the latter instrument the shutter
need not cut off the light absolutely in the intervals
between the little pictures; and in many cases it is found
preferable, as has already been explained, to riddle it
with holes, or otherwise make it partially permeable to
light, in order that the obscuration shall not be absolute.
But it is easy to see that for the making of the series
photographs no such compromise is permissable. The
shutter must not only be opaque, but it must fit so closely
to the walls of the cell in which it works that it is impos-
sible for the light to creep round it by reflection, and thus
reach the sensitive surface at the wrong times, and cause
it to be fogged.
For this reason it is not usual to employ the cylindrical
shutter (see fig. 16, p. 53) for camera work; and where
it is used, it must be specially made to defeat the tendency
of the light to sneak in when it ought to be shut out. It
is more usual, because more convenient, to employ a
segment shutter (see fig. 15, p. 53), which is arranged
to revolve almost in contact with a fixed partition; or,


better still, to turn between two such partitions which are
placed close to it on either side.
It is a common practice in cinematography to use a
lens with the largest aperture that it is possible to obtain,
and to make the shutter opening as small as possible, so
that the exposure is always as short as is consistent with the
lighting of the subject. Whether this is the best principle
on which to work is a matter of question. It involves the
employment of a shutter whose opening can be varied in
extent with the brilliancy of the lighting and the char-
acter of the subject of each photograph ; and the lens is
used with the largest possible aperture, so that its defining
power is always strained to the utmost—a fact which
makes itself conspicuously evident whenever any portion
of the picture is portrayed which happens to be behind
its somewhat restricted focal range. On the other hand,
if a smaller stop be used, all parts of the view, both near
and distant, may be kept well in focus, while rapidly moving
objects will not be caught with sufficient speed to prevent
a slight blurring of their outlines. It is a question whether
such objects are better portrayed with absolute crispness
of detail when, as projected, they will appear to cross the
sheet in a series of very rapid jerks, or whether it is better
to have the stijler objects in perfect focus, and those that
move rapidly to betray their movement by slight blurring
of their vertical lines. Possibly the best solution is found
in a compromise : the lens to be stopped down only so far
as will ensure good definition over a reasonable range, while
the shutter is not opened during the whole time the film
is stationary, except under such conditions of lighting that
sufficient exposure could only be ensured by that means.
As has been previously hinted, a large number of cine-
matograph projection machines are also available, with
slight modification, for use as taking instruments. The
modification consists, as a rule, of either of two devices:
either the whole machine is detached from the optical
portion of the projector, and enclosed in a light-tight
case, the handle by which the instrument is actuated
being re-attached from outside this case; or the in-
strument is originally made in such a manner that it is
light tight, and it is merely necessary to attach two spool


boxes, one above and one below, for the reception of the
film respectively before and after exposure. In either case
means must be provided by which the exposed film can be
re-wound automatically on another spool after it has passed
through the machine. Although such a device is often
fitted to projection machines pure and simple, it is very
rarely used, as it has proved more convenient to allow the
film to drop out of the machine into a box or basket placed
for its reception.
It must not be supposed that a cinematographic camera
that is merely a converted projector is only a makeshift
concern, and would naturally be inferior to an instrument
specially made for the one purpose. It is not so by any
means in most cases, though, doubtless, in some the adapta-
tion is not so satisfactory as it ought to be. In the case
of a well-known instrument, made on the “ claw ” principle,
described on page 39—possibly the best machine that it
is at the present time possible to procure—the machine is
suitable alike for photography, contact printing of the
positive from the original negative, and for projection. In
each of its capacities it is unequalled by any instrument
on the market, whether of the “ triple purpose ” variety or
constructed specially for the one use alone. The mechanism
is enclosed in a small box, and when required for photo-
graphy it has two other little boxes attached in which the
spools for the sensitive celluloid are placed and guarded
from the action of extraneous light. This instrument is
merely quoted here in order to refute the belief—common
in some quarters—that a camera, to be satisfactory, should
be designed and used for the one purpose only, and the
same with the other two devices.
As may be supposed, the lens which is best suited for
cinematographic projection is not the best for taking the
series photographs in the first instance. Thanks, perhaps,
to the great “ boom ” in animated photography, there is
no lack of good lenses for either purpose. This branch of
photography is bound to be, for the present at all events,
so very expensive a matter that there would appear to be
good excuse for economy wherever there is a suitable
loophole. But it is no economy at all to use cheap and
inefficient lenses: that were indeed a case of spoiling


the ship for a ha’porth of tar. When it is duly borne in
mind to what a tremendous amount of magnification the
little pictures made in the camera are intended to be
subjected, it is surely unnecessary to point out that the
definition of the original pictures must be beyond reproach.
And then, when it is remembered under what peculiarly
exacting conditions, as far as the lens is concerned, these
photographs are taken, the necessity of using nothing but
an excellent lens for their production will be apparent.
All the good opticians are making lenses for cine-
matographic work, and a good optician does not risk his
reputation by selling a lens that will not give satisfaction.
Therefore go to a recognised maker, and pay a fair price,
unless you are prepared to wade through many expensive
experiments with numberless lenses, until you find one
that suits you. lam told that the “ Stigmatic ” lens,
which has won such golden opinions wherever it has
been fairly tried, has been adapted to cinematography
with such success as one might expect from it when it is
remembered that this glass will work at almost any aperture
and still give perfect definition. It is rumoured that for
animated photograph work it can be made with an aperture
of //2, and under those circumstances cinematography in
all weathers begins to loom large upon the horizon of
immediate possibility.


CHAPTER XIII.
ON TAKING ANIMATED PHOTOGRAPHS.
IT has been thought by many that the future of
cinematography will find its principal development in
the hands of the amateurs, and there is certainly much
precedent in support of the theory. But the taking of
cinematograph photographs is a very expensive hobby, and
not one to be lightly undertaken by him whose purse strings
are not inordinately supple. The original cost of the
apparatus, though considerably more than would buy an
outfit of ordinary photography, is not • sufficiently great
perhaps to act as a serious bar to the pursuit, but the
expense of the material to carry on the hobby is more than
ninety-nine per cent, of amateurs could contemplate with
equanimity.
The average price of a piece of negative film of standard
size and ordinary length ranges from fifteen to twenty-five
shillings, and the strip on which to print the positive costs
as much again. The chief reason for its high price is the
cost of the celluloid base on which the sensitive emulsion
is spread ; and if in the future—as is more that probable—a
cheaper, but equally efficient, material should be discovered,
the expense of cinematography as a pastime might be very
considerably reduced.
It is rather beyond the scope of this unpretending little
manual to give directions in the by no means easy branch
of photography which gives the title to this chapter. Nor
is there much demand for such instruction; for, whatever
may be the future of cinematography, it is certainly not at
present an amateur’s pursuit. The majority 6f persons
interested in the living photographs, who have not taken


up their production as a professional pursuit, have confined
themselves, and wisely, I think, to the projection upon
the screen of the comparatively excellent products of the
cameras of professionals, and which are to be purchased
in very great variety at a price which, considering all the
circumstances, cannot be considered excessive.
But there are those who will wish, for the sake of
completeness, if not for a more practical reason, to try
their hands at cinematography; and even those who do
not intend to dabble personally in the mysteries of the
production of animate photographs may find a few brief
particulars as to the modus operandi interesting if not
profitable.
Every photographer knows the names of the few manu-
facturers who hold the entire field for the production of
rollable sensitive film. Naturally it was to these that the
earlier experimenters turned for the sensitised material
upon which to make their series negatives, and it is in the
hands of these to-day that the whole trade in photographic
film is to be found.
By the way, it is a rather unfortunate circumstance
that both the material on which these series photographs
are taken and also the finished photographs themselves,
ready to be placed in the cinematograph, are vulgarly
known as films'. In ordinary photography we have, first,
plates or films, then negatives, and lastly, prints or lantern
slides. In cinematography we have films first, then negative-
films, and lastly, films. It is sometimes very confusing.
The film supplied by the makers may be had either
perforated to the standard Edison gauge or in plain strips
of the required breadth, and up to about a hundred and
twenty feet long in one piece. For commercial work it
is strongly to be recommended that the film be bought
unperforated, and that operation performed by the photo-
grapher. For, to get the very best results in the matter of
steadiness of picture, it is essential that the perforation of
both negative and positive be exactly similar arid exactly
in correspondence with the sprocket wheels of camera,
printing machine, and projector. But for the amateur
who naturally does not wish to invest in the somewhat
expensive piece of apparatus known as a perforator, the


former plan will be more advantageous, and he will not
object to pay a little extra for the perforated films.
The film, then, is placed in the upper spool holder of the
camera in such a manner that its sensitive side will face
the lens. The free end is then threaded through the
instrument, and adjusted upon the sprocket wheels or other
moving device in the prescribed manner, and finally attached
to the receiving spool.
As to the focussing, that must be accomplished according
to the exigencies of the particular instrument in use. In
some you focus upon the film itself; in others you focus for
a test object at an approximately equal distance to those
you are going to photograph beforehand on a piece of spare
celluloid before you put the sensitive film in the camera ;
and others you do not focus at all, for the camera is of the
fixed focus variety.
Regarding exposure it is very difficult to say anything
that shall be any guide to the worker. It has been well
said that subjects which are suitably lighted and other-
wise “possible” for the hand camerist may be safely
attempted with a cinematographic camera. But the class
of subjects that are fit food for the animated camera is
naturally of quite a different kind.
The beginner may be recommended to practise turning
the handle of his instrument regularly and rythmically
at home before he attempts to expose a film in the field.
As to the speed at which he should turn it, that depends
to a certain extent on the character of the subject on which
he is exposing, and to a great extent on the gearing of his
instrument. It may be taken as a general average that
the rate at which these animated photographs should be
taken is about fifteen to twenty per second. For very
rapidly moving objects the speed may be greater if smooth-
ness of running of the projected picture be considered of
superior importance to the length of film consumed for a
given result; and for subjects in which the changes are
very slow the speed may be less. It is hardly necessary
to point out that the pictures should be projected at
approximately the rate at which they were taken, although
a slightly slower speed is often permissable.
With an instrument in which the handle is attached


directly, without any gearing, to, say, a “ five-picture ”
sprocket wheel, the handle should be turned, generally
speaking, at a not lower rate than three revolutions in a
second. Set a metronome to beat seconds and “count
three in a bar.” It is an easy matter to deduce or count
the gearing of your instrument, and you will be well
advised to practise with it a little before taking it out for
actual work.
There is nothing much that can be said with regard to
the choice of subjects, but a hint or two as to the avoidance
of some of the most glaring faults that are to be found
in most of the commercial film pictures of the present day
may be of advantage. In photographing crowds and street
scenes and similar subjects—which always make more or less
interesting pictures, having, at all events, the merit of being
full of life and movement—precaution should be taken to
prevent people passing just in front of the camera and
blotting out the whole picture for a time with their huge
and ill-defined forms. A hand-camera man chooses a time
when such figures are not in the way : the cinematographer
can do the same, but a hundred people may surge in front
of his instrument before the exposure is finished. In the
old wet-plate days the same might be said of ordinary
photography, yet> its practitioners somehow avoided the
horrible results that are so frequent among the animated
photographs. Surely if a living photograph, of all things,
be worth taking at all it is worth taking a little extra
trouble to free it from such a glaring fault as this. Re-
course should be had only in the last extreme to placing the
camera right above the people’s heads, so that they cannot
get in the way : the naturalness, and, therefore, the charm,
of the photograph is to a great extent destroyed that way.
Let the photographer take with him a few friends, who
will stand near the camera, in front, but just beyond the
angle embraced by the lens, and politely cause the passers-by
to pass by somewhere but right in front of the instrument.
Again, the use of a wide-angle lens, nearly always
reprehensible, is generally most abominable in connection
with the production of a living photograph. The mere
movement of the objects from place to place in the picture
is sufficient to lend to it a heightened perspective effect,
7


which, in a single photograph, would be by no means so
marked, and the exaggerated perspective of wide-angularism
becomes horribly aggravated. For instance, what could be
much more ridiculous than a representation of a boxing
match, intended to inspire the spectators with excitement
and dread, when the participants alternately dwindle to
Lilliputian pigmies and swell into ungainly giants, as they
dance around one another in the ring ?
Little made-up comedies, carefully arranged and well
acted (there’s the rub!) make perhaps the most pleasing
of all subjects for the living photographs, just as, when
indifferently performed or evilly conceived, they are in-
effectual or repulsive.
When advising a beginner in ordinary photography as
to the choice and treatment of subjects, it is usual to suggest
that he study the works of others and be guided thereby.
But to the maker of living pictures let me say: Go, study
the work of others, so that you may avoid their faults by
all means, but do not copy any one. Think out some good
subjects for yourself, and treat them in an original manner.
There is a tremendously vast field before you, and up to
the present it has scarcely been touched at the very edges.
Above all, seek to make your pictures natural, for it is
their reproduction of natural effects that nothing else can
portray which is their charm.


CHAPTER XIV.
DEVELOPING , PRINTING, ETC.
THE real difficulties in the making of a series photo-
graph for cinematographic projection are first en-
countered in the darkroom. The amateur who purchases
his film ready made and ready perforated experiences no
particular difficulty in its manipulation in the field if he be
tolerably familiar with the operations of ordinary photo-
graphy. It is when he gets the exposed material home,
and attempts to develop it and otherwise finish off the
results of his previous labours, that the contrast to ordinary
photographic procedure becomes more apparent and the
manipulations more difficult. The development of a piece
of flexible film, eighty feet long and rather less than an
inch and a half broad, is an undertaking that may well
make the average photographer shudder to contemplate.
But like many others which appear so terribly formidable
at first acquaintance, this is robbed of most of its terrors
when you know how it is done; and, given the necessary
implements, is not so very difficult after all.
Cinematograph films are usually manipulated in the
darkroom by the aid of either one of two simple contriv-
ances for reducing the unwieldy material to a form in
which it is fairly amenable to the required treatment:
either the long strip of film is wound upon a large drum
or barrel, which is revolved with a portion of its periphery
in a trough of developing solution; or it is wound upon a
number of pegs set in a frame to keep the several convolu-
tions from actual contact with one another, and can thus be
completely submerged in the solution. Some workers
advocate one method and some another. It is quite a


matter of taste. One or two other contrivances have been
suggested for successfully tackling and taming the wild
and unruly pellicle, but as I have never seen these in
actual use, or met any one who uses them, it is probable
that they are suggestions and nothing more.
To the thoughtful worker it will only be necessary to
hint at the character of the peculiar implements used in
the development and subsequent treatment of cinematograph
films, and he will easily be able to fill in the details, and
in all probability to make the several contrivances himself
with but little trouble. Fig. 21 represents the “drum”
developing device. It is such a simple affair that it needs
FIG. 21.
very little explanation beyond the sketch. As will be seen,
it consists simply of a wooden cylinder, closed at the ends,
and built up in segments after the manner of the roller
at the bottom of a theatrical drop-scene. Each end has
a central pivot by which the cylinder is supported on two
upright arms, so that its periphery just dips within a
shallow trough beneath; and one of the pivots is extended
to form an attachment for a handle by which the drum
is kept revolving in its trough [during the progress, of
development.
The method of using the implement is also pretty well
self-explanatory. Hold the roll of film as it is taken from
the camera in one hand, the fingers grasping the centre at


either end so that it can turn easily; draw off a short
length, and attach the end (sensitive side upwards, of course),
by means of a drawing pin, to the extreme edge of the
drum ;' then turn the handle, guiding the film on so that
each convolution takes up its position on the cylinder as
near as may be to another, until all the film has been
transferred from the little roll to the drum. Fasten the
free end with another drawing pin, and proceed to develop.
A drum measuring fifteen inches in diameter—a con-
venient size—will, of course, comfortably accommodate four
feet of film in each convolution, and, allowing an inch and
a half for every layer of film, which is ample, a cylinder
fifteen inches long will be large enough for a forty-foot
film. A cylinder of twice that length will not be found
to be too unwieldy, and it will accommodate a film that
is as long as the majority produced. The trough may be
as shallow as will sufficiently meet the case without running
the least risk of the film rubbing against the sides, and
the smaller it is the more economical it will be in the matter
of developing.
With the constitution of the developing solution it is
unnecessary to say anything to photographers, beyond a
hint that it should not be one that is too easily oxydisable
by exposure to the air, of which, as is obvious, it gets a good
deal with this device. That objection does not apply to
the alternative method to be presently described. Progress
of development is chiefly judged by the red light shining
upon the surface of the film; but towards the end of the
operation it is advisable to detach one end of the film, and
draw off a little, so that it may be viewed by transmitted
light.
It is obvious that this cylinder need not be truly cylin-
drical, and may well consist of a number of laths, say,
thirty inches long, screwed at the ends to two stout circular
wooden hubs, fifteen inches in diameter, which any wood-
turner would supply for a few pence. Seeing that the
cylinder cannot conveniently be made of one piece of wood,
it is better that the necessary crevices between the segments
should be wide than narrow, as in that way they are more
easily cleaned.
The alternative implement for holding the film during


its progress through the darkroom is shown in the diagram
(fig. 22). It is a rectangular wooden cross having on the
face of each of its arms a row of perpendicular pegs an
inch and a half high, set a short and equal distance apart.
Here again the method of using needs but little explana-
tion. Attach one end of the film to one of the pegs nearest
to the point of intersection of the arms—the peg may well
be split for its reception. Thence the film is carried around
the pegs similarly placed on the other arms, so that it forms
the sides of a small square box, as it were, the sensitive
side, of course, being away from the centre ; thence around
the four pegs just behind those already used, and so on until
the end of the film is reached and is attached in any
FIG. 22.
convenient manner to the last peg that it touches. Thus the
film, when wound on this frame, forms a flat affair, which
can be totally submerged in the developing solution in a deep
dish of suitable size. In fact, it can be treated very much
like a big glass plate ; and that is why, perhaps, this method
appeals rather more strongly to photographers than the
other.
Development completed, the film is first thoroughly rinsed
to remove all traces of the reducer not only from the
surface of the film, but also, as far as possible, from the
many lurking places it will find around the pegs and
between the laths. Then it is transferred bodily, together
with its supporting cylinder or cross frame, as the case may
be, to another trough or deep dish containing the hypo.


Next follows a very thorough washing, and finally a treat-
ment with solution made up as follows :
Glycerine ...... 2 ounces.
Water ...... 2 quarts.
Then the picture is finished, and should be allowed to dry
spontaneously —still upon its support. After it has been
resting for a few minutes, a plug of soft cotton wool attached
to a piece of stick may be used to remove any drops of the
glycerine solution that may have collected upon the surface
of the film, and which might otherwise leave drying marks
upon it.
As has been already pointed out, several cinematographs
—notably those having the “ claw ” movement—are avail-
able for use as camera and printer as well as projector.
When used for contact printing, two spools are attached in
a light-tight box to the top of the instrument, one carrying
the sensitive (positive) film, and the other the negative to be
printed from. They are drawn together by the mechanism
past the “ window ” where they receive the necessary ex-
posure to light, and then the sensitive film is re-wound in
the receiving box as in the case of the camera, while the
negative falls out on to the floor or into a box placed to
receive it. There may, of course, be variations of this,
but it is the general scheme of the arrangement.
Generally speaking, the claims of , those instruments, in
which a sprocket wheel is the motive means, to contact
printing capabilities should be regarded with suspicion.
Where two films have to go together round one sprocket
wheel there is a liability for one to creep upon the other,
and the correct registration of the picture is disturbed.
This undesirable result may have been guarded against
in some cases, but it is as well to be forewarned. Printing
machines specially made for the purpose have separate
sprocket wheels for each film ; and in this case, of course,
the movement is not intermittent.
The development and other operations to which the
positive film must be subjected subsequent to exposure need
not be entered into; they will have been suggested by the
remarks concerning negatives, to which they equally apply,
except that such a developer must be used, and the process


only carried so far, that a clear, pleasant-coloured, and not
too dense picture is the result. As a general thing, positive
films are much denser than they need be. It is well to
guard against this fault, for there is no light to spare when
projecting a living photograph. Let the positive films,
as the others, be well fixed, thoroughly washed, and do not
omit the treatment with glycerine solution after everything
else.


CHAPTER XV.
CONCLUSION.
ANIMATED photography is quite in its infancy. In-
deed, it is only three or four years old, is still in a
very incomplete stage of development, and some persons
are inclined to think that it had been better for it, and,
possibly, for all parties—except a few of its earlier guardians,
who reaped substantial benefit from its early debut —were
it still in its nursery, awaiting a nearer approach to
maturity. But it was destined to be an infant prodigy,
and, in fulfilment of its natural destiny, was prematurely
exhibited, proudly and nightly, to rapturously admiring
crowds at all the music halls, etc., where it periodically
brought down .the houses in exultant admiration for its
infantile precosity. Meanwhile, it trembled violently, was
most erratic in its movements, winked and blinked and
quivered, and otherwise exhibited evidences of its immaturity
-and incapacity. Let us hope it will not suffer the unhappy
fate of so many infant prodigies, and, when the unwonted
“ boom ” subsides, as it inevitably will, find itself entangled
in a “ slump ” from which it has not the strength to ex-
tricate itself, for all its wriggling.
When animated photography does succeed in emerging
from the depressed state which is likely to follow the present
period of abnormal activity, it may be expected that it will
have reached a far more advanced maturity. Already there
are not wanting signs that the radical changes are being
contemplated by which alone the present faults can;- be
really eradicated. Some of the more earnest and thought-
ful workers have retired altogether from the present
struggle for supremacy, content to quietly perfect their


ideas until they shall have ready so accomplished an in-
strument that the world shall be taken by storm a second
time; others, who combine a keener business aptitude
with their science, and evidently think that a bird in the
hand is worth feeding and holding, though there are a
dozen fatter ones in the bush, are keeping up the supply of
the best machines they can turn out on the at present
recognised lines, while at the same time working out other
instruments on a new and improved system.
One new machine which is imminent, being built upon
an entirely fresh basis of, I think, a very promising descrip-
tion, is well worth mentioning before bringing to an end
this unpretending review of the cinematography of the
present day. If the view of persistence of vision, which
supposes that the image of any object persists upon the
retina with unimpaired brilliance for an eighth of a second
or thereabouts, were correct, living photographs which are
only “ blinked ” for a fraction of that time ought to appear
absolutely continuous; that is to say, there would be no
flicker at all. As that is very far from being the case, it
is natural to suppose that the persisting image occupies its
period of persistence in gradually fading away. That being
so, the only way to overcome the flicker which is still such
a bug-bear is by making the projection of the picture upon
the screen absolutely continuous. It is obvious that all
attempts to overcome the defect by shortening the interval
between the flashes can only result in minimising the
objectionable flicker, and never in its complete removal.
It is a “ continuous illumination ” machine which is pro-
mised us, and it seems to me that this is a larger step in
the right direction than has been made for a long time.
When you want to change from one lantern slide to
another with a single lantern, the best way to do it is
by covering the lens for a moment while you slide the
carrier through. You cannot make the change without
an interval of some kind, more or less unpleasant, except
by the use of a biunial lantern. So it is with the cinemato-
graph. Several people have recognised that the way to
overcome flicker was to employ two projecting systems,
and actuate them alternately, but they did not see how
to do it.


Some have thought to gain the desired
result by running two similar films side by
side, each having its own set of lenses, with
a rotating shutter covering them alternately,
so that one picture is thrown on the screen
to cover the flicker of the other. Besides
the obvious one of requiring two films to
serve the purpose of one, there are many dis-
advantages to this dodge which make it
impracticable. In the machine under con-
sideration the two optical systems are one
over the other, as in an ordinary biunial
lantern; and although there is separate
mechanism for each, working alternately
from one handle, the film passes through
both.
The ingenious dodge by which the pictures
are shown in their proper order by the two
lanterns working alternately and yet the
same “ phase ” of the picture is not projected
twice, is this :—From an ordinary film nega-
tive, taken in the usual manner, a positive is
printed by a special, but simple, machine,
so that the “ phases ” are arranged in peculiar
order. Along the side of this page is a
diagram (fig. 23) of a piece of film showing
the order in which the consecutive little
photographs are printed. The first picture
of the series is at the bottom, and it may
be supposed to be in position for exhibition
in the bottom lantern. No. 2 is fifteen
spaces higher up, which is the correct distance
to bring it into place in the upper lantern,
the intermediate slack being absorbed by the
sprocket wheels and rollers required to give
the upper portion of the film the necessary
intermittent motion. No. 3 picture is not
next above No. 1, but is next door but one
to it, the intermediate space being blank.
No. 4 is a similar distance above No. 2, and
so on, until by the time No. 15 is reached
F IG . 23.


the later figures begin to occupy the spaces left between
the earlier.
To follow out the history of such a film picture through the
duplex instrument, we will suppose that the first two pictures
are in position in the lower and upper lanterns respectively,
and, the shutter being open in the lower lantern, picture
No. 1 is on the screen. The shutter in this duplex
instrument would naturally take the form of a single
fan or segment alternately covering and uncovering each
lantern, and so arranged that the process of covering one
is exactly simultaneous with the opening of the other, so
that there is no variation whatever of the quantity of light
upon the screen. The shutter, then, rotates in front of
the two lenses, and in the course of its revolution covers
the lower lens and at the same time opens the upper.
Picture No. 2 is thus thrown upon the screen, and the film
in the lower lantern, under cover of the shutter, takes two
steps forward and brings picture No. 3 into position.
Another half revolution of the shutter and the upper
lantern is again covered, giving the film therein the oppor-
tunity of moving two steps forward and bringing No. 4
between the lenses.
Thus a real step is made towards attacking the problem
of the flicker from its very root. Already the uses of
cinematography for scientific purposes are coming to be
recognised ; an appreciation of its possible services to
education is likely to follow, and it is surely not too much
to say that before long we shall see the instrument rid
of most of its present imperfections and taking up its
proper level as the lantern has done. That the cinemato-
graph has contributed much to the gaiety of nations can
hardly be denied, but that it will continue to do so to
anything like the same extent for much longer is most
improbable.
Printed by Hazell, Watson, & Viney, Ld., London and Aylesbury.


Animated PhotographssHome
MOTORGRAPH
ONLY
£l2 12/-.
Complete with
LANTERN,
JET, TROUGH,
Etc.,
£2l.
THE MOTORGRAPH
Can be affixed to the front of any ordinary Optical Lantern, and
will project Animated Pictures on the Screen as steadily and
perfectly as any machine on the market. It takes the Standard
Gauge Films, is simple to use, and can be quickly removed, so
that the Lantern can be used for Slides in the usual manner.
A GREAT VARIETY OF FILMS ALWAYS IN STOCK.
PRICES from 301
Write for Catalogue of New Subjects (over 1000 to
select from), Post Free.
Jubilee Films,
Comic Films,
Sporting Films,
Theatrical Films,
War Filmsw
W. WATSON i SONS,
OPTICIANS,
Sole
London
Address
[313, High Holborn,
LONDON;
AND AT
Manufacturers of Optical
Lanterns, Slides , etc.
78, SWANSTON ST.,
MELBOURNE.


Philipp Wolff for Films.
Special Terms to Dealers.
HIS List is composed of Four Series (A, B, C, D), in which the subjects
1 are numbered.
By giving an order it must be kept in mind that though the names of some
subjects are similar they differ in price and quality.
Concerning the length mentioned in the headings, no guarantee can be given
as to the exact length indicated.
All my Films are after the Edison perforation system (four holes), and can
be worked on any machine.
SERIES A.—Between 60 and 75 feet long, clear.
1. A Dispute with a Coachman
2. The Drunkards
3. Menuet, Louis XV.
4. The Sentinel (comic scene)
5. Feeding an Elephant at the Zoo
6. The Czar in Paris
7. The Czar in Paris (4 lengths)
8. Bath of a Parisian Lady
9. A Bride Retiring to bed (double
length)
10. Assault of Arms between the Champions
Pini and Kirshoeflfer (i£ lengths)
New Series: —Scenes of the Life of Christ. These pictures of great artistic
value, varying in length according to the subject they represent —their
prices are in proportion.
11. The Birth of Christ, the Shepherds and
Magi (about 53 feet)
12. Jesus in the Temple (about 40 feet)
13. Jesus Restoring to Life the Widow’s,Son
(about 43 feet)
14. Let the Little Children come unto Me
(about 69 feet)
15. Entry into Jerusalem (about 40 feet)
16. The Last Supper (about 26 feet)
17. Gethsemane, the Agony, the Treason
(about 92 feet)
18. Before Pilate, Condemnation, Ecce Homo
.(about 32 feet)
19. On the Way to Calvary (about 56 feet)
20. Golgotha, the Cross (about 56 feet)
21. The Descent from the Cross (about 24
feet)
22. The Resurrection (about 19 feet)
The whole Series (n-22) —Price on application
ROBERT HOUDIN.
SERIES B.—About 75 feet long, clear.
1. A Wedding Party Leaving Church
2. A Terrible Night (comic scene)
3. Lightning Cartoonist (drawing M.
Thiers)
4. Lightning Cartoonist (drawing Mr.
Chamberlain)
5. Lightning Cartoonist (drawing Queen
Victoria)
6. Lightning Cartoonist (drawing Prince
Bismarck)
7. The Vanishing Lady
8. Ladykillers
9. The Haunted Castle
10. The Haunted Castle (3 lengths)
11. Leaving a Workshop
12. The Clown
i - On Board a Steamer (between Calais and
Dover)
14. Mont Blanc, a Dangerous Passage/
15. On the Roof (exciting scene)
16. Nightmare
17. Mr. Devant “The Famous Conjuror”
Scenes in the Graeco-Turk
War.
18. Mohammedan Inhabitants of Crete Mas-
sacring Christian Greeks
19. Turks Attacking a House Defended by
Greeks (Turnavos)
20. The Greek Man-of-War George Shelling
the Fort of Previsa
ax. Execution of a Greek Spy at Pharsala
LONDON. PARIS. BERLIN.
9, Southampton St., Holborn, London, W.C.


Philipp Wolff for Films.
Special Terms to Dealers.
LUIVIIERE.
SERIES C.—so feet and 60 feet long.
These Films, perforated after the Edison system, can be worked on almost
every type of Machine.
Complete List furnished on application.
SERIES D.—About 70 feet long, clear.
1. Arrival of a Workmen’s Train
2. Passing Infantry
3. A Family Breakfast
4. Passing Cavalry
5. Washerwomen
6. Bathing in the Seine
7. A View of the Sea
8. Leaving a Factory
9. On the Landing Bridge of a
Steamer
10. A Voyage in a Train
11. The Boulevards of Paris
12. A Joiner at his Bench
13. A Parisian Lady’s Bath
14. A Children’s Ball
15. Danse Macabre
16. The Arrival of a Tramcar
17. A Wineshop
18. Boating on the Marne
19. Place de la Concorde
20. A Lovers’ Scenel
21. The Market
22. Leap Frog
23. Children Scrambling for Sweets
24. A Farm Scene
25. A Grindstone Man.
26. In a Barber’s Shop
27. A Terrible Night
28. Place de la Republique
29. Arrival of the Czar in Paris
30. A Card Party
31. Ragpickers
32. Masons at Work
33- The Port of Cherbourg
34. A Quadrille at the “ Moulin Rouge ”
35. Serpentine Dance
36. A Murder
37. Yvette Retiring to Bed 1
38. Caught in the Act
39. Love Scene
40. A Love Duel
4r. The Undressing of a Model
42. A Dispute
43. A Malgache Dance
44. Washerwomen in the Fields
45. A Dance under an Umbrella
46. A Roundabout
47. A Fantastic Dance
48. A Boating Party
49. At the Central Market
50. Arrival of a Train
51. Passing Dragoons
52. Divers
53. On a Sofa
54. Navvies at Work
55. Blacksmiths
56. Farriers
57. Courtyard of a Barrack
58. Discharging a Ship
59. Soudanese Bathing
60. Place de l’Opera
61. Horse Jumping at Saumur
62. Cavalry Horses Drinking
64. Children Playing on the Sands
65. Sea Breaking on the Rocks
66. Manoeuvres of a Brigade
LONDON. PARIS. BERLIN.
9, Southampton St., Holborn, London, W.C.


Philipp Wolff for Films.
Special Terms to Dealers.
67. Military Scene at Vincennes return
from Exercise,
68. A French Soldier’s Courtship
69. A Trick with a Funnel
* In National Costume.
70. *A Marriage Scene in Russia
71. *The Headdress of a Bride
72. *A National Dance
73. *An Eccentric Russian Dance
74. *A Jumping Russian Dance
75. Pierrots
76. The Senegalais
77. Trained Dogs and Rats
78. The Boulevard St. Michaels
79. A Bicycle Race
80. Infantry Exercise
81. Telegraphists and Pastrycooks (comic)
82. The Carnival at Paris (5 Subjects)
83. A Greek Dance in National Costume
84. Acrobats
85. Battle of Flowers at Nice
86. Men-of-War Manoeuvring
87. A Caravan in Egypt
88. Place Victoria in Berlin
89. Queen Victoria Street, London
90. Oxford Street, London
91. A Wedding Party
92. Danse du Ventre
93. A Spanish Acrobat
94. A Lion’s Cage
95. Switchback
96. In a Balloon
97. Selling Wafers
98. A Rabbit
99. Dancing at a Fair
100. Miss de Vere, Danseuse
101. Unter den Linden, Berlin
102. Leizgerstr, Berlin
103. The Guard, Berlin
t lnauguration 0/ the Monument of
William I.
104. (Defile of the Germania
105. tßicyclists
106. tDefile of the Students
i°7- tLadies of Honour
108. tThe Emperor heads the Standard-
bearers to the Monument
109. Westminster, London
110. Bois de Boulogne, Paris
in. A Comical Painter and his Model
112. A Girl of the Bretange
113. Chambre Separde
114. Menuett (Dance Louis XV.)
115. Tambourin „
116. Dance Gracieuse ~
117. English Dance
118. March Past of Chasseur Regiment
119. President of the French Republic ac-
companied by the Ministers
120. March Past of Artillery (with Cannon
and Ammunition Waggons)
lax. Manoeuvres of Artillery
122. Railway Crossing
123. A Scuffle on the Terrace of a
Caff
124. Flora
125. An Arrest
126. Tipsy Girl in a Wheelbarrow
(humorous)
127. Stick no Bills (humorous)
128. The Bridge at Joinville
129. The Clowns (humorous)
130. The Jumping Clowns (humorous)
131. The Executioner
132. March Past of the French Guard on
Horseback.
133. Boat Race
134. Flower Girl and the Fireman (humorous)
135. Lady’s Tailor
136. Peasant Riding on Donkey
137. A Violent Character (humorous)
138. The Undressing of a Lady
139. Spanish Dance
140. From Nogent to Joinville (Panorama
taken jn a Train)
141. Execution in Berlin.
SERIES E. —Length about 75 feet.
1. A Funny Solution
2. Fireman and Servant Girl
3. Country Wedding
4. The Confession
5. Pigeons Flying Up
6. The Three Periods of Female Life
7- St. Antoine of Padua
8. Perriot and Columbine
9. The Unexpected Bath
10. The Discovery of a Lynched Man
11. The Pierrot and the Charwoman
12. A Farce.
LONDON. PARIS. BERLIN.
9, Southampton St., Holborn, London, W.C.


Philipp Wolff for Films.
Special Terms to Dealers.
COLOURED FILMS.
All the subjects mentioned in this list can be obtained in colours. The
price of these varies, according to the length and subject, from £1 to £s.
Any information relating to projecting and taking machines or Films will be
furnished on application at any of my offices.
Taking machines from £l2 to £6O.
Blank Films at wholesale prices.
WOLFF’S VITAPHOTOSCOPE.
The projection apparatus, “ The Vitaphotoscope,” is made entirely of metal,
the framework altogether being of steel. The complete apparatus consists
of:—
1. The Driving Mechanism with first-class Object Glass.
2. The Lamp Box made of sheet steel, with superior Condenser.
3. An Electric or Limelight Lamp {ad libitum ).
4. A Flywheel with Belting.
5. The Plant Board with Packing Box.
The driving mechanism with object glass (No. 1) and the lamp box with
condenser (No. 2) are fixed on the plant board (No. 5) ; for projecting, this
latter is attached by means of additionally supplied screws on the packing
box, while the flywheel is strongly screwed on the side of said box, which
causes the apparatus to be ready to project in a space of time requiring scarcely
five minutes. r The working of the apparatus is most elementary, and the un-
initiated are made acquainted with it in a few minutes. Its weight, including
accessories, is very light. Inside the packing box is also adapted a wooden
box, in which the lamp, films, etc., find their place. Pictures obtained by
means of my apparatus are very steady, there being no tiresome oscillation
nor trembling; and they can be produced of any size up to 25 feet long to
19 feet high.
The complete apparatus, finely nickled, costs £35, all accessories, as above,
included.
The strong and at the same time practical build of my apparatus has been
the object of my especial care, and therefore I am enabled to deliver with it a
written guarantee for two years, its working being irreproachable.
For any further information I keep myself at the disposal of such persons as
wish for same.
Blank Films, perforated, transparent, and opaque, of any length up to
450 feet long to hand,
Apparatus for production of oxygen as well as saturators and acetylene lamps,
that can be used in any place independently of gas, always in stock.
LONDON. PARIS. BERLIN
9, Southampton St., Holborn, London, W.C.
8


fa ,
* VAMIDOe
/ METOL
/ In Bottles
f \ / or in
4^/:a rtridge form
GLYCIN
THIOCARBAMID
Al*
THE LATEST NOVELTY
ORTOL
THE NEWEST AND BEST
DEVELOPER
O
BRILLfANT *l^-
RESULTS /
W SOLE IMPORTERS /
v\fuerst/>^
BROS. / 4^-
\l7- PhilnotLann/ ,
*j>\ /Q,


!4\n
NO FLICKERING !!!
&
or other objectionable
FEATURES
COMMON TO MOST MACHINES
A
ABSOLUTELY THE BEST
&
THE ORIGINAL
AND BY FAR
&
THE BEST
MACHINE
&
4k
BAR
NONE
a:
1000
ILMS
&
OF EVERY
CONCEIVABLE
&
VARIETY TO
SELECT FROM
SOLE AGENTS
For Great Britain and Colonies
&
' FUERST BROS.
17, PHILPOT LANE, LONDON, E.C.
k t= t


ABBREVIATED LIST
Of FILM VIEWS
SOLD BY
FUERST BROTHERS
Giving only the Most Sensational Subjects.
16. Boxing (Pedlar Palmer)
29. Dance on the Stage
30. Japanese Dance
31. Tyrolese Dance
32. Departure of Cab
33. Departure of Cyclists
34. Unloading a Ship
35. Pistol Duel
76. Firemen—Departure of Fire En-
gine
77. Firemen—Getting Ready
78. Firemen—Playing on the Fire
79. Firemen—Life Saving
Comic Views.
99. Gardener Sprinkling and being
Sprinkled
100. Women Fighting
101. Snowballing
102. Nursemaid and Cuirassier
103. Nursemaid and Soldier
104. Boxing (Comic Scene)
105. Hat Transformation Tricks
106. Hairdressing
107. Mechanical Meat-chopping
108. Carpenter and Box-maker
109. Sack Race
no. Blind Man’s Buff
in. Discussion
112. Dentist and Client
113. Russian Dance
114. Giant and Dwarf (Brothers Marco)
115. Playing with Cards and Sad Ending
116. Jury of Painters
117. Grotesque Skater
118. Photographer and Chapter of
Accidents
119. Conjuror
120. Give and Take (Practical joking)
121. Traveller and Pickpockets
Coronation of the Czar.
300. The Sovereigns and Guests going
to the Coronation Ceremony
Sied Staircase)
e Empress-Mother and the
Grand Duchess Eugenie Driving
302. Czar and Czarina entering the
Church of Assumption
303. Count of Montebello and General
de Boisdeffre going to the
Kremlin
304. Countess of Montebello
305. Admiral Sallandrouze and General
Tournier
306. Asiatic Deputation
New York.
319. Broadway
320. Arrival of Train at Battery Place
321. Brooklyn Bridge
322. Metropolitan
323. Broadway and Wall Street
324. Passengers descending from
Brooklyn Bridge
Niagara.
339. The Waterfalls
340. The Rapids
Royal Procession.
490. Her Majesty the Queen and her
Escort
491. Foreign Princes
492. Ambassadors
493. Life Guards and Dragoon’s Band
494. Naval Field Battery and Guns
495. Colonial Premiers and Colonial
Troopers
496. Royal Horse Artillery with Guns
9000. Aldershot Review. I. The
Queen’s Arrival
9001. Aldershot Review. 11. The
Queen’s Departure
9002. Aldershot Review. 111. The
Crowd
Also Sole Agents for
LUMIERE'S DRY PLATES AND PAPERS
FUERST BROS.
17, Philpot Lane, London, E,C.


LUMIERE
CINEMATOGRAPH
FILMS
OVER 1000 SUBJECTS TO SELECT FROM
£2 10s. each
Also LUMIERE f S
EXTRA RAPID PLATES
ORTHOCHROMATIC PLATES
PANCHROMATIC PLaTES
$
CITOS GLOSSY P.O.P.
CITOS MATTE P.O.P.
Ptatino Matte BROMIDE P.O.P.
Round Yellow Screens
for use with
LUMIERE'S
PLATES AND
FILMS
TRIBASIC
SODIUM
PHOSPHATE
All
HAUFF’S
DEVELOPERS
Kept in Stock
Also
EIKONOGEN
HYDROKINONE
PYROGALLIC ACID
RODINAL
PARAMIDOPHENOL
CARBONATE OF SODA
SULPHITE OF SODA
Etc., Etc.
•AXE BRAND
■AXE BRAND
TRADE
MARK
Chloride of GOLD.
Nitrate of SIL VER.
OUR ONLY ADDRESS IS
17, PHILPOT LANE, E.C.
/ / / MAKE A NOTE OF IT F F I


FILMS ON HIRE .
As our New CINEMATOGRAPH that we are now introducing does
not tear the Films, we are prepared to Hire the Films to
purchasers of same. We have a number of interesting Subjects, INCLUD-
ING THE .TUBILEE, and are constantly adding to the list.
OUR NEW
‘lnvicta Cinematograph’
GIVES A PICTURE
FREE FROM VIBRATION AND FUCKER,
is noiseless, easy to work, and can be used with any Lantern, and the PRICE
IS MODERATE. It is therefore
The BEST MACHINE for AMATEURS as well as PROFESSIONALS.
Full Particulars on Application.
Special High Power Jet with Intermediate Regulators, £>2.
NOAKES & NORMAN,
NELSON STREET, GREENWICH, S.E.
For PROJECTION and for PHOTOGRAPHY.
In sizes 2, 3, 4, and 5 in. focus. Exceptionally flat field and
large working aperture.
These Lenses are being used at all the leading Exhibitions.
Price List, including these and other Lenses, free.
W. WRAY, Optician,
59, NORTH HILL, HIGHGATE,
LONDON, N.


TKe YEtOGpPH.
Patent No. 17049.
1. The most perfect Projecting Machine.
Noiseless, Light, and Portable.
2. The most perfect Camera, fitted with Day-
Light Changing Boxes.
3. The best Films, correct Edison Standard Gauge
Perforation.
All Notable Events and New Subjects taken daily.
4. Special Films 'Taken, Developed, and Printed
for Customers.
Price List on Application.
TKe Yelo<Jr&pK 5 yndic&le, wl
ißegisteret* ©ffice : 242, London Road,
••«ot™ a croydon. Croydon. LONDON, S.E.


Hnglo=Hmerican pboto import
©ffice.
AND OF
368, Rue St. Honore,
PARIS.
65, CHANCERY LANE,
LONDON, W.C. - - -
©N account of the constantly increasing demand for our
well-known CINEMATOGRAPHS and FILMS, we
take pleasure in announcing that we have opened a LONDON
the above address,
OUR FILMS are made for exhibition in accordance with
the standard size, Edison gauge, and one-hole Lumiere
perforation, correct in every detail.
OUR PRINTING MACHINE is our own invention,
and enables us to obtain such results that will challenge
competition for excellence of work at a moderate price,
OUR PRICES are strictly nett cash with order. No
Machines or Film are sent out on approval, as all ap'
paratus made by us is warranted to be of the best work-
manship and material. Any claims must be made
immediately on the receipt of goods, otherwise they will
not be entertained.
Every care is exercised in Packing, and all shipments are
made at purchaser’s risk unless instructions are received to
dispatch at risk of carrier or shipper.
To avoid errors, give full name and address, and state carrier
or shipper by which goods are to be sent.
PRICES OF FILMS ON EDISON’S OR LUMIERE’S GAUGE.
FILM 68 to 70 feet - - - - £1 16 O
Do. 40 feet lonjf - - - - - -Cl 00
Do. 30 „ „ °
Discounts to the Trade only.


VOIGTLANDER & SOHN,
BRUNSWICK.
LONDON BRANCH (Wholesale only), 92, HATTON GARDEN , E.C.
CINEMATOGRAPH LENSES.
We have constructed specially small Lenses on the same formula as our Collinear Lenses,
Series 11. and 111., also Portrait Lenses, Series 1., which have been used with great success
for Cinematograph Cameras and Lanterns.
These small Collinears have a large flat field with perfect definition. They are not suitable
for projection purposes, for which our Portrait Lenses are very efficient and pass the maximum
amount of light.
PRICES FOR CINEMATOGRAPH CAMERAS.
* We recommend this Lens as being the most useful one. ,
PRICES FOR CINEMATOGRAPH LANTERNS.
OUR LENSES ARE OBTAINABLE FROM ALL DEALERS.
Lantern Books
THE BOOK OF THE LANTERN.
By T. C. HEPWORTH, F.C.S.
A practical Guide to the Working of the Optical (or Magic) Lantern—either
as an Educational Instrument for Exhibition Purposes, or as an Enlarging
Apparatus for Photographers. With full and precise Directions for Making
and Colouring Lantern Pictures.
3j. 6 d. Postage 3 d.
THE LANTERN-SLIDE MANUAL.
By JOHN A. HOBOES,
Author of “Elementary Photography” “ Practical Enlarging, etc. A com-
plete Practical Guide to Lantern-Slide Making by all processes. With
numerous diagrams.
Crown B vo, cloth, 2s. Postage 3 d.
London : HAZELL, WATSON, & VINEY, Ld., i, Creed Lane, E.C.


OXYGEN
REPORT OF ANALYST g6 , S°/ 0 NITROGEN 3-5%
STEEL CYLINDERS, COAL GAS AND ACCESSORIES.
PARKINSON’S
CONDENSED GAS CO.,
STRETFORD,
MANCHESTER.
TELEPHONE TELEGRAMS!
NO. 1,000. “OXIDE,” STRETFORD.
WOOD’S MOVENDOSCOPE.
This is a new and improved Instrument for Exhibiting Animated Photographs. By a
clever device much of the cumbrous and complicated mechanism so common in other
instruments is dispensed with, smoothness and ease of working are ensured, and liability to
injury reduced to a minimum. Messrs. Wood have much pleasure in recommending this
instrument to their customers. It will be found to fulfil all requirements, and prove a certain
and remunerative attraction at bazaars and similar gatherings, and is an indispensable adjunct
to all up-to-date entertainments.
Wood's Movendoscope, for use with any ordinary Lime-
light Lantern £l2 12 0
Ditto, with Limelight Lantern, complete £lB 18 O
WOOD’S MOVENDOSCOPE CAMERA.
This Instrument is a modification of the projection Movendoscope, specially constructed to
meet the requirements of photography. It has been found in practice that the projection
machine cannot be advantageously used for photographic purposes. Messrs. Wood have
therefore constructed a modified machine, by means of which highly interesting and occasion-
ally valuable reproductions of the various scenes of daily life may be permanently recorded.
These scenes, by the aid of Wood's projection Movendoscope, may be thrown on a screen to
the delight of old and young.
Price, without Lens £lO 10 O
Suitable Lenses for the above from £2 10 O
Catalogue of Lanterns and Slides per Post, Three Stamps.
E. G. WOOD, 74, Cheapside, London.


CLASSIFIED INDEX TO ADVERTISEMENTS.
ANIMATED PHOTOGRAPHIC APPARATUS:— ' page
The Bioscope. Maguire & Baucus, Ltd., 4 & 5, Warwick Court,
High Holborn, London, W.C. Inside Back Cover
Cinematographs. The Anglo-American Photo-Import Office,
65, Chancery Lane, London, W.C. xviii
„ Fuerst Bros., 17, Philpot Lane, London, E.C. . xiii
„ Voigt lander & Sohn, Brunswick, and 92, Hatton
Garden, London, E.C. xix
Fireproof AnimatOgraphe. R. W. Paul, 44, Hatton Garden,
London, E.C. Facing inside Front Cover
Invicta Cinematograph. Noakes & Norman, Nelson St., Greenwich, S.E. xvi
Kinematograph. Newman & Guardia, 90 & 92, Shaftesbury Avenue,
London, W.C. Inside Front Cover
Motorgraph. Watson & Sons, 313, High Holborn, London, W.C. . vii
Movendoscope. E. G. Wood, 74, Cheapside, London, E.C. ... xx
Velograph. The Velograph Syndicate, Ltd., 242, London Road,
Croydon, London, S.E. xvii
ARC LAMPS:—
“ Ross-Hepworth.” Ross, Ltd., hi, New Bond Street, London, W. . ' vi
DEVELOPERS :
Fuerst Bros., 17, Philpot Lane, London, E.C. ...... xii
FILMS: —
Fuerst Bros., 17, Philpot Lane, London, E.C xv
MagUire & Baucus, Ltd. (Lumiere), 4 & 5, Warwick Court, High
Holborn, London, W.C. Inside Back Cover
Noakes & Norman, Nelson Street, Greenwich (on hire) . . . xvi
Northern Photographic Works, Ltd., Barnet iii—iv
The Anglo-American Photo-Import Office, 65, Chancery Lane, W.C. xviii
The Velograph Syndicate, Ltd., 242, London Road, Croydon, S.E.. xvii
Watson & Sons, 313, High Holborn, London, W.C vii
Wolff, Philipp, 9, Southampton Street, Holborn, London, W.C. . viii — xi
LANTERN BOOKS
Hazell, Watson, & ViNey, Ld., 1, Creed Lane, London, E.C. . . . xix
LENSES
J. H. Dallmeyer, Ltd., 25, Newman Street, London, W. v
Maguire & Baucus, Ltd., 4 & 5, Warwick Court, High Holborn,
London, W.C. Facing inside Back Cover
Ross, Ltd., hi, New Bond Street, London, W vi
VoiGTLANDER & SoHN, BRUNSWICK, AND 92, H.ATTON GARDEN, LONDON . xix
W. Wray, 58, North Hill, Highgate, N xvi
OXYGEN:—
Parkinson’s Condensed Gas Co., Stretford, Manchester ... xx
PRINTING AND DEVELOPING:—
Northern Photographic Works, Ltd., Barnet . . . . . iii—iv
VIEWS :
Fuerst Bros., 17, Philpot Lane, London, E.C xiv


JfIACUIRE&BAUCUS, LIMITED.
WHOLESALE DEALERS
In all kinds of Apparatus for Taking and Projecting
ANIMATED PHOTOGRAPHS.
Our extensive connection with the Cinematograph Trade
throughout the world enables us to supply our customers with
any make of TAKING or PROJECTING Machines (English,
American, French, or German) at lowest prices.
Accessories of the Best Quality always in
ELECTRIC ARC LAMPS, LANTERNS, CARBONS,
CALCIUM JETS, SATURATORS & LIMES, OXY-
HYDROGEN GAS GENERATING oijTFITS,
OBJECTIVE AND CONDENSING LENSES, Etc., Etc.
Get our Prices for
LIFE MOTION PICTURE PHOTOGRAPHIC CAMERAS;
PRINTING, DEVELOPING, and PERFORATING MACHINES;
SENSITISED FILM STRIPS (All Lengths) FOR TAKING.
Double your Stock of Films for
Price of One.
No Exhibitor can afford to do without it.
The BIOSCOPE REVERSER (Price <*2 10s.)
Will fit any Machine.
/ Most ludicrous results are obtained by reversing the Film
(Machine being operated in regular way), thereby giving you
the advantage of practically increasing your present assortment
of Films just two-fold, at a minimum cost.
Reverser with Special 1| In. Focus Objective. I’ricc V 4 10s. complete.
Rcvcrser with Special 2or In. Focus Objective. I'ricc 554 complete.


Our Personal Experience
with all makes of Screen Machines and Films, dating from our
introduction of the original Edison Kinetoscope throughout
Europe, gives to our judgment value. We can conscientiously
recommend the
AMERICAN “BIOSCOPE”
(Price <£26, complete)
as the BEST Projecting Machine now obtainable.
It is remarkable for its Steadiness, Absence of Flicker,
and the Superior Brilliancy and Definition in the picture
projected. It is built on strictly mechanical principles, Simple
in its Operation, and is of the Best Workmanship.
While we handle all makes of Films, we specially recommend
lERE FILMS,
le Standard American Gauge
£2 10s. each),
sest Film manufactured.
(have no equal in Clearness, Definition,
of subjects which are taken from all
parts of the world.
They are recognised as the standard of excellence. Length of Films
average 53 feet. Duration of exhibition from 50 to 60 seconds. They
are Copyrighted by Messrs. A. LUMIERE & SONS, Lyons, France,
and are so marked. Catalogue comprises over 700 subjects.
CeleTiafed
Films of all Other Makes and Lengths are supplied
on order at Reduced Prices.
We are in the business to supply your wants, and shall be
pleased to give you any information pertaining
to our line, desired.
It is to vour interest to have your name included in our Mailing List, so that we may
keen vou posted from time to time, as we are constantly introducing new appliances
and HANDLE THE BEST AND LATEST APPARATUS, the knowledge of
which may prove of value to you.
MAGUIRE &BAUCUS, Ltd.,
4 & 5, Warwick Court, 44, Pine Street,
High Holborn, LONDON, W. NEW YORK, U.S.A


JVIAGUI PE&BAUCUS, mum
WHOLESALE DEALERS
In all kinds of Apparatus for Taking and Projecting
ANIMATED PHOTOGRAPHS.
Our extensive connection with the Cinematograph Trade
throughout the world enables us to supply our customers with
any make of TAKING or PROJECTING Machines (English,
American, French, or German) at lowest prices.
Accessories of the Best Quality always in
ELECTRIC ARC LAMPS, LANTERNS, CARBONS,
CALCIUM JETS, SATURATORS & LIMES, OXY-
HYDROGEN GAS GENERATING otfTFITS,
OBJECTIVE AND CONDENSING LENSES, Etc., Etc.
Get our Prices for
LIFE MOTION PICTURE PHOTOGRAPHIC CAMERAS;
PRINTING, DEVELOPING, and PERFORATING MACHINES;
SENSITISED FILM STRIPS (All Lengths) FOR TAKING.
Double your Stock of Films for
Price of One.
No Exhibitor can afford to do without it.
The BIOSCOPE REVERSER (Price <£2 10s.)
Will fit any Machine.
/ Most ludicrous results are obtained by reversing the Film
(Machine being operated in regular way), thereby giving you
the advantage of practically increasing your present assortment
of Films just two-fold, at a minimum cost.
Reverser with Special 1| In. Focus Objective. Price £4 l«s. complete.
Revcrser with Special 2 or *f In. Focus Objective. Price £4 complete.


Our Personal Experience
with all makes of Screen Machines and Films, dating from our
introduction of the original Edison Kinetoscope throughout
Europe, gives to our judgment value. We can conscientiously
recommend the
AMERICAN “BIOSCOPE”
(Price JE26, complete)
as the BEST Projecting Machine now obtainable.
It is remarkable for its Steadiness, Absence of Flicker,
and the Superior Brilliancy and Definition in the picture
projected. It is built on strictly mechanical principles, Simple
in its Operation, and is of the Best Workmanship.
While we handle all makes of Films, we specially recommend
FILMS,
jfttf§jtfate3v&\ie Standard American Gauge
Ifev SBr sw cCa lOs. each),
rest Film manufactured.
have no equal in Clearness, Definition,
of subjects which are taken from all
parts of the world.
They are recognised as the standard of excellence. Length of Films
average 53 feet. Duration of exhibition from 50 to 60 seconds. They
are Copyrighted by Messrs. A. LUMIERE & SONS, Lyons, Franee,
and are so marked. Catalogue comprises over 700 subjects.
Films of all Other Makes and Lengths are supplied
on order at Reduced Prices.
We are in the business to supply your wants, and shall be
pleased to give you any information pertaining
to our line, desired.
It is to your interest to have your name included in our Mailing List, so that we may
keep you posted from time to time, as we are constantly introducing new appliances,
and HANDLE THE BEST AND LATEST APPARATUS, the knowledge of
which may prove of value to you.
MAGUIRE &BAUCUS, Ltd.,
4 & 5, Warwick Court, 44, Pine Street,
High Holborn, LONDON, W. NEW YORK, U.S.A


