

JJkffes
JfaaijAladiw
Jk
, vHTk
ddlmaiMill[
NANCY STUART GURR






BILLY AND BERYL" BOOKS
. BILLY AND BERYL IN
CHINATOWN
Thomas Burke
. BILLY AND BERYL IN
SOHO
Thomas Burke
BILLY AND BERYL IN OLD
LONDON
Thomas Burke
APPLE-GEORGIE FARM
By F. and K. Thompson
THE SECRET TOYSHOP
By Diana Pares
GYP AND THE PEDLAR’S
RING
Vera Barclay
ANIMAL TALES FOR ANN
By Nancy Stuart Gurr




m &
DY FOR BED AT SIX O’CLOCI


ANIMAL TALES
FOR ANN
NANCY STUART GURR
ILLUSTRATED BY
J. SHARP
GEORGE G. HARRAP Sf CO. LTD.
LONDON TORONTO BOMBAY SYDNEY


First published 1938
by George G. Harrap & Co. Ltd.
182 High Holborn, London IV.C.i
Copyright. All rights reserved
Made in Great Britain. Printed by The Riverside Press, Edinburgh


PI 1339
4 OCT 1939
THIS BOOK IS LOVINGLY DEDICATED
MY LITTLE NIECE
ANN MARION


\


PAGE
15
21
32
45
53
59
7 1
80
89
7
CONTENTS
Eric the Elephant 15
Bertie the Bandicoot 21
Reggie the Rat 32
Kate the Kangaroo 45
Susie the Snake 53
Marko the Monkey 59
Peter the ’Possum 71
Billjim, the Father Bear 80
Freddy the Frog 89


t&hp&p
But after tea she changes


yi s soon as Ann has finished her tea, and there is
i\just about half an hour before she jumps into
bed, a queer little look comes over her face. It’s a story
look!
You know, Ann is just like any other little girl. She
has bobbed golden-brown hair, two pretty grey eyes, a
slightly tilted nose, and a great big smile. But after tea
she changes.
Her eyes get bigger and glisten, her little nose tilts
higher, and that smile gets more winsome than ever.
She climbs on my knee, twists her arms about my
neck, and, in a voice full of affection, says:
“Aunty Nance, what about a story?”
Who can resist an attack like that ?
I can’t, and I’m sure you can’t. That is my excuse
for this ‘story book.’


-
■


ANIMAL TALES FOR ANN
nn was growing up!
A There was no doubt about it. Her legs were
growing longer and longer, her frocks shorter and
shorter, and her teeth were coming out!
She didn’t mind so much when they came out one by
one, but when two came out together, it was quite an
occasion. The second had to have a little tug, but she
shut her eyes, held on to the chair, and never uttered
the tiniest squeak till she heard Mummy say, “There,
darling,” and it was lying white and small in her hand.
That night the biggest glass in the house held two
tiny teeth, but next morning the fairies, after a good
night’s work, left a large silver piece instead of the
usual sixpence.
Ann was delighted. From six o’clock in the morning
till eight she held that silver piece tight in her hand,
thinking of all the lovely things she could do with it.
Just before she started her porridge—she knew! She
dropped her spoon, ran to the hall, and carefully lifted
the telephone receiver. After dialling the number she
waited with breathless expectancy for a voice.
It answered her. She wriggled her toes with excite-
ment till her sandals nearly fell off.


“Uncle Lex, can you —no, can I take you to the
Zoo ? ”
The voice said, “Hey, there, young Ann, what’s all
this?”
Ann took her tongue out of the empty space where
the teeth had been.
“ It’s my teeth-money, darling Uncle Lex. It’s two
shillings this time, so I thought you and Maria and I
could go to the Zoo. I’ll pay! ” she added hastily.
The voice seemed to choke a little, but in a second it
very gravely said :
“ That’s awfully nice of you, young Ann. Maria and
I would like that better than anything else we can think
of. Now when do we let you take us?”
“Would ten o’clock suit?” said Ann.
She had heard some one say that to Mummy at the
door and rather liked the sound of it.
“Ten o’clock would suit,” said the voice. “And
look your prettiest, young woman!”
That worried Ann a little. She looked at her
mother as she slipped on her blue linen and asked a
little anxiously:
“ Mummy, are you sure I look my prettiest? ”
The answer was a big kiss and a hug, and a minute
later Maria drew up to the front gate, her body polished
till it shone, and her horn blowing madly as Uncle Lex
gave the special salute. This was six long and six short
toots alternately, and the noise was terrific.


i
Soon they were parking Maria at the Zoo gates, and
in another minute were walking to the entrance, Ann
tightly clasping the “teeth-money.” She felt very
important as she walked through the
children’s turnstile and collected Uncle
Lex and the change the other side.
Now Ann had a special reason for
wanting Uncle Lex at the Zoo, because
he was really a very wonderful person.
He could talk to animals!
He had a dog called Donald, and you
would be surprised at the things they
told each other. Ann had often asked
him how he did it, but he only said:
“It’s a gift, young Ann, it’s a gift.”
But the main thing Ann learned was
that one had to love animals very much
to understand them. The more you loved them, the
more they told you.
Ann had been doing some very deep thinking. If
Uncle Lex could talk to dogs and cats, what could he do
at the Zoo ? The possibilities were boundless!
As they walked across the lawn, Ann looked round
her. There were flowers, birds, and trees, and
numerous exciting paths that wandered in all directions.
For a second she did not know what to do first, so she
looked at Uncle Lex. He smiled that nice warm smile
that Ann loved so much and raised his eyebrows.


Ann thought hard, drew in a deep breath, and just
managed to say, “The Elephant!”
They were off down a winding path, and through the
trees she saw a great grey head and a swinging trunk;
then they caught a glimpse of children laughing and
swaying from side to side on the elephant’s strong back.
Ann tugged at Uncle Lex’s hand and pulled him
round to the elephant-house. For a minute or two
they stood and watched the load of happy children
dismount while the elephant stood quietly blinking his
little eyes.
Uncle Lex felt another tug and heard a little voice
saying very urgently :
“Talk to him now, Uncle Lex. Talk to him now”
A great light dawned on Uncle Lex. Grabbing
Ann s hand, he walked a little nearer the elephant and,
with a funny, twinkling look, gazed hard into those wise,
kind eyes.
The elephant looked at Uncle Lex and swayed his
trunk from side to side. Ann watched breathlessly.
Uncle Lex nodded his head and raised his eyebrows.
“Really?” he said to the elephant. “White, was
he?”
The elephant blinked and went on swaying his trunk.
Uncle Lex nodded again, and after a few minutes, Ann,
watching this marvellous interchange with intense
interest, heard Uncle Lex say:
Thanks, old chap, that was most interesting.”


Eric the Elephant
And the elephant went on his way again with another
load of happy children.
As he passed them, Ann thought she saw Uncle Lex
wink at the elephant, and the elephant solemnly wink
back. She was nearly beside herself with excitement
and kept jumping up and down, saying:
“ What did he say, darling Uncle Lex ? Quick, what
did he say ? ”
While they sat in the sunshine on the lawn, Uncle
Lex told her all he had heard about Eric, the extra-
ordinary cousin of the Zoo elephant.
Eric the Elephant
Once upon a time, far away in the jungle, lived Mr
and Mrs Algy Elephant and their little son, Eric.
Eric was the quaintest little elephant in the world.
He was round and chubby and full of fun, but —really,
I quite hate to tell you —he was white!
Now wasn’t that the queerest thing? Of course his
mother and father loved him very much indeed, but
they were grey, and all the elephants they had ever seen
were grey, so they used to look at Eric in a very puzzled
way.
One day his mother rolled him in a muddy pool,
and for a few minutes Eric really looked quite normal;
but very soon he was splashing about in the river, and


when he came out he was as white as white could be
again.
His mother gave a sad little sigh and said to his father;
“ Well, I really don’t know what to do about the boy.”
Eric grew very quickly
and wanted to play with the
other little elephants. But
whenever he tried to join
them in a game, they all
walked away and left him.
Poor little Eric! He would
look sadly after them and
go to the river and play all
by himself. Once he asked
them why they were so un-
kind, and Eustace, quite a
nasty little prig, put his
trunk in the air and mut-
tered :
“My mother says that no one has any use for white
elephants except Prime Ministers and Mayors.”
Poor Eric! He looked at his white skin and tried to
get as dirty as he could, but at heart he was a clean little
chap, and he ran to the river and came back white again.
As the months went by, Eric became bigger and
stronger than Eustace or any of his playmates. But he
was always lonely and wished he could find a Mayor or
some one who really loved a white elephant.


Eric the Elephant
One hot day the birds began to screech, and the
monkeys chattered and swung themselves from the
thick vines and branches in great excitement. Some-
thing was coming through the jungle!
Eric listened hard, and then dashed for cover, but he
was too late. A horde of dark men surrounded the
herd, and Eric, Eustace, and a few others, after a long
march, reached a city of beautiful buildings made of
marble, with great domes and slender minarets. It was
the capital of a great Indian Rajah.
Eric had never seen a Rajah, but he hoped he would
be like a Mayor and have a weakness for white elephants.
Eustace began to put on airs when they arrived, and
told them all he was quite sure he would be a royal
elephant, but he felt sure Eric would have to work for
a living.
All the elephants felt very nervous, because they were
not used to seeing people. As they marched along in
a grand procession, every one lined the streets and
cheered and cheered. Little boys ran along beside
them, and little girls threw flowers.
Eustace curled his trunk most elegantly and
murmured as he passed Eric, “I’m sure every one is
cheering me!”
They halted before the Rajah’s palace. It was so
gorgeous that Eric’s legs positively trembled with
excitement. Then the Rajah appeared!
He was tall and handsome, with kind, dark eyes.
B iy


His beautiful satin robes were of scarlet and blue, and
in his turban and round his neck glistened priceless
gems. He gave one look at the elephants and walked
straight up to Eric.
“Magnificent!” he cried, as he stroked Eric’s trunk.
“Never before have I seen such a beautiful elephant.
He shall be my favourite and the most famous elephant
in India.”
Eric’s heart missed a beat, and a little tear of joy
trickled down his cheek. The Rajah’s servants decked
him in scarlet and blue silk, put a beautiful gold chain
round his neck, and hung a great jewel in the centre of
his forehead. How gorgeous these trappings looked
against his white skin!
As they led him off to the royal elephant-house,
Eustace sniffed as he passed; but Eric was so happy
that he didn’t even hear him.
Now Eric lives in the greatest luxury, loved by the
Rajah and his children, whom he wakes every morning
by thrusting his head through the bedroom window
and tickling their feet with his trunk. That, you must
admit, is a royal privilege.
Away back in the jungle his mother and father, who
have heard of Eric’s great success, never tire of talking
about him. They proudly say to their friends:
“I suppose you have heard about our Eric? He’s
done so well for himself. But of course he always was
a most exceptional child.”


Eric was the quaintest little elephant in the world


Ann, silent for a minute, gave the most tremendous
sigh, and then said:
“What a perfectly lovely story!”
She looked round her. On the lawn, near a flower-
bed, she saw a long, pointed nose. It looked familiar.
As she rushed across with Uncle Lex, two bright eyes
looked at them.
Ann danced up and down with delight.
“Why, it’s a bandicoot,” she cried. “Just like the
one we saw in our garden on Sunday. Why, I think it
must be his brother. His face is exactly the same —
truly it is, Uncle Lex.”
Uncle Lex smiled.
“We’ll soon find that out, young Ann,” he said.
The bandicoot ran round a bush, nibbled something,
and looked up at Uncle Lex. Uncle raised his eye-
brows. The bandicoot shook his head.
“Oh!” said Uncle Lex. “You’re not?”
The bandicoot nibbled again, and his nose quivered.
Uncle Lex looked at him with amazement.
“What!” he said. “An uncle of Bertie’s? Well, I
never ! You know, that’s jolly interesting. I believe
he’s a great chap.”
The bandicoot seemed to get very excited. He ran
round in a little circle and then stopped and gave Uncle
Lex a very arch and knowing look. Uncle Lex said
“Timbuctoo” in a very surprised tone and laughed.
Ann was hanging on to his coat with both hands, her


Bertie the Bandicoot
eyes growing bigger and bigger every minute; but she
didn’t say a word in case she stopped this exciting
conversation.
The bandicoot was pretending to dig. He scraped
the earth with his front paws and looked up again at
Uncle Lex.
Uncle whistled. “Oh! She did, did she?” he
said.
This was really getting too mysterious for Ann, and
it was just as well that Uncle said, “ Cheerio, old chap.
My congratulations to Bertie ! ” and led Ann away
round some shrubs.
“I didn’t like to tell you in front of him,” he
whispered, “because some animals don’t like their
family secrets talked about.”
Ann pulled him farther away to a sunny spot on
the lawn, and, with a hasty “I promise I won’t tell
a soul,” sat on his knee, tense with excitement, while
Uncle began the tale of Bertie, the nephew of the Zoo
bandicoot.
Bertie the Bandicoot
Once upon a time there was a handsome young
bandicoot with a very, very long nose. His name
was Bertie.
Now Bertie was very popular in bushland. All the
bandicoot girls used to quarrel over him and whisper


-»♦♦♦♦♦■»♦■»♦ ♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦
as he passed, “My dear, hasn’t he the most divine
nose!”
The bandicoot boys were a little jealous, of course,
but they all tried to copy the grunts he made as he ran
up the lawn at night.
Bertie, by the way, was not popular in the long house
with the green windows, because the garden really
didn’t look very nice after Bertie and his boy friends
had dug big holes here and there.
A shy little bandicoot girl called Brenda admired
Bertie very much indeed, but he never took the slightest
notice of her.
One night, when Bertie was digging an extra big
hole, Brenda crept quietly to his side. As he paused
to take a deep breath he heard her say:
“ Oh! How marvellous! ”
Bertie looked round, really feeling rather pleased.
“Did you speak?” he said.


Bertie the Bandicoot
Brenda swallowed hard, and her poor little nose
quivered with shyness.
“I only said how —how marvellous,” she gasped.
Bertie put his long nose in the air and sat back.
“Well,” said he, “although I say it myself, I can
dig a hole.”
Brenda came a little closer and looked at him with
shining eyes.
“Oh, Bertie,” she whispered, “how far could you
dig if you tried hard? ”
Bertie looked at her, put his nose a little higher in the
air, and then said:
“I could dig a hole to Timbuctoo.”
Now Bertie didn’t know where Timbuctoo was, only
he had heard the naughty little boy next door tell his
sister to go there.
Brenda looked at him with her mouth open.
“Oh, Bertie,” she said, “how far is that?”
“Jumping snakes!” he said. “Don’t you know
where Timbuctoo is?”
“No,” Brenda admitted.
“Well, it’s under that hill where the trees touch the
sky, straight down the other side of the world. I’ve
just made up my mind to go there. But don’t tell
anyone, will you?”
Brenda promised and rushed away into the bush.
But, like any other girl, she told every one she
met:


Bertie s going to Timbuctoo! Bertie’s going to
Timbuctoo ! ”
Very soon the garden was in commotion. Bandi-
coots, possums, lizards, and mice were all fighting,
shoving, and pushing to get to the front to watch
Bertie start off.
He sat up, waved his tail, and with a careless “ So
long, fellows,” began to burrow.
Earth and plants flew in all directions, and soon
Bertie disappeared from the sight of the cheering
bush-animals.
After a while he began to feel rather tired, and he
paused for a short rest. It was then that he heard a
timid little voice just behind him say :
“Oh, Bertie, you are marvellous!”
It was Brenda. Bertie’s tail quivered with anger.
“ What on earth are you doing here?” he thundered.
Brenda came a little nearer.
“Oh, Bertie,” she said, “I always said I’d go to the
other end of the world with you.”
“Well, you can go home instead,” he replied


Gertie the bandicoot
rudely, “because I don’t want any girls hanging round
here. This is a man’s job.”
Brenda didn’t answer, but he heard her crying softly.
That rather upset Bertie ; he really was quite kind at
heart, and just then he began to think he’d be feeling
lonely before he dug to the other side of the world.
“Stop crying,” he said, “and you can stay.”
Brenda wiped her eyes with her little paw and took
turn-about with Bertie and made the earth fly. I’m
afraid she really wasn’t very helpful, but she did her
best. What girl can do more ?
After a time they couldn’t see any light at all, and
Brenda felt a little frightened in the cold and darkness.
Now and then a worm would pop up his head, look
at them, and then slither back into the earth. The
worms weren’t pleased they were digging their way
to Timbuctoo!
Farther and farther they went, till suddenly Brenda
felt her feet were getting wet.
“Oh, Bertie!” she cried. “Where are we now?
Bertie looked about a trifle alarmed.
“I hope we’re not under the sea. That will be
awkward.”
“What a pity we didn’t bring our goloshes,” said
Brenda.
“Why not gum-boots?” Bertie grunted.
The water was now half-way up her poor little
legs.


“Oh, Bertie,” she moaned, “wouldn’t it be awful if
we were drowned ? ”
“Do try to be cheerful. Timbuctoo can’t be far
away. Perhaps it’s raining there. Once in a while it
does rain in Timbuctoo.”
“Oh, Bertie,” said Brenda, her fears forgotten,
“you are marvellous!”
Bertie started to dig again, although he had com-
pletely lost his bearings. After a while they heard a
frog croaking.
“I wonder,” said Bertie, “if the frogs are black in
Timbuctoo ? ”
Brenda shivered a little at the thought of black frogs
and clung hard to Bertie’s tail.
“You’ll look after me when we’re married, won’t
you, Bertie dear?” she said.
“When we are what?” he shouted.
“M—married,” said Brenda, in a quivering little
voice.
“Jumping snakes!” said Bertie. “Who said we
were going to get married ? Why, I’m going to dig my
way all over the world before I settle down. Every
stout fellow must have a little adventure. No, Brenda
old girl, just forget about it.”
Before she could answer they heard a queer noise just
above them.
“Pattering feet!” cried Bertie. “Hurrah! We are
nearly there.”


Gertie the Bandicoot
♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ ♦
He started to dig furiously again, and all at once a
beam of light broke through, and they saw a long nose
thrust through the opening and, above it, two bright
eves peering at them.
It was Bill, Bertie’s brother. The face suddenly
disappeared, and as they both wriggled out of the hole,
they heard Bill’s voice calling to the bush-animals.
Bertie looked at Brenda.
“That was Bill right enough,” he said. “But how
did he get to Timbuctoo before us? ”
He gazed about him. There was a very familiar
look about that lawn and the flower-bed with its tall
zinnias and yellow marigolds.
A minute later a crowd of excited and laughing bush-
folk surrounded a very dazed and dejected Bertie and
Brenda.
A terrible thing had happened. Instead of digging
to the other side of the world, they had burrowed
under a corner of the long house with the green
windows!
Poor Bertie! Every one was laughing and jeering,
and he didn’t know what to say.
Then he heard Brenda speaking.
“Bertie could easily have got to Timbuctoo,” she
said, “but we decided to turn back and get married
before we went any farther.”
Every one stopped laughing and cheered wildly
instead. Bill poked Bertie in the ribs with his nose,


f4r/ '
/ f r^
Z 1
and all the other boy bandicoots did the same, while the
girls kissed Brenda and hoped she would be very happy.
Bertie opened his mouth to speak but wisely closed
it again. He decided very suddenly that he would
rather be married than laughed
at, because, after all, he did
not know the way to Tim-
buctoo.
So Bertie and Brenda lived
happily ever after.
If we can find happiness
where we are, why go to
Timbuctoo to look for it?
Ann felt a little indignant
about Bertie.
“He should have wanted
to marry poor little Brenda,
shouldn’t he, Uncle Lex?”
Uncle smiled a funny little smile
“You women!” he said.
It didn’t seem a bit the right answer to Ann, but she
decided it wasn’t worth worrying about. She jumped
up and pulled him to his feet.
“ That was a lovely story, Uncle darling. Please can
I have some biscuits?”
Out of the corner of her eye she could see a little girl
clutching a large full bag and carefully shoving one


Bertie the Bandicoot
biscuit through the bars of a cage, and just as carefully
pushing the next into her own little mouth.
Ann thought this was a lovely idea. As they walked
up to the kiosk, she thought it would be an even better
idea if they bought peanuts as well. As Uncle insisted
on ice-cream, too, they were quite laden as they walked
back down the path.
Uncle Lex looked at his watch.
“I shall rest my aged bones for a short spell
under this tree, young Ann, and then for Maria and
home.”
Ann looked at him a little doubtfully.
“I’m sorry you’re tired, darling Uncle Lex, but you
can’t be old, ’cause people aren’t old till they get
married.”
Uncle grinned.
“Well, that certainly is one way of looking at it,
young Ann,” he said.
He stretched out his long legs on the grass, lit a
cigarette, and closed his eyes. Ann felt for another
biscuit.
There was a rustling sound in the bushes near by.
Ann looked round quickly. Two beady eyes were
watching her. She screamed !
Uncle Lex sat up and blinked.
“What on earth —” he began.
But Ann was crouching behind his back, and he
heard her saying in a shaky little voice:


“There are two eyes in the bushes, Uncle Lex, and
they want my biscuit.”
Uncle grabbed the biscuit and threw it near the
bush.
“Keep quiet,” he whispered. Ann stood up and,
peering over his shoulder, watched.
There was the soft, rustling sound again, and the next
moment a big grey rat had seized the biscuit and dis-
appeared. Ann gave a jump and clutched Uncle hard,
but to her surprise she heard him call out in tones of
pleased amazement:
“Why, Reggie!”
She looked across at the bushes. Those bright black
eyes were there again. Uncle turned to her.
Its old Reggie, the rat,” he said. “He must be
having a look round the Zoo.”
He broke off another piece of biscuit and threw it
over.
Reggie came out slowly this time and sat up and
watched them. Uncle seemed to be settling down to a
nice long chat.
“How r are Rene and the children?” he said. “I
suppose the youngsters are quite liking the country
now.”
Reggie stroked his whiskers and looked hard at Uncle
Lex. Uncle laughed.
“You certainly did have an exciting time,” he
said.


Bertie the Bandicoot
Reggie’s eyes seemed brighter than ever, as he ran
round in a circle, sniffing the ground.
Uncle was still laughing.
“Yes, Reggie,” he said, “I certainly knew Cedric,
and I don’t suppose you’re likely to forget him.”
From the look on Reggie’s face Ann felt sure Reggie
wouldn’t forget him.
Uncle threw him another piece of biscuit. Reggie
swallowed it quickly and came a little closer. Uncle
seemed pleased.
“I’m glad you like the country so much,” he said.
“ Well, old boy, remember me to Rene and the children,
and take this to them with my regards.”
Uncle tossed over a whole biscuit, and Reggie care-
fully lifted it into his mouth and, with a cheery wave of
his tail, disappeared.
“Did you know him before?” Ann whispered.
Uncle looked at her.
“Know old Reggie?” he said. “Why, Ann, he’s
one of my oldest friends ! I met him first at the long
house with the green windows, and he’s just told me a
great tale.”
Ann sat on his knee and kissed the end of her uncle’s
nose.
“Please, Uncle Lex, tell me,” she said.
“Well, this is the last for to-day,” said he, and after
making sure Reggie had gone, he began. . . .


Reggie the Rat
ONCE upon a time, in a corner of an old packing-
case in a paddock, lived a young bush-rat called
Reggie.
When Reggie was quite a lad, big, handsome, and
strong, with a long tail and bright, beady eyes, he spoke
of himself as a “real son of the soil.”
I don’t think you would have liked Reggie so much
when he grew a little older, because he forgot he was
just a simple country rat and began to give himself airs.
Every day he used to lick his fur till it looked sleek and
shiny, and I know you won’t believe it, but he even
used to curl his whiskers ! This used to annoy his
father very much, and he’d say to his wife at night:
“ A lot of foolish nonsense our young hopeful has got
into his head ! Calls himself Reggie now ! And tries
to ape those city fops. No one had notions like that
when I was a boy. We were brought up hard, and
better rats we were for it, believe me!”
Reggie’s mother, a gentle old lady, would tremble a
little and murmur;
“He’ll get over it, Pa; he’s just a lad.”
But Reggie didn’t get over his big ideas. He got
worse and worse, till one day he carelessly said, “ Good-


Reggie the Rat
bye, folks. I’m off to see the world.” And after
smoothing his coat, curling his whiskers, and parting
his hair, he disappeared into the scrub.
When he reached the road he felt so frightened that
the curl came out of his whiskers,but on and on hewent,
till he passed some very fine houses. That reminded
him he ought to select a home. He picked the biggest
he could see—ten rooms, wide verandas, spacious lawns,
lovely harbour views, private E. to P., and garage at
side-entrance.
That, by the way, was the way Reggie used to
describe his home to his friends. ‘Private E. to P.’
used to puzzle them a little, till they found it meant
‘private entrance to pantry,’ and then, of course, they
were very deeply impressed.
Reggie entered his new home through the kitchen
door, where a delicious smell of toasted cheese made
his mouth positively water. He looked round. There
was no one about, so in he popped, and made straight
for the pantry.
A second later, in came the maid for some ground
rice. Reggie leapt behind a big box of odds and ends
and lay there, his heart beating in his throat and his legs
trembling.
And in that corner, behind that box, Reggie lived in
peace and comfort for many weeks.
The shelves were packed with the daintiest things
imaginable—cakes, cheese, breakfast foods, and even
c 33


(Irl /*\
Y|- [f ' ((/)
K '■■ r \ x$te 9, if
J TjfKf I , ,■ >
icing-sugar. Some other rat had lived there before,
because he had made the private E. to P., a neat hole
gnawed through the wood floor. Whenever anyone
came into the pantry Reggie
would hastily dive through
it and take a stroll under the
house.
After a few weeks Reggie,
now sleek, fat, and well
groomed, decided he was in
a position to marry, so he
began to court Rene, from
the long house with the green
windows.
Rene was a real city girl,
and she had delicate, soft
little paws. She never did any work —the vain little
thing—but massage her pretty face.
One night, when Reggie called on her with a tasty
lump of cheese under his arm, she said:
“My dear, it would simply kill me if I had to soil
my paws.”
Reggie looked at her with adoration and murmured;
“Rene, marry me, and you never shall! I have a
magnificent home, a beautiful car and garage, and three
big human slaves, as well as two smaller ones, to look
after me; and believe me, good slaves are hard to
find.”


Her mother gave a big tea-party


When Rene heard how prosperous Reggie was, she
agreed to marry him at once, and her mother gave a big
tea-party to all her girl friends, who were green with
envy when they heard the news and saw how handsome
Reggie had grown.
Rene loved her new home, and one day when Mr
Warehouse Jones came into the kitchen, Reggie called
her, and together they peeped at him from under the
pantry-door.
“That,” said Reggie boastfully, “is my principal
slave. I send him out to work every day.”
He then saw Mrs Warehouse Jones. He looked at
her with a frown.
“My dear,” he said, “I am not very satisfied with
that slave. She makes too much noise, steals food out
of my pantry, and is always washing the faces of our
small slaves, John and Judy. She also had the cheek
to suggest there were rats in the pantry. One day I’ll
order her out of the house —you see if I don’t.”
He looked so fierce that Rene clung to his arm and
begged him not to be hard.
The only complaint he had about the little slaves,
John and Judy, was that they helped themselves to cake
and jam when no one was around; but he forgave
them because they were young, and thoughtless of a
rat’s comfort.
One evening Reggie came home from his after-dinner
stroll to find Rene proudly licking four pretty little baby


wC
Reggie the Rat
rats. He was so delighted that he rushed off to tell his
friends the great news. He returned late, looking quite
festive, his fur ruffled, his eyes very bright,'with a lump
of cheese under his arm as a
peace-offering to Rene.
As the baby rats grew
bigger they learnt to squeak,
and that made Reggie very
anxious. He looked severely
at Rene.
“ Really, my dear,” he said,
“you must teach them to
be quiet. Well-behaved little
rats never squeak.”
But little rats must squeak
sometimes, and both Mrs
Warehouse Jones and the
maid heard them quite plainly, and told Mr Warehouse
Jones about it. Mr Jones said something about a
cat, and a day or two later, Rene saw a big tabby
drinking a saucer of milk placed for him on the kitchen
floor.
Rene thought of her babies and rushed back and told
Reggie. But Reggie just laughed, although really his
heart jumped into his throat.
“Oh!” he said airily. “That poor thing! Why,
my dear, you mustn’t be frightened of him ! I brought
him here to amuse the children when they get a little


older. Why,” he said, as he laughed rather hollowly,
“that’s what is called a pet!”
Rene sniffed.
“Pet or no pet,” she said coldly, “I don’t like him,
and he’s not going to amuse my children.”
Reggie smiled in a superior way, but he decided to
move the family under the house. They still slipped
in and out of the pantry through the private E. to P.,
and life went on as happily as ever.
But Cedric, the cat, began to take a disagreeable
interest in the pantry. He sat with his nose under the
door and sniffed in a most objectionable way.
Rene began to get very annoyed. She looked at
Reggie.
“ Would you mind getting rid of your little pet ? ” she
said angrily. “I tell you I don’t like him.”
Again Reggie just looked superior.
Cedric had a very curious mind. Whenever the maid
opened the pantry-door he rummaged in the box in the
corner. The box was removed. . . .
There, for all to see, was the private E. to P. Mr
Warehouse Jones, with a nasty smile, drove a wedge of
wood into it. He made such a noise that even Reggie
began to feel a little frightened.
When he tried to get into the pantry the following
night, and found he couldn’t, Reggie was furious.
Savagely he nibbled at the wood all night, and at last
he saw daylight through a little hole.


J$iL» JS J9 M
39
Reggie the Rat
He also saw two big green eyes staring into his.
Cedric seemed quite interested in his night’s work.
Sick with fear and fury, Reggie returned to Rene.
She looked at him coldly. Reggie tried to smile.
“I think I’ll turn in now, old girl,” he said. “I’m
feeling rather tired.”
Rene’s eyes flashed.
“Tired, are you?” she screamed. “Well, we are
hungry, and what are you going to do about it? I’m
certainly not going to soil my paws looking for food.
“I’ll see to that after I’ve had a good rest,” said
Reggie.
He didn’t look quite so bold and bumptious as usual,
but no one does after working all night.
Fortunately Cedric couldn’t get under the house, but
he spent a lot of time near another hole Reggie had
made, his exit to the garden when he felt like a turn in
the fresh air.
In the meantime, Reggie and his family began
to feel famished. The hungrier Rene got, the more
bad-tempered she became, till, after two days, she
threatened to leave him and take the children.


Poor Reggie! He couldn’t bear that, so next
evening he crept out and found the kitchen-door open.
Quietly he slipped under the pantry-door and, climbing
on the shelves, gorged himself till he nearly burst.
The house was very quiet.
Picking up a lump of cheese, he made a dash for the
front door, and was about to jump down the steps —
when Cedric arrived ! Reggie dropped the cheese.
Cedric sprang!
Round the house they raced, Reggie’s tail within close
reach of Cedric’s wicked paws. Just when he felt he
couldn’t last out another minute, he saw the hole under
the house, and in he shot, not a moment too soon.
“ I think we’ll move, my dear,” he said to Rene, when
he managed to get his breath. “ It’s time you and the
children had a change of air. The country is beautiful
at this time of the year.”
So they decided to go, but leaving was dangerous.
A bright idea occurred to Reggie.
“I’ll nibble at the plug of wood in the floor,” he said,
“ an d while I’m saying good-bye to my pet, Cedric, you
and the children can run off and wait for me in the
gutter in front of the house.”
The plan worked very well.
Cedric, in the pantry, patiently waited while he heard
Reggie nibbling, but when the maid put his saucer of
milk on the kitchen floor he decided that a cat must eat,
and off he went for his dinner.


j ßeggie the Rat
By the time he got back, Reggie and the family were
well on their way back to the country, and the next day
were settled in the old packing-case where Reggie was
born.
Rene was very disgusted at first, because she had to
work hard, and her little paws were often very soiled.
One day Rita, Reggie’s sister, called and asked her if
she would rather be back in the city.
“ Oh, no, my dear,” said Rene, in her bored city way.
“A big house, slaves, and a pet cat are all very well, but
one gets so tired of them. Besides, the simple life is so
much better for the children.”
Reggie forgets to curl his whiskers these days, and
never parts his hair, and loves to stump round the bush
with his old father to observe the weather.
“The country could do with a drop o’ rain,” he
would say.
You see, he’s a “real son of the soil” again.
“ Did he really and truly tell you all that ? ’’ Ann asked.
“Of course he did,” said Uncle Lex. “As a matter
of fact, young Ann, you’d be surprised if you knew all
that rat told me. When I stayed at the long house
with the green windows, Reggie used to creep into my
room at night and talk for hours. Even a rat feels he
needs a friend to chat to.”
Uncle Lex jumped to his feet. He was listening to
something.


“Did you hear that?” he said.
“Is it Reggie?” asked Ann, gazing at the bushes to
see if those bright eyes were back again.
“No, not Reggie,” said Uncle, “but I thought I
heard Maria. She wants to go home, and so do I.
Talking makes me hungry. All I can think of now is a
beefsteak.”
Going through the Zoo gates, Ann stopped, her
face quite woebegone. “Oh, Uncle Lex,” she said,
“we didn’t see the monkeys !”
Uncle lifted her into Maria.
“Don’t you know,” he said, “we have a special
invitation to come again next Sunday afternoon?”
The following Saturday, Ann’s mother was very
puzzled. Instead of wanting to stay up late, Ann was
ready for bed at six o’clock. No one could understand
it except Bimbo, her cat. Ann confided to him why
she was going to bed early.
“It’s this way, Bimbo darling,” she explained.
“The sooner I go to bed, the quicker to-morrow will
come.”
At last to-morrow came, and Ann and her uncle paid
another visit to the Zoo.
Uncle Lex followed a crowd of boys and girls down
a little winding path which bore a notice, “To the
Kindergarten.” In a special enclosure Ann saw a dear
little dolls’ house surrounded by a wire fence. A


Reggie the Rat
glimpse of soft furry bodies made her cry “Guinea-
pigs !” and rush towards it.
In and out of the house and along the verandas,
mother, father, and baby guinea-pigs chased one
another. While Ann gazed, spell-bound, Uncle Lex
strolled on to the next wire fence. A young kangaroo,
with a little one in her pouch, was gazing at the crowd.
She soon recognized Uncle Lex and hopped over to
him.
The wonderful thing was happening again!
Uncle was stroking the kangaroo’s head, and his lips
were moving. The kangaroo sniffed his fingers, looked
earnestly into his eyes, and gently put her baby on the
ground.


Ann, not wishing to disturb them, crept nearer and
nearer and heard Uncle say:
“Do you mean to say she left him under a gum-
tree? ”
The kangaroo, quite overcome, hopped twice to the
left and came back again. Her eyes were moist.
“It served her right,” said Uncle severely; “but I’m
glad she found the poor little chap.”
Uncle felt a little nudge. “Oh,” he said to the
kangaroo. “This is Ann.”
“Place your hand on her head,” whispered Uncle Lex.
Very gently Ann did as she was told. A soft nose
sniffed her fingers. The kangaroo’s left ear twitched.
“Oh, we’re sorry we must go,” said Uncle. “But
I’ll give Kate your message if I meet her in the
country.”
With the baby again in her pouch, the kangaroo
hopped back to the father kangaroo.
Uncle and Ann pretended to be interested in the
guinea-pigs.
“What did she say?” whispered Ann.
“Tell you in a minute,” said Uncle Lex, speaking
through his teeth so that the kangaroo wouldn’t see his
lips moving. They skipped behind a summer-house.
“That’s better,” said Uncle, with a sigh of relief.
“I didn’t want her to think I was repeating gossip.
She was telling me about Kate, a relation of hers in
the country. Here’s the story.”


Kate the Kangaroo
Kate the Kangaroo
Once upon a time there was a beautiful young
kangaroo called Kate. She had soft grey fur,
pretty pointed ears, big brown eyes, and the longest and
strongest tail you could possibly imagine.
When she was quite young her father used to look at
her and say, “Well, Kate certainly has my tail. What
a pity she isn’t a boy. Now when I was a lad ”
At that Kate’s mother would say, “Yes, Father.
Isn’t the grass green for this time of the year?”
You see, in his young days Mr Kangaroo had been
the swiftest kangaroo in the country, and he never
tired of telling of the great races he won. But poor
Mrs Kangaroo had got very weary of hearing about
them.
Secretly she was very pleased Kate was a girl,
because she thought it was very much nicer to have a
pretty daughter than a great big son who might win
races and boast about them as Father did. But as
Kate grew older she learned something that grieved her
mother very much. Kate found she could hop farther
than any of the young kangaroos she knew.
Her father was delighted. He would watch her with
pride and then say to his wife;


,#*v
I' "" "'I
>• U||
' S \ s>^ vv
“Mother, we’ll make a champion of her yet.”
Poor Mrs Kangaroo! Her eyes filled with tears, and
with a little “\es, Father,” she hopped away and wept
bitterly behind an ant-heap.
One day she took Kate quietly into the bush and told
her that when she was young no nice girl went in for
sports and she wished Kate, like a sensible girl, would
marry and settle down. But I’m sorry to say Kate was
a very wilful girl sometimes, and she just tossed her
head and said:
“Don’t be old-fashioned, Mother. Anyhow, Father
is training me for the race against the boys at the
annual sports.”


ij\ /| v '
V v. (^w
" A
VI \ J
, %* Vo
*?< *
y
, u u #^I\U
,_ «\\Vw4 . • W\\«V»-
- iiil
“ One — two — three —spring off your tail /”


Every morning Kate and her father rose at sunrise
and hopped over to the big paddock, while poor Mother
moped round and sulked. There, with the bush-folk
slowly awaking to greet a lovely summer’s day, Kate
stood gazing at her father with her shining brown eyes.
Old Man Kangaroo, thinking of past glories, looked
very wise.
“Straighten up a bit, my girl.”
Kate straightened up.
“Now then. One —two —three—spring off your
tail ”
Away she would go.
Each time she touched the ground she bounced like
a great ball and hurtled through the air with great leaps,
her pretty ears set back, and her eyes bright with
excitement.
When the sports day arrived, there was a great
chattering of “Have you heard the news? Old Man
Kangaroo has entered Kate for the race against the
boys! Isn’t it wonderful ? ”
Kate’s girl friends were most excited.
“Disgraceful, I call it,” muttered an elderly aunt on
Kate’s mother’s side, with a sniff every one heard.
Every eye was on Kate. She was a bit nervous, but
tried not to show it. Beside her came her father,
swaggering with pride.
In a few minutes they were all lined up.
“One —two —three —spring off your tail!”


Kate the Kangaroo
They were off! Down the paddock they went, with
beautiful, strong, flying leaps.
Ah! There was one pushing ahead. It looked like
Kate! It was Kate! She was two hops ahead of
the others. The crowd was
shrieking with excitement!
She was three hops ahead
of the others! Kate’s father
was jumping up and down like
a jack-in-the-box. Another
few yards to go.
“Hurrah! Hurrah! She’s
won\ ”
Kate was the heroine of
bushland.
Some time later, Keith, a
fine young kangaroo who loved
and admired Kate very much,
asked her to marry him, and
what a wonderful wedding it
was!
I/,,. / /(
The whole of bushland turned up to wish them luck.
Bertie and Brenda and Reggie and his family were
there, and Peter, the ’possum, walked the tight-rope as
a special treat for the guests.
To her mother’s great delight, Kate gave up sport after
she was married. When her little son Kim was born,
she seemed quite happy carrying him about in her pouch.
D 49


But alas! One day, as she gently hopped along by
the paddock, she saw the young kangaroos training for
the sports again. I’m sorry to say it, but it was too
much for Kate. She carefully put young Kim under
a gum-tree and joined in.
Up and down the paddock they hopped, and I’m
afraid it was nearly dusk when Kate suddenly thought
of Kim. Her heart almost stopped beating. With a
few great leaps she reached the gum-tree, but there w r as
no Kim!
She called softly. There was no answer. Her voice
grew sharp with fear.
“ Kim! ” she cried. “Kim!”
There w r as still no answer.
She was home in a few minutes, hoping she would
find him with her mother or Keith. But he wasn’t
there. It was dark now, and the bush was filled with
strange rustlings and whisperings. The soft moon-
light filtered through the branches of the trees as they
searched and called. Kate was frantic with fear and
anxiety.
Soon all bushland heard the dread news.
“ Kate’s Kim is lost! Kate’s Kim is lost! ” one cried
to the other.
All the animals joined in the search, and it was dawn
when Willy, the wombat, found a funny little long-
legged figure curled up under a bush by the creek.
Poor little Kim! He was very frightened, and cold,


Kate the Kangaroo
too, but he soon snuggled into his mother’s pouch,
while Kate cried with happiness at finding her little
son again.
Kate has never raced from that day to this.
His father eagerly watches Kim’s tail grow big and
strong, and often says to his wife:
“ We’ll make a champion of him yet, Mother! ”
And Kate quietly answers:
“Yes, Father —perhaps!”
“Oh!” said Ann. “I didn’t think they were going
to find little Kim.” She touched her stomach. “I
felt all sick here, Uncle Lex.”
After Uncle Lex had assured her that Kate would
never let Kim out of her sight again, they went back to
the kindergarten.
Soon they came to the cage with the glass front.
Something long and green lay curled up there and
watched Ann and Uncle Lex with black unblinking
eyes. Ann jumped back with fear.
“Come away, Uncle Lex,” she cried. “It’s a
snake!”
To her surprise, Uncle wasn’t a bit frightened. He
tapped on the glass, and she heard him say:
“How are you, old dear?”
Ann couldn’t believe her eyes.
The snake uncurled and wriggled towards him, its
tongue darting in and out.


“ So you’re Patty, the python, and you know all about
Susie!” said Uncle.
Ann could stand it no longer.
“You can’t love a snake,” she cried, and tried to pull
him away, but he wouldn’t move.
“Every living thing is interesting,” Uncle Lex said.
“Please don’t disturb me, because Patty has something
very important to tell me.”
The slim green body crawled over a little log and came
nearer. Ann liked the colour of Patty, but that was all.
Patty’s tongue darted in and out again.
“Do you mean to say,” said Uncle, “that she said a
thing like that? What a snake of a snake she must
have been!”
He turned to Ann.
“ Patty would like to meet you,” he said.
Ann came a little closer, but although she tried hard
to be friendly she just managed to mumble, “How do
you do? ” and edged back to the white mice.
At last Uncle had finished, and, raising his hat very
politely, he bow T ed to Patty and crossed over to Ann.
“What a charming snake!” he said. “I know you
would like her if you knew her better, Ann! She’s not
a bit like Susie! ”
“But who’s Susie?” asked Ann.
“A poor snake,” said Uncle Lex, “who thought she
was somebody but really wasn’t. She came to a bad
end, and this is how it happened.”


Susie the Snake
Susie the Snake
Once upon a time, deep in the heart of the
Australian bush, lived a fat diamond snake called
Sarah.
Now Sarah wasn’t a very nice creature. She was
lazy, not very careful of her personal appearance, and
inclined to be rather bad-tempered. She had been
quite a fine-looking reptile in her time, but now she
loved to wriggle round in all the dust she could find,
and really, at times you simply couldn’t see the pattern
on her back.
Well, one morning in summer, when the air was filled
with the fresh sweet smell of bush-flowers and the songs
and soft flutterings of birds, Sarah lay in a pile of dust
and slept while the children wriggled all round and
played hide-and-seek among the twigs and leaves.
I forgot to tell you about the children.
There were thirteen, a happy wriggling mass of them.
All except one, I should say, and she just wouldn’t play
with her brothers and sisters. Her name w r as Susie.
Even when Susie was only a few inches long she
wouldn’t mix with the others. While they tumbled
and slid in and out of the leaves in the hot midday sun,
she lay on one side where it was clean and cool, and
pretended she didn’t know them. She wouldn’t go to


• ♦♦♦♦♦ ♦ ♦♦♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ » ♦ ♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦»
her mother when she was called and often got a smack
from her tail for disobedience.
As she grew older, she got prouder than ever. She
watched her diamond pattern grow more beautiful every
day, and often went to bed
with a stiff neck admiring
her own back.
Sometimes she lay in the
sun, just to watch the scales
of her skin glistening. When
her little brothers and sisters
tried to tease her she raised
her head, hissed, and glided
away.
One or two little snakes tried to become friendly with
her, especially Tessie, the tree-snake. Tessie was a
gentle creature, kind and harmless, and she admired
beautiful Susie very much indeed. One day, as they
lay in the sun together and Susie kept looking at her
own back, Tessie said:
“ Susie dear, don’t you think that my skin is rather
a sweet colour?” It was a beautiful green.
Susie looked at her sharply.
“Certainly not,” she hissed. “It’s very ordinary
indeed! Of course,” she said, looking down her own
back, “diamonds are always smart and fashionable.”
Poor Tessie! She wriggled sadly away, feeling that
she looked very, very plain.


—
'(X ' H ‘ V f i 1U j.
TS n RP.V
Susie the Snake
»♦♦♦♦«♦»! » t tt^^^^******** ♦ ♦ ♦♦♦
The Queen of the bush-fairies heard Susie’s cruel
answer and was very annoyed. She stood and looked
at Susie and shook her head.
From the top of a gum-tree there came a wild shriek of laughter
“Believe me,” she said darkly, “the conceited often
come to a bad end.”
And this is how it happened.
It was a lovely day. Sarah was asleep, and the
children were playing hide-and-seek near by. Susie
lay some distance off—as usual. Suddenly from the
top of a gum-tree there came a wild shriek of laughter.
Sarah woke with a start.


“A kookaburra! Quick, children!” she cried.
“Into the hollow log.”
In a second they were all safe and sound from the big
beak of Ken, the kookaburra.
Except—Susie!
Where was she? Sarah carefully poked her head
out of the log and called:
“Susie!”
I told you Susie was disobedient. She didn’t move!
Suddenly there was another burst of laughter, and it
was nearer this time.
“Susie!” screamed Sarah. “The hollow log!”
Susie, at last alive to her danger, moved quickly
towards the log, but
She suddenly thought how beautiful she must look,
gliding over the leaves in the sunshine. . . . She
stopped, and carefully looked down her back.
There was a flutter of wings, a big beak opened, and
Ken, the kookaburra, had a plump little snake for his
lunch.
And that, my dear, was the end of a conceited snake!
“I’m glad as glad he ate her all up,” said Ann.
She was just going to add that she wished a kooka-
burra would eat Patty up, too, when she saw all the
children gathering round in a circle.
“Something’s going to happen,” said Ann. She
wriggled her way like an eel to the front row.


Susie the Snake
A wonderful thing was happening. A big keeper was
holding a monkey by the hand. He had a cheeky,
mischievous little face, and a funny hat on his head.
As he ran along at the side of the man, the children
clapped and cheered; the more noise they made, the
cheekier and happier the monkey looked.
He was led to a little bicycle, and the next minute
Ann saw the monkey sitting on the seat.
“ He’s not going to ride it, is he ? ” she called to Uncle
Lex, but before he could reply the monkey was riding
it. Round and round the ring he went, while the
children screamed with delight. A little later he got
on a scooter.
With his little hands clasping the handle-bars, and
one foot pushing himself along, he shot round the ring
in fine style, and the harder the children clapped, the
harder he pushed. Ann clutched the little girl next to
her, and every time the monkey passed them, they
almost fell into the ring with excitement.
At last the circus was over, and Ann followed the
monkey back to his cage. Uncle produced a bag of
peanuts from his pocket, and Ann gave the monkey
four peanuts for riding the scooter and three for
riding the bicycle.
The monkey jumped up and down, and then began
to chatter to Uncle Lex.
“What is he saying?” asked Ann.
“He’s asked me to give a message to a friend of his


in the big pit, so I think we’ll go right over now, young
Ann,” said Uncle. “He wants us to hear a story about
a monkey called Marko, because he says it’s funny, and
he thinks it would make you laugh. By the way, Ann,
he told me he likes you. He was watching you out of
the corner of his eye as he flashed past on the scooter.”
Ann gave the monkey two more peanuts.
“I think you’re wonderful,” she said, blushing a
little, and, with a farewell wave, set off with Uncle for
the big pit.
There was great fun there. Big monkeys, little
monkeys, and baby monkeys were leaping, fighting,
scratching, and stuffing themselves with fruit and nuts.
Babies played together, till a mother would suddenly
jump forward and, catching her baby up in her arms,
leap off to a cave to scold and nurse it.
Ann was so excited that instead of throwing a pea-
nut into the pit she threw the whole bag, by mistake,
and carefully put the solitary peanut back in Uncle’s
pocket.
Uncle laughed so much that Ann had to laugh, too,
and it was only when they saw a monkey with a very
black face fighting to get the bag that they remembered
the message.
Uncle stared at that very black face.
“Why, that must be Bingo,” said he.
The monkey must have heard his name, because he
jumped up and down with joy.


Marko the Monkey
Uncle leant over the pit.
“Mike send his regards, and says he’s having a fine
time in the kindergarten, and will you please tell us
about Marko.”
The black-faced monkey sat up at once and chattered
as hard as he could.
Uncle laughed. “ The dirty little rascal,” he said.
The monkey scratched himself with gusto and began
chattering again. This was too much for Ann; she
was simply bursting with curiosity. Bingo was doing
the funniest things. He grabbed the tail of the monkey
nearest him, leapt up and down the rocks, looked as if he
were going to cry one second, and then grinned all over
his funny black face the next.
At last the story was over, and, after playfully cuffing
his little son over the ears, he disappeared.
Uncle was still laughing.
“Wait till you hear this one,” he said.
Settling himself beneath a big, shady tree, he lit a
cigarette and began. . . .
Marko the Monkey
Once upon a time there was a little monkey called
Marko.
lam sorry to say that was not his only name. He
was better known as ‘the Dirty Mark.’
You see, poor Marko was rather greedy. He would


try to stuff too much food into his mouth. Now
Marko lived on wild figs and mangoes. He was very
fond, too, of a kind of berry that was purple and full
of juice, and the state
of his face and nice
grey coat let the whole
world know that it was
his favourite fruit.
His mother used to
look at him, sigh, and
say:
“ Oh, Marko, you are
a dirty boy! Why can’t
you eat like a well-
behaved monkey and
keep yourself clean?”
Marko lived in a
very delightful spot in
the jungle, just at the
bend of a clear, cool river almost overshadowed by the
branches of great fig- and mango-trees, and to this river-
bend every evening came all the forest folk for a drink.
They didn’t all come together. The soft-eyed deer
and other gentle animals came earlier. They alw r ays
liked to be out of the way before the tigers and leopards
padded softly to the water’s edge. Marko and the
other monkeys climbed up the highest branches and
kept very still when the tiger came for his big drink.


Markp the Monkey
In fact the jungle got so still and quiet that anyone
would think that the tiger was the only one living in
it. But hundreds of anxious eyes watched him as he
moved stealthily through the brushwood down to the
river.
And last of all came the elephant.
Now Marko loved the elephant. As he saw him
swinging through the undergrowth, with his great trunk,
pointed tusks, and kind, wise eyes, he would turn his
dirty little face to his friend Matthew, and in a voice
shaking with emotion say:
“There’s no doubt about it, Matthew, old boy, he’s
a king!”
Marko watched him have a drink, and then draw up
water in his big trunk and spurt it over his back and
shoulders.
Marko couldn’t understand that. He thought it was
a terrible waste of time.
He was getting so dirty that the other monkeys were
refusing to play with him, and even Matthew seemed
to be cooling off a little. That made him sulky. He
swung his way home to his mother and sat huddled on
a branch near her, muttering to himself.
His mother looked at him coldly.
“And what’s the matter now?” she said.
“It’s the boys,” he said, wdth a scowl. “They won’t
play with me. I can’t help having a dirty face and
coat. The juice will run out and splash all over me,


and that’s the end of it. I think it’s very unkind of
them to keep away from me and call me ‘the Dirty
Mark.”’
He soon got tired of having no one to play with, so
he decided he would have to do something to make the
jungle animals talk
about him in a differ-
ent way. It was tire-
some just being called
a dirty monkey. He
felt if he could only
do something bold
and daring they would
forget about his dirty
face.
Just as he was thinking about this, the elephant came
for his drink and Marko got his great idea.
He climbed down on to a branch where several
monkeys were sitting and said in a whisper:
“Look here, you chaps, do you know what I’m
going to do? I’m going to pull the elephant’s
tail!”
The monkeys were speechless with horror. Pulling
an elephant’s tail in the jungle is worse than pulling
the coat-tails of a bishop at a Church garden-party.
They all looked at him in silence for a minute and
quickly climbed away and left him to think over his
wickedness. They told their fathers and mothers when


Marko the Monkey
they got home, and soon the news spread right through
the jungle.
The crow met a parrot.
“I say, have you heard the news?”
“ What news ? ”
“ Marko’s going to pull the elephant’s tail.”
Soon after, the jackal
met the hyena and slyly
muttered:
“What is the jungle
coming to ? ”
The hyena slunk a
little nearer.
“What’s up now?”
“Marko’s going to
pull the elephant’s
tail.”
And so Marko’s
threat went from ear to
ear, and from mouth to
mouth, till at last the
bear knew about it. He was furious. Never had he
heard of such lack of respect for the king of the
jungle.
One day he met the tiger quietly strolling along to
the river-bend for a drink.
“ Hullo, old Stripes,” he said. “ Have you heard the
latest? ”


“Ouch,” said the tiger. “I never listen to gossip.
But what is it now?”
He strolled a little farther towards the river, stopped,
and looked back.
“ Well ?” he said gruffly. “ What is it ? ”
“Marko’s going to pull the elephant’s tail.”
The tiger was too shocked and disgusted to speak at
first, but finally he gave a tremendous “ ouch ” and said,
rather grimly, that it would be a good thing if some one
boxed Marko’s ears.
The days passed, but Marko didn’t attempt to go
near the elephant. Soon the animals, especially the
monkeys, began to tease him. Matthew, swinging from
one high branch to another, would look down at him
and say with a grin;
“And when is our big, bold Marko going to do the
wicked deed ? ”
Poor Marko! Whenever he thought of the size of
the elephant he felt all sick and dizzy. The animals
knew he was afraid, so they asked him the same
question every time they saw him.
Even at night he had no peace. He used to dream
that all the jungle folk were collected round him in a
great circle, their eyes fixed on him, and all their voices
raised in a dreadful chorus of;
“Marko, when are you going to pull the elephant’s
tail?”
At last he could stand it no longer. He made up his


Marko the Monkey
mind one afternoon that he would pull the elephant’s
tail, so he went straight to Matthew and told him he
was going to do it.
“And listen, old boy,” he added. “If you don’t tell
anyone, you can watch
me do it.”
Of course in a few
minutes all the mon-
keys knew Marko’s
secret, and all clus-
tered round to see the
fun.
Just before sunset they heard the elephant trampling
through the undergrowth. A little later he came into
sight, his great ears flapping, and his long trunk
swinging from side to side. Never before had he
looked bigger, more royal, or more dignified.
Marko dropped from one branch to another till he
sat on the lowest just above the elephant.
He’s going to do it! He’s going to do it!” the
monkeys whispered one to another. “ Tell his mother
—quick.”
The elephant had a good drink, spurting the water
from his trunk down his great throat. When he had
finished he filled his trunk again to start his daily bath.
At that very moment Marko swung down, held on to
a branch with his hind legs, and, catching the elephant’s
tail, tugged—hard!


+ ■» ■». »»»»♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦ •♦"♦• ♦♦♦♦♦♦
All the monkeys groaned together and put their hands
up to their eyes to shut out the dreadful sight. But
they opened them again just in time to see the elephant
swing his trunk over his shoulder and spurt out a stream
of water like a fire-hose.
Whoosh!
It caught poor Marko in the middle of his chest and
left him swaying about for a few moments like a leaf in
a gale as he gripped the branch with all his strength.
There he hung, gasping and spluttering till he got his
breath, and then he leaped to the very top of the tree.
Shivering and cold, he stayed there till his mother
came along and put him to bed after giving him a good
scolding.
Next morning he was dry and so clean that nobody
knew him. Later on he went down to the river for a
drink, and sat and gazed at the reflection of a handsome
young monkey.
Marko gave a wistful little sigh.
“I wish I looked like that,” he thought.
The monkey looked wistfully back at him. He
wriggled his ears. The handsome monkey wriggled
his.
“Good heavens,” said Marko, “it’s me!” And he
nearly fell into the river with excitement.
Now every evening the cleanest monkey in the jungle
waits to see his great friend, the king of the jungle, pass
on his w 7 ay to the river.


W I' I \
| |V i
—A^Z^u
Sat and gazed at the reflection of a handsome young monkey


Animal Tales for Ann
And the elephant greets him with quite a merry
twinkle in his eyes.
“I knew the elephant would be kind to him,” cried
Ann. “I do love elephants, Uncle Lex. Mummy
told me that when she was a little girl she gave one
a bun. Pd like to give the elephant who washed
Marko’s face a hundred buns.”
“Oh, to be an elephant!” murmured Uncle Lex.
Ann ran back to the pit to have another look at
Bingo, but he was curled up in a little cave having a
sleep.
It was on her way back that she saw the white
monkey. He lived alone in a special cage. He looked
magnificent in his white furry coat. Ann was deeply
impressed.
“ I beg your pardon,” she said to him, “ but are you a
royal monkey? You see,” she added hastily, “Eric is
white, and he’s a royal elephant. I suppose you belong
to a Rajah, too! ”
The white monkey looked haughtily down from his
cage and simply refused to speak. Ann felt a little
hurt.
“We’ve just been having a talk to Mike at the
kindergarten, and Bingo,” she said, trying to make
conversation.
The white monkey merely sniffed at the mention of
Mike and Bingo. This made Ann furious.


Marko the Monkey
“They are much nicer than you, anyway,” she said;
“and Mike has got a hat and a scooter —so there!”
She ran back to Uncle Lex and, sitting on the grass
beside him, muttered something about “nasty, white,
conceited creatures.”
“Good heavens,” said Uncle, “what’s all this
about?”
“It’s about the white monkey,” said Ann; “he just
thinks he’s wonderful.”
Uncle laughed.
“That’s just because he’s on his own, young Ann.
You see, he hasn’t anyone to take him down a peg
sometimes. Besides, perhaps he’s lonely and rather
miserable. Being a royal monkey isn’t much fun, you
know. You might look beautiful and have a cage to
yourself, but you can’t have a good time like jolly old
black-faced Bingo.”
“I’d rather be Mike,” said Ann, “and have a
bicycle and a scooter. Anyway, he doesn’t think he’s
wonderful.”
“No,” said Uncle, “he doesn’t think he is, but he
knows he can do something wonderful, and that is much
more important. Now, as I said to Peter ”
“Peter?” said Ann.
“Look,” said Uncle. He was gazing into the
branches of the big tree, and Ann, after a moment or
two, saw a queer-looking nest.
“Is it a bird?” she asked.


Animal Tales for Ann
“Wait, and you’ll see,” said Uncle.
Something moved up in those branches.
“Why,” cried Ann, in great delight. “It’s a
’possum! ”
“It’s Peter, the ring-tailed ’possum,” said Uncle.
“While you were away we’ve been having a great old
yarn.”
“But why isn’t he in a cage?” asked Ann.
“You don’t have to put ’possums in cages,” said
Uncle. “Why, Peter loves these trees, and wouldn’t
think of leaving. He’s like Bertie, the bandicoot: the
whole Zoo is his home.”
Ann looked up at the branches, but she couldn’t see
a sign of Peter.
“He’s gone to have a sleep,” said Uncle, “so we had
better speak in whispers. You see, Ann, he wakes up
at night. He only got up just now to tell me about
himself. Very decent of the old chap, wasn’t it?”
“He must be a darling,” said Ann, “and tell me
what he said —quick! I’ll sit up close, so that we can
talk as softly as anything.”
Uncle began to whisper into her ear.
“No,” she cried, “not so close as that —it tickles!”
She leant her little head against his arm.
“Now,” she said.


Veter the ’Possum
Peter the ’Possum
Once upon a time there was a dear little ’possum
called Peter. He was just a bundle of soft fur
with two bright eyes and a lovely long tail.
Now Peter wasn’t very clever, and he was always
wishing he could do something wonderful. He was so
shy and timid that when all the bush-animals had
games at night he climbed away out of sight and, from
the branch of a tall gum-tree, watched the others enjoy
themselves.
He was also very afraid of dogs. In the long house
with the green windows, built on the edge of the bush,
there lived a big Alsatian dog called Boof, and to Peter
he seemed enormous. His paws were big and fat,
because he was really only a puppy, and when he went
prancing up the lawn, tossing a bone in the air, poor
Peter shivered with fright.
Well, one quiet night when Peter was sitting on top
of a clothes-line post, watching the bandicoot boys have
a digging competition in the lawn, he heard a great
barking. The bandicoots bolted, and Peter almost
jumped out of his skin.
I told you he was very nervous.
His nervousness worried his mother very much, and
she often used to say to his father:


fi iiH IPL
W mf
Animal Tales for Ann
“Really, my dear, I wish Peter were not so highly
strung. I think he gets it from your side of the family.
Remember your sister Peggy! ”
Peter looked down the post, and at the foot of it, with
his ears standing up with excite-
ment and his big mouth open, was
Boof.
Peter trembled. Boof jumped,
and it seemed to Peter that the
big teeth just missed the end of
his tail.
Peter looked round in terror and
saw a wire connecting his post
with a telephone-pole in the garden
next door. He knew he would
be safe if he could only get to it,
because Boof couldn’t get over
the fence. Before he knew what
he was doing he had begun to
walk along the wire.
Poor little Peter! He managed quite well till he got
to the middle—and then he looked down. The lawn
seemed miles below him, and Peter suddenly felt dizzy.
But just as he thought he was going to fall, he curled
his tail round the wire, and that steadied him. His
little heart was thumping with fright, but he looked
straight ahead, and kept saying:
“I will get to that pole. I will get to that pole.”


*» -__ \ 'v I \
- Ife. \
Peter was sitting on top of a clothes-line post


/fm,, 1 vlM^
> Vi- vH
It’s surprising how it helps if we believe we can do
something.
The wire kept swaying in the breeze, but he went on
and on, and presently he was sitting safely on the pole
next door, while Boof barked on the other side of the
fence, and the echoes answered him.
Suddenly a voice shouted:
“Come to bed, you wicked dog!” Peter gave a sigh
of relief as Boof was locked up for the night.
Peter looked at the post he had left and the thin wire
between, and his heart swelled with pride.
“By gum-nut,” he said, “Tve done something
wonderful. Why, I’m the first ’possum to walk the
tight-rope.”
He whisked his tail to and fro, and his eyes glistened.
His nervousness was all gone now.
“I can walk the tight-rope, I can walk the tight-
rope,” he kept telling the big moon peering above the


Peter the ’Possum
gum-tops. He was so happy when he got home that
his mother looked hard at him as he got ready for bed.
Later she said to his father;
“Something has happened to that boy. He looks
brighter and more grown up —more like my side of the
family.”
A few weeks later there was great excitement in bush-
land. The animals decided to hold their annual sports
meeting on the lawn of the long house with the green
windows, if Boof was safely tied up.
At length the great night arrived. It was clear and
starry, and the moon, like a great golden lamp, shone
over the quiet waters of the bay.
The first event was a lizard race. The competitors
all lined up at the end of the garden path, their tongues
darting in and out as they waited for our old friend
Bertie to give the signal to start.
They were off!
Down the path they waddled amid great excitement.
Larry won by a tail.
Then there was the hole-digging contest for bandi-
coots. That, of course, was won by Bertie.
The next event was a rat race. That was very
thrilling, because the course was right down the garden
and round Boof’s kennel. All sprinted as they passed
the kennel. Reggie won by a nose! He felt, and
looked, a hero.
Then came the great announcement:


“Exhibition by Mr Peter ’Possum!”
Peter’s mother grabbed Father’s arm.
“It’s our Peter!” she cried. “I don’t know what
he’s going to do, but whatever it is,
you must stop him!”
But it was too late. Out came Peter,
walking on his toes and looking like a
champion. While all the bush-animals
watched in breathless excitement, he
climbed the post.
He stepped on to the wire, and, while
his poor mother held her breath, he
started to walk across. This time he
didn’t look down, but went steadily on,
saying to himself:
“I’m the best tight-rope walker in the world.
I’m absolutely the best tight-rope walker in the
world.”
Soon he reached the other pole and slid gracefully to
the ground. Every one cheered and jumped round him,
and Peter was the hero of the night.
Now he does not start with fright when Boof barks,
because he knows he can do something that even an
Alsatian wouldn’t have the courage to do.
“Oh, I do wish I could see him just for a minute,”
said Ann, who had been watching Peter’s little home
all through the story.


Veter the *Possum
“’Fraid not,” said Uncle, shaking his head. “Peter
has a meeting on to-night. He said it was a business-
meeting, but you can never tell with these ’possums.
Anyhow, young Ann, he mustn’t be disturbed, because
he’s got to have some sleep, you know.”
“I’d love to have stroked him,” said Ann a little
wistfully.
Uncle had a triumphant look in his eye.
“Stroke him?” he said. “I know something much
better than that. How would you like to nurse the
softest little baby bear in the Zoo? ”
Ann could scarcely believe her ears.
“Uncle Lex, you don’t mean a really and truly live
one, do you? ”
“ You wait and see,” said Uncle.
They were off down the path leading to the koala’s
home, Ann running to keep up with Uncle’s long
strides, and her face alight with anticipation.
She could see some trees ahead, and, in the fork of
the nearest one, a bundle of grey fur. She was off like
a flash, and when Uncle reached her she had joined a
little band of children, who, with adoring eyes, were
watching that lovable and fascinating little Australian,
the koala bear.
Lazily he stretched out his paw, and pulling a gum-
leaf chewed it, as he gazed back at the children.
Ann turned eagerly to Uncle.
“ May I nurse this one? ” she whispered.


“Wait till you see the others,” said Uncle, leading
her off to the next tree.
“ Oh! ” cried Ann.
Clinging tightly on to its mother’s back was the
sweetest little bear, with a quaintly curved nose, and
two eyes like shiny black buttons.
“Do you like it?” said Uncle.
But Ann was so overcome that she couldn’t speak
for a moment. At last she managed to find her
voice:
“It’s even more beautiful than Annabelle!”
Now Annabelle was Ann’s favourite doll. Battered,
with one arm missing, and straw poking through the
holes in her knees, she had been, in Ann’s eyes, the
loveliest thing in the world—till now!
The keeper, gently taking the baby bear in his hands,
placed him in Ann’s arms. He clung there, while Ann,
hardly daring to breathe, nursed him and patted his
little head.
Then the little girl next to Ann held him for a
glorious minute. But as Mother Bear’s eyes were
looking anxious, the keeper handed her baby back to
her, and off she went to a perch, away from their eager
little hands.
“Wasn’t he a darling?” said Ann, turning to where
Uncle Lex had been standing.
But he wasn’t there. She hastily looked around.
There he was, at the next gum-tree, talking very
78


{^llf
Sf
Veter the > Possum
earnestly to the biggest bear Ann had seen. Uncle
turned to her, and as she ran up to him, he turned to
the bear.
“Binghi,” said Uncle, “I want you to meet young
Ann. She loves animals, and when she grows a little
bigger she is going to under-
stand their language as well
as I do.”
Ann smiled at the bear,
who pulled a gum-leaf from
a branch and held it out to
her.
“See that?” whispered
Uncle. “That means he
likes you and he knows you
are a friend of all the bush-
animals.”
Uncle turned to the bear.
“By the way, Binghi,” he said, clearing his throat a
little. “Do you mind if I tell Ann all about Billjim,
the old father bear, now she’s one of us? ”
The bear nodded his head and, climbing farther up
the tree, began to chew his gum-leaf.
“Thanks, old man,” said Uncle, and, nudging Ann,
he said softly:
“Go on —say good-bye to him! ”
“Good-bye, Mr Binghi,” said Ann very politely.
She didn’t like to address him as Binghi. That, she


felt, would be like calling Granddad ‘Bill,’ which of
course would never do.
Picking a seat from where they could watch the
merry-go-round, Uncle, after pouring a little heap of
peanuts in Ann’s lap, began. . . .
Billjim, the Father Bear
Once upon a time there lived a big father bear
whose name was Billjim. He was much bigger
than most koala bears and very wise. Perhaps it was
because he was getting old that he spent most of the
day resting, with his back against the fork of a branch
in the most sunny spot he could find. The younger
bears always felt he was watching everything they did
and listening to all they had to say.
Every little bear w r as taught to say, “ Good morning,
Father Bear,” and make a nice little bow when they
came near him. After all, he was entitled to respect.
If the old bear left one gum-tree for another the others
followed him. Old Billjim always seemed to be able
to pick the trees with the youngest and most juicy
leaves.
But that was not all. Twice in the memory of the
older bears there had been a great bush-fire. The
flames had leaped from tree to tree with a terrifying
roar and crackle. The smoke had almost blinded the


v - 3' IvA
O *&H o \3>Jd
Billjim, the Father Bear
poor koalas, while the heat had singed their furry coats.
It was always the old father bear who had shown the
others a way out of the danger and had saved their
lives.
Bears are very quiet and lovable creatures, but of
course they, have little tiffs at times. When this
happened, they would ask the old father bear to judge
who was in the wrong. You see, they could not have
got on very well without old Billjim.
Among the many bears who lived in this clump of
gum-trees was one called Kozie. She was a very soft,
pretty-looking young bear, and she knew it. Kozie
liked to be admired. She was always trying to do
something to attract attention. Would you believe it,
she used to try to turn her nose up ! Now all really
well-behaved bears are always taught to turn their noses
down. It wasn’t anything very serious really, but I
just mention this to let you know what sort of a girl
Kozie was.
Kozie got married at last and lived very happily.
She used to talk a little more than her husband could
stand, and sometimes she set his head in a whirl. Then


,r
'•. (», f-* ) f)
}i f i \ jr )
M \7 %.
the baby came. It was a great moment for Kozie
when it learned to crawl out of her pouch and clamber
on her shoulders, and she could show her son off to all
the other bears.
Every mother is proud of her baby, but Kozie
talked so much about her son and the wonderful things
he could do that the other
bears started to edge away.
Really, Kozie’s baby was
no different from quite a
couple of dozen little bears
all born about the same
time.
Old Father Bear heard
Kozie boasting about her
son one day, and told her
it was always a hard job for
him to know one baby bear from another. That hurt
Kozie very much. As the koala bears wouldn t listen
to her, she thought she’d tell Mr ’Possum what a
wonderful baby she had.
The ’possum said he thought her baby was not nearly
as pretty as a ’possum baby, because koala babies
hadn’t got a tail.
“ But they’ve got a head, and a big one at that, said
Kozie, “which is very much more important.
It was the cleverest thing Kozie had ever said.
But Kozie thought a great deal about tails after this,


Billjim, the Father Bear
and began to believe all koala bears would look much
prettier with nice long fluffy tails like a possum’s. She
not only thought it, but she told the other bears so, and
Kozie used to talk so much that at last she persuaded
the other bears that a tail was a very desirable
thing.
“I wish little Kurly had a tail,” she said to her
husband one bright morning.
“I don’t,” he replied quite rudely, as he stuffed
another gum-leaf into his mouth.
One day she turned Kurly upside down and down-
side up and gave a little cry of joy. “ I believe Kurly’s
growing a tail,” she said.
“I wish you’d be more sensible, Kozie,” said her
husband, as he climbed out of hearing.
In a little while every bear round about knew that
little Kurly was growing a tail.
“ Can’t you notice it ? ” she used to say to her friends.
Have a good look.” One after another they picked
up poor little Kurly and turned him upside down
and, just to please Kozie, said they believed Kurly was
growing a tail.
Poor little Kurly didn’t like being stood on his head
so often. It made him feel dizzy and sick. So he
asked his mother why they did it.
“My dear, you ought to be a very proud little
bear,” she replied. “You’re growing a tail.”
But I don t want to grow a tail,” he whimpered.
83


c ' *
V -rf
fc‘*%
j t v
'PTto
kw
\u>v ... JS>M.
“I’ll look just like a silly ’possum if I do, and every one
will want to pull it.”
“ You’ll be a very famous koala bear if you grow a tail,
my dear little son. Perhaps you’ll get a jubilee medal
for it. Some people have got it for less than that.”
But poor little Kurly cried all
night, and spent most of his time
afterwards feeling if the tail was
really growing. He was very un-
happy indeed.
Kozie became so busy talking
about her son’s tail that she was
glad to get some one to look after
Kurly. A very nice young bear
named Kutie, who had no baby
of her own, often begged Kozie
to let her mind Kurly. Sometimes Kutie would look
after three little bears at once, and she felt very proud
as she climbed up a tall branch with all of them
clinging to her back.
Some of the bears now really began to think Kurly
was growing a tail. The matter became so serious
that they made up their minds to ask old Billjim if he
had ever known a koala bear with a tail.
“I remember many things,” old Billjim said. “I
remember when the whale came into the lagoon; of
course it might have been a porpoise, but it was a very
long time ago. I remember seeing a white swan fly


BiUjim, the Father Bear
♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ » » ♦ ♦
into the lagoon with a flock of black ones; of course it
might have been an albatross, but I do know it was a
very long time ago. But I cannot remember, very
old as I am, ever seeing a koala bear with a tail.”
“That makes my Kurly so wonderful,” said Kozie.
“He’s getting a tail. I know him however far away he
is from me by the little lump where his tail is growing.
There’s no other little bear just like my Kurly.”
“Kozie,” said old BiUjim, with a smile, “there’s
only one bear more wonderful than Kurly, and that’s
you.”
Kozie spent the rest of the afternoon telling every one
that old BiUjim was getting very old and silly. “He
sleeps most of the day, and that’s a bad sign.” She
repeated this to Kutie when she brought Kurly back,
and Kutie felt so angry that she told the old father bear
what Kozie had said.
Old BiUjim put one paw on Kutie’s shoulder and
whispered something in her ear.
“I’ll do it,” said Kutie, with a little laugh.
“Remember the time. To-morrow just as the sun
is straight over this tree. Make their little faces as
black as you can. We’ll all be waiting.”
Just before midday the old father bear summoned
all the koalas. They hurried along and swarmed about
him. At first they were a bit frightened. They
thought old BiUjim had smelt another bush-fire. He
had a wonderful nose for smelling all kinds of danger.


Kozie and her husband were there, too. Old Billjim
looked about him.
“Is every one here, big and little?” he inquired.
“Every one,” said a big bear, “but Kutie and three
little bears. She went away with them some time
ago.”
Just then they saw Kutie climbing up the next tree
with three little bears clinging to her back. At least,
the little ones looked like bears, only their little faces
were as black as they could be.
“What have you been doing to those baby bears?”
all the mother bears shouted together.
“They’ve been poking about in the burnt log,” said
Kutie.
“A nice sort of nurse you are,” said Kozie, who was
very angry. “You’ll never take my Kurly out for a
walk again—never, never, never!”
“Take them off your back,” said old Billjim, “and
stand them in a row on that branch, Kutie.”
Kutie did as she was told.
“Now,” said old Billjim to Kozie, “which one of
those bears is Kurly? You ought to know—you’ve
told us you can pick him out quite easily because he is
growing a tail. Now, Kozie, which one of those little
bears belongs to you?”
And you’d hardly believe it, but poor Kozie picked
the wrong one.
How those bears laughed at poor Kozie! She never


Billjim y the Father Bear
felt more foolish in her life. As for old Billjim, all
the bears thought that even if he were getting old he
was still very, very clever.
It took Kozie a long time to rub the black dust and
grime off Kurly’s face, but she felt so happy when he
looked a real bear again—a nice clean koala bear—that
she gave him a big hug.
She doesn’t talk about Kurly’s tail now, and not once
since has she turned the poor little chap upside down.
Kurly thinks the world is becoming quite a pleasant
place to live in now that he doesn’t spend so much time
on his head, and when he greets old Billjim he gives
him two bows. He thinks the old father bear is very
good and very wise.
“Did that big bear really know Billjim?” asked
Ann.
“ Why, yes,” said Uncle. “ Binghi is the son of Bill-
jim! He’s very proud of his father, young Ann. That’s
why he told me all about the old chap.”
“ If I could only take a baby bear home,” sighed Ann,
“ I’d look after it so carefully, Uncle Lex.”
Uncle pulled her to her feet.
“ What about a ride on the merry-go-round instead ? ”
he suggested.
Careering round on their galloping steeds, Uncle
looked across the blue waters of the harbour and saw
the sun was sinking behind the hill. The breeze was


growing a little chilly. He lifted Ann down and helped
her into her little blue coat.
“ We are not going home, are we? ” she said, looking
crestfallen.
“Yes, we must go now,” said Uncle. “Can’t you
hear the frogs calling from the ponds? They are
trying to tell the people
that the animals want
to be alone.”
He stopped suddenly.
“Why, Ann, that’s
Freddy calling! I would
know his voice any-
where. Can you hear
that very deep croak?”
They were walking
towards the fishpond,
and Ann heard it quite
clearly. In a voice
louder and deeper than the others, Freddy warned
little boys and girls and their mothers and fathers that
it was time to go home.
Do you know him, too? ” asked Ann, marvelling a
little at this wonderful uncle of hers.
I ve known him a long time,” said Uncle carelessly.
As a matter of fact I knew him before he came to live
at the Zoo.”
His eyes twinkled.


Freddy the Frog
“He used to be a fine singer,” he said.
Ann held his hand encouragingly.
“Go on, darling Uncle Lex,” she pleaded.
“Into Maria first,” he commanded, swinging her
into her seat and climbing in next to her.
Ann snuggled up close.
“ Now,” she said.
“Well,” said Uncle.
Freddy the Frog
Once upon a time, in a little stream running
through a meadow full of wild flowers, there
lived a frog called Freddy.
Now Freddy wasn’t an ordinary frog. He was a frog
with a Voice, and that made him feel very superior to
all his brothers, sisters, and relations. In the warm
summer twilight Freddy would swim up and down the
stream and say to his friends:
“I say, you fellows, what about a sing-song?”
Soon a little crowd of frogs would gather round him,
and then the fun would begin.
First you would hear young Freda (she was a high
soprano):
“Glug!”
Then Frankie (he was a baritone)
“Glug!”


Then Freddy (he was a basso):
“GLUG!”
Ah, but what a ‘glug’ was Freddy’s! Deep, rich,
and powerful, it echoed all round the country-side, and
even the birds, sitting in
the willows, stopped to
listen and said admir-
ingly:
“ What a voice! What
a note! ”
Of course all this was
very fine, but it really
wasn’t good for Freddy.
Instead of singing a song
and letting some one else
sing, too, he wanted to
sing all the time. Can you wonder that Freda began
to get very annoyed with him ?
One evening, as dusk was falling and she was sitting
on the bank admiring the little gold bachelor’s buttons,
Freddy hopped up beside her.
“ Hullo, old girl,” he said; “what about trying a duet
with me? I’ll try to sing softly so that I won’t drown
your little voice.”
Freda was furious.
“I’m sorry,” she said, her nose in the air, “but I’m
singing all my duets with Frankie.”
“That’s all right, old girl,” said Freddy. “I know


Freddy the Frog
I sound best on my own, but I just thought I’d give
you a little encouragement.”
Now what would you do with a frog like that?
Freda felt she could stand no more, and without a
word she dived into the stream. A little later, Frankie,
who tried to look as if he were just casually passing
Freda’s home, heard her voice shrill with anger
saying:
“And, Mother, what do you think he said then, the
big conceited creature ? ”
Frankie fled and decided to call another night.
One afternoon Freddy, who had been trying to sing
louder and louder every day, opened his mouth to give
the biggest ‘glug’ of his career.
Nothing happened.
He tried again. Still nothing happened. He
tried a third time, and all he produced was a hoarse
whisper.
Freddy clutched his throat; his eyes popped with
horror.


“My voice,” he wailed to his mother. “My voice!
Call a doctor, quick!”
His mother rushed off and returned with Dr Francis
Frog, who wore horn-rimmed glasses and a grave look
and carried a little black bag.
“Open your mouth, sir,” said Dr Francis.
Freddy opened his mouth. He opened it wide
enough for the doctor to put his head into it.
Dr Francis made a clicking sound and solemnly
shook his head three times.
“What is it, Doctor?” said Freddy, pale with
anxiety.
“Bear up, Freddy,” said the doctor. “It’s nothing
very serious. You’ve strained your vocal chords. No
singing for a week, and you must drink a glass of cold
water three times a day with the juice of dandelion
in it.”
“No singing for a week!” screamed Freddy. “But
what about my public?”
Dr Frog clicked again, picked up his little black bag,
and hopped away through the rushes, still shaking his
head. He wanted to smack Freddy.
“Come along, my boy,” said Freddy’s mother.
“You must be brave.”
The next morning she gave Freddy his first glass of
dandelion mixture and made him sit in the sun on the
bank of the stream.
It was a lovely summer’s day. The dragon-flies


Freddy the Frog
darted up and down, their wings glistening in the sun-
shine, but Freddy didn’t even look at them. All he
could think of was his voice.
Suddenly he had a great idea.
“Now,” thought Freddy, “if it takes three glasses of
mixture a day for a week to make me well, twenty-
one glasses swallow r ed in one day will enable me to
sing to-morrow.” [You see, Freddy was very good at
sums.]
Freddy started at once on his get-well-quick cure.
After six glasses he began to feel rather queer. After
twelve glasses he began to feel queerer still, and found
he was getting bigger and more bloated every minute.
After eighteen glasses he discovered he couldn’t see his
feet.
Drinking the last three glasses was a tremendous
effort, and he rolled over on his back looking like a little
football. How his poor stomach ached!
Just then a little girl came running down the path at
the side of the stream. It was Marcia, from the pretty
cottage near by. She often came that way to pick
buttercups for her mother after school.
Freddy tried to hop into the stream. He couldn’t
move. He struggled and wriggled, but he couldn’t
roll over on to his feet. He could hear Marcia coming
nearer and nearer, and he felt faint with fear.
Suddenly she saw him, gave a little gasp of surprise,
and picked him up. Freddy rolled his eyes with


terror. Marcia squeezed. Freddy’s mouth opened,
and out spurted a thin stream of water.
Marcia screamed, dropped him with a plomp , and
ran, as fast as her legs could carry her, back to her
mother.
Poor Freddy just lay on the bank with the water still
oozing out of the corners of his mouth. After a while
he was able to see his legs again. A little later he
managed to sit up. It took him some time to hop
slowly towards the stream and hide in the rushes.
When he felt stronger he made his way home to his
mother and told her of his terrible experience. She
scolded him at first, but Freddy promised he would
always do as he was told by his mother and the doctor,
and very soon he got his voice back.
Now whenever he feels he would like to sing louder
than anyone else, he remembers his vocal chords and
is quite content just to join in the chorus.
Ann sat as quiet as a mouse, trying to hear the last
note of Freddy’s song. The lengthening shadows and
a cool wand from the sea made her shiver a little, so
Uncle started up Maria, and with a snort and a bang
they were off!
Dowtl the road they sped, and in a few minutes
Maria was parked outside Ann’s gate. She slipped
her arms tightly round Uncle’s neck as he lifted her
out.


ft / \
Freddy the Frog
+ »»»»»»♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦***
“Thank you so much, darling Uncle Lex,” she said.
“When I grow up I want to be a man exactly like
you! ”
Bimbo, her cat, pretending to be a fierce black
panther, leapt out from behind the geranium bush as
she ran excitedly up the garden path.
Ann caught him up in her arms. “Oh, Bimbo!”
she cried. “I’ve got the most wonderful things to tell
you! ”
She hugged him and stroked his soft black fur, and
when he began to purr she was sure she heard him say,
“Promise you will tell me after tea!”
Ann then knew that, if Bimbo could talk to her now,
by next birthday she might be able to understand the
Zoo elephant!






- .y >


(s( j^l
vs>\. Jy
A 823
GUR
3 1508 01755377 2


