

ANNA JANE VARDILL NIVEN
THE AUTHORESS OF “CHRISTOBELL,” THE
SEQUEL TO COLERIDGE’S “CHRISTABEL.”
WITH A BIBLIOGRAPHY.
BY
WILLIAM E. A. AXON, LL.D., F.R.S.L.
WITH AN ADDITIONAL NOTE
ON
"CHRISTABEL”
BY
ERNEST HARTLEY COLERIDGE, HON. F.R.S.L.
Reprinted from the Transactions of the Royal Society of Literature.
London
PRINTED BY ADLARD AND SON,
BARTHOLOMEW CLOSE, E.C.
1908.




ANNA JANE VARDILL NIVEN, THE
AUTHORESS OP “GHRISTOBELL,” THE
SEQUEL TO COLERIDGE’S “CHRIS-
TABEL.” WITH A BIBLIOGRAPHY.
BY WILLIAM E. A. AXON, LL.D., E.R.S.L.
WITH AN ADDITIONAL NOTE ON
“ CHRISTABEL.”
BY ERNEST HARTLEY COLERIDGE, HON. E.R.S.L.
-Lee publication, under the auspices of the Royal
Society of Literature, of a facsimile of the MS of
Coleridge s “ Christabel,” with critical apparatus by
Mr. Ernest Hartley Coleridge, gives a new interest
to a literary problem which, if not of first-rate
impoi tance, has certainly excited some curiosity for
many years that is the authorship of “ Christobell,”
that sequel to Christabel which appeared in print
in the year before Coleridge’s poem was published.
In 1815 there appeared in the ‘European
Magazine for April a poem entitled “ Christobell,
a (lothic Tale, which the author states was ec written
as a sequel to a beautiful legend of a fair lady and
her father, deceived by a witch in the guise of a
noble knight’s daughter.”
-This is an accurate description of Coleridge’s
1


“ Christabel,” which was not published until 1816
although written at the close of the eighteenth
century. Strange to say the spelling adopted in
the title of the sequel is one that Coleridge occasion-
ally employed. Although not printed there were
manuscript copies of “ Christabel ” in circulation
among a limited circle, and one of these must have
been seen by the contributor to the £ European
Magazine,’ who uses “ V.” as a signature.
On examining this new edition of ££ Christabel,”
for which Mr. E. H. Coleridge and the Royal Society
of Literature deserve the high praise due to an
excellent idea worthily executed, it occurred to me
that it would be worth while to make an effort to
identify the writer of “ Christobell” in the £ European
Magazine.’ The thought came all the more readily
that in former years I had been somewhat familiar
with that periodical, and had carefully examined
many of the volumes for quite other purposes of
research. The results of my inquiry were given
briefly in the ‘ Bookman,’ August, 1907, and are
now more fully stated.
I found that V. was a constant writer of verse and
prose for the £ European Magazine.’ The first con-
tributor under that signature appeared in May, 1814
(p. 482); the last in April, 1822 (p. 325). The dis-
continuance of V.’s aid may, perhaps, be connected
with the fact that under the new proprietors there
had been a somewhat ungenerous reference to the
Asperne family, to wdiom the magazine had previously
belonged. (See the article C£ The Editor’s Converza-
tione,” behind the title of the number for April, 1822,
and also p. 874.) That Y. was a woman may be


concluded from the verses which appear in April,
1821 (p. 533), “The Editor’s Compliments of the
Season to his Well-beloved Public, Readers, Con-
tributors, and Correspondents,” in which he says:
“Yes, —we’ll uncloak them all!—Y., R., and D.,
Delta, and T., and S, W. X. Izzard.
For when their goodly articles ye see,
And hang delighted o’er them, it is hard
The writers should, like money lenders, he
Concealed behind so strange and thick a vizard.
That e’en to guess them you are quite unable—
’Tis sitting at the play without a play-bill.”
After some reference to himself the editor pro-
ceeds :
“ What, Yariella, can we wish to thee ?
For thou possessest all that’s dear unto man;
Wit, talents, erudition, though they he
Not always so delightful in a woman ;
Yet those who read thy tales and poems, see
A soaring mind, and genius most uncommon.
Still, still soar on! In prose and verse still
charm us,
v For whilst thou leadst the van, there’s nought
can harm us.”
The signature “ Yariella ” does not appear in the
c European Magazine,’ but the description given of
her work applies to the articles signed Y., though a
modern reader might, perhaps, be less enthusiastic
in his praise.
Amongst the contributions to which Y.’s signature
is attached is one that appears in December, 1817,
which is headed “Anacreontic, by the late Rev.
Dr, Vardill” (p. 550). This suggests a relationship
between Y. and the author of the “Anacreontic.”


The Rev. John Yardill, D.D., was a graduate of
King’s College, New York, now Columbia Uni-
versity, and was a tutor in that institution. In
1774 he embarked for England for the purpose of
taking Holy Orders; was created M.A. of Oxford
June 28th of that year, in which he was also elected
assistant rector of Trinity Church, New York. He
declined the office and did not return to America.
He was a Loyalist, and for a time was employed by
the British Government. In 1785 he was in Ireland.
He was the author of some poetical satires on the
Whigs, and Trumbull, in his ‘ McFingul,’ says :
“ In Yardill that poetic zealot,
I view a lawn bedizen’d prelate :
While mitres fall, as is their duty,
On heads of Chandler and Auchmuty.”
He died in England in 1811, at the age of fifty-
nine, Rector of Skirbeck and Fishtoft, Lincolnshire.*
Another poem of his, “The Spirit of Toussaint;
a Fragment,” appeared in the ‘ European Magazine,’
for July, 1814 (p. 46). An inscription for a memorial
tablet appears in February, 1811 (p. 134), from the
pen of his daughter, and the editor, in eulogising
her beauty and literary attainments, mentions that
“ several instances ” of her talents have appeared in
the magazine.
Anna Jane Yardill was the authoress of two volumes
of verse, one anonymous and the other bearing her
name on the title-page. The first in point of time
* ‘ Biographical Sketches of Loyalists of the American Revolution,’
by Lorenzo Sabine (Boston, 1864), vol. ii, p. 381; Foster’s ‘ Alumnae
Oxoniensis,’ iv, 1464.






was: 4 Poems and Translations from the Minor
Greek Poets and Others : Written chibfly between
the ages of ten and sixteen, by a Lady. Dedi-
cated by Permission of Her Royal Highness, the
Princess Charlotte of Wales.’ (London ; Asperne,
1809.) This is reviewed in the 4 European ’ for
February (p. 142). Another enloginm appeared in
the 4 Poetical Register’ for 1808-9 (p. 612) which
was edited by R. A. Davenport. The copper-plate
of the engraved title-page designed by the authoress
is still in existence, and has been lent for the illus-
tration of this paper by Mr. J. Arthur Slingsby.
The authoress states that, 44 a most indulgent father,
in the retirement permitted by his station in the
church, found amusement in familiarising his only
child with the poets of antiquity.” She passed the
early part of her life in the village of Gatehouse
of Fleet, Galloway, Scotland, 44 noted for the ex-
tensive cotton works of a near relation.” The
poets from whom she translates are Anacreon, who
occupies the greater part of her attention, Sappho,
Alcaeus, Theocritus, and Horace. An 44 Address
to the Patrons of the Refuge for the Destitute,”
written by her for the Anniversary Dinner, January
26th, 1809, is given in the January 'Magazine’
(p. 78; cf. p. 141). An enlarged edition of the
4 Poems ’ appeared in the same year, and is noticed
in the August number (p. 126). A third edition
appeared in 1816. The little volume includes an
44 Address to the Ancient and Honourable Society of
Freemasons, at the Anniversary Meeting for the
Benefit of their Charity School, April 14th, 1809 ”;
and three hymns, namely, 44 Occasional Hymn for


a Benevolent Society” (“ Almighty Love call’d into
birth ”), pA 178; second occasional hymn, sung
by the Freemasons’ orphans (“ When faint and
comfortless we strayed”), p. 179; third occa-
sional hymn (“ Sublimer than the choral song ”),
p. 18.
As a fair specimen of these earlier verses we may
quote:
An Hungaeian Gipsy’s Song.
1.
“ From Preshurg’s plain, from Buda’s tow’rs.
From old Carpathia’s mountains drear,
To bounteous halls and fruitful how’rs
We chartered libertines repair.*
Here by the Danube’s silent wave,
Or ’mid the shades of Szelitz cave.
Our ample feast we share :
And round the bowl with fearless glee,
Rejoice in love and liberty.
2.
“ And oft the Yaivod’s fur-clad dame
Soft-smiling thro’ her azure veil,
In whispers tells some cherished name,
And fondly hears our mystic tale:
While where the honied chesnut dwells,
Or where the melting melon swells
In Temeswara’s dale,
We fill the bowl with fearless glee,
And sing of love and liberty.
* Gipsies, so numerous in Europe for about 400 years, are now
scarcely seen except in Hungary. From Saxony and the Alpine
regions they have been expelled by special edicts. (‘ Grellman’s
Dissertation on the Gipsies.’)


3.
“ And when o’er Toma’s * saffron fields
Our chiefs the flying elks pursue,
The prize a richer banquet yields
Than Ban or Pandour t ever knew;
Then where the herb of wisdom f glows,
Or where to Kazan nectar flows,
We bid our cares adieu;
While round the bowl with fearless glee
We sing of love and liberty.
4.
“ Now though in Alpine wood no more
Our lawless revelry we hide ;
Tho’ chas’d from Elba’s envied shore
By Saxon wealth and Saxon pride,
Still o’er this gem-fraught mountain’s head,
Or to yon river’s golden bed §
Our weary feet we guide ;
Then round the bowl with fearless glee,
We sing of love and liberty ! ”
Her second work was : “ The Pleasures of Human
Life ” (London, 1812). At p. 86 is a reference to
her father, and in a note (p. 99) she says : “ These
and the subsequent lines are a feeble tribute to the
memory of a most revered and lamented father,
whose death is still recent. His keen wit and fluent
* A fertile district in Upper or Northern Hungary at the feet
of the Carpathian hills, and not far from the celebrated cave of
Szelitz, and the vineyards of Tokay,
f Titles of German nobility.
+ Tobacco which abounds there.
§ Gold mines and precious stones are frequent among the
Carpathian mountains.


eloquence were enriched by the mildest urbanity,
and his profound scholastic knowledge by the most
endearing social virtues. His presence was the light
of his domestic circle, and gave joy to every society
he entered. Ever devoting his. rare talents to the
purest philanthropy, he beautified religion by his
example.” Miss Vardill does not refer to her
father’s interest in the drama, but a play entitled
“ The Unknown ” was performed at the Surrey
Theatre in 1819, and was written by Dr. Vardill.*
There is a long and eulogistic notice of the
“ Pleasures of Human Life ” in the c European ’ for
April, 1812, and in the course of it her author-
ship of e Poems and Translations ’ is revealed (p.
275).
The £ European Magazine ’ for November, 1813,
contains an “ Epitaph designed for William Frank-
lin, Esq., late Governor of New Jersey, Ob. Nov.
16, aged 82.” This is signed A. J. V. So are the
“ Elegiac Verses on the Death of Miss Charlotte
Demys ” who died at the age of 15, in the number
for October, 1815 (p. 357). The third edition of
c Poems and Translations,’ does not include any of
V.’s contributions, but neither does it include the
pieces signed A. J. V. The probable reason is the
desire to preserve the character of the first volume
as a collection of juvenilia. The identity of V. and
Anna Jane Vardill is pretty clearly indicated in a
poem in the ‘ European ’ for September, 1819 (vol.
Ixxiv, p. 261).
* R. Inglis, in ‘Notes and Queries,’ second series, ii, 437.


To Hee who Deseeves it.
Addressed and inscribed to Miss F******
“ No envy mingles with my praise.
Though could my heart repine
At any Poet’s happier lays.
It would, —it must at thine ! ”
Cowper.
“ Round the cloud-kissing margin of Helicon’s spring,
To the lute of Apollo the Graces were dancing;
But the Muses had quarrell’d, and now to their King,
To beg his decision, their steps were advancing,
Yet deem not, that their’s was that contest of hate,
Which sours with its passions all mortal debate; —
No! —Harmony e’en from their discord arose.
And when friends thus dispute, they can never be foes;
—But now for the cause —To a daughter of earth,
Whom Science, and Poetry, blest at her birth,
The sisters had given so much of their art,
And so much with their protegee’s skill were delighted;
That, while each wish’d to rule unrestrain’d in her heart.
They all were averse to sway o’er it united.
“ Cried Thalia, — f She’s mine ! —every trace of her pen
Has shewn it already,—will prove it again—
Lampidosa’s wild Legends, all genius, are glowing
With wit, like our Helicon’s rill, ever flowing;
Not dismal, and sad, like a Melo-drama, darkling!
But lively and bright, with my gaiety sparkling—
While Humanity’s pleasures proclaim in each line,
That their Authoress must be a pupil of mine ! ’
“ With an air somewhat proud, —like a Goddess when
vext—
Stern Melpomene spoke, and her claim advanced next,
To her sister she said, — f Flirting trifler ! away,—
Shall the mind which I’ve formed for all hearts to admire,


Yield its powers to tlie fancies of thy fickle sway,
And be ruled by the whims of the laughing Thalia ?
Forbid it, those feelings inspired by her lay,
When the Rosebud of Britain had faded away;
When the Bride’s Dirge of Death round the Green Island
floated,
And its voice o’er the Silver Sea woe had denoted !
Like my Byron she thrills every nerve of the soul,
Terror, pity, and love, own her magic control,
And spell-bound by me, with dark Tragedy’s zone,
The strains of fair Anna, are strains of my own ! ’
♦
“ ’Twould be useless to tell, all the con’s and the pro’s
And the pleadings—which long before Phoebus arose,
How Clio, Euterpe, Calliope, join’d
To establish their claims to the realms of her mind.
Till at length, said Apollo, ‘Let jarring no more
Be heard from those lips, which all music should be ;
But soften your glances, and peace to restore,
Attend my decision, and mark my decree.
To none but to me can your Anna belong—
Who dare claim without rival, this votary of song ?
“ ‘When e’en by yourselves it is own’d that Earth’s daughter
Excels all alike, in the arts ye have taught her;
No more then betwixt ye, her talents shall lay,
She must be your equal —the Muse of her day ;
And, trust me, her genius her own will advance,
For all gifts shall unite, in—The Muse of Romance ! ’ ”
J. T.
Thursday, September, 24th, 1818.
In this, whilst several of V.’s contributions are
identified, her Christian name, Anna, is also revealed.
Apart from “ Christobell,” there is one of Miss


Vardill’s contributions to the 4 European Magazine ’
that demands special notice. An anonymous poem,
sometimes called “ Lines to a Skeleton,” sometimes
44 Lines to a Skull,” has had a wide popularity and
has been included in various anthologies. Finding
it in 44 Weeds and Wild Flowers, gathered by
William Wrightson ” (York; J. Hodgson, 1868), I
attributed the verses to him in an article which
appeared in 4 Notes and Queries ’ (seventh series,
xii, 481).
I find it, however, with the signature of Y. in the
4 European ’ for November, 1816. It will be worth
while to give this impressive poem as it came from
the author’s pen, for the text is sometimes found
modified, and not always for the better.
A Fragment round in a Skeleton Case.
“ Behold this ruin ! ’twas a skull,
Once of etherial spirit full:
This narrow cell was Life’s retreat;
This space was Thought’s mysterious seat.
What beauteous pictures fill’d that spot!
What dreams of pleasure long forgot!
Nor Love, nor Joy, nor Hope, nor Fear,
Has left one trace, one record here !
“ Beneath this mould’ring canopy
Once shone the bright and busy eye;
But start not at the dismal void! —
If Social Love that eye employed;
If with no lawless fire it gleam’d,
But through the dew of kindness beam’d; —
That eye shall be for ever bright,
When stars and suns have lost their light.


“ Here in this silent cavern hung
The ready, swift, and tuneful tongue :
If Falsehood’s honey it disdain’d,
And when it could not praise was chain’d;—
If bold in Virtue’s cause it spoke,
Yet gentle Concord never broke;
That tuneful tongue shall plead for Thee
When Death unveils Eternity.
“ Say, did these fingers delve the mine ?
Or with its envied rabies shine ?
To hew the rock, or wear the gem,
Can nothing now avail to them;
And if the page of truth they sought,
And comfort to the mourner brought,
These hands a richer meed shall claim
Than all that waits on wealth or fame.
“ Avails it whether bare or shod,
These feet the path of duty trod
If from the bower of joy they fled
To soothe Affliction’s humble bed;
If Grandeur’s guilty bribe they spurn’d,
And home to Virtue’s lap return’d; —
These feet with angel’s wings shall vie,
And tread the palace of the sky ! ”
Mr. E. H. Coleridge bad been inclined to attribute
“ Christobell ” to Janies Hogg, but on these notes
being submitted to him he has adopted the theory
they are intended to support and at once supplied
an important piece of additional evidence. How
came Y. to be familiar with Coleridge’s work ? The
answer is to be found in the ‘ Diary ’ of Henry
Crabb Hobinson, who records :
“ December 19th, 1814. Took tea with the Flaxman’s
and read to them and Miss Vardel [so he spells the name


here, though elsewhere more correctly, Yardill] Cole-
ridge’s f Christobell ’ with which they were all delighted,
Flaxman more than I expected.” ( f Diary ’i, 465.)
I have been obliged to give these facts in some
detail in order to show the process of identification.
To me they appeared conclusive, and it was a great
gratification to find that they convinced Mr. E .H.
Coleridge, to whom one naturally looks for light and
leading in Coleridgean problems.
Some biographical details have incidentally been
given in this statement of the data which convinced
me that Miss Yardill was the writer of “ Christobell.”
It is more than half a century since she died, but I
have been able to communicate with representatives
and friends of the family and in this way to add some
additional facts.* That she wrote “ Christobell ”
was known to her relations.
The authoress of “ Christobell ” was born Novem-
ber 19th, 1781, at 81, Norton Street, Portland
Road, London. She began to write at a very
early age. Her first volume contained poems
written between ten and sixteen. Two letters
from Lord Moira have been preserved which relate
to the negotiations about the dedication of the book
to that hapless princess whose untimely death was
so greatly mourned.
* I have to express my warm thanks to Mr. John P. Allan, writer,
Glasgow, Mr. Charles Birtwhistle, J.P., Stroud, Mr. Adam Brown,
writer, Kirkcudbright, Mrs. Anna Jane Niven Candlish, Leicester,
Mr. Arthur H. Kaberry, Scarborough, and Mr. J. Arthur Slingsby,
J.P., Skipton, to whom I am specially indebted for important and
precise data.


December 10th, 1808.
My Dear Sir, —I am happy to tell you that Princess
Charlotte accepts with great pleasure the dedication of
Miss Yardill’s Poems, and there is no necessity for Miss
Yardill’s name appearing on the title-page or subjoined to
the dedication if her delicacy would wish it otherwise.
Your very obedient servant,
W. Fusteen, Esq. Moira.
St. James’ Place,
February 11th, 1809.
Madam, —My own acknowledgments for the book with
which you honoured me appeared a poor return for your
flattering compliments, and they seemed still more inade-
quate when measured with the gratification which I had in
the perusal of your Poems. I therefore wished to render
them less inacceptable by transmitting at the same time
those thanks which I knew the Prince of Wales would
commission me to offer as soon as he should have been able
to read the work. It is with peculiar satisfaction that I
now obey his commands in expressing to you, madam, the
Prince’s sense of your polite attention as well as his
assurance of the pleasure he found in what he has been
studying. Insignificant as my professions of obligation
must be after those of His Eoyal Highness, allow me still
to add them, and believe, madam, that I have the honour
to remain
Your very obedient and humble servant,
Miss Yardill. Moira.
She was a most constant contributor to the c Euro-
pean Magazine ’ whilst it was the property of the
Asperne family. The editor appreciated her work :
“The Contributions of Y.,” he says, “are always
acceptable” (vol. Ixvii, 377); and again: “We can
assure our correspondent Henricus —N.O.P.—M.A.L.


T.P.A.—L. of Bath and several other inquirers that
the beautiful poetical tales signed V. are original
and not extracted from the works of either Scott,
Southey or Lord Byron ” (vol. xvii, 473). She
ceased to write for it soon after it changed hands.
It must be observed, however, that the Aspernes
relinquished the proprietorship at a period when
another and absorbing interest was entering into
her life. After her marriage to Mr. James Niven,
of Grlenarm, on May 17th, 1822, at the New Church,
Marylebone, she ceased, if not to write, at all events
to publish. We catch glimpses of her before and
after marriage in Crabb Robinson’s ‘Diary.’ We
read : /
“ March Ist, 1820. Took tea at Flaxman’s. I had not
seen him since his loss. There was an unusual tenderness
in his manner. He insisted on making me a present of
several hooks, Dante’s ‘ Penitential Psalms ’ and [a blank
in the Diary], both in Italian, and ‘Erasmus’s Dialogues,’
as if he thought he might he suddenly taken away and
wished me to have some memorial of him.
“The visit, on the whole, was a comfortable one. I then
sat an hour with Miss Yardill, who related an interesting
anecdote of Madame de Stael. A country girl, the
daughter of a clergyman, had accidentally met with an
English translation of ‘ Delphine ’ and ‘ Corinne,’ which
so powerfully affected her in her secluded life as quite to
turn her brain. And hearing that Madame de Stael was
in London she wrote to her, offering to become her
attendant or amanuensis. Madame de Stael’s secretary, in
a formal answer, declined the proposal. But her admirer
was so intent on being in her service in some way that she
came up to London and stayed a few days with a friend,
who took her to the great novelist, and speaking in French,
gave a hint of the young girl’s mind. Madame de Stael,


with great promptitude and kindness, administered the
only remedy that was likely to be effectual. The girl
almost threw herself at her feet, and earnestly begged to
be received by her. The Baroness very kindly, but
decidedly, remonstrated with her on the folly of her desire.
‘You may think/ she said, ‘it is an enviable lot to travel
over Europe and see all that is most beautiful and distin-
guished in the world, but the joys of home are more solid,
domestic life affords more permanent happiness than any
that fame can give. You have a father —I have none; you
have a home—l was led to travel because I was driven from
mine. Be content with your lot; if you knew mine you
would not desire it/ With such admonitions she dismissed
the petitioner. The cure was complete. The young woman
returned to her father, became more steadily industrious,
and without even speaking of her adventure with Madame
de Stael, silently profited by it. She is now living a life of
great respectability, and her friends consider that her cure
was wrought by the only hand by which it could have been
effected.”
In 1826 he writes :
“ During this year I was made executor to a Mrs.
Yardill, a character. She was the widow of a clergy-
man, an American loyalist, a friend of old General
Franklyn. The will had this singular devise in it, that
Mrs. Yardill left the residue of her estate, real and personal,
to accumulate till her daughter, Mrs. Niven, was fifty-two
years of age. I mention this will, however, to refer to one
of the most remarkable and interesting law cases which our
courts of law have witnessed since the union of England
and Scotland. The litigation arose not out of the will, but
out of a pending suit, to take from her property in her
possession. The question was whether a child legitimated
in Scotland by the marriage (after his birth) of his father
and mother can inherit lands in England. But, happily for
my friend, the English lawyers were almost unanimously of


the opposite opinion. Connected with this decision is an
act of Lord Brougham’s, so curious that it deserves a place
in the future biography of his lordship. I will therefore
relate it here. The trial, at Yoi’k, took place while Mrs.
Yardill lived. The special verdict was argued in B. 8.,
and judgment given unanimously in favour of the
defendant.* There was then an appeal to the House of
Lords, and it was argued before Lord Chancellor Lynd-
hurst.f The judges attended, and a certificate was put in
giving an opinion also in our favour, but Lord Chancellor
Lyndhurst went out of office without giving judgment.
Brougham came in office. Nothing was done. As we
were in possession with a judgment in our favour, it was
not our business to stir. And so matters remained till we
were startled, not to say alarmed, by Lord Brougham’s
rising in the HouseJ and making a speech to this effect:
c I have to move that a case which has long been waiting
for your lordships’ judgment—Birtwistle v. Yardill—should
be argued again by a single counsel, that judgment may be
given.’ He then stated the point, and proceeded: ‘I
argued this case for the English heir, and my argument
was successful, for the learned judges gave in a certificate
in favour of my client, but my argument was a very bad
one, and the learned judges were all wrong. In fact, my
lords, the learned counsel who argued the case for the
Scotch heir never understood the case, and the right argu-
ment was not used. I knew what it was, and I knew that
I had no answer to it. I therefore move that it be heard
again.’ § On this Lord Lyndhurst rose and said, that the
2
* See 5 Barnwall and Creswell’s ‘ Reports,’ p. 435.
f In 1830.
i September 2nd, 1835.
§ Tliis is a paraphrase only of Lord Brougham’s speech, which will
be found fully reported in 2 Clark and Finelly’s ‘ Reports of Cases
in the House of Lords,’ p. 582. But the official report shows that
his Lordship stated himself to have argued the case in support of the
English heir’s claim, and to have succeeded on grounds which he had
maintained professionally at the Bar, but which were unsatisfactory


case had been argued by the noble and learned lord on one
side, and by very eminent and distinguished persons on
the other; and he agreed that it ought to be argued again.
The argument was, of course, ordered. Now, what makes
this so curious is that the argument which was delivered,
as Lord Brougham said, by one who did not understand
the case, was the argument of Lord Brougham himself.
This blunder is easily accounted for,
“On the trial at York, Mrs. Yar dill’s counsel were Scarlett,
Brougham, and Courtenay. After the verdict, when I had
become interested as devisee in trust, I spoke with
Brougham on the subject, and he said, £ Don’t flatter
yourself that we shall succeed, for the law is against ns.
We have not a leg to stand on/ Knowing this 1 objected
to Brougham’s being chosen to argue the case before the
Lords (before B. R. Courtenay as the junior argued it, and
he had a brief to take notes). It being found that we had
left Brougham out before the Lords (we had Scarlett and
Courtenay), the plaintiff put in Brougham and Tindal.
Brougham felt very strongly in this case. His whole heart
and soul were in it. When it was argued for the last time
by Attorney-Hen eral Campbell for the plaintiff in error,
and by Dampier for the defendant. Brougham was very
busy running from one judge to another. Our attorney,
Mr. Law, heard him say to Campbell after leaving some of
the judges, 4 Damn ’em, I can’t shake them.’ ”
On October Ist of that year Crabb Robinson
visited the Nivens at their house at Kirkcudbright
and made this entry in his 4 Diary.’
“Mr. Niven, no slanderer of his countrymen, related to me
in a few words a tale, which in every incident makes one
think how Walter Scott would have worked it up. Sir
(Gordon wilfully shot his neighbour. The man might have
to himself sitting in the House as a judge whereas it would appear
he had really held a brief and argued for the Scotch heir.


been cured, but he preferred dying, that his murderer
might be hanged. The Gordon fled, and lived many years
in exile, till he was visited by a friend, Sir Maxwell,
who persuaded him that the affair was forgotten, and that
he might return. The friends travelled together in
Edinburgh, and there they attended together the public
worship of God in the Kirk. In the middle of the service
the Maxwell cried aloud, ‘ Shut all the doors, here is a
murderer ! * The Gordon was seized, tried, and hanged,
and the Maxwell obtained from the Crown a grant of a
Castle, and the noble demesnes belonging to it. The
account was given to me while I was visiting the picturesque
ruins of the castle,”
Mr. Niven died February 11th, 1830, at the age of
sixty-one. There was one child of the marriage,
Agnes Vardill Niven, who was born January 24th,
1825. After her husband’s' death Mrs. Niven re-
turned to England and lived mainly at Woolwich
Common and Skipton in Craven, where she died June
4th, 1852. Some letters written by her to her cousin
Mrs. Kissock are in the possession of that lady’s
daughter, Mrs. Candlish, but they are almost
exclusively of domestic interest. The only child
of Anna Vardill and James Niven died unmarried
at Skipton October 7th, 1872, as I learn from her
godson Mr. Arthur Helder Kaberry. Mrs. Niven
left behind her in MS a diary extending from
November, 1837, to September, 1848. It consists
almost exclusively of accounts and of memoranda
as to her property. The entries show, however,
that during her widowhood she made some tours at
home and abroad. Hastings, the Lake District,
Buxton, Bristol, Oxford, Stratford-on-Avon, Bath are
mentioned, and in 1843 she visited France and Italy.


Milan, Parma, Modena, Florence, Rome, Naples,
and Turin are amongst the places mentioned in this
journey, which extended over ten months. She was
again in France in 1845 and in 1847, when she also
visited Scotland. The diary also records letters
sent to Miss Mitford, and has many references to
H. Crabb Robinson and the legal matters in which
he represented her interests. Mr. Slingsby also
possesses a MS written in 1830 for her daughter.
It has prefixed to it a letter of great interest, which
reads:
December 31, 1830.
My Dear Little Daughter, —The trifles you will find in
my portfolio were chiefly written for a young friend not
more than twice your age. She had a very infirm mother,
for whose amusement she placed a little box of Athenian
cedar, the gift of Professor Flaxman, in the corner of her
drawing-room; and all who were acquainted with the
aperture in its side slid in such pieces of prose or verge as
they thought acceptable. On the first and second Wednes-
days of the winter months the Attic Chest was unlocked
by its owner after tea, and the contents read to the small
party of her select friends. On the last of these evenings
each acknowledged his or her share, and a dance concluded
the social pastime. My dear friend's marriage with Sir
John Franklin, whose adventures at the North Pole you
have already heard, and her early death closed the Attic
Chest; and its principal contributors, Dr. Benjamin
Franklin's only son, Dr. Hutton [or Hatton] and his
grandson, Flaxman and his gifted wife and sisters, William
Hayley and two or three friends of Walter Scott and Lord
Byron Coleridge and Wordsworth, are gone from us.
Many of the tales composed in prose or verse have appeared
in annuals or other miscellanies, some you will find in
manuscript, and three were added lately, to preserve in


remembrance facts which seemed to prove that many
evils in a woman’s life might be prevented by an early
knowledge of the laws which regulate her place and
property. This year deprived you of the Father who
would have guarded both, therefore I can offer you no
better gift for the next.*
The “ Imitations of Minor Greek Poets ” and the
“ Pleasures of Human Life ” were intended only for the
perusal of a fond parent and partial friend —your Grand-
father and Lindley Murray. The fragments of the Attic
Chest are more Calculated for your amusement, having
been collected from the conversation of the antiquaries,
travellers and civilians who attended its owner’s happy
evenings. The pleasures of remembering such conversa-
tions is one of the many advantages gained by a habit of
attention to every source of knowledge. If these relics
enliven or improve yours, the Attic Chest will be still
delightful to your fond mother, A. J. N.
Probably the portfolio named in the letter con-
tained printed copies of such contributions to the
Attic Chest as had been published. The listr
includes many that appeared in the ‘ European
Magazine.’
The first wife of Sir John Franklin was Eleanor
Jane Porden, a lady of literary tastes, some of whose
poems were printed and had a certain amount of
success in the social circles in which she moved.
She died in 1825.
The unsolved problem of “ Christabel ” is the
character of Geraldine. Who and what is she?
On the answer to this question depends the nature
* This refers to three articles which Mrs. Niven has dated 1830,
and described in the table of contents as: “A Little Girl’s Law-
Book,” Part I; “A Young Lady’s Law-Book,” Part II; “An Old
Lawyer’s Legends,” Part 111.


of any possible sequel to Coleridge’s magnificent
fragment. The poet, whilst declaring that he had
the story all complete in his mind, appears to have
kept the secret locked in his own breast. There is
no hint extant as to his intentions. Anna Yardill’s
continuation of the legend is as wild as Coleridge’s
poem, and although it is not so beautiful, it is not
without a weird charm. For her Geraldine is the
Witch of the lake, who has for a time escaped from
Merlin’s spell. The Magician raises the spirit of
Sir Leoline’s dead wife and from her learns that
Geraldine’s power will pass away at the moment of
the espousal of Christobell and her own true knight.
And with the discomfiture of Geraldine the story
ends. How well the Coleridgean manner is echoed
may be shown by two quotations :
“ Lord Leoline sat in chair of pride,
The white-armed stranger by his side—
-0 bright was the glance she gave to view,
When back her amaranth locks she threw !
It was like the moon’s on the fountain brim
When the amber clouds around her skim;
The rubies that on her bosom flamed
Seemed of her richer lips ashamed ;
There never was lovely lady seen
Like the stranger-guest, fair Geraldine.”
A messenger brings a goblet of crysolite with a
message from Sir Roland. The goblet is filled by
Sir Leoline, who places it in the lady’s hand :
“ But the crysolite changed as she touched its brim
And the gem on its sapphire edge grew dim—
The lamps are quenched in their sockets of gold,
The hour is past and the bell has toll’d.”


Then comes the transformation scene, for as the
spells of Geraldine are exhausted she falls again
under the more potent influence of Merlin :
‘'There sits a dame of royal mien,
But her lips are pearly, her locks are green;
The eider-down hides her speckled breast,
The fangs of the sea-wolf clasp her vest;
And those orbs, once bluer than western skies,
Are shrunk to the rings of the serpent’s eyes,
“ ‘ Witch of the lake ! I know thee now,
Thrice three hundred years are gone
Since beneath my cave
In the western wave
I doomed thee to rue and weep alone,
And writ thy shame on thy breast and brow.
“ ‘ But those and thy envious fiends in vain
Have risen to mock my power again,
The spell which in thy bosom waketh
No holy virgin’s lips can stain ;
The spell that in thy false eye lurketh
But for an hour can truth enchain.
“ ‘ Not ev’n thy serpent eye could keep
Its ire near guiltless Beatty’s sleep;
The spirit of evil could not dare
To look on heav’n —for heav’n is there.
Thy hour is past —thy spells I sever;
Witch of the wave, descend for ever !’”
So ends “ Christobell.”
It is not claimed that Anna Vardill can be placed
in any conspicuous position among the women writers
of Britain. But high culture, artistic taste and a
poetical temperament were certainly hers. She
shared in the enthusiasm of the age that, breaking


conventional trammels, felt the magic of the legends
and the folklore to be found on the Scottish
hills and in the Yorkshire dales. Her talent, though
not strikingly original, was sympathetic to the same
influences that moved Scott and Byron. In the
one effort by which she will now be remembered
Anna Yardill caught the echo of Coleridge’s wild
and spiritual music. In her “ Christobell ”we
have something of the glamour of the great poet
who had fed on honey-dew,
“And drunk the milk of Paradise.”
Bibliography.
Poems and Translations from the Minor Greek Poets
and Others : Written chiefly between the ages of ten and
by a Lady. Dedicated by permission to Her Royal
Highness the Princess Charlotte of Wales. London;
Asperne, 1809, pp. 165.
The original verses are as follows :
The Battle of Trafalgar (an irregular ode); The Rights
of Woman (a bnrlesqne essay) ; Inscription design’d for
the Statue of William Pitt; Address to the Patrons of the
Refuge for the Destitute ; On the Statue of Sir John Moore
at Glasgow; Address to the Hon. Society of Freemasons,
written for their Anniversary Meeting.
Six Sonnets Descriptive of Scenes in the West of Scot-
land : (1) On a Yiew of Castrammon ; (2) On the River Dee,
near Kirkcudbright; (3) On the Fleet, near Gatehouse;
(4) On Raeberie Hill; (5) On Ross-lsle, near Balmae ; (6)
On Balmae House.
Six Sonnets to the Memory of a Young Friend.
Occasional Trifles: To the Hon. Miss C. on Her First
Introduction at Court; To Two Sisters ; The Favourites, a
Tale; On a Silver Tea Chest, Presented to the Right Hon.
Lady 0.; The Power of Fancy; To a Young Lady on her


return to Copenhagen; The Birth-day ; On the Portrait
of an Infant God-daughter ; Enigma Found in a Lady’s
Instrument; On Lindley Murray’s Works; On an Ice Plant.
Imitations of Various Styles of Poetiy: A Persian Dirge ;
An Hungarian Gipsy’s Song; A Wandering Savoyard’s
Tale; A Spanish Serenade and Reply; A Portuguese
Rondeau from Camoens; A Sonnet from Petrarch; An
Italian Madrigal; A Portrait from the French; A French
Madrigal; A Scotch Ballad; An Ancient Minstrel’s Lay.
Songs : A Canzonet for Three Friends, written at thirteen
years of age; War Song sent to the Craven Legion;
A Song for the 19th Century; A Welsh Student’s Wish;
Burlesque Translation into Macaroni Verse; The Married
Traveller’s Return; A Parody on the Preceding; The
Philosopher’s Return; Coeleb’s Apology, Written for an
Harmonic Society; On Earl Moira’s Marriage to the
Countess of Loudoun; Three Hymns for Benevolent
Societies; Lord P. . .’s Epistle to the Hon. Colonel
0.. .n; Addenda.
There was a second edition in 1812, The third edition
has also “An Essay on Music.” To this.is the following
foot-note : “ This essay was begun at ten years of age. The
writer’s accidental loss of sight detained it from the press
till the third edition had been published.” The copy
of the third edition in the British Museum is dated 1809.
The explanation is that an engraved as well as a printed
title-page was issued in 1809, and this was inserted in each
subsequent edition with the number of the edition printed
on it, but retaining the printers’ imprint of 1809.
The British Museum copy of the third edition has lost the
printed title-page and retains only the engraved one of 1809.
No doubt it was issued after 1816. Another bibliographical
curiosity about the third edition is that the page on which
the “ Essay on Music ” begins is numbered 199, the
leaf immediately preceding it, and which formed the last
leaf of the second edition, being ignored altogether,
although it contains two small poems, the pagination


following on from tlie leaf preceding that which was
numbered 198.
The Pleasures of Human Life, a Poerii; by Anna Jane
Yardill. London: Printed for Longmans, Hurst, Rees,
Orme and Brown, by James Ballantyne & Co., Edinburgh,
1812, 4to, pp. [3] 100.
Contributions to the f European Magazine.’
[ln this list the pieces are in verse and signed “V.”
unless otherwise noted.]
Yol. lix, p. 136, Inscription for Tablet to Memory of the
Rev. Dr. John Yardill, by his Daughter.
Ixiv, 430, Epitaph Designed for William Franklin.
(A.J.Y.)
Ixvi, 435, The Outcast; an Indian Tale.
Ixvii, 55, Lomond’s Isle; 241, Count Bertram; 543,
Christobell: a Gothic Tale; 442, The Warden of Carlisle;
539, The Bridal Eve : a Hermit’s Legend.
Ixviii, 53, St. Hubert’s Yigil; 157, Don Sebastian ; 253,
Eric and Amabel; 355, Hohenhelm; 357, Elegiac Yerses
on the Death of Miss Caroline Demys (A. J. Y.) ; 441, De
Courcy; 534, Love’s Yisit (this is not signed but is the
last of the “Legends of the Hermitage” which form the
six preceding).
Ixix, 58, The Invisible Cap : a Tradition of Tabby Hall;
151, The Rivals (second tradition); 247, The Wreath (third
tradition); 341, Ridicule versus Pocket (fourth tradition) ;
446, Sir Jerome’s Heiress (fifth tradition) ; 544, Roderic’s
Dream (sixth tradition).
Ixx, 8, 116, 204, 296, 397, 496, Memoirs of a Recluse (in
prose) ; 68, Fifty Years Ago (seventh tradition) ; 166, Bibo
de Montefiesco (eighth tradition) ; 261, Cupid at School
(the last tradition of Tabby Hall); 362, Happiness: a
Fragment; 457, Brown Bread Found in an Attic Poet’s
Cupboard: A Fragment Found in a Skeleton Case; 543,
The Festival of Hauruz.


Ixxi, 20, 97, 191, Memoirs of a Recluse (continued) ; 65,
The Legend of Dunbar; 152, A Yorkshire Legend; 289,
385, 481, Legends of Lampidosa: Collected by a Recluse
(in prose); 442, The Lost Dove,
Ixxii, 6, 102, 201, 297, 411, Legends of Lampidosa (con-
tinued) : 69, A Relic from Waterloo; 70, Another Relic;
158, The New Coinage : written for a Literary Society
opened by a Ball July 14th; 263, The Hall of Flowers : an
Irish Legend; 358, The Pearl Island: a Fragment; 449,
The Bride’s Dirge [on the Death of Princess Charlotte] ;
493, Extracts from a Lawyer’s Portfolio (in prose) ; 550,
Anacreontic, by the late Rev. Dr. Yardill; 551, English
versus French.
Ixxiii, 9, 97, 193, 289, 385, 473, Extracts from a Lawyer’s
Portfolio (continued) (in prose) ; 63, Time to Beauty; 153,
The Chapel of the Isle: a Fragment; 257, The Elfin
Arrow : Found on the Coast of Malta; 343, The Progress
of Music; 435, A Highland Husband’s Gift: From aMS
in the McGregor Family ; 526, On a Lady’s Kaleidoscope.
Ixxiv, 9, 97, Extracts from a Lawyer’s Portfolio (con-
tinued) (in prose) ; 61, The Arctic Navigator’s Prayer ; 62,
The Canal and the Brook ; 162, Prologue to a Play Acted
in a Nobleman’s Barn ; 162, Epilogue ; 193, Extracts from
an Arctic Navigator’s Journal (in prose); 259, Winter in the
Country to Winter in the Town; 289, An Arctic Islander in
London (in prose); 356, The Arctic Moon; 385, Origin
of an Arctic Colony (in prose); 439, Sir Locrine; 481,
Relics of Popular Superstitions [Observed near Park Gate,
West of Scotland] (in prose); 536, The Banquet Song of
the Tonga Islanders : verified from a literal translation.
Ixxv, 9, 105, [St. Mark’s Eve in Yorkshire] 208, 297,
393, 487, Relics of Popular Superstitions (continued) (in
prose) ; 54, The Queen’s Bower; 148, The Lykewake
Dirge; 262, The Carnival of Corfu; 355, A Bridal Serenade:
By a modern Welsh Harper; 454, The Glow-worm to the
Moon; 544, The Minute Bell ; 9, Tales of To-day (in
prose), (first not signed), 105 (signed Y.), 201, 297, 393, 489.


Ixxvi, 66, Another Edition of Edwin and Angelina :
from a Collector’s Portfolio ; 165, On a New Made Grave
near Bolton Priory ; 265, Winter in Town to Winter in
the Country; 356, The Blind Traveller; 455, The Marine
Society’s Appeal to the Ladies of Great Britain; 456, The
Prodigal to His Wife; 543, Le Pas Trois: an epigram
from M. de Lewis.
Ixxvii, 9, Tales of To-day (continued) ; 53, The Pilfering
Poet’s Apology to his Judges; 153, Annals of Public
Justice : The High Court of Justiciary and a Gipsy Chief
(in prose); 166, The Eldest King of Britain: Llewellyn’s
Dream [on the Deaths of George 111 and the Duke of
Kent] ; 201, Annals, etc.: an Austrian Assassin (in prose) ;
260, A Walk to Ilkley ; 297, Annals, etc.: The Western
Assize Court in 1689 (in prose); 357, On Seeing the
Flower called Honesty in a Lady’s Cap; 393, Annals, etc.:
The Bronze Statue (in prose) ; 430, The White Horse of
Wharfdale ; 489, Annals, etc.: The Brothers of Dijon (in
prose) ; 536, St. Valentine’s Eve, or the Fireside Fairies,
Ixxxviii, 13, Annals, etc. : The Czar and the Czarawitz
(in prose); 105, Annals, etc.: The Traveller’s Dream (in
prose); 153, A Freemason’s Epitaph near Bagdad ; 201,
Annals, etc.: 11 due Gobbi (in prose) ; 263, An English-
man’s Farewell to a Converzazione ; 297, Annals, etc. : The
Black Gondola (in prose); 352, An Exile’s Dream; 389,
Annals, etc. : Count Orlofl’s Divorce (in prose); 454, The
Yew in Skipton Castle; 489, Annals, etc. : Queen Mary’s
Cross (in prose) ; 548, The Farewell Cup to the Dead at a
Highland Funeral.
Ixxix, 9, 105, 202, 303, 400, The Secrets of Cabalism
(in prose); 73, A Christmas Carol; 167, The Pelican and
the Swan; 229, An Unexpected Heir’s Legacy; 259, The
Stroll of the Last Sylph; 360, A Fragment from a
Lawyer’s Portfolio ; 457, The Keep of Windsor Castle : a
fragment from tradition; 492, The Last Secret of Cabalism
(in prose) ; 553, La Morte d’Arthur; or the Legend of Sir
Launcelot. Collected from the MS in the Harleian Library.


Ixxx, The Coronation Eve [on the Coronation of George
IV], 127, 217; 6, Denon’s Hundred Days in England (in
prose) ; 144, Wit and Reason; 261, A Whisper at a Con-
versazione ; 310, 412, 511, The Last Leaf of the Parish
Register (in prose) ; 320, A Traveller’s Story; 508, The
Hermit of Loch Lomond.
Ixxxi, 9, 120, 218, 310, 411, 506, My Godmother’s
Legacy; or the Art of Consoling (in prose); 26, The
Prisoners of Mount St. Michael; 112, The Boat of the
Stars; 214, Malham Tarn; 325,The Fairies’ Nursery: an
April Dream.
Mr. Ernest Hartley Coleridge, who was in the
Chair, then spoke as follows :
I think that we shall all agree that Dr. Axon has
brought to a very triumphant finis a difficult piece
of literary investigation, and that he has solved once
for all a minor literary problem which has teased,
and vexed, and baffled many patient but less
successful inquirers. His success is the reward both
of exhaustive and thoughtful research, and of the
literary acumen which can alone make good use of
the materials so acquired. His connection, or rather
identification of V., first with feminine authorship,
then with the editor s tribute to Vanella (six years,
remember, after the “ Gothic Tale ” appeared), then
with the Reverend John Yardill’s “Anacreontic,”
and finally with Anna Jane Yardill, had proved his
point before it occurred to me that the name
“ Yardill ” might be mentioned in Henry Orabb
Robinson’s 4 Diary,’ and I chanced to light upon a
singular confirmation of Dr. Axon’s independent
surmise. I had, as Dr. Axon points out, hazarded
a kind—perhaps I ought rather to say a shadow—


of a guess, that James Hogg might have had a hand
in the composition of “ Christobell.” For I had dili-
gently read Y.’s numerous other contributions to
the £ European Magazine,’ and I could not persuade
myself that the gleams and flashes of something like
poetry, nay, some dozen or more lines which Cole-
ridge might have written himself, could have pro-
ceeded from the pen of the author of the colourless
diluted effusions which appeared in each number
before and after 1815 under the same signature.
And, moreover, I was familiar with that finest and
tenderest and most beautiful of all parodies, Hogg’s
“ Cherub,” modelled upon and all but reaching up to
Coleridge’s “ Knbla Khan,” which was published in
1817, in the anonymous collection of parodies,
entitled the c Poetic Mirror.’
So rare and so delicate is the melody that Robert
Browning, who had unearthed it from some forgotten
magazine, sent it as a genuine Coleridgean lyric to
James Dykes Campbell, who sent it on to me. Alas !
I was obliged to tell Mr. Campbell that the “ Cherub ”
was a manufactured freak, a kind of Barnum’s
Lusus Naturae, and thenceforth I heard no more
of the subject either from Mr. Campbell or from
Browning. But I do not wonder that its dulcet
tones had deceived these elect persons, or that
“ Christobell, a Glothic Tale ” suggested to me the
poetical mimicries of the Ettrick Shepherd. For, as
Dr. Axon finely puts it: “ Here and there Anna
Yardill caught something of Coleridge’s wild and
spiritual music.” And, indeed, an element of
mystery remains, of mystery which in no way affects
Dr. Axon’s identification of Y. with Anna Yardill,


but which prompts other inquiries and other guesses.
For it is not conceivable that Crabb Robinson’s one
reading of the MS of “ Christabel ” would enable
anyone to write a continuation in the same style and
metre and with so much of the gusto of the original.
One reading or recitation might inspire another
poet with the lilt and something of the romantic
glamour of the original, as Dr. Stoddart’s one read-
ing of the MS of “ Christabel ” at Lass wade, in 1802,
inspired Walter Scott with the air and metre of the
“ Lay of the Last Minstrel,” but one reading could
not have resulted in “ Christobell, a Grothic Tale.”
.No ! the good Crabb must have left the MS in Miss
Vardill’s hands, and as he was a good friend to
Coleridge, and a man of honour, and as she appears
to have been a high-minded and honourable woman, I
cannot but think that the appearance of the “ Gfothic
Tale” in the May number of the ‘European Magazine’
was not altogether a surprise to the real Simon
p nre — i, e. to S. T. C. himself. If it had been a
base trick —a cruel anticipation of his unpublished
p oem —I think that he must have known about it
and would have complained of so unwarrantable a
transaction to some of his friends. We know that
long years after when he was questioned on the
subject he said : “ It is a singular affair,” and that he
would explain the whole story, but proceeded in-
stead to explain or to begin to explain some other
story altogether. There is, of course, no proof, but
it is a pardonable guess that Miss Vardill must have
submitted proof or copy to Robinson, and that he
must have obtained some kind of assent or permission
from Coleridge himself.


Be that as it may, one short year went by, and
thanks to Lord Byron’s intervention the Lovely
Lady herself and not another, was at length pre-
sented to the public, and the anticipation or con-
tinuation only remained as a problem and a puzzle
to the curious.
ADLAED AND SON 3 IMPS., LONDON AND DOEKING.




