

.
I ANNALS
IS OF
ffl , ACHIEVEMENT
m> J-
. *
I ■ (^n^sk)
I p||^~— '
I 1847


Armais
of
Achievement
is published by the Centenary Committee of the Queensland
Methodist Conference to mark the One Hundredth Anniversary
of the Church in Queensland.
It goes forth with the fervent prayer that it may awaken in
the Methodist people a due sense of gratitude to God and a dis-
position to be worthy of the heritage which they are privileged
to enjoy.
Edited by THE REV. R. S. C. DINGLE
Foreword by THE REV. J. W. BURTON, M.A., D.D.
President-General of the Methodist Church of Australasia.
Epilogue by THE REV. H. M. WHELLER, Ex-President-General.


jr
THE
BOOK
DEPOT
135
Castlereagh Street
SYDNEY










ANNALS OF ACHIEVEMENT
A Review of Queensland Methodism
1847-1947
Edited by
The Rev. R. S. C. DINGLE
With a Foreword by the President-General of the
Methodist Church of Australasia,
The Rev. J. W. Burton, m.a v d.d.;
and an Epilogue by the Ex-President-General,
The Rev. H. M. Wheeler
Illustrated
BRISBANE
QUEENSLAND BOOK DEPOT
ADELAIDE STREET


Registered at the General Post Office, Brisbane
for transmission through the post as book
Jf holly sot up, printed, and bound in Australia, by W . R, Smith & Paterson Pty, Ltd,
Kemp Place, Valley, Brisbane
1947


FOREWORD
By the Rev. J. W. Burton, m.a., d.d., President-General.
I am delighted to know that, in connexion with the Cen-
tenary of Methodism in Queensland, a permanent record is
being published of the striking and valorous achievements of
our Church in that vast State. It gives me, therefore, much
pleasure to write a brief foreword and to commend this volume
to the thoughtful attention of our people throughout Aus-
tralasia.
It was fitting, almost inevitable, that this task should have
been commenced by the Rev. W. H. Harrison, who for sixty-
five years served God and Methodism so faithfully and well.
His long life and compelling witness have greatly enriched the
life of the Church, and his influence and inspiring example
have spread themselves over some of the most significant and
progressive periods of its activity. He was one of the wise
leaders of our time, with a fervent faith in the future.
This volume, compiled by the Rev. R. S. C. Dingle, is only
a record, for the real story has been written in the courageous
and adventurous lives of many, and often unnamed, men and
women through the long years; but a record is necessary to
preserve the tradition and to encourage others to greater
activity and devotion in the unscanned future. The foundations
have been well and truly laid, and now others must build
thereon.
For many years —until 1893—Queensland Methodism was
under the supervision of the New South Wales Conference, and
for nine more years the Wesleyan Methodist Church there car-
ried its own responsibility. There was much capable leader-
ship in that critical period, and one result was the consumma-
tion of Methodist Union in 1902, since when the United Church
has marched steadily forward as one great body loyal to the
spirit and genius of its founder.
It has been my pleasure and privilege to visit Queensland
Methodism on many occasions, and I, with others, have been
impressed, even embarrassed, by the gracious fellowship and
warm hospitality of its ministers and laity. Without making


unhappy comparisons, I think most of us will agree that there
is no part of this huge continent where hospitality is more
generous and fellowship more warm than in this great and
growing Northern State. Perhaps this is due, to some extent,
to the land itself with its immense distances and its incredible
lonelinesses. Narrowness assorts ill with such broad uncon-
fined spaces, generosity and tolerance grow out of a common
need and long vision is the result of the distant horizon.
Much of the work of the Church has of necessity been of a
pioneer character and this volume recounts the hopes and
fears, the encouragements and disappointments of those who
looked beyond the ranges and discovered vast billowy downs
which they knew would be the future homes of men and
women and little children. All this effort has called for care-
ful planning and for wise administration, and Queensland
Methodism has been fortunate in having leaders of foresight
and of heroic enterprise. Experiments have been made —some
of them have been successful and some have ended in failure;
but there has been bred as the result a spirit of courage and of
indomitable purpose that have left their mark upon the on-
going Church.
Our politicians have worked the phrase ‘Vast potentialities”
almost to extinction; but there is certainly one part of Aus-
tralia where it is not misapplied. One has only to look at the
map to realize the staggering size of the land, and to study the
returns of productivity to see the possibilities that lie ahead.
Queensland has a range of climate that we dwellers in the
South must needs envy, and it seems inevitable that the popu-
lation will steadily and perhaps quickly increase as people
move northwards to areas where the sun is more generous of
his rays and where the moon is more prodigal of her beauty.
We are apt to forget that nearly seven hundred thousand
square miles make up this division of Queensland —nearly
one-fourth of the total area of Australia, and nearly six times
that of the United Kingdom. Everything is on a big scale.
Mere space, however, is of little value: what matters is the con-
tent of that space; and in Queensland there is some of the most
fertile land in the continent, being blessed, for the most part,
by a good rainfall. Huge herds of sheep and cattle mean un-
told wealth; and enormous plantations of sugar, bananas and


tobacco, are a hint that Australia must depend more and more
upon these northern lands for its tropical products.
At present the population is pathetically small —not much
over a million; but the increase will undoubtedly be great in
the years ahead, and Queensland has every reason to expect
large and prosperous development.
There is therefore a great future for the Church that has the
courage and wisdom to minister effectively to this growing-
land, and that seeks the moral and spiritual advancement of
its people. The Church has already firmly established itself
in some gracious cities and in some thriving progressive towns,
but its sane and considered policy is to step out into the
sparsely-populated areas, and it is there that Methodism, in
particular, has won its more significant victories. In the early
days of the century the messenger of the Cross travelled on
horseback over dusty plains and ragged tablelands, and this
book tells of the hardiness and endurance of these sturdy
pioneers; now the motor car and the aeroplane are harnessed
to the Christian task and adventure and daring take on a new
phase.
Methodism has maintained its distinctive witness, and we
are particularly grateful that the Centenary Celebrations have
been marked not merely by generous giving to funds that will
make possible the material extension of the Church, but also
by a spiritual life campaign that will supply the living streams
to fill the channels that have been so bravely and patiently
dug. Above all else Methodism needs to recapture and to
refine this spirit of evangelism, else it will be unable to seize
the opportunity that now presents itself, and I am sure that
the whole Church prays that as our Church in Queensland
enters upon its second century of life and service there will
come upon it a reinforcement of spiritual power, so that the
glory of the former years will be eclipsed by those that are
yet to come.


REV. Wm. MOORE MRS. MQORE
REV. J. H. FLETCHER REV. JOHN WATSFORD


PREFACE
The following review of the origin and development of the
Methodist Church in Queensland during the past one hundred
years has been undertaken in connection with the Centenary
Celebrations. It goes forth, having the imprimatur of the Com-
mittee, with the fervent prayer that it may awaken in the
Methodist people a due sense of gratitude to God and a dis-
position to be worthy of the heritage which they are privileged
to enjoy.
To produce this volume was the earnest desire of the late
Rev. W. H. Harrison. Upon his retirement from the Editor-
ship of the Methodist Times” after eighteen years’ energetic
service, following a successful regular ministry, he declared
his intention to write an account of the history of Methodism
in Queensland. At the age of eighty-three, therefore, he com-
menced his task.
With the able assistance of his daughter, Mrs. G. Shelton, he
examined the available records and collected relevant facts
with discrimination and understanding. He worked tirelessly
until he had accumulated a mass of valuable data. Illness
overtook him, however, laying him aside more than once, and
hampered his progress. In 1946 he handed to the Centenarv
Committee the results of his research and very reluctantly
relinquished his self-imposed task. Mr. Harrison was denied
the joy of seeing the completed volume: he passed to Higher
Service on April 26th, 1947, at the age of eighty-six.
At the Conference of 1947 Mr. Harrison was the centre of
affectionate interest. It was recognised that his ministry had
covered two-thirds of the century which was being celebrated
and that he was the representative of pioneer ministers to
whom the Church was indebted. The following resolution
was unanimously carried, beautifully illuminated and pre-
sented to him at the Centenary Meeting held in the City Hall
on February 27th, 1947:
u The Conference gives thanks to Almighty God for the
long and honoured ministry of the Rev. W. H. Harrison and
rejoices that he has been spared to share in the Centenary
Celebrations of our Church in Queensland.


“Conference recognises that during his sixty-five years of
ministry Mr. Harrison largely participated in the pioneering
service which led to the extension of the work of God
throughout the State and in establishing our Connexional
Institutions.
“Conference gratefully acknowledges the high quality of
his service as preacher and pastor in many circuits and the
efficiency and success with which he occupied official posi-
tions with the Home Mission Society, King’s College,
Secondary Education, The Book Depot and as Editor of The
Methodist Times,’ Secretary of Conference (1901 —4, 1910)
and President of the Conference (1905 ).
“In all his relationships Mr. Harrison has revealed a sin-
cere and whole-hearted devotion to Christ and His Church
and has shown an ardent desire for the furtherance of the
Gospel.
“Conference extends its warmest thanks to Mr. Harrison
for having initiated the proposal to celebrate the Centenary
of Methodism and for his painstaking research into the
records of our Church for the purpose of compiling the
Centenary Volume. Conference rejoices with Mr. Harrison
upon the manifest blessings of God in his life and work and
upon his being privileged to see such rich fruitage from his
labours.”
In December 1946 the Centenary Committee invited me to
write the book with the aid of the data which Mr. Harrison
had gathered. This was by no means an easy task in view of
my personal affection for him and my high admiration of his
ability, which in the days of his mental and physical vigour
would have enabled him to produce a work of great value.
The book has been written amidst circuit responsibilities as
well as Connexional tasks. It has been accomplished of
necessity in all too limited a time. In addition to Mr. Har-
rison’s extensive notes, I have consulted the Minutes of Con-
ference, from which appropriate quotations are made, and 1
have had occasion to seek information from the Methodist His-
torical Society, Sydney, to the secretary of which, the Rev. Dr.
D. A. Spence Little, M.A., B.Litt, I am much indebted. Articles
by Mr. J. S. Gill in the Quarterly Magazine of the Society have
been of real value.


The chapter entitled “Settlement in Queensland is based
upon an excellent article which appeared under the name of
the late Dr. Cumbrae Stewart, who was an authority on the
history of Queensland, in a special issue of the Brisbane
“Courier,” on July 28th, 1924.
The Committee, through the organising secretary, the Rev.
C. A. Read, have been helpful and encouraging. I am greatly
indebted to the Rev. C. T. Palethorpe for much useful in-
formation.
The sincere thanks of the Committee are extended to the
President General, the Rev. Dr. J. Burton, M.A., for graciously
writing the Foreword and to the Ex-President General, the
Rev. H. M. Wheller, for contributing the Epilogue.
The Circuit Notes have been written from information which
has been kindly supplied by the ministers. It is regretted that
they are necessarily brief.
I am grateful for the privilege of serving the Church by
writing these pages; the experience has been a most salutary
one. I am filled with pride at the great succession of ministers
and laymen whose combined service has brought our Church to
its present strength and effectiveness. The achievements have
been so wonderful that we lift our hearts to God in a glad
Doxology.
R. S. C. Dingle
Wooloowin,
Brisbane, July 1947.


■rar •
..
0 ' %
|p»
FIRST ALBERT STREET CHURCH
SECOND ALBERT STREET CHURCH


CONTENTS
Page
Foreword ------- - 3
Preface -------.7
Celebrating the Centenary ----- 13
PART I
PIONEERING 1847-1883
Chapter
I—Settlement in Queensland - - - - 17
ll—The Beginnings ------ 21
lII The First Building Enterprises 31
IV — Early Efforts on Darling Downs - - - 35
V —Australian Conference Constituted 41
Vl—The Queensland District - - - - 51
VII —Expansion Northwards - - - - 61
VIII —Methodist Union - - - - - 67
IX —Queensland Autonomy ----- 75
X—Some Gleanings - - - - - - 81
PART II
CONNEXIONAL INSTITUTION AND FUNDS
I—The Home Mission Society 87
II CONNEXIONAL FIINDS - - - - - 111
lII Book Depot, Epworth House, Connexional Journal 121
IV — The Church and Social Service - 127
V —The Church and Education - - - - 135
VI —Young People's Department - 155
VII —The Central Mission ----- 166
VIII —Overseas Missions - 175
IX —The Local Preachers ----- 187
Methodism in Two Wars - - - 189
More Gleanings - - - - - -196
PART 111
CIRCUITS AND STATIONS
I—The Brisbane District - - - - - 199
ll—South Brisbane District - 223
HI —West Moreton District - - - - - 241
IV—Downs District _____ 249
V —North Coast District - - - - 261
VI —Wide Bay and Burnett District - 269
VII —Central District - 279
VIII —Northern District _____ 292
Epilogue ------- - 302


jll j I
i^fc;. ■' y* :|v '■'■*£■■,■'
ALBERT STREET METHODIST CHURCH, BRISBANE
THE CENTRE OF THE
CENTRAL METHODIST MISSION


CELEBRATING THE CENTENARY
The Conference of 1943, humbly acknowledging the bless-
ing of Almighty God upon the faith and sacrificial service of
the Methodist pioneers and upon the assiduous labours of a
vast number of Christian workers, agreed that the work and
achievements of the century were worthy of special celebra-
tions in 1947.
It v/as determined that in four preparatory years there
should be a crusade in each circuit “that Methodism may make
her contribution to the spiritual rejuvenation of the world and
the building up of a Christian order in the Pacific.” It was
resolved to raise a Thanksgiving Fund of £IOO,OO0 —£1,000
for each year of the century, to give the members a practical
means of expressing gratitude for the past and to enable the
Church to embark upon new enterprises, thus building upon
the foundations laid in the first century. The proposed dis-
bursement of the Fund was as follows: Loan Fund £10,000;
Circuit new enterprises and trusts £20,000; District War
Memorials £10,000; King’s College—including £2,500 for
War Memorial Chapel— £25,000; Connexional Loans Ex-
tinction, £15,000; Overseas Missions, £5,000; Home Missions
(Developmental Work), £5,000; Inland Mission (Federal and
State), £5,000; Young People’s Department £5,000; Working
Expenses, £5,000.
In view of the magnitude of the task proposed, Conference
appointed a strong committee and designated two ministers as
full time secretaries —the Revs. C. A. Read (Organising Secre-
tary) and A. W. Preston (Field Secretary). Mr. Read was
released from the Army where he had done praiseworthy ser-
vice as the first Methodist chaplain to leave Queensland for the
Middle East. He saw service at Bardia, Tobruk and in Greece,
and had returned to continue his duties with the troops in
Australia. His record as a circuit minister, as well as his suc-
cess as a chaplain, influenced the Conference in its choice.
During the past four years Mr. Read has been untiring in his
efforts to inspire the people in the circuits throughout the
State with a sense of their privileges and of the value of the
ministry of the Church. The response to his fervent appeals


on behalf of the Thanksgiving Fund have been remarkable.
As the date for the official celebrations draws near, gifts and
promises to the Fund amount to £75,000.
The Rev. A. W. Preston had revealed an aptitude for evan-
gelistic work and his ministry had been used of God in the
conversion of many people. In preparation for celebrating
the Centenary he has been awakening the Church and enlisting
the members in a higher appreciation of Churchmanship. God
has honoured his ministry so that in many centres there are
those who attribute their rededication to Christ to Mr. Preston s
earnestness and there are those, especially among young
people, who testify to their salvation through his faithful
presentation of the Gospel.
During the years of preparation the whole Church has been
aroused to considerable activity and the promise of the future
is exceedingly bright. It is evidence of the faith and vision ol
the Church that new preaching places are being opened, new
premises planned and old buildings modernised, and the
general equipment for Christian work improved. Building
enterprises totalling nearly £IOO,OOO have been approved by
the Property Committee while others are projected.
The Centenary celebrations were the feature of the 1947
Conference, which was probably the largest in the history of
Queensland Methodism. Greetings were cordially given on
behalf of the Church of England, by the Archbishop of Bris-
bane, and by the official heads of the other denominations. A
public gathering of great historic importance was held in the
Brisbane City Hall on February 27th, presided over by the
Treasurer of the Thanksgiving Fund, Mr. W. H. Green and
addressed by the Rev. A. E. Albiston, M.A., 8.D., of Mel-
bourne. The Centenary choir of 250 voices, under the diiec-
tion of Mr. Les Price, led the singing.
Another meeting held in the City Hall gave prominence to
Home and Overseas Missions. Sir Frederick Stewart, of Syd-
ney, presided and the Revs. A. R. Gardner, 8.A., General
Secretary of the Overseas Missions Society, and A. G. Mane-
field, 8.A., General Secretary of Home Missions in New South
Wales, were the speakers. On two successive Friday evenings,
the pageant “A Good Inheritance,” in which the history of
Queensland Methodism was dramatised, specially written and


produced by Mr. Leo. Guyatt, in collaboration with Miss
Dolores Guyatt, was staged before crowded audiences. This
was done in connection with the Young People s Department
and was designed to impress upon the youth of the Church the
heroic efforts of their forefathers on behalf of the Kingdom of
God and to inspire them to similar devotion and service.
Visitors bringing greetings from the Southern Conferences
have conducted services and meetings in the State, by which
they have helped to create the appropriate atmosphere for the
celebrations and to quicken the purpose of the Church as it
begins a new century. Amongst them were: The Rev. H. G.
Secomb, Secretary General (Melbourne), Rev. Dr. G. Calvert
Barber, M.A., 8.D., (Melbourne), Mrs. J. Woodhouse, M.B.E. r
(Sydney), Mrs. A. G. Manefield (Sydney), Miss Rita Snow-
den (New Zealand), Rev. G. E. Johnson, 8.A., (Sydney), Rev.
A. H. Wood, M.A., B.D. (Melbourne), and Rev. W. F.
Hambly, M.A., 8.D., (Adelaide). To these the whole Church
is deeply indebted.
A Thanksgiving service is to be held in the Albert Street
Church, Brisbane, on October 17th, the date on which, one
hundred years ago, the Rev. Wm. Moore came to Brisbane to
commence his work. On the same evening there will be a
public celebration in each circuit in the State and on the fol-
lowing Sunday special services will be held in the churches.
In addition to this, there will be a pilgrimage to Zion’s Hill at
Nundah, where Rev. Wm. Moore conducted his first meeting in
Brisbane. It is intended to erect on the site a cairn to com-
memorate the event.
The programme for celebrating the century of magnificent
achievement in which the blessing of God has been manifest r
has thus been a comprehensive one. Members of the Church,
ministers and other workers are justly proud of their heritage
and are moved to dedicate themselves with whole-hearted zeal
to the tasks of the future. The Church is marching on. No
form of criticism and no amount of public indifference dis-
courage the servants of Christ. The faith they entertain and
the vision they cherish are justified because the God of our
Fathers is also our God. As He brought the seed they sowed
so industriously and so faithfully to rich fruitage so He will
give an abundant harvest to the labours of to-day. The best
is yet to be.


•• >>:> '•■ v '|||*v. f ' ■■••;■ / . .
REV. J. BUCKLE REV. JAMES WILLIAMS
REV. M. FOGGON REV. W. POWELL
President/ 1899


PART I
Pioneering 1847 —1883
CHAPTER I
SETTLEMENT IN QUEENSLAND
The history of settlement in Queensland began on September
24th, 1824, when Lieutenant Oxley founded a penal station at
Redcliffe in Moreton Bay. This station was transferred to the
“Settlement,” as the capital city was once called,
two months later, when Lieutenant Miller of the
40th Regiment occupied the site of the present
Executive Building. His successor was Captain Bishop, who in
turn gave place to the energetic Captain Logan of the 57th, to
whom we owe the earliest stone buildings. For these, stone was
quarried at Kangaroo Point, whilst kilns at Limestone Hill,
later called Ipswich, supplied the lime. The earliest inter-
course between these two places was established both by road
and water.
Captain Logan discovered the Logan River on the coast,
about the same time as Allan Cunningham, setting out from
Sydney, travelled overland to Canning Downs and the site of
the present city of Warwick. This was in the
year 1827, and although from a point on the
range between the Downs and Moreton Bay, now known as
Cunningham’s Gap, he looked down on the “Settlement,” he
was unable to reach it. The following year he was at the
“Settlement,” having made the trip from Sydney by sea, and
after an interesting journey to the head of the Logan with
Captain Logan, he succeeded in reaching the Darling Downs.
Allan Cunningham continued to explore the Brisbane Valley
during 1829, and in 1830 Captain Logan lost his life while
engaged in the same task. During the five years he had been
Commandant, the convict “Settlement” was given the form it
maintained until it was broken up in 1839, whilst the build-
ings he constructed eventually became the public buildings of
the Colony of Queensland. The out-stations which had been


established before 1839—New Farm, Eagle Farm, Redbank
and Limestone Hill—were connected by roads, which were the
first highways in the State.
The settlement at Moreton Bay had been formed hurriedly
by direction of Sir Thomas Brisbane, Governor of New South
Wales, to meet the pressing needs of the time. His action was
confirmed with some reluctance by the Colonial
Office, which rightly considered the place more
suitable as a field for free immigration. The
penal settlement proved very expensive and wholly failed to be
self-supporting. Several proposals for abandoning it were
considered, but it was not until May 1839 that one of the plans
was put into operation. The establishment was reduced to a
minimum, only those officials, and others required for looking
after Government property, being retained. A careful survey
of the settlement was made by Major (afterwards Colonel)
Barney through three staff surveyors from the Richmond River
-—Messrs. Dixon, Warner and Stapylton—who were the first
persons to reach Moreton Bay overland.
For three years the surveyors were engaged in preparing the
district for settlers, but Stapylton was murdered by the blacks
in 1840. In this year squatters first crossed what is now the
boundary of New South Wales and Queensland. In view of the
fact that casual settlers on Crown Land in other parts,
especially at Port Phillip, based their claims on alleged bar-
gains made with the blacks, the authorities determined to ex-
clude everybody from Brisbane and Limestone Hill unless a
pass was held. Under this regulation no unauthorised person
was allowed within fifty miles of the settlement and its out-
stations until the survey was completed. Three years after
Moreton Bay ceased to be a penal settlement the district was
thrown open for selection and the first sales of land took place
in Sydney on July 14th, 1842.
According to the first census taken in March 1846, the
Stanley district of New South Wales, which included Brisbane,
Ipswich and the surrounding areas eastward of the main range
and along the north coast, had 255 houses—forty-
one being of brick and the remainder of wood.
North Brisbane had 483 people, South Brisbane
345, Ipswich 103, squatting stations 453, military and govern-


merit establishments 185. Of the total population twenty-four
were Methodists.
On June 20th, 1846, the "‘Moreton Bay Courier,” printed and
published by the proprietor, Arthur Sydney Lyon, at the
general printing office, Albert Street, made its first appearance.
Nine days later the first paddle steamer, the “Experiment,”
commenced to run between Brisbane and Ipswich carrying pas-
sengers and cargo. Brisbane became a post town in 1842.
“Alford’s Inn,” afterwards Drayton, was given a post office in
1845. Ipswich followed in 1846 and Warwick in 1848, when
postal communication with Sydney was established. Mary-
borough, Gayndah, and Callandoon received post offices in
1849. The earliest means of land transport were the horse and
pack-bullock and afterwards the bullock dray.
After the “squatters” had taken up the greater part of
southern Queensland, most of the labour required on the sheep
and cattle stations was supplied by convicts and ticket-of-leave
men, but public agitation led to this being dis-
continued. Eventually it became imperative that
some form of organised immigration should be
introduced. The first ship to bring immigrants from the United
Kingdom to Moreton Bay was the “Artemesia,” a sailing vessel
of 558 tons, which sailed from Plymouth in August 1848, and
anchored in Moreton Bay in December of the same year, bring-
ing 240 new settlers for Brisbane. The following month the
barque “Fortitude” of 608 tons brought 256 new settlers. This
was one of three ships despatched from England as the result
of the activities of Dr. J. D. Lang. She was followed by the
“Chaseley” which arrived with 214 immigrants in addition to
several saloon passengers, and by the “Lima” which brought
eighty-four immigrants six months later.
Among the passengers from the “Chaseley” were Mr. and
Mrs. David McConnel whose home became a centre of Christian
influence. An extract from Mrs. McConnel’s diary gives an
idea of the hardships endured on some of these voyages from
England: “Each passenger paid £2OO to the Immigration
Bureau as organised by Dr. Lang, which gave the passenger the
right to take up a certain area of land within a given radius of
the seat of government. The weather was very bad and the
captain ran completely off his course. Throughout the trip


the ration of water, apart from that taken at the table, was three
pints daily, to serve as bath as well as drinking . . . No free
passengers were carried on this trip, and the new arrivals made
a rush to get a good location as their selection/’ Mr. and
Mrs. McConnel obtained a property about ninety miles up the
Brisbane River, and later Methodist services were held at their
home.
This briefly sets forth the background against which we may
review the history of the Church, and it will help us to
appreciate the high quality of the Christian experience of the
pioneers both amongst the ministers and laity, as well as their
determination, fortitude and persistence.


CHAPTER II
THE BEGINNINGS
The Methodist Church was established in Queensland by the
New South Wales District, which had been inaugurated in 1812
by the British Conference. The Chairman was the Rev. W. B.
Boyce, who had been appointed the General Superintendent of
Wesleyan Missions in Polynesia, with full authority to aid the
new enterprises in Australia. The vast area that became known
as Queensland was, indeed, a part of the State of New South
Wales, and its affairs were administered from Sydney. It was
not until 1859 that Letters Patent were granted, creating
Queensland a separate colony.
The northern outpost was regarded by the residents of Syd-
ney as being almost uninhabitable. It was known that there
had been a community of convicts and a regiment of soldiers,
together with a few civilians, at Moreton Bay; that the place
was quite undeveloped; and they believed that owing to its
remoteness, the wild nature of the country and its sub-tropical
climate, it held little prospect of becoming anything more than
a bush township.
The Methodist community in Sydney doubtless shared the
popular opinion of the distant Settlement. It was, therefore,
to their great credit that at the District Meeting held in
Sydney, under the chairmanship of the Rev. W. B.
Boyce, in July 1847, it was resolved that a repre-
sentative of the Church should be appointed to
Moreton Bay. In the list of Ministers’ Appointments there
appeared this historic announcement: —
MORETON BAY —ONE TO BE SENT.
At least a year before this, Mr. Boyce had received a com-
munication from a few Christian people living at Moreton Bay
asking for the appointment of a minister. They felt the need
themselves of the ministry of the Church, but they were more
deeply concerned for the welfare of the people in the Settle-
ment, as the moral degradation of the place was appalling.
These people, amongst whom were some Methodists, were
associated with a simple Mission Hall in Queen Street which


HON. J. TURNER REV. N. TURNER
REV. W. G. TAYLOR REV. HALSE ROGERS


had been built at his own expense by Mr. George Little, a part-
ner in the firm of Little and Phelan, general store-
keepers. Little was a godfearing man, and was
moved to erect a hall in which a Sunday School might
be conducted for the children who were growing up in the
midst of much wickedness without the teachings and restraints
of religion. He has been described as a man “unassuming and
retiring in his habits, with one idea uppermost in his mind—
the moral welfare of his youthful pupils.” The character of
the man is clearly indicated in a tribute paid to him when he
was presented with a gold watch and an Address by the resi-
dents, on the occasion of his removal to Sydney. In the
Address, praise was given for his “zeal and indefatigable
labours for a period of four years, in having erected and estab-
lished the first Sunday School for the training of the youth of
Brisbane in moral and religious knowledge; and for having
appropriated during that period and left behind him for the
same purpose the building so erected, at much personal ex-
pense, for the worship of God and public prayer.”
Around Little’s meeting place there had gathered a group of
earnest souls who sought to encourage each other in the Chris-
tian Faith, and to serve the community. One was named
Williams, a man of sturdy character, earnest, full of fire and
with an intense pity for the ignorant; and when he saw the
children growing up as if no man cared for their souls, he con-
ducted the Sunday School and watched over their spiritual wel-
fare. Another helper was Corporal Fursman of H.M. 12th Regi-
ment, an acceptable local preacher, who conducted the Sunday
services. He was probably the first Methodist to preach in the
colony.
In response to the appeal for a minister, Mr. Boyce sent two
young men, William Moore and William Lightbody, to More-
ton Bay on a mission of investigation. They were men of in-
sight and vision, and at Moreton Bay they saw a
promising field for mission work suited to the
peculiar genius of Methodism. On their return to
Sydney they reported to Mr. Boyce in the most fav-
ourable terms, with the result that at the next District Meeting
it was decided to create a circuit at Moreton Bay and to
appoint a minister as soon as possible. The young men had em-


phasised the urgency of the need, but as few ministers were
available, even for the circuits already established in New
South Wales, it seemed likely that Moreton Bay would have to
wait. Mr. Boyce prayerfully faced the need, and it was surely
providential that he was led to send William Moore, who was
not at that time an ordained minister, but a layman who had
volunteered for service on the Mission field at Fiji. As there
was no immediate prospect of his appointment to Fiji, Mr.
Boyce decided to use his services in the capacity of pioneer
missionary at Moreton Bay.
Moore was peculiarly suited in temperament and in ability
for the exacting task. For two years he laboured in the new
field with devotion and courage, showing considerable sagacity
and administrative skill. Together with Mrs.
Moore he arrived at Moreton Bay on Sunday,
October 17th, 1847, after a long and tedious voy-
age from Sydney. He was kindly received and entertained by
a Mr. Zillman, a Moravian missionary, of Zion’s Hill, where
he spoke at a meeting that evening. Apparently the pioneers
spent the night, for want of a better place, in military barracks,
and the next day they sought a suitable dwelling place. The
best they could find was a cottage containing “two dismal,
dreary rooms, with gaol-like doors” in Queen Street, and here
they established themselves on the Tuesday. The rest of the
week was spent visiting the people, interviewing all the Chris-
tians they could find, and generally preparing for the work of
the following Sunday. Mr. Moore was called upon during
this week to bury the body of “a poor harlot” who had died
suddenly, and this opened his eyes to the wickedness of the
place. It was evident that there was need for the preaching of
the Gospel and the influence of the Christian Church.
On Sunday, October 24th, 1847, he opened his commission
in the little hall in Queen Street which had been made avail-
able by the friends of George Little. “In the morning,” he
says, “eighty people were present, many being in tears, and in
the evening the chapel was full, a large number having to
remain outside.” In the afternoon a service was held at South
Brisbane when about twenty people attended. Referring to this
historic day, Moore said “The Lord is with us. I believe some


felt concerned. I feel that the Lord will make me a blessing to
this people.” He did, indeed!
Besides the meeting house in Queen Street, William Moore
found another door wide open, through which he did not hesi-
tate to pass. It was at the German settlement at Zion’s Hill—
now known as Nundah. The complete history of
this extraordinary community has been adequately
told in the brochure “Queensland’s First Free
Settlement, by H. J. J. Sparks. The settlement was estab-
lished in 1838 when ten brave men and their noble wives and
two pastors arrived in Moreton Bay to commence a mission for
the aborigines, under the auspices of the Rev. Dr. John Dun-
more Lang, a Presbyterian minister, whose vigorous efforts led
to a large number of settlers coming from Europe to assist in
the development of Northern New South Wales. The mis-
sionaries were well-educated, deeply pious, and highly
respected Germans. Their names are inscribed on an obelisk
erected in Nundah commemorating the first 100 years of the
history of Queensland. They are —Pastors C. Kipper and
K. W. Schmidt, and Messrs. G. Haussmann, G. Wagner, P.
Niquet, A. T. W. Hartenstein, J. L. Zillmann, A. Olbrecht, F. T.
Franz, A. Rode, L. Doege and M. Schneider. The inscription
on the obelisk reads:—“ln honour of Queensland’s first Free
Settlers. These missionaries and their families settled at Zion’s
Hill near this spot in the year 1838. This settlement was in-
spired by J. D. Lang and Johannes Goszner.”
When the missionaries arrived in the settlement it was on the
verge of being transformed from a penal to a free settlement.
The convicts, who in 1031 numbered 1,066, were being grad-
ually withdrawn and in 1837, just one year before the arrival
of the missionaries, only 300 were left.
A further contingent of missionaries arrived in June 1844.
It is evident that a determined attempt was to be made to
evangelise the aborigines. However, in spite of heroic efforts
and much hardship and self-sacrifice on the part of the mis-
sionaries, there was no appreciable response from the natives
so the enterprise was abandoned. Although some missionaries
left to engage in Christian service elsewhere, others remained
at Nundah and identified themselves with the Methodist


«Bl
MR. JOHN LITTLETON
Crow # s Nest
MR. W. A. NOBLE
Toowoomba
MR. G. P. BARNES
Warwick
MR. R. ALAND
Toowoomba


Church, and their descendants are numbered amongst our most
influential members at the present day.
It was amongst these settlers that Moore found some of his
warmest friends and most ardent supporters. They gladly wel-
comed him to their prayer meetings and cordially agreed to
support him in conducting a regular weekly service of
Public Worship at Zion’s Hill. Therefore, within a
week of commencing his work, Moore had two regular
preaching places, one in Queen Street and another at Zion’s
Hill, while a third at South Brisbane was being investigated!
Mr. Moore being a devoted and energetic servant of Christ,
was greatly affected by the prevalent ungodliness of the people,
often deplored his inexperience and inefficiency, and spent
much time in prayer. He was assiduous in pastoral visitation
and preached with the fervour of a true evangelist, striving
always to lead men to the Saviour. His stipend was but £2O
per quarter, his “parsonage’" was inadequate and there were
other hardships which had to be endured; nevertheless, his
chief joy was that he was a servant of Christ entrusted with the
great privilege of laying foundations upon which others would
build. It soon became apparent that his unceasing toil and the
splendid co-operation of his wife were finding favour among
the people. Public interest in the services increased, the Sun-
day School enrolment improved and more willing workers were
found.
It was characteristic of Moore that in November 1847, one
month after his arrival at Moreton Bay, he visited Ipswich, then
known as Limestone. Here lime kilns had been erected to pro-
vide for the requirements of house-builders at
Moreton Bay. A considerable settlement gathered
around the kilns and this represented a further cen-
tre for his pioneering labours. No suitable building was found
where services might be held, so a second visit was made dur-
ing January 1848 when, notwithstanding stormy weather, a
service was held in the Court House, with some fifty people
present. When it was apparent that the new cause was pros-
pering, Moore decided to conduct occasional Sunday Services.
The first of these was held on Easter Sunday, April 1848. It
is recorded that thirty-five people were present, in addition to
some children; that more than twenty children were enrolled in


the Sunday School and several people offered their services as
teachers. With an eye to the needs of the future, Mr. Moore
had already established a Church building fund which was
substantially supported on this historic Sunday. A note in
Moore’s diary referring to this day reads: 4fe This is the first Sun-
day I have spent in Ipswich. The congregation is small, about
thirty-five in the morning and several children. Let Thy bless-
ing rest upon this young plant, 0 God of Jacob! Preached in
the evening to about thirty adults and a few children. Felt that
the Lord was present in the evening to help. Oh, I want moie
concern for souls. Lord, help and quicken! Fill me with love,
and make me useful.’
It was not until about nine months after he commenced his
ministry, and when it was evident that firm foundations had
been laid, that Moore, probably advised by Mr. Boyce, the
Chairman of the District, instituted the Quarterly
Meeting for the transaction of relevant business and
a properly constituted administration in terms of
Methodist law and procedure. Thus on June 30th, 1848, the
First Quarterly Meeting of the Brisbane Wesleyan Circuit was
held. Those present were: William Moore, Chairman, Johann
Hermann, William H. Robertson, James Sutherland, and G. F.
Poole. The following officers were elected: G. F. Poole, Cir-
cuit Steward; W. H. Robertson, Society Steward; J. Suther-
land, Chapel Steward; J. Hermann, Poor Steward.
Mr. Moore reported to the meeting that there were twenty
church members —twelve at North Brisbane and eight at Zion’s
Hill. A very interesting record of the financial statement pre-
sented at this meeting has been preserved. It shows an income
for the period October to June of £2B/6/8 and an expenditure,
including Mr. Moore’s removal expenses from Sydney
(£2l/17/-) and the cost of a horse and saddle (£l7/12/-), of
£122/1/8. The deficiency of £93 was not a charge on the young
circuit, but was met partly out of a Colonial fund and partly
from a grant from the Committee under the control of the Aus-
tralian District Meeting.
During 1848, Mr. Moore had the assistance of the Rev. G.
Poole, a supernumerary minister who had served the Church


in England and the West Indies. He came to live in Brisbane
for the benefit of his health. He was not able to
conduct services, but his counsel and his fellowship
were of the utmost significance to Mr. Moore and his
helpers. His son, G. F. Poole (Circuit Steward) was also a
valuable worker; he has been described as a local preacher of
more than ordinary ability and good literary gifts.
In a report to the District Meeting held in York Street, Syd-
ney, on Friday, August 4th, 1848, progress is reflected in the
following words:—
'‘lpswich has been visited with every prospect of suc-
cess. We have preaching also at Kangaroo Point, South
Brisbane, and the German Station.”
A further reference to Moreton Bay in the same report
says:—
*‘ln this place and neighbourhood an important Mission
has been commenced during the past year, which affords
promise of much good. The small Chapel, formerly
erected by Mr. Little when resident here and lent by him
gratuitously to the Society, has generally been filled to
overflowing, and the Word proclaimed has been the Power
of God to the salvation of several souls. A class has been
formed consisting of eighteen members. In North Bris-
bane, a town of rising importance as the principal port
and mart of North Australia, is the central sphere of our
operations. The Lord has given your agent favour in the
eyes of many. A new Chapel of larger dimensions has
become absolutely necessary in order to accommodate the
many who are disposed to hear. Arrangements are being
made to accomplish this desirable object. A considerable
sum has been already promised, and we hope ’ere long the
Foundation Stone will be laid.”


m .. Jm
vjliillr -<v^S>
REV. A. HUTCHISON
President, 1901
REV. W. DINNING
President, 1920
REV. I. CASTLEHOW
President, 1908
REV. T. BRASSINGTON
President, 1912


CHAPTER 111
THE FIRST BUILDING ENTERPRISES
At the Second Quarterly Meeting held on October 4th, 1848 r
Mr. Moore was able to report that “the ground for a chapel at
Aorth Brisbane has been granted and steps are now being
Burnett taken for its immediate erection. ’ This was indeed
(^ aue j evidence of genuine progress, and the beginning of
the fulfilment of one of the dreams of the aggressive
pioneer missionary—that of having a Chapel consecrated to the
mission of Methodism from which to exercise his ministry. The
work had quite outgrown the restricted accommodation in
Queen Street. The new site was a substantial block in Albert
Street, between Adelaide Street and Burnett Lane, consisting of
three allotments, each 66ft. by 132 ft. This was a grant made
by the Government of New South Wales. The site was any-
thing but attractive; a watercourse crossed at the adjacent cor-
ner, and it can be easily conjectured how evil a thing this
would be when it is remembered that drainage and sanitation
were of the crudest description, the elementary principles of
which were not practised. The streets were in an appalling
condition; they were ill-made and worse kept. There was no
municipal council to attend to matters of making roads, nor of
exercising any care over public hygiene; yet, on this site the
first Methodist Church in Queensland was erected. It was built
of brick at the cost of £l5O. Its dimensions are given as 35ft.
by 18ft. and it was capable of accommodating 150 people. It
was by no means an ornate building but it was a Methodist
meeting house, the fulfilment of many fervent prayers, the
result of faithful toil and much sacrifice. The church members
and the workers had the joy of worshipping and witnessing in
a place that was their very own. The building made the
Methodist denomination an established entity in the growing
township and it immediately improved the status of the Church
and helped to extend its influence.
Adjacent to the new Church and facing Burnett Lane, a small
parsonage was built, the first in Queensland. It consisted of
two rooms and was constructed from material already on the-
property. Later, two rooms were added in response to a


stimulus from Mr. Boyce, who paid the cost, and this ultimately
became the minister’s home.
The new Church was opened for Public Worship on March
10th, 1849. The morning service was conducted by the Rev.
Thomas Mowbray, a Presbyterian minister who had recently
arrived in the town, and in the evening by Mr.
Moore. The Church attracted new worshippers, so
that shortly after it was opened Mr. Moore re-
ported:—
North Brisbane—our congregation is very good in the
new Chapel. It is regularly filled and frequently crowded.
We have recently received a few valuable accessions to
our numbers from England.”
At the same time as the building in Brisbane was proceed-
ing, William Moore was engaged in preparations for a Church
at Ipswich. A site consisting of two acres had been granted
by the New South Wales Government. It was heavily
timbered, but a “working bee'* was organised to clear
the land. A band of sturdy men, members of the
congregation, gathered with axes, saws and fire-brands, and
quickly demolished the forest. Then followed the erection of
a wooden Church, 14ft. by 28ft. The versatile Mr. Moore was
the architect and part builder, assistance being generously
given by members of the congregation. Mr. A. Scells, who
ai rived in Moreton Bay in April 1849, in some interesting
reminiscences says with reference to the Ipswich Chapel “my
father was busily engaged with Mr. Moore until the comple-
tion of the little chapel. I, a boy of eight summers, occupied
the important function of handing up tools to the builders.”
This is an indication of the personal influence of Mr. Moore,
and of his ability to enlist the co-operation and service of
others.
We have no record of the official opening of the Ipswich
Church, but it is known that regular Sunday services were in-
stituted immediately, and that the work was organised on the
lines of Methodist usage, with class meetings, prayer meetings
and young people’s activities. Mr. Moore officiated on one
Sunday each month, the other Services being supplied by local
preachers. The officials gladly and efficiently undertook the
responsibility of the Church life in the minister’s absence.
32
ANNALS OF ACHIEVEMENT


With two Churches —one in Brisbane and the other at Ips-
wich —and three other preaching places —South Brisbane,
Kangaroo Point and Zion’s Hill—a Preachers’ Plan was
necessary. This was first issued in July 1849. It
provided for seven Services every Sunday and three
week-night Services. The preachers’ names appear-
ing on the plan were W. Moore, G. F. Poole, Corporal Furs-
man, Scells and Bailey. Later, other names were added to this
list —Zillman, Gericke, Trundle, Gerler, J. B. Carvosso and
James Robinson.
Travelling was difficult and slow. Many miles of rough
roads were traversed by the preachers. Mr. Moore covered the
area of his wide bush circuit on horseback, and it is certain
that the animal had few rest days! An appointment at Ips-
wich necessitated using the steamer on the Bremer River, so
that a Sunday’s work required a week-end for the purpose.
The preachers were grand men who strove to translate into
practice the historic injunction of John Wesley to his helpers,
“You have nothing to do but save souls. Therefore spend and
be spent in this work, and go always, not only to those who
want you, but to those who want you most.” These helpers in
the task of evangelism felt themselves equally responsible with
the minister for the salvation of men. Evil was rampant in the
small population —horse-racing, gambling, drunkenness, bush-
ranging and other degrading forms of wickedness challenged
them to use every opportunity of telling the story of redeeming
love. The first local preachers were the forerunners of a long
line of such men whose self-denying and faithful labours are
indissolubly linked with the history and development of our
Church.
The ministry of William Moore ended abruptly in December
1849. He was advised by Mr. Boyce of an appointment to the
Fiji Islands where he could realise his life’s ambition to
become a foreign missionary. He hastily called
together the members of the Quarterly Meeting
and announced his impending departure. So con-
cluded a most memorable and valuable ministry. It is un-
equalled in the history of pioneering missionary work any-
where in Australia. For twenty-six months Moore had toiled
unceasingly with conspicuous results. His diary reveals the


spirit in which he served his Lord. ‘"January Ist. I have just
come in from Watchnight. Praise God, it was one of the best
I have been at, and to my astonishment we had about sixty per-
sons there. I feel humbled at my past unfaithfulness and I
covenant afresh this morning to live for God.”
When Moore left Brisbane there were two churches, one par-
sonage, forty-eight church members, and the circuit was fairly
meeting its expenses. The memory of the man which was most
cherished by those who were associated with him, was that of
his character. Mr. W. A. Noble, who arrived from England in
December 1847, said of him: “I liked William Moore well. He
was not a brilliant preacher, but he was a wonderful man of
prayer. You felt when he came into the pulpit that he had
just come from his knees, and that he brought the presence of
God with him.”


CHAPTER IV
EARLY EFFORTS ON DARLING DOWNS
The Rev. William Lightbody was transferred from the
Queenbeyan circuit to succeed Mr. Moore. He arrived early in
1850 and left again in less than a year. He was of the same
calibre as his predecessor. It is recorded that dur-
V jl] 0111 ] ing his ministry “The Spirit of the Lord was
Ligntooay ' , t • • i i
poured out, and the dispirited were encouraged
with hope; the weak in faith were strengthened; the backsliders
restored; the careless sinner awakened and savingly converted
to God. 7 ' We may read between the lines of this comment and
understand the quality of Lightbody’s character and work. He
was a man of God, with the passion in his soul to bring men
face to face with the Saviour.
The steady growth of the circuit is revealed in his official
report to the Thirty-Second Meeting of the Australasian Dis-
trict held in Sydney in August 1850: —
“Moreton Bay Circuit. Our members here manifest
their love to the Lord Jesus by the feeling of peace and
unity prevalent among them; by their upright deportment
before the people of the world; by their zeal in seeking
the conversion of sinners; and by their liberal contribu-
tions towards the support of the Gospel.”
“North Brisbane (Burnett Lane). Here we have three
classes containing fifty-two members, including those on
trial. The congregation is composed, in part, of persons
residing in South Brisbane and Kangaroo Point. It is in
a state of improvement so that enlargement of the Chapel
is now become necessary.”
“German Station. In this settlement and in its im-
mediate vicinity there are about ninety souls. It is regu-
larly supplied with preaching; the sermons are well
attended here; we have a class of twenty members much
alive to God.”
“Ipswich. Here we have a small weatherboard Chapel,
large enough to accommodate eighty persons. There are
here five members of Society but no leader except when
visited by the preachers.”


■HF
WKfm l -iwWi
/ <* ♦? +
♦" ’ 4 -
.; • . . ? • - “ *' '/^^mBBS^
a$g| $*&&%& - -- I A\
-> ;- ' .. v . ■’ , " -. * ■ ,_. - •
.■ • ■ •-. ■•'
A METHODIST STATESMAN
REV. H. YOUNGMAN, D.D.
President 1893, 1898, 1907
President-General, 1910-1913


It was also reported that there were two Sunday Schools in
the circuit —one at Brisbane with fifty children and seven
teachers, and one at Ipswich with fourteen children and one
teacher. Thus upon the firm foundation laid by Moore and
his helpers a strong Church was being slowly built. In an
environment of moral decadence, of riotous living, of brazen
and defiant wickedness, Methodism was a witness to holy
things.
The Rev. John Watsford, a native of Parramatta, succeeded
Mr. Lightbody, and his name first appears in the records of the
Moreton Bay Circuit in the minutes of the Quarterly Meeting
held on January 14th, 1851, at which he presided.
Mr. Watsford, who had seen service on the mission
field in Fiji, quickly took up the tasks which his
predecessors had laid down. With a soul burning with
evangelistic zeal, he preached sermons that roused the con-
sciences of his hearers in each of the preaching places in his
circuit. He sought, in loving solicitude, to build up the
believers in their faith, and he explored every possible open-
ing with a view to establishing new preaching centres. Per-
sonal comfort and such considerations were disregarded. John
Watsford commenced in the Moreton Bay Circuit a notable
career as an evangelist of the type that John Wesley would
have heartily approved. Ultimately he was stationed in the
Victoria and Tasmania Conference where he laid the founda-
tions of the Home Mission Society. His name became a
household word throughout the Connexion and he was affec-
tionately known as “Father Watsford.”
At the first Quarterly Meeting he discussed with his officials
the very obvious need for a new chapel. The one at Burnett
Lane had become too small for the congregation, besides which
it was not a very good witness to the growing strength and
dignity of Methodism. The meeting agreed that a larger and
more convenient chapel was necessary, and Mr. Watsford was
authorised to take preliminary steps to erect another building.
At his next Quarterly Meeting he offered to find the necessary
funds to build a small weather-board preaching place at South
Brisbane, if the meeting would guarantee that he should have
the amount repaid to him as soon as convenient. This offer
was readily accepted, and Bros. Sutherland and Poole were


appointed to act as a committee to call for tenders and superin-
tend the erection of the building.
Towards the end of 1851 the Rev. John G. Millard, a
brother-in-law of William Moore, was sent to assist Watsford.
and was stationed at Ipswich. The Moreton Bay circuit was
now beginning to take its place with the important
circuits in the New South Wales District. The two
men worked as loyal colleagues. Their fellowship
in the service of Christ was a beautiful example to the mem-
bers of the Church.
Together they travelled extensively, “making peaceful penc-
il ation into the surrounding country districts, and occasionally
visiting the sheep stations, where they were welcomed and
given a good hearing by the people.” They conducted
simple services of worship under the trees, in farm sheds, in
homes built of rough slabs; wherever they could get a few
people together they told them the old, old story, and taught
them to sing the hymns of Wesley. They baptised infants and
observed other religious ordinances, using these opportunities
for further Christian teaching.
It is very likely that their travels took them beyond the Great
Range to the Darling Downs, where a settlement had been
formed in 1840. It is also probable that they reached War-
wick, for in the District Minutes of 1851 it is recorded that two
acres of land had been secured here for the purposes of a
chapel and a minister’s residence. If this conjecture is sound,
the journey was an adventurous one. All the hazards and diffi-
culties of the primeval bush had to be encountered, besides
which, in this area were to be found large groups of aborigines
who were often in hostile mood. These men were true pioneers,
they literally blazed the trail along which succeeding preachers
have travelled in comparative safety.
The aborigines were not in those days under Government
supervision, and their encampments were found in the most un-
expected places. Although the white people, especially those
engaged in Christian work, were eager to help them, they were
often a great nuisance and sometimes a menace. Referring to
his contacts with the aborigines at Ipswich Mr. Millard said
that they were in the habit of camping on the outskirts of the
town, and often made the night hideous with their strange


noises. He often spoke to them of their sins and their Saviour,
‘‘but I fear,” he said, “the evil habits they had formed from
intercourse with a certain class of white people prevented much
impression.” On one occasion he witnessed a battle in Ips-
wich between two hostile tribes, when spears and boomerangs
were freely used. The belligerents numbered some hundreds,
and the white residents of the township were obliged to let
them have their quarrel out.
John Watsford was recalled to resume his missionary work
at Fiji. This necessitated Mr. Millard’s removal
to Brisbane. Mr. Millard left a valuable record
of his experiences in Ipswich in which he
relates:—
“Mrs. Millard devoted a good deal of time to visiting
and the distribution of tracts, and by her influence
generally largely contributed to the advance of the cause.
Dr. Challinor, Messrs. Macalister, Deacon, Cockburn,
Welsby, Benj. Cribb, Burrall, Allen, Scells, Izard, Mrs.
Hall (daughter of Rev. Jacob Stanley, one of the ex-
Presidents of the British Conference) are names that occur
to me as fragrant in my recollection. It was during my
residence in Ipswich that the gold discoveries in N.S.W.
and Victoria attracted so many thousands of people from
their homes and ordinary occupation, that Mr. Watsford
and I had chiefly women and children for our audiences,
the men, at least many of them, having gone to the dig-
gings to seek their fortunes there. In this way many
families were thrown on our special care and attention.”
Mr. Millard presided at the Quarterly Meeting as Superin-
tendent of the Brisbane Circuit in April 1851 and for three
years he maintained an unbroken ministry. The question of
building a new church was constantly under discussion. It
was recognised that it must be larger than the original church,
more ornate and in harmony with the public buildings that
were being planned for the growing town. The chief difficulty
was the cost, as the finances of the Methodist community were
straitened. Although the building was not erected during the
term of Mr. Millard, he kept the project before his people.
In July 1851 it was decided that the Mechanic’s Institute
should be hired for six or twelve months. A subscription list


was opened for the purpose of building the new chapel, and
Mr. Boyce was appealed to for assistance. Referring to his
ministry in Brisbane Mr. Millard said: “At this time the
preaching places were —North Brisbane, South Brisbane,
German Station, Ipswich, and Moggill Creek. I also conducted
a service now and then at Eagle Farm at Mr. Connell’s, and
sometimes, when I made my periodical visitations to Ipswich,
at Mr. D. McConneEs station on the Bremer. Seasons of
refreshing were granted from the presence of the Lord, and at
the German Station (or Zion’s Hill) especially the influence of
the service was often unspeakably sweet and hallowing.”
During Mr. Millard’s ministry many changes took place in
Brisbane, the population increased by several thousands, and
new industries were introduced. The township was becoming
better organised, and more substantial buildings were being
erected. However, the discovery of gold in New South Wales
and Victoria unsettled the people. Most of them became highly
excited, while many of the adventurous men went off to the
diggings. This was reflected in the Church life, so that, though
the work was well maintained, and there was no falling off in
the congregations, it was not easy to meet the current expenses,
and much harder to finance the building of a new church. It
is noteworthy that in the Pastoral Address to the Methodist
people in 1855 there appears this warning:—
“We feel it our duty most affectionately to caution you
against those schemes and speculations in business Lo
which you may be tempted by the sudden changes in
mercantile affairs so frequent in these Colonies; but
which, if they do not involve you in pecuniary difficulties,
will overcharge your minds, oppress them with worldly
cares, incapacitate them for spiritual exercises, and divert
to merely worldly enterprises the energy and resources
which would otherwise be devoted to the cause of Christ.”


CHAPTER V
AUSTRALIAN CONFERENCE CONSTITUTED
The year 1855 marked an important constitutional change.
Until this time —since 1812 —the Australian churches had been
a “District” of the British Wesleyan Conference, presided over
by a General Superintendent. This relationship had
been a most cordial one —the District loyally observing
the regulations of Conference, and Conference unfailingly sup-
porting the growing District by sending most capable ministers
and by liberal grants. Conference in 1854, gratified with the
progress of the District, and assured of its permanent
character, resolved that the District should be raised to the
status of a separate Conference, having complete autonomy, the
only qualification being that the British Conference should
reserve the right to appoint the President. This right was
exercised until the new Conference was considered to be
financially self-supporting. The change was not sought by the
members of the District meeting, although it had been antici-
pated, but “it originated under the Providence of God in the
Fathers and Brethren in England.”
The propriety of the change was obvious. The Australian
Churches were too remote from the Connexional centre for
detailed administration, besides which, it was recognised that
the new independence was well deserved. The ministers and
members of the District regarded the change as a compliment,
as indeed it was. The results of thirty-seven years of pioneer-
ing under the most arduous and primitive conditions were
revealed in the Conference Address to the Methodist Societies
of Australasia of 1855 —“Several of the senior ministers have
referred to the state of religion in these Colonies twenty years
since, and have contrasted it with our present state and
prospects. That was the day of small things. Now we have
442 chapels and 391 other preaching places; 116 ministers;
19,897 members, of which 7,190 are Europeans and the rest
are native converts in New Zealand, the Friendly Isles and
Feejee; 35,576 scholars receiving instruction in our Day and
Sabbath schools; and about 80,000 hearers of the Word.”
The first Australasian Conference was “begun in Sydney on


m |k -- jHpIfe- l|||
REV. S. LARKIN
REV. W. SMITH
President, 1915
REV. W. H. GREENWOOD
President, 1922
REV. W. LITTLE
President, 1924


Thursday, January 18lh, 1855,” presided over by the President
appointed by British Conference, Rev. William Binnington
Boyce. This was a well merited honour for Mr.
Boyce, a compliment to his work and a tribute to
his statesmanship. Boyce was one of God’s best
gifts to Australia. INo better man could have been found to
direct the pioneering efforts in this vast undeveloped country.
He was known for his piety and his culture, for his practical
ability, sound judgment and unvarying sympathy. He was
interested in the progress of the community as well as of the
Church. Amongst other important public positions, he was
a member of the first Senate of the Sydney University incor-
porated in 1850.
The Conference consisted of nine Districts: New South
Wales with fifteen circuits; Victoria with twenty; South
Australia with nine; West Australia with four; Van Dieman'«
Land (Tasmania) with eight; New Zealand (Auckland) with
ten; New Zealand (Wellington) with nine; the Friendly Isles
with five; Feejee with seven circuits. Brisbane and Ipswich
were two circuits in the New South Wales District. The Rev.
W. J. K. Piddington was appointed as Superintendent and
associated with him was Nathaniel Turner, a Supernumerary.
The Minutes of this Conference gives the following information
regarding Government grants of land to Queensland
Methodism: —North Brisbane, three allotments; South Bris-
bane, two acres; Kangaroo Point, two acres; Ipswich, two
acres; Ashby, quarter acre; Cleveland, two acres; Drayton,
two acres; Warwick, two acres.
Mr. Piddington spent three busy and fruitful years in the
Brisbane Circuit. At the outset he applied himself to the build-
ing of the new Church. In this he had the willing assistance
of his people, amongst whom was the Hon. J. S.
Turner, M.L.C., son of the Rev. Nathaniel Turner.
By profession he was a banker; he was therefore
able to bring a wide business experience to the service of the
Church. He was a fine type of Christian man whose witness
was a potent influence in public life. He was profoundly
interested in the work of God, and he helped to improve the
status of Methodism in the new settlement, besides giving
generously of his time and his resources to the Church.


The new Church —a fine brick building, 80ft. by 40ft. with
seating accommodation for 500—was built on the site of
Moore’s humble chapel. It was officially opened on December
6th, 1856. The Rev. John Eggleston of Sydney
conducted the opening services when large con-
gregations were present. There was also a Tea
and Public Meeting which 300 people attended. The proceeds
amounted to £SO from collections and £3O from the Tea Meet-
ing. The Church cost £2,667, what debt was carried forward
we are not told. The new building, which was to serve
Methodism in Brisbane for thirty years further improved the
standing of the Church in the settlement and was a token of
its permanent character.
Mr. Piddington did not surrender himself wholly to the
claims of Brisbane. The number of people moving westwards
to establish new settlements was increasing and it was his duty
to follow them with the ordinances of religion. He was fond
of hush life, and was noted for his horsemanship. It is related
that he travelled the distance between Brisbane and Ipswich—
twenty-five miles —in two-and-a-half hours.
It was Mr. Piddington who conducted the first services at
Vi arwick. He was ever on the alert for opportunities for
expansion. Distance was no deterrent to his pioneering spirit,
nor was he daunted by any other difficulties.
M arwick, then a lonely township on the vast Darling
Downs, whose reputation for fertility was attracting
large numbers of settlers, was situated about 160 miles from
Brisbane over rough and mountainous roads. It appears that
Mr. Jonathan Harris (grandfather of the Rev. F. J. Harris)
with his wife and family, was appointed in 1855 as headmaster
of a National school at Warwick. When he found that there
was no Methodist Church in the district he and another young
man, Thomas Amies, invited Mr. Piddington to visit the town
and establish a Methodist preaching place. They promised to
give their personal support in every possible way. This was
the kind of appeal suited to the minister’s heart. With as little
delay as possible he rode to Warwick, and met the friends who
were so anxious for his services. On the Sunday he conducted
two well attended services at the Court House. The evening
congregation was beyond the capacity of the building. This


was the first evening service ever held by a Christian minister
in that district- The following Tuesday evening Mr. Pidding-
ton preached again to an equally large congregation, after
which he invited all persons who had been members of the
Methodist Church in England or elsewhere to meet him at the
conclusion of the service. About seven did so, and these were
at once constituted a Methodist Church. In 1857
the Rev. W. Fidler was appointed to Ipswich, and
it was arranged that he should visit Warwick
about once a month, a duty which he faithfully and lovingly
performed until April 1859 when he was appointed by the
Conference as first resident minister of the Methodist Church
at Warwick and the Darling Downs.
It was during Mr. Piddington’s ministry that the Valley
Church was established. His colleague, the Rev. Nathaniel
Turner, a saintly man who had seen many years of service in
Tasmania, New Zealand and Tonga, had taken up
residence in Brisbane, and had built a substantial
house at North Quay. He intended spending the
rest of his years in retirement, cultivating his garden. He had
worked hard all his life, had known many trials and was
surely entitled to rest in his declining years. However, the
wickedness of Brisbane moved his soul, so that he could not
resist the impulse to use all his remaining strength to further
the work of God. He was a loyal colleague to the Superin-
tendent minister, who gave him every opportunity for service.
He preached often and visited the sick and the needy. He gave
the full benefit of his experience, sagacious counsel and
vigorous energy to the young cause, and many enterprises
owed a considerable measure of their success to his help.
Mr. Turner took special interest in Fortitude Valley. Ser-
vices had been held here, but they had lapsed, and Mr. Turner
was determined to recommence them. It is related that he
conducted his services in the open air in Ann
Street, and was happy to find large companies of
people willing to hear him. The proprietor of the
Royal George Hotel, a Mr. Loudon, not wishing to see the old
gentleman and his hearers exposed to the hot sun, offered the
use of one of his large rooms which was well furnished with
seats. A compact was made and kept that no liquor should be


sold during Church service hours. Services were continued in
this room for some time. In 1856 a building was erected in
Ann Street, which was the first Valley Methodist Church. It
is interesting to note that it exists to-day, and is a mechanic’s
workshop. Mr. Turner was also instrumental in reviving the
work at Eagle Farm, where another small Church was built.
In addition to this he travelled to Maryborough to lay die
foundations of the Church. He visited Rockhampton at the
same time although with less success. Nathaniel Turner, there-
fore, served the Church with sacrifical zeal as a supernumerary
for nine years and was laid to rest in 1864.
The second Ipswich Church was opened on July 18th, 1858.
The population of this town had grown and the Methodist
community found the first Church too small for their require-
ments. It was a Gothic building, and although not
so large as that at Brisbane, it was more attractive.
Several friends travelled from Brisbane by boat to
congratulate the congregation on their success. The building
costing £I,OOO, was of brick, 48ft. by 33ft., and was so con-
structed as to permit of easy enlargement. It is the central
portion of the present Ellenborough Street Church.
It was during the ministry of Rev. S. Wilkinson that the first
service was held in Toowoomba. This information is given in
an article which he contributed to the “Christian Advocate”
entitled “The Journal of a Ministerial Visit to the
Darling Downs.” He was accompanied on a
journey of 400 miles, occupying eighteen days, by
the Rev. William Fidler. It was no simple task
to take such a trip in those days. It is significant therefore, to
read:—“ Having first been commended to God by His people,
we left Brisbane this morning, August 25th, and arrived at the
populous town of Ipswich, a distance of twenty-five miles.”
Here a new Church recently had been erected at a cost of
£I,OOO. The next day the ministers passed through Laidley,
the following day they rode into Gatton, and on August 28th
came to Drayton.
August 29th, 1858, was the date of the first Methodist service
held in Toowoomba. Mr. Wilkinson records on that date
“Preached at Toowoomba this morning to about thirty-five
persons, most of whom we had individually invited on Satur-


day, Mr. Fidler taking one side of the street and myself the
other, distributing tracts as we went. Mr. Fidler preached at
night to a more numerous assembly. At Drayton, three miles
further, I preached in the evening in the Court House to a
crowded congregation, several being at the door, who listened
to the words with evident and manifest concern.”
The evangelists continued their tour of exploration, visiting
Cowrie, Rosalie Plains and Dalby, then a township about the
size of Toowoomba with very primitive buildings of myall
saplings and bark. Calls were made at lonely
houses, tracts and papers left, the Bible read and
prayer offered. Services were held where possible,
and congregations gathered through personal visitation. On
Saturday, September 4th, Mr. Wilkinson and his colleagues
arrived at Warwick—twelve days after leaving Brisbane —
‘‘after a weary journey, characterised not so much by its length
as by the badness of the roads. The rain softened the surface
and made the road slippery and rendered the soil adhesive, so
that the horse lifted four or five pounds with each foot.” The
next day a new chapel was consecrated at Warwick. It was a
wooden structure costing about £2OO. The subscriptions had
fallen short of the total expense by about £64, but this amount
was received at the opening services, so that the building was
free of debt.
Mr. John T. Littleton, a local preacher with a wide experi-
ence in Cornwall, England, was the real pioneer of Methodism
in Toowoomba. When he arrived in Brisbane in 1862, he
went at once to the Rev. J. H. Fletcher and presented
his credentials. His name was duly placed on the
Ipswich Preachers’ Plan as there was no Methodist
cause beyond the Range. The only Methodist Mr. Littleton
could find in Toowoomba was Mr. Henry Lavers, who had
recently arrived from New South Wales. Two Methodists were
enough for this Great-Heart to begin a Methodist fellowship.
He found that morning services only were held in Anglican
and Congregational Churches; he therefore resolved to hold
an evening service under the auspices of the Methodist Church.
Having obtained permission to use an unoccupied Presbyterian
Church he announced that a service would be held on the


\ . , .a '
•.: ■ p ,/h'-' '■ ..;
.’ * V* * . .* Jgf /jg
REV. ROBERT HARTLEY
HARTLEY MEMORIAL CHURCH
Rockhampton


following Sunday evening; he had the privilege of preaching
to ninety people.
In response to Mr. Littleton’s earnest request, and in view of
the promising efforts he had made in the town, a probationer
was appointed—the Rev. J. Corbett, and at once a duly con-
stituted Methodist circuit was inaugurated. Mr.
Littleton gave the minister loyal assistance;
indeed, when Mr. Corbett suffered a sunstroke he
carried on single-handed, managing two preach-
ing places for some time. He lived to be ninety-five, and was
a loyal Methodist to the end. He was a striking personality —
robust, vigorous and intense. He was respected throughout
Methodism on the Darling Downs, and the origin of many
preaching centres may be traced to his zeal and diligence. His
appointments took him to places as far distant as Warwick and
everywhere crowds came to hear him. He preached the Gospel
of full and free Salvation with characteristic Cornish fire,
using his mighty voice often to the point of shouting, emphasis-
ing his message with vigorous gestures, using homely logic and
apt illustrations that compelled attention and frequently
secured conversions. John T. Littleton made an abiding
impression upon Methodism on the Downs.
Thus the work on the Darling Downs began; it developed
until Toowoomba and Warwick became frontiers from which
neighbouring towns and even the far South-West were pro-
vided with the ordinances of the Methodist Church,
From 1858 until 1862 the Church was embarrassed by
financial difficulties. The struggle began when help from
England was discontinued. Until that time, as much money as
was possible was raised locally, and the deficiency
was passed on to the Rev. W. B. Boyce to be paid
by the British Conference. From the Quarterly
Meeting dating 1857 an unequal battle was waged between the
expense involved through the growing needs and expanding
areas of the new district and the income limited, despite many
generous donors. It was a severe test to the Methodist com-
munity. The debts at times must have seemed overwhelming.
Here is a summary of them: —1857 the debit was £56; 1858,
£194; 1859, £346; 1860, £370. The Quarterly Meeting
Minutes record evidence of the anxiety of ministers and


officials during these trying days:—April 1859, “After anxious
deliberation upon the financial position, it was resolved that
the three ministers, Revs. Wilkinson, Fidler and Turner con-
sent to a reduction in their allowances for the year.” (At the
following Quarterly Meeting this motion was rescinded and
the amounts deducted were refunded to the ministers.) January
1860, “As this circuit has received a liberal grant from the
Wesleyan Church Extension Society towards the circuit debt,
and a further sum of £IOO having been undertaken privately
by four friends, this meeting feels itself pledged to a special
effort in order to remove the remainder, estimated to date at
£370 less £250 —£120.” April 1860, “This meeting empowers
the Superintendent Minister and Circuit Steward to initiate a
worthy celebration when in their opinion the time has arrived
to congratulate themselves as a Church that the heavy debt has
been removed.” This represents a bright hope which did not
materialise until the following year. Mr. Wilkinson, who
guided the Church through this its first financial struggle, con-
cluded his ministry in April 1861 leaving the Church entirely
free from debt, thus opening the way for his successor, Rev.
J. H. Fletcher.


CHAPTER VI
THE QUEENSLAND DISTRICT
At the Conference held in Sydney in 1863 the Queensland
circuits, which had been included in the Sydney District, were
constituted a separate District. The new status given to Queens-
land was a sure proof, not so much of the numerical and
financial strength of the circuits, but of the great promise of
the future development of the work. The official record of the
Conference is in the following terms: —
“Queensland District —
Brisbane —Joseph H. Fletcher; N. Turner (Super-
numerary) .
Ipswich —Theo. Beaizley. One from England.
Warwick —One from England.
Toowoomba —Jabez B. Watkin.
Maryborough —One from England.
Rockhampton—One from England.
There were, therefore, four ministers but these were
increased to seven two years later, with the Rev. J. H. Fletcher
as the Chairman. He had been in Brisbane since 1861, and
had made his mark in the community and upon the
young Church. Joseph Horner Fletcher was an
Englishman, and had given notable service to the
Church in New Zealand and in New South Wales. He was a
fine scholar and a powerful preacher but he was outstanding
as an administrator. During his term in Queensland, he con-
solidated the work of his predecessors and laid foundations in
new areas north of Brisbane which were being rapidly settled.
In 1863 he was transferred to the Ipswich circuit, from which,
a year later, he was honoured by being appointed Principal of
Newington College, Sydney.
Mr, Fletcher was profoundly affected by the irreligion, the
immorality, and the godlessness of the people around him.
Large congregations attended his preaching, but he could make
no apparent impression upon them. “A force,” he said, “like
an explosion of gun powder, and almost volcanic violence is
needed to dislodge the intense worldliness of our colonial
hearers. I confess I am no Elijah to call fire from heaven upon


the sodden and lifeless sacrifice. Yet ‘the still small voice,’ I
trust, often speaks to my hearers’ hearts . . . Lord, help me,
and Oh, work Thyself! Oh, how critical, how important, is a
revival and a mighty one here and now. Lord, help! —Begin
to save on the right hand and on the left.”
Mr. Fletcher suffered financial handicap from the outset of
his Chairmanship. The Conference that created the Queens-
land District resolved that grants from the Sustentation Fund
would not be available for Queensland. “It is expected,” read
the lesolution, that as speedily as possible, Queensland will
have funds, separate from those of New South Wales, as are
those of other colonies. By this resolution, an area of over
600,000 square miles with a total Church membership of 170
was required to provide for itself. The history of the Church
in Queensland has been one of stress and strain to achieve the
impossible, and it is pathetic to turn the folios of early docu-
ments and note the heroic efforts made to meet requests for
help from north and west. Many appeals were made to the
Conference, but without avail except for a sum representing
collections taken up in several circuits in New South Wales.
Mr. Fletcher attempted to avert a serious financial landslide by
collecting over £3oo—a creditable sum in those days. From
this fund £155 was paid to bring three men from England, and
from the balance grants were made to the circuits.
The period of Mr. Fletcher’s chairmanship marked the com-
mencement of the Church at Maryborough and Rockhampton.
By this time, settlement was gradually moving northwards. It
was some time before the gold rush, and the
lure of the northern areas was due to the need
for agricultural lands. Settlers came from New
South Wales, and many came from Europe, who were attracted
by the abundant facilities for pastoral enterprise north of
Brisbane. On November 12th, 1863, the steamer “Queens-
land with Captain Curphey in charge, arrived at Mary-
borough bringing Revs. J. H. Fletcher and N. Turner and Mr.
J. Sutherland from Brisbane. They had been appointed a
commission to make arrangements for extending the operations
of the Church to the principal towns north of Brisbane. From
the information available it appears that Mr. Fletcher did not
stay long in the town, but proceeded by the same boat to Rock-


Hampton. Nathaniel Turner could well be trusted to estimate
the needs of the town and to take the necessary action on
behalf of the Church. Accordingly we read in Mr. Turner’s
Diary, “I visited Maryborough to prepare the way for one of
the three young ministers now expected from England, and
had a warm reception, many promising to do all in their power
towards his support. During the week I was there I preached
three times to good congregations, visited many families,
bought for Church purposes two good allotments in a central
situation for £IOO, half cash down, which I personally begged
in the town. The balance, friends promised to collect, and I
gave a six months’ P.N. with good names. I have not spent a
more laborious or profitable week.’'
It is worth noting that the seed sown by Mr. Turner quickly
grew and bore rich fruit. A year later the Rev. H. Woodhouse
was stationed in the town as first Methodist minister. The first
services were held in an unoccupied store, after-
wards the School of Arts was used. A small
church was built, the plans being drawn by Mr.
Jhomas Holme (later a clergyman of the Church of England),
who also superintended the erection of the building. Mr.
Woodhouse said, “I received £5 from some fund in Brisbane
when starting for Maryborough and was told that was all the
help I could have. About half the amount went in paying
steamer charges, and with the balance I had to start work in a
strange place with no people and but a small population in
the town. We solicited subscriptions from likely and unlikely
people and within nine months of our opening services in the
School of Arts, we had a very nice church costing £6OO and on
the night of the opening services paid for it.” Amongst those
who supported the work were men whose names have become
permanently associated with the Maryborough circuit and the
Wide Bay District —Robert Jones, J. Barlow, S. Scott and W.
Southerdon. The present commodious church was erected in
1883. The initiative was taken during the ministry of the Rev.
M. Maddern, a Cornishman who began his ministry in New
South Wales and who spent seven years in Queensland and
became the editor of an influential religious paper, “Glad
Tidings,” having a circulation of 10,000. A considerable
sum of money was raised during his ministry, but the Church


SgSfcJv-r
REV. ROBERT HARTLEY MEMORIAL
Rockhampton


was not opened until the ministry of the Rev. Frank Duesbury.
Mr. Fletcher and Mr. Sutherland made a careful survey of
Rockhampton to prepare the way for one of the three ministers
expected from England, who would commence the work of the
Wesleyan Church there. Reporting on his visit,
Mr. Fletcher said, “We met with some encour-
agement, but the cost of land there is high.” Apart from
visiting the people, conducting prayers and giving their bless-
ing, the commissioners returned to Brisbane without having
secured a place of meeting. However, when the Rev. Ben-
jamin Dixon arrived in 1864, he was welcomed and encouraged
by a few souls who were ready to co-operate with him. Dixon
was a young man whose ability and zeal were owned of God;
he gave great promise of a successful ministry. He preached
for some time in a room lent by Mr. A. Grant, where regular
services and a Sunday School were organised.
Two hundred people attended a tea meeting—a happy
feature of Church life in those days—when an appeal was
made for money for a Church. The response was immediate
and gratifying! Subscriptions amounting to £230, made it
possible for a Church to be opened on August 28th, 1864. It
was a Gothic structure, 45ft. by 26ft., with a vestry 10ft. square.
(This church still stands and is kept in good order, but it is
now owned by another denomination.) After successful labour
in Rockhampton, Mr. Dixon was appointed to the district of
Port Denison. A few days after he arrived at Bowen he was
seized with gastric fever and died in May 1866. The work at
Rockhampton was continued by a succession of capable
ministers, supported by excellent laymen. The present Camp-
bell Street Church was opened in July 1881 during the
ministry of the Rev. J. Spence.
Methodism in Rockhampton owes much to the Primitive
Methodists. Indeed, this was the principal centre for many
years for their activities. Their first services were held in
1858 under a gum tree, but the work was not organised until
the Rev. W. Colley became the minister in July 1863. A site
was secured at the corner of Fitzroy and Bolsover Streets; a
church and parsonage were built at a cost of £575, and the
official opening took place in January 1864. The Rev. B.


Dixon, the Wesleyan minister, attended and conveyed the
felicitations of his circuit.
The early history of the Primitives in the Central District
was remarkable, largely due to the dominating personality of
the Rev. Robert Hartley, who lived and laboured in the town
for twenty-eight years. He was the man for the
times, and so his devotion, ability, energy and
experience found a wide scope. He was a Lanca-
shire man who served his Church in England for twenty-four
years before coming to Australia. He spent four years in
Sydney prior to going to Rockhampton in 1864, being then
forty-seven years of age. The slowly developing town was
being hustled into busy life by the vast number of settlers
attracted by liberal land laws, by indentured labour from the
South Seas and by the discovery of gold at Crocodile, Hector
Reef, Cawarral, Gerry’s Rush, Stoney Creek, Blackfellow’s
Gully, Bonnie Doon, Rosewood and other centres. Mr. Hartley
followed the diggers to the gold fields; met immigrant ships,
advising the newcomers as to settlement; became the trusted
friend of the Kanakas (South Seas Islanders), and became
their counsellor and guide upon domestic matters, the care of
their money and other very practical affairs.
As the broad lands of the Central West fell open to selection,
Hartley journeyed out enduring privation and hardship,
gathering little communities together for fellowship and wor-
ship. Assistance came to him—William Powell, John
Addison, James Williams, A. R. Bailey, Matthew Foggon,
A. E. Fox, William Little, W. H. Greenwood —all splendid
men, and soon there were circuits at Emerald 165 miles west-
wards, Blackall 378 miles, Barcaldine 360 miles, and Long-
reach 427 miles. How those men toiled! Mr. Hartley did not
spare them. Wherever there were a few settlers he sent them
off to organise services. Money was not plentiful so his men
had to live frugally and to labour with absolute self-denial.
The case of one minister stationed in Rockhampton was typical
of the kind of service all the ministers were called upon to
give. He left Rockhampton on horseback to visit all the small
townships on the Western line. He travelled as far as Long-
reach and back, a trip occupying four months.
Mr. Hartley became a supernumerary minister in 1875, but


he did not cease to toil. He had no official authority in the
District, but he could not be ignored by his colleagues. His
name was known far and wide and it was a passport to any
home. He died in 1892 and it was realised by the Church and
the community that a great man had passed on. The whole
town mourned the loss of a sympathetic friend, a fearless foe
of wrong and a faithful helper of the poor. At a largely
attended gathering of citizens it was agreed to erect a memorial
to his great public service. Outside the Rockhampton Post
Office to-day there may be seen a drinking fountain bearing the
following inscription:—
“This Memorial of the Rev. Robert Hartley, for twenty-
eight years (1864-1892) a minister of the Primitive
Methodist Church, Rockhampton, is erected by his Fellow
Citizens in Token of the Esteem in which he was held as a
Man of Noble Character, Godly Life, Integrity and
Benevolence.”
Maryborough became the centre from which pioneering was
undertaken at Gympie seventy miles south, and Bundaberg
fifty miles north. To reach Gympie from Brisbane it was
necessary to proceed to Maryborough by boat and
then to travel south by coach. The solitude of the
forest covering the picturesque hills of Gympie was
permanently broken when in October 1867 Mr. Nash dis-
covered gold in one of the gullies. At once the roads were
crowded with all sorts of men hurrying to share in the fortunes
which were to be made. Methodist miners and adventurers were
in the crowd and they early began to witness to the claims of
God and the soul. The names of these men are not known,
but their influence undoubtedly lives on.
The Primitives started public worship under the trees. Mi.
Thomas Payne, who remained a staunch Methodist to the end
of his life, was the preacher. In 1868 a plain weatherboard
building, known as the "Diggers’ Bethel,” seating about 200
people was built and it was consecrated by the tears of
penitents and the songs of the redeemed. The Wesleyans
erected a bark church opposite the site of the present Surface
Hill Church in 1868. Services were conducted by local
preachers and the Rev. C. Wiles made occasional visits from
Maryborough. It was he who inaugurated the scheme for


building a new church which was completed in 1869. Con-
ference realised the importance of Gympie and appointed the
Rev. H. Woodhouse as the first minister. He was a man of
many parts, combining deep piety with practical ability and
organising skill. He found the work drifting and many of the
officials discouraged. The title to the land was only by
Miners' Right and this constituted a major problem, but by the
exercise of much tact and persistent patience he secured justice
for the Church, saved the cause from collapse and saw it
prospering.
One of Mr. Woodhouse’s helpers, a local preacher who had
maintained the services in the bark hut, was Jimmy Jeffrey,
from Ballarat. He was a noted figure in the Gympie “rush”
and he had been prominent on other goldfields. A Cornish-
man and a red-hot Methodist, he preached with great vigour
and much fervour, and his message went home with power to
the hearts of his hearers, so that many a gold-digger took
away from the services conducted by Jeffrey richer treasure
than the gold that had attracted him to Gympie.
Amongst the mine managers of the Gympie fields was Mr.
W. M. Elfverson. He was a man of integrity and an earnest
supporter of the Church. Besides holding other offices he was
superintendent of the Sunday School. He commended himself
to the people and helped to establish the Church in the high
respect of the community largely by his good works. Mrs.
Wm. Ferguson was also a tower of strength. Mr. Matthew
Mellor was another active worker. The Gympie Church has
grown in influence on the firm foundations laid in the days
when the gold mines were flourishing. Now that agriculture
and not mining is the feature of the district there are other
loyal souls who continue the Methodist traditions.
Bundaberg Wesleyan Methodism had an interesting origin.
The Maryborough minister, the Rev. W. Maddern, had visited
the town and conducted services in 1881. A year later, the
Rev. F. Duesbury was appointed with the Rev.
Vv. H. Harrison, a probationer recently arrived
from England, as his assistant. The railway to
Bundaberg had not then been built, but the two ministers
decided upon a visit to that town to inaugurate officially the
ordinances of the Church. They hired a horse and buggy and


set out for Bundaberg arriving, after an exhausting journey, at
the end of the second day. They engaged the Victoria Hall for
an eight days’ mission—in that way a Church was often com-
menced. The residents rallied to the meetings, souls were
saved, lapsed Methodists reconsecrated themselves, and
arrangements were made for Mr. Harrison to reside in the
town. Regular services were at once organised. Mr. Harrison
was kept constantly at work and by his pastoral visitation, as
much as by his services of public worship, secured the hearty
co-operation of the people. Liberal support was given by
several well known families, notably the Toms, Knotts,
Walkers and Lambs. Their kindliness, friendliness and
generosity made it possible for all the costs to be met and at
the end of one year a surplus of £3OO was allocated for the
erection of a church. From this beginning the Bundaberg
Church made consistent progress, and it has been a centre from
which pioneering has extended through a wide district.


y* $\
REV. W. H. HARRISON
President, 1905
MRS. W. H. HARRISON
First Secretary, Children's Homes
MR. G. I. BOURNE
HON. F. T. BRENTNALL, M.L.C.


CHAPTER VII
EXPANSION NORTHWARDS
The policy of the Church has been to gain a footing in the
coastal towns, using them as bases for activities in neighbour-
ing districts. As a general rule, Methodism has followed the
settlers, and often accompanied them so that in their severe
trials and their most arduous labours under primitive condi-
tions, they have been reminded of the Presence of the Great
Father and have had the encouragements of Christian fellow-
ship and worship.
The far northern towns were the most remote centres to be
pioneered. When the circuits in the southern portion of the
State demanded the best resources of Conference, ministers
were appointed to the North, generally without any guarantee
of support. The Christian principle of taking the Gospel to
people wherever they may be gathered, trusting in God alone,
was consistently observed. The spiritual results of the labours
of these dauntless pioneers were so remarkable that it is certain
that the Church was divinely guided. In less than forty years
after William Moore commenced the work in Brisbane, the
three large centres in the North were Methodist circuits- -
Townsville being inaugurated in 1876, Charters Towers 1877
and Cairns 1883.
The Rev. W. B. Mather was appointed to Townsville in 1876.
He found there a company of Methodists who had met together
regularly for worship and had formed a class meeting for
mutual encouragement in the Christian life. Their
attitude was characteristic of all people to whom
Methodism has been the medium through which
the Grace of God has become known. These Methodists used
the Court House as their place of worship and there they
gathered all who desired to hear the Gospel. There, George
Camp, to whom Townsville Methodism owes so much, and
other local preachers zealously declared the gospel, calling
upon men to repent and be saved.
Mr. Mather used the simple organisation already there and
enlarged it so that very soon he had a small but strong


Methodist Church. He held his first Quarterly Meeting a few
months after his arrival. Those present included Messrs.
T. Davey, S. Williams, George Camp, W. H. Poulteney and
W. H. Dean. On the Members’ Roll were eighteen names;
they were the nucleus of a large and strong circuit which has
sent the Christian influence throughout the whole of the
INorthern District. Mr. Mather lost no time in securing a
spiritual home for his flock. He bought a good site for £SS
and with the help of the Methodist Loan Fund a church and
parsonage were soon erected. The church was a wooden
structure 30ft. by 20ft. and was officially opened by Dr. Sellors
on Easter Sunday 1877.
Charters Towers was the next centre to which Mr. Mather
turned his attention. It was then a growing town with a
reputation that was extending throughout the whole Continent.
It was soon to become one of the largest towns in
Queensland and one of the most famous in the
country. Gold was discovered there in 1872. Then
followed the usual frantic rush for claims and large numbers
of people came from the south and from England; amongst
the latter were many Cornish Methodists who brought with
them the characteristic features of Methodism as they knew it
at home. The whole of the north was ablaze with excitement.
It was a great opportunity for the Church, and it was not
neglected. As the years passed, when fortunes were quickly
made and lost, when the passion for gold was burning in men's
hearts, when slogans like “there’s nothing like gold” were
inscribed on buddings all over the town, when vulgar pleasures
were patronised and when money as well as moral values were
being recklessly squandered, the Church of God stood in the
community for eternal values.
Earnest local preachers held services before any official steps
weie taken to establish Christian work. The first WTsleyan
Church was opened in 1879, and the first Primitive in 1884.
These became focal points from which public worship, Sunday
Schools and class meetings were established in adjoining areas.
The work was full of adventure, ministers and church officials
being challenged by prevailing evils to be diligent and faith-
ful, enterprising and utterly uncompromising, and they were!
True to the traditions of Primitive Methodism, the Rev.


Matthew Foggon established open-air meetings in Charters
Towers, but he met with considerable opposition from officials
of the municipality. In 1886 he was fined £lO
for preaching on municipal land. A by-law for-
bade anyone using municipal land for “purposes
of trade,” and the Police Magistrate decreed that Mr. Foggon
was following his trade and the heaviest fine was inflicted. Mr.
Foggon was short of stature and did not, by his appearance,
create the impression that he was a force to be reckoned with,
but he was full of grit and was a formidable foe of every form
of injustice. He refused to pay the fine and said he would
rather go to gaol. There was a vast amount of sympathy with
him; his case was the talk of the town. However, it was found
that the Church property, which was held by “Miners’ Right”
in Mr. Foggon’s name, would be imperilled; it was necessary
to pay the fine to safeguard the property. The amount was
quickly subscribed by sympathetic friends.
The Wesleyans also held regular open-air services on Sun-
day evenings before Church services. The attendance was so
large that the road traffic was almost blocked. The editor of
the “Northern Miner” called the attention of the police to this
and urged that these “gospel howlers” be stopped. However,
the speakers stood on Church ground and the police could not
interfere.
Methodism was introduced into the coastal district between
Townsville and Cairns, a distance of over 200 miles, as oppor-
tunities presented themselves. The sugar-cane plantations were
developing and settlers found their way to Ingham, Cardwell,
Innisfail and intermediate centres, gradually opening up im-
mense acres which to-day are producing an abundance of
sugar-cane, making it one of the staple industries in the State.
Travelling was for many years restricted to the use of horses
and bullock teams. Long journeys over mountains and across
rivers and numerous creeks were perilous and expensive. We
find, however, that one minister after another with the urge for
the furtherance of the Gospel in his heart, fared forth into the
unknown bush with all its uncertainties to visit lonely settlers
and newly formed townships.
One such journey that had far-reaching results, is recorded
by the Rev. W. H. Harrison in an article which he contributed


to the “Christian Witness,” then edited by the Rev. H. Young-
man, in October 1889. Mr. Harrison was Superin-
tendent of the Townsville circuit and his colleague
was the Rev. T. Ellison. News had reached him
that there were Methodists among the settlers within 150 miles
of Townsville. Despite the heavy claims of his circuit he felt
it to be his duty to find these people, and others who had no
church attachments. He wrote: “My colleague and I determined
to extend our borders and look up a few scattered sheep which
we heard were browsing round the Herbert River scrubs and
Cardwell Ranges. Some had been bleating for some time, and
were not a little distressed that no Methodist shepherd
responded to their call.”
Accordingly Mr. Harrison and his colleague left home by
buggy bound for Ingham. They made good progress, con-
sidering the creeks to be crossed and the bad roads they
encountered, and reached Ingham about seventy miles away on
a Saturday, after having visited many settlers en route. The
afternoon was spent putting up notices announcing Sunday
services and visiting from house to house. Morning and even-
ing services were held on the Sunday and afternoon services
at Halifax and the Victoria Sugar Mill. The congregations
were good and the people were deeply interested, and numbers
of them asked that the visit be repeated. On Monday morning,
leaving the buggy at Ingham and borrowing a second horse the
ministers started for Cardwell, a township forty miles further
north over mountain ranges. Here they were entertained by
Mr. James Crellin, the local school master, and his gracious
wife, both of whom later became well known in Brisbane
Methodism. “They are old members of our Church,” explained
Mr. Harrison. “In the Brunswick Church, Leeds, Mr. Crellin
occupied honourable positions as local preacher, class leader
and Sunday School superintendent.” Here the ministers con-
ducted a service with a large congregation at the Court House.
On their return journey they held further services at Ingham
and Victoria. Ten members of the Church and a number of
adherents were discovered on this journey.
The first visits paid by a Methodist minister to the Burdekin
delta, of which the Ayr circuit is now the chief centre, were


accomplished by the Rev. and Mrs. W. H. Harrison, with a
horse and buggy. Starting out from Townsville they
journeyed thirty miles on the first day, stayed with
friends for two days, then travelled on sixty miles
to Seaforth. There was only a bush track, but most of the
journey was made without serious mishap. In the extensive
lagoon country one treacherous swamp was reached, which
extended as far as the eye could see. The only visible wheel-
marks went through the middle of it, but when the adventurers
essayed to follow they became stuck in the middle with the
water flowing over the floor of the buggy. Mr. Harrison jumped
into the water and attempted to coax the pony on, but the
traces snapped in the effort and Mrs. Harrison was left in the
buggy. After much united effort the vehicle was dragged from
its precarious position and the journey continued. Plantations
were visited, services were held, and literature was distributed.
Many were the expressions of thanks and requests were made
to “Come again soon.” The last occasion on which a minister
of any denomination had conducted a service was fourteen
months earlier.
This is typical of the manner in which the Church went out
to sparsely settled areas with a message of encouragement to
those who were endeavouring to maintain the spiritual glow
without the usual means of grace to aid them, and with a word
of hope to those who were outside the fold.
Cairns Methodism was founded by the Primitives —the
minister being the Rev. E. T. Lloyd —in 1883. It was not until
three years later, however, that the work was properly
organised. Cairns, like other coastal towns, took its
full share of pioneering. It was from here that the
first preachers visited the Atherton Tableland, Herberton and
other mining centres, until to-day all the small townships in
this rich and beautiful country are regularly served by our
ministers and missionaries.


|1L
mnj*- 1 y* Bf
' ''
REV. A. C. PLANE
President, 1921
REV. G. E. ROWE, D.
President, 1910
REV. R. STEWART, D.D.
President, 1902 and 1913
REV. F. DUESBURY
President, 1911


CHAPTER VIII
METHODIST UNION
The several branches of Methodism have all been repre-
sented in Queensland. The Wesleyans have always been the
strongest, next to them the Primitives have had a creditable
record, which in itself would provide material for an interest-
ing volume. The other branches, reflecting their status in
England, have never been influential elements in the religious
life of the State.
The Primitives began operations in Brisbane in 1859, twelve
years after the Wesleyans had established themselves. Here is
a brief outline of their history. Several members of the Church
in Sydney, among whom were the Rev. J. Sharpe
and Mr. W. Allen, inserted an advertisement in a
Methodism ...
Brisbane newspaper inquiring whether there were
any members of the denomination resident there. They received
responses from Messrs. Thomas Payne and James Graham. In
1860 the Rev. W. Colley arrived from England to begin the
work in Brisbane, and in 1861 the first Primitive Methodist
Church was erected in the Valley. A second Church, to which
the Rev. Joseph Buckle was appointed, was built in Adelaide
Street shortly afterwards.
The second town missioned was Rockhampton where the
Rev. W. Colley supervised the erection of a Church at the
corner of Fitzroy and Bolsover Streets. The opening services
were held in January 1864 and in October of that year the
Rev. Robert Hartley was transferred from Sydney. Although
confronted with heavy Church liabilities he became endeared
to all classes of the community because of his Christlike
philanthropic character.
The Rev. J. Buckle visited Ipswich from Brisbane, and in
1865 the first Church was built at Bundamba. Following the
people who had made their way to the Gympie goldfield in
1867, he established there what was known as the “Diggers
Bethel.”
Queensland having been separated from New South Wales,
the first Primitive Methodist District meeting was held in


Brisbane in January 1874. About this time the Churches at
West End, Indooroopilly, the Gap and Leichhardt Street were
built. In 1875 the Rev. J. Buckle became superintendent of
Maryborough and Gympie. During his term Walker Street
and March Street Churches, Maryborough, were erected and
Bundaberg became a preaching centre.
The three years following saw much progress, Churches
arising at Brunswick Street, Toowong, Caboolture, Paddington,
Samford and Upper South Pine. The Ipswich circuit extended
to Laidley in 1877 and also to Toowoomba. On two occasions
the Rev. J. Williams paid six weeks’ visit from Rockhampton
to Mackay, Townsville, Charters Towers, Herberton, Cairns,
Port Douglas and Cooktown. During 1885 and the succeed-
ing years Albion, Bulimba and Fernberg Road Churches were
built but the latter was afterwards removed to Latrobe Terrace,
Upper Paddington, where it still is in use.
As early as 18/5 a quarterly journal, “The Queensland
Primitive Methodist,” was published, and it was changed to a
monthly in 1885. “The Christian Ensign” began in 1893 and
continued until it was merged into the “Methodist Leader” in
1897. The question of Methodist union for some time met with
very general and strong opposition, but gradually the feeling
in favour grew until in 1896-7, it was firmly resolved to accept
the proposal.
In June 1866, the Bible Christians rented a room in South
Brisbane for services. During 1867-8, the Revs. W. Woolcock
and G. Netherway were appointed. So great were the financial
difficulties encountered that negotiations for union
were opened with the Wesleyan Methodist Church
in Queensland in 1894. After two years of meet-
ings and correspondence with England, the following report to
the Conference of 1896 was made by the Rev. H. Youngman:
“The following sites have been transferred to the interim
trustees under the provision of the Model Deed: Clifton
Terrace, Kelvin Grove, Everton Park, Bunya (2), Brookfield,
Moggill, Indooroopilly Pocket, Hamilton and Carina.” The
final repayment was made to the Bible Christian Conference in
England in April, 1897.
The L'nited Free Methodists were represented by a few
Churches and two ministers in Brisbane and the neighbour-


hood. Two small causes, Downfall Creek (later Chermside)
and Stafford, came into the Union, but the Eagle
Junction Church, whose minister was the Rev.
W. Osborne Lilley, later became the Congrega-
tional Church of that name.
The Conference of 1893 will be remembered as the
Methodist Union Conference. A full-dress debate on the
advisability of union with the other branches of the Methodist
Church was held, nineteen members taking part.
Proposals and amendments were submitted, and
after full and earnest discussion the motion for
union was carried by twenty votes to seventeen. The Primitive
Methodist Assembly, in March 1895, voted in favour of union
by twenty-five to eleven. A federal council was formed com-
posed of members of both Churches, ministerial and lay, and
this body invited the Rev. W. H. Fitchett to Queensland in the
cause of Methodist Union. It received a powerful impetus, the
new outlook being almost electrical. One of the results of Mr.
Fitchett’s addresses was the lifting of the question into a wider
and clearer light. One of the perils had been the narrowing
of the subject to mere local considerations. Difficulties and
objections were dealt with satisfactorily, and a new optimistic
tone was introduced. He visited Warwick, Toowoomba,
Ipswich, Brisbane, Maryborough and Bundaberg and every-
where was received with enthusiasm.
The Conference of 1896 resolved “that we reaffirm our con-
viction that the organic union of the Methodist Churches is
desirable as a means of the more effective employment of their
influence and resources in the interests of the Kingdom of God,
and are gratified in believing that the sentiment in favour of
such union is being more widely diffused. It also was resolved
“that we generally approve of the draft scheme for effecting
union contained in the report of the Federal Council; and that
the statement of the scheme be freely circulated among our
people, and be considered at the Quarterly and Trustees’ Meet-
ings of the Churches.’
Resolutions on union passed by a conference of representa-
tives of the Wesleyan and the Primitive Methodist Churches in
1897, and confirmed by Conference of 1898 were: —
1. Union shall be effected between the Wesleyan and Primi-


/"* * ;, m %y«a*i|
'■? MSSSSffl&SS ; -l‘ * ''-£$> 7
•__. ; , ! -- ' '» , '
if*’- if ,i/< . * ,' i J ,
'$&?/*' i ? I MmSk bhM, - .
REV. W. BROWN
President, 1917
REV. J. BOWES
President, 1903
REV. J. J. GEE
President, 1916
REV. T. R. THURLOW,
President, 1920


tive Methodist Churches in Queensland on the first day
of January 1898.
2. Financial arrangements at present in operation in the
two uniting Churches shall continue during the year
1898.
3. That for the first three years after union the ministers
belonging to each of the respective Churches generally
shall be appointed to circuits belonging to the said
Churches.
4. All ministers required to become members of the
Wesleyan Supernumerary Fund, it being agreed that
ministers of not less than eight years’ standing shall pur-
chase full benefits; those from nine to seventeen years
not less than two-thirds benefits; those from eighteen
years upwards half benefits.
It was necessary to obtain a two-thirds majority before union
could be consummated. After several votes had been taken by
the two churches in 1897 the final voting was: —
Wesleyan Methodist For 1,767 Against 241 Neutral 320
Primitive Methodist „ 1,287 „ 275 „ 178
‘The Methodist Leader,” said that paper, “was the first
practical outcome of the decisions of the last two Conferences,
and now we are highly gratified to communicate the intelli-
gence that on this first day of January 1898, Methodist Union
in Queensland is an actual fact. Praise God!” A meeting for
thanksgiving and prayer was held in the Albert Street Church
on January 3rd, 1898, when addresses were given by the
Presidents of the uniting Churches.
The “Leader” of January 1898 said: “The Methodists of
Queensland were in a state of great uncertainty owing to pro-
longed delay by the British Primitive Methodist Conference in
forwarding its resolution on Methodist Union. Its consent was
vital as the Primitive Methodist Church in Australia was
dependent on England both for its control and maintenance.
This protracted delay occasioned much unnecessary expense
and trouble causing great dissatisfaction. At last a letter was
received stating that Queensland had full power to effect union
according to decisions, but the British Conference refused the
request to continue the Primitive Methodist grant to Queens-
land for three years after union.”


On the evening of March 2nd, 1898, there opened in the
Albert Street Church, Brisbane, a Methodist Conference of
special historical significance. This was the first public
demonstration of the consummation of Methodist
union in Queensland, which was the first State to
realise it. The Bible Christians and two of the
three United Methodist Free Churches already had joined the
Wesleyan Church. The Conference met as a united Church
from the start. The ministers and lay representatives from
what had been both Churches joined in the election of the
President (Rev. (later Dr.) Henry Youngman) and Secretary
(Rev. William Powell). An equal number of ministers and
laymen composed the Stationing Committee.
Although Methodist Union was consummated in 1898, years
elapsed before the officers of the uniting Churches could
finalise it. During the year 1905 eleven meetings of the Com-
mittee were held and these were attended by a large proportion
of members.
Steps were taken to complete the preparation of the Bill to
confirm Union and to make the necessary provision for the
change of the name of the Church. The Conference communi-
cated with the Premier, Hon. A. Morgan, asking
for the Bill to be adopted as a public measure, but
he declared himself unable to accede to the request
as all the parties affected were not in agreement. A petition to
introduce the Bill as a private measure then was prepared and
presented to the Legislative Council by the Hon. F. T.
Brentnall, M.L.C., and by Mr. T. W. Bouchard, M.L.A., in the
Legislative Assembly.
Immediately after the Bill had been introduced two writs of
the Supreme Court were issued intended to test the right of the
Conference to deal with the former Primitive Methodist
properties. A most critical situation was created. Overtures
for a friendly settlement were made, but for some time it
appeared inevitable that the matter should come before the
Court, with much consequent expense, embitterment and ill-
feeling. Ultimately negotiations were opened on the basis of
the Leichhardt Street circuit being included in the United
Church. After considerable discussion an agreement was
arrived at and the circuit came under the direction of the


President of the Conference (Rev. W. H. Harrison) in
December 1905.
To enable the officials of the Leichhardt Street Primitive
Methodist Circuit to meet circuit and other obligations, and
the better to consolidate union, £4OO was paid to them, £l5O of
this amount to be attached as an additional liability to the
Leichhardt Street Church, and a second £l5O to be distributed
as a further liability on the other Churches in that circuit. In
order to obtain the £4OO required the Revs. Dr. H. Youngman
and W. H. Harrison mortgaged their Life Insurance Policies
for that amount. Later this was refunded to them.
As the result of this agreement proceedings were stayed and
opposition to the Bill was withdrawn. Its course through
Parliament was now made comparatively clear, although some
opposition was offered in the Legislative Assembly, where a
division took place on the second reading which was carried
by thirty-four votes to eight.
In January 1906, the Union of the Wesleyan Methodist and
Primitive Methodist Churches, as on January Ist, 1898, was
confirmed, the name of the united Church being the Methodist
Church of Australasia. Wesleyan and Primitive Methodist
Church properties were to be held under the Model Deed, the
latter being vested in the Revs. Dr. Henry Youngman, William
Powell, Isaac Castlehow, and Messrs. George Down and Eugene
Chappie as Trustees. Throughout the negotiations Dr. Young-
man was Secretary of the Committee.


t '"■b- »il|. ®,
REV. R. DUNSTAN
President, 1913
REV. R. E. BACON
REV. J. H. HEATON, B.A.
President, 1928
REV. A. E. LAPTHORNE
President, 1936


CHAPTER IX
QUEENSLAND AUTONOMY
The General Conference of 1891, held in Sydney, gave
authority for the constitution of a separate Queensland Con-
ference. For a long time it had been felt that the colony was
too extensive and too remote from Sydney to permit of its
being adequately administered, and that larger powers of self-
government would be to the advantage of Methodism. Pro-
vision was made for the exchange each year of two ministers
from the New South Wales Conference if Queensland should
make such a request. In Queensland at that time there were
twenty ministers, three supernumeraries, ten probationers,
1,981 members and eighty-six on trial, eighty-two Churches,
nineteen parsonages, eighty-five Sunday Schools with 806
teachers and 7,261 scholars, and 15,440 Church adherents.
The Home Mission income was about £5OO and Loan Fund
capital £2,635. These were the only means through which con-
nexional aid could be given for the erection of churches and
parsonages.
The resolutions of the New South Wales and Queensland
Conference, 1892, founding the Queensland Conference, were;
“That the Queensland Districts be constituted into an Annual
Conference. The Conference directs that due provision be made
for safeguarding the interests of ministers who have gone, or
may go, from New South Wales to Queensland, and may wish
to return. The division is not to take effect until 1893.” “That
the President of the General Conference preside over the first
Queensland Conference, and if he is unable to attend, one of
the ex-Presidents of New South Wales.”
The first Queensland Conference was held in the Albert
Street Church in March 1893, “an event which had been antici-
pated with growing interest on the part of ministers and people
from one end of the colony to the other, represent-
ing Wesleyan Methodism in Brisbane, and for
many miles west, north and south.” The Con-
ference was opened at a time of great rain, heavy floods sweep-
ing away numerous bridges and houses. Traffic was dislocated,


widespread devastation was caused, and for a while it was
doubtful if it would be possible for the Conference to
assemble.
The Rev. A. J. Webb, minister of the Albert Street Church,
spoke the first word by giving a hearty welcome in the name
of the trustees of the Church to members of the Conference
and to Rev. Dr. R. Sellers, an ex-President of the New South
Wales Conference, who had been delegated to open it. The
chairman of the South Queensland District, Rev. Henry Young-
man, called the roll. The ministers who answered to their
names were: Revs. C. Wiles, A. J. Webb, H. Youngman, E.
Youngman, W. Dinning, W. Jeffries, J. Bowes, J. G. Martin,
A. Hutchison, R. Stewart, W. H. Harrison, T. B. Holmes,
G. W. Payne, B. Bottomley, T. Brassington, T. Warham,
E. Dyer, T. Ellison and H. H. Nolan.
The opening hymn, And are we yet alive? 7 was sung with
much feeling. Psalm 103 was read, Revs. A. J. Webb and
W. Jeffries led in prayer, and Dr. Sellers delivered the
Inaugural Address. Before leaving Sydney to attend the Con-
ference he had visited the home of Rev. W. Moore, the first
minister who had laboured in Queensland. Though feeble in
body, with sincere sympathy in his heart the aged pioneer
sent a greeting to the newly constituted Conference.
The ministers elected their first President by ballot, which
resulted in an almost unanimous vote for Rev. Dr. Henry
Youngman. The announcement was greeted with demonstra-
tion. The members stood while he was installed by Dr. Sellers
who handed him a copy of the Scriptures as his insignia of
office. The Rev. J. Bowes, chairman of the Northern District
was elected Secretary, the Revs. A. Hutchison and W. H.
Harrison Assistant Secretaries, while the Rev. T. \Yarham was
given charge of the Journal.
The lay representatives were: Albert Street, Hon. A. Rut-
ledge, M.L.A.; Wesley, Messrs. N. Lade and C. S. Nichols;
Valley, Mr. C. H. Gardner; West End, Mr. H. Warren;
Toowong, Mr. C. Highfield; Enoggera, Mr. W. E. Howes;
Ipswich, Messrs. R. Allen and J. McGill; Pine River, Mr. J
Duffield; Toowoomba, Mr. R. Aland; Maryborough, Mr. W.
Williams; Gympie, Mr. M. Mellor, M.L.A.; Bundaberg, Mr.
A. Gibson.


The Revs. J. J. Gee, J. Snell, T. Warham and E. Dyer were
ordained, Rev. Dr. Sellers delivering the Ordination Charge.
The probationers—T. Ellison, H. H. Nolan, T. R. Thurlow,
J. R. Williams, J. Doran and S. Muscio were advanced one
year, and A. Taylor was recommended for another year’s train-
ing at Newington College.
The Conference resolved to associate the laymen with the
ministers in the election of the President and Secretary in
future years. A resolution was passed that the Home Mission
Society be authorised to appoint some special agency to work
among the scattered population of the colony, either by horses
and saddlebags or a waggon. The combined Home and
Foreign Mission meeting was presided over by the Governor,
Sir Henry Norman. Rev. (later Dr.) R. Stewart reported that
the income for the year was: Home Missions, £573; Foreign
Missions, £321. The speakers were Revs. J. Bowes, A. J. Webb,
E. Youngman and Mr. J. McGill, and the choir was conducted
by Mr. W. M. King. The Governor was so impressed by Mr.
Bowes’s address that next day he forwarded a cheque for £lO
for Home Missions to be applied to the special scheme of the
proposed bush mission.
This first Conference set a high standard by the thorough-
ness with which it did its work. Among the subjects reviewed
were: Bible teaching in State Schools, Theological Training,
Church Extension at Hughenden, Burketown, Cloncurry and
Herbert River, Property Matters, Conference Secretary for
Sunday Schools (Rev. W. Brown being appointed), Rules of
the Home Mission Society, Book Depot, Furniture Grants,
Ministers’ Removal Expenses, Contingent Fund, Supernumerary
Fund, Children’s Fund, Examining Committee, Methodist
Union, releasing the President during his term of office for
visitation, and the projected visit of the Rev.
Thomas Cook for evangelistic missions. A Con-
ference garden party was given by Hon. A. and
Mrs. Rutledge at their home at Upper Paddington.
Here is the first list of ministers’ appointments:—
Queensland South District—
Brisbane (Albert Street) —Arthur J. Webb; Geo.
Woolnough, M.A. (Supernumerary).


liNr
REV. A. A. MILLS, M.C.
President of Conference
1930, 1947
Connexional Secretary
REV. R. S. C. DINGLE
Secretary of Conference, 1947
REV. C. A. READ
Organising Secretary
Centenary Celebrations
REV. A. W. PRESTON
Field Secretary
Centenary Celebrations


Brisbane (Wesley)—Wm. Dinning, Eldred Dyer
(Coorparoo).
Brisbane (Valley)—Thos. B. Holmes, Henry Pen-
nington (Nundah).
Brisbane (West End) —W. H. Harrison.
Toowong—Wm. Jeffries.
Enoggera—Tom Ellison.
Sandgate—One to be sent.
Ipswich—Robert Stewart, Wm. Brown. One to be sent.
Pine River —Wm. H. Howard.
Pimpama —J. J. Gee (Beenleigh), Isaac Harding
(Supernumerary).
Toowoomba —Henry Youngman (President).
Warwick —Alex. Hutchison.
Stanthorpe —Joseph Snell.
Roma —James R. Williams.
Maryborough —Edward Youngman, Charles Wiles
(Supernumerary).
Paradise-Home Missionary.
Gympie—J. Gerrard Martin. One to be sent.
Bundaberg—Thomas Brassington.
Henry Youngman, Chairman of District; A. Hutchison,
Financial Secretary.
Queensland North District —
Rockhampton —Joseph Bowes, Thomas Warham
(Mount Morgan).
Peak Downs —Silas Muscio.
Townsville —Geo. W. Payne, Howard H. Nolan.
Herbert River —Home Missionary.
Charters Towers —Benjamin Bottomley. One to be sent.
Croydon —James Doran.
Normanton —Thos. R. Thurlow.
Cloncurry—One to be sent.
Joseph Bowes, Chairman of District.
The following is an extract of the Rev. H. Youngman’s
presidential retiring address in 1894 at the close of the first
year of Queensland’s existence as a separate Conference:
“Disaster (1893 flood), depression, difficulty have been close
attendants upon us all. We have been finding trouble or,
rather, trouble, sorrow and anxiety have been finding us. Many


of our people have been, and are, passing through tight places.
They have had to bear the hard loss of homes which repre-
sented years of thrift and loving labour, and look grim poverty
in the face, and feel its chill, bony pinch. It was not to be
expected that such a year would witness much new enterprise
or extension. It has been labour enough in most places to
hold our own. But it will be found that a substantial increase
has been made in the membership, and our connexional funds
have been well sustained. Our efforts at extension in the north-
west proved unsuccessful for this year owing to unfavourable
conditions.*’


CHAPTER X
SOME GLEANINGS
THE GREAT MINISTRY OF REV. W. G. TAYLOR
No record of the early history of Queensland Methodism
would be complete without a reference to the Rev. W. G.
Taylor who spent the years 1871 to 1879 in this State, and
whose ministry was marked by a glorious revival.
The Church was strengthened, financial problems
were solved and a new era of prosperity was
inaugurated. Mr. Taylor tells the story in his autobiography
“The Life Story of an Australian Evangelist” published in
1920. He came to Queensland from England in 1871 and
became the second minister of the Albert Street circuit. Shortly
after his arrival conversions took place at his services, at the
South Brisbane Church in particular, when the Communion
rail was filled with penitents almost every Sunday night.
Albert Street, then Fortitude Valley soon caught the flame and
altogether Mr. Taylor knew of over 400 conversions. In 1873
he was appointed to the Warwick circuit. Here he conducted
a similar evangelical ministry with outstanding results. It
was in this revival that the brothers George P. and Walter
Barnes, and George H. Knowles were converted. During his
ministry in Warwick the present Church was built and was
opened free of debt. The Rev. Arthur Rutledge, afterwards
a Judge of the Supreme Court, took a prominent part in the
dedicatory services on February 24th, 1875. “Not many days
passed,” said Mr. Taylor, “ere the cry of the penitent and the
joyous outburst of the saved were heard in the beautiful new
building.”
In 1876 Mr. Taylor was appointed to Toowoomba, where
the work appears to have been in a depressing condition. Here,
however, he engaged the School of Arts for his Sunday services
and the congregation reached 300 in the morning and at least
500 at night. Again there was a revival, and steps were taken
to build a new Church. The foundation stone of the present
Neil Street Church was laid on August 14th, 1877, by His
Excellency the Governor, Sir Arthur E. Kennedy. A few


months later the Church was completed and opened. The
entire scheme cost £3,200 and the Church opened with a debt
of £I,OOO upon it. Mr. Taylor was a man of commanding
presence, strong personality, with a rich baritone voice of
powerful appeal. He maintained an evangelical ministry
throughout his career with extraordinary results.
* -55- -X- * -X- -X* 45-
REV. W. G. TAYLOR GOES TO CROW’S NEST
The Rev. W. G. Taylor, when living in Sydney, related that
“as the Superintendent of Neil Street, Toowoomba, on July
24th, 1877, at 7.30, I preached at Crow’s Nest. My text was
John 3: 16.” In his autobiography he gives a graphic account
of this visit. It is published here not only to reveal the spirit
of Mr. Taylor, but to indicate the conditions under which all
the pioneer preachers pushed out the frontiers of the Church
and established the work of God.
“A ride of five hours, over rough bush tracks, under a hot
sun, brought me at sun-down to a recently-erected bush public
house, a mere shanty, situated in the midst of dense bush with
miles on miles of valuable pine tree country
around. Everything was in a state of primi-
tive roughness—a pioneer clearing here and
there, an occasional saw-mill with its settlement of timber-
getters near by. What brawny-armed, broad-chested fellows
these were —fond of strong drink, black tea and rankest
tobacco, and sadly addicted to the use of sulphurous language.
Yet they were fine fellows, many of them; generous to a fault,
and often with hearts as tender as a child’s. Living in the
atmosphere of danger, they handled those monsters of the
forest as if they were garden saplings. Among those fellows
I determined to hold a service; hence the ride of to-day. The
young parson received a rough and ready welcome from the
publican’s wife, and was invited to tea.
“I set to work to get my congregation. A shed in the
publican’s paddock was pointed out to me by the publican’s
wife. The night was ‘as dark as a bull’s mouth,’ a con-
gregation of a dozen men, smoking dirty pipes and discussing
dogs, gave me their patronage. After much searching we dis-
covered an empty ginger beer bottle. This we filled with oil


supplied by the publican, and with extemporised wick hanging
from its mouth our church light was secured. Lighting up, we
formed a procession not quite so spectacular, but arranged
with same purpose as those of Westminster Abbey. Led by
the publican, the parson followed the bearer (as was meet) of
the lighted torch, and was followed by a silent, wondering
group of smoking men. How we got through that service may
never be put upon paper. There was one good old Methodist
present, and he did help to give a semblance of reality to the
proceedings. I could see but few of the faces of my con-
gregation. It is interesting, however, to note that upon that
spot now stands the rising town of Crow’s Nest with numerous
stores, attractive churches and comfortable homes. It is the
head of an extensive circuit (fifty miles across it) in a pros-
perous district.”
****** *
THE PRESENT ALBERT STREET CHURCH
One of the most notable events in the early history of
Queensland Methodism was the building of the present Albert
Street Church. The first, it will be remembered, was built by
William Moore on the site at Burnett Lane and
Albert Street in 1849 —the second during the
ministry of the Rev. W. J. K. Piddington in 1856.
With the growth of Methodism in Brisbane and in
the country, the second building was found to be inadequate.
Brisbane was rapidly growing, commercial, educational and
political institutions were being established, and people of
vision realised that it was destined to be a city of considerable
size and importance. It was felt that worthily to represent
Methodism a beautiful Church must be built. The original
site, a free grant by the Government to William Moore, had in
forty years become valuable. It was sold for £25,000. The
new site at the corner of Albert and Ann Streets was purchased
for £IO,OOO, and the building was erected at a cost of £IO,OOO
plus the cost of the organ and the furnishings. The building
was designed by Messrs. Oakden, Addison and Kemp, Mr. G.
H. M. Addison being responsible for the work.
Five foundation stones were laid on August 18th, 1888 by
Mr. L. M. Turner representing his father the Hon. J. S. Turner*


REV. C. T. PALETHORPE
President, 1939
Editor, “Methodist Times"
REV. W. L. SLATER
President, 1940
REV. E. G. WALKER
Chairman, P. & M.S.A. Council
President, 1932
REV. D. S. BRUMWELL, 0.8. E.
Senior Chaplain
President, 1937


treasurer of the building fund, The Hons. F. T. Brentnall and
A. Rutledge, and Messrs. R. Edwards and C. M. Foster.
Fifteen months later it was opened for worship on November
Bth, 1889 by Lady Norman, wife of His Excellency the
Governor, Sir Henry Norman in the presence of a great throng
of representative citizens. The Rev. J. H. Fletcher, of Newing-
ton College, Sydney, who had been the minister at the second
Albert Street Church twenty-nine years before, preached the
first sermon.
4f 41- 4f 4;- 4;- 4<-
JUBILEE OF METHODISM
In 1897, the Jubilee of Methodism was celebrated in Queens-
land. It is interesting to note from the statistics presented to
the 1897 Conference the progress which had been made in
Jubilee Y ears * There were 32 ministers, 2,742 Church
members, and 18,109 adherents. There were 94
churches and 27 parsonages, also 77 other preaching places;
139 local preachers and 68 class leaders. There were 101 Sun-
day schools with 9,537 scholars and 938 teachers. The capital
of the Loan Fund had reached £3,541 and the Home Mission
income for the year amounted to £612. The Jubilee was duly
celebrated, several distinguished ministers coming from the
south to participate. The year also marked the decision to
unite the Methodist Churches, although the formal union did
not take place until the following year. A special Jubilee
Fund was opened to which at least £5,000 was subscribed.
The following extract from the Pastoral Address of 1897 is
most moving:—
“The year which we have entered is a memorable one.
Fifty years have sped away since the Wesleyan Methodist
Church was planted in this colony. A noble race of men,
many of whom have gone to their reward, endured much
privation and fatigue in carrying out this great work.
Through their labours we are the inheritors of great
privileges. God has been gracious to our Church in a
marked manner all through those years. The benefits
conferred upon the entire population must not be
estimated by figures, but by influences direct and indirect
touching all the springs of our national life. The Jubilee


year should be distinguished by gratitude, encouragement,
and liberality. A widespread revival of religion, and an
in-gathering of souls on an extensive scale will be the best
monument we can raise, or, rather, which God will raise
for us if we are faithful. In the possession of an
evangelical theology and a church polity, which in all its
departments and appliances is adapted to the spread of
scriptural holiness throughout the land; with traditions of
heroism, devotion and self-sacrifice on the part of
ministers and laymen, who have passed to their rest
eternal, which are an enduring honour to our Church, we
would invite you to celebrate the Jubilee of Methodism in
this land. The celebration of the Jubilee amongst the
ancient people of God was a time for grateful review, for
unselfish consideration for the condition of others and
for the development of a kindly spirit; above all of
enthusiastic rejoicing before God. Let us endeavour to
emulate them, and in the best sense to imitate themT


PART II
Connexional Institutions and
Funds
CHAPTER I
THE HOME MISSION SOCIETY
With the passing of the years, Conference has revealed an
increasing sense of responsibility for evangelisation, a due
appreciation of the difficulties involved, and has adopted a wise
practical policy which has been consistently followed. Every
Connexional Department was inaugurated to meet immediate
needs; its original form was simple and suited to local require-
ments. Whilst being loyal to the spirit and traditions of
Methodism, Conference has always felt itself free to create
methods adapted to prevailing conditions. These meant
anxious thought and discussion and much prayer, but they
have always justified the wisdom of Conference.
We cherish a sense of gratitude to God for the quality of
ministers and laymen who have been charged with executive
authority and with the leadership of the Church. In many
instances they were richly endowed and all served the Church
ungrudgingly, laying foundations of institutions whose
activities have helped to extend the influence of Christianity
and have given stability and permanence to our Connexional
life.
A noble idea was established when the Home Mission Society
became an integral part of the Connexion. Its achievements
have been remarkable, especially in utilising the services of
laymen, in providing a preparatory sphere for
ministers and as a pioneering agency. Distant and
sparsely populated areas could never have had the
benefit of the ministry of the Church but for the Society. Its
funds have been of vital importance, making possible to an
incalculable extent the work of ministers and missionaries. The
Society was founded in the year 1864 when the Rev. J. H.


r ' ' 9Hp|| ' HRKf
*«P y M . ?■ &SB j^B^r
mSSb? >
\ _ 1 M
” '-fWssm smSimt &*-> .**&*. !%-»<», |ii?lBH®
:,j30&k f IHP H
* j^l
■, WKK
MR. A. M. JOLLY
Treasurer, Home Mission Society
REV. J. A. PRATT
President, 1935
MR. C. S. NICHOLS
MR. E. T. CAMPBELL


Fletcher, Chairman of the District, under pressure of great
need collected the sum of £351. An unofficial meeting of
ministers and laymen was held to disburse this money, and
grants were made towards the building of chapels at
Toowoomba, Maryborough and Rockhampton. The balance
was used to defray the cost of bringing three ministers from
England.
The following year, the Australian Conference held in
Sydney gave recognition to the action taken in Queensland, and
we find the following record in the Minutes: “The Conference
approves the formation of the Queensland Home Mission and
Contingent Fund and that the following persons comprise the
committee for the ensuing year—the ministers and stewards of
the Brisbane and Ipswich circuits with Messrs. W. J. Costin,
T. A. Costin, Jarrott, Coates, J. Foote and Hargreaves, and that
the Chairman of the District and Mr. J. S. Turner be treasurers
of the fund and also of the Chapel and Loan Fund at present
connected with it.” This momentous resolution profoundly
affected the course of Queensland Methodist history.
The Home Mission committee was the executive for the Con-
nexion. Its duties were to make grants to circuits and loans on
new buildings, to direct property affairs, govern the Book
Depot and generally to administer Connexional undertakings.
In the process of time, sub-committees were appointed to deal
with these several subjects, and by a further evolution they
were created separate departments.
It was some years before the Connexional spirit was
awakened in the circuits so that the people understood and
acknowledged their responsibility to other stations. The Home
Mission Fund reached only £SOO when an earnest appeal was
made to the consciences of Methodists. They were told that
it was not a reasonable sum for them to contribute for so great
a work. This was emphasised by the statement that the census
showed 17,000 Methodists and the Church had only discovered
10,480. Those 7,000 missing from the recognition of the
Church were commended to the concern of those who were
better cared for.
A distinct development in Home Mission policy is discerned
with the appointment of the Rev. W. Halse Rogers as Secre-


tary. The 1880 report rejoices that the Revs. J. H. Nolan
(Chairman) and W. H. Rogers (Secretary) had
made an extensive tour in the North, holding
meetings and services, the income being
increased to £361. “An interest in our work has been awakened,
and if in the future regular visits can be made to all our cir-
cuits, it is certain our annual income will soon amount to £SOO,
a figure which is the very lowest we ought to entertain for such
a Fund as this, a Fund upon which depends more than upon
any other agency, the consolidation of past work and the future
development of every department of Church enterprise.” The
new policy was justified; the first substantial increase appear-
ing in the 1881 report when the income was £590, an advance
of £235, besides £l5O raised as a Fund for bringing young
probationers from England.
The efforts of Mr. Rogers are delightfully apparent and no
expenditure was more wisely incurred than £125 per annum
paid to his circuit towards the cost of a probationer to assist
while he was away on tour. A proposal was made for setting
him apart from circuit work in 1889, but for private reasons
he was unable to accept the position. On his retiring from the
secretaryship to return to New South Wales, a special resolu-
tion was passed in recognition of his signal service rendered to
the Church. In his last year Mr. Rogers saw the Fund reach
£778 besides £IOO raised for the passages from England of
three more probationers.
A valuable summary and comparison were included in the
1892 report. The five previous years had seen a forward
movement. Three Home Mission stations had been established,
the number of ministers had increased from twenty to thirty
and Church members from 1,178 to 1,848. Thirty new
Churches had been erected, whilst the average yearly income
for Home Missions had increased to £653. “And yet there is
little room for boasting,” said the report, “in many places the
opportunity which so long waited our acceptance is gone.
Others have entered the open door. From other places the
cry still comes to which we are compelled to turn a deaf ear.
We greatly need that a new impetus should be given to our
Forward Movement. Let us hope that the first Queensland
Conference will be encouraged to do and dare great things


for Christ, by finding that our Home Mission enterprises have
this year been generously sustained.”
From this time onwards new circuits were frequently
opened and these became effective mission centres. For
instance, about this time the Rev. William Brown of Bunda-
berg visited Paradise Goldfield, Mount Perry, Gin Gin and
Biggenden, and a new Home Mission station was created in
each place. The Home Mission Report of 1893 gives
prominence to Nambour: “the youngest and weakest of our
Home Mission stations has been in existence since last
September. The people of the district have built a neat
church as a centre of Home Mission effort. Two Sunday
Schools have been formed with sixty-four scholars and five
teachers. The Committee hopes that this will soon develop
into a strong mission.” And so the work went on, new stations
were opened year by year and weak circuits received assistance.
By 1905 there were sixteen Mission stations and twenty-one
missionaries. On two stations —Logan and Albert, and Gin
Gin and Mount Perry—the work had grown so considerably
that it was no longer possible for one agent to do it
and a second agent had been engaged. In several
other cases either a second missionary was about to
be sent or the stations were to be divided. A missionary had
been sent to Chillagoe. The minister of the Herberton circuit
had made occasional visits but the number of miners in the
town had increased and there were prospects of further
development over the entire mineral area, so that it became
imperative that there should be a resident missionary and
regular services. It was reported that each Mission station
averaged seven preaching places, and that quite 100 townships
were being systematically served. The annual report stated: —
“It should be remembered that many stations are remote
from centres of population, where the missionary’s
disabilities are accentuated. Not in the spirit of boasting,
but of thankfulness, we claim the credit of helping
thousands of people who are most difficult to reach and
where the work is expensive to sustain.”
Places mentioned were Cunnamulla, Thargomindah,
Normanton, Croydon and Port Darwin. By 1907 the opera-
tions had extended over twenty-three Home Mission stations.


The staff included twenty-five missionaries appointed to
stations; two were with the bush waggons and two were em-
ployed as connexional evangelists.
A further proof of the importance of the Society and another
stage in its development was seen in 1910 when the Rev. W. H.
Harrison was appointed full-time Secretary. For five years he
had been successfully doing this work in con-
junction with his circuit duties, but the claims of
the Society had become so great that it was
decided by Conference: “That nothing less than the whole time
and energy of the Secretary will suffice to meet our need in
view of the rapid development taking place in this State.” For
the next ten years Mr. Harrison was in labours more abundant
in the interests of the Society. By his energy and zeal and his
capacity for organisation he consolidated the work which
already had been done, opened new avenues of service, and set
new standards for both circuits and ministers. His innate
friendliness, his enthusiasm and optimism, enabled him to
enlist the sympathy and secure the support of the people
throughout the Connexion. Under his administration the
income of the Society increased from £1,432 in 1909 to £4,238
(including special contributions for soldiers’ work) in 1920.
From 1910 there was an increasing demand for ministers
and missionaries. As few young Queensland Methodists
offered themselves for this service, Mr. Harrison, following the
custom of earlier years, brought young men from England. He
secured substantial help from Cliff College and other centres.
Many of the recruits became ordained ministers in Queensland
and have successfully served in circuits and Connexional
departments; amongst them are Revs. J. A. Pratt, H. R.
Rycroft, R. E. Bacon, R. P. Pope, J. H. Crossley, H. J. Garrett,
T. Bibby, R. S. C. Dingle, F. Chowns, T. H. Taylor, A. S.
Rothwell and J. G. Hunter (who was killed in action on
Gallipoli).
The relationship between Mr. Harrison and his staff of
missionaries was largely responsible for the success of the
work. He was always considerate and encouraging, giving
them brotherly counsel in both their personal affairs and the
conduct of their stations. The Annual Reunion held at the
Secretary’s residence in Brisbane, when all missionaries and


probationers were generously entertained by the Rev. and Mrs.
W. H. Harrison, was more than a social event. It had a high
spiritual value, cementing the bonds that united the men to the
Church and the great work of the ministry.
When Mr. Harrison retired from the Secretaryship in 1921
the Home Mission Society was firmly established, and was an
indispensable agency of Church expansion. As a token of
appreciation the Conference presented to him a roll-top desk;
and in a resolution paid a tribute to the great and good work
which he had done, often at much personal sacrifice, for the
Home Mission Society, and assured him of the gratitude and
goodwill of the Church.
The Rev. A. A. Mills, M.C., was the next minister to devote
his whole time to the Home Mission Department. He served
with distinction for seventeen years, some of which were those
of the industrial depression with its accompanying
reaction upon the Funds of the Church. Mr. Mills
came to our Conference from Victoria in 1907, and
at once adapted himself to the conditions of pioneering for the
Church in Queensland. In wide circuits like Kingaroy and
Crow’s Nest his experience amongst new settlers, in opening
new preaching places and building churches, was excellent
preparation for the Home Mission leadership. His service as a
Chaplain with the A.I.F. from which he returned with the
Military Cross awarded to him for gallantry on the field of
battle in France, further qualified him for the arduous toil and
long and often wearisome journeys required of the Home
Mission Secretary. His robust physique, his alert mind, his
remarkable fluency, his aggressive spirit~mll were used with-
out reserve by Mr. Mills to make the Home Mission Society
effective. He was elected President of Conference in 1930 and
he used the office, its honours and privileges, for the benefit of
the Society, bringing to it added prestige and increasing the
interest of the Methodist people in its work. On his retire-
ment, in 1937, to become Connexional Secretary, the Confer-
ence expressed thanks to him for the devoted zeal, fidelity and
ability with which he had discharged his duties. ‘'Linder his
direction” it was stated, “the work of the Home Mission
Society has greatly increased with the passing of the years and
the development of the State, and Mr. Mills has displayed a


. . ' \ - A
£8Sw::£j&:&;S:::::iiSi%^^
THE BUSH WAGGON
1905
METHODIST INLAND MISSION PLANE
1946


genius for organising which has enabled each situation to be
met as the need arose. He has laid the Church under a debt
of gratitude to him for his full and faithful service.”
In the early twenties, large numbers of Italian immigrants
settled on the sugar cane farms of North Queensland between
Ingham and Innisfail. Their presence there without religious
ministrations of any kind, represented a challenge to
the Home Mission Society. After considerable thought
and discussion Conference of 1927 decided to estab-
lish a Mission amongst these aliens. Negotiations were opened
with the Chairman of the Italian District of the British
Methodist Conference, as a result of which the Rev. Romani
Montanari was lent to Queensland to work among his own
countrymen. His headquarters were at Tully where a church
and parsonage were provided at a cost of about £2,000. He
laboured with commendable devotion for three years, liberally
supported by the Home Mission Fund.
The results, however, were disappointing. Racial feeling
was much in evidence and was a great hindrance. The anti-
Protestant sentiment of many Italians was also a difficulty.
The Society was compelled therefore to terminate the work in
1930 and Mr. Montanari returned to Italy. The experiment,
though an expensive one, was essentially the duty of the Home
Mission Society. It was judiciously and bravely undertaken
and was not without useful lessons for the future. It may prove
to be the first of similar attempts to minister to foreign
immigrants.
The practice of appointing young laymen to Home Mission
stations without first having some training for the work, had
exercised the minds of the Home Mission Committee for many
years. Young men were accepted on the ground of their
earnestness, their experience in Christian work and the
evidence they gave of possibilities of becoming ministers. Some
of them were Englishmen with no knowledge whatever of con-
ditions either social or religious in this country, but they were
sent out after being interviewed and advised by the Home
Mission Secretary and other members of the Committee, into
remote and difficult stations. It is a wonder that so many were
successful. It was felt, however, that if such young fellows
were received into an institution where they could live, if only


for a short time, in the atmosphere of Home Missions, and
where they could receive elementary training in habits of study
and in the practical work of a missionary, their careers would
be more assured.
In 1927 the Home Missionaries’ Training Institution was
established in the ample parsonage of the Valley Church,
situated at Bowen Hills, Brisbane. The building was adapted
and enlarged for the purpose, and the Rev. B.
Frederick was appointed Superintendent, together
with the responsibility of the Valley Church.
For six years Mr. Frederick exercised his dis-
tinguished gifts in this exacting position and Mrs. Frederick
served with loving devotion as honorary matron. Classes
were conducted by the Superintendent with the assistance of
visiting ministers, in Bible study, Homiletics, Greek, etc., and
students received advice upon the duties of a missionary. He
was succeeded in 1934 by the Rev. R. S. C. Dingle, whose wife
also undertook the duties of matron.
A new feature was introduced into the Institution during Mr.
Dingle’s term. Accommodation was provided for youths from
Methodist homes in the country who came to the city to pursue
special studies or for business reasons. They needed care and
guidance and the advantages of home life. They were placed
under the authority and protection of the Superintendent, who
endeavoured to help them in the tasks for which they had come
to the city, and encouraged them to keep within the moral and
religious restraints of the Church. This work was many-sided
and although it added immeasurably to the work of the
Superintendent and his wife, it was most fruitful. It was felt
that this was part of Home Mission work, continuing the
influence of the Church in the lives of boys who had been
trained in our Sunday Schools.
In 1940 Mr. Dingle was succeeded by the Rev. T. H. Cherry,
L.Th., who laboured devotedly for four years, and whose wife
undertook the duties of matron under circumstances of extreme
hardship occasioned by the war. At the conclusion of his term
Mr. Cherry returned to England where he became identified
with the British Methodist Conference. The present Superin-
tendent is the Rev. J. Newton Bagnall, L.Th., who is intro-


ducing the features of a Community Church into the organisa-
tion at the Valley.
The vast “outback” of Queensland, inhabited by lonely
people living and working on the great cattle and sheep
stations, was a recurring problem in Evangelism for our
Church. No ordinary methods of Church organisa-
tion were possible. These people, stoically toiling to
produce the wealth of the State represented in its
primary products, and rearing their families with but few of
the amenities of civilisation, were amongst the State’s bravest
citizens. How to reach them with the gospel of Jesus Christ
and provide their children with the means of religious instruc-
tion was the question which caused the Conference much
anxious thought.
In 1898 a decision was made —the Bush Mission was
instituted. The record reads, “the Bush Mission scheme is to
receive a fair trial. This is a new departure from circuit or
even Home Mission lines. It is to be a special feature in oui
work of evangelising the backblocks. The proposition is to
equip a minister with a vehicle, literature, and other things
likely to help him with his work, give him a roving com-
mission that will enable him to follow the track of settlement,
camping among the shearers and carriers, and living the life
of a nomad; his home his waggon, his parishioners the men
and women who inhabit the realm of pastoralia. Cunnamulla
has been selected as the point of departure, and the vast in-
terior region stretching into the heart of Australia is to be ex-
ploited in the interest of righteousness.”
That was the plan. It was comprehensive and it was
audacious. It was a noteworthy attempt to discharge the
obvious obligation of the Church. The kind of life proposed
for the minister, the people among whom he was to labour, and
the point of departure, Cunnamulla, suggest that the scheme
was proposed after careful thought and investigation.
A special fund was opened for this mission and other prac-
tical steps were taken to put the resolution of Conference into


effect. It was not, however, until 1905 that the work was
actually commenced. It was not easy to find the
right man to pioneer the scheme, and there were
other considerations which had to be overcome.
James Moorhouse was the first missioner. Bush life appealed
to him; he was temperamentally suited to its conditions; he
was a man among men, virile, practical and endowed with an
abundance of commonsense. He could do many things usually
associated with men nearly twice his size—manage horses, use
the axe, extricate himself from such unpleasant circumstances
as often befall bush travellers. Withal, he was sincerely pious
and an earnest worker for Christ. Equipped with a specially
constructed waggon, a couple of strong horses, provided with
literature, an organ, a magic lantern, and all the necessary
requirements for Christian work in the bush, Mr. Moorhouse
fared forth on a mission to the lonely.
In 1907 Ernest Ball was appointed to a similar position.
For some time two waggons travelled the bush tracks, often far
from civilisation. Mr. Ball, like Mr. Moorhouse, commended
himself to bush people wherever he went. He had
been a soldier in the British army in India, and his
soldierly qualities, which were always manifest, con-
tributed greatly to a fruitful ministry amongst those whose first
respect was for rugged courage and devotion to duty. He was
a splendid type of Christian, interpreting the principles of
Christ in deeds of kindness and mercy and in brotherly love.
He spent many years in the West, even after he relinquished
his association with the Bush Mission, conducting an especially
memorable ministry at Winton for six successive years, and
later serving the Inland Mission at Boulia. His influence abides
amongst the people, and it is revealed in their respect for the
Church which he served. The success of the Bush Mission can
be attributed to the character and spirit of the two men who
were its pioneers. Both Mr. Moorhouse and Mr. Ball con-
tinued to serve the Home Mission Society in many spheres,
winning the increasing respect of the Church, until in 1930
Conference honoured them by admitting them into Full Con-
nexion as ministers of the Church without subjecting them to
the usual tests.
The Bush Mission was discontinued for some time but it was


undertaken again in 1927 as the Federal Inland Mission under
the auspices of the General Conference. The purpose was the
same but the area was extended, and instead of horse
waggons, specially equipped motor vans were used.
The scheme was conceived by the Rev. Dr. A. T.
Holden, C.8.E., 8.A., Superintendent of Home Missions in Vic-
toria, and later President-General. It was only an ecclesiastical
statesman such as he who could visualise this immense under-
taking. The General Conference of 1926 instituted the Federal
Inland Mission, and in the following year it was inaugurated
by the opening of five centres and the appointment of five mis-
sioners. By 1931 there were ten centres, five of them being in
Queensland, namely Cloncurry, Mount Isa, Camooweal, Boulia
and Birdsville, and Katherine River. It was arranged that the
Mission should be managed by a Board under the direction of
Dr. Holden. The estimated cost of the Mission was £6,000
annually and it is an indication that it has won popular ap-
proval and support that this cost has been met every year.
Some idea of the extent of the Mission, and of its early success
is seen in the Director’s report to the General Conference of
1929:
“Overshadowing this enterprise from its inception has
been the manifest guidance and blessing of God. In the
selection of the staff and the allotting of them to their
respective spheres, in the service they havs already ren-
dered, and in all other phases of the new venture, we have
felt God’s Spirit witnessing with our spirit that we were
fulfilling the good pleasure of His Will. Confirmation of
the need of this work was soon apparent. None of our
agents was placed in any area where there was already a
permanent resident minister of any denomination. In
some cases there never had been a resident minister to the
white population. In varying terms each missioner has
reported cases where no clergyman had been in the homes
for periods up to twenty-five years; in many homes never
at all. No Church had previously attempted, on the same
scale, work such as we are doing in the Interior. So zeal-
ous have our missioners been that there are few towns or
hamlets that they have not already visited in an area half
as big as Europe. We trust that soon there will not be one


£ M • |j Jf % : -:- :^|L
: : y., I ; :
:;•; . J| «| |®|
■ ■y.\-y.y_'.\ ... . .v.v.v'-'
......
'■ ?
A *
1 a U A jJraH
Bfc J ffi& 4| A . $
AT THE LAUNCHING OF THE CENTRAL WEST MISSION AT WINTON, 1946
Missionary A. Heiner, Rev. R. S. C. Dingle, Rev. G. D. Smith, Rev. J. A. Pratt,
Missionary J. Hughes, Missionary R. W. Morton
SUCCESSIVE HOME MISSION SECRETARIES
Rev. W. H. Harrison, J. A. Pratt, A. A. Mills and C. A. Read (who will
commence duty in 1948)


home where they are needed, in which prayer has not been
offered. Their total car mileage to September 13th, 1928,
is 77.241 miles —more than three times round the earth al
the Equator. Testimony, direct and indirect, has filtered
through as to their faithfulness in Christian teaching and
ideals, and to their own personal success amongst the
Inlanders. The nature of their work makes big demands
on physique, resourcefulness, bush-craft and courage,
although all the staff deny that it is unduly hazardous.’'
In 1946, the Rev. Cliff. Lanham, who had spent several years
on the Inland Mission staff before joining the R.A.A.F., re-
sumed his work at Mt. Isa. Instead of a motor van he was sup-
plied with an aeroplane, the first to be used by our missioners.
This is prophetic of the widespread use of the ’plane in the
Inland.
During the regime of the Rev. J. A. Pratt, who succeeded
Mr. Mills as General Secretary in 1937, the Society has had a
period of gratifying progress. Many factors have contributed
to this, but much is due to the indefatigable
labours and the leadership of Mr. Pratt. If
finance be a standard of judgment, never has the
Home Mission Society been more successful than during the
past three years, when the income (including contributions for
special purposes) was as follows: —1944, £5,942; 1945,
£7,864; 1946, £5,254.
Mr. Pratt, by training and experience, has been in complete
sympathy with the aims of the Society. He came to Australia
with a passion for Evangelism acquired at Cliff College, Eng-
land, and in this State he was appointed to stations and cir-
cuits as far removed and as different as Winton and Darwin,
Boonah and Bundaberg, and in the metropolitan district he
spent five successful years at Nundah as well as serving in
other circuits. With a full ministry, including a year as Presi-
dent of the Conference as a background, Mr. Pratt confronted
his manifold tasks and the difficulties arising from the circum-
stances of war with confidence, skill and optimism. There has
been as much expansion in the last nine years as the political
and social conditions would allow, and in this the General Sec-
retary has had a full measure of responsibility. Mr. Pratt s
principal aim has been to ensure the stability and permanence


of existing stations and institutions. “What we have, we’ll
hold,” is one of his familiar sayings and this represents his
purpose.
On more than one occasion Mr. Pratt has travelled among
the great Inland Mission stations associated with the Queens-
land Conference. He has given to the missioners the benefit of
his experience, and he has himself become better fitted to join
in discussions at meetings of the Inland Mission Board, of
which he is a member.
With the formation of the Central West Mission in 1946,
Mr. Pratt saw the fulfilment of one of his ambitions. Under
the superintendency of the Rev. G. D. Smith, L.Th., of Bar-
caldine, the country, comprising four circuits and
Home Mission stations, is to be regularly patrolled
by the Superintendent and his three assistants. One
of the happiest of the duties of Mr. Pratt as General Secretary
was to launch this undertaking in company with the Chairman
of the Central District, the Rev. R. S. C. Dingle. In the Winton
church the missioners were solemnly dedicated to the work at a
service of Holy Communion, and the motor vehicle— the gift
of the Home Mission Society—was later formally handed over
to the Chairman. The funds of the Home Mission Society will
be liberally advanced for the maintenance of this special
Mission.
A similar Mission has opened in the South-West area, with
headquarters at Warwick. It extends as far as Goondiwindi in
the South and Surat in the West. A motor vehicle for patrol
purposes has been provided by the Home Mission
Society and was dedicated by the Rev. J. A. Pratt in
October 1946. The whole scheme involved in this
undertaking was pioneered by the late Rev. E. G. Hall, who in
many circuits revealed an intense interest in expanding the
work of the Church. His death shortly after his election as
Secretary of the Conference in 1946 was a heavy loss to the
Church. The influence of his energetic ministry and of his
sincere Christian character will be abidingly manifest.
Mr. Pratt has shared in a considerable development in
Federal Home Mission outlook and enterprise. The Federal


Home Mission Council, appointed by General Conference of
1941, was the outcome of conferences between the
Home Mission representatives from the various
States. A survey of the Commonwealth was under-
taken and it was discovered that there were vast areas
in Queensland and Western Australia where the Methodist
Church was not represented. As a result it was agreed that
Queensland and Western Australia should be financially
assisted by the other States. New South Wales is now
generously giving £SOO a year for five years to the Home Mis-
sion Society of this Conference and Victoria is similarly help-
ing Western Australia.
Contributions of £SOO each have also been received from the
Central Mission Officials and the Board of Management of the
Queensland Book Depot. An era of even more remarkable
progress is being planned and anticipated.
Whilst the Home Mission Society has been fortunate in its
succession of secretaries, it has been no less fortunate in its
treasurers. Amongst the clerical treasurers have been the Revs.
Dr. Henry Youngman, W. Dinning, and Joseph
Bowes. Mr. Bowes occupied the position for
twenty-one years until his lamented death in 1929.
He served the Society courteously, gladly and lovingly. He
brought to the office undoubted ability and considerable ex-
perience as a circuit minister and a Connexional officer. He
was held in affectionate esteem by all his brethren. His bon-
homie and sprightly bearing endeared him to all. His literary
gifts are still in evidence in his stories for boys. It is note-
worthy that his ministry in the Albert Street church is com-
memorated by a suitably inscribed tablet on the walls of the
sanctuary. Mr. Bowes was succeeded as clerical treasurer by
the Rev. W. H. Harrison, who until the age of eighty-six con-
tinued to occupy the position, thus maintaining his association
with the Society of which he was once the General Secretary.
Among the lay treasurers, those who have served for the
longest periods are Mr. Chas. S. Nichols—thirteen years, and


Mr. E. T. Campbell—-twenty-two years. Both men helped to
shape the financial policy of the Society, and made
an ineffaceable impression upon its history. Mr.
Nichols was a Methodist by training and convic-
tion. At the age of twelve he received his first ticket of mem-
bership in the Wesleyan Church in England, and throughout
his life he was unwavering in his loyalty to the doctrines of
the Church. In addition to occupying important positions in
his local Church at Wooloowin, Brisbane, he was at intervals
treasurer of the Overseas Missions and the Young Peoples
Department; but it was to the Home Mission Society that he
gave his best and longest work; it was dear to his heart. Upon
this onerous work he bestowed meticulous care, every phase
receiving his conscientious attention. He was one of the most
gracious of men, trusted and esteemed by a wide circle of
friends.
Mr. E. T. Campbell maintained the tradition established by
Mr. Nichols. During the years of his treasurership the Society
developed its interests considerably, and the treasurer’s duties
increased accordingly. Mr. Campbell was equal to
the demands of the office. It was his unhappy ex-
perience to have to guide the Society through the
years of financial strain due to the industrial depression; it
was a task which called for skill and the willingness and dis-
position to be self-sacrificing. Upon his retirement the Con-
ference acknowledged his faithful and efficient service and paid
a tribute to the thoroughness of his interest and his under-
standing of the work of Home Missions.
The present lay treasurer is Mr. A. M. Jolly, a lifelong
Methodist and a business man, who has brought to
the work of Home Missions a glad and willing
spirit. Already he has shown an enthusiasm for
our Home Mission work.
In 1894 a group of women met together to discover new
methods of assisting the work of the Home Mission Society.
This was the birth of the Women’s Auxiliary which has had an
uninterrupted existence and has rendered invaluable
service to the Church. The members have kept in
touch with missionaries on the field, especially by
forwarding Christmas tokens, provided Anzac Day lunches,


and conducted efforts for the benefit of the funds of the society.
The membership of the auxiliary has comprised representa-
tives from Brisbane circuits and other women with special
interest in Home Mission work —a loyal and enthusiastic band
of women blessed with wise and efficient leadership. Amongst
the presidents of the auxiliary have been Mrs. G. E. Rowe,
Mrs. W. Brown, Mrs. A. C. Plane and Mrs. A. Wagner. For the
past ten years Mrs. A. H. Berg has occupied the position and
has added to the dignity and prestige of the auxiliary. Mrs.
R. S. C. Dingle was appointed to succeed Mrs. Berg and asso-
ciated with her are Mrs. R. McGhee, secretary, and Mrs. C.
Herbert, treasurer.
The Auxiliary has substantially contributed to the funds of
the Society and through the personal service of the members
has assisted every branch of the work for which the Society is
responsible. Home Missionaries have been encouraged from
time to time to receive kindly intimations of the interest of the
Auxiliary in their work and the people associated with Home
Mission Stations have been gratified to know that a splendid
band of women in the city labour on their behalf.
Since 1910 the Church has been privileged to care for a
large number of orphaned and otherwise unprivileged children-
No work has been more consistent with the spirit of Christ and
none has been more profitable to the Church and
State. It is an exacting work, but there have not
been wanting consecrated women willing to under-
take the heavy responsibility. Two homes have been con-
ducted, the Queen Alexandra Home for girls and small boys,
opened in 1910, and the Margaret Marr Home for boys, com-
menced in 1924. Hundreds of children have been cared for
with excellent results. The State Government has given its
hearty endorsement to the methods employed in the Homes and
has frequently congratulated the committee on the health and
the happiness of the children. This endorsement has been sup-
ported by generous annual donations. Since their inception
they have been a branch of the Home Mission Society which
has directed their policy; but the management of both institu-
tions has been in the hands of a committee of capable women.
Like many of our Church Institutions the Queen Alexandra
Home was made possible by the generosity of kindly and sym-


Ullljn ■.-: --■£■•■• •v-:-Sy- ■■<->^--:>^ > - NN: ' : ~
-sm^mw^mmrn.mm -■ '"'"***'
HOME MISSIONARIES'
TRAINING INSTITUTION
MRS. R. S. C. DINGLE
President, Women's Auxiliary to
Home Missions
MISS M. POWELL
President, Women's Auxiliary to
Overseas Missions


pathetic friends. Mrs. D. R. McConnel, realising the need for
a home for necessitous children and desiring to
perpetuate the memory of her parents, the late
Hon. Henry and Mrs. Jordan, offered to the
Methodist Church the family home of “RobgilT’ at
Indooroopilly, to be used for this purpose. The offer was
gratefully accepted and the Rev. W. H. Harrison, Home Mis-
sion General Secretary, was directed to call a meeting of
women to discuss the organisation of the suggested Home. At
this meeting seventeen women consented to act as a Committee.
Mrs. J. J. Kingsbury was elected President, Mrs. W. H. Har-
rison, Honorary Secretary, Mrs. W. Smyth, Honorary
Treasurer, and Mesdames John Archibald and 0. S. Osborne
Vice-Presidents. The members of the Committee were
Mesdames W. P. Spargo, J. Bradley, A. Wagner, E. Chapman,
D. Lahey, G. Nicklin, T. Howling, F. Curnow, G. I. Bourne,
T. C. Abraham, J. Sankey, Hawkins, Faulkner and Miss F.
Fade.
On July 28th, 1910, the first three children were admitted,
and so commenced a romantic and beautiful ministry by means
of which neglected little children receive loving care and atten-
tion in the name of the Saviour. As there was accommodation
for only ten children at “Robgill,” larger premises very soon
were required. A large house at Coorparoo, the home of the
late Mr. and Mrs. R. Nicklin, was accordingly purchased for
£2,500; Messrs. G. F. and W. F. Nicklin and Mrs. W. T.
Horsley generously donated £SOO of the price in memory of
their parents, Mr. and Mrs. R. Nicklin, who lost their lives on
the “Quetta,” which was wrecked on an uncharted rock off the
North Queensland coast in February 1890. Both were members
of the Church, Mrs. Nicklin being known for her saintly good-
ness and active benevolence, and Mr. Nicklin as genial and
liberal.
The new Home was opened with sixteen children in
December 1911, with Sister Martha as Matron. In 1914 the
number of children had increased to forty-eight and further
dormitory accommodation was required. A new wing was
built and opened in February 1915 at a cost of £2,134; by the
end of that year eighty-three children were in residence.
Further extensions have been necessary from time to time.


Sister Martha was succeeded as Matron by Miss L. Horsley who
occupied the position for eleven years and passed away among
the surroundings she loved. Her place was filled by Miss
McLaren, who had been for four years a member of the staff.
Miss McLaren later married Mr. John Else, and together they
served the home as Matron and Superintendent until 1946. The
long service of Mrs. Else enabled her to see many of her
charges happily and successfully established in life. The value
of her work and her influence in the lives of these girls is
beyond all possible calculation. Many of them continue to
regard her as “mother” and consult her about their affairs.
All through the years the Committee has been fortunate in
its officers. The Presidents have been Mrs. J. J. Kingsbury
until 1913, Mrs. T. C. Abraham for twenty-three years, Mrs.
Wagner, and the present President, Mrs. F. Tritton, a member
of the Committee for twenty years. Mrs. W. G. Webb is the
present Secretary and Mrs. Gibson the Treasurer.
The Margaret Marr Memorial Home for boys was opened
by His Excellency Sir Matthew Nathan on March Ist, 1924, as
an extension of the work of the Queen Alexandra Home. Mr.
John Fyfe Marr, as a memorial to his wife, gave to
the Methodist Church eighteen acres of land at
Wynnum on which the Home was erected. The
first building cost £1,608 and the furnishings £312.
Further accommodation was soon necessary and with £1,025
given by Mr. John Lahey and assistance from the Trustees, the
“John Lahey” wing was opened free of debt in 1927. The
average number of boys in residence through the years has
been fifty. The Home is ideally situated and wisely admin-
istered. This Home is controlled by the same Committee as
the Queen Alexandra Home except that it has a separate
Honorary Secretary, who is at present Mrs. J. W. Greene, and
Honorary Treasurer, who is Mrs. J. L. Clark. The Home has
been fortunate in the Masters and Matrons who have been en-
gaged through the years, and in other members of its staff. Mr.
and Mrs. Edwards, Mr. and Mrs. Little and Mr. and Mrs. E. W.
Lewis have been successively in charge. Mr. and Mrs. Lewis
have held the position for twelve years and have enjoyed the
esteem and love of the boys as well as the confidence of the
Committee. Many “old boys” maintain a close contact with the


Home by their visits and generous gifts. Gifts in both cash
and kind have enabled the Committee to continue their work.
Doctors, dentists, auditors and solicitors have given their ser-
vices without any hesitation in an honorary capacity to this
Home as well as to the Queen Alexandra.
During the war years both Homes were evacuated to the
country—the girls to Murgon and the boys to Proston. This
disturbance caused much anxiety to the Committee and Staff,
but happily they now are restored to their respective Homes at
Coorparoo and Wynnum and the good work of creating Chris-
tian citizens continues.
The policy of conducting hostels for young people is now
well established and is being pursued by a Hostels Council
affiiliated Avith the Home Mission Society. At Herberton and
Murgon two excellent institutions already are suc-
cessfully caring for large numbers of young
students. The Herberton Hostel was inaugurated through the
labours of the late Rev. R. E. Bacon. As chairman of the
Northern District, he had every opportunity of estimating the
need for the Church to provide accommodation for children
in distant areas who had to reside in the larger centres for the
purposes of securing a secondary education. Accordingly, the
Herberton parsonage was used as a hostel under the direction
of Missionary and Mrs. F. W. Jones. From time to time, the
accommodation was increased until now no less than seventy-
five young people are cared for. Credit is due to Mr. and Mrs.
Jones for their foundation work, and to Mr. and Mrs. Clive
Lanham who succeeded them and who for five years developed
the work. To-day, Mr. and Mrs. Roy Toft are in charge and
are rendering fine Christian service on behalf of the Church.
A large hostel was opened at Murgon in April 1947. A pro-
perty was purchased, largely through the generosity of Matron
Meddleton, and adapted, at cost of £4,000, for the require-
ments of a hostel. It now has accommodation for forty
young students. Mr. and Mrs. John Else are exercising a
splendid influence amongst them, and at the same time are
laying a good foundation for the future. It is hoped that hostels
will be built elsewhere and that thereby the Church will con-
tinue to fasten upon young lives the principles of Christ and
guide them in the ways of Christian citizenship.


ill
REV. H. R. RYCROFT
President, 1941
REV. J. E. JACOB
Director, Department of Evangelism
REV. RON. WOODGATE, 8.A., B.Ed.
Tanga
REV. L. N. KENTISH, 8.A., B.D.


CHAPTER II
CONNEXIONAL FUNDS
Owing to the expansion of the Church the Secretarial duties
assigned to various ministers in addition to their circuit work
became so heavy that it was imperative that one minister should
be entirely relieved of circuit work to enable the consolidation
of Church activities to progress more rapidly. This was done
in 1907. It was natural that the Rev. Dr. Henry Youngman
should be appointed to the position, as he had been for many
years an outstanding leader of the Conference, and had for
some time performed connexional duties as a circuit minister.
Dr. Youngman held the position until his retirement in 1922
during which time his service and influence profoundly
affected the development of the Church.
He entered the ministry in New South Wales in 1871 and for
sixteen years he gave service of a distinctive character in that
State. In 1887 he was appointed to the Albert Street circuit,
Brisbane, and for the following nineteen years he
fulfilled a noble ministry in leading Queensland
circuits. Dr. Youngman had much to do with the
establishment of the Queensland Conference in 1893, of which
he was the first President. He was the leader of the movement
which resulted in the union of the Methodist Churches, and he
presided over the first United Conference in 1898. He was
again elected President in 1907. His great powers of mind were
abundantly displayed not only on these occasions, but also
when elected Secretary of the General Conference, 1907-10, and
President-General, 1910-13.
His name always will be associated with the Connexional
Departments. It was during his period as Secretary that he
instituted the Fire Insurance Fund, and the Conference acting
upon his advice repurchased a portion of the original property
which belonged to the Church at the corner of Burnett Lane
and Albert Street. He wisely administered the Book Depot y
and for many years was the Editor of the Connexional Journal.
The educational policy of the Church was dear to his heart and
for a term he was Chairman of the Presbyterian and Methodist


Schools Association. Dr. Youngman’s wide knowledge, his
keen, sane judgment, calm judicial habits of thought, and
great powers of administration, were ever unreservedly used
in the interests of the Church.
He, at first, conducted his secretarial duties in his home at
Toowong, but later the Conference secured for him an office at
Epworth House. Here he wrote, in his own inimitable
caligraphy, his official letters and kept his account books
meticulously. The duties of the Property Committee which
were allied to his department brought him into touch with
every circuit in the Conference, and he became an authority on
the affairs of Methodism throughout the State.
The Rev. Dr. Robert Stewart succeeded Dr. Youngman in
this office, but after only four months’ service he passed to his
reward. Then the Rev. Wm. Brown, a Supernumerary
minister, came to the office. He was a different
type of man from Dr. Youngman, but he had un-
doubted administrative gifts. He was sagacious
and discriminating; he had wide vision and sound judgment;
he displayed due caution, but was not without courage to lead
the Church into new ventures. In Conference and Synods he
spoke with restraint, but his opinion was so dependable that
he was listened to with great respect, and frequently his utter-
ances determined a vote. Mr. Brown had been in circuit work
in the Northern, Central and Brisbane districts, he had been
Secretary for the Young People’s Department and had been
both Secretary and President of the Conference. His ex-
perience brought him into sympathy with ministers and circuit
officials.
The scope of Connexional responsibilities widened until dur-
ing Rev. A. A. Mills’ administration which began in 1931,
they assumed considerable proportions. For six years Mr.
Mills was both Connexional Secretary and General Secretary
of Home Missions. The list of offices which he was called
upon to fulfil was a formidable one, and only a man of his
physical and mental capacity could possibly have faced the
task it represented. This is the list —Secretary and Treasurer
of the Connexional Expenses and Children’s Fund, the Super-
numerary Fund, Annuitants’ Fund, Fire Insurance Fund,
•Cyclone and Flood Relief Fund, Secretary of the Property


Committee, Custodian of Deeds, Clerical Treasurer of the Loan
Fund, Clerical Treasurer of the Sites Fund, A competent office
staff was provided by Conference and assistance was given to
the Home Mission Department. Even with this help the Sec-
retary’s responsibilities were heavy indeed. However, in 1937
Mr. Mills retired from the Home Mission secretaryship and
was then appointed full-time Connexional Secretary.
The Connexional Expenses and Children’s Fund, the Sec -
retary’s principal responsibility, is concerned with the
necessary costs incurred in the connexional workings of the
Church, the payment of ministers’ removal ex-
penses, allowances to ministers’ children,
General Conference expenses, etc. The income
is derived from a levy determined by Conference on circuit in-
come. For some years the levy was twenty-one per cent., but
through the generosity of the Board of Management of the
Book Depot in making a grant of £SOO per annum for five
years, and the improvement in circuit income it has been
possible to reduce the levy to sixteen per cent. The income for
the year 1946 amounted to £6,483. The detailed work in-
volved in the conduct of the fund is immense, but it has been
efficiently done.
For twenty-eight years the lay treasurer was Mr. T. Fielding,
the simple beauty of whose character was reflected in the man-
ner in which he served the connexion. Throughout his life he
has loved the Church and has given capable
service in many spheres, always graciously,
generously, and for the glory of God. Without
ostentation, but with consistent loyalty he carried on the work
until advancing years and declining strength compelled him to
relinquish his duties in 1940. Mr. Fielding won the confidence
of all who laboured with him and the Conference expressed
thanks to him in the following resolution: —
u On the retirement of Mr. Thomas Fielding from the
office of Lay Treasurer of the Connexional Expenses and
Children’s Fund, Conference gratefully records its high
appreciation of the faithful services over the long un-
broken period- —twenty-eight years- —as treasurer of one of
the most important Conference funds. Conference assures
Mr. Fielding that he will carry with him into his retire-


merit from office the high esteem of both ministerial and
lay representatives who have admired the gracious and
efficient manner in which he has discharged the duties
that have been so willingly undertaken in the interests of
the Church and for the furtherance of the Kingdom of
God.”
The present Treasurer is Mr. G. H. Nelson. He is well known
in the Church by his association with the work of the Nundah
circuit and with the great Christian Endeavour
Movement, of which he is one of the World Vice-
Presidents. He is highly respected in business circles
and his wide knowledge of financial affairs is gladly placed at
the disposal of the Church.
Through the advocacy of the Rev. Dr. Youngman, and under
his leadership, the Conference of 1909 decided to establish its
own Fire Insurance Fund in which all Methodist buildings
were to be insured. This has proved a wise and
useful policy. No capital was available to start
the scheme, but a guarantee of £5,000 was given by
sympathetic friends in case claims were made before the
department was financial. There was no need to make any
demand upon these guarantors. The fund was quickly built
up and the capital now stands at approximately £15,000. From
the profits, other Church enterprises have been liberally
assisted.
The secretaries have had the assistance and advice of com-
petent business men in initiating and administering the fund,
so that every phase of its operations has given the utmost satis-
faction to the Conference. The present Treasurer is Mr. W. A.
Jolly, C.M.G., who, notwithstanding many claims upon him
when he was the Ford Mayor of Brisbane and a Member of the
Federal Parliament, has gladly and efficiently served the
Church in this as in other capacities.
Churches in Central and Northern Quensland have from
time to time suffered the visitation of storms and cyclones.
Townsville has been devastated twice by severe cyclones
officially designated u Feonta” 1903, and 4t Sigma”
1896. The loss sustained by the Church in each
calamity was serious and necessitated raising funds
throughout the connexion and in the Southern Conferences for


reconstruction purposes. The Mackay Church and parsonage
were entirely destroyed in 1918, and Cairns and Innisfail have
similarly suffered.
The possibility of such calamitous occurences and of storms
of lesser severity in almost any part of the State, suggested to
Conference the need of a fund from which trustees could obtain
financial assistance for rebuilding or repairs. On the basis of
our Connexional constitution, by means of which the Churches
render mutual help, the Cyclone and Flood Relief fund was
opened in 1928. Trustees were asked to make a nominal con-
tribution annually for each building under their control. Thus,,
it was hoped, a substantial fund would ultimately be estab-
lished from which grants could be made in times of need.
Trustees were at first reluctant to take advantage of the pro-
tection offered, but prejudice gradually was overcome until
now all are contributing and may depend upon the privileges
of the fund. Happily no serious damage has been suffered in
recent years, but even where slight damage has been caused by
storms, the committee has made grants to trustees often cover-
ing the whole cost of repairs. The present capital of the fund
is £3,500.
For some years the establishment of a Sites Fund in con-
nection with Methodist activities had been given serious con-
sideration by those associated with the developmental work of
the Church. The growth of the suburban areas
in Brisbane and the larger provincial cities
indicated the necessity of such a fund, it being
impossible for existing circuits to accept the
additional responsibility of securing new sites. Upon the
death of the Rev. Dr. Youngman, the Conference of 1931
decided to establish the fund as a fitting memorial to his states-
manship in the Church. It was commenced with a capital of
£250. Rev. A. A. Mills was appointed Clerical Treasurer and
Mr. W. H. Green Secretary and Lay Treasurer, which positions
they continue to hold. In 1944 Mr. E. T. Campbell was ap-
pointed Assistant Secretary and Treasurer and continues to
carry on this work. The fund operates in conjunction with the
Loan Fund, and during its short life has rendered assistance to
many important projects, fully justifying its existence. The
capital is now £3,277.


}■ npn ifi 'IJBBI
l!i.:Li Ft |\" r~
£> r — , _
«**■*:«'»' IT . f * ' 1— #«■- ic.
■■-, | Jnii ;
4i4Jib ■■ ., 4 %JML ri. ,*. : Jta/ iHBa » :
IT % ipK --t| m ' ( %i : f . 1m
m w aisppa i ' wj * lil|! >« ' ; yswSzd * 4 *v .. t * ■
Mfc mSF liii& -..-m MBf - e - 1BK MWsmL .,. 1h|||| # Jp
W*L JHB mH -'v "~ ’s&SlmSSBm '■* tthiMlR ~ » | ,,
4 V
-%&f $jSm 'f-v :
■ ■ V 9 b ff m i 1BB8 .4 &y
nL J8BI 9 9 9 B Bill ijpak h I " : Bp>
, -^Br---:., WB 8BHBK jSBSgSt H ;i - ; i ■’ JOB
■ *Wk4 *
' j ~: •* k« V |||§B ||SB Kfe%J| pp$B BRB|
SiiiS«s WJ wMBhJSjn Jra» jE' *$'’
tWFTgr- sir"^1KP^|PP :( • €w» f
THE CENTENARY COMMITTEE


The Methodist Church of Queensland owes much to Church
statesmen who by their faith, zeal and vision, brought into
being funds that have enabled the Church to carry out its
evangelical mission, extending its borders and en-
larging its sphere of spiritual activities. It truly can
be said that the founders of the Loan Fund were
divinely inspired. This is a fund from which needy circuits
and new enterprises are helped, the money being lent for a
given period free of interest, to be paid back to the fund in
regular instalments. The maintenance and extension of the
Church in Queensland have been made possible through the
operations of the Home Mission and Loan funds. In the initial
years of the Church’s history these two funds were linked
together. It definitely can be stated that every circuit, trust
and Home Mission station has been directly benefited by the
help received from these agencies.
In 1871 the Loan Fund was separated from the Home Mis-
sion Fund, it being resolved on the motion of Mr. J. S. Turner
That the £l5O belonging to the Loan Fund be used solely for
loans and not in any case for grants, and that the amounts re-
paid to the account be kept for the loan.’’ This was the genesis
of the Loan Fund. Lpon his appointment as Chairman of the
Queensland District, Rev. F. T. Brentnall persistently urged its
claims at the New South Wales —Queensland Conference.
Through his efforts he was instrumental in procuring, through
the Conference, a conditional promise from the English Mis-
sionary Committee. This committee undertook to make a grant
of £I,OOO to Queensland on condition that £SOO was raised in
the colony, the grant to be paid in proportion to the amount
contributed. The offer was accepted, and it was resolved to
amalgamate two efforts —£500 to be raised for the Loan Fund
and £250 wherewith to begin a book depot.
The united scheme was successfully launched at a tea meet-
ing in the Temperance Hall, and a meeting in the Albert Street
Church when £250 was raised. The Home Mission Secretary
was appointed to visit Gympie, Maryborough and Rock-
hampton, and every minister was designated a canvasser. By
May 1876 the district was in a position to claim the first £SOO,
and soon after was able to apply for the second £SOO. The
capital then reported was £1,803 of which £l5O was paid to the


Book Depot. The following loans (the first from the fund)
were: Paddington, £100; Toowoomba, £450; Ipswich, £350;
Rockhampton, £180; Valley, £350; West End, £2O. So with
the limited means at its disposal, under the direction of the
New South Wales Conference, this fund continued to help in
the development of the work in this State.
When the Queensland Wesleyan Methodist Church was
separated from New South Wales in 1893, the capital of the
fund was £2,635. At this time and for some years later it was
necessary to call the administrative committee together only
twice a year. When union of the Methodist Connexions in
Queensland was consummated in 1897 the capital of the fund
was £3,541. Now, in 1947, it is £26,000.
The growth of the capital has been very gradual, the first
twenty years showing an increase of £324; the next decade,
£1,770; the following decades £2,752, £5,997, £4,749, and the
last £6,288. In addition to the original grant from England
increases have been effected by annual retiring collections
taken in all the Churches, and various Connexional efforts.
These included the Birthday League originated by Rev. Dr.
Youngman by which £475 was raised, Conference Memorial
Fund in 1893, Wesley Bi-Centenary effort in 1904, Fifty
Thousand Shillings Fund in 1911, Centenary Fund in 1919,
and assistance from the Methodist Fire Insurance Board and
the Queensland Methodist Centenary Fund. Legacies and gifts
have also increased the fund.
Besides rendering assistance to Church trusts the fund has
been called upon to assist various Connexional activities. In
1897 it assisted in making repayment to the Bible Christian
Church in England for its undertakings in this State. In 1907
it rendered assistance to the Connexional fund towards meet-
ing the liabilities of the Primitive Methodist trustees. The
same year the Conference requested the fund to keep its
capital at call to meet acute financial situations in connection
with the Primitive Methodist Corporation properties. It has
helped the Book Depot, Fire Insurance, Connexional Expenses.
King’s College, Young People’s Department, and William
Powell Home. Its value in the developmental work of the
Church is clearly indicated in the estimated saving of interest
to the various trusts and connexional funds. On a conservative


basis of four per cent, interest it is estimated that the saving
has been at least £25,750.
The fund has indeed been fortunate in those who have ad-
ministered its affairs. The Hon. Arthur Rutledge was the firsl
secretary and treasurer. He was succeeded by Mr. G. I. Bourne
in 1878, when the fund became very active. He resigned in
1925 after forty-seven years of efficient service. This was a
record for any layman in a Connexional office. Conference
gratefully acknowledged his faithfulness and devotion and
affirmed that his steadfast, fostering care had greatly assisted
in increasing the capital of the fund. The kindly manner in
which Mr. Bourne conducted his work, his approachableness
and his genuine sympathy with ministers and trustees in new
enterprises are well remembered to-day by those who were
privileged to be associated with him.
Mr. W. H. Green succeeded Mr. Bourne, and the affairs of
he fund remain in his capable hands. In his management of
the fund he has been guided, not only by his business acumen
and his loyalty to the policy of the Church, but also by his
personal acquaintance with the needs of trustees based upon his
long experience in the Townsville circuit where he loyally
served the Church and guided the affairs of the circuit. Thus
for sixty-eight years there have been only two occupants of this
office. Assistant secretaries successively have been Messrs.
W. R. Keenan (1905-16), W. A. Jolly, C.M.G. (1917-24),
W. A. Y. Jeffries (1925), E. T. Campbell (1944 ).
The Church office at Epworth House is the organised centre
<4 Connexional activities; the Secretary of each department is
accommodated here, and the staff of typistes together with
complete modern office equipment is under the capable super-
vision of Miss May Nichols, daughter of the late Mr, C. S.
Nichols. This significant evidence of the present strength of
the Church is an achievement beyond the greatest dreams of the
earlier leaders of Methodism in Queensland. It is also an
eloquent tribute to the quality of their foundation work and a
promise of future development.


9K& m i. m I JH \
sSmaXmr SSimmmm MiMiBMi i
HBy H ™1«1 ■ *•*>p?^
B affl . K jnS P *B I 9k ' 4,i
Jffi BBIIM WBM ■WjifflWt 1 -IHHk JB -
J# M l 1 B J i JB
« I i BH B 1 |Hr
fcl r i f] I J • ■ ’*
jap:', ipp 1 #' cr* * »^yi.^,
? >, ‘^is^ " ,• ■ -mSm 1 i
."'v * ■ . -**••'■ / ;: -' 'ir ; sis $, 1/ > & 111
A GROUP OF SUPERNUMERARY MINISTERS
BACK ROW.—Rev. C. T. Palethorpe, W. H. Sanders, R. P. Watkinson, H. J. Potter.
FRONT ROW.—W. S. Bath, 8.A., B. Frederick, A. Taylor, D, Fletcher.


CHAPTER 111
BOOK DEPOT, EPWORTH HOUSE,
CONNEXIONAL JOURNAL
The Book Depot had its origin in a simple way while
Queensland still was associated with the New South Wales Con-
ference. The Rev. Isaac Harding, who was Superintendent of
the Albert Street circuit, and Chairman of the Queens-
land District in 1870, was a minister of the old school.
In the early days of the Church in England it was the
custom for ministers to fill their bags with literature and take
“the monthly packet,” consisting of the Wesleyan magazine
and other publications, to the country places on the occasion
of week-night services. Mr, Harding, on arrival in Queens-
land, followed this custom with great devotion. As there were
no funds to establish a Book Depot he imported books from
England and America at his own expense. The parsonage
became a book room where the best literature of the day was
made available. In this he was assisted by his family, par-
ticularly his sons, Alfred, now a supernumerary minister in
New South Wales, and Edwin, a loyal servant of the Church
who recently died at his home at Toowong. The arrival of the
zinc-lined cases of books by sailing ship was always an event
of great interest.
Mr. Harding distributed and sold the literature as far north
as Gympie and westward to Warwick. Precious parcels were
conveyed by packhorse, Cobb’s coach and boat. Ministers and
laymen at Toowoomba and elsewhere also received supplies.
Mr. Harding placed a case of books for sale in the window of
a chemist’s shop in Edward Street as an indication of the kind
of work he was doing.
The official commencement of the Book Depot was due to the
Rev. F. T. Brentnall, an Englishman who served in the ministry
first in the British Conference, then in New South Wales, and
came to Queensland in 1873. He made a deep im-
pression upon early Methodist history, combining
in his personality energy, courtesy and dignity.
He was a powerful preacher and a man of affairs; he had wise


vision, great courage and was a strict disciplinarian. He served
in the Valley and Albert Street Churches, and was Chairman of
the District. Retiring from the ministry in 1883, owing to a
throat affection, he joined the staff of the Brisbane “Tele-
graph, ’ eventually becoming the Managing Director of the
Company. In 1886 he was appointed a Member of the Legisla-
tive Council, and as such he did much for the community. He
was active in affairs of the Church until his death in 1924, at
the age of ninety.
Mr. Brentnall secured the sum of £l5O from the Loan Fund
and solicited contributions from interested persons for the
balance required to commence the Book Depot. The account
book still is available in which he carefully entered the names
of the donors; these included Messrs. W. Fryar, J. A. Lewis,
Edwin Campbell, Charles Highfield, George I. Bourne, F.
Curnow, J. Crowther, J. McMaster, J. Joey, Robert Jarrett,
John Reid, Arthur Rutledge, John Potts, Moses Ward, J. W.
Forth, W. H. Knowles and W. H. Parker. The contributors
from Ipswich were Joseph and Ambrose Foote, J. Rose and
J. Greenham, those from Toowoomba were Robert Aland,
C. Cox, James Campbell, J. Anthony, E. Wilcox, W. A. Noble,
J. Palethorpe and P. Mensforth.
The opening of the first shop in Queen Street, about midway
between George and Albert Streets, was a notable event. Im-
mediately the Church began to sell good books, according to
the usages of early Wesleyan Methodism and the
example of John Wesley. It was found, however, that
it was not a simple matter to conduct a Book Depot in
a small community such as existed in Queensland at that time.
Unexpected financial difficulties arose, and exercised the minds
of the Committee. In the course of years the financial position
became so acute that the business was moved to less expensive
premises in Albert Street. During Dr. Youngman’s term as
Book Steward the business became steadier. Then Dr. Young-
man set his heart upon recovering at least a portion of the land
which was originally a Government grant to the Church, but
which had been sold to build the new church. This was
situated immediately opposite the premises then occupied by
the Book Depot in Albert Street. He was successful in secur-
ing the allotment and building on the corner of Burnett Lane


and Albert Street, and immediately the business was trans-
ferred to these premises. This transaction, no doubt, was re-
garded by Dr. Youngman as one of the proudest achievements
of his life.
There was a succession of managers, each of whom did his
best for the business. Mr. C. J. Dobbie, who was manager for
several years, brought to the position a wide experience of the
book trade, and under his management the business
showed great progress. He continued in this posi-
tion until his death in 1935. In the same year the
present manager, Mr. R. Utting, came from New Zealand to
succeed him. It is to the credit of his personality, business
training and methods, and efficient administration that the
Book Depot is now being conducted upon a sound and profit-
able basis and ranks amongst the finest book stores in Australia.
In 1940 the land on which the Depot stood was required by
the Commonwealth Bank. The Book Board had no option but
to release it, although this was done with great reluctance,
especially in view of its sentimental significance. After much
investigation a three-storied building in Adelaide Street was
purchased. Extensive alterations were effected to accommodate
the Book Depot on the ground floor, the Church Offices on the
first floor, and offices for rental on the top floor. If there were
misgivings as to the wisdom of choosing this new site, they
have completely vanished; the change in every way has been
satisfactory.
Amongst those who have been officially appointed by Con-
ference as Book Stewards were Revs. Joseph Bowes, Dr.
Youngman and W. H. Harrison. Mr. Harrison held the posi-
tion for seventeen years and upon his retirement in 1946 the
Board commended him for his long and faithful service. The
Rev. H. M. Wheller, who has been a member of the Board
for twenty years, and who has given invaluable service, is the
present Book Steward.
The Epworth House and the Book Depot, on the unanimous
decision of the Conference in 1945, is now combined under one
authority and the whole institution is entirely free from debt.
The present happy position has been attained after long years
of constant endeavour and anxious thought on the part of
ministers and laymen, amongst whom were the late Messrs.


J. J. King and R. J. Archibald. Both of these served as treasurer
for successive periods. The present treasurer is Mr. E. T.
Campbell.
The first Queensland Wesleyan Methodist Journal dates from
January 1889. It was “The Christian Witness,” edited by the
Rev. Dr. Youngman and published monthly. Evidently the
paper met with serious difficulties at the outset,
as the leading article of January 1891 indicates:
“We are glad to be able to present our New Year’s
Greeting to our readers in enlarged form and new dress. It is
something to have lived for two years, under the circumstances.
Some of our friends were afraid of being called upon to pay
funeral expenses before now, but thanks to economy, careful
nursing, and the kindliness of our supporters we have not only
survived the initial difficulties of journalistic life, but can see
our way with tolerable clearness to extended service.” The
paper continued to serve a very useful purpose in the Church
and was a creditable predecessor of subsequent journals.
On the occasion of Methodist Union in 1897 the Christian
Witness (Wesleyan) and Christian Ensign (Primitive) were
merged and came out as a fortnightly paper under the title
“The Methodist Leader.” The Rev. Dr. Youngman was editor
in two periods totalling twenty years. In this, as in all his
other duties, he gave painstaking service. His contributions to
the columns were sane and illuminating and gave evidence of
his wide knowledge of ecclesiastical affairs and public ques-
tions. His aim was to stimulate the interest of Methodist
people in the spread of the Kingdom of God at home and
abroad.
The Rev. J. J. Gee was appointed editor in 1916, and ably
filled the position for the following eleven years. He had an
extensive knowledge of literature and could wield a facile pen.
His experience as a circuit minister, chairman of district, and
Secretary and President of Conference, his familiarity with
Methodist law and procedure, and his intense interest in every
phase of Church life could be seen in his editorial work. Mr.
Gee was a man of strong individuality, with pronounced
opinions and convictions, and was a striking personality in
Conference and in the Councils of the Church.
The “Leader” gave place to the “Methodist Times,” a


weekly paper, in 1927. The change was demanded by the
growth of the Church and extension of its activities. The Rev.
W. H. Harrison was the new editor with the Revs. C. C. Truman
and W. L. Slater as assistants. Mr. Harrison held the office for
eighteen consecutive years, and thereby added to an already
long and successful ministry of forty-four years, a service
which involved him in much toil and exacting demands, but
which was of great value to the Church. Under his editorship
and to a great extent owing to his personal efforts the number
of subscribers exceeded considerably that of the previous
papers.
During the early years, Mr. Harrison had the invaluable ad-
vice and assistance of Mr. George S. Shelton, a local preacher
and a journalist who came to Brisbane from New South Wales
to become sub-editor of the “Daily Mail ’ newspaper. He
ranked amongst the most capable and successful men in his
profession. He was transparently good and consistently bore
a splendid witness for Christ. His association with the “Metho-
dist Times” greatly helped to put it upon a sound basis. He
returned to New South Wales to take up a position in New-
castle, where after a few years he passed away and the Church
suffered a great loss. From 1934 until 1944 the Rev. R. S. C.
Dingle was assistant editor. The Rev. W. S. Bath, 8.A., upon
becoming a supernumerary minister, succeeded Mr. Harrison.
The Rev. C. T. Palethorpe, a regular contributor to the paper
for ten years, is the present editor.
The paper has had more than one printer owing to circum-
stances beyond the control of the committee, and at times it
encountered the difficulties incidental to many Church journals.
With the Rev. A. A. Mills as secretary of the committee and
Mr. J. A. J. Ferguson as advertising manager, the circulation
of the paper has improved and advertising space has been
readily filled. For ten years the income has met the ex-
penditure.


. .«# *■*%• .
PHtek. JgHmT ■ ■**■ /
: •■ w |H Hf jh
«. ■ ' ll
MR. W. TAYLOR
MRS. A. H. BERG
Secretary, Women's Home Mission
Auxiliary, 1927-37
President, 1937-1947
SUCCESSIVE DIRECTORS OF THE Y.P.D.
Rev. H. N. Prouse, T. N. Deller and H. A. Denny


CHAPTER IV
THE CHURCH AND SOCIAL SERVICE
WILLIAM POWELL HOME AND THE SOCIAL ORDER DEPARTMENT
The Home for discharged prisoners is named after the Rev,
Wm. Powell, to whose persistent advocacy and untiring en-
deavours its origin is due. Mr. Powell was at the time a super-
numerary minister to whom had been entrusted the
work of Chaplaincy to the gaols. He had already
served fifty-one years as a minister, eleven years in
the Primitive Methodist work in England and forty years in
Queensland. It had been an extremely gracious ministry. A
rich evangelical preacher, a devoted pastor, a lover of young
people, endowed with powers of organisation and a directing
mind, he was loved in all his circuits. In his early years in
this State he was a pioneer minister in a number of the larger
centres, such as Ipswich and Rockhampton. He travelled long
distances and endured much hardship to establish the means of
grace. He became the President of the Primitive Methodist
and later of the United Conference.
He undertook his Chaplaincy duties seriously and with pro-
found concern for the prisoners. He quickly saw that the prob-
lem of their rehabilitation, especially for first offenders and
those who were penitent, was an acute one. He
felt the need of some institution to which those
willing to benefit by the interest and the helpful-
ness of the Church could be cared for and restored to decent
citizenship. He represented his views to Conference and
earnestly sought guidance in the matter. Conference at this
time had other financial responsibilities and was reluctant to
endorse Mr. Powell’s proposals. This valiant servant of God,,
however, believing himself to be divinely led, persisted in his
views and began to enlist the sympathy of his friends. He met
with a response from Mr. Lovekin who gave him a valuable
piece of land at Kuraby not far from Brisbane. Thus encour-
aged, Mr. Powell continued his representations. He visited
many circuits throughout the State, although in enfeebled
health, preaching and lecturing upon the theme which was-
dear to his heart and making personal appeals for supports


He soon had enough money for a building, and Conference,
with profound admiration for his earnestness and his toil, gave
its cordial approval to the proposal and accepted full respon-
sibility for a Home.
So the first Home for Discharged Prisoners, a practical
means of their restoration to Christian citizenship and the
logical support of the work of the Chaplain to the gaols, was
opened by His Excellency the Governor, Sir Matthew Nathan,
in November 1922. The Governor generously and warmly
commended this expression of Christian Social service. Mr.
Powell was not permitted to see the official opening, as he
passed away two months before that event. His labour of
years was rewarded and the dream of this grand old man of
God was realised. To honour his memory Conference deter-
mined that the Institution should be called “The William
Powell Home for Discharged Prisoners.”
Mr. Sidney Webb was the first Superintendent, and carried
out this difficult work for eight years. Men, on leaving prison,
found a home of refuge and hope. They received kindness, ad-
vice and help, and were given an illustration
of the spirit of Christ in action. Mrs. Webb
co-operated with her husband and performed
the duties of Matron. In 1930 the Home was removed to a
larger and more suitable site at Eagle Farm. Adequate accom-
modation was provided for the men and a suitable house for
the Superintendent and his wife. There was enough land to
make possible a small farm on which the men could work—
a very necessary form of discipline. Upon the retirement of
Mr. Webb, Mr. Stuart Collard became the Superintendent in
1932. Rich in personal qualities of devotion and ability he
proceeded to enlarge and extend the usefulness of the home.
In this he was loyally assisted by his wife, who as matron has
rendered signal service.
Both Mr. Webb and Mr. Collard have been men of the right
type for this work. No weakling or one easily discouraged
could long serve in this capacity. The results have not been
one hundred per cent., but there are grounds for encourage-
ment and hope in the large number who have responded fav-
ourably. The Superintendent conducts services in the gaols
twice a month and at other times visits the inmates. Entertain-


merits are arranged for them from time to time, parcels of
Christmas cheer distributed and other acts of kindness shown
to them.
A further change in location was made in 1945 as the
property at Eagle Farm was required by the Government. A
new site, consisting of ninety-one acres, embracing a fertile
flat adjacent to Oxley Creek, was obtained. There a model
farm is being made where discharged prisoners resident in the
Home can work until suitable jobs can be found for them. This
represents a larger scheme than that envisaged by William
Powell. His work was as a seed sown, and it is now bearing
fruit a hundredfold.
Since its inception 750 men have passed through the home;
a large percentage of them have been found suitable work and
others have returned to their own homes. Reports from farms,
factories and other places indicate that on the whole they have
given satisfactory service, and that the influence of the home
upon their lives has been permanent.
The precise nature of the work done by the home makes
both publicity and tabulation difficult. The following extracts
from letters to the Superintendent will, however, give some in-
dication of the valuable nature of the work that is being done.
The writer of the first letter was a drug addict who spent many
years in prison—
“l write these lines to let you know that I have started to
serve my Lord and Master, having got converted last night.
Well, Sir, you were the means in the first place
to make me realise that there was something to
look forward to, and I shall never forget your
kindness. When all others cast me aside you came and took
me in and made a man of me. I hope God will give me
strength to fight against the temptations, for I have been a
waster off and on for sixteen years.”
The writer of the following letter spent some time in gaol
and then went to live at the Home: —
“Just a few lines to let you know how I am getting on and
to express my gratitude for the help that you accorded me
when I left the ‘Big House.’ I can honestly look my fellowmen
in the face now and can see eye to eye with the Christian view-
point, for I am a Christian. ... I signed the Decision Card


and verbally promised to help on the work of God, and lam
thinking of entering the ministry. We have some very helpful
meetings in the Church here, and I am continually thanking
God for taking the craving for strong drink away from me for,
as you know, I am now a total abstainer.”
Another expressed his gratitude in the following words: —
“I arrived here safe on Sunday, and now take the pleasure
of thanking you for all the kind things you have done on my
behalf. I cannot express in words how thankful I really am.
Enclosed you will find a small donation; kiidly accept same
for the Institution. I will now conclude, hoping you will long
continue your noble work.”
At the outset, the Home was placed under the direction of
the Home Mission Committee, but in 1924 a separate committee
was formed with full responsibility for its management. The
Rev. Joseph Bowes was the first chairman and until his death
in 1928 he was intimately associated with every phase of the
work. The Rev. H. M. Wheller, the present chairman, has
gladly given wise leadership and sound advice. The first
treasurer was Mr. E. T. Campbell who gave valuable service
until 1935 when he was succeeded by Mr. C. C. Clifford who
has served with the devotion and earnestness which he reveals
in other connexional departments and in his association
with the Order of Knights and the Taringa Church. The Sec-
retary of the Committee has been called upon to carry much
responsibility in conjunction with his circuit, in which the
Home has been situated. The present secretary, the Rev.
W. L. Slater, Superintendent of the Sherwood Circuit, is
efficiently carrying out his duties by the standards set by his
predecessors.
Miss Marion Powell, daughter of the late founder, has by
her intense interest and devoted labours assisted the committee
by organising annual efforts for the financial support of the
home. To her zeal, ability and achievements the committee is
under a debt of gratitude. It is noteworthy that the funds have
been further assisted by an annual grant from the State Gov-
ernment, which sincerely and gratefully acknowledges the work
as being of substantial value to the State.
The Conference of 1943 resolved that a department be in-
stituted to co-ordinate the work of the Temperance and Morals


and the Industrial and Post War Problems Committees, to be
designated “The Department for Christian Social Order.” The
Rev. E. G. Walker was appointed director.
The new department combined two committees which had
been working separately for some time —The Temperance and
Morals Committee and the Industrial Movement
Committee. The former, under one designation or
another, had been operating throughout the whole
period of Queensland Methodist history. The second com-
mittee came into existence in 1924 when there appeared to be
an urgent need to apply Christian principles to industrial
affairs.
The Temperance and Morals Committee had always repre-
sented the mind of Methodism upon liquor, gambling, immo-
rality, Sabbath desecration and similar social evils. As long
ago as 1893 we find the following pronouncement made by the
Conference —
“This Conference regards intemperance as amongst the
most serious moral and social evils now prevalent, and urges
the Methodist people to discountenance those customs of
society which foster this vice, and to promote all legislative
measures which aim at the restraint or extinction of the
liquor evil.
“This Conference deplores the evil arising from the too
unrestricted sale of strong drink, recognises the right of citi-
zens to regulate the issue of public-house licenses, and
accordingly approves the principle of Local Option.
“This Conference, deeply convinced of the divine obliga-
tion of the Lord’s Day as the Christian Sabbath, and the im-
portance to families and nations of its observance, strongly
urges upon all members and adherents of our Church the
necessity of resisting all efforts that may be made to open
public libraries, museums, public galleries, etc., on the
Lord’s Day, whether such efforts be made by the Parliament,
Municipal Councils, or by the Committee of the School of
Arts.
“This Conference deprecates the spirit of gambling that
is prevalent in the Colony, and pledges itself to use all pos-
sible means within its power to discountenance the same,
and directs the attention of our members to the law which


MR. T. G. V. DAVIS
Treasurer, Y.P.D.
REV. T. N. DELLER
Director, Y.P.D.
MISS D. GUYATT
Lady Assistant to the Director
MISS E. SPARKS
State Superintendent, M.G.C.


prohibits them from engaging in lotteries, raffles, and other
games of chance in connection with sales of gifts or bazaars,
or otherwise; and urges them to co-operate with and support
all legislation and other well-directed measures which seek
to wholly suppress gambling, racing, consultations, sweeps,
and betting of all kinds.”
Similar statements, as uncompromising and emphatic, have
been made every year for the guidance of the Methodist people
and publicly to declare the Christian principles for society. Ihe
committee has taken, on behalf of the Church, practical steps to
create a social conscience upon these great questions and to
overcome their influence. Moreover, the Church has been in
hearty co-operation with every reputable organisation and with
every movement which has stood in the community for the
principles of temperance and social righteousness.
The Queensland Temperance League, one of the most power-
ful institutions of its kind in the world, through its long and
honourable history has been able to rely upon the practical
support of the Methodist Church. The present president of the
League is Mr. W. H. Green, who is also president of the Aus-
tralian Band of Hope Union. The Revs. H. M. Wheller and
A. A. Mills, two champions of temperance from pulpit and
platform, and Mr. E. T. Campbell are others who are serving
the League.
The increase in facilities for gambling and the more wide-
spread practice of the evil has evoked the condemnation of the
Church, while the desecration of the Lord’s Day has been de-
plored. These features of the Methodist witness have been in
harmony with our evangelical mission. The Methodist Church
is valiantly contending for social as well as for individual sal-
vation and is making an effective contribution to the ultimate
victory in the world of Christian truth. The committee has em-
ployed many methods in its campaign for social righteousness.
In the distribution of literature, in directing pledge-signing
campaigns, in its many protests to Government and Municipal
authorities against lawlessness, the Committee has pursued its
ideals. Under the new Department the work will receive a new
impetus and greater support.
The Industrial Christian Movement, which has been super-
seded by the new department, was concerned with the Chris-


tianising of Industry. The policy of this committee was deter-
mined by the official pronouncements on Industrial and Social
affairs of the General Conference and it was organised on the
lines directed by the General Conference of 1932. The Chris-
tian Social Relations, affecting questions of Employment and
Unemployment, War and Peace, and allied themes have there-
fore been given prominence in the Church. By the distribu-
tion of selected literature, public demonstrations, group
studies, lectures at factories and workshops, the committee has
endeavoured to assist ministers in their work, advise Church
members, represent the Christian point of view to those outside
the Church and to guide leaders in industry upon the prin-
ciples of a stable social order.
The following excerpts from the Director’s report at the
1945 Conference suggests the magnitude of the questions which
the Department is facing—
“ Somehow there will have to be a great change in the
social and economic set-up of our life. This tragedy of re-
curring depressions with a war every second generation or
so, is not to be accepted as the normal way of life for man-
kind. One of the basic questions that must be settled is ‘How
far must individual freedom be surrendered for the interests
of the community as a whole?’ There will be any amount of
heartbreak, toil and disappointment for us all before we are
through with the business of reconstruction. Our Christian
Faith must be practised in word and deed and manifested
in all our relationships with other countries.”
The Christian Social Order Movement in Queensland owes
much to the Rev. T. Bainbridge, 8.A., the present Director, and
the Rev. E. G. Walker. Both these ministers have shown
enthusiasm for the work and have been untiring in their efforts
to rouse the Church upon the importance of the issues implied
in the functions of the department. The future will, no doubt,
see greater interest focussed upon this department as the social
implications of the Gospel are more clearly understood.


CHAPTER V
THE CHURCH AND EDUCATION
king’s college and the secondary schools
In the history of Methodism, the events of the second half of
the century are as important as those of the first. While they
grew out of the pioneering efforts and the institutions of earlier
leaders, when Brisbane was little more than a village and the
rest of the State undeveloped forest, they have a significance
of their own. They witness to the dreams of ministers and lay-
men, to their wisdom, determination and audacity. This is true
in a peculiar sense of King’s College which was opened in
1913. It was a hope —at first hesitatingly entertained —then a
reality which has become a vital and indispensable institution
of the Church.
The college was established officially by the Conference of
1913 as a University College at which also candidates for the
Ministry could be trained. This dual purpose has prevailed
throughout its history with beneficial results to both classes of
students. The first group was entered in 1913 and comprised
ten University and eight Theological students. In 1947 there
was a record enrolment of 108! That, in a nutshell, is an in-
dication of its extraordinary growth.
Preliminary consideration was given to the commencement
of a college affiliated with the University in 1910 and 1911.
There were a few idealists who longed to see it established,
the obligation to train men for the ministry being the govern-
ing reason. Up to this time, candidates had been sent to the
colleges of the Southern Conferences for training, but this was
thought to be impossible as a permanent policy. A represen-
tative committee had met on several occasions to prepare a
basis for discussion at Conference. At the 1912 Conference the
report was presented, together with the following resolution
which had been unanimously passed at the committee meet-
ing: “That this committee is of the opinion that the time has
arrived when steps should be taken towards training in Queens-
land of accepted candidates for the Ministry, and making some
provision for Methodist and other students attending the Uni-
versity of Queensland. Having obtained and considered much


information relative to the matter, it appears practicable under
certain conditions to commence a college affiliated with the
University, and we recommend the Conference to appoint a
special committee to consider the whole subject with a view to
such action being taken as may be deemed expedient.” The
decision of Conference was given in three historic directions.
(1) The Conference resolved that the college be regarded as
established after the sum of £3,500 had been secured in cash
and promises, £5,000 to be regarded as necessary to equip the
college for its work. (2) The Revs. F. Duesbury and R.
Stewart were appointed joint secretaries with a view to their
carrying out the financial effort to establish the college. (3)
The Rev. Robert Stewart and the Hon. Angus Gibson, M.L.C.,
were appointed treasurers.
For the guidance of the committee, the Rev. W. H. Harrison
had been deputed to seek advice from the Principals of the
Sydney and Melbourne Methodist Colleges. The response was
encouraging, and valuable information was
supplied. The joint secretaries, Revs. F. Dues-
bury and R. Stewart, gave themselves with the
utmost zeal and labour to the task of raising the sum specified
by Conference. In this they succeeded, and even collected a
much larger sum. To them the Church is deeply indebted.
They belong to the group of ministers which has led the
Church along the ways of progress. Rev. Frank Duesbury had
served the Church in Queensland for over thirty years. He
had won the confidence of his people in his circuits by his
evangelical preaching and solicitude and his gracious de-
meanour. It was this trust that helped him to approach them
for their financial assistance for the college. The Rev. Dr.
Robert Stewart was an Irishman, with the ardour and aggres-
siveness and courage of his race. He was ordained to the min-
istry in his native land, but it was a blessing to Australia that
he came, with his devoted wife, to minister here in 1874. He
was an incessant toiler. In his circuits at the Valley (two
terms), Ipswich, Paddington, Toowong, Wesley and elsewhere,
he took an intimate interest in every detail of the work. He
was a tireless connexional officer, serving as President of the
Conference on two occasions (1902 and 1914), Secretary of
Conference, Book Steward, Home and Foreign Missions Secre-
tary. He was vigilant, always jealous of the old landmarks, yet


disposed to venture upon fresh fields of endeavour if the
Church could be strengthened.
Dr. E. W. H. Fowles, M.A., LL.B., was another who helped
the foundation of the college. His scintillating intellect and
his practical ability were given unstintingly to the Church
throughout his life. As a local preacher and
platform speaker, he was in great demand. He
was associated with the Presbyterian and Metho-
dist Schools’ Association from its inception; he was instru-
mental, together with Mrs. Fowles, in building the beautiful
Church at Kingsholme where he worshipped for many years
and where he was choir master; he published a valuable Com-
panion to the Methodist Hymn Book and had much to do
with introducing the new book into numerous churches. He
was often a member of General Conference and was a member
of the Queensland Conference from its beginning. There was-
no important sphere in the Church in which he did not render
conspicuous service. His death in 1946 was a severe loss to
Methodism. As a member of the University Senate, a member
of the Fegislative Council, and with his wide legal knowledge
he was able to give reliable guidance in the establishment of
King’s College. Dr. Fowles was a Fellow of the College from
its inception, as well as being a member of the Council and
the Bursar from 1936 until his death.
The property at Kangaroo Point was secured through the
foresight of the Rev. Dr. Stewart. It was purchased for £2,200
and immediately adapted to the needs of a University college.
The accommodation was soon found to be inadequate and fur-
ther extensions were made. Indeed, there have been ten
property extensions throughout the years. The most recent
addition was erected, through the courtesy of the Trustees, in
the grounds of Wesley Church. Here fourteen students now
are accommodated.
The first Master of King’s was Dr. M. Scott Fletcher, M.A.,
B.Litt., then a minister of the Church in the New South Wales
Conference, a nephew of the Rev. J. Horner Fletcher. He
had just spent two years at Oxford for educational
purposes. His intellectual attainments and his in-
stincts as a teacher, as well as his spiritual ideals,
gave the college the dignity and reputation it required. After


TI ' l> r .v J^pR-;
*S§ J$3pl< , p *\M* %®"' ;:: i»
JF'"' -gOSBIk'* '**&&St •> .. -3E||M £ *,’ ltt^ j
I -i . A /***- I: “
EX-PRESIDENT OF CONFERENCE AND CHAIRMEN OF DISTRICTS CONFERENCE 1946


three years Dr. Fletcher returned to New South Wales and the
Rev. L. E, Bennett, M.A., 8.D., of the Victoria and Tasmania
Conference, succeeded him. Mr. Bennett came to the college
in 1916 during the first World War, when the enrolment of
students had been reduced to five; in 1917 there were eleven
and in 1918 there were nine. A paragraph in the Master’s Re-
port to Conference of 1919 summarises the outlook of King’s
during these years. “We have been quite content to pass
through heavy days during the war; we were glad to supply
so many for the ranks of the gallant A.1.F., and we now wel-
come peace and brighter prospects with gratitude and hope. *
Mr. Bennett continued to preside over the college until 1923.
He raised its status in academic circles and exercised a marked
influence upon students, especially the theological students for
whose training he was particularly responsible. In
the lives of those men and in the service they have
rendered in the ministry his influence lives on.
Brighter days for the college began in 1919, when
the enrolment increased, and there has been a steady increase
in numbers every year. In academic achievements, in sports
and in other phases of college life, there has been an improve-
ment year by year. The Council and the Conference reluctantly
parted with Mr. Bennett in 1923, when he resigned to take up
a similar position at Wesley College, Sydney.
The new master, the Rev. H. H. Trigge, M.A., 8.D., of the
Victoria and Tasmania Conference, had just concluded a
term as a chaplain in the Royal Australian Navy, having served
on the H.M.A.S. Sydney during the War. For
twenty-three years he has given unremitting ser-
vice to the college and has won for himself the con-
fidence of the Church and the respect of the University. His
long term as Master has enabled him to see many changes and
improvements at King’s and to share in its great prosperity.
He has seen his students go forth into the professions to dis-
tinguish themselves, and others to live effectively as ministers
of the Church at home and overseas.
During the first year of his Mastership there were twenty-
six students, including seven Theological, the next year there
were thirty and a steady increase has been maintained until in


1946 there were eighty-six University and eighteen theological
students.
Mr. Trigge has built well upon the foundations laid by his
predecessors. He has had 120 theological students under his
charge, of whom twenty-five have secured the diploma of
Licentiate of Theology; eight have secured the degree of
Bachelor of Arts; three, the Master of Arts; three, the
Bachelor of Divinity. Six have served the Church in Overseas
Missions and three in the Inland Mission, and others are en-
gaged in useful work in the circuits. In 1944 the Conference
appointed an assistant Master at King’s, in view of the increas-
ingly heavy duties which had fallen to the Master. The Rev.
I. H. Grimmett, M.A., 8.D., a former theological student, was
chosen for this position, and his service during three years has
justified the choice. Mr. Grimmett’s academic attainments
combined with his natural aptitude for teaching and the in-
tensity of his Christian experience and aim have made him an
effective colleague to the Master.
Mr. Trigge has witnessed a gratifying increase in the awards
and bursaries which have been made available to the students.
„ . The following is the list and annual value of
Bursaries 0 i i i • i •
scholarships, Bursaries and Prizes at present —
For University Students —
Hon. F. T. Brentnall £2O
Dr. Robert Stewart 20
Hon, Angus Gibson 10
Mrs. Rebecca Balser 10
Dr. T. P. Lucas 6
King’s Old Collegians 5
Foundation 20
‘"John Doe” ...... 7
Service (increasing) 10
F. G. Brameld 8
For Theological Students —
Rev. C. T. Stead £7O
Dr. G. E. Rowe 40
Charles Stanley Green and Wm. Herbert
Green Jnr. 40
Hon. F. T. Brentnall 20
Rev. W. H. Harrison 4


Dr. Hy. Youngman 10
S. & L. Cooper 6
Foundation 20
Joseph Edwin Cook 12
The Master himself was responsible for securing the “Dr.
Robert Stewart” and the “Foundation” Bursaries, and he now
is engaged in working for the “Service” Bursary. Patiently and
doggedly he labours to achieve his purpose. Each bursary has
involved him in much personal sacrifice but this has been
gladly made. Conference of 1945 recognised the twenty-one
years of the Master’s service in the following resolution: “That
in view of the fact that the Rev. H. H. Trigge, M.A., 8.D., has
now completed twenty-one years as Master of King’s College,
Conference records its deep appreciation of the effective and
fruitful ministry exercised by him during that period. The
high position occupied by the college in the educational life
of the community and the steady development and expansion
of college activities are expressive of his unstinted devotion and
enthusiastic labours. The high tone of the college has been
maintained and fresh lustre added to its traditions.
“Not only has the Master displayed unremitting interest in
the intellectual life of the students, but always has had at heart
their moral and spiritual welfare. Old Collegians in many
walks of life today owe much to the help and influence of the
Master, while the Christian ministry has been greatly enriched
by his devoted services, as principal of the Theological In-
stitution, in the training of theological students.
“Conference recalls with thankfulness the energetic and self-
sacrificing labours of the Master in establishing the ‘Dr.
Robert Stewart,’ ‘Foundation’ and ‘The Service Bursary’
Funds. Conference congratulates the Master on his twenty-
one years’ service and wishes for Mr. and Mrs. Trigge con-
tinued help and blessing in this work.”
The college is governed by a council appointed by Con-
ference, consisting of the Master and twenty-six councillors.
The following comprised the first college council: The Master
of King’s, the President of the Conference ( Rev. R. Dunstan),
the Superintendent of the Wesley Circuit, the following Trus-
tees, namely Revs. Henry Youngman, D.D., Robert Stewart,
Frank Duesbury, Charles Martin, George Edwards Rowe,


Alexander C. Hutchison, William H. Harrison, and T. Brass-
ington; other members were: Sir Arthur Rutledge, K.C.8.,
Messrs. George Watkins, James Jordan King, Robert John
Archibald, George Iredale Bourne; also Revs. William Powell,
Joseph Bowes, Hon. Frederick T. Brentnall, M.L.C.; Messrs.
Thomas Fielding, C. W. L. Heiner, S. D. Fletcher, D. H.
Rhoades, William Henry Barclay, Dr. A. J. Gibson, C. H.
Hooper, together with the Bursar (who shall be elected by the
council), and the following Fellows: Hon. E. W. H. Fowles,
M.A., LL.B., J. J. Kingsbury, M.A., and Dr. G. H. C. Douglas,
M.8., Ch.B., conveners. The joint secretaries, Revs R. Stewart
and F. Duesbury.
The Board of Fellows which gives important counsel in
scholastic matters was constituted in 1913 with the following
members: Hon. E. W. FI. Fowles, M.A., LL.B., D.Litt., Dr.
G. A. C. Douglas, M.8., Ch.B., M.S., Mr. J. J. Kings-
bury, M.A. In 1914 Dr. A. J. Gibson, Ph.D., was
appointed and since then Professor S. Castlehow,
Dr. E. H, Derrick, M.D., 8.5., Colonel J. A. Robinson, 8.A.,
Dr. F. W. Whitehouse, D.Sc., Ph.D., Dr. T. P. Fry, M.A.,
8.C.L., Sc.Jur.D., Dr. M. Scott-Fletcher, M.A., B.Litt., Briga-
dier R. J. H. Risson, C.8.E., D.5.0., B.E.
The first Theological Institution was constituted as follows:
Revs. R. Dunstan (President of the Conference), Robert
Stewart (Secretary of the Conference), T. Brassington (ex-
President), M. Scott Fletcher, M.A., B.Litt, Master of King’s,
H. Youngman, D.D., William Powell, William Smith, Frank
Duesbury, Joseph Bowes, A. Hutchison, George E. Rowe, Wil-
liam Brown, Thos. Robert Thurlow, John James Gee, W. H.
Harrison, Sir Arthur Rutledge, K.C., Hons. Angus Gibson,
M.L.C., F. T. Brentnall, M.L.C., E. W. H. Fowles, M.L.C.,
Messrs. G. I. Bourne, J. J. King, F. J. Beet, J. J. Jones, Thos.
Fielding, George Watkins, D. H. Rhoades, C. Hooper, C. W. L.
Heiner, G. A. Bayard and J. B. Lugg.
The Rev. Dr. Stewart was secretary of the council from the
establishment of the college to his death in 1921. He was suc-
ceeded by the Rev. Wm. Brown (1921-1930), Rev. W. H.
Harrison (1930-1935), Rev. R. P. Pope (1935-1937), and the
Rev. T. Bibby who was appointed in 1937. The Hon. Angus
Gibson, M.L.C., was treasurer till 1920. He was followed by


Hon. F. T. Brentnall (1920-1924), and Mr. W. H. Green
(1924-1944). Mr. A. S. Hulme, the present treasurer, is con-
tinuing the high quality of service of his predecessors. Amongst
the clerical treasurers have been Revs. Robert Stewart (1912-
1922), Rev. W. Brown (1922-1935), Rev. W. H. Harrison
(1935-1944), Rev. W. S. Bath, B.A. (1944-1947). Both Rev.
W. H. Harrison and Mr. W. H. Green retired in 1944 and Con-
ference extended thanks to them in the following terms —
Rev. W. H. Harrison. “On the retirement of the Rev.
W. H. Harrison from the office of Clerical Treasurer of
King’s College, Conference places on record its high appre-
ciation of the services he has rendered the college through
this office. Almost the whole time since the establishment of
the college, Mr. Harrison has been associated with the insti-
tution. He was secretary of the committee charged with the
responsibility of founding the college in 1913. From 1930
to 1935 he was secretary and also clerical treasurer. His
enthusiasm, understanding and wise counsel have meant
much to the administration and progress of the college, and
his annual prize to a theological student is a continual en-
couragement. It is gratifying to know that he has consented
to retain his association with the college as a member of the
council.”
Mr. W. H. Green. “Having received with much regret an
intimation from Mr. W. H. Green that he feels constrained
to retire from the position of lay treasurer, Conference
places on record its high appreciation of the services as
treasurer which he has rendered to the college and the
Church.
“On coming to Brisbane from North Queensland nineteen
years ago, one of the first Connexional offices Mr. W. H.
Green accepted was that of treasurer of King’s College.
Throughout the extensive period that has followed, Mr.
Green has given himself with keenness and ability to the
financial and general interests of the college; and his advice
has contributed greatly to the stability, strength and growth
of the institution. His generous gift of the Charles Stanley
Green and William Herbert Green Junior Memorial Bursary
of £l,OOO to assist a theological student is indicative of his
devotion and generosity. Conference is pleased to know that


r«. -~» - iJEj „, - diM*.|?B . <» «* k - 3 «*" m s Jf' » ««g m m h£ t ■-> ««&* \»%*MA ,JT ■
**£fC -' -»« ** ■• • *. *£r~w- ***&< *Sr rv »: mTaas*,! _fV!S Wi Sr aw? «»«
-»m '' "v Hu^yfr^jjc.. A< g "*" _.. r
w s&v%m y ' \ !..y ■. — JBSjSBHHBPBBSC’
; JTf , ]k . 4r ,^4^ET^^' <r * <
CENTENARY CONFERENCE, 1947


Mr. Green has consented to continue his association with the
college as a member of the governing body.”
Throughout the years, the financial affairs of the college
have been controlled with skill and care. The frequent addi-
tions to the property, and the rising costs of commodities
caused some anxiety and apprehension at times, but with great
faith in the future of the college and by discreet expenditure
the council steadfastly pursued its way to the better days which
have undoubtedly come. The first balance-sheet showed an in-
come of £2,021 and the expenditure, including the purchase of
the property £2,200 and improvements £1,000, as £3,461.
There was therefore an overdraft at once, but this was inevit-
able. The income for 1946 was £8,672 and the expenditure
£8,427.
The Old Collegians Association was officially commenced in
1923 and has rendered continuous service to the college in
social activities and in assisting the bursary funds. Among
those who secured post graduate scholarships are:
C. Courtice and H. M. Whyte (Rhodes), J. E.
Morwood and J. Mulholland (Walter and Eliza
Hall), M. White (1851 Exhibition), F. W. Whitehouse and
A. G. Berg (Travelling), W. J. Simmonds and K. G. Grice
(Nuffield). Military awards have been as follows: T. Francis,
M.C., P. H. Brown, M.C., B.E., J. A. Robinson, D.S.O., B.A.,
R. J. H. Risson, C.B.E., D.S.O., B.E., and A. G. Grant, O.B.E.
The duties of matron have been carried out by Mrs. M. Scott
Fletcher (1913-1915), Mrs. L. E. Bennett (1915-1924), Mrs.
A. H. Berg (1924-1925), and Mrs. H. H. Trigge. It will be
,, , seen that the three Masters’ wives were responsible
Matrons t . T 1
for the domestic arrangements. In the case of Mrs.
Irigge the period was a very long one and during the time of
the increasing progress of the College. It was finally realised
by the council that this was too big a demand to make upon
her and an independent matron was accordingly appointed.
The council took the opportunity of thanking Mrs. Trigge for
her long and strenuous work, gratuitously and graciously per-
formed in a very practical way.
The college has been fortunate in having an energetic com-
mittee of ladies since 1925. It grew out of a group of women


which had organised a successful Garden Party to help to meet
the cost of nine additional rooms which had been
built. It was suggested that this group become a
permanent committee to act as an auxiliary to the
college. This was formally agreed to at a special meeting held
on July 31st, 1925. The election of officers was as follows:
President, Mrs. W. H. Green (now deceased), Secretary, Mrs.
E. W. C. Holdaway; Treasurer, Mrs. W. Webb; Vice-Presi-
dents, Mesdames W. Brown, B. Frederick, J. Bowes, and A.
Douglas. The Committee comprised: Mesdames G. E. Rowe, A.
Taylor, E. J. Jones, E. W. H. Fowles, W. Taylor, G. A. C.
Douglas, W. M. Douglas, Millar, A. H. Berg, W. Little, E.
Proctor, G. I. Bourne, J. C. Hobbs and Miss Marion Powell.
ITie personnel of the committee and the officials have changed
from time to time; some members have passed to higher ser-
vice. The committee, however, has continued to function suc-
cessfully. The ladies have raised funds with which they have
added to the furnishings of the college and met the costs of
replacements.
The annual garden party, at first held at the picturesque
home of Mr. and Mrs. R. J. Archibald at Paddington but in
recent years in the college grounds, has been a great social
event at each Conference, and a source of revenue to the com-
mittee.
The Queensland University will in the near future be trans-
ferred to modern premises in the spacious grounds at St. Lucia.
Here King’s College has been given an excellent site of six and
a half acres where a substantial brick or concrete
building, in harmony with the general design and
character of the University buildings, will be
erected. It will comfortably accommodate at least 100 men
and will have all the equipment for the assistance of the
students, and for their comfort and recreation. It is estimated
that the building will cost about £IOO,OOO. The expenditure is
justifiably demanded by the status of the college and its credit-
able record, as well as by the work which it is hoped will be
accomplished in the future.
On the occasion of the Silver Jubilee of the college in 1938,
greetings were received from friends near and far, amongst
whom were the President-General of the Methodist Church of


Australasia, the Rev. Prof. A. E. Albiston, M.A., 8.D., and the
Chancellor of the Queensland University, the Hon. Sir James
Blair.
Prof. Albiston said: “Methodists of Australasia have every
reason to rejoice in the first twenty-five years of King’s Col-
lege. Though the youngest of Church Colleges affiliated with a
University in the Commonwealth, it has already a splendid re-
cord in the scholastic world, and its contribution to an edu-
cated ministry is worthy of all praise. When we remember that
the chief function of a University is to send forth graduates
with high ideals, whose mental equipment and ethical standards
will enable them to accept responsibility and leadership in
various departments of social service, we can appreciate the
value of such a college as King’s, in furthering these ends.
Under its successive Masters, King’s has deservedly enjoyed the
fullest confidence of our people, ministerial and lay, evidence
of which is furnished by the steady increase in the number of
students and the success with which it has been financed.
Queensland Methodism is loyal to the best traditions of our
Church, and in this college is demonstrating the essential unity
of Culture and Evangelism. The whole Church praises God for
this Institution and confidently anticipates for it an even more
glorious future.”
The Hon. Sir James W. Blair, Kt., C.J., Deputy Governor of
Queensland, and Chancellor of the University, in a commen-
datory letter writes: “I cannot let the occasion go by without
expressing my appreciation of the work done by this college.
Founded in 1912 by the Methodist Church of Australasia, es-
tablished to afford residence, religious instruction and tutorial
assistance to undergraduates, King’s College has fulfilled dur-
ing its twenty-five years of existence the hopes of its founders,
and has played an important part in the life of the University
and the State.”
SECONDARY EDUCATION
In the field of Secondary Education, the Methodist Church
has been for the past thirty years in partnership with the Pres-
byterian Church. Under the designation of the Presbyterian
and Methodist Schools Association, colleges for girls and boys
have been successfully conducted in Brisbane and Charters
Towers. The relationship between the twenty-four representa-


tives of both Churches on the governing council has been most
cordial and agreeable.
In December 1917, a small committee comprising ministers
and laymen from the two Churches held a meeting to consider
proposals for the joint ownership of educational institutions
in Brisbane which were then on offer. The com-
mittee was composed of the Revs. G. E. Rowe, D.D.,
R. Stewart, D.D., Dr. E. W. H. Fowles, M.A., LL.B.,
and J. J. King from the Methodist Church, and Revs. James
Gibson, M.A., D.D., R. Glaister, M.A., D.D., W. C. Radcliffe
and Sir David Hardie from the Presbyterian Church.
The organisation known as the Presbyterian and Methodist
Schools Association which emerged from the meeting, pur-
chased with the endorsement of both the Methodist Conference
and the Presbyterian Assembly, two well-established colleges
—the Brisbane High School for Girls from Miss C. E. Harker,
8.A., and Miss K. Jarrott, 8.A., and the Clayfield College for
boys from Mr. A. W. Rudd, M.A., LL.B. The sum of £II,OOO
was provided as capital, but so rapid was the progress of the
venture that this amount was found to be insufficient. Even-
tually each Church contributed the sum of £28,000.
The Brisbane High School for Girls was situated at Wick-
ham Terrace, but in 1920 it was transferred to its present loca-
tion in South Brisbane, the Council acquiring the property
known as Cumbooqueba—the home of the Step-
hens family, who were closely associated with the
early history of Queensland. A large educational
block was added and the existing residence was adapted to ac-
commodate boarders. The name of the school was then
changed to Somerville House after the pioneer in women’s
education, Mary Somerville. A Junior school was opened in
1928 and the generosity of past pupils made possible the
building of a swimming pool, a library and an art studio. The
Misses Harker and Jarrott continued as joint Principals until
the retirement of Miss Harker in 1930. Miss Jarrott then
became the Principal with Miss E. F. Craig, 8.A., as Vice-
Principal. In 1940 Miss Craig was appointed Principal.
The second World War seriously disturbed the school man-
agement and dislocated the whole organisation. The property
was acquired for the Administrative Headquarters of the


United States Army; this necessitated the transfer of the board-
ing school to a large property at Stanthorpe, while the day
pupils were accommodated at the Queen Alexandra Home at
Coorparoo and at “Drysslwyn, ’ Auchenflower, now Raymonl
Lodge, the hostel for student girls conducted by the Central
Mission.
The school has had conspicuous success and its influence has
become widespread.
Under the administration of the Association, Mr. Rudd con-
tinued to be the Principal of the boys’ college at Clayfield —
the name of which was changed to the Brisbane Boys’ College.
A large educational block was opened in 1919 and
necessary amenities were provided. The progress of
the college was such that it outgrew its accommoda-
tion and the Council was compelled to find a new and larger
property. Accordingly, an area of fourteen acres was secured
at Toowong —a part of the estate of the late Sir Robert Philp,
a highly respected figure in the life of the State. In 1931 the
present ornate and convenient buildings were opened, afford-
ing accommodation for 100 boarders and 200 day boys.
Mr. Rudd retired from the position of Principal and became
Vice-Principal. Mr. P. M. Hamilton, M.A., Dip. Ed., then
became the Principal and served the school until he resigned
in 1946. He was succeeded by Dr. Ross McKenzie, 8.A.,
M.Ed, Ph.D.
The boys’ college like Somerville House, was affected by
the War, although not in a similar way. Many members of the
teaching staff joined the armed forces so that the administra-
tion was difficult to maintain. Conditions have now improved,
of course, and the college is rapidly recovering its status and
prosperity.
The property at Clayfield vacated by the boys’ college
became in 1931 a college for girls. This was an experiment,
but it has been fully justified by splendid results. It began
with an enrolment of seven pupils with Miss Nancy
Ashburn, 8.A., as Principal; it has become one of
the leading secondary school for girls with an enrol-
ment of over 250 including twenty-one boarders. The council
will probably arrange the necessary accommodation for a
larger number of boarders within the near future.


J— —■
Bwk %
*#
REV. T. BIBBY
Secretary, King's College Council
REV. H. H. TRIGGE, M.A., B.D.
Master, King's College
HON. A. GIBSON, M.L.C.
HON. E. W. H. FOWLES
M.A., LL.B., D.Litt.


Parents of the pupils, together with past pupils, have shown
considerable interest in the college and have shared with the
council the cost of a swimming pool and of improving the
playing fields.
This school is in a different category from the other colleges
controlled by the P. and M.S.A. The property, situated at Wyn-
num, was a gift to the Methodist Church from
the Misses Greene in memory of their late father,
Mr. John I. Greene, who was a highly respected
layman and local preacher of our Church.
The school was founded in 1902 and had secured high
prestige as an educational and cultural centre, and was one of
the leading girls’ colleges in the State. The gift was, there-
fore, a generous one and it was accepted by the Conference
with gratitude. A resolution was unanimously passed by the
Conference of 1944, when the gift was formally received,
which expressed appreciation to the donors. “For many years
ihis fine school,” the resolution read, “has been recognised as
one of the foremost girls’ schools in Queensland, maintaining
a high standard of educational and cultural life . . . The gift
to the Methodist Church is an indication that the donors desire
that the spirit of the school, so well established, should be
preserved and strengthened by being under the charge of the
Methodist Church. The gift also marks the culmination of long
years of devotion and service on the part of the Greene family
to Methodism . . .”
The school was committed to the control of the P. and
M.S.A. in 1944. Miss Elsie G. Greene, 8.A., became the Head
Mistress and Miss Hilda Greene, L.R.A.M., the Director of the
school of music. These ladies retired from their respective
positions in 1945. They were succeeded by Miss Ella M.
Christensen, M.A., 8.E.d., who had been a member of the staff
of the Methodist Ladies’ College in Melbourne.
Since the P. and M.S.A. assumed control, alterations and
additions have been made to the property, including the erec-
tion of a kindergarten room and accommodation to be used
for the purposes of a hospital ward.
The Association will bring to bear upon its administration
the benefit of its long experience, so that the traditions of the
school will be maintained.


Schools were founded at Charters Towers through the initia-
tive, energy and zeal of the Rev. R. E. Bacon. As chairman
of the Northern District he was impressed by the need for
secondary schools where young people residing in
remote areas could be educated within reasonable
distance from their homes and at the same time
benefit by the ordinances of the Church. Mr. Bacon had
served the Church in many circuits since coming from York-
shire, and everywhere he had revealed a deep interest in the
people of the bush. In North Queensland he believed he was
faced with a unique opportunity of helping them. He opened
many new preaching places and built many churches, some-
times voluntarily accepting full responsibility for the financial
liability. The idea of establishing secondary
schools seemed to him the call of God to follow a
new avenue of service by which the teachings and
principles of Christ could be set before young people, and
perhaps through them to their homes.
With characteristic intensity and with simple faith in God
he bought Thornburgh House and Blackheath, two splendid
properties suitably situated for the co-education of boys and
girls. Both houses were adapted for the requirements of col-
leges—Thornburgh for boys and Blackheath for girls —and
opened in 1920 and 1921 respectively.
The colleges were governed by a local committee, but Mr.
Bacon was the soul of the whole organisation. He travelled
throughout North Queensland enlisting the practical sym-
pathy of the people. It is estimated that in the thirteen years
during which he was associated with the colleges he collected
no less than £40,000. The tasks and responsibilities volun-
tarily undertaken with the most altruistic motives at last
proved too great for him, and at his passing there was wide-
spread grief.
Upon the death of Mr. Bacon the Presbyterian and Metho-
dist Schools Association was requested by the two Churches to
assume control of the two colleges.
Thornburgh College was opened with Mr. J. F. Ward, M.A.,
as Principal. For five years he laid the foundations of the
school and inaugurated an organisation which contributed to
its sturdy growth. He was succeeded by Dr. J. F. Rossiter and


during his seven years as Principal he saw extraordinary
development. The enrolment of boarders alone reached 150,
necessitating the provision of additional accommodation. Both
Mr. Ward and Dr. Rossiter resigned to undertake similiar posi-
tions in Methodist colleges in Perth and Adelaide.
When the P. and M.S.A. undertook the control of the col-
leges, Mr. C. A. Foggon, M.A., was appointed Principal and
continued to occupy the position until 1939, when he resigned.
Dr. T. Ross McKenzie became his successor until 1947, when
he was appointed Principal at the Brisbane Boys’ College.
During recent years the college has known remarkable
growth and has had marked success in every phase of its
activity. The Rev. C. D. Alcorn, 8.A., 8.D., is the present
Principal and this is in harmony with a new policy which the
association has adopted. Associated with Mr. Alcorn is Mr.
H. R. Taylor, B.Sc., as Vice-Principal.
Blackheath College for Girls commenced with Miss Jean
Bullow, 8.A., as Principal in 1921, and for seventeen years
she exercised wise and effective control. She resigned in 1938
and Dr. McKenzie became the Principal and Miss
M. A. Sawtell, L.T.C.L., as resident Mistress. The
college has featured music and art with good suc-
cess, and has a creditable record of academic achievements.
The students of the boys’ and girls’ colleges have shared in
the one curriculum and have benefited by the co-educational
policy.
Mr. E. T. Campbell has been the secretary of the Association
throughout its career and he has enjoyed the unqualified ad-
miration and appreciation of the two co-operating Churches.
Without reserve he has dedicated his ability and ex-
perience to the interests of the Association and by
his wide knowledge of finance he has successfully
guided the colleges through difficult and anxious times. It is
largely due to him that they are now prospering upon a sound
basis. Although a Methodist and prominent in the councils of
our Church, in his capacity as secretary of the council of the
P. and M.S.A. he has always held the balance even.
Amongst the representatives of the Methodist Church, twa
laymen—the late Messrs. J. J. King and E. Proctor —served


for many years with the utmost fidelity. Mr. King was a
foundation member of the council and was a member
of the committee appointed to negotiate the purchase
of the first two colleges. He occupied many positions
including those of treasurer and vice-chairman and for three
years was chairman. At the close of his twenty-one years of fine
service, the council paid a tribute of gratitude which had the
endorsement of the Church.
Mr. Proctor was a member of the council for twenty years
and his knowledge of property matters made him an ideal con-
vener of the committee entrusted with the care of the valuable
college buildings. He was untiring in his efforts on
behalf of the Association. Both Mr. King and Mr.
Proctor were trusted leaders in our circuits and in
Conference and they commended themselves by their self-deny-
ing labours and their sincerity.
The Secondary Education Committee, to which has been
committed the duty of directing the secondary education policy
of the Church, has often been called upon to face delicate
situations demanding caution and discretion. The successive
secretaries of the committee have been entrusted with arduous
duties and heavy responsibilities. The work has always been
done without friction and in a fine Christian spirit. The pres-
ent secretary, Rev. E. G. Walker, is also the president of the
P. and M.S.A. Council.
154
ANNALS OF ACHIEVEMENT


CHAPTER VI
YOUNG PEOPLE’S DEPARTMENT
Methodism has a large place in her heart for young people.
It has been her aim from the outset to lead them to the Saviour
and she has kept in touch with the best methods for their reli-
gious instruction. The place given to the young in modern
society, in which their rich potentialities for the nation are
recognised, receives the enthusiastic support of the Church. At
the beginning of the century, the consideration by the Church
given to youth, was confined to the provision of Sunday
Schools and Christian Endeavour Societies; to-day young
people have a much larger place; all phases of youth work are
represented and encouraged.
The Rev. Wm. Moore founded a Sunday School in George
Little’s hall in Queen Street when he arrived in 1847. He re-
ported that in the school there were about sixty
scholars and that “it affords promise of much good.”
That was the first Methodist Sunday School in
Queensland. Very soon there was one at South Brisbane and
another at Ipswich.
At the first Conference of the Australian Wesleyan Church,
held in Sydney in 1855, several resolutions were passed in-
tended to stimulate Sunday School work. One of the most
significant stated “that Conference records its conviction of the
great value and high importance of these institutions as nur-
series of the Church.” This represents the view held at that
time.
There seems to have been no annual report to Conference
upon the strength of Sunday Schools until 1864; from then
onwards there is evidence that work among young people was
impressed upon Conference with increasing force.
In 1897, General Conference made a pronouncement and
instructed each Annual Conference to fix a day to be called
“Young People’s Sunday” upon which special services were to
be held for young people, with a view to leading them to de-
cision for Christ. In 1899, four years before the Union of the
Wesleyan and Primitive Methodist Churches, a Sunday School


'f 1 ‘ 1 v : I
MiBBlaMBIBF' ..: B I B f***i* nHHHI
■ ‘ ».-.. yij
';: 4 JKS||i||l ;- v 'ijrW < - <H^p
11 v 4BbIL - ;
4^; &?& ■. ■ ? ;>/ $S&. -
. llMT
j - .-
Hi llw- JP < ■' >x ' \v' , * j ’' ; ls£~ * Wf I Jraip : :
I fv 1 * as I * «HHHKMisiS: ffsBMiP ,, >.<•■ ... «|-*-' Ajp W\AWk,m- 1H
f T #. - ." I SBSMMiummmBf %■■'-: -xi. f - f > te I .^g
Mi' ' ' > V* JKm wm. •j&f.JUW iBBillMMKI „ j| mBmmm m
mm 4: ■ |m „ J flH« f
te . I $$V V. t v - : SSBSm ’ B * J® - J . SE*‘. if
j I** £ jf '"'4 t H * y'
1 '!■■■ ImP Wi f Maw**. Wm g^™
M VW* ' I
THEOLOGICAL STUDENTS, 1947


Union of the two Churches was formed with the Rev. Wm.
Brown and Mr. E. Chappie as secretaries.
Interest in young people’s work continued to grow and in
1910 the Young People’s Department was instituted “for the
purposes of fostering and consolidating all branches of work in
the interests of the young people of the Church in Queens-
land.” The Revs. L. T. Copeland, J. J. Gee, Wrn. Brown and
F. Hof were successively the secretary of the department.
Under the guidance of these ministers, who combined the duties
with their circuit ministry, many new branches of youth acti-
vity were introduced, including the annual Scripture Examina-
tions, which have been continued to the present time.
The appointment of the Rev. H. A. Denny as full -time secre-
tary in 1920 signified a new and important step in the pro-
gress of the department. Mr. Denny had been a circuit minister
for twelve years, with abundant opportunities
for observing the urgency for co-ordinating,
strengthening and improving youth activities.
He was a young man in touch with the rising generation. He
launched himself upon his responsibilities by immediately tour-
ing the State to investigate youth work in all the circuits. He
at once commended himself to leaders and to young folk, and
in the twelve years during which he held office he enjoyed this
confidence.
Mr. Denny was soon able to report to the Council of the
Department very comprehensively upon his findings and to out-
line a policy. There was need for teacher and leader training
and the introduction of modern methods and equipment —es-
pecially suitable buildings and furnishings. He urged the need
for putting youth in a more prominent place in the whole
organisation of the Church.
The two exclusively Methodist youth organisations —the
Girls’ Comradeship and the Order of Knights, which began in
New South Wales in 1918 and 1914 respectively, were regarded
by the department as valuable agencies. They were
introduced into Queensland at the Raff Street (Too-
woomba) Circuit in 1921, during the ministry of the
Rev. R. P. Watkinson. Very soon ministers and church officials
realised the possibilities of these organisations, and other
branches were formed. In 1923 two branches of the Com-


radeship were opened in Brisbane —one at Ithaca and the
other at Ashgrove. By 1928 there were sufficient branches in
Queensland to form a Grand Council to supervise the branches
throughout the State. Miss E. Julian was the first State
Superintendent. In 1938 Miss E. M. Moor was elected the
General Superintendent for the whole Commonwealth. The
Order of Knights grew similarly and in 1924 a High Court
for Queensland was formed.
Mr. Denny led the department also in introducing and de-
veloping the “Mail Bag Sunday school” for children in the
Out-back, beyond the range of the usual organised Sunday
school activities. By means of correspondence
lessons under the supervision of experienced Sun-
day school teachers, children in isolated districts
are taught the stories of the Bible and encouraged to follow
Christ. This feature of the Young People’s Depatrment has
been increasingly successful. Literature is regularly sent to the
children, friendly letters are exchanged between teachers and
pupils, and tokens are forwarded to them at Christmas time,
so that they realise that they are embraced within the interest
of the Church and are a vital part of Christian enterprise. The
contact which the Mail Bag has had with numerous homes has
created a new interest in religion for the parents as well as the
children. It has helped to solve for them the serious problem
of moral and religious training created by their life in the
far-off bush.
The secretary’s report to Conference of 1926 mentioned an-
other new feature, revealing the earnestness of the department
in meeting the needs of modern youth. It was the commence-
ment of Young People’s Holiday Camps, which
through the years have become very popular. “For
a fortnight at Christmas time,” it was reported, “up-
wards of forty young men went into camp at Southport. It
was a new venture, but it proved a distinct success. There were
gathered from far distant parts of Queensland young men as-
sociated with our Church. The Christian Fellowship which was
a distinctive feature of the camp will surely make its contri-
bution in helping young men to achieve a Christian per-
sonality.”
Two years later, fifty-seven availed themselves of the privi*


leges of the camp. In 1927 a camp for young women, under
the supervision of Miss Heathwood, was conducted when over
forty attended; in the same year over fifty attended the young
men’s camp. Year by year the camps have been conducted,
where happy and safe holiday conditions have been combined
with group circles for the study of Christian truth and
training in habits of devotion and in service. Recently camps
were conducted in other seaside resorts, Margate, Maroochy-
dore, Pialba and Emu Park. It is now a permanent feature of
our youth work. At Southport and Currumbin houses have
been purchased for camp purposes and sites have been secured
where suitable holiday homes will be built.
In Mr. Denny’s final year as secretary there were more than
120 young people holidaying under the care of the Church.
Mr. Denny retired from the position in 1931. It was recognised
that he had served the Church loyally. Conference placed on
record its appreciation of his services and affirmed that “The
consolidation of the work in Sunday Schools and Christian En-
deavour Societies and the inauguration of the Girls’ Comrade-
ship and the Order of Knights marked the term of Mr. Denny’s
service as memorable in the history of our Church in this State.
Under his guidance, foundations have been well and truly
laid.”
Under the direction of the Rev. H. W. Prouse (1931-1939)
the Department exercised a still wider and more useful in-
fluence in Methodism. Each of its many branches received
minute attention and wise control. The personal
contact of the secretary with individual churches
throughout the State led, in many instances, to
youth leaders being quickened to a new interest in their work
and a new enthusiasm. Youth rallies were held in strategic
centres when young men and women were challenged to follow
Christ. A large number responded. Study groups were organ-
ised, teacher and leader training was encouraged and fresh
methods were introduced. The principle of the decentralised
school was enjoined and when the accommodation was suit-
able, it was followed.
The Christian Endeavour movement, with which the depart-
ment always had been actively identified, received a special em-
phasis at this time. The Methodist Church has contributed to


the growth of the movement in this State and amongst the
early Presidents of the movement were the Revs. W. Jefferies,
James Doran, W. H. Harrison and A. E. Fox. The Rev. H. W.
Prouse was President in 1929, the Rev. J. Bean in 1945, and
the Rev. S. Y. Potter, 8.A., occupies the position at present.
Mr. G. H. Nelson has been the Australian President and is now
a World Vice-President.
The number of Methodist Societies has increased in recent
years, especially amongst the Juniors, and all have become
more vigorous. In Christian Endeavour has been found a use-
ful means of encouraging young people in moral principles
and spiritual practices and in providing them with opportuni-
ties of sharing in the privilege of Christian service. Some of
the ministers acquired their first experience in conducting
meetings in Christian Endeavour Societies.
To Mr. Prouse belongs much credit for developing the Mail
Bag Sunday School which he found so well established. Due
to his efforts, the number of children enrolled increased from
275 in 1932 with forty teachers to 572 in 1938 with sixty-seven
teachers. The work continues to prosper. The 1946 report of
the department said: “The department conducts a growing
Mail Bag Sunday School which is now serving many hundreds
of children in isolated areas. It is now divided into three
grades and seeks to serve all children from the Cradle Roll to
Bible Class.”
The department has received much valuable assistance in
this work from Miss D. Maddrell, Miss J. Kantor and Miss
M. E. Moor and Mr. T. G. V. Davies, who have over several
years directed this branch. In 1945 a fund was established in
memory of Mrs. A. J. Bradfield, who at the time of her death
was lovingly engaged as a Mail Bag Sunday School teacher.
She had been an active Sunday School teacher for fifty years.
The interest on the “Mrs. A. J. Bradfield Memorial Fund” is to
be used for the benefit of the scholars.
Practical measures were taken under Mr. Prouse’s guidance
to encourage teacher and leader training. As a former State
School teacher, he knew the value of this and his annual re-
ports nearly always emphasised the need—“ The Church,” he
once said, “is lamentably in need of more glowing-hearted and
efficient workers and the time is opportune to encourage young


people to train for leadership so that the oncoming generation
will be benefited. * ‘Train for Leadership*’—that was a kind
of slogan with Mr. Prouse. The three-year course recommended
by the Council of Religious Education was introduced with
good results.
The Band of Hope movement came to Australia in 1858, and
it was not long before branches were opened in Queensland. In
the minutes of Conference frequent references were made to
the value of the movement and church members were
urged to encourage young people to join it. In recent
years the revival of the movement, with a new constitu-
tion and technique, has had the effect of popularising it. The
Young People’s Department cordially supported it and Mr.
Prouse gave himself heart and soul to rousing young people to
a lively interest in Band of Hope activities. The number of
branches in Queensland Methodism under our Y.P.D. increased
from twenty-five in 1932 to seventy-three in 1939 and to ninety-
six in 1946. This movement is regarded as one of the best of
all methods of attacking the liquor evil and of securing the
benefits of temperance, and is now strong throughout the Com-
monwealth. The National President is Mr. W. H. Green and
the Vice-President, Rev. A. A. Mills. Miss N. M. Mills, 8.A.,
is the energetic assistant secretary of the Union in Queensland
and to her assistance many of our branches owe their strength
and success.
When Mr. Prouse retired from the Secretaryship Confer-
ence honoured him with a splendid tribute by saying he had
“given himself without reserve to the important task of leading
the young people during the formative period of their lives, to
dedicate themselves to the service of Jesus Christ and to secure
their fellowship in the various societies of the Church.” The
success of his work is amply demonstrated in both the number
and the enthusiasm of young people carrying on Chritsian
work in every part of the State.
The war seriously disturbed Young People’s work through-
out the State and the Rev. T. N. Deller, who began his duties
in 1939 under the designation of Director of the Young
People’s Department, has had interrupted and an-
xious years. From 1940, the National call to the
Services seriously depleted the ranks of Sunday
school workers —one suburban Sunday school with an enrol-


JB - # i lit, • •-'"*' Ml fet W Ss
~ ■ - - -*-* — — -v. HI — — -* -■• * t - ■
QUEENSLAND BOOK DEPOT
Conducted by the Methodist Church


merit of 220 children was without efficient leadership through-
out almost the whole period of the war. Members of the Order
of Knights joined the armed forces and Comrades the Women’s
Auxiliary Services to such an extent that many branches were
unable to function; the element of danger at one period
necessitated closing some Sunday schools. Mr. Deller was ap-
pointed by the Conference for two years as a chaplain with the
A.I.F. and upon his return the demands of the circuits made
it necessary for Conference to appoint him to a circuit for two
years —he was then part-time director. During these years,
however, the department carried on bravely. While Mr.
Deller was serving as a chaplain the department was directed
by the Rev. J. A. Pratt, in conjunction with his Home Mission
duties. The responsibility laid upon Mr. Pratt was gladly
undertaken and efficiently carried out. A resolution of Con-
ference of 1943 conveys an impression of the situation in which
Mr. Pratt was called upon to serve —
“Conference is gratified to learn of the active Christian
witness of the young people of the Church in the disturbing
conditions of social and moral life occasioned by war-time
activities. In the increasing temptations and difficulties con-
fronting them they are finding new avenues of service and in
the ideals of their church training are upholding the tradi-
tion of Methodism. In entertaining men of the Forces and
the active interest of those in the Forces in associating them-
selves with the church life of the community adjacent to the
camp, the witness within the military and munition duties r
our young people are rendering effective service.”
Associated with Mr. Pratt in the administration of the de-
partment at this time were Mr. T. G. V. Davis, who was offici-
ally appointed secretary of the Y.P.D. Council; Mr. F. Field-
ing, who acted as treasurer in the absence on active service of
Mr. W. J. E. Kerrison; the Rev. R. P. Watkinson, the clerical
treasurer; Miss M. E. Moor, the Sunday school examination
secretary; Miss M. Buckle, State Superintendent of the M.G.C.;
and Mr. R. McGhee, Grand Commander of the Order of
Knights.
Mr. Deller, upon his retirement from the chaplaincy to the
Army, gave himself with great enthusiasm to the department,
but it was obvious that with the responsibilities of a circuity


his work was far beyond the powers of any man to perform.
The Conference of 1946 found it possible to release Mr. Deller
from circuit work and he has since given all his time to the
department. Already the benefit of this policy is evident. Since
the close of the war Mr. Deller has had the satisfaction of see-
ing the young people’s work return to almost normal con-
ditions. A Radio Sunday School was inaugurated by Mr.
Deller, and he conducted ihe session every Sunday morning
from a metropolitan station, which continued for over two
years with gratifying results. Similar work has been done for
some time through provincial broadcasting stations by circuit
ministers.
In 1941 Mr. Deller advised the Conference that “one of the
outstanding events of the year was the formation of a Women’s
Auxiliary to the department with Mrs. M. A. Ferguson as Pre-
sident, Miss M. Braun, Secretary and Mrs. C. Wiles, Treasurer.”
This new organisation has loyally co-operated with the de-
partment, especially on social occasions. Mrs. Ferguson re-
signed in 1944 after having led the auxiliary with her great
ability for three years. Miss M. Phillips succeeded her.
Conference of 1943, recognising the supreme importance of
youth work and the urgent need of conducting it by the best
modern methods, directed the Y.P.D. Council “to consider the
appointment to the staff of the Y.P.D. of a lady
graduate conversant with modern educational
methods, for the purpose of assisting in the organis-
ing and developing of work among the young people and chil-
dren of our churches and Sunday schools.” This was an at-
tempt to take a big step forward. It was not an easy matter
to fulfil the suggestion, although the council appreciated the
point in it. However, in 1946, Miss Dolores Guyatt, a highly
competent young lady, was appointed and has already ren-
dered valuable service.
The finances of the department have been in a satisfactory
state —although much more could be done for young people if
the income were higher. The department has carried on with
an expenditure of less than £I,OOO a year, about one-third of
which has been received as dividends from the Australian
Graded Lessons Publications—in the profits of which our
Church is a participating member.


Mr. T. G. V. Davis now holds the position of treasurer to-
gether with the Rev. A. L. Robinson, 8.A., as clerical col-
league. Mr. M. McDonald was treasurer for twenty-four years.
He gave faithful oversight to the finances of the
and in other ways gladly served the interests of young people.
The future will, no doubt, see further developments in youth
work. It is probable that a larger place will be given to child
psychology and methods of religious education in the train-
ing of ministers; possibly the time will come when the Church
will have a staff of specially trained youth leaders, dedicated
in a way similar to the ordination of ministers; specially de-
signed buildings for Sunday schools will be built and modern
methods such as the cinema will be used for religious instruc-
tion. The Church can yet make a great contribution to the
life of the nation and to the Kingdom of God by an intensified
ministry amongst the young. All this is recognised by the
\ oung People’s Department Council and it will continue to
work steadily until the utmost resources of the Church are de-
voted to this branch of its service.


CHAPTER VII
THE CENTRAL MISSION
Albert Street Church and the Central Mission represent two
sides of one great organisation and of one gracious public
ministry. It successfully combines the dignity of public wor-
ship and the essential elements of a regularly organised
Church with all the features of a city Mission to the unfor-
tunate and unprivileged.
It has been the subject of the prayers of the whole Church
and Methodists everywhere have gladly shared in the
generosity that has made its social work possible. It may be
regarded as the symbol of the spirit and ideals of Queensland
Methodism. Its many-sided ministry has been signally blessed
of God, and an unnumbered host have been led to the accept-
ance of the Christian faith by seeing the Gospel translated into
deeds of love.
The Mission holds a unique place amongst the Christian
denominations of Brisbane and enjoys the respect and con-
fidence of all people who love the Lord, and of a vast number
who make no Christian profession but who gladly acknow-
ledge sincere goodness when they see it expressed in practical
forms.
Albert Street Church is the mother of Queensland Method-
ism. Its history dates from the time when William Moore
founded the Church in 1847 and erected the first place of wor-
ship on the corner of Albert Street and Burnett Lane.
The Centenary of Queensland Methodism is also that
of Albert Street. The growth of the work under
William Moore and his successors, as the city of Brisbane
began to take shape and develop, was shown in the increased
Church membership and the large attendances at public wor-
ship. This necessitated the building of a new and larger church
in 1856. The second building was the centre of a remarkable
Christian work for thirty years. It was the head of a wide
circuit and its ministers were such men as the Revs. J. H.
Fletcher, W. J. K. Piddington, Isaac Harding, F. T. Brentnall,


Dr. Sell ors and M. H. Parkinson. They were assisted by richly
endowed younger men who made their mark in Methodism —
Revs. W. G. Taylor, Joseph Spence, W. H. Harrison and
W. Halse Rogers. This church was blessed with many young
laymen who found their joy in its work and fellowship; some
of them lived to advanced years to continue their Christian
witness. There were earnest local preachers like R. Jarrott,,
C. M. Foster, E. Campbell and W. H. Knowles; Sunday school
workers such as John Crowthers, John Costin, J. A. Lewis, G. I.
Bourne, J. S. Bennett, A. J. Bradfield, E. J. Jones, Walter
Jones and W. H. Barnes. Mr. S. Knowles, the senior trustee
of Albert Street, now in his ninetieth year, recalls that he was
the Sunday school organist for twenty-three years; he has re-
freshing memories of the warm fellowship of the class meet-
ing, the fervour of the prayer meetings, and the influence of the
Church upon his early life. It was inevitable that such high
quality of Church activity should find the dimensions of the
building too restricted for its needs. Accordingly the present
church was opened during the ministry of the Rev.
Dr. Youngman in 1889. This marked the beginning
of the third phase in the history of Albert Street. Dr.
Youngman was followed bv the Revs. Arthur Webb, Joseph
Bowes, C. E. James and J. Snell. These were men of different
types but were chosen for their power to interpret the Gospel
to people engaged in building a great city. The spread of the
population and the opening of numerous suburbs made new
circuits necessary, so that one by one churches were separated
from the mother Church until Albert Street alone remained.
The Albert Street church occupies one of the best sites in
the city; opposite the beautiful City Hall and adjacent to the
two main railway stations, it stands in the heart of the busy
metropolis, the embodiment and expression of beauty and the
symbol of eternal truth; its tall spire constantly directing
men’s thoughts to God and reminding them of His claims. The
handsome church led the way in ecclesiastical architecture in
Brisbane and even to-day it is not surpassed. It is a monu-
ment to the faith, vision and courage of the leaders of Method-
ism of sixty years ago and an inspiration to their followers.
The church embodies the features that encourage true worship
and it is so designed that all its appointments have an aesthetic


' ... ■
INTERIOR OF BOOK DEPOT


and religious value. Early in 1947 six memorial windows of
rare beauty were unveiled and arrangements are in hand for
nine more, in honour of the founders of the Church and of
those who served in the second world war. These will be un-
veiled at the Centenary service which is to be held in the
church on October 19th, 1947.
The Central Mission was inaugurated by the late Rev. (later
Dr.) G. E. Rowe who came from Perth, Western Australia, in
1906. He had had a most successful ministry for thirteen
years in the western city, had built a fine
church there and secured for Methodism a
splendid block of buildings which remains a
monument to his vision. At Albert Street
Dr. Rowe immediately took up the movement which had been
initiated by the Rev. C. E. James four years before, to convert
the circuit into a Central Mission. He advised the Quarterly
Meeting to approve the proposal and the following Conference
gave it its sanction. On April 7th, 1907, Dr. Rowe conducted
the inaugural services and began the forward movement which
has been attended by extraordinary blessing.
The Mission demanded a new technique and new organisa-
tion; it required public sympathy and support and the interest
of Methodists throughout the connexion. The alert, energetic,
and audacious Superintendent understood all this and was
equal to the demands. By judicious propaganda he soon had
almost half the people in the State talking about the Mission
and a large number of workers associated with him.
Under the new policy, Albert Street became famous for its
aggressive Christianity. The utterances from its pulpit,
especially in reference to political and social questions, were
regarded with respect and the Superintendent became known
to all classes of people. Dr, Rowe’s fine physique, the prac-
tical bent of his mind, his charity and sympathy, as well as
his deep conviction that the Gospel is the power of God unto
salvation, contributed to his effectiveness. He was a Cornish-
man by birth and he displayed the intensity of his Celtic tem-
perament in all his work and in his religious fervour and
wholeheartedness. He took his full share of connexional re-
sponsibility and was elected President of the Conference in
1910. His sudden death in 1926, which closed his twenty


years’ ministry at the Central Mission, was a severe loss to the
Church and to the community.
The Rev. H. M. Wheller has exercised a conspicuously suc-
cessful ministry since 1927 and has raised the Mission to
higher levels of influence. Profound changes have taken place
in social life during the past twenty years which
have presented a new challenge to the Central
Mission. Mr. Wheller has bravely taken up the
challenge and has led the Mission in new adventures in ser-
vice. The industrial depression which followed the first World
War created problems which tested the ingenuity and faith of
the Superintendent and his committee. As a centre of philan-
thropy it was natural that the poor and lonely should turn to
the Mission for help. A stream of men and women came,
therefore, every day with a multitude of needs. The Mission
office was the scene of intense activity. Through the generosity
of friends thousands of parcels of food and clothing were dis-
tributed and no case of genuine need was disregarded. The
desperate plight of the unemployed men was alarming; where
possible, work was found for them; for others hostels were
opened where they could get food and shelter, and daily
luncheons for over four hundred men were provided at the
Albert Hall. The Thursday night service for unemployed
men, maintained for ten years, was a powerful influence for
good and enabled thousands of men to retain their faith. The
singing of the great hymns and the warm fellowship of the ser-
vice encouraged them in their struggle against cruel circum-
stances. Never was the Mission more active or more effective
than in those days. Its positive contribution to an involved
social situation and the relief it brought to bewildered lives
and troubled homes established its position in public esteem
and created for the Mission a permanent place amongst the
philanthropic agencies of Brisbane.
During the depression the problem of caring for aged
people became acute and the idea of providing accommodation
for them in small furnished cottages built round a common
dining hall and administrative quarters occurred
to Mr. Wheller as the most kindly way of helping
them. The idea gradually developed in his mind
until the magnitude of his plan seemed to make its fulfilment


impossible. A few friends shared his views and made sub-
stantial contributions, hut it was Mr. George Marchant, a
large-hearted philanthropist of Brisbane who made the dream
come true. He made a magnificent gift of twenty-six acres of
land at Chermside and erected the necessary buildings —a gift
of some £20,000. The Mission, in accepting the gift, provided
over £2,000 for furnishings. Three years later Mr. Marchant
added nine more cottages fully furnished. The grounds are
laid out with paths, gardens, and bowling green, so that the
surroundings are in themselves restful to the residents. Dr.
Findlay, who came from England as the Cato Lecturer in 1938,
paid a glowing tribute to the Settlement in which he said it
was “the most beautiful thing in Methodism.” The Settlement
was officially opened by His Excellency the Governor of
Queensland, Sir Leslie Wilson, in November 1936.
In 1941, a beautiful sanctuary, the gift of the late Mrs. E. E.
Raymont, was dedicated, and it is the centre of rich fellowship
for the residents. It is expected that in the near future there
will he erected a large self-contained unit with accommodation
for twenty-six people. Ibis will enable the Mission to care
for those who are too infirm to walk to the central dining hall.
The Settlement is administered by the Executive officers of
the Mission. The treasurer, Mr. W. M. Reid, and the secretary,
Mr. George Hall, with Mr. S. Cooper have rendered service of
great value. The first matron, Sister Amy Evans, made a valu-
able contribution to the success of the venture, and now Sister
Muriel Thomas is discharging her duties with marked
efficiency.
Du ring recent years some generous gifts have been made to
the Mission, partly because of its social work and partly
because of the spiritual influence of the Church. Through one
generous bequest, that of Mrs. E. E. Raymont, the whole of the
Church and Mission properties are entirely without debt. At
Auchenflower a beautiful home for student girls, appropriately
named “Raymont Lodge,” was opened by His Excellency the
Governor, Sir Leslie Wilson, in September 1945.
“Cooper House” at New Farm, the generous gift of
Mr. and Mrs. S. Cooper, was opened in May 1947
also for the purposes of a young women’s hostel. Another gift


has enabled the Mission to acquire a property at Albion where
a lodge for student men has been opened.
“Wesley House, ’ the administrative centre, was opened in
1940, but it is to be enlarged to meet the needs of the increas-
ing activities of the Mission. During the war “Wesley House,”
known far and wide as "'The Friendly Corner,” provided for
thousands of servicemen and women. Large numbers of the
Allied Forces found their way to the Church; friendships were
formed and a spiritual fellowship enriched and strengthened
the lives of men and women of many different nations.
From the pulpit, Mr. Wheller has related the message of
Christ to the lives of men, not more earnestly than his pre-
decessors, but in a form suited to the spirit of the times. The
personal needs of his congregation, current political problems,
prevalent social evils and international affairs have been dealt
with in a forthright and fearless manner. With a clear mind
and a sympathetic heart Mr. Wheller has been a preacher in
the true evangelical succession, sounding a new note and using
revised phraseology. He has dared to entertain ambitions for
the Mission and to make plans on a considerable scale. The
Lord has given him the joy of witnessing abundant fruitage
from his labours.
Mr. Wheller is a South Australian, but has spent the whole
of his ministry in Queensland. Albert Street, however, has pro-
vided him with the most suitable opportunities for giving ex-
pression to his personality and of serving the Church. His in-
terests have extended beyond the Central Mission. Amongst his
many public duties he has been for twelve years a member of
the University Senate, and until recently he was President of
the Council of Churches, in which position he served all
denominations. He has also been Secretary and President of
the Queensland Conference. He was elected President-General
by the General Conference held at the Albert Street church in
1941 and for four years —the most anxious years of the war —
he wisely led the Church and gave generously of his time and
energy to all the States. The appreciation of the General Con-
ference was expressed when it met again in 1945 in the follow-
ing Resolution: —
4 That the sincere thanks of the General Conference be
conveyed to the ex-President-General, the Rev. H. M. Whel-


ler, for the service rendered by him to the whole Church
during the past quadrennium. Throughout the strenuous
and, at times, critical War period he has given a wise and
spiritual lead of which the Church is deeply sensible.
“With sincere gratitude to God for travelling mercies
vouchsafed to him, we record with pleasure the visits he has
paid to the various States during the years of office, by
which the common ties of our Methodism have been greatly
strengthened.
“The Conference expresses its appreciation of, and thanks
for, the retiring address of the ex-President-General, in
which he placed before our Church the vision of our high
calling in Christ Jesus, and with which he brought to a fit-
ting conclusion his Presidential term.
“The Conference also expresses its deep sympathy with
the ex-President-General and Mrs. Wheller in the great sor-
row that came to them in the loss on active service of their
son. It commends them both to God and wishes for the ex-
President-General many years of ministry amongst us to
the glory of God and the advance of Christ’s Kingdom in
this great Commonwealth.”
His own Conference in Queensland unanimously passed a
resolution of appreciation in similar generous terms.
New visions are coming to the Superintendent of the Central
Mission and to his committee. The work will continue, possibly
along new lines, but the needs of the times will determine that.
The Methodist Church will continue to regard the Mission with
pride and its success will, as in the past, be an inspiration to
churches and circuits throughout the Conference.


Bbl Bl
MR. R. UTTING
Manager, Book Depot
MR. LES. F. PRICE
Centenary Choir Conductor
MR. G. H. NELSON
MR. J. PACKER


CHAPTER VIII
OVERSEAS MISSIONS
Queensland Methodism, although engaged in the task of
evangelism in its own immense State —a task which in itself
has demanded all its resources —has not been indifferent to the
Christian obligation to evangelise the whole world. It has
accepted its share of responsibility and labour in implement-
ing the Overseas Missions policy of Australasian Methodism
and has rejoiced in the widening of the field of overseas ser-
vice, especially in the islands of the South-West Pacific and in
India. It may be modestly claimed that in proportion to its
strength, Queensland Methodism has made a creditable con-
tribution to the successful efforts which have been made under
the guidance of the Mission Board in civilising and christianis-
ing the native peoples. The growth in interest and in practical
support has been consistent with the developments on the home
front.
Some of the earliest ministers who laboured in this State
were imbued with the missionary spirit and earnestly enjoined
upon Church members, limited in numbers, in means and in
public prestige, the duty of supporting the expan-
sion of the Church overseas. William Moore did
this. He had been designated for work in Fiji and
was sent to Brisbane to commence the Methodist Church while
waiting the opportunity to proceed to his destination. John
Watsford came from Fiji to Brisbane in 1851. He had known
the joy of seeing large numbers of natives accept Christ and
embark upon the Christian way of life as a result of his im-
passioned evangelism. Nathaniel Turner retired to Brisbane
after having lived strenuously and successfully at Tonga and
elsewhere overseas. These men could not keep silent concern-
ing the duty of the home Church towards the moral and
spiritual needs of their unprivileged brothers in other lands.
By their insistent and sympathetic advocacy, the Church in
Queensland took upon its heart the burden of the heathen
world and at no time during the century has the significance
of this obligation been forgotten.
On every mission field under the jurisdiction of the Aus-


tralasian Conference, Queensland has had its representatives
in ministers, laymen and sisters. Some of them have served
with great distinction and four ministers have been chairmen
of districts.
The Rev. J. F. Goldie was one of Queensland’s greatest gifts
to missions and his record of service through the past forty-five
years has been outstanding. He is still remembered for his
brief ministry with his Mother Conference and his
achievements on the mission field have been
watched with pride and thanksgiving. He was one
of the two pioneer missionaries in the Solomon Islands in
1902 and he has continuously occupied the position of chair-
man of the district. His wonderful work and his personal in-
fluence were noted in a special resolution by the 1947 Con-
ference of New Zealand when Mr. Goldie’s ministerial jubilee
was recognised. The resolution embodied a survey of his
jnanifold labours and an eloquent reference to his success: —
“The Conference extends hearty and affectionate con-
gratulations to the Rev. John F. Goldie upon the attainment
of his golden jubilee in the active work and expresses heart-
felt thanks that every year of his distinguished ministry has
been blessed of God to the salvation of many people.
“During his forty-five years in the Solomons, Mr. Goldie
has had the joy of seeing primitive, blood-thirsty and fear-
ridden people entering the light of God’s Kingdom, their
languages reduced to writing, educational and medical ser-
vices of no mean order established and the development of
a native ministry that is already exercising a profound in-
fluence upon its people. In all this truly great work, he
has been, under God, the wise and trusted leader and he
occupies a place in the hearts of his people which none
other can ever hold,
“After fifty years of ministerial service and with a record
of forty-five years’ continuous chairmanship, which must he
unique in Methodism, Mr. Goldie’s bow abides in strength.
We pledge ourselves to work and pray, that before retire-
ment, he may have the joy of seeing the stations, laid waste
by war, fully restored and the whole district won for
Christ,*'
In 1909 Queensland supplied another pioneer missionary,


the Rev. F. J. Nunn. He was privileged to launch the Metho-
dist Mission at Azamgarh, India. He was chairman of the dis-
trict and was personally responsible for much valuable founda-
tion work which has now developed to considerable pro-
portions.
The Rev. H. R. Rycroft was transferred from Queensland to
the mission field in 1912 to become the colleague of the Rev.
J. F. Goldie in the Solomon Islands. There he served with
praiseworthy diligence, especially in developing
educational institutions and in translation. His
duties took him amongst tribes who had never
heard the Gospel and it was his privilege to bring many to see
the Light of Christ. In 1918 Mr. Rycroft was appointed to the
New Guinea District where he adapted himself to new condi-
tions and helped to consolidate many branches of Christian
work in the circuits. Mr. Rycroft made useful contributions
to missionary literature, especially by his volume “From
Savagery to Christ.” It is noteworthy that Mr. Rycroft figured
prominently at missionary rallies on a visit to England when
he told the romantic story of the mission work in the South-
West Pacific. He returned to resume his work in Queensland
in 1926 after spending fourteen years with the Mission Board.
The Rev. T. N. Deller, a native of Queensland, laboured for
fifteen years in Fiji, from 1921-1936. He revealed the true
instinct of a missionary and early won the confidence and
affection of the natives. He served in three circuits
and by his initiative and enterprise strengthened
each department of the work. He engaged in ex-
tending the educational institutions, especially those for native
pastors; he organised the Fiji centenary celebrations, produc-
ing an excellent brochure with reference to the development
of the missionary adventures and victories amongst both the
Indians and the Fijians.
The Rev. J. C. Rundle, L.Th., a greatly beloved Cornishman,
of personal charm and endowed with practical ability, heard
the call of God to missionary work when labouring with the
Queensland Conference. He was appointed to
Salamo in the Papua District. From 1929 to 1939
he was superintendent of the Bwaidogo Circuit and
in 1939 he succeeded the Rev. M. K. Gilmour as chairman of


the district. Mr. Rundle left his district only a few days before
the Japanese invasion of Papua and when at length he found
it impossible for him to return as a missionary to the field
which had then become an operational area, he enlisted as a
chaplain in the R.A.A.F. and for some months was stationed at
Papua. He was therefore able to encourage and advise the
native Church which had been bereft of its European mis-
sionaries. He was serving as chaplain in the North Australia
Air Stations in 1944 when he met with a fatal accident. In his
death the Missionary Society lost one of the best members of
its staff and Queensland mourned the loss of one of its most
effective representatives on the overseas field.
The Rev. L. N. Kentish, 8.A., 8.D., became a missionary to
the Aborigines in North Australia in 1935, after having
laboured successfully in several circuits in Queensland. He
was highly qualified for missionary work both by
temperament and ability. He was the colleague of
the Rev. T. T. Webb on whose retirement in 1940
he became chairman of the district. He made a close study of
the needs of the people and of the problems confronting the
Christian church in its work for the welfare and uplift of the
people amongst whom he worked, and through his patient and
understanding ministry won their full confidence. During the
early years of World War 11 he continued his labours with
unabated ardour, assiduously visiting the Islands and superim
tending the work at great hazard to himself. He was taken
prisoner by the Japanese while engaged in his missionary
duties on January 22nd, 1943. His whereabouts were unknown
until in 1946 it became officially known that he had been
executed by the Japanese at Dobu in the Aru Group on May
4th, 1943. His untimely death removed from the ranks of the
Methodist Ministry one of the most promising and devoted
young men. The Queensland Conference paid a tribute to Mr.
Kentish in the following terms: —
'‘Conference desires to place on record its deep sense of
loss, but at the same time its gratitude for the life and wit-
ness and outstanding missionary labours of Mr. Kentish. His
name will ever hold a high and honoured place with those
of other missionaries who have striven in Christ’s name to
bring the light and power of the Christian Gospel to the


Aborigines of Northern Australia and his example of fer-
vent service to the Kingdom of God will remain an inspira-
tion to all who come after.”
The present chairman of the Samoa District, the Rev. C. L.
Williams, was appointed for overseas work from Queensland
in 1940. He is much loved and administers his district with
sagacity and devotion. The difficult conditions of the Pacific
War found him equal to heavy demands.
Other ministers from Queensland now serving as mis-
sionaries are the Rev. Gordon Cook, Salamo, Papua; Rev.
Roland Barnes, L.Th., New Guinea; and the Rev. R. A. W.
Woodgate, 8.A., B.Ed., Tonga.
Amongst the layworkers was the late Mr. George Bardsley r
a builder, who was privileged to accompany the pioneer mis-
sionaries to New Guinea in 1891. He toiled hard, superintend-
ing the erection of houses and other necessary build-
ings, and he took his share in Christian teaching. He
was well adapted for team work and won the abid-
ing affection of his colleagues. Messrs. Rupert Kentish and K.
Grainger Smith are engaged amongst the Aborigines of Croker
Island in the North Australian District.
Many teachers and nurses from Queensland have revealed a
truly Christian spirit in their missionary service and by their
self-sacrifice have helped to make possible the romantic
achievements on their respective fields. Phoebe
Mills, 8.A., resigned from the Department of
Public Instruction in 1938 under a strong mis-
sionary impulse, to become a teacher in the Ballantyne Girls’
School in Fiji. She remains on that field, but is engaged in
educational work in other centres. Sister Dorothy Beale, of
Gladstone, has served at the hospital in New Guinea since
1932. On the Japanese invasion she and three other sisters
were taken prisoner and were not released until the end of the
war. Sister Beale received a generous welcome from her
friends in Queensland and the Church rejoiced in her safety
and in that of the other sisters. After rest and recuperation
she volunteered to return to the field and to the work she
loved. This attitude of Sister Beale greatly touched the whole
Church by its revelation of courage and sacrifice. She is now
again engaged in the work of healing in the name of Christ.


f- ■•- . ;^^Sl
IJIL
'
IH
I - ? 11 :
lB||| \ | ■:
l|| I 3p
m
Hl
■■■ . . .
*
REV. H. M. WHELLER
President, 1926
President-General, 1941-1945
MR. S. KNOWLES
MR. W. H. GREEN
MR. R. J. ARCHIBALD


Sister L. Chowns was appointed from Queensland to the hos-
pital at Fiji in 1944, Sister Joyce Walker to serve in New
Guinea and Sister D. B. Fraser to the hospital staff at Azam-
garh, India. Miss Jenkins, 8.A., gave fine service in conduct-
ing a school at Rabaul for Chinese children for some years.
The ministers now in circuit work in Queensland who have
been members of the Overseas Mission staff for varying periods
are: Rev. C. D. Alcorn, 8.A., 8.D., D. F. Boorman, 8.A., T.
Deller, T. Dent, J. E. Jacob, W. T. Phillips, H. R. Rycroft,
T. C. Toft and C. Whitehead. The Revs. A. E. Lapthorne and
E. G. Hall, whose lamented death recently bereaved the
Church, also gave unstinted service overseas.
The Home organisation has been conducted with the sincere
interest of the Church and by wise and understanding officials.
Conference has invariably given to Overseas Missions due
priority and not even the insistent demands of
local projects or the urgent claims of the cir-
cuits have been permitted to obscure its im-
portance. The best methods of educating the people in mis-
sionary activities have been sought and the best intelligence
of the Church has been directed to securing the utmost sup-
port.
Until 1920 the Queensland secretaries of Overseas Missions
were also circuit ministers, and the records reveal the intensity
of their zeal. Within the limits of their opportunities they
faithfully and successfully led the Church into a more prayer-
ful concern and more generous giving for world evangelisa-
tion. The Revs. S. B. Fellows, H. H. Nolan (returned mis-
sionaries), W. S. Bath, 8.A., and A. Hutchison saw a consider-
able increase in missionary enthusiasm in the circuits. Their
own contribution to this was, in each case, highly commend-
able.
In 1920 the Rev. A. Hutchison was appointed the first full-
time secretary and for six years he worked with untiring
energy. He was a man of many parts. Amongst other quali-
fications he had a sound knowledge of business
affairs, an intimate experience of circuit work and
a disposition which made him at home wherever
he went. He travelled incessantly, leaving no opportunity
neglected of rousing the Church to an earnest participation in


the great missionary cause. Mr. Hutchison gave new impetus
to the sense of missionary obligation in every circuit and led
the Queensland Church to a more worthy level of sacrifice for
missionary work. The annual income in 1920 was £2,256 and
when he retired in 1926 it had reached the total of £3,516.
The Rev. J. E. Jacob succeeded Mr. Hutchison and occupied
the secretaryship for the next ten years. He had recently
returned from Papua where he had served as a missionary for
six years.
It was therefore, with a heart warm with the missionary
passion and a mind well informed upon the opportunities and
needs overseas that Mr. Jacob entered upon his work. He found
the Church alive to the importance of his depart-
ment and by his accounts of the conditions on the
field he quickened the interest still further. He
availed himself of new methods of propaganda and supported
his own vivid story with pictures shown with the aid of a
powerful electric projector. He also effectively used the
cinema films for the first time in Queensland, especially “The
Transformed Isle” and “Tonga To-day.”
The advantage of having a returned missionary as the execu-
tive officer of the Missionary Department was obvious during
Mr. Jacob’s term. He spoke with a measure of authority and
the inspiration of his example of self-sacrificing service led to
increased subscriptions and to young people offering their
lives for missionary work.
The appointment of the Rev. H. R. Rycroft, the present sec-
retary, another missionary, to succeed Mr. Jacob, was a natural
step. His experience in the Solomons and New Guinea pro-
vided him with the appropriate background for
his work and an inexhaustible source of informa-
tion and instruction. For twelve years he has pur-
sued his task with characteristic fervour and with success. He
has been received with the respect and consideration due to his
personal relationship to missionary experience, and to his able
advocacy of the cause.
Mr. J. J. King, who represented the Queensland Conference


as a member of the Mission Board, greatly assisted the or-
ganisation in Queensland by his advice and guidance,
bringing to this service, as he did to all his other
church duties, a consecrated heart and the full benefit
of his experience in commercial circles.
Mr. F. Fielding succeeded Mr. King and for many years was
a valuable member of the Mission Board. His sympathy with
the whole overseas policy, born of a personal experience with
the work during his residence in Papua, is revealed in his dis-
position and willingness to assist the work in any capacity. The
value of his unobtrusive and unostentatious service to the
Board in many ways has been invaluable. He has come to be
recognised as one to be depended upon in matters of great
delicacy requiring caution and discretion, as well as experi-
ence.
Mr. W. H. Green is the present representative of Conference
to the Mission Board and his sincere Christian interest is re-
vealed in this as in all other activities of the Church.
Mr. S. Knowles, now in his ninetieth year, reveals an
unfailing solicitude for the progress of the missionary cause.
He has been the treasurer of the Committee since 1926, and
was a member of the Mission Board for many years.
A noteworthy piece of mission work, in complete harmony
with the aims of the Australian Overseas Mission Society, has
been done in Queensland itself amongst the Chinese. On the
opening of the Palmer goldfields, North Queens-
land, in 1874, Chinese poured into Queensland, and
in 1876 there were 17,000 of them scattered
throughout the State, mostly in the north. Rev. E. Youngman
went to China to learn the coastal language to enable him to
minister to the Chinese in North Queensland. As President of
the Wesleyan Conference in 1895 he visited Rockhampton,
Townsville and Charters Towers holding services for the Chin-
ese in addition to his ordinary services. The large numbers of
Chinese who attended his meetings were delighted to hear a
European speak their language. As a result of his experiences
amongst them, Mr. Youngman urged upon the Conference the
duty of providing adequate ministrations for these Asiatics.
The General Conference of 1898 appointed two Chinese
catechists to Queensland with Townsville as their headquarters,


and in 1901 another, the Rev. Joseph Tear Tack, was ap-
pointed to Cairns. Mr. Tack was well advanced in years and
not a little broken in health and yet he toiled with great hope.
He found, however, that the work assigned to him was beyond
his physical powers and he died after six months’ residence in
the northern city. The Rev. E. J. Piper, a returned missionary
from the province of Hunan, continued Mr. Tack’s work but as
the Chinese of Cairns were natives of Canton it meant his
learning another form of the language. Mr. Piper encoun-
tered many obstacles but he laboured on and in a short time
his endeavours were successful. After two years he was trans-
ferred to South Australia in 1904.
The Rev. E. Youngman, in 1904, visited Rockhampton,
Townsville, Ravenswood, Geraldton, Cairns, Herberton and
Atherton to work amongst the Chinese. At this time there
were 1,000 Chinese in Cairns, 2,000 at Geraldton (now Innis-
fail) and 1,000 at Atherton. Mr. Youngman met the leading
Chinese business men and other representatives wherever he
went and they gave him a cordial welcome. On the whole
Mr. Youngman’s services were well attended and greatly ap-
preciated. In April, 1905, he was appointed Superintendent
of the Chinese Mission in North Queensland, where he worked
hard and with an appreciable degree of success. When the
Government, under the White Australia Polcy, made it diffi-
cult, even impossible, for Chinese to come to this country,
many Chinese returned to their homeland and the need for the
special services of the Church diminished, and eventually the
mission was discontinued.
In 1912 a band of women formed an Overseas Missions
Auxiliary under the presidency of Lady Rutledge, with Mrs.
Thompson as secretary, and Mrs. M. Scott-Fletcher as
treasurer. The primary object of the organisation
was to support the work of the missionary sisters
serving on all fields, but it also aimed at stimulating
missionary interest, guided especially by prayer. Without
interruption the auxiliary has met regularly throughout the
years and though the membership has changed, the purposes
remain the same. The result of the annual efforts has been
considerable in financial returns, but more in the encourage-
ment and good cheer that have been brought to the sisters


serving on the mission field. There have been four presidents
of the auxiliary—Lady Rutledge 1912-1915, Mrs. H. Toung-
man 1915-1920, Mrs. A. Douglas 1920-1935 and Miss M.
Powell, who had served as secretary for nineteen years, from
1935 until the present. The secretary, Mrs. H. R. Moore, has
occupied the position for nine years, Mrs. Ebbott has been
treasurer for eleven years, and Mrs. F. Fielding has been the
recording secretary.


.~ •*. jw.% ' V
■ ■■■ v~ j*Jj.
*** * *
■ •, v »■
• *' JSKjMMIpP ’. ■* ?j
tm «. ; ■ --niiHiwmiiiifflMiflFiffiBffiafflS^I^P^^ffi^^^raiWi^ 1^:
* ffWfgai - ’’
GARDEN SETTLEMENT
COOPER HOUSE—YOUNG WOMEN'S HOSTEL


THE LOCAL PREACHERS
No survey of Queensland Methodism would be complete
without giving due honour to the place which the local
preachers have occupied in the progress of the Church, or
without acknowledging the debt of obligation which
the Church owes to them. Their invaluable service has
been woven into the fabric of Methodism and its
spiritual worth is beyond human computation. The history,
development and quality of the Church are closely associated
with their heroic labours. An immense number of preaching
places could not have enjoyed frequent and regular ministia-
tions apart from their assistance. Many strong circuits owe
their origin to the local preachers who in loyalty to their
“call” and in obedience to Christ initiated preaching services,
and became the pioneers of the Methodist work.
The conditions in Queensland have made the work of the
local preachers unusually exacting and have called for much
sacrifice. Their appointments have necessitated long journeys
over rough roads, often in the burning heat of summer, to
preach to small congregations gathered in bush sheds and
similar unpretentious places. Without the amenities which are
calculated to inspire a preacher they have been instant in sea-
son and out of season, faithfully declaring the gospel and win-
ning souls for Christ.
The Conference of 1930 gave special consideration to local
preachers. It was recognised that to give them a place in the
annual statistical table was not enough to officially mark the
value of their work. It was therefore agreed to
give long-service certificates to all who had com-
pleted twenty-five years’ service and to present
certificates to all recruits upon their becoming fully accredited.
To Mr. W. Tyler was committed the duty of compiling a list
of preachers and of preparing chronological records.
An historic gathering was held in the Albert Street Church
on August 1st, 1930, preceded by a complimentary dinner to
local preachers. The President of the Conference, Rev. A. A.
Mills, presented certificates to the metropolitan section of 168


preachers who were eligible to receive them. Included in the
list read at the meeting were nineteen preachers who had each
completed fifty years’ service. They were W. F. Whitlock 66
years, James Bennett 61, John L. Fox 61, Arthur Morry 60,
Edwin Brooks 58, A. R. Bailey 57, G. P. Barnes 56, James
Dean 56, W. H. Drew 55, George Cox 55, James Grimmett 54,
John Fielding 52, George Willey 52, W. H. Barnes 51, Arthur
F. Kentish 50, Richard Campling 50, Henry Finch 50, J. H.
Barkell 50 and Walter Knowles 50.
The occasion marked the commencement of a new policy by
which more worthy recognition was given by Conference to the
local preacher. There is now a complete record of the par-
ticulars of service of every one, and every newly accredited
preacher is reported by the superintendent ministers to Synod.
To the secretary of the committee for seven years, Mr.
William Tyler, belongs the credit of initiating the new status
which has been given to local preachers and for many other
advantages which have established for them a
better relationship with the Church. Himself a
preacher since 1885, Mr. Tyler had a high con-
ception of the preacher’s privilege and responsibility. He was
a distinguished member of Conference and an ardent worker
in his circuit. His gifts as a preacher, his long unblemished
career in the Public Service and his splendidly consistent
Christian life commanded high respect. Upon his death in
1937, Conference paid a tribute to his labours in the interest
of local preachers.
Mr. A. J. Bradfield succeeded Mr. Tyler and for nine years
continued his work with painstaking care. He prepared a com-
plete card index with regard to relevant facts concerning every
local preacher serving with the Conference and superintended
the examination each year with the utmost fidelity. With
characteristic thoroughness and generosity he used his experi-
ence and skill to put the affairs of the local preachers upon a
sound basis. On his retirement in 1946 Conference passed the
following resolution:—
'‘Conference places on record its deep appreciation of the
excellent services rendered by Mr. A. J. Bradfield, secretary
of the local preachers’ committee, during the past nine
years. Mr. Bradfield has discharged his duties with courtesy


and devotion and Conference compliments him on the
thorough compilation of statistics and details respecting
local preachers’ records and examinations. In tendering our
best thanks we congratulate Mr. Bradfield on his approach-
ing his seventy-seventh year and pray that he may be spared
to enjoy health and blessing for many years to come.”
Mr. Frank Fielding, the present secretary, continues the
work and is rendering service which in quality and in extent
conforms to the high standards of his predecessors.
Proposals are now before the committee to recommend Con-
ference to create a local preachers’ department. It is probable
that this will be done in the near future.
METHODISM IN TWO WARS
The War of 1914-1918 seriously disturbed the organisation
of the Church throughout the State and retarded its progress.
On the other hand, it revealed the quality of ministers and
Church members by the challenge it presented to
their faith and endurance. Eligible young men
from the circuits in large numbers enlisted in the
Forces, as well as some ministers and home missionaries, while
many ministers were appointed to serve as chaplains. There
was a consequent shortage of staff, necessitating some ministers
having to care for adjacent circuits as well as their own.
The following ministers were appointed chaplains and spent
varying periods overseas: The Rev. A. C. Plane , V.D. , who
served in Egypt and Gallipoli and on his return lectured on
his experiences for the benefit of the Home Mission appeal for
Soldiers’ Rest Huts. The Rev. D. S. Brumwell , 0.8. E. who
was on duty with the 31st Battalion from September 1915 to
the end of the War. He suffered from shell shock and from
gas in France. For his long and creditable service he w T as
awarded the 0.8. E. The Rev. W. S. Bath, 8.A. , who was on
duty in Egypt and France with the 12th Infantry Brigade and
was for some time at a Training Camp on Salisbury Plain,
England. The Rev. A. A. Mills , M.C., who was attached to the
41st Battalion in France, where he distinguished himself by
special meritorious service on the field, in recognition of which
he was awarded the Military Cross. The Rev. G. W. Pitten-


Ik
_ . : . ■
"RAYMONT LODGE"— STUDENTS' HOSTEL.
Conducted by the Central Mission


drigh, who served in France and the Rev. A. E. Lapthorne, who
was in Egypt and Palestine.
Amongst the serious casualties the Revs. J. Hunter, A. W.
Wheatley and H. P. Hare were killed in action. These men
had enlisted in the ranks. Mr. Hunter was an accepted candi-
date resident at King’s College. He was a promis-
ing young man with a Scottish background and a
fine Christian experience. He served with the fam-
ous 9lh Battalion which landed on Gallipoli on April 25th,
1915. He was killed on June 28th. As a man and as a soldier
he won ihe esteem of his officers and comrades.
The Rev. A. W. Wheatley, 8.A., had completed his theologi-
cal training at Queen’s College, Melbourne, and had been
appointed to circuit work in Queensland, but in 1915 enlisted
in the A.I.F. He received his commission as a lieutenant in
France and was attached to the 9lh Battalion. He was killed
at Ypres on April 25th, 1918. Officers and men who had
known him paid tribute to his life and character. He lived a
godly life and died a hero’s death.
Ihe Rev. H. P. H are, who was received as a minister in
1905, was a man of considerable magnetic power who always
attracted large congregations. He was fearlessly outspoken on
all moral and social evils. He joined the A.I.F. and served in
Egypt, Gallipoli and France. He was commissioned as a lieu-
tenant of the Field Artillery. He was killed in battle in France
in 1916.
Other ministers who enlisted in the ranks and are now serv-
ing with the Conference are: Revs. T. Bainbridge, 8.A., C. W.
Morsley, J. Bean, R. J. R. Delbridge, W. T. Phillips, and S. G.
Monroe.
The Rev. W. Penfield Brown, a much loved minister, an
eloquent preacher and sympathetic pastor, who had served the
Church in many capacities, filled the position of camp chap-
lain in Brisbane throughout the war and continued
as a chaplain to the military hospitals until his
death in 1931. The Revs. F. J. Harris and F.
Chowns were also appointed camp chaplains.
I he Home Mission Society bore the strain of heavy costs in-
volved in maintaining chaplains in ihe local camps.
The Senior Chaplain, Rev. G. E. Rowe, V.D., gave his energy


and his gifts unsparingly in support of the chaplains and to
provide facilities for their work at home and abroad. He served
with characteristic eagerness as a chaplain on a troopship to
Egypt and back, and enjoyed the confidence of all who served
with him.
At the close of the war, on Sunday afternoon, March 2nd,
1919, a Memorial Service was held in the Albert Street
-Church, under the auspices of the Conference, for Queensland
Methodist soldiers who made the supreme sacrifice. Printed
on the order of service, a copy of which was sent to each
family, were the names of nearly 700 men who died in the
War.
The Second World War challenged the Church to a much
higher degree and demanded greater service and sacrifice. The
challenge was willingly and earnestly accepted and both minis-
ters and people shared in the national struggle for
freedom. Chaplains were appointed to the three
Services, while other ministers enlisted in the ranks
or served as welfare officers. Large numbers of young men
and women from the circuits joined the Armed Forces and the
Auxiliary Services, which sadly depleted the staffs of Sunday
schools and the youth organisations. Altogether thirty-six
Queensland ministers were engaged, including several part-
time chaplains and two Y.M.C.A. officers and three in the
ranks. Concerning the chaplains, the senior chaplain, Rev.
D. S. Brumwell, 0.8. E., E.D., in a report to Conference said:
“The Methodist Church is well represented by able ministers
who are very well received by officers and men. They are doing
a good job.”
One chaplain, the Rev. P. J. Lanham, M.A., died of illness
while on active service in Egypt. His many fine gifts were all
dedicated to the work with the troops amongst whom he exer-
cised a splendid influence. His death was a great loss to the
Queensland Conference. The Rev. Mervyn Pankhurst, a non-
commissioned officer, paid the supreme sacrifice while on ser-
vice in the Middle East. He bore a brave witness for Christ
.amongst his comrades.
The senior chaplain directed the Naval, Military and Air
Force Departments throughout the war. His experience over-


seas during the first war gave him a complete understanding
of the duties and responsibilities of the chaplains
bemoi' under his care. He also had acquired the rare art
Chaplain m # ri
of dealing effectively with the troops. Conference
of 1947 expressed appreciation to the Rev. D. S. Brumwell,
0.8. E., in the following resolution: —
“This Conference learns with regret of the impending
retirement of the State Senior Chaplain, Chaplain D. S.
Brumwell, 0.8. E., E.D., on March 31, 1947. Chaplain
Brumwell served with great distinction in World War I and
for his devotion to duty, and conspicuous services received
the Order of the British Empire. After his demobilisation
he served with great acceptance as a chaplain in the Militia
forces. On the outbreak of the Second World War, as the
Senior Chaplain of the Methodist Church he again volun-
teered for service. He was stationed in many camps and at
a Leave and Transit Depot in Brisbane. In these camps he
was able to render valuable service to chaplains of all
denominations and to the men of all ranks. His friendli-
ness and genuine interest in the welfare of the soldiers won
for him the highest esteem of officers and men in the Aus-
tralian Military Forces, his fellow chaplains and the Chap-
lain-General.
“He has rendered outstanding service to the Church and
to the Army and as he transfers to the list of retired officers
he does so with the esteem and the good wishes of the Con-
ference which he has served so loyally and so well.'’
Subsequently, the Chaplain-General requested Mr. Brum-
well to return to his position as senior chaplain (Northern
Command) which he consented to do.
The following is the list of ministers who were engaged in
war service:—
Chaplains — Army : Full time: Revs. C. A. Read, P. J. Lan-
ham, M.A., C. G. Browne, L.Th., S. T. Vickery, L.Th., C. G.
Robinson, Gordon James, M.A., 8.D., I. W. Alcorn, L.Th.,
G. D. Smith, L.Th., J. D. Gaydon, all of whom
served overseas; Revs. D. S. Brumwell, 0.8. E.,
A. E. Lapthorne, G. W. Pittendrigh, C. W. Morsley,
T. N. Deller. Revs. T. Bainbridge, 8.A., F. J. Harris, J. Tain-


lIKISIIAN t BOYS- COLLEGE, TOOWOUG


ton, 8.A., H. R. Heaton, L.Th., R. E. Bramley, L.Th., and T. C.
Toft, L.Th., part time.
Navy : Revs. C. D. Alcorn, 8.A., 8.D., and R. W. Fulcher,
M.A.
Air Force : Revs. G. Nash, 8.A., A. L. Robinson, 8.A., C.
Lanham, R. Howe, L.Th., G. C. Swain, L.Th., who gave full
time service; Revs. H. W. Prouse, T. Dent, N. H. Grimmetl,
L.Th., G. Bishop, L.Th., J. L. C. Rowley, L.Th., who gave part
time duty at the stations within the area of their circuits.
The Revs. E. A. Wells and J. Mitchell gave service as
Y.M.C.A. Welfare Officers.
In conjunction with the Presbyterian Church provision was
made, involving the capital expenditure of many thousands of
pounds, for the welfare of the men of the Armed Forces and
women of the Auxiliary Services. Huts and tents fully
equipped were erected in the camps, a hostel for men
and another for women were opened and proved to
be of immense value. A committee known as The Presbyterian
and Methodist Soldiers’ Welfare Association, with Rev. A. A.
Mills and Mr. R. S. Byrnes as joint secretaries, met regularly
to control the activities and associated with them was a ladies’
committee composed of representatives of the two Churches,
Mrs. Norman Millar being the first president, followed by
Mrs. D. S. Brumwell. In addition, a large number of ladies
from the Churches of Brisbane gave voluntray service in the
hostels every day.
A feature of the Second War was the presence of vast num-
bers of Australian service men and women and many
thousands from the United States of America encamped in
various centres throughout the State. This gave local Churches
an opportunity to provide recreational and social facilities for
them. This was done on a considerable scale. The unremitting
iabour which this involved, and the heavy cost of it, were
cheerfully borne by the circuits. The social life with the
Churches relieved the strain under which the Service people
were living and established a link with the ministry of the
Church which was a moral restraint and a means of spiritual
renewal. In many of the Churches privileged to have given
this service, the memory of the association with the Allied
Forces is a very gracious one.


MORE GLEANINGS
The Conference reports from about 1929 to 1936 indicate
the severe depression consequent on the war of 1914-1918.
This applied to all the departments of the Church, and every
report was prefaced with such phrases as: “extreme
difficulty,” “unprecedented difficulty,” “hard times,”
“serious decline.” During these years the Church
battled bravely on, meeting emergencies caused by the
depression as they came, some of them seeming almost insur-
mountable. The staff of the Book Depot was rationed, em-
ployees taking a week off in turn. The enrolments of the
secondary schools dropped and all the funds of the Church
were in a precarious condition. Reports of 1937, however,
show the gradual passing of the depression, the improvement
in the finances of the various institutions and general progress
being marked. The Conference minutes record: “The year has
been marked by considerable activity in property matters to
which prompt and careful consideration has been given. Beau-
tiful brick churches in course of erection at Bundaberg and
Cairns mark a distinct advance in Methodist building enter-
prise, and reflect great credit on all concerned.” The Confer-
ence minutes of 1939 report “remarkable financial recovery in
connection with the secondary schools during the past few
years,” and those for 1941 show record incomes for both Home
and Overseas Departments.
The Queensland Conference gratefully acknowledges the
generosity of the Victoria and Tasmania Conference and also
of the New South Wales Conference. At the General Confer-
ence held in Brisbane in 1913, the Rev. E. S. Bick-
ford, General Secretary for Home Missions in Vic-
toria, was greatly moved to learn of the peculiar
difficulties which the Queensland Home Mission Society was
facing, in view of the vastness of its territory and the inade-
quacy of its local resources. He asked what Victoria could do
to help. The reply was prompt and decisive: “We want half
a dozen young ministers to supply our circuits.” Mr. Bick-
ford’s reply was equally ready: “You shall have them, and
they shall be good men.” And they were! At a later dale


the Rev. Dr. A. T. Holden became Mr. Bickford’s successor,
and after the Conference of 1923 he met the Home Mission
committee, expressing his concern and good will. To ascer-
tain for himself the conditions in Queensland he offered his
assistance as Home Mission deputation for two months, and at
the close attended the committee meeting. He said that Queens-
land was faced with what appeared to him an impossible task.
He had noted the wide range of the mission stations and the
little wooden chapels built here and there, and on behalf of
his committee in Melbourne he ventured to offer some practical
assistance. He promised that on his return home he would con-
vene the Victorian Home Mission Committee and recommend
it to make a substantial contribution towards developmental
work. The Victorian committee not only endorsed his sug-
gestion of a gift to Queensland of £SOO, but increased it to
£I,OOO.
In 1945 the Home Mission Society of New South Wales,
realising the magnitude of the operations of the Queensland
Society and the need for opening new stations, offered to assist
by contributing £SOO a year for five years. Already with the
aid of this sum the committee has been able to initiate new
forms of service, especially in the Central West, and to extend
the work in the suburban areas of Yeronga, Enoggera and
Bardon. The visits of the Rev. A. G. Manefield, 8.A., General
Secretary of the New South Wales Home Missions Committee,
to the Queensland districts and his valuable counsel are greatly
appreciated.
*J* v; vr
In 1921, a committee of Brisbane laymen launched an
appeal —known as the Laymen’s Drive —with the object of
raising the sum of £25,000 to assist Connexional Funds. A
strong committee, with Mr. R. J. Archibald as chair-
man, Mr. E. Proctor as convener, and Mr. E. T.
Campbell as secretary and treasurer, endeavoured
to raise the money by appeals through the post and by per-
sonal visits to circuits in the metropolitan area. This was not
satisfactory; the time it demanded was beyond the ability of
the committee to give. The Rev. B. Frederick was, therefore,
invited to assist as the organising secretary. For three years
he devoted his whole time to the work with much zeal. His


meetings were of an inspirational nature and he aimed
primarily at deepening the spiritual life of the Churches. His
powers of exposition, his evangelical fervour and magnetic
personality which had always been evident in his ministry,
were probably never more effectively employed than in con-
nection with the Laymen’s Drive. The Rev. R. E. Bacon, who
was at that time engaged in building up the Schools at Charters
Towers, co-operated with the committee by visiting the North-
ern circuits on behalf of the Drive.
The final result was not as good as was expected but great
spiritual graces had been secured. Of the £15,000 received,
after providing for expenses, £13,250 was distributed as fol-
lows: Connexional Properties £3,980; Secondary Schools
(Brisbane) £4,720, (Charters Towers) £1,312; Home Mis-
sions, £1,990; King’s College, £1,235.
The committee presented its final report to the Conference
of 1926 and was accorded a vote of thanks expressing the
appreciation of the Church.


PART 111
Circuits and Stations
The following Notes have been compiled from information
supplied by circuit ministers. They are not intended to be
exhaustive, but only to indicate the origin and, to some extent,
the development of the work. Reading between the lines, how-
ever, one may realise the volume of service, the sacrifice and
devotion of faithful ministers, local preachers, Church officials
and other workers, whom God has used and blessed. Some
circuits can boast of little development, owing to the fixed
population of the districts in which they are situated. Here
the work is as valuable and as effective as in the cities; the
numerical strength of the membership or of the finances is not
always an index of the spiritual influence of the ministry
afforded by any circuit. No one can read these notes with-
out being profoundly impressed by the enthusiasm for expan-
sion which has been consistently shown by the Conference and
supported by the districts.
CHAPTER I
THE BRISBANE DISTRICT
Methodism began here with a series of prayer meetings fol-
lowed by a Sunday School. In 1856 a small church was built,
largely through the efforts of the Rev. Nathaniel Turner. The
second church, now used as the Sunday School, was
a ey built in 1871. This building, capable of seating 400
people, was the centre of considerable activity and the scene of
great spiritual prosperity. It was the first church in a large
circuit, embracing Eagle Farm, Nundah and Sandgate. The
land, which was extensive, was a Crown grant; a good deal of
it was subsequently sold. In 1886 a movement began under
the ministry of the Rev. J. H. Nolan, to build the present
beautiful church. It was opened in 1888 at a cost of £6,000.


e f;' ■ ‘ ; ‘f v "': 7 '/I
I
■ 5' " i
| ■ mmi ’ : * '•'i lifim’n'ififiiitfiiuuuLj ■miW '
| ’, ” " S I ||||| iSIII
® i s . . U||
.■■ 9 mHb jmt ,Av - t
SOMERVILLE HOUSE
Girls' High School, Brisbane
BLACKHEATH COLLEGE, CHARTERS TOWERS
THORNBOROUGH COLLEGE, CHARTERS TOWERS


The large parsonage costing £2,800 was erected in 1885. The
Valley Circuit continued to grow until it included a district as
far northwards as Pine River. The new church greatly im-
proved the status of Methodism in Brisbane and it became
for a time the leading city church with a large and influential
membership. From here many suburban churches were
opened which became centres of new circuits.
The Valley has an honoured history and it has been one
of the most connexional of all the circuits. Associated with its
membership have been men and women who embodied and ex-
pressed the true spirit of Methodism and who served the
Church with great devotion. Amongst them may be mentioned
Dawson Robinson, John Massey, E. Chapman, B. M. Brookes,
H. F. Fox, John McMaster, G. Rilat, T. Curphey, Hon. James
Cowlishaw, Hon. John Archibald, Hon. E. W. H. Fowles,
George Down, John Nock and A. Hollingworth, whose recent
lamented death followed soon after the loss of two splendid
sons in the war.
A new policy was introduced by the Conference of 1927,.
when the Valley was constituted a Mission and with it was as-
sociated the Home Missionaries’ Training Institution. The
Rev. B. Frederick was appointed to superintend both branches
of the work. His experience in many circuits where he was
eminently successful, and his intimate knowledge of the needs
of Home Mission stations, as well as his intellectual and
spiritual endowments, enabled him to discharge the dual posi-
tion with distinction. The Conference of 1947 temporarily
suspended the training of home missionaries at the Institu-
tion. The present superintendent of the mission is therefore
able to concentrate his attention upon creating a Christian
community centre. Plans are in hand to provide the necessary
facilities for this purpose.
The Brunswick Street Church was originally the centre of
Primitive Methodism in Brisbane. The work was commenced
in the atmosphere of a revival in 1861 when a small building
was established in Windmell Street. In 1876,
through the enterprise and labours of the Rev.
Wm. Powell, the present church was opened. Foundation
stones were laid by the Rev. Dr. S. Antcliff (an official visitor
from the British Conference), Messrs. W. Dart, Moses Ward


and D. McIN aught. The Rev. Robert Hartley officiated at the
opening ceremonies. The school hall was erected during the
ministry of the Rev. F. A. Malcolm in 1936. It is noteworthy
that the Fortitude Valley Penny Savings Bank, the only one of
its kind now functioning in the State, was opened in 1886.
The first deposit was made by a boy named Alfred Bennett,
who is now the secretary!
Kings holme began with open-air meetings conducted by a
few earnest Christians, amongst whom were some Methodists.
Then followed regular cottage meetings—an interesting feature
of Christian witness in the early days. In 1870 it was decided
to build an undenominational mission hall, which became the
centre of revival services that led to many conversions. The
Methodists eventually became responsible for the services at
this hall, under the auspices of the Valley Circuit. As a result
of the overtures of the supporters of the work, the hall became
Methodist property. The present church, which is largely the
outcome of the devotion and generosity of Dr. and Mrs. E. W.
H. Fowles, was opened in 1927. The cost was £3,400 and the
property was very soon free of debt. The names of Dr. and
Mrs. Fowles, Mr. and Mrs. A. J. Bradfield, Mr. and Mrs. F.
Lather are amongst those to whom the success of the Methodist
work at this place is due.
In 1867 the Rev. Wm. Woolcock, a Bible Christian minister,
•arrived in Brisbane under instructions to commence the work
of that church in Queensland. The first meeting place, a shop
in South Brisbane, was destroyed by fire. Brickyards
had been established at The Oval (near the present
Kelvin Grove Military drill grounds) and Mr. Wool-
cock saw an opportunity for his enterprise in the surrounding
population. Sunday School was conducted in the most primi-
tive manner, logs being used for seats. A block of land was
secured and the church erected by Mr. Sylvanus White (a
nephew of Mr. Woolcock) who later became a Wesleyan
Methodist. Mr. Woolcock worked from this base and later
built churches at Seventeen Mile Rocks, Brookfield, Moggill
and Ironsides—the means of transport being a horse and a
boat. On “Quarter Day” the officials gathered to transact the
business of the circuit, Messrs. Richard Rayment, Richard Mid-
dleton, Charles Pitty, Pollard, C. W. Gregory, Fulcher, Wm.


Dart, Mills, Brimblecombe, Yallance, Makepeace, Collum,
Joblin and Deller being among the number. Among those
who were the mainstay of the Oval were the Newman, Hancox,
Moon, Thomas, Suffolk, Bell, Free, Walker, Milliner, Stone
and Clark families. Mr. D. W. Thomas was the superintendent
of the Sunday School.
About 1880 Mr. Woolcock secured a large block of land fac-
ing Clifton Terrace and the first section of the present church
was built. A small building was erected at the corner of Enog-
gera Road and Davidson Street, Kelvin Grove, in 1883. This
was later moved to the back of the allotment to make way for
the present Kelvin Grove Church in 1914. These Bible Chris-
tian Churches united with the Wesleyan Methodists in 1896.
Herstan , another church in the circuit, was once the first Primi-
tive Methodist Church in Adelaide Street. It was removed to
the present site and opened in 1923. Previously Sunday School
had been conducted in private homes.
Both the Primitives and Wesleyans were early in com-
mencing activities in this district. The Primitives built a
church attached to the Leichhardt Street Church. The Wes-
leyans began in a tent but they built a church in
1875. The church was for some time in the
Albert Street Circuit. After Methodist Union the Rev. W. H.
Harrison was the superintendent minister with the Rev. H. M.
Wheller as probationer. The two churches, Primitive and
Wesleyan, were combined to form the present buildings. The
Latrobe Terrace Church —originally a Primitive Methodist
cause —began in a tent in 1896 and later a church was opened.
The oldest record of Torwood Church, dated May 7th, 1891,
shows it was in the Primitive Methodist Circuit of Leichhardt
Street under the superintendency of the Rev. Wm. Smith. This
church has done effective work. A new preaching place,
opened in the growing suburb of Bardon is full of promise.
Kennedy Terrace Church , which of itself constitutes this cir-
cuit, sprang from a Sunday school conducted by Mr. Wm.
Cricks and Miss Jane Buchanan (later Mrs. F. J. Harris) at
Latrobe Terrace, at Mrs. Barron’s residence, com-
menced in May 1883. As the school grew it was trans-
ferred to a bush house at Primrose Park, the property of Mr.
John Stack, father of Mrs. H. M. Wheller. Church services


were also held here. Part of the present church site at Ken-
nedy Terrace was purchased and a small building opened in
March 1884. Additions were made in 1885, 1886 and 1903.
This was a part of the Albert Street Circuit until 1890 when
the circuit was divided into three—Albert Street, Toowong
and Enoggera—Kennedy Terrace was included in the Enog-
gera Circuit. In 1896 the Bible Christian churches at Clifton
Terrace and Kelvin Grove were added to the circuit. In 1905
Clifton Terrace, Kelvin Grove and Samford churches became
the Clifton Terrace Circuit; and Kennedy Terrace, with Pad-
dington, the Ithaca Circuit. In 1907 the Leichhardt Street,
Paddington, Latrobe Terrace, Torwood and The Gap churches
were added to the Ithaca Circuit. In 1908 Conference separated
the Kennedy Terrace section of the circuit from the Padding-
ton, grouping with it Grove Estate, The Gap and Samford. The
last alteration of boundaries came in 1924 when Kennedy
Terrace became a single-church circuit. The present substan-
tial brick church was opened in 1920 at a cost of £2,283, Mr.
Lange L. Powell, son of the Rev. Wm. Powell, being the archi-
tect. Mr. W. T. Abraham was choir conductor for fifty-three
years; Mr. P. W. Fulcher was organist for thirty-eight years
and his youngest son, Ronald, has succeeded him in that posi-
tion. No record of Kennedy Terrace would be complete with-
out reference to the long, faithful, and unstinted service given
by Mr. and Mrs. F. G. Harris and Mr. and Mrs. J. B. Lugg.
Rev. F. J. Harris, Rev. Robert Fulcher, M.A., and Rev. R.
Woodgate, 8.A., B.Ed., were all boys in the Kennedy Terrace
Church.
The work began here with the formation of a Sunday school.
On Sunday, June 21st, 1891, thirteen children gathered at the
residence of Mr. W. Ross, under the superintendency of Mr.
W. Cricks. During the first year the number of
scholars increased to thirty-nine and the teachers
to eight. Regular Sunday services were introduced by the Rev.
T. Ellison of the Paddington Circuit in 1892. A small hall at
Windsor Road was bought and erected in Harry Street. Grove
Estate, but some years later it was removed to its present site
and additional accommodation was provided. The locality
has shown remarkable progress in recent years and has become
one of the most closely settled suburbs of Brisbane. This has


necessitated extensive alterations to the church, including the
addition of an upper and a lower hall. Amongst the workers
have been Messrs. A. Muntz, Howard Daniels, W. Evans, New-
man, F. G. Harris, E. E. Parker and Klomas.
The church has an honourable record of service, and many
workers in other circuits received their early religious training
at Ashgrove.
The cause at West Ashgrove , now a flourishing centre, had
modest beginnings in 1929. Miss Margaret Fraser then con-
ducted a small Sunday school at Embassy Hall. The church
was built in 1931 when the suburb was still in its initial stage.
Various activities were introduced, largely through the vision
and faith of the early workers. Now, however, the church is
surrounded by a large population and the enterprise of the
pioneers has been fully justified. The Gap Church is meeting
the needs of an area that is still rural. In 1873, services were
commenced by the Rev. J. Buckle, who organised the work in
connection with the building of a church.
The foundation services, initiated by the Rev. Wm. Powell,
of the Primitive Methodist Church, at Toowong were held in
January 1878, under a large gum tree in Church Street. Dur-
ing one Sunday a storm broke and Mr. Wm. Richter
(late Baptist minister) invited the congregation into
his home. Services were held there until the Primitive Metho-
dist Church was built in 1876. Often the services were taken
by local preachers, the most faithful of them being Mr. Col-
ledge, father of Mr. G. M. Colledge, who walked from Roma
Street to conduct the services. The Albert Street quarterly
meeting decided to erect a Wesleyan Church at Toowong, and
it was built on the present site for £3OO in 1879. Messrs. J. S.
Bennett and C. Highfield were instrumental in securing a big
proportion of the cost.
In connection with the jubilee services of Queensland
Methodism in 1897, united services of the two churches were
held, and the first united trustees' meeting took place in Sep-
tember 1898. Those present were: Revs. W. Dinning and J.
Prowse, Messrs. W. Busby, C. H. Schuntner, G. Richards,
F. W. Wales, S. Earle, J. L. Wool, G. Watkins, J. Cross, H. Dar-
lington, George Melton and W. H. Knowles. Other members
and splendid supporters of the church in the early years were


*
■
E . . ■- ■
CLAYFIELD COLLEGE, BRISBANE
GRACEVILLE CHURCH


Messrs. C. Fletcher, T. H. Brown, J. W. Todd, A. E. Vi ills, G.
Rose, D. Guyatt, G. Prosser, J. T. Badger, S. Ewing, W. M.
King, F. Cross, P. Peachey, J. B. Ward, H. Robinson, Mrs.
Craker and the Misses Beaton.
Noteworthy has been the service rendered by Messrs. F. W.
Brookes, J. Evans, W. Richards, G. C. Bailey, F. H. Hopkins
and George Watkins —a great friend of the circuit and a leader
in the larger interests of the Conference. Of more recent years
the names of Messrs. G. M. Colledge (choir conductor), C. F.
Siemon, J. Ure, E. T. Campbell, W. J. Trotter, H. M. Cook,
J. Pickering, J. Fanham, Bruce Poole, W. H. Brown and
A. L. Bennett, K.C., have been associated with the history of
Toowong.
From Toowong have come Rev. Percy Fanham, M.A. (who
died in the Middle East when a chaplain during the 1939-45
war), Rev. Clifford W. Fanham (of the Inland Mission), Rev.
Arthur Meadmore; and Miss M. Jenkins and Miss Jacobs, both
of whom served with Overseas Missions.
The foresight and initiative of the Rev. C. T. Copeland was
largely responsible for the erection of the pretty little church
at Auchen flower in 1910. This was the only church in the
growing suburb for some years and was attended by all
denominations. Mr. V. Price was the first Sunday school
superintendent and Mrs. W. H. Harrison, wife of the Rev.
W. H. Harrison, was the first president of the Ladies Church
Help Society. Eater the building was raised to make accom-
modation for the Sunday school underneath. On October 7th,
1939, the building was totally destroyed by fire, and in 1940
the new church was opened —a commodious and attractive
building with a large hall beneath.
Early members who still are actively engaged in the work are
Mr. J. Mackay and Mrs. Mackay (formerly Miss Freeman, a
member of one of the foundation families), Mr. and Mrs. Dun-
can Mackay, Mr. and Mrs. A. K. Chapman and their
Mrs. Holt, Mrs. Molineaux (for many years church organist)
and Miss Major. Other workers are Mr. J. H. Stokoe (super-
intendent of the Sunday school), Mr. and Mrs. May, Mrs.
McLeod, Mrs. G. Shelton and Mrs. R. Keating (daughter and
granddaughter of the Rev. W. H. Harrison), Mr. and Mrs.
Gregory and Mrs. G. F. Pike.


Rainworih was begun in a small way, the church being re-
moved from Laidley Creek. Recently improvements have been
made to the building.
The oldest church in the Indooroopilly Circuit is situated at
Brookfield. The first services were held in the home of Mr.
and Mrs. Laws, Mrs. Laws starting a Sunday school in 1869.
Revs. W. Woolcock and B. Rounsefell, Bible
Christians, were the first ministers. Mr. Barnett
gave three acres of land and a church was built. The building
became too small for the congregations and the present church
was erected, the old building being removed to the recreation
ground, where it is used as a public hall.
The Indooroopilly church dates from 1872, and owes its
origin to the activities of a Primitive Methodist minister, Rev.
Joseph Buckle, whose relatives, Mrs. J. Buckle and daughter
Muriel, are now active workers. Five acres of land were pur-
chased from the Government and the chief workers for the
erection of the church were Messrs. J. Graham, J. Russell and
J. Frost. Later, land was acquired in Moggill Road and a
church and parsonage were erected. During the 1914-1918
war, land was secured at the corner of Station and Musgrave
Roads and the Anzac Memorial Church, a fine brick building,
was built in 1919. The parsonage in Grosvenor Road was built
in 1926 and the hall in 1930. The present church was built
by Mr. John Bradley, who though now eighty-seven still
attends the church, and his daughter is the organist. The church
at Chapel Hill was built by the Primitives in 1874. A ceme-
tery is attached to this church. Church workers through the
years have included Messrs. E. E. Richards, J. Graham, J.
Bradley, E. Ferriday and Mesdames A. Jones and J. Pryde.
The Taringa church has the largest membership in the cir-
cuit. The first Primitive Methodist Church was built in Mon-
trose Road in 1887. The present building was erected by Mr.
John Bradley in 1898, who incorporated the original building
in the new structure. In early years it was part of the Albert
Street Circuit and later it was associated with Toowong. The
Sunday school, now under the superintendency of Mr. C. C.
Clifford, is one of the largest in Queensland. A prayer meet-
ing is held every Sunday night after the church service.
The land on which the Toowong Reach church is built in


Ryan Road, was given by the “Courier-Mail” proprietors on
condition that it be named the Toowong Reach Church. The
building was opened in May 1915, one of the principal
workers being Mrs. D. Guyatt. Messrs. J. Wagner and David
Guyatt were secretary and treasurer of the trust respectively,
and Mrs. A. Hess the organist.
In January 1946, Mr. H. S. Gresham, of Chelmer, gave a
block of land to the Church at Upper Brookfield. A good
Sunday school and Band of Hope, both conducted by Miss D.
Dart, have been commenced and monthly services are held.
The earliest minute book of this church records the follow-
ing: “On Friday evening, October Bth, 1886, and within the
house of Mr. Thomas Johnston, a meeting was held accord-
ing to appointment at 7.30 o’clock, the object of
which was to ascertain what steps be taken, if
possible, to start a new place of worship in the district, the
same to be immediately connected with the Wesleyan Metho-
dist Church and attached to the South Brisbane Circuit of that
Church.”
Mr. T. Payne, affectionately known as “Father Payne,” a
loyal member of the Methodist Church, was the chairman of
this meeting. The Revs. Halse Rogers and B. Dinning were
present and advised that land be secured for church purposes.
A committee was appointed whose duty it was to take the
necessary steps to carry out the decisions of the meeting. This
committee comprised Thomas Payne, 0. Judd, A. E. Appleton,
T. Johnston, W. Wood, T. G. Johnston, J. Johnston, W. Warnes
and J. Shanks. It was decided to commence a Sunday school
at once, Mr. J. Shanks being appointed superintendent.
Before a month had passed a hall had been secured, at a
rental of £4 per annum, in which to hold services and a Sun-
day school, and one meeting each week, presumably a class
meeting. The opening Sunday was October 24th, 1886, when
the response was most gratifying and encouraging. Shortly
after this it was decided to build a church. In May 1887, the
contract of Mr. T. Johnston to build a church for £l2O was
accepted. It was a small building, twenty-two feet long and
twenty feet wide. The opening took place on September 4th
amid much enthusiasm.
In 1903 Sherwood became a circuit and proposals were con-


sidered to build a new and adequate church on a central site.
The present site was first secured and steps were taken to erect
a concrete building. The opening took place during the minis-
try of the Rev. William Brown on September 12th, 1914. The
church has been blessed with devout faithful workers, amongst
whom may be mentioned John Moffatt, J. Tainton, Miss Nos-
worthy, T. Payne, H. Evans, E. Jarrott, T. J. Holland, J. J.
King, W. H. Jones, A. E. Hoskin, A. Richards, A. Trevaskas, E.
Brown, S. Castlehow, T. Fielding and F. Fielding, together
with their families. Many of these have passed to their reward;
others remain to carry on the work. An excellent hall built in
1918 was enlarged in 1933 and provision made for a decen-
tralised Sunday school.
A hall was opened at Graceville in 1917, but the present
beautiful church in perpendicular Gothic style was the result
of the interest, foresight, and liberality of Mr. Walter Taylor,
who also designed and built it. A school hall of similar
design, now in course of erection, is also the outcome of the
initiative of Mr. Taylor.
Adjacent to the Sherwood Circuit and under the direction of
its quarterly meeting is the Dana Home Mission Station.
Several churches in this station were preaching places in the
Primitive Methodist West End Circuit, before Methodist Union.
The first services were held at Darra in 1914, and the church
was built ten years later. In the same year Oxley became a
preaching centre and a church was built there in 1931.
This circuit is comprised of three churches situated in the
suburbs of Windsor, Wilston and Grange. Two of the
churches —Windsor and Wilston —were formerly part of the
Valley Circuit. In 1922 they were constituted a
separate circuit. Windsor church had its beginning
in 1887 when the Mission Band of the Valley Circuit began
holding open air meetings at Swan Hill. Soon a small house
was secured and used for services and a Sunday school. The
work progressed and a desire to erect a church was expressed
by the people. Land was purchased and a church built in
Swan Terrace. On August 11th, 1889, during the ministry of
the Rev. R. Dyson, the church was opened. During the flood
of 1893 the building was used as a refuge by people rendered
temporarily homeless.


In 1903, through the efforts of the Rev. Dr. Stewart, the
church was removed to its present site, corner of Green Ter-
race and Newmarket Road, and a trust was formed with James-
A. Rigby secretary, and Thomas Hossack treasurer. Additions
were made to the building in 1905 and in 1918, and in recent
years two memorials were erected —a platform to the memory
of Thomas Chapman and a porch to that of Matthew and
James A. Rigby.
Wilston church had its beginning about the year 1913. An
area of land was donated on which the church now stands at
the corner of Hawdon Street and Kedron Brook Road. Mr.
Shields had been for some time conducting a Sunday school in
his home near the church site. Services also had been held
there. In 1913 permission to build was granted by the Con-
ference Property Committee and tenders were called for the
erection of the church building. The amount of the accepted
tender was £450. The church was opened by the President of
Conference, Rev. Richard Dunstan, on October 25th, 1913.
Of the foundation trustees only two survive, and of these, one
only, Mr. R. D. Chapman, is now associated with the trust.
After the first World War the settlement of families near
the church increased greatly, with a correspondingly rapid in-
crease in the number of members and adherents and a quicken-
ing of church interest generally.
As a tangible memorial to the services rendered to the
Nation by young men and women of the congregation in the
second World War, the trustees in 1944 decided to erect a new
church, the building to be of brick.
Grange Heights. The commencement of the Methodist
cause in this district dates back to September 1931, when a
Sunday school was opened in the home of Mr. and Mrs. M.
Ferguson, with Miss J. Madge as superintendent. The pioneer
work for this was done by Mr. Kentish who canvassed the dis-
trict for scholars. On the removal of Mr. and Mrs. Ferguson
from the district in 1932 the Sunday school was transferred to
the home of Mr. and Mrs. R. C. Werry. In August 1932, ser-
vices also were begun in their home. The first service was
conducted by Mr. Thomas Murray. The progress made by the
Sunday school and the growing attendance at the services
demanded increased accommodation. In August 1933, a hall


a
WESLEY CHURCH, BRISBANE
ELLENBOROUGH STREET CHURCH, IPSWICH


situated at Progress Parade, Alderley, was purchased and
dedicated to its sacred purposes by the President of Confer'
ence, the Rev. H. A. Denny. In 1925 the circuit was raised to
the status of a married minister’s circuit and a commodious
house, situated in Montpelier Street, Wilston, was purchased
for a parsonage.
In 1945, under the direction of the Rev. E. J. Taylor, a
scheme for building a substantial church costing £3,200, was
launched. This challenged the interest and enthusiasm of the
people and with great joy they responded. In November
i 946, the building, well equipped with a beautiful sanctuary,
school hall and committee rooms, was opened for worship. It
reflects credit both on the minister and on the people.
4 he Rev. Wm. Powell opened a Primitive Methodist Church
here in 1879. It would appear that the cause developed
slowly. With the increase in the population in the suburb, the
church became stronger and more aggressive. In
1925 the present Enoggera Circuit was constituted,
and included Upper Kedron , Samford , and Camp Mountain ,
In 1935 Oakleigh church was opened. The Rev. H. R. Heaton
has launched a forward movement in this now progressive
suburb. Many forms of community service have been intro-
duced, and it is intended to conduct the work of the church on
entirely new lines. A large building programme is being car-
ried out throughout the circuit, including a new church at
Mitchelton Heights which it is estimated will cost over £2,000.
New preaching places have been opened at Everton Park and
Oxford Park. Many earnest souls have stood loyally to the cir-
cuit in days of difficulty and helped to make possible the
present prosperity; amongst them were Messrs. F. Slaughter,
S. J. Lugg, R. H. Carlyon, James Gibson, L. F. B. Hartshorn,
George Hemingway and W. F. Fanham.
In 1873 a few Methodists, who had been for some time wor-
shipping in a private house at Futwyche, decided to build a
church. A committee was organised under the direction of
the Rev. John Gardiner, superintendent of the
Valley Circuit. After much work and sacrifice a
sand-brick church was built. Through the generosity of Mr. J.
Rees, who donated the land, and the proprietors of a number of
brick kilns in the district, the cost of the church was only £341.


At the opening ceremony £125 remained to be paid. This
amount was soon raised and the property remained free from
debt for many years. The trustees of the church were Messrs.
John McMaster, J. Rees, W. Hopkins, W. H. Griggs, and J.
Hewlett. Amongst the ministers who officiated at the church
were the Revs. W. Woolcock and F. T. Brentnall.
The church was the centre of a very gracious influence as
part of the Valley Circuit and later of the Wooloowin Circuit,
but subsequently it became a separate circuit. During the
ministry of the Rev. R, S. C. Dingle the present church was
built in 1925, the total cost being £3,000. Mr, J. Currie, a
trustee and a member of the church for many years, both
designed and erected the building. The President of the Con-
ference, Rev. Wm. Little, officiated at the opening ceremony on
August 10th, 1925. In 1927 the parsonage was built and a
year later a large school hall was erected. Messrs. H. G.
McPhail, F. Allwood, J. Currie, A. M. and W. A. Jolly, M.
Russell have helped to maintain fine Methodist traditions in
the circuit.
The Gordon Park church was opened during the ministry of
the Rev. H. W. Prouse in 1929. The district is rapidly develop-
ing and hopes are entertained that Methodism in the area will
he well supported.
Methodism was established in this prosperous suburb under
the direction of the Lutwyche Circuit. The Rev. R. S. C.
Dingle, assisted by a few earnest Methodists, amongst whom
were Mr. J. Packer, Snr., Mr. and Mrs. J. Packer,
Jnr., and Mr. and Mrs. Eric Greenwood, engaged a
picture theatre where a Sunday school was opened and public
worship held for a year, commencing on April 26, 1925, the
Rev. S. J. R. Murr being the preacher. The work prospered
so well that land was acquired and the present commodious
hall erected. It was officially opened in May 1926, by the
Rev. Dr. A. T. Holden, C.8.E., B.A. Amongst the first trustees
were Messrs. J. Packer, Eric Greenwood, J. Taylor, and P.
Stone. Mr. Packer was elected treasurer, in which position and
in other spheres of service he has served the church with sin-
cere devotion. Other trustees who were appointed shortly
afterwards were Messrs. E. J. Jones and J. R. Parnicott, both


of whom have given splendid service to the church through
many years.
Conference of 1928 constituted Kedron a separate circuit
together with Chermside and Stafford. In 1935 a modern par-
sonage was built to accommodate the first married minister to
to be appointed to the circuit.
Services were held at Chermside in 1873. Mr. T. A. Hamil-
ton, now in his eighty-seventh year and the senior member of
the church, recalls that his father, mother, two sisters and him-
self settled in the district in 1870. There were few settlers in
the area then; however, a Sunday school was opened in an
empty cottage and Christian work began. In 1873 the United
Methodist Free Church undertook to conduct a weekly service
in the cottage, until in 1877 a small church was built. In 1884
it was supplied by the Bible Christian preachers and a year
later the Wesleyans made it a preaching place. After this it
again became the responsibility of the United Methodists.
Finally the Wesleyans agreed to exercise permanent oversight
and incorporated the church in the Nundah Circuit. It was
attached to the Lutwyche Circuit in 1926 and the building was
removed to the present site and renovated. From that time the
church has had uninterrupted prosperity and it has been the
centre of a gracious Christian fellowship.
Stafford was a United Methodist Church. For many years
it was almost hidden by dense bush and the population of the
area was small. It is now one of the most prosperous suburbs
with a rapidly increasing population. It is proposed to build
a new church, costing £3,000 to accommodate the increasing
congregations and to provide facilities for the various activi-
ties amongst young people. Mr. W. Moor and Mr. J. Boot
have loyally supported the work at Stafford and now have the
satisfaction of knowing that their loyalty through many try-
ing years was fully justified.
The Wooloowin church was established in 1902 by the
Valley Circuit, under the direction of the Rev. Dr. R. Stewart,
with the Rev. W. S. Bath, 8.A., then a probationer, as the
minister in charge. It became the spiritual home
for the Methodists of the district who, until then,
travelled either to Nundah or to the Valley on Sundays for
worship. Amongst the foundation members were: Messrs.


T. J. Marrison, G. I. Bourne, J. Hulett, J. J. King, W. M. King,
S. Knowles and J. T. Smith.
In 1908 Wooloowin, together with Lutwyche and Albion,
became a separate circuit, with the Rev. J. Bowes as superin-
tendent and Messrs. G. I. Bourne, and T. J. Marrison as
stewards. In 1921 Lutwyche and Albion were constituted a cir-
cuit, leaving Wooloowin the only church in the circuit.
Throughout its history Wooloowin has been the centre of a
spiritual work whose influence has spread far and wide. The
Church has encouraged a deep interest in missions and year
by year the people have made generous contributions to both
the Home and Overseas Societies. In other directions also the
Church has shown a connexional spirit and some of its officers
have been engaged in connexional duties. The Revs. L. T.
Vickery, 8.A., and S. T. Vickery, L.Th., were called to the
ministry from this Church, whilst many who received their
early religious training at Wooloowin are to be found working
in other circuits in the State.
Messrs. T. J. Marrison, G. I. Bourne, J. T. Smith, J. F. Beet,
A. J. Littledike, A. W. Lind, F. Davis, T. F. Maguire, W. J.
Duus, C. S. Nichols, J. Hulett, P. J. Ebbott, S. S. Carver, F.
Vickery, S. Cooper and M. Macdonald have occupied re-
sponsible positions in the circuit and together with their
families have served the Church in many departments.
The Albion Church began as a mission at Breakfast Creek
where services and a Sunday school were held in a hall. Public
response to the ministry of the Church was not encouraging
and it was decided to establish the work in another part of the
district. Accordingly the present site in Little Street was
secured and the church opened in 1912. In 1921 Albion joined
with Lutywche to form a new circuit. In 1944 it was once
again included in the Wooloowin Circuit. Mr. A. Rix was an
official upon whom rested the responsibility for the work in the
Breakfast Creek area and to him sincere praise is due. Messrs.
W. Rowland, W. Maxwell and J. Redfern, helped to sustain
the work at Albion. Messrs. James Allen, Jack Marken and S.
Green are continuing the good work of their predecessors in
office. The present circuit stewards are Messrs. W. A. Little
and R. F. Walters.
The oldest church in this circuit is at Eagle Farm. There is


available an authentic record of its being re-opened in 1858
as a new Wesleyan Church, “A neat, substantial, well elevated,
_ . hardwood building.” It is assumed that this build-
Hamilton , , . , . ,
mg had been erected in a settlement at Pagle r arm
for convict women and had been used probably by the Church
of England. When the convict settlement was closed there was
no further use for the building and it was transferred to the
Methodists in 1858. The re-opening was conducted by the
Rev. H. Parkinson, the trustees being Messrs. Henry Jordan,
James Sutherland, John L. Zillman, William Mason, George
Robinson, John Lancaster, George Appel and William
Brookes.
The Hamilton church was built in May 1911 in a rising
suburb. It was renovated and modernised, and a commodious
school hall was erected and opened in November 1931, as a
memorial to the late Mrs. W. H. Green. A parsonage was built
in 1926 to accommodate the first married minister to be ap-
pointed in the circuit. Mr. W. H. Green has been secretary of
trustees for twenty-one years. Rev. A. W. Preston was a candi-
date from this church and other young people now engaged in
Christian service in other parts of the State were led to know
Christ through the gracious influence of the fellowship of this
church. The modern church at Hendra was built under the
leadership of the Rev. T. Bainbridge, 8.A., in 1927, and in
1938 a school hall was added. This church owes much to the
devoted service of Mr. J, Chapman. An attractive church at
Myrtletown serves the farming community there. Rev. F.
Buchholz was a member of this church and an ardent worker
when he offered himself as a candidate for the ministry. Hamil-
ton was constituted a circuit in 1913. Previously the three
churches had been part of the Nundah Circuit.
The Rev. Wm. Moore attended his first meeting at Zion's
Hill (afterwards called Nundah) when he arrived to establish
Methodism in Brisbane, on October 17th, 1847. He was wel-
comed by warm-hearted Christians who had come
from Germany to conduct a Mission amongst the
aborigines. The mission failed but some of the missionaries
remained at the settlement and engaged in farming. Amongst
these people Mr. Moore and his successors held regular Metho-
dist services. A union church was erected jointly by the


wwfeftii • w -•" • • • # •■ M lllw■ - ; Pill ill
■pirn' s ■>>'^W^tf^^^^^y!‘. , .'.v.w>>:- , '''>‘ !'*' 1 to w ''wJS
" ■"■■ ■ ’ M Wmxffi&iMM: ||a
x. : y TWT
ImUlg mmMmiRnvm m £..,. f &
'No
TO»V V ■vSss£C£ ' ■ •'•>X'.%vyjPl^^tKvtSpp^^^yMwSSutOTPCVySS^^flPWQl
■•^•%'-' ; ' :; ' m ® I i
jWfcCv , > cttoW!■ iv/Xv!• wX- ;8;vXv vi'x'ffi*/ ™ —
tSRsvC*. • vXwvSv -Xw?!*'- XXv*' •■• % ‘w*' n > .•XwS»s3W>
MOOtogO *• vhflgv - vwv XKv •«•••*•'■ > ®*-'<^ s%w>v> ‘ >v - v '‘-' ,, X-■■•■ ‘ v!w?wWJ
NORTHGATE CHURCH
BRIGHTON CHURCH


Lutherans and Methodists, but in 1859 the Methodists built a
church for their own use on land donated by Mr. J. L. Zillman.
In 1867 the Brisbane Circuit was divided and Zion Hill (also
known as German Station) was included in the Valley Circuit.
Then the population increased, the building was removed to a
site on the Sandgate Road. The trustees of this property were
pioneer laymen whose service contributed much to the growth
of Methodism in the State. They were J. McMaster, G. Atthow,
E. Bennison, J. Rode and W. A. Noble.
In 1882, during the ministry of the first resident minister at
iSundah, the Rev. G. 0. Cocks, the present church was opened
and four years later a parsonage was built. The Nundah Cir-
cuit was constituted in 1894.
The church has been indebted for its consistent prosperity to
staunch laymen, amongst whom must be mentioned W. B. and
J. Robinson, A. H. Outridge, G. Atthow, E. J. Jones, R. Westa-
cott, A. Wagner, J. A. Fox, G. A. Ferguson and E. Proctor,
i outh activities have always been a feature at Nundah and its
success has been due to the service of such well-known workers
as J. A. J. Ferguson, H. V. Walker, R. B. Jensen, E. A. Brig-
house, W. J. Buckle, A. J. Adcock, T. A. Stoddart, Miss J.
Vagner and Miss A. Moxey. Mr. E. A. Brighouse, the choir
conductor since 1928, maintains a fine tradition.
The Nudgee church dates from 1889 when the first building
was erected. The present well-equipped church was opened
free of debt in 1927. Mr. and Mrs. W. F. Schulz have given
inspiring leadership to this church.
Services were commenced at Northgate in the home of Mr.
and Mrs. W. B. Robinson in 1914. The church, one of the
most attractive in Brisbane, was built in 1928. A vigorous
and effective work has been conducted here.
At Crihh Island , services were held in the home of Mr. and
Mrs. Jackson until a church was opened in 1918. Wavell
Heights , a new and thriving suburb, is the most recent area to
be provided with the ordinances of the church. A fine hall has
been erected and all branches of Christian work have been
established and are in a flourishing condition.
Sandgate was pioneered from the Valley church by the Rev.
C. Wiles. The first services were held in the home of Mr.


Griggs. The Sandgate Institute was purchased in 1882 for
£1,050, but the debt of £750 with a yearly interest
charge of £6O was a great burden for the people.
The debt was reduced to £3OO by the sale of portion of the
land. In September 1899, the church was moved to Signal
Row and greatly improved. A commodious parsonage was
built on the adjoining allotment. The buildings are beauti-
fully situated, facing a park and overlooking Moreton Bay.
The history of the Brighton church began in 1916 when
Messrs. F. G. Harris, H. Valle, J. W. Neville, J. Blake, and J.
Buchanan formed a committee to collect funds for a church.
A Sunday school was opened at Mr. Blake’s home, Mr. Harris
being the superintendent until his death in 1935. A small hall
was opened in 1915; this served as a church for three years
but was inadequate for the increasing congregation. A church
situated at Killarney was bought and re-erected at Brighton in
June 1920, with a total liability of £560. In 1925 the two
buildings were combined to provide more accommodation. The
present beautiful church, costing £1,550, was opened on
December 2nd, 1939, by the Rev. F. A. Malcolm, President of
the Conference. The old building was moved to the back of
the allotment for Sunday school purposes. The jubilee of the
circuit was celebrated during the ministry of the Rev. C. W.
Morsley, when a hall was opened at Signal Row by the Lord
Mayor of Brisbane, Aid. J. W. Greene.
The history of Methodism in this district dates from 1870
when the Methodists in the area erected a church at South
Pine, the pastoral oversight for which was undertaken by the
Valley Circuit. In 1873 the work extended to Bald
Hills where a church was built, and in 1877 to North
Pine where another church was erected. The South
Pine church was built about the same time. Thus a vigorous
work was established. Generous support was given by the
families of Wright, Johnston, Neitch, Armstrong, Raymont,
Bickley, Carson, Tucker, Protheroe, Duffield, Hawkins, Lang
and Carseldine (2). These were pioneers indeed, and helped
to carry the financial responsibility of the respective churches
and of the circuit. Busily engaged in establishing their farms
they found it a joy to promote the work of God in the district.
In more recent times the families of Day, Messenger, Strickly,


Neville, Sanderson, West and Allan have given valuable sup-
port.
In 1888, Pine River became an independent circuit with the
Rev. J. J. Gee as the first minister. The present Bald Hills
church was built during the ministry of the Rev. Thos. War-
ham in 1891. The parsonage was erected in 1911. Sub-
sequently the circuit was enlarged to include Bunya, Harri-
son’s Pocket, Zillmere and Aspley. Financial difficulties which
hampered the work for many years are now overcome and a
spiritual work of a high order is being conducted under the
direction of the Rev. C. P. J. Clarkson.
The circuit has always been indebted to local preachers for
maintaining the services. Messrs. A. Day, G. Armstrong, R.
Protheroe and P. Carseldine are in a great succession of faith-
ful preachers. Sunday schools and other young people’s or-
ganisations are exerting a wide influence throughout the cir-
cuit.
Thirty-one years ago, Mr. T. J. Marrison of Margate col-
lected funds and purchased land, on which he hoped a Metho-
dist church would be erected. Nothing, however, was done
R'l I‘f e a fr er the opening of the Hornibrook Highway
across the mouth of the Pine River, which brought
the Humpy Bong Peninsula, of which Margate forms a part,
within easy reach of Brisbane. The rapid increase in popula-
tion and popularity of this seaside resort led to the decision of
the Home Mission Committee to begin work at Margate. A
large marquee was purchased and erected on the church site.
The work was placed under the charge of the Rev. Alf. A.
Mills, then Home Mission Secretary, assisted by Students
Arthur Preston and G. Walker.
In addition to regular preaching services, a Sunday school
was started, two scholars presenting themselves at the first
session. The tent gave useful service until so severely damaged
by a storm that it had to be dismantled. Services were then
held in the residence of the Misses Marrison. Meanwhile,
plans were prepared and approved for a small but beautifully
designed church. A tender for £Bl2 was accepted. The stump-
capping ceremony was held on Saturday, March 27th, 1937,
the President of the Conference, the Rev. D. S. Brumweli,
0.8. E., capping the first stump. On Saturday, June 27th,


1937, the church was officially opened, the services on the fol-
lowing Sunday conducted by the Rev. J. F. T. Short, the Secre-
tary of the Congregational Union, and the Rev. J. A. Pratt. In
the afternoon the Sandgate choir gave a musical programme,
the service being conducted by the Rev. A. E. Lapthorne. The
church was beautifully furnished with memorial gifts, the
handsome pulpit being given by their many friends in memory
of Mr. and Mrs. T. J. Marrison. Later the adjacent corner
block of land was purchased, and a contract has been let for
the erection of a modern school and social hall at ap-
proximately £2,000.
Arrangements were made for a Commission to visit Humpy
Bong Peninsula with a view to making recommendations for
the extension of Methodist activities. As a result, a fine site at
Scarborough, was purchased. The school hall at Deagon was
removed to the site at a cost of £75, plus an expenditure of £SO
for painting and other improvements. The stump-capping
ceremony was held on December 11th, 1937, and £2l was
placed upon the stumps. Those taking part were Rev. A. A.
Mills, who presided, Rev. J. A. Pratt, the Home Mission Secre-
tary, Mr. F. Nicklin, M.L.A., the Rev. H. M. Wheller and Mr.
W. H. Green. The official opening took place on Sunday,
January 9th, 1938, the preachers being Rev. J. A. Pratt, Home
Mission Secretary, and Rev. H. R. Rycroft, Conference Over-
seas Missions Secretary. Regular morning and evening ser-
vices were established and a Sunday school organised, which
began with ten scholars. There are now over sixty children
on the roll. The grounds have been fenced by voluntary labour
and a beautiful lawn laid down upon the portion of the land
reserved for the future church, which is being planned and
towards which funds are already in hand.


CHAPTER II
SOUTH BRISBANE DISTRICT
Methodism was established in South Brisbane by Rev. Win.-
Moore in 1847-49. The exact location of the work at that time
is not known, but the present Wesley church is undoubtedly
the outcome of the vision and faith of the great
pioneer. An authentic report refers to a grant
of land by the Government in the late fifties for
the purposes of the Wesleyan Methodist Church. It was
situated in Stanley Street next to where the Police Head-
quarters now stand. This position was not considered suitable
for a church and another site, now occupied by the Wooloon-
gabba Post Office, was purchased and a small wooden church
erected upon it. A vigorous work was conducted here under
the auspices of the Albert Street Circuit. In 1880 the church
became the head of the Stanley Street Circuit, which embraced
Coorparoo, East Brisbane, Thompson Estate, Morningside,
Tingalpa, Wynnum and Wellington Point —a very extensive-
area.
The land given by the Government and the property in
Stanley Street were eventually sold to buy an acre of land
between Linton and Princess Streets, and the church was re-
moved there. During the ministry of the Rev. W. Powell,
steps were taken to build the present church —an imposing
structure in the early Gothic style. The building was opened
in 1903 by the Rev. W. G. Taylor. It soon became the centre
of a very inspiring Christian work which was supported by
well-known people, Messrs. J. Cosgrove, J. Gillbanks, W.
Sommers, F. Edmonds, R. Fegan and G. A. Bayard being
among them.
The Sunday school was a special feature of the church or-
ganisation in the early days. It was commenced in 1883, Mr.
Geo. Rogers being the first superintendent. Mr. Nathaniel
Lade and Mr. W. H. Barnes, M.L.A., were also superintendents
in early times. Mr. Rheuben Nicklin gave the first organ to
the church and was himself the organist for many years. Music-
has always been, and still is, prominent in the worship of the-
church.


jgKSm>*
jM $L
Mgr J&p
' .
W4. ' y
\ W .40
PW»
IP* }
REV. G. W. PITTENDRIGH
Chairman, Downs District
President, 1938
REV. A. LEWIS
Chairman, South Brisbane District
President, 1944
REV. R. P. POPE
Chairman, North Coast District
President, 1931
REV. F. A. MALCOLM
Chairman, West Moreton District
President, 1939


In 1920, Conference constituted Wesley Church a mission
and for six years a social work of a useful character was corn
ducted. A Sister of the People was appointed who assisted the
minister with the pastoral duties. Clubs were formed which
attracted young people and intensive visitation was undertaken
to secure the interest of the people in the claims of the gospel.
Wesley has been the Mother of neighbouring circuits and its
influence has become widespread.
The East Brisbane Church began when Primitive Methodist
services were held in a shed —no other suitable building being
available. The keynote of the preaching here was Evangelism
and conversions were sought and secured. In 1889 a small
church was built on the site of the present church, the Rev.
Peter Aston being the minister. The rules of the Primitive
Methodists in those days were such that the minister was held
responsible for any financial liability on the property. When,
therefore, Mr. Aston removed to another circuit, the debt at
East Brisbane pursued him, much to his embarrassment.
The present church was opened in 1924. Mr. R. L. Gordon
is remembered here for his long and generous support,
especially for fifty years in the Sunday school. Mr. J. A.
McNaught has been a Sunday school worker for over twenty-
five years and in other capacities he has served the Church
well.
The church at National Park was opened in 1917. It has
been the scene of a steady and successful work and it has been
supported by a band of willing workers. Mr. C. Theaker has
been a trustee since its inception and has been choir leader
without interruption. He has also served as circuit steward.
Other trustees, who with their families, loyally stand by
National Park are Messrs. G. Burr, H. Parker, W. Morrison,
H. Wren, R. Brier and Shelton.
In 1884 the Rev. C. Wiles, then superintendent minister of
the Stanley Street Circuit, began services in a cottage in
Stephens Street, West End. The interest in the meetings was
such that soon a church was necessary. A com-
mittee was appointed to inaugurate a scheme for
raising the necessary funds and to erect a suitable building.
The committee comprised Messrs. J. Harris, W. Steele, R.
Rogers, J. Nicklin, D. T. Stewart, C. H. Gardner, W. L.


Brierly, J. R. Campbell, F. A. Narracott, T. Lee, F. T. Brent-
nall, J. Potts and J. T. Snow. The present site was purchased
and vested in trustees.
The foundation stone of the church was laid by Mr. J. Potts
in January 1885, and the official opening took place in Novem-
ber of the same year, the Rev. Geo. Brown, of Sydney, being
the officiating minister. In 1888 West End was created a
separate circuit with the Rev. W. Brown, a probationer, in
charge. The first parsonage was opened in 1902; the present
house was erected in 1916.
In 1924 the interior of the church was altered and beautified
to receive a gift of a new organ from Mr. R. J. Archibald. Mr.
Archibald was the organist for many years, as well as being
deeply interested in all branches of the church. He was also
the conductor of the choir, succeeding in this position Messrs.
S. D, Fletcher, a well-known and esteemed layman whose
Christian influence abides in the lives of many whom he helped
into the Kingdom, and T. G. Rabbetts, who occupied a fore-
most place in Brisbane journalism and who was devoted to the
West End church and all that it represented.
The finances caused the trustees some anxiety at one period,
but in 1926 the Ladies’ Guild undertook to reduce the debt of
£1,700. This they succeeded in doing by 1939.
Mr. W. E. West has the distinction of being the senior active
member and church officer. His association with West End
dates from the time of the Primitive Methodist Circuit. Mrs.
Dinning, widow of the Rev. W. Dinning, one-time minister of
the circuit, now in her ninety-eighth year, is resident in the
circuit and retains her interest in the work.
In 1888 the Hill End church was built in response to an
ever-increasing need of the worshippers in this district. The
Rev. Peter Aston was the Primitive Methodist minister of the
West End Circuit at the time and Mr. A. Morry was the archi-
tect for the new church. Mr. Eugene Chappie was the first
Sunday school superintendent. In 1894 Mr. R. Broadfoot
choir conductor, introduced the hymns of the Jubilee Singers
to the choir, the Brandon brothers later making them popular
throughout Brisbane. The Brandon family have always been,
and still continue to be, a tower of strength to the Hill End
cause and consequently the church has been known for its


hearty singing. In August 1914, the church was removed to
its present location in Dornoch Terrace.
[n 1890 a band of young men associated with the Wesley
church, South Brisbane, led by Mr. J. Lang, engaged in open-
air preaching and organised cottage meetings. One of these
was held at Ipswich Road and attracted large num-
bers of people. Rev. Albert Taylor, now the
“Father” of the Conference, who was one of the enthusiasts in
the group, relates that at the invitation of Mr. Lang he con-
ducted his first service one Sunday at the Ipswich Road meet-
ing. The place was full of people and at the close of the ser-
vice there were two conversions.
At the invitation of those interested in this simple witness,
the Rev. William Powell, of the West End Primitive Methodist
Church, exercised pastoral oversight and gave them the benefit
of his mature experience. Acting on the enthusiasm manifest,
Mr. Powell directed the attention of the people to the building
of a church. A small, humble structure was erected which
served the purpose of helping to secure the permanency of this
work. With the growth of the population, the strength of the
little cause increased until a better building was provided. Two
halls for young people’s work were opened later.
At first associated with the West End Circuit, it was con-
stituted a separate circuit in 1913. While they include only a
few of those interested in the early days of Annerley, Mr. and
Mrs. Kirkham, Mr. and Mrs. Thorpe, Mr. and Mrs. Walden,
Mr. and Mrs. Weston and Mr. and Mrs. Summers may be men-
tioned as taking a prominent part. Later the Manahan, Cos-
grove and Wilson families gave most encouraging assistance.
Merton Street church has a history extending back to the
year 1883. In that year, while Rev. Peter Aston was in charge
of the West End Primitive Methodist Circuit two men from
the Vulture Street church were charged with the responsibility
of initiating a cause at Boggo Road. They were Mr. John
Beeston and Mr. W. J. Nilmer.
A Sunday school was opened in Grove Street with fourteen
scholars. Services were held in a private house for about two
years until in 1885 the present church was built. Few churches
have been so fortunate as to be able to recall so many who
have rendered outstanding service to Methodism. A few famil} 7


I ♦
I
s ■ - ■■ ■» • '
NEIL STREET CHURCH, TOOWOOMBA
SURFACE HILL CHURCH, GYMPIE


names from amongst the many are Nilmer, Beeston, Peterssen,
Exley, Low, Rowton, Dahl, Miss Pedler (later Mrs. Roberts),
Clarke, Block and Roe. Some of these remain in the work
and continue to exercise fine Christian influence.
The church at Coorparoo was formed in 1885 as a result of
a meeting of Methodists residing in the district, amongst whom
were Hon. F. T. Brentnall, M.L.C., —who was treasurer of
trustees until his death —N. Lade, J. Potts, J. S.
Bennett. An excellent site was secured in what
was then a bush area on the outskirts of South Brisbane, but
which is now a popular residential suburb. A church was
opened in 1886, the Rev. W. Halse Rogers being the minister.
Among the influential members connected with the church have
been W. H. Barnes, J. Redfern, J. Bennett, Edwin Campbell,
J. Grice, Kidston, A. J. Bradfield, James Crellin, Gardiner,
Holdaway and R. Hunt (who has been choir master for thirty
years). A commodious Sunday school hall was built in 1919
which has been the centre of youth activities on a large scale.
A proposal to build a modern church has been delayed by the
war.
Thompson Estate church, which is situated in a thickly-
populated suburb, began as a Primitive Methodist Sunday
school in 1887. A year later public worship was commenced
in an ample, well-appointed church, Mr. and Mrs. J. West and
Mr. and Mrs. H. Kay and their families are amongst those who
have been associated with the church from its inception and
have helped to maintain a fine Christian witness here.
Camp Hill is a comparatively new suburb. Services began
in the home of Mr. and Mrs. F. Fielding, until a small church
was built in 1928, during the ministry of Rev. A. Taylor. This
was a useful building until the population of the district in-
creased, when it was enlarged and a kindergarten hall added.
This cause is yet in its infancy but it has many promising
features. The Sunday school is one of the largest in the
Brisbane area.
Holland Park is another new and progressive suburb. Ser-
vices were commenced in the home of Mr. and Mrs. R.
Woodley in 1934. An ideal site was acquired and a church
was opened in 1936. Already the building is too small for
the requirements of congregation and Sunday school, and


steps are being taken to enlarge it. A parsonage is projected
to accommodate a second married minister in the circuit. In
this church, as in many others, credit is due to the Ladies’
Guild for consistent efforts to assist the trustees to meet their
financial commitments. The choir, under the leadership of
Mr. G. McFarlane, has rendered fine service to the church and
has also been of assistance to other churches. The future of
this Methodist centre seems assured.
June 1930 marked the beginning of the work of the
Moorooka Circuit, when a service was held in the Oddfellows’
Hall. The work was so full of promise that Mr. H. A. Mana-
han, of Annerley, donated half the cost of a site for
a church. Four fine allotments were accordingly
secured. Within fifteen months Rev. G. W. Pittendrigh or-
ganised the work and a church was opened in November 1931.
Three years later the building was enlarged and during 1937
a club room was constructed. For all this developmental work
much praise must be given to Miss S. Nixon and to Messrs. G.
Russell and R. Wood, secretary and treasurer of the trust. In
1936 the work was extended to Sunnybank where a new church
was opened. The family of Mr. Netting, Mr. Soper, Mrs.
Martin and Mrs. White played an important part in this ven-
ture.
Cooper s Plains is another promising centre. The latest ven-
ture has been the erection of a fine parsonage in 1945.
Rev. Isaac Harding, superintendent of the Albert Street Cir-
cuit from 1868 to 1870, after his retirement took up land at
Pimpama and there made his home. He arranged for services
to be conducted in the district, and the first service
was held in a cottage opposite to where the Pim-
pama church now stands. The site was given by Mr. Harding.
On this a building was erected which was replaced by the
present church built by Mr. Coulter (who still lives) sixty
years ago. Other churches were built at Coomera , fifty-one
years ago, and at Loganlea, sixty-one years ago. The date of
the erection of the Beenleigh church is uncertain, but a book-
case in the church shows that there was a mutual improvement
society in operation in 1873. Mrs. Beatty, daughter of Rev.
Isaac Harding, lived at Coomera, reaching the ripe age of
ninety years. Her family takes a keen interest in the work of


the church, and her daughter has the unique honour of being
one of the few women trustees appointed in Queensland.
Services at Beenleigh were commenced in the Lutheran
church until the present church was built. Among the founda-
tion members of the Pimpama church were the Lahey family,
who made the district famous for its arrowroot. They were
great promoters of all interests in the community, especially
those connected with the church. Almost the entire cost of
the building of the Pimpama church was collected by Miss
Eva Lahey, later the wife of the Rev. W. H. Harrison. Miss
Lahey was also superintendent of the Coomera Sunday school.
Among the ardent workers were the families of Beatty,
Doherty, Oxenford, and Youatt, the last named being the
school master at Coomera.
The earliest record of church services at Bulimba is in the
volume by Mrs. D. McConnel entitled “Bygone Days.” Most
of the worshippers at a small service held under a large tree
were employed by Mr. McConnel. Mr. Thorpe
Riding, recognising the promise represented in the
services, gave an area of land on which the first Primitive
Methodist church in the district was erected in 1856. Among
the early members were Mr. and Mrs. J. Nuttall, Mr. and Mrs.
Baldwin, Mr. and Mrs. Crouch, Mr. and Mrs. T. Crouch, Mr.
and Mrs. T. Enever, Mr. and Mrs. Lindsay, Mr. McLeod and
Mr. William Tyler and family. Mr. Riding was a local preacher
who was most generous in rendering service wherever he was
needed. In 1926 the church was moved to a higher position
on the site and a two-story building was erected to give ade-
quate accommodation for Sunday school activities.
Services at Morningside were held first in the home of Mr.
and Mrs. Allison by preachers of the Wesley Circuit. In 1900
land was purchased and a church was erected in 1902. A
book has been preserved containing the names of the earliest
members of the class meeting and amongst them are Charles
and Jane Crowther, Joseph and Sarah Briscom, Alexander
and Agnes Munyard, Ezra and Eliza Firth, Thomas and Maria
Cocks, Fred and Elizabeth Allison, Charles and Lillian Stan-
ton, Nellie Munyard, Emily Crust, Mary Kite, Ada and Mary
Wooten. Mr. Lang and Mr. T. N. Kelly are respected especially


• ■'■■■■ ■'■■■ i
■ flip • w g|| » » » » J|i|||r I I
£WKw IBIS w~
y % ' 4^'' ~' : - v - -~ i* ' > ->r— —->- : ||| «H
WESLEY CHURCH, MARYBOROUGH
BUNDABERG CHURCH


for their long service as Sunday school superintendents, Mr.
Kelly still being in office after thirty-six years of service.
In 1920 a useful transept was added to the church as a
memorial to the young men of the church who had made the
supreme sacrifice in the Great War. Mr. R. G. White, secre-
tary and treasurer of the trustees for twenty years, by the care-
ful control of the finances, made it possible for all outstand-
ing liabilities on the property to be liquidated. Considerable
property improvements are being made in celebration of the
centenary of Methodism in Queensland.
The Tingalpa church has had a useful career. The building
was opened for public worship in July 1877. The building
committee comprised Angus Gibson, J. Hamilton, J. Cope, T.
Daw, B. Waugh, R. Fleming, J. Porter and J. Morris, with the
Rev. W. Wilson as chairman. Mr. E. Daw was the treasurer
of trustees for forty-two years. Mr. D. Alcorn, the presenl
secretary and treasurer, has contributed excellent and highly
effective service. Two of his sons, the Revs. C. D. Alcorn, 8.A.,,
8.D., and I. W. Alcorn, had their early religious training and
their first opportunities for Christian service in the Tingalpa
church.
Wynnum Methodism had its beginning when Rev. Frank
Duesbury, superintendent of the Brisbane (Wesley) Circuit,
conducted the first service in Mr. Wilde’s home in February
1889. Eighteen months later the first Wesleyan
church was opened in Wilde Street. Mr. John U
Greene, a foundation member and local preacher, was the con-
tractor. At the second united Methodist Conference in 1898 r
the following resolution was adopted: “That Wellington Point,.
Manly, Wynnum, Upper Tingalpa and Cleveland be formed
into a home mission station.” Two years later it was raised
to the status of a circuit. Rev. G. W. Payne was appointed,
and during his year of ministry the property in Wilde Street
was sold and the new church in Ashton Street was erected. The
church was officially opened in April 1902. Methodism in
Wynnum is greatly indebted to the fine service of the Greene
family.
The Manly church was opened on New Tear’s Day 1904.
he parsonage, delightfully situated in Kingsley Terrace, was
built and occupied during 1911. The Conference of 1913 re-


solved that Wellington Point, Birkdale and Cleveland be in-
cluded in the Redland Bay Circuit and Hemmant (from the
East Brisbane Circuit) be included in the Wynnum Circuit.
Hemmant, by far the oldest church in the circuit, was opened
in November 1866, and the Hon. Angus Gibson was one of the
foundation trustees. In December 1916, the official opening
of the Springs church took place. In January 1921, the fifth
church of the circuit, Lota , was opened.
Methodism had its beginning in Redland Bay , in 1880, when
Mr. William Dart opened his home for services and Sunday
school. Later Mr. Dart gave the land for a church, which was
opened in March 1885. The work was carried on
as an outpost of the East Brisbane Primitive Metho-
dist Circuit. A parsonage was erected in 1915, and a fine
school hall in 1922. The Redlands Circuit is well served bv
j
an experienced and devoted band of workers. The present
trust secretary, Mr. H. J. M. Moore, who has held office for
thirty-six years, is a son of Mr. James S. Moore, one of the
original members and trustees of the church. Mr. Bert Moore
has entered upon his twentieth year of office as circuit steward.
Mr. Arthur Collins is the efficient superintendent of the Sun-
day school. Mr. and Mrs. Henderson are the leaders of the
Order of Knights and Girls’ Comradeship respectively.
The first Methodist services at Wellington Point were held
in the home of Mr. John Woodgate in January 1883. The
Hon. F. T. Brentnall was active in promoting the building of
a church here and he officially opened it on Easter Sunday
1888. It was destroyed by lightning and fire in November
1920 and the present building was erected on the site over-
looking the railway station. Mr. Alfred Day, of Wellington
Point, has been senior circuit steward for more than fourteen
years.
The Birkdale church was erected in 1932. Mr. and Mrs.
Guy find a labour of love in caring for the church property.
Mr. Wm. Eichenlolf is the Sunday school superintendent.
The Cleveland church was opened in November 1909. A
school hall, opened in January 1921, was a fine addition to the
property, and a further improvement was the erection of a
parsonage, opened in July 1927. For many years Mr. and
Mrs. Peters and her sister, Miss Williams, with other helpers,


carried on a most valuable work in the Sunday school. The
young men’s class, under the leadership of Mr. J. Ashworth,
was very strong. Mr. Hermann Holzapfel has served the
church faithfully as steward and trustee for many years.
Services have been held continuously at Russell Island since
the opening of the church in December 1920. Messrs. Mark
and Tom Jackson give unfailing support to the cause, and
Mr. and Mrs. Charles Hansen provide unstinted hospitality to
visiting ministers. There are also Methodist congregations
meeting in halls at Ormiston , Thornlands and Victoria Point.
At Victoria Point Messrs. Win. and Phillip Benfer and Mr.
George Wicks are ever watchful of the church’s interests. Mr.
Phil. Boleby pioneered and superintends a fine Sunday school
at Thornlands. Mr. G. E. Manders and Mr. T. R. Fox are the
church stewards at Ormiston.
Occasional Methodist services were held in the home of Mr.
and Mrs. S. R. Le Grand by the Rev. James Moorhouse prior
to the appointment of Rev. H. A. Denny to this Home Mission
Station in 1907. Services were then held in a
public hall. In 1908 Beaudesert was constituted
a circuit. A church was built in May of the same year, and a
Sunday school was opened with Mr. J. Jenyns as superin-
tendent. A parsonage was purchased in 1921. Meetings were
called in 1904 at the residence of Mr. F. Klumpp for the pur-
pose of building a church at Cedar Creek.
Early settlers on the Bromelton Estate came mainly from
Victoria and gathered for worship at regular periods at the
homes of Mr. and Mrs. J. G. Bayley, Mr. and Mrs. A. Evans
and Mr. and Mrs. E. Kittle. In 1924 Mr. A. P. Struss donated
a block of land and it was arranged that the McLean church
should be removed to this site. The official opening took place
in March 1925. For some years services were held in a union
church at Woodhill, and later in the home of Mr. and Mrs.
Gray A. Ferguson, but these services, owing to changing cir-
cumstances, are now held at adjoining centres.
The first minister from Boonah to visit Thulimbah was the
Rev. M. Webster, about fifty-one years ago. Services were held
every month alternately in the homes of Mr. and Mrs. W.
Harper and Mr. and Mrs. J. Davis. A church was opened free
of debt in 1908.


\ MKKm .j t ■ '-
* * \ * _ **" ' - -M
/■ • ■ a J
*Sfc „ rnsimm JWmmi
<
REV. G. E. HOLLAND
Chairman, Wide Bay District
REV. GEO. NASH, B.A.
Chairman, Northern District
REV. W. T. PHILLIPS
Chairman, Central District
REV. T. BAINBRIDGE, B.A.
Director, Christian Social Order
Department
President, 1946


The church at Palen Creek was built during the ministry of
Rev. J. H. Heaton, of Boonah. At Jimboomba a Primitive
Methodist Church was built and stood near the present state
school site, but was afterwards removed. Largely through the
efforts of Mr. and Mrs. L. Tambling, services were recom-
menced in a Union church and have been maintained by the
ministers of the Beaudesert Circuit.
Regular services are held at the residence of Mr. and Mrs.
G. A. Todd, of Laravale. By the courtesy of Mr. and Mrs.
F. L. White, of Brooklands, Kagaru services are held monthly
at their hospitable home. Another hospitable home in which
services have been held since 1940 is that of Mr. and Mrs.
A. G. Venz, on the Nindoinbah Estate.
The services at Veresdale were established in the public
hall. At Hillview the services are held in a church which is
privately owned, being part of the Hill Estate. On the road
to Lamington National Park, the Lamington church is the
vital centre of the religious life of that district. The church
was built more than twenty-five years ago, almost entirely by
voluntary labour, and all the materials were given.
Since 1899 services have been held at Canungra , first in the
School of Arts, and in 1900 in a church, of which the free use
was extended to the Methodists. Taking an active interest in
the cause there were the families of Messrs.
T. G. Lahey and David Lahey. Later Canungra,
with the adjoining centres of Wonglepong, Pine
Creek, Tamborine and Logan Village, was constituted a Home
Mission Station, attached to the Beaudesert Circuit; Darling-
ton was also visited by the home missionary appointed to this
station. Sunday schools were conducted at Canungra, Logan
Village and Darlington and now a flourishing Sunday school
is being conducted at St. Bernard, South Tamborine, by Mr.
D. Fowler, assisted by Mrs. A. D. Johnston.
The work of the Methodist Church at Wonglepong was com-
menced in 1894 by Rev. Thomas Thatcher, who was stationed
at Woodhill. Services were held in the Lower Canungra
school. Later, they were held at “Coburg,” the home of Mr.
and Mrs. Caswell, and at “Sarah Vale,” the home of Mr. and
Mrs. E. Franklin. The church was opened in March 1906.
The work at Southport was commenced on Easter Sunday,


1905 by Rev. A. Douglas, who was a supernumerary minister
residing there. He diligently visited the families in the dis-
Southport tr * ct
grew he secured accommodation in the School of
Arts. Missionary J, Bowran was appointed to Southport in
1907. Mr. Whyte donated an allotment of land for a building,
and soon a small church was erected. The work has extended
over a wide area, embracing Surfers’ Paradise, Labrador,
Benoa, Nerang, Gilston and Advancetown. In 1927 the original
church was sold and a new church was erected in Scarborough
Street. In 1939, during the ministry of the Rev. T. Bainbridge,
8.A., a beautiful church was built at Surfers' Paradise. Fol-
lowing in the steps of his father, Mr. P. J. Earl has a record of
long and consistent service as organist and choir master. The
organ was a gift to the church from Mr. Earl. Others who have
given long and conspicuous service are Messrs. Shillito, H.
Philling, H. J. Lewis and Brown.
Early in 1919, when Coolangatta was but a small seaside
resort, a tent was erected in which church services were held,
and they were maintained until a Soldiers’ Rest Home was
established in Griffith Street about 1916. Services
were held regularly in this building and in 1921
Rev. E. Ball was appointed to take charge of the work. It was
under his energetic leadership that a fine church was erected
in 1924 and the Rest Home, no longer needed, was sold. In
1930 the Coolangatta and Tweed Heads Circuits were
amalgamated, but after eight years this arrangement was dis-
continued, and in 1938 Coolangatta became a probationer’s
circuit, extending to Burleigh Heads. A valuable corner block
of land adjoining the church has been purchased and a Sun-
day school hall erected. In recognition of the services ren-
dered by Rev. E, Ball and Mr. Matthew Hope a memorial wall
and gates were unveiled in 1940. Local preachers from Tweed
Heads have rendered assistance to this circuit. Mr. Ephraim
Bailey, whose father served as a local preacher for fifty years,
has himself served for fifty-eight years, and his son, Mr. Eric
Bailey, has been a local preacher for twenty-seven years. The
present circuit stewards, Messrs. H. E. Twigg and C. G. Simp-
son, have been workers in the church for many years. One of


the oldest members of the Ladies’ Guild, Mrs. J. Jolly, con-
tinues to give of her best to the church.
The cause at Burleigh Heads is still in its infancy, but shows
signs of progress. Services were first held in an open-air pic-
ture theatre. Later a church was erected, largely through the
interest of the late Rev. Dr. Youngman. One of the outstand-
ing personalities connected with the Burleigh church is Mrs.
Hadley, who for seventeen years conducted the Sunday school
and was absent only on one Sunday during that period.


J,;, \ ,■'-*■/ ''^^} ,
,3»
i:&&:5:&:*:?:£ : '&:-:-^
:::v:;::::x*>x>>/:’x : :V/.vXvX-X:^
lllll
. m ■
CAMPBELL STREET CHURCH, ROCKHAMPTON
GLADSTONE CHURCH


CHAPTER 111
WEST MORETON DISTRICT
The Rev. Wm. Moore conducted the first service at Ipswich
on Easter Sunday, April 30th, 1848. The story of the early
development of the work is told elsewhere in this volume. At
Ipswich the ti me the fi rst church was opened there were
(Ellenborough only five members, but they were the nucleus of
Street) a gracious spiritual influence in the town and
the beginning of a strong church which formed the head of an
extensive circuit. The central portion of the present building
was the second church erected in 1858. The opening services
were conducted by the Rev. S. Wilkinson and the Rev. IN.
Turner. In 1863 the building was extended by twenty feet
and a gallery erected. In 1892 transepts were added making
it possible for the church to accommodate 500 persons.
In 1861 the Ellenborough Street Circuit included Too-
woomba, Drayton, and Warwick. Not long after this, the cir-
cuit embraced an area extending from the Great Dividing
Range to Goodna, and from Toogoolawah to Boonah. There
were four ministers, forty local preachers and thirty preach-
ing pi aces on the plan. Ellenborough Street is therefore the
mother of many circuits and its influence is incalculable.
The church has been blessed with splendid laymen. Messrs.
Weiss, John Foote, W. Oarson, Joseph Foote, T. B. Lyons, R.
Raymond, R. Aland and W. Gunn were active during the
period from 1861. More recent workers have been Messrs. T.
Wolley, D. Hughes, G. Bowser, J. C. Foote, C. H. Fleishmann,
Joseph Rose, J. Richey, J. Down, Jacob Born, J. G. Bourke,
J. W. Dalton and Wilfred Foote. Henry Evans was one of
the foundation members of the church and a local preacher
who never spared himself. Robert Allen, a class leader and
local preacher, is remembered for his sincere devotion. Ellen-
borough to-day is striving to be worthy of its traditions. It is
intended to mark the centenary by making improvements to the
property and church members are being called to make a
renewal of their vows.
The work of the church began here when a few devout souls
gathered together for prayer and fellowship in their cottages.


In the year 1886 a Sunday school was opened and in 1888 a
church was built. The cost, £1,250, represented a con-
siderable sum for the few Methodists then resident
in the district to subscribe, but they had great faith.
Amongst these pioneers were men like W. M. Payne, H. Evans,
J. Spresser, H. Box, A. Cole, A. May, E. Freeman, J. Macart-
ney, C. W. Louis Heiner and Miss Raymond, They were suc-
ceeded by a large number of ardent workers who have found
their joy in continuing the fine witness of the past.
The jubilee of the church was celebrated in 1938 when,
under the guidance of the Rev. David Fletcher, extensive
renovations to the property were undertaken at a cost of £7OO.
The first services were held in the Blacksoil District during
the early sixties. A cotton shed was used as the first place of
worship but later a church was erected. It is recorded that
Hon. J. C. Foote was the first to preach in the building and
Mr. Thos. Willcock was the first Sunday school superintendent.
The Rev. John Gardner was the first minister to be appointed
by the Primitive Methodist Conference. People travelled many
miles in buggies, waggons, carts, and on horseback to attend
the services. Eventually the building was removed to Brassal
and in closer proximity to the residents. Subsequently a new
and larger church was erected in the site. The Brassal church
is deeply indebted to many who loyally supported the work
through trying days: The Chandler brothers, J. Mensfortiu
J. W. Dalton, J. H. Barkell, T. Jackson, T. Miller, J. H. McKee
and A. W. Vogel. Mr. T. Chesters was the choir conductor for
many years.
During Rev. Wm. Powell’s ministry in the Ipswich Primi-
tive Methodist Circuit, SilJcstone is first mentioned as a preach-
ing place. Beginnings were evidently on a very small scale,,
for the collections for the first quarter were 12/6.
The first church was built in 1890, the land and
building costing £132. The committee comprised
Messrs. J. E. Burren (president), Thos. Shordon and J. Ains-
worth. A. Towson, R. Seymour, G. Proud and G. Wood (sec-
retary), Mrs. Alec Smith and family, Mrs. T. Shordon and
Miss Follett (Mrs. Thos. Smith) and Mr. J. Butler are remem-
bered for their generous and enthusiastic help.
Before the debt on the first church was liquidated a fierce


storm lifted it from its foundations; but the people had a mind
to work and after clearing the debt began to raise funds for a
new church. The old church was moved to the rear of the allot-
ment, and a new one, costing £B2O, was opened in August
1923. An adjoining allotment was secured in 1927 as provision
for future needs. The following families were intimately con-
nected with the church in the early years: J. L. Burren, Wm.
Shillito, Wm. Cook (the first organist), Chas. Denning, Jas.
Law, J. Morris, J. Scarborough and W. Reason. Later are the
well-known names of J. Hurford, J. Munro and R. Lupton. The
children of the early pioneers, Mr. and Mrs. Burren, have been
active workers in the Silkstone church ever since: Wm. Burren
is a trustee and church steward, and his sisters Mesdames
Owens, Gray, Wildey, Broadley and Miss Edith Burren have
been devoted workers. The following are trustees of the church:
Messrs. C. H. Cutler (treasurer), A. T. Beverley (Sunday
school superintendent), W. Burren, G. Skippen, H. Denning,
J. Follett, E. Fortescue, M. Wood, J. Allsop, G. Jones (choir-
master), R. M. Williams, W. Llewellyn, A. Williams, F. Tom-
linson, R. Collins, Reg. Owens (secretary).
Methodism was introduced into this district by the Rev.
Joseph Buckle, one of the most aggressive pioneer ministers
of Primitive Methodism. His influence extended throughout
the Connexion. He was respected for his business
capacity as well as for his evangelical preaching
and his pastoral work. He visited Bundamba in 1865 and at
once commenced preaching services. A tablet in the present
church is inscribed: “To the memory of Rev. Joseph Buckle,
James Cooper, James Pocock, Richard Seymour, Thomas Bar-
rett, Adam Perrett and Henry Middleton.” The first church,
known as the “Tabernacle,” was built in 1865. The present
church was opened in 1911.
A Methodist Society was opened at Dinmore in 1899 by the
Revs. Dr. Youngman and J. Adamson. The “old clubhouse”
was used as a meeting place until the church was built in
1901. Further additions have been made to the property from
time to time. The Centenary of Queensland Methodism is
being celebrated by considerable improvements to the build-
ing.
The Rev. W. Little, of the Ipswich Circuit, opened a church


at Redhank in 1903. Services were held at Moggill in 1856,
the home of Mr. T. Makepeace being made available for the
worshippers. The church was built in 1868, Messrs. T. Make-
peace, R. Sexton, J. Shield, being amongst the foundation
members. The Brisbane River was then the main highway,
preachers travelling from Brisbane by rowing boat. In 1942
the Sinnamon Memorial Hall was built.
The earliest Methodist efforts in this circuit were begun at
Glamorgan by Messrs. T. Pratt and C. Denning. Ministers
from Ipswich conducted services in a private house until a
church was built in 1872. A larger building was
erected in 1884. Services at Fernvale were held first
in a cotton shed, then for two years at the home of Mr. and
Mrs. A. Phelps, where a “Prophets’ Chamber” was reserved
for the preachers. The first church was associated with the
United Methodists but was purchased by the Wesleyans and
made a preaching place on the Ipswich plan. It was subse-
quently replaced by the present building. Mr, A. Phelps was
the first Sunday school superintendent; he was followed by
Mrs. J. Michel, and Miss L. P. Phelps, granddaughter of the
original superintendent is now in charge.
The Lowood church was built in 1902. Messrs. E. Michel,
J. Geddes, and W. Denning were amongst the earliest sup-
porters of the work. Good work is being done also at Haigs-
lea, Lark Hill and Tallegalla.
Methodism was introduced in the Esk district more than
fifty years ago. A useful church was built and became the
centre of a vigorous work, in which local preachers, largely
from Ipswich, earnestly co-operated. Services
were also held at Deep Creek and Moonborough.
Revs. T. Nock and James Moorhouse were
amongst the earliest ministers to have the direction of the cir-
cuit. Messrs. Edwin Broad and Thomas Peters are remem-
bered for their great assistance in making possible the strength
and success of this church. During the ministry of Rev. R. E.
Bacon in 1909, services were inaugurated at Toogoolawah,
first in a school-house and later in a Union church. About
1923 a Methodist church was built and the valuable service
of Mr. Wallace Broad, a local preacher, was loyally given to


the work. The circuit was extended to Colinton and Moore
and later a beautiful church was built at Linville.
Fassifern (as this circuit was previously named) is about
sixty-six years old. In 1881 the Ipswich quarterly meeting
added Fassifern and Dugandan to its plan of preaching
places. Thereupon, the Rev. Wm. Powell regularly
visited the district. He greatly appreciated the initial
co-operation represented by the esteemed names of Horton,
Betts, Hardcastle and Beverley.
Mr. Elijah Horton early opened a subscription list for a new
circuit. His strenuous efforts were rewarded and the Rev. I.
Castlehow, one of three young men recently arrived from Eng-
land, was appointed to take charge of the work. Two churches
soon arose —one at Dugandan and the other at Fassifern. The
Rev. Wm. Little followed and in two years ably developed the
growing possibilities of the new station. Successive ministers
faithfully applied themselves to the work, opening new preach-
ing places and erecting churches and halls. The names of very
helpful laymen were associated with the arduous labours: 0.
Alcorn, L. Neibling, R. H. Mills, D. and J. Cossart, C. F. Meil-
land, W. J. Austin, J. Slatter, A. Vogel, J. Muller, T. B. Haw-
kins, and W. B. Hardcastle. The Bruckner family, under the
lead of Miss lima Bruckner, have rendered great service
through the years.
The circuit was extended to include Rosevale and Maroon,
enlisting the help of sturdy laymen like J. Gray, W. Harper
and G. Childs at Maroon and J. Laurende and C. Walton at
Rosevale. Further additions to the circuit included Oakey
Creek, Bath Hill, Burnetts Creek and Charlwood, where the
assistance of L. Wiss, G. Whitney, W. H. Abell and R. H. Nos-
worthy were valuable helpers.
The Rev. J. H. Heaton (1907-1911) initiated and completed
a series of building enterprises which included a parsonage,
churches at Boonah, Thulimbah and Christmas Creek, a hall
at Running Creek and the re-erection of a church at Engles-
burg. This was a period of great activity and expansion,,
necessitating the assistance of a missionary. In 1910 the cir-
cuit was divided —the Christmas Creek District being formed
into a separate Home Mission Station, Jonathan Slatter and
William Harper being its executive officers. At Boonah r


Ip jll
BMW B WB B\ II
jsl ; JB , MSSjmM j '*•'*’* si
CONNEXIONAL OFFICE STAFF
BACK ROW. Mrs. N. Yoho, Mrs. H. E. Rider, Miss N. Braid, Miss V. Thomsen.
FRONT ROW, Miss D. Castle How, Miss E. M. Nichols, Mrs. C. Raynor.


Messrs. Wm. Williams and E. Raymond supported the minis-
ter in his energetic work.
Much activity has taken place in the circuit in recent years,
calling for unceasing vigilance and self sacrifice. But as a
widespread circuit, rough for travelling and varied in its
demands, it is amongst the most prosperous in Queensland
Methodism.
This and associated preaching places were originally part of
the Ipswich (Ellenborough Street) Circuit and in the earliest
days the services were supplied regularly by the Ipswich local
preachers. The churches were built in the follow-
ing order: Milora, 1869; Woodchurch, 1871;
Birkwood, 1876; Rosevale, 1887. In 1926 the Woodchurch
church was removed to Harrisville, and it has become the
centre of a very successful Christian work. The Rev. Stephen
Larkin rendered outstanding service in the preaching places
in this circuit when he laboured in the Laidley Circuit. Mt.
Forbes church was opened in 1911, but the district has
declined numerically, necessitating the discontinuance of the
work. Limestone Ridge is a small preaching place and ser-
vices are conducted at the home of Mr. Taege. The parsonage
was opened in 1922.
The Rev. Thomas Thatcher, Primitive Methodist minister at
Ipswich, conducted services at Blenheim at the residence of
Mr. James Pitt in 1878. Prior to his coming, field work had
been carried out by two local preachers, Messrs. J.
Webber and A. Card, who were accommodated by
Mr. R. J. Blake in 1876. A Sunday school was opened at the
home of Mr. J. Fielding. The Rev. Stephen Larkin was the
first resident minister in the circuit, commencing his ministry
in 1881. Under his leadership the Laidley and Blenheim
churches were built in 1882. During the five year’s ministry
of the Rev. T. Thatcher the Laidley church was enlarged and
churches were erected at Fairfield and Thornton. In 1922 the
present attractive church was opened.
The circuit has had the advantage of the services of many
capable local preachers, amongst whom have been John Field-
ing who was active for fifty-four years; Henry Bidson, forty-
four years; Mathew Pitt, forty years; Joseph Geddes, thirty-
nine years. The names of R. J. Blake, J. Fielding, T. and J.


Burgess, H. Head, C. W. Hooper, M. J. Pitt, A. R. Bailey and
C. H. Wyman are amongst those who have served the interests
of the circuit. It is noteworthy that Mr. M. J. Pitt was circuit
steward for forty years, Mr, J. Fielding Sunday school super-
intendent for fifty-four years, Mr. C. W. Hooper Sunday school
superintendent for thirty years. For forty years Mr. C. C.
Sanger was secretary of the Lake Clarendon Trustees. Few
circuits can boast of so many workers who have served for
such long periods.
The present minister, the Rev. Harold Larkin, is the son of
the Rev. Stephen Larkin, who pioneered the circuit fifty-six
years ago.
The first Methodist church in the Helidon district was
erected at Rocky Creek in 1886. This building was removed
to Helidon in 1896 and enlarged in 1901. The first trustees
were Rev. E. G. Walker, Messrs. H. Hamlyn, C. Jeffs,
eU ° n R. Kettle, J. Barclay, M. Morgan and W. Turner. In
1914 the church was demolished by a cyclone and rebuilt to
stronger specifications. A comfortable little parsonage was
opened in 1929.
During 1906 Methodist preachers visited the settlers at
Grantham Scrub and commenced regular services. This led to
a small church being erected in 1909, largely through the in-
terest of Messrs. R. J. Thomas, J. R. Dugdale, T. H. Roberts
and J. Turner, In 1916 the building was removed to the Grant-
ham township.
The original church at Flagstone which was as old as
Grantham has long since been disposed of and a new building
has been erected. Services are regularly held in a Union
church at Mt. Whitestone. Lockyer, Murphy’s Creek and Spa
Water are also included in this circuit.


CHAPTER IV
DOWNS DISTRICT
The story of the beginning of the Methodist witness in Too-
woomba belongs to the record of pioneering the Darling
Downs, and it has been told in the early chapters of this book.
In 1862 John T. Littleton commenced preaching
here, in the same year the Rev. J. Corbett was ap-
pointed first minister. In 1865 Toowoomba was separated from
Ipswich and constituted a separate circuit, Mr. T. J. Robinson
being the first steward. The first church was built in Neil
Street , between Herries and James Street, at a cost of £620.
Marked progress was made during the ministry of Rev. W. G.
Taylor who arrived in 1876. Many people were converted to
God and the membership increased, so that the church became
too small for the congregations. Temporary use was made of
the School of Arts hall, while the present fine site was pur-
chased for £5O and the main part of the brick church was
erected in 1877. The whole scheme cost £3,200. At that time
the population of Toowoomba was about 6,000. The transept
was added in 1901, Rev. T. Warham being the minister. Mr.
Robert Aland, who was elected junior circuit steward in 1867,
was for thirty-eight years a useful and loyal worker as local
preacher, school superintendent, trustee and treasurer. Mr.
Thomas Mathewson gave good service as an early secretary.
The names of Merritt, Tucker, Wyeth, Hoey, R. Wilcox, E.
Wilcox, Powell, J. Anthony, Cocks, Palethorpe (2), Noble,
Jarrott, Mansford, Hamwood, Watson, Merry, Rowbotham,
Usher, Beer, Gaydon, Webb and Hampson are indelibly
written in the foundations of the church. From the Neil Street
church came into the ministry the Rev. C. T. Palethorpe, who
later had the distinction of being the first Queensland born
President of the Conference. All the Methodist work to the
West was begun from Neil Street; the present Pittsworth Cir-
cuit, and part of Crow’s Nest, and Oakey were her daughters.
Rev. H. Youngman, when stationed at Toowoomba, visited
Thargomindah and Cunnamulla, and also paid monthly visits
to Miles, Wallumbilla, Roma and Mitchell, when an experi-


merit of village settlements was made by the Government
authorities.
Raff Street began as a Primitive Methodist church under
Rev. A. R. Bailey, when a few earnest folk gathered for wor-
ship. In 1881 a small building was erected, which later was
remodelled and considerably enlarged. It was largely
due to Rev. A. Taylor that the present neatly-built and
commodious church took the place, in 1908, of one
that had done duty for many years. For some years Raff
Street was the vigorous centre of a separate circuit comprising
several preaching places.
The Newtown cause began with a Sunday school conducted
by Mr. G. P. Merry, assisted by Mrs. T. J. Jenkins and some
young people from Neil Street. It was held in Cousin’s hall
for some time and later in Gardiner’s hall. In March 1911 a
building, formerly a German church, with half an acre of land,
was bought for £350. The property has been greatly im-
proved and it is now planned to build a new church.
Like Newtown, Rangeville began as a branch of the Neil
Street Sunday school, conducted by Mr. and Mrs. T. Turner in
their home, and later by Mr. and Mrs. Matthews. In July 1911
a church was opened, costing £2OO.
At Middle Ridge, services began in the shire hall about the
beginning of the twentieth century. A Sunday school was con-
ducted by Mr. and Mrs. Eggleston, who regularly came from
Toowoomba for the purpose. About 1912 half an acre of land
was given by Mr. and Mrs. G. F. Hoeper and a church built
upon it. Rev. T. N. Deller is a product of this Sunday school.
Blanchview began when Miss Rowbotham (later Mrs. T.
Turner) invited some children who were playing about one
Sunday afternoon, to her father s barn, where she started a
Sunday school. This grew so quickly that assistance had to
be sought. A preaching service was begun in the barn, and
later a church was erected, which was the scene of a gracious
revival.
Drayton is one of the oldest settlements on the Downs.
Originally the church belonged to the Congregationalists, but
us the settlement declined the Methodists bought it. Some of
the oldest families of Methodism have worshipped here;


among them are the Peak family. The ravages of time made
necessary the building of a new church.
Queensland Methodism was only four years old when in
1851 the name of Warwick appeared on the official records.
The district meeting received a report that the church there
owned two acres of land for a chapel and minister’s
house. The Government had granted one acre for
burial ground, concerning which little is known. In 1857
Rev. Wm. Fidler was appointed to Ipswich, Rev. S. Wilkin-
son being at Albert Street. The former regularly visited War-
wick each month, riding 100 miles each way. In 1858 a Sun-
day school was established, and it was attended by children
of all denominations. After the use of the Court House, the
only available hut in the place was rented for eight shillings
per week, the seats being made of slabs. In a few hours one Sat-
urday afternoon seventy pounds was raised for a new church.
This was built of wood, costing about £2OO. The sum of sixty-
four pounds was contributed at the opening services, thus free-
ing it of debt, on September sth, 1858, when Revs. S. Wilkin-
son and Wm. Fidler came. In 1863, Rev. J. H. Fletcher (chair-
man, Queensland District) reported that the once flourishing
cause had been without a minister for two years, the neat little
chapel being closed. He visited Warwick in June 1863, and
arranged for occasional visits by Rev. Jabez B. Watkin of Too-
woomba. A class was again begun, Mr. Johnston being the
leader. The latter had supplied Sunday services and had kept
the cause together. Mr. Andrews and Mr. Watt also encour-
aged the work. At the first district meeting, at which were
Revs. J. H. Fletcher, T. Beaizley, Nathaniel Turner (super-
numerary) and Jabez B. Watkin (probationer), it was agreed
that as the railway now connected Warwick with Brisbane, a
minister must be sent there, as well as to four other places.
The ministry of Rev. W. G. Taylor was a time of ingather-
ing unparalleled in the circuit. The church was soon filled to
capacity, and then the town hall was taken and also filled. The
present church is the abiding memorial of Mr. Taylor's minis-
try. Later on a school hall and a kindergarten hall were
added. To-day Methodism has a splendid property in the cen-
tre of the town of 7,000 inhabitants. The influence of the re-
vival under the ministry of the great Australian evangelist,


I "
\ "
\ : C ■,
,,.^-X- >- \. **•
C i »'"• “ j}l I j I fi ijj 111[ j Ik' ' m
' lM ..MiuniiiiliijfliillllMlIiiH
ggJ ti :■ »• f*t{ .-* .n«i*fily J
i ***f «
MURGON HOSTEL
MACKAY CHURCH
SURFER'S PARADISE CHURCH


W. G. Taylor, is still felt. The Sunday morning fellowship
class has continued for an unbroken period of sixty-two years,
under the leadership of Mr. G. P. Barnes. This Grand Old
Man of Warwick is now in his ninety-first year! The causes
at Stanthorpe, Killarney and Goondiwindi were sponsored by
the Warwick Church, though the two latter are not now in ex-
istence. Mobile units, under the direction of the Federal In-
land Mission, the N.S.W. Home Mission Department, and that
of our own Conference, now patrol the vast area between War-
wick and the South Australian border.
Mr. W. A. Noble, Senior, who was prominently associated
with Wm. Moore’s pioneering at Moreton Bay, went to Stan-
thorpe in 1872 upon the discovery of tin. There were several
Methodist families in the locality, but no services
were held. Rev. R. Orton, who was stationed at
Warwick in 1873 bought, at the first land sale, an allotment
of land and handed the matter over to Mr. Noble to arrange
for its payment, as it was for church purposes. Mr. Noble
commenced preaching services in a room at his home, about
forty people attending. Mr. Noble says: 4 T made a collection
at each service and banked the money to the credit of the
church fund. My daughter, Mrs. Davidson, and Mrs. G. P.
Merry went out to the tin mining companies and collected a
goodly sum of money. This, with the nest egg already in the
bank, warranted us in building the first Wesleyan church in
Stanthorpe. I was very ably assisted in preaching services by
a dearly-loved brother, Hugh Long. In 1874, the Rev. F. T.
Brentnall, accompanied by several ministers, came up to open
the church, the official ceremony being performed by Rev.
W. G. Taylor from Warwick.” In 1876 there was an ingather-
ing of souls by which the membership increased from fourteen
to forty with eleven on trial. After some years of prosperity,
mining seriously declined, and very difficult days followed
until the expansion of fruitgrowing throughout the Granite
Belt attracted new settlers. In 1914 a new church was built,
the old building being used as a Sunday school until 1924,
when it was replaced by the present commodious hall. A
generous bequest by Mr. W. C. Wilmott in 1933 enabled the
trustees to make extensive improvements to the interior of the


church, which give it a quiet sense of beauty and an atmos-
phere of worship.
From the early days services have been conducted across
the border in New South Wales, at first at the “Herding Yard”
now known as Amos field. A Wesleyan church was erected in
1886 and was replaced by a new building in 1913. This later
structure has since been removed to Liston, also on the New
South Wales side of the border. In 1915 services were com-
menced in the home of Mr. Taggert at the Summit , which was
then developing as a fruit-growing area. Within a few months
a fine country church was erected on an excellent site which
had been donated by Mr. W. Burnett. The latest addition is a
very promising cause at Sevenlea where a church was opened
in November 1945, which also serves the families from Glen
Aplin and Mt. Tully. Through the years, some ministers, in-
cluding Revs. S. Muscio, A. E. Robinson, H. L. Martin and
T. H. Blackburn, who were in ill-health, have made the Stan-
thorpe district their home, and their keen interest in the work
of the church has enriched the life of this circuit.
The building of the first church began in November 1866,
and it was opened on Christmas day by the Rev. Charles
Olden, of Toowoomba. This building served for worship until
1896 when the present church was opened. Later a
church hall was added which had previously been used
as the Glengallan church. The parsonage was built in 1908.
The Clifton church was erected in 1900, this being a monu-
ment of faith to the early workers who were responsible for
the venture. A church was built at King’s Creek, and served
its purpose while the need existed. It was sold for removal in
1917. Other preaching places have lately been acquired at
Berat and Pilton. At the latter place a new church has recently
been built and opened. Allora and Clifton were part of the
Warwick Circuit for many years.
Methodists were the religious pioneers of the Crow’s Nest
district. In response to requests by residents, Rev. W. G. Tay-
lor, of Neil Street Wesleyan Methodist Church, Toowoomba,
visited Crow’s Nest on July 24th, 1877, and preached
there, having previously visited Plainby on November
28th, 1876, and Merritt’s Creek on the day following.
Fie also visited Pipe Clay and Highfields on September 6th


and 11th of the same year. The Crow’s Nest service was held
in a shed of saplings and bark belonging to the hotel. Mr.
A. R. Bailey had been appointed to the Ipswich Primitive
Methodist Church as assistant to Rev. Thos. Thatcher in April
1877, and about the following August an appeal was made by
Mrs. Hamlyn, Senior, of Merritts Creek, to send a minister to
Toowoomba especially to work the outside districts as they had
no regular services. The appeal was so strong and the need
so great that though Mr. Bailey was only a young inexperi-
enced man, he was sent to supply the need. He visited Crow s
Nest monthly, held services in the Court House and visited
the scattered centres of Cowrie, Koojerewon, Merritts Creek
and Pipe Clay Creek. Mr. J. T. Littleton, who came from
Toowoomba, and his wife, were the first settlers in Crow s
Nest in 1875. For many years he held prominent office in the
church, and was always a generous helper.
In 1899 Crow’s Nest Circuit was duly constituted and an or-
dained minister was appointed —the Rev. C. Wesley. Soon
afterwards under his guidance a site was secured at Plainhy
and a beautiful little church built. In 1901 the Glenaven
church was built, where it served the community for twenty-
three years. In 1924 the church was moved to the present site
where it was re-erected, enlarged and improved. Churches were
also erected at Cowrie Flat , Whichello , Emu Creek and Pine-
lands.
In 1877 a few Methodist families were scattered about in
what was then known as the North Branch district, now Pitts-
worth. Cottage meetings were organised, being held at Mr. J.
Trott’s home, Hermitage, at North Branch Pro-
visional school house, at Mr. J. Edwards’ or Mr.
Wm. Geizer’s for the residents of Spring Gully, and at Mr. R.
Anderson’s for the South Brook people, where a small Union
church was erected. The Spring Gully service was moved to>
the Provisional school, Pittsworth, and later to the Court
House. When the township of Pittsworth was surveyed, the
Toowoomba quarterly meeting secured a piece of land for
church purposes, but it was in an unsuitable position and was
later sold. A committee consisting of Messrs. G. Mann, J.
Holmes, J. Curry, H. Morwood, and J. Daniel, Senior, bought
the present site, on which a store had been built. The store


Mb/ jyiliBL
HL # ■ flKSHtete^ ii ' _9BLt_.. j \Wt m.
| mKm\ W * gffl '^^V
MR. W. J. E. KERRISON
MR. C. C. CLIFFORD
MISS M. E. MOOR
Past General Superintendent, M.G.C.
MR. S. COLLARD


was remodelled and opened for public worship in 1888 by
Revs. W. Dinning and S. I. Alden. As this was a part of the
Toowoomba Circuit for many years the services were supplied
by local preachers. These included Messrs. Rowbotham, W. A.
Noble, H. Morwood, J. Daniel and J. J. Daniel, who often rode
long distances to conduct the services. Pittsworth became a
circuit in 1901, Rev. T. Brassington being the first minister.
Situated nineteen miles from Toowoomba, Oakey stands at
the gateway to the western plains. Church activities were com-
menced at this centre, then a little town amidst large holdings,
by the Toowoomba Circuit. Preachers were sent out
to Oakey Creek until closer settlement prompted a
forward movement. A circuit assistant was sent from Too-
woomba under the superintendency of the Rev. T. Warham.
Land was acquired, a church built and an additional minister
appointed. In 1910 Oakey was constituted a circuit and the
church was erected during that year. Four other preaching
places were established. The circuit now contains five preach-
ing places, most of them being on the Cooyar railway line, of
which Oakey is the business centre. East Lynne is on the
Goombungee line. There are three churches and a parsonage
in the area, and at the other preaching places halls and barns
are used.
At Cooyar , the Church of England building is used. The
settlements still are very scattered, but the work of the church
is being consolidated and new buildings are being considered.
The names of the families who have been closely associated
with the work of the circuit are: Oakey—Mr. H. Rutledge, Mr.
Ramsay and the Bock and Gordon families. Greenwood —
Messrs. Harth, Bosse, Achilles and Martin and their families.
East Lynne —Messrs. Morwood, Luck and Hughes and their
families.
The first Methodist services were conducted in 1911 by the
Rev. W. H. Leembruggen, who was in charge of the Oakey Cir-
cuit. The rapid development of the work and the spiritual
needs of a wide district led to Dalby being constituted
a circuit the following year, and a church was opened
in 1912. Dalby has grown into a large and modern town.
Methodism has accepted the challenge and has launched a
scheme for the erection of a large ornate church.


Jandowae, an important preaching place, has purchased a
central site and is preparing for the erection of a church. It
is worthy of note that Mr. R. C. Drew, whose name appears in
the minutes of the first quarterly meeting as junior circuit
steward, holds the position of senior circuit steward to-day.
In many capacities and as a representative to Conference he
has served his church well.
In 1910 a steady flow of settlers, chiefly from Victoria,
began to take up holdings in the Tara area. As many of them
were Methodists they were eager to have services, and the first
were conducted by Mr. Reg. Bilson, a local preacher.
The homes of Mr. and Mrs. C. W. Kentish and Mr. and
Mrs. A. Day were thrown open for the services at The Gums.
Mr. Day was the Sunday school superintendent, and from this
small cause came Rev. Ten Kentish, 8.A., B.D. (who died in a
Japanese P.O.W. Camp), Mr. R. J. Kentish (now lay mission-
ary at Croker Island), and Mr. Reg. Kentish, a local preacher.
Some of the people travelled ten miles each way (walking,
riding and in every variety of horse-drawn vehicle. Until the
appointment of the Rev. R. S. C. Dingle as home missionary
in 1912, the services were maintained by local preachers in-
cluding Messrs. C. W. and A. F. Kentish, A. Henry, and A.
Day (later organiser of the Temperance League). During
Mr. Dingle’s term churches were built simultaneously at Tara
and The Gums. Later local preachers were Messrs. C. Moore
and T. Eley. The sturdy pioneers battled against successive
droughts, and many of them were compelled to relinquish
their holdings and return south. Tara remains a home mis-
sion station supervised and frequently supplied by the Dalby
Circuit.
In the early days Chinchilla was an outpost of the Roma
Circuit. The first services were held in the old Court House
in 1893 by the Rev. John Calvert, of Roma. An allotment of
land for a church was given by Mr. J. R. Allen, in
1900. A determined effort was made to build a
church, and it was opened in December 1902. Among the
original trustees was Mr. George Lithgow. In 1906 Chinchilla
became a separate home mission station, Mr. James Grimmett
being the first steward. The station has many outposts, and
churches were built at Baking Board in 1914 and at Brigalnw


in 1921. The prickly pear plague retarded the progress of
the station, but when this was cleared, advance was again
made. Chinchilla was made a circuit in 1937, and two years
before it was obliged to do so a request was made for it to
become a married minister’s circuit, and a comfortable par-
sonage was built. The forward movement was greatly helped
by the generosity of Mr. and Mrs. J. P. Beasley. Chinchilla
has the great distinction and honour of having reared in their
early days three ministers who are now members of the
Queensland Conference; Revs. N. H. Grimmett, T. G. Lithgow
and George Andrews.
Roma became the centre from which Methodism worked in
the south-west when the Rev. J. Snell was appointed in 1892.
He covered the area between Miles and Mitchell. During the
two years of Rev. J. R. Williams’ ministry, the circuit s
boundary moved westward to Charleville and eastward
to Condamine. Rev. J. Calvert’s term of three years from 1895
was characterised by deep interest in the work of the church on
the part of its members, and intense activity on the part of the
minister. The Roma church was built and opened in 1896. Mr.
Calvert took in more territory, touching Cunnamulla, Thar-
gomindah, Charleville and Tambo in the west, and going east-
wards as far as Warra. From the beginning of Methodism in
Roma, two families have been outstanding in their interest and
loyalty, those of Wilson Miscamble and John Crawford. Roma
was relieved of responsibility for Cunnamulla in 1902, Chin-
chilla became a separate home mission station in 1906, and
Mitchell was separated from Roma in 1909. Although Mitchell
is a separate home mission station it has been without an agent
at various times through the years, when the Roma minister
has been required to look after the interests of Methodism in
that area. Signal service has been rendered to the church in
Mitchell by the families of James Chisholm and Richard
McAnally.


' ' jj B* I u \
SOME EXECUTIVE OFFICERS OF WOMEN'S ORGANISATIONS
BACK ROW -W rs -C- Herbert Mrs R. S. Shelton Mrs W. G. Webb, Mrs. F. Fielding, Mrs. J. W. Greene
CDn .._ J - /Wheatley, Mrs. J. Gibson, Mrs. C. H. Raynor. oreene,
0 ‘ R ° W D^e r r S / M p Gh J eC Eb^o?i. J Mts-. M ‘ F ‘ Mi ” *• "■""P* Mrs. T. N.


CHAPTER V
NORTH COAST DISTRICT
The Rev. Isaac Harding opened a church constructed of bark
stripped from the neighbouring forest in 1868. It was a humble
3eginning but it represented the foundation of a very success-
ful circuit. Under the auspices of the Mary-
borough Circuit a more dignified chapel was
opened in 1869. About the same time a small
cottage was built for the accommodation of the minister.
The Rev. Henry Woodhouse was the first duly appointed
Wesleyan minister and he began his ministry in 1870. Hitherto
“supplies ’ had been sent who could make only temporary
appointment of officials. Mr. Woodhouse found the church in
a state of unrest and anxiety, but he showed great tact and
patience and put the church upon a stable basis.
The earliest quarterly meeting minutes preserved date from
October 25th, 1870. There were present Rev. H. Woodhouse*
Messrs. W. and T. Ferguson, Finney, Elfverson, Demack and
Mellor. These all were men who contributed much to the
strength and progress of the circuit. The present Surface Hill
parsonage was built in 1880. The present church, with its
attractive appearance and appropriate furnishings, was erected
in 1890, when the Rev. T. B. Holmes was the superintendent
minister. It involved an expense of over £3,000. Surface Hill
Circuit has been well served by a succession of helpers of
whom are affectionately remembered: Matthew and T. Mellor*
E. Bytheway, T. and W. Ferguson, R. L. Bring, T. J. Cox*
F. J. Bennett, Mrs. Simpson, Mr. and Mrs. G. Ashford, Mr. and
Mrs. W. Bines, J. Snell, S. B. Suthers, J. Mallett, J. Bennett*
D. Webster and J. M. Webster.
The origin of this circuit reflects the pioneering enterprise as
well as the self-sacrificing labours of the early Primitive
Methodists. They were the first Christian workers to follow
the miners to the gold diggings, which began in
1867. Five months later they opened services in
a small wooden building which was known as the
“Digger’s Bethel.” Gympie became a preaching place of the


Brisbane Ipswich Circuit together with One Mile and Imbil.
The first minister appointed here was the Rev. T. G. Dobson.
After Methodist Union, the Wesleyan Church at One Mile to-
gether with the former Primitive Methodist Church were com-
bined to provide a fine group of buildings which has become
known as the Red Hill Church. The parsonage was built in
1888, but it was subsequently enlarged and improved. The cir-
cuit is now an extensive one embracing a wide area and twelve
preaching places.
Imbil , twenty-five miles from Gympie, is the largest centre
on the Mary Valley Line and it is the headquarters of the
second minister in the circuit. A parsonage has been recently
opened here. Fhe Primitive Methodist Church began services
at Imbil in 1870.
The history of this circuit is interwoven with that of the
Caboolture and Nambour Circuits. From Caboolture over
seventy years ago, the stout-hearted pioneer Methodist
preachers set out on horseback to explore wide,
sparsely settled areas. They first visited Buderim
Mountain and gathered the few former Methodists into a
warm-hearted fellowship. For many years Methodism was
the only denomination represented on the mountain and it in-
cluded almost the whole population. The work of the minis-
ters was supplemented by the earnest efforts of laymen like
Messrs. L. Burnett, H. V. Fielding, Foote, Bartholomew, Hen-
derson, and Beckwith. Some of these were local preachers,
others were stewards and Sunday school workers. With the
extension of Methodism to Nambour, Buderim became incor-
porated with that circuit. It was associated with the newly
formed Palmwoods Circuit in 1924.
The Rev. B. Frederick conducted open-air services at Mont-
ville for some time, until a private home was opened for the
purpose. In 1911 a public hall was engaged. The present
church was erected in 1912, the Rev. Dr. Youngman officiating
at special services. Methodism at Montville owes much to the
devoted labour of Messrs. J. C. Clark, J. C. Unwin, A. E.
Brown, H. Senescall, T. E. Brown and A. Bowser.
The Rev. T. Brassington commenced the work at Palmwoods
in 1902. Under the superintendency of the Rev. J. Tulip, a
church and a parsonage were built in 1928. Mr. John Duf-


field and his sons, Fred, and Frank, have served as trustees
and circuit stewards and have otherwise supported the work
here. Messrs. Ashton, Tulin, Tapper, Stebbins, Daniels and
Finch will long be remembered in this circuit. A church was
opened at Mooloolabah in 1932.
Mr. Stephen Fountain took up land on the banks of Burpen-
gary Creek in 1868, and at once commenced services in the
name of the Primitive Methodist Church, but Upper Cabool-
ture, with its alluvial flats and the hinterland of
semi-scrub land at Moorina and Rocksberg, was
destined to become the active centre of the work. The homes
of Messrs. C. Unwin and George Gibbings were used as places
of worship, Messrs. J. Wright and C. Unwin conducting ser-
vices on alternate Sundays. A Sunday school was opened in
1871. It had a large enrolment under the direction of Rev.
Joseph Buckle, who regularly rode from Brisbane to Gympic,
taking monthly services on the way.
During the next ten years services were held at Burpengary,
Upper Caboolture, Landsborough and at two other centres
which are now in Landsborough Circuit, and Buderim, now in
Palmwoods Circuit. Later, in 1880, when Rev. W. Faulkner
became the first resident minister, Mt. Mee and Peachester, now
in Woodford Circuit, were opened as preaching centres.
In 1872 five acres of land at Upper Caboolture were pur-
chased from the Government for £3/15/-. A bark church was
erected on this ground and continued in use till it became too
small to accommodate the growing congregation. On January,
1875, the “sod-turning” was held for a more substantial build-
ing, and the present church was opened in November.
Too much cannot be said of the faithful labours of Mr. John
Wright of Orange Grove, who, with his devoted wife, did much
to organise and maintain the ordinances of Christian worship.
The untiring services of Mr. C. Unwin, one of the most regular
worshippers and consistent stewards, must be also recorded.
The following were original members and officers: Messrs. G.
Gibbings, J. Litherland, F. H. and A. Dobson, T. Franz, Snr.,
R. Zillman, Snr., and their families.
The first services in Caboolture are known to be definitely
associated with the late Mr. W. H. Payne, who arrived in the
district about 1876. At his home he started a Sunday school


, s
r v. :
I wi&miB yiWMjjyyi n|| mm § g«« i^PiiSt
CAIRNS CHURCH
INGHAM CHURCH


and services were commenced by the Primitive Methodists.
Mr. Payne was the Sunday school superintendent until his
death in 1893.
In 1881, Rev. T. Nock, then of Brisbane, preached at centres
that now compose Caboolture, Landsborough and Woodfood
Circuits. As the first resident minister he had the satisfaction
of seeing the first church opened in 1891.
In October 1924 an ambitious plan was put into operation at
Caboolture. Half an acre of land, facing Bruce Highway, was
purchased. The vacated church at Beerburrum Soldiers’ Settle-
ment was bought and removed to the new site. The original
Caboolture church was moved to the back of this church and
joined by a new vestry and provided a spacious Sunday school
and social hall.
A church was erected at Bribie Island in 1930. The total cost
amounted to £320. Mr. and Mrs. W. Freeman commenced a
Sunday school in 1923 and services were started in 1924. Mrs.
Freeman was the most beloved woman on the island.
Early in the century, well attended services were commenced
at Elimhah and Rocksherg. The Elimbah congregation owns
a block of land on which it is hoped soon to erect a church. In
1933 Deception Bay was opened and is now a flourishing
cause, services being held twice a month. Nerangha is a
preaching place which is visited regularly.
Preaching places now constituting this circuit were formerly
included in the Nambour Circuit. Preachers travelled long
distances to minister to small congregations and to supervise
Sunday school work. A separate Home Mission
Station was constituted in 1905 which embraced ten
preaching places. By the following Conference, there were
seven Church members, two Sunday schools with four teachei!"
and twenty-seven scholars. Steady growth in each department
of Church work led the Conference of 1910 to raise the station
to the status of a circuit—there were then forty Church mem-
bers.
The district served by the circuit greatly developed and
became closely settled so that to-day there are 157 Church
members. Home missionaries and ministers have been loyally
supported by officials of whom must be mentioned Messrs.


A. S. Douglas, C. Bengston, Gray, Lester, Green, J. Brooks and
W. C. Zerner.
The history of the Nambour Circuit began when Mr. J.
Whalley, a Methodist local preacher, came into the district in
1884. He conducted services in the home of Mr. Wm. Perren,
and generally supervised a strong Christian work in
the area. A church was built in 1892 on land
■donated by Mr. T. Howard, giving permanence to Mr.
Whalley’s work. Of the original trustees of this property, only
Mr. J. Perren survives. In 1902, the disused School of Arts
building was purchased, removed to the present site and
adapted for the purposes of a church. Good work of an abid-
ing value was done by the Rev. C. C. Truman, under whose
■direction Nambour developed as a Home Mission Station.
In 1902, Nambour became the centre of a circuit with the
Rev. T. Brassington as minister. At this time, the present
parsonage was built. The Sunday school was opened in 1892
and has always been a successful feature of the church. The
Ladies’ Church Help Society has functioned continuously since
1903, Mrs. Brassington being the first president. Mr. J.
Whalley, who assisted in the building of the first church, has
never ceased to be an active worker and is to-day a church
steward. Mr. W. Whalley, who came to Nambour with his
father in 1884, walking from Brisbane, is the treasurer of
trustees. The trustees have had only three secretaries: Messrs.
G. H. Jones, eleven years, and Mr. W. Lanham, thirty-seven
years —both these also served the church and circuit in many
ways and are remembered for their devotion; and Mr. A.
Grimes is the present secretary. Woombye, a very old preach-
ing place, situated on the camping ground of Cobb and Co.
used in the days when the coach travelled between Brisbane
and Gympie, has been the scene of a vigorous spiritual work.
Jhe Revs. J. Tainton, 8.A., and T. Blackburn were boys in the
Sunday school here and were associated with the Church as
■candidates for the ministry. There are well supported preach-
ing places at Maroochydore, a popular seaside resort, Didilla-
bah, Bli Bli and Mapleton.
Services were held here by the Primitive Methodist ministers
in 1881. It appears to have been a preaching place on the Bris-


bane Circuit plan but there is no evidence of there being any
organised church here until 1902, when the Rev.
James Moorhouse, of the Kilcoy-Nanango Circuit,
regularly visited the town. At first the response to the over-
tures of Mr. Moorhouse was not very encouraging, but by 1912
the work had developed so that a church was built and a new
circuit constituted with a probationer in charge. A useful work
has been done here and many settlements adjacent to the town
are visited. To-day there are eighty-two Church members and
ninety-six scholars in three Sunday schools.
On the Conference station sheet of 1902 appear the words
“Hopetoun —Home Missionary.’’ The Rev. Thos. Powell had
previously visited the district from Caboolture; thus it became
known to the Home Mission Society and the Rev.
James Moorhouse was appointed the first home
missionary. Mr. Moorhouse commenced his work in the home
of Mr. and Mrs. Traves and in some of the provisional schools
—wherever services could be held. He also visited the Xanango
district and erected a church at Kunoon West. After a few
months Mr. Moorhouse left to visit England and was succeeded
by the Rev. R. P. Watkinson who pioneered numerous preach-
ing places, the following names appearing on the first plan:
Hopetoun, Westvale, Mt. Brisbane, Villeneuve, Neurum,
Woodford, Delaney’s Creek, Stanmore, Stoney Creek, Wool-
mar, Gregor’s Creek, Court-le-rui, Highwood, Sheep Station
Creek, Mt. Kilcoy, Stanley Gates, Cressbrook, Stone House,
Blackbutt, Yarraman, Taabinga, Emuvale, Wooroolin, Eden-
vale, Kunioon, Hazeldean, Nanango and Home Creek. These
places were visited regularly once a month. During Mr.
Watkinson’s term the church was built at Kilcoy on land given
by Mr. Holland, and sites were secured in other centres. As
the work progressed two assistants were engaged. Later, the
area was divided into several circuits and Home Mission
Stations. Kilcoy was raised to the status of a circuit in 1907
and for two years was supplied by probationers. The parson-
age was erected in 1924 during the superintendency of the
Rev. C. Whitehead. The school was built in 1945.


CANBERRA HOTEL, BRISBANE
Conducted by the Queensland Temperance League.
Chairman: Mr. W. H. Green
MARGATE CHURCH


CHAPTER VI
WIDE BAY AND BURNETT DISTRICT
The Primitive Methodists opened the first services here. A
group of settlers from England met together for prayer and
fellowship for some time, when the Rev. J. Buckle visited the
town and offered to provide a minister to estab-
lish the work which had been commenced. His
offer was gratefully accepted and the people promised to con-
tinue to support the work and to enlist the interest of others.
Accordingly the Rev. Wm. McNaught was appointed and com-
menced services in a public hall in August of 1875. The rent,
£1 per week, proved a heavy obligation to the infant cause.
?he population of the district was then about 550 and the
people were by no means wealthy. Such was the energy of
the small company of members that land was secured and the
church erected. It was a primitive structure built of slabs with
a shingle roof. There were eight church members and eight
Sunday school scholars. Two years later the membership had
increased to thirty and the scholars to eighty.
The Rev. James Williams was appointed in 1878 and at once
commenced a scheme for building a new and better church
which was opened the following year. In the same period a
church was built at South Kalkie also. In 1880 the South
Bundaberg church was built and other preaching places were
opened and served with characteristic devotion.
The Wesleyans began a church as a preaching place in the
Maryborough Circuit, under the direction of the Rev. F. Dues-
bury, as superintendent, and the Rev. W. H. Harrison, who was
stationed at Bundaberg. At first the services were held in a
hall but in 1885 a church was built. When the Primitive and
the Wesleyan Methodist Churches united, the two church build-
ings were removed to a site in Barolin Street and joined
together.
The scheme for the erection of the present church was in-
augurated under the direction of the Rev. J. A. Pratt. Nine
years later during the ministry of the Rev. W. S. Bath, 8.A.,
the foundation stone was laid by His Excellency, The Gover-
nor-General of Australia, Lord Gowrie. The total cost of the


building and furnishings was £9,000. It is now entirely with-
out debt.
The work at South Kolan began in 1882 and two years later
it received considerable impetus with the arrival of Messrs.
Angus and James Gibson, who were received by the Bundaberg
Circuit as local preachers transferred from Brisbane. These
men successfully developed the Bingera Plantation which in
turn was of great assistance to the Church. The present Union
Church at South Kolan, opened in 1884, has been used regu-
larly for Methodist services. The Bingera hall on the planta-
tion is the meeting place for the Methodists of that district. The
Hon. Angus Gibson, Messrs. James Gibson, W. Gibson, W. G.
Gibson, A. L. Gibson and Dr. A. J. Gibson and their families
have given long and devoted service to the Church.
Sharon, Burnett Heads, Newtown, West End and Bargara
are also preaching places in the circuit.
A site situated at the corner of Adelaide and Alice Streets
was bought in 1864 for £lOO and a church was built shortly
afterwards. The local newspaper remarked: “It is really a sur-
prising feat that one section of the community
should be able to raise the handsome sum of
£5OO in the space of a few months.” The first
circuit steward was Mr. Robert Jones who served the Church
for over forty years. Amongst other offices he held was that
of choir master. Being musically inclined and having a splen-
did voice he was able to make the service of praise an out-
standing feature of public worship. Among the valued workers
of that early period were many whose names became well
known in Methodism in Maryborough and elsewhere: Mr. and
Mrs. T. Holme, Messrs. S. Scott, R. Brown, J. C. Walker, T.
Trevethan, J. Rowley, R. Harding, W. Williams, W. Olney, J.
Merson and “Father” Payne, J. Robinson, R. W. Sims, R.
Marsh, W. Young, E. J. Hobson, C. Powell, H. S. Granfell, E.
Negus, T. A. Bromiley, H. Challands, W. Faulkner. Rev. C.
Wyles, a supernumerary minister, Messrs. J. Walker, T.
Walters, J. Hutchinson and G. Willey all did fine service and
helped to make the Methodist Church an influence in the town.
The parsonage was built in 1872 in Alice Street, almost
opposite where the present parsonage stands.
In 1879 an energetic committee was formed with the view of


building a new and a permanent church. Messrs. W. Souther-
den and R. Jones were appointed joint treasurers and Mr. G.
Willey the secretary. Competitive designs were invited and as
a result of much hard work the fine brick edifice was opened
in December of 1883. Particulars of the cost are recorded as
follows: Land £1,639, building £3,633, furniture and organ
£660 —a total outlay of almost £6,000. The debt that remained
proved to be a very heavy burden for the trustees for many
years. Assistance was rendered by the ladies of the church
who, inspired by faith and hope, worked hard and prayerfully r
led by Miss J. Brown, Miss S. E. Bodimeade and Mrs. Wil-
liams until at last the property was free from debt. From time
to time the church has been improved and beautified and this
year of Queensland Methodism Centenary Celebrations further
renovations are to be made.
Dunmora, attached to this circuit, has been served by the
ministers of Wesley for many years and their efforts have been
appreciated by the people of this farming district.
Originally a Primitive Methodist Circuit, Walker Street ha&
had an interesting history. It has been noted for its loyal
adherents, and its evangelical spirit of Methodism, and has
numbered among its members those who have
served the denomination with fidelity. The
Primitives began here in 1872, conducting
meetings in private homes and preaching in hired halls. In
1876 a site was secured and duly consecrated for church pur-
poses. A special open-air service was conducted by Rev.
Robert Hartley (Rockhampton) and Mr. Annear, a city alder-
man, turned the first sod in preparation for the building of a
church. An enthusiastic public meeting was held in the Tem-
perance Hall the same evening. The church was opened in
January 1877 and it is recorded that the Revs. W. Powell, J.
Williams (of Brisbane) and T. Thatcher of Ipswich officiated.
he Annual Conference of the denomination was held at this
time in the new church. Great interest was taken in Walker
Street and it was anticipated that it would become the centre
of a progressive work.
The building served its purpose very well but owing to the
increase of the population in the district and the growth of
church activities it has been enlarged from time to time. A


succession of ministers have faithfully led the Church and
loyal laymen and women have contributed to its influence. The
names of Heselwood, Birtles, Axelsen, Hansen and Miss Lip-
sett are written deeply in the history of this Church. Until
recently the principal office-bearer in this Church was Mr.
James Birtles who was associated with the Church all through
his life. Messrs. H. Matthies, J. Matthies, F. Trigger and W.
Hansen are now the senior trustees of this church.
Missionary E. Axelsen was the pioneer for the Church in
this district in 1908. The Home Mission Station then extended
from Gayndah to Monto, a distance of about 130 miles. Ser-
vices were held in private houses and sheds and
public halls. The first steps towards making per-
manent the work were taken when land was purchased at
Gayndah for eighty pounds. With the assistance of a com-
mittee comprising Messrs. L. F. Reinke, A. G. C. Davies, W.
Jesseries, W. Kirk and C. E. Armstrong a church was erected
and opened in 1913. Credit is due to the Rev. G. W. Pitten-
drigh for his leadership in this enterprise. Mr. Pittendrigh also
inspired and directed the efforts which led to the building of
churches at Didcot in 1912, Reid’s Creek and Humphrey in
1914 and Mundubbera in 1915. Services are also held in the
following preaching places: Ban Ban, Ideraway, Woodmillar,
Bin jour, Bush Home and Brown’s Creek.
Rev. A. S. J. Stewart, L.Th., and Deaconess Mable Trigger
received their earliest religious impressions and opportunities
for Christian service here.
The introduction of Methodism into the Mundubbera dis-
trict is associated with the arrival of Mr. L. Reinke who
arranged for regular Sunday services to be held in his home.
The first services in the town of Mundubbera
were conducted by the Rev. T. H. Taylor, of
Biggenden, in 1912. Later, the Rev. G. Pittendrigh, of Gayn-
dah, exercised pastoral oversight of the district. A church was
built in 1915 and a parsonage in 1922, when the Mundubbera
Home Mission Station was constituted. Messrs. G. Johns and
J. F. Reinke were the first stewards. Riverleigh was opened as
u preaching place in 1912 as a result of many Methodist
settlers coming to the district: Messrs. G. Johns, A. Welford.
H. Crofts, the Chappel brothers, Brandon, Smith, Whitley.


Coomber and McLennan. A temporary church was built, but
in 1918 a substantial structure was opened.
Other preaching places in this wide circuit are Cooranga,
Cattle Creek, Philpott Creek and Malmoe. In 1943 Mono-
gorilby, formerly in the Proston Circuit, was added to the
Mundubbera Plan —this involves the preacher in a round trip
of 100 miles to conduct services. Mundubbera was raised to
the status of a circuit in 1932. A recent report shows that
Methodism is firmly established in the district.
The early history of the Methodist work at Pialba is obscure.
It is reasonably certain that the minister of the Howard Circuit
conducted services here for some time. Later, however, and
for many years, it was a preaching place on the Mary-
borough (Walker Street) plan. A Union church, used
in association with the Church of England and the Presby-
terian Church, was the place of worship until 1909, when
through the generosity of Mrs. A. Hutchison a Methodist
church was erected. Of this building the following trustees
were appointed: Messrs. N. Tooth, L. H. Nissen, G. Messer,
C. A. Popp, R. T. Greig, M. Jacobsen, V. Nissen, J. Messer,
C. E. Christensen, and F. Tooth, all of whom, with their
families, have helped to maintain the Methodist witness at
Pialba. Nikenbah, once the centre of a community of Danish
settlers where there was a Danish Church, has been a preach-
ing place for over forty years. Piabla, together with
Nikenbah, Mountain and Urangan, became a separate circuit
in 1915 when the Rev. G. W. Pittendrigh was appointed super-
intendent minister. Faithful work through the years has made
it possible for a wide district to be visited from time to time.
To-day there are eighty Church members in the circuit and the
minister visits seven State schools to give religious instruction.
This interesting “pocket” circuit lying between Mary-
borough and Bundaberg is well known for oranges and coal.
With its sister townships of Burrum and Torbanlea, it is dis-
tinctly a mining district. The Primitive Methodists
opened here in 1884, and with the lead given by
George Barker and John Tench erected a neat church. Quite
a strong group of miners from the English Midlands and from
Vales settled here. They brought with them a very fervent
spirit. Music received a steady impetus by regular musical


MR. ISAAC HENRY
Ingham
MR. CHAS. GREEN
Mackay
MR. J. COSSART
Boonah
MR. G. WILLEY
Maryborough


festivals held in the district, and the Howard Church flourished
with much energy, both in attendance at public worship and
in Sunday school activities. Amongst well known names asso-
ciated with the work are those of D. Roderick, W. Steley, C.
\ hitby, R. and J. Shaw, J. T. Watkins, W. Stevenson, and W.
Moore.
Howard began as part of the Maryborough (Walker Street)
Circuit but was separated to become an independent circuit in
1887. Extension was made to, and churches erected at, Horton
in 1886, Torbanlea in 1891 and Childers in 1895. At the time
of Methodist Union Howard and Childers became separate cir-
cuits. In 1900 the esteemed church organist at Howard, Miss
Watkins, resigned, and Miss Barker was appointed. Through
all the years Miss Barker has faithfully fulfilled her duties and
still holds the position.
After many happy and progressive years, there was a period
of depression, aggravated by strikes among the coal miners and
the exodus of miners to Ipswich and elsewhere. Now Howard
is associated with the Childers Circuit and is showing signs of
renewed vigour.
At a public meeting held at Gin Gin in August 1898, the
question of providing a church building for the Methodists
was discussed. The President of the Conference, Rev. Dr. H.
Youngman, who was present, explained the pro-
cedure to be followed and opened a subscription list.
A suitable site was given by Messrs. Gibson and Howes of Bin-
gera, and the following trustees were appointed: Messrs.
Angus Gibson, T. Wilson, J. Noon, J. Bates, W. Allan and
S. W. Jack. Contributions were solicited and a generous re-
sponse was received. The church was opened in December
1898, when ‘‘three very fine sermons were preached by the
Rev. T. Ellison to large congregations.”
Good work was consistently done throughout the district and
many preaching places were opened. The first world war
made it impossible for the Home Mission Society to appoint a
missionary to the station, which seriously interrupted the work.
However, in 1923 the Rev. J. Rundle, then a home missionary,
was appointed and immediately reopened services throughout
the district. On the whole the work was well maintained until
the second war again interrupted the supply of a missionary


and the responsibility for the work was undertaken by the
Bundaberg Circuit.
Services were first held at Wataiva in 1898. A church, the
property of the Queensland Kanaka Mission, was purchased
and did service for some time. In 1907 it was taken down and
the materials built into a new church. The preaching place at
Marrondon was opened in 1911. Services are also held at
Wallanville, where it is intended to build a church.
To the late Rev. James Moorhouse, then a home missionary,
must be given the honour of conducting the first services in the
district that now embraces the Kingaroy, Nanango, Wondai
and Murgon Circuits and the Proston Home Mission
Station. Travelling over the Blackbutt Range from
Kilcoy, then known as Hopetoun, he conducted ser-
vices at Kunioon where a number of Victorian Methodists had
settled, at Hazeldean, not far from Nanango, and Edenvale
where a Lutheran Church had been erected by Danish and
Scandanavian settlers, and Kilkivan, then the terminus of the
branch line from the North Coast. Later, the area was con-
stituted a Home Mission Station and amongst others the Rev.
H. R. Rycroft, now the Overseas Mission Secretary, served as
a home missionary.
The extension of the railway line to Kingaroy and the open-
ing up for settlement of country that had been included in
station leases led to very rapid settlement and development.
The Methodists had the distinction of erecting the first church
in the town of Kingaroy. Conference finally decided in 1909
to constitute the Kingaroy Circuit, the boundaries of which ex-
tended from Kilkivan, on the Kingaroy Line, to Benarkin, then
the terminus of the Brisbane Valley Line, and Cooyar the ter-
minus of the branch line from Oakey. The Rev. Alf. A. Mills,
then a probationer, was appointed to the newly-constituted
circuit. The first trustees of the Kingaroy Methodist Church
were Messrs. G. H. Whitney, L. C. Petersen, R. Pook, J. C.
Lorster and L. H. Stebbens.
A more centrally situated site was secured, to which the
church was very soon moved bodily, most of the townspeople
lining the track taken by the steam tractor to view this some-
what unusual sight. The adjacent block was purchased, upon
which the old church now stands, leaving the corner allotment


for a new brick church, which is to be erected as one of the
Centenary proposals.
The original church site was retained for parsonage pur-
poses and three years later a well-designed house was built,
being first occupied by Mr. Mills, who brought his bride from
Tasmania in 1912. Much pioneering work was done by Mr.
Mills and his assistant, the Rev. R. P. Pope, a new arrival from
Cliff College, England, later to be nominated from the Kinga-
roy quarterly meeting as a candidate for the ministry. Yet
later, he became Secretary of the Conference in association
with Mr, Mills during his occupancy for the first time of the
Presidential chair. Mr. Pope succeeded his one-time superin-
tendent, as President of the Conference. He was the first
student from Cliff College to become President of a Methodist
Conference, a fact which gave much joy to the Principal, Rev.
Samuel Chadwick.
In 1910 the circuit was divided, Wondai becoming the head
of the newly-constituted circuit, with Murgon as the second
most important preaching place. With the division of the cir-
cuit, the Rev. R. P. Pope was transferred to Nanango,
one of the oldest towns in Queensland, having been
the stopping-place for coaches on the old road to
Gympie. A fine site was purchased and later a commodious
church was built. Meanwhile, services were held in the Odd-
fellows Hall and a Sunday school started, under the superin-
tendency of Mr. Amos Calvert, a local preacher from the Isis
Circuit. Mr. Calvert was one of the first trustees to be
appointed. Later, he became a home missionary, giving the
church fine service.
Preaching places were opened at Broadwater, Yarraman,
Blackbutt and Upper Yarraman and a church built at each
place. In the immediate Kingaroy area churches were built
at Memerambi, Reedy Creek, Kumbia, Inverlaw and Craw-
ford. The church at Coolabunia, erected by Messrs. John
Perrott and Hubert Horne, was transferred to Methodist
trustees. Later, the Reedy Creek church was sold to the Pres-
byterian Church and the Crawford church removed to Proston.
Mr. Robert Horton, who founded the Horton settlement near
Kumbia, gave a site at Reedy Creek, the timber for the church
being given in the log by settlers and sawn on the ground by


a travelling mill. Mr. Horton also gave generous financial
help and service in the establishment of new causes in the
adjacent areas.
The Kingaroy Circuit was again divided and the Nanango
Circuit established. The Wondai Circuit continued to develop
and was divided by the establishment of the Murgon Circuit
and Proston Home Mission Station. Messrs. John
and Harry Shelton gave outstanding service as local
preachers, trustees and stewards. Mr. Thomas Caswell, pioneer
of the district, and his wife, were much given to hospitality
and in every way helped to build up and consolidate
Methodism in the rapidly growing district of which Wondai,
Murgon and Goomeri are the leading centres. Churches were
erected at Merlewood, Home Creek, Tingoora, Leafdale and
Proston. When married ministers were appointed to the cir-
cuit, parsonages were built at Wondai and Murgon.
No country district in the State is better served with Metho-
dist churches than the circuits whose areas were once included
in the Kingaroy Circuit.


CHAPTER VII
CENTRAL DISTRICT
Wesleyan Methodism had an unassuming beginning in Rock-
hampton, but from it has grown an effective Christian witness
which has extended into the far west, as well as north and
south. In 1863, the Rev. J. H. Fletcher, chair-
man of the district, visited Rockhampton to
make preliminary arrangements for commenc-
ing a church. The population of the town was then small and
there was little to suggest in the unmade roads and the
roughly-built houses and stores, that it would be the site of the
present fine city with a population of about 35,000 people. Mr.
Fletcher resolved that a minister should be appointed to com-
mence church activities. Three young men were at that time
on their way from England to augment the ministerial staff in
Queensland and one of them was designated for Rockhampton.
In less than a year the Rev. Benjamin Dixon from the
British Wesleyan Conference was appointed. He was welcomed
by the few Wesleyans resident in the town who had earnestly
desired to worship under a minister of their own denomina-
tion. The congregation increased and new members were
added to the roll, and in 1870 a church was built. It was a
modest structure, costing £420, but it was a source of pride to
the congregation, and in that far-off day it was one of the best
churches in the town. It was well built, for it is still in exist-
ence and is used every Sunday by another denomination.
The gold rush in the neighbourhood of Rockhampton in-
creased the population of the city considerably and the church
prospered accordingly. During the ministry of the Rev. J.
Spence in 1879 a site in Campbell Street was secured and the
present church was officially opened in 1881, entirely free of
debt. The Sunday school hall which was added some years
later had been used as two suburban churches. They were
pulled down and rebuilt at Campbell Street.
The church has been singularly fortunate in its laymen,
amongst whom were: E. B. Moyle, local preacher, circuit
steward, and Sunday school superintendent; R. Davis, also a
local preacher, to whom distance was no deterrent, a man who


'J; '
MR. E. T. PROCTOR
Brisbane
MR. J. COBEN
Mackay
MR. G. NEILSON
Ayr
MR. A. VOGLE
Boonah


loved God with all his heart and was uncompromising in his
devotion to the gospel; for a period when business necessitated
his living at Emerald, he stood by the church there; G. B.
Jones, a Sunday school worker and circuit steward; W. H.
Rogers, Mrs. G. H. Jenkin, faithful Sunday school workers;
H. Williams and T. B. Renshaw, circuit stewards; J. G.
Donaghey, the leader of the choir for many years. These men
belong to the category of real pioneers whose heroic service
contributed to the progress of Methodism. Mr. N. Wiley has
been church organist for over fifty years, and Mr. J. H. Davis
the conductor of the choir for twenty-one years. Campbell
Street was the principal church in Wesleyan Methodism in the
Central district until union took place. The present Church
officials include Messrs. A. H, Head, C. A. Harding, M. A.
South and A. J. Rawkins.
This was the Mother Church of Primitive Methodism in the
Central and Northern districts. The beginning of the circuit
took place in July 1863, when the Rev. W. Colley, at the in-
vitation of Mr. W. Allen, visited the town and
preached in an empty store in East Street,
opposite the Post Office. On October 3 of the
same year, Mr. Colley officially opened his ministry in the
town. A site was purchased at the corner of Fitzroy and Bols-
over Streets for £725. It was too large for the requirements of
a church so that a portion was sold for £4OO. A church and
parsonage were erected at a cost of £575. The Rev. Robert
Hartley, then a minister in Sydney, opened the church on
January 17, 1864. In the following October Mr. Hartley was
appointed to succeed Mr. Colley as superintendent of the new
circuit. On his first Sunday Mr, Hartley preached not only
in the church, but also in the open-air; open-air services were
a feature of his ministry for some time. The story of Robert
Hartley is briefly told elsewhere in this volume —although it
demands a separate volume to give an adequate account of his-
life and ministry. He was a public figure as well as a church
statesman.
Financial depression made the work of the church difficult
for some years, and property affairs caused anxiety. However,
the circuit survived the crisis and became the centre of a


vigorous policy of expansion. In 1887 the present block of
land in Archer Street was purchased and shortly afterwards
the church was built as a memorial to the great work of Robert
Hartley.
In 18<9. the Rev. James Williams inaugurated a campaign
for the extension of the circuit. All the settlements southward
as far as Raglan and along the Central-West railway line to
the terminus at Emerald were visited bv the preachers. At
Emerald. Mr. R. Davis and his brother extended hospitality
and gave the ministers all possible assistance. W hen the line
was extended to Bogantungan. Mr. Williams secured land and
opened a church built of corrugated iron. This building was
removed from time to time as the line was taken further west-
wards.
From Archer Street. Mr. Williams sent a missionary to
Mackay, Charters Towers, Cairns, Herberton and Cooktown.
During this period, church membership grew from forty-two
to 130. the quarterly income from £32 to £220. and the minis-
terial staff from one to six. In 1889. the Rev. James Williams
returned to the circuit for another period of four years and
resumed the policy of expansion. Many centres under his
guidance became independent circuits.
Many noble men and women have contributed to the splen-
did witness of Archer Street, amongst whom must be men-
tioned William Allen, who arrived in the town in 1862 and
who was largely responsible for the appointment of the first
Primitive Methodist minister: L. G. Landsberg, a local
preacher and circuit steward for many years: T. F. Henderson,
who assisted in raising a substantial sum for the Hartley
Memorial church and who could always be depended upon for
service: Joy Power, connected with the church from 1866;
Stewart Hartley, son of Robert Hartley, a great worker and a
splendid Christian: Mrs. Thommason. a godlv woman, con-
stant in her place in the sanctuary and an example of devotion.
Archer Street continues its good work. Westwood and Bushly,
two country centres, are on the plan, as well as Wandal, a
nearby suburb, where a promising cause has been established.
This circuit had its origin in the enterprising spirit of
Archer Street church, which, under the guidance of Robert


Hartley, adopted a policy of expansion in order to give small
groups of settlers the ministry of the church.
Accordingly, a church was opened for worship
at North Rockhampton in 1880. Very soon it
became the head of a separate circuit, and in 1887 the Rev.
Isaac Castlehow was appointed minister. Before very long so
many preaching places were being served every Sunday—there
have been as many as twenty-two preaching places attached to
the circuit —that North Rockhampton congregation was able to
have the minister conducting worship only one Sunday in four.
The congregations throughout the circuit were necessarily
small as the settlers were few in number; circuit income was
proportionately small, no more than £SO a quarter being the
average income for some time. Ministers were therefore com-
pelled to live frugally!
The loyalty of the laymen of this church has helped to make
possible the successful ministry of the present day. Joseph
and William Dawson, Arthur and E, P. Jones, C. T. Davis,
Welch and his son Ben, gave of their substance, their time and
ability to the church from sheer love for Christ. The circuit
now consists of six preaching places, most of which are well
organised. This Centenary year will be marked by the open-
ing of a beautiful new church. Preparations are also in hand
for the building of a modern church in the rapidly growing
suburb of Frenchville, where a good work has been maintained
for some years. The circuit has a comparatively new par-
sonage adjacent to the church.
The Mount Morgan Circuit grew up around a gold mine. A
hare-looking ridge on the Range became noted for its mineral
content and mining operations, chiefly for gold, were com-
menced in 1882. The population increased until in
a few years the number had risen to about 16,000.
Methodist activity commenced from Rockhampton,
twenty-two miles away. Appointments were made on the
Rockhampton plan, and services were held in a Chinaman’s
shop by the Rev. William Powell in 1883. Sunday school was
conducted in Mr. Jem Scott’s home. In 1886, the Rev. John
Adamson was appointed by the Primitive Methodist Confer-
ence, and a small bark building was secured for a church. The
Wesleyan Church opened operations about a year later, Rev.


J. Snell being the first appointee. Both Churches secured valu-
able central properties in the town, the Primitives in East
Street and the \\ esleyans in Central Street. The two Churches
were eventually merged on the East Street site. About 1925
the industrial depression was severely felt; the mine was
closed down, the population diminished and property was
sold. Small churches at Horse Creek, Mount Usher and
Moonera were sold and Mount Morgan was reduced to a home
mission station.
Better times came, however, the mine was reopened and the
population increased to about 6,000 and this prosperity has
continued. For the past ten years ordained ministers have been
in charge. As well as at the central church services are now
held in places corresponding with the circuit of earlier days.
The development of the Dawson Valley—Callide Valley
Home Mission Station, stretching away for over 100 miles, is
under the supervision of the Mount Morgan Circuit. The re-
sponsible officers of the circuit have had busy times in rising
from a bark hut to the present beautiful church. Such men as
Mr, Samuel Lee and Mr. Joseph Hall served well in many
offices of the church, and to them and their companions a well
deserved tribute is paid.
These two beautiful seaside resorts twelve miles apart are
combined in one circuit. It is all that remains of a large
Primitive Methodist circuit which comprised Cawarral. Bon-
doola and Mount Wheeler, commenced in 1884
during the aggressive ministry in Rockhampton of
the Rev. Robert Hartley. It was the time of the
famous gold rush when large numbers of people came to the
district. A church was built at Cawarral with the Rev. J.
Pike, from England, as the minister. Yeppoon was included
in the circuit, but it had not then many residents, while Emu
Park was practically unknown. Eventually the gold mines
were worked out and the people left the district. Services were
continued at \ eppoon the ministers of the Rockhampton
Circuit. A ride of twenty-six miles to conduct an afternoon
service was then regarded as a privilege. The railway line was
extended to Emu Park and the settled population greatly in-
creased, so that in 1924 a Methodist church was built under
the direction of the Rev. G. Phillips, L.Th., of North Rock-


Hampton Circuit, and a new circuit was constituted. The work
has been sustained with the help of generous friends, amongst
whom must be mentioned Mr. and Mrs. E. P. Jones and family.
Mrs. Jones was the daughter of Mr. Davis who was a loyal
supporter of the church at Bondoola when regular services
were held there. The circuit is prospering with the increasing
importance of the district.
Gladstone is one of the youngest home mission stations in
the Conference, yet one of the strongest and most promising.
Although one of the oldest towns in Queensland—because of
its excellent harbour it was once proposed that the
capital of the State should be located here—-
Methodism was introduced as recently as 1936, when it became
a preaching place in the Mount Larcom Home Mission Station.
Successive home missionaries gave their energies to the
development of the Church activities until in 1940, in view of
the rapid growth of the work and the building up of a strong
organisation, Gladstone was made the headquarters of the
station. An excellent site was bought and steps were taken to
build a church. In 1941 the Rev. G. T. A. Phillipson was ap-
pointed. His knowledge, experience, and organising ability
have been used to their utmost to consolidate the work and to
carry the building scheme to completion. In spite of difficul-
ties occasioned by the war, under the guidance of God this has
been done. In November 1946, a beautiful church was
formally opened by the Senior Military Chaplain, the Rev.
D. S. Brumwell, 0.8. E., E.D., together with the chairman of
the district, Rev. R. S. C. Dingle. The Home Mission Society
has generously supported the work here and there is every
justification for it. There are several preaching places on the
‘‘plmV’ all of which are appreciated by the people.
The story of Methodism in the Sarina area dates to 1884,
when the sparsely-populated district was known as Plane
Creek. Mr. Charles Heron and his family came from Rock-
hampton to take up a property named Carlton. At
Mr. Heron’s invitation, the minister of the Mackay
Circuit visited the district and held services at his home. As
time went on, Grasstree gold mine, Plane Creek Mill on its
erection, Plane Creek West and Alligator Creek were included
in the itinerary. In 1905, an interdenominational mission hall


aBBS / . J^g8^
l&M .ffiw : ' -- ' ■■ 7 Wifi'* >■ i& ,~ 'Mto i> -' /v<aSiw888lB»Bfr>- smwmm
" «Wp^ JWgBMi*- a -.:
ft \ Jfim. a! W&& HS^M
■- . .. «j gpfe •■■ |^H
THE METHODIST INLAND MISSION CAR


was erected at Alligator Creek. How the work was sustained
over the bush tracks, and the crossing of tidal rivers infested
with alligators, reads like an epic. As settlement by the sugar
cane farmers became more general, and the Plane Creek Sugar
Mill attracted settlement, the colony at Sarina inlet was trans-
ferred to the site of present-day Sarina.
In 1909 Sarina was made a home mission station with
preaching places at Sunnyside, Homebush, Eton, and the
Hatton district. There was no church building of any
denomination available and the missionary had to rely on the
generosity of the hotel-keepers for the use of their halls. Mr.
and Mrs. W. R. Williams, who had given the missionary the
hospitality of their home, were vitally interested in their
beloved church and offered their home as a meeting place. A
block of land was donated by Mrs. Williams, and the first
church was opened in January 1912. Steady growth con-
tinued, and twenty-five years later a new church was erected at
a cost of £559. Appropriate furnishings were installed and the
recent acquisition of a fine organ completes a beautiful place
of worship. A parsonage received its first occupants in April
1946.
Mention must be made of lay members who served the
church and helped to extend the work of the Kingdom. Fore-
most is the name of Mr. W. R. Williams, whose interest has
been unremitting; others are Messrs. W. German, T. S.
Howard, W. C. Allan, E. A. Everitt, W. J. Hill, J. W. Curtis,
J. Edmunds, W. Brooks, who gave their services as local
preachers. Other helpers and leaders were: Messrs. IN. Corbet,
Robert Henry, S. H. Williams, and W. A. Thomas. The
inestimable work of the women in guilds and societies made
possible the progress of the circuit.
In 1881, when Mackay was little more than a township, Mr.
Charles Green came from Brisbane to establish an engineering
business. He was an ardent primitive Methodist, having been
associated with that Connexion since within a year or
two of its inception in Queensland. He was the first
local preacher of the denomination in Brisbane and an active
worker in the Sunday school at Windmell Street and Leich-
hardt Street. Immediately he settled at Mackay he began to*
organise Methodist work with characteristic zeal and industry^


His strong personality soon made an impression upon the
religious life of the district. He held regular services at the
Good Templars’ Hall and conducted a successful Sunday
school with the able assistance of his wife. Mr. Green occupied
the position of superintendent of the school for sixteen years.
An earnest temperance worker, he was leader in the Band of
Hope Movement which was then at the height of its popularity.
It is noteworthy that his son, Mr. W. H. Green, is at present
the Australian president of the Band of Hope Union.
By the end of 1882 the support accorded the work of Mr.
Green was so encouraging that the Primitive Methodist Con-
ference appointed the Rev. W. Faulkner as superintendent of
a newly constituted circuit there. He commenced his work in
1883 and by that time the services and Sunday schools were
being conducted in various centres in an area extending 100
miles north and south of Mackay.
Associated with Mr. Green, and of immense help to the
minister, was Mr. A. H. Stokoe who arrived in Mackay from
England in 1883. He gave himself with zeal to local preach-
ing and Sunday school work for three years, when he offered
himself as a candidate for the ministry and was accepted. Mr.
Stokoe laboured for forty years in thirteen circuits before be-
coming a supernumerary. He was a man of dauntless faith
who cherished a sincere love for Christ. As a diligent pastor,
faithful preacher, full of love and sympathy for his people, he
provoked many to good works. It was, however, his service
as one of the pioneers of the Methodist organisation at Mackay
that constituted his most significant contribution to the
development of the Church.
In 1898 the church at Mackay was removed from its founda-
tions by a cyclone and had to be replaced. In 1914 it was en-
larged but four years later it was completely destroyed by
another cyclone. The Rev. R. P. Watkinson who was the min-
ister at the time solicited help from Methodist Conferences in
the Southern States, as well as in Queensland, with the result
that £I,BOO was contributed towards the rebuilding of the
church. It was not until 1924 that the present substantial
church was erected. The opening ceremony was conducted by
the Rev. Dr. G. E. Rowe, assisted by Mr. W. H. Green. The


circuit now comprises four country preaching places and two
suburban churches.
Situated on a branch railway line north-west from Emerald,
Clermont is the centre of cattle stations; adjacent is the famous
Blair Athol coal mining area. In 1865 it was second in im-
portance to Copperfield, then a prosperous mining
town with a considerable population. Here a large
church was built and a successful ministry conducted amongst
the miners. However, mining activities gradually declined
and the miners removed to other districts, especially to the
gold-mining settlements near Rockhampton. In 1896, the
church was sold and Clermont received closer attention from
the ministers. The only part of the Copperfield church now
in use is the bell which is regularly rung at Clermont to call
the people to worship. Although the work at Copperfield was
not permanent, it was very much blessed and owned of God.
The Rev. T. Brassington was appointed to Clermont in re-
sponse to a request from interested people in 1885. The church
was erected the following year, the first blocks being set in the
ground by the Mayor of Clermont, Mr, W. H. Thompson and
Mr. J. F. Beet, head teacher at the Copperfield school. The Rev.
T. B. Holmes, of Rockhampton, conducted the opening services
on September 19th, 1886. The circuit was then known as Peak
Downs and it included Copperfield and a number of station
properties in an extensive district. Mr. T. Heard was one of
the loyal helpers in the circuit and his son, Mr, T. J. Heard, is
to-day one of the stewards. The Rev. E. J. Taylor had his early
religious training in Clermont. The circuit now comprises
Clermont, Capella and Blair Athol.
This mission was constituted by Conference of 1946 as a
part of a new policy by means of which vast areas associated
with old established circuits and home mission stations will be
patrolled by ministers and missionaries annually.
Rev. G. D. Smith, L.Th., was appointed superin-
tendent of the mission which comprises three circuits
and one home mission station. Barcaldine , the administrative
centre, is a very old Methodist circuit. In 1887, the Rev. James
Spalding, of the Primitive Methodist Circuit, paid a visit to
the newly-formed township to establish Christian work. A
properly constituted Methodist Society was opened shortly


afterwards. A small iron building which had been used at
Bogantungan, Pine Hill and Jericho, as the railway line was
extended westwards, was erected as a place of worship for the
people at Barcaldine. When the town became well established
a new and substantial church and a parsonage were built. The
area of the circuit has always been extensive and now it in-
cludes Alpha and Aramac.
Longreach, a substantial town seventy miles from Barcaldine
is the centre of famous sheep stations and is included in the
Central West Methodist Mission. Methodism has been repre-
sented in the town since 1892, when the Rev. William Little, of
Barcaldine, called a meeting of those interested in the forma-
tion of a Primitive Methodist Church. There was a good re-
sponse and some of the best known townspeople attended the
gathering. A committee was appointed to organise the work
and arrangements were made for Mr. Little to conduct services
and to exercise pastoral oversight twice every month. A church
was opened in the same year. George Meacham, Jack Mills,
H. Ricketts, D. Mitchell, E. Peterson, McFarlane and other
well-known business people gladly gave the enterprise support.
Rev. W. H. Greenwood was the first minister to be appointed
to the circuit in 1893.
Winton has been the centre of Methodist activities for fifty
years, and at some periods it was the base for the visitation of
the people living on distant sheep stations. The church was
built in 1910 and the parsonage was brought from Charters
Towers and rebuilt in 1915. The name of the Rev. E. Ball is
honoured here for his ministry of two terms. During the first,
lasting six years, he won the esteem of all classes of people.
Now that it is included in the Central-West Mission it will
form a link with the Federal Inland Mission.
Blackall, together with Tambo, appeared in the Home
Mission report as a Home Mission Station to be supplied in
1904. For many years it was hoped to establish the Methodist
work here and visits had been made by the minister stationed
at Barcaldine. A hall was used for worship until 1913 when
a church was built. A consistently good work has been con-
ducted here.
Adjacent to the Mackay Circuit, lies the extensive Pinnacle-
Nelherdale Home Mission Station, which embraces a large por-


tion of the former Proserpine Station. This wide-spread area
of eleven preaching places was pioneered from
Mackay in the early days of settlement. At first
a considerable portion of the congregations was
composed of Kanakas or their descendants. Churches are well
established at Pinnacle and Netherdale, while at Galen the
work is conducted in co-operation with the Presbyterian
Church.
The Primitive Methodists at Rockhampton, under the direc-
tion of the Rev. James Williams, introduced regular services
at Emerald in 1879. It was then the terminus of the Central-
West railway line. In Mr. R. Davis and his brother
me were found loyal helpers. They entertained the
visiting ministers and accepted the responsibility for the work
in their absence. Mr. Geo. Kerr, a Methodist of sterling
quality, also cordially co-operated. In 1866, Emerald became
a separate circuit with the Rev. T. Nock as the minister.
The work has continued without interruption and earnest
efforts have been made to meet the needs of the population,
which is largely composed of railway employees, and of the
district as far east as Duaringa and west to Bogantungan.
Recently a memorial gate to the property at Emerald was
officially dedicated by the President of the Conference, Rev.
A. A. Mills, to the memory of the late Mr. and Mrs. A. J. Kidd,
who were worshippers and staunch supporters of the Emerald
Church for fifty years.


CHAPTER VIII
NORTHERN DISTRICT
The story of the beginning of Methodism in Townsville is
told on another page. The Rev. S. Mather in 1876 laid solid
foundations and inaugurated a work which has extended to the
whole of the Northern District. The remoteness of
the city from the closer settled communities of the
South has developed in the people an independence which is
revealed in initiative and enterprise. This has been reflected
in the life of the Church. The circuit comprises thirteen
preaching places in the city and suburbs and it has a staff of
three ordained ministers.
Two cyclones of considerable intensity caused widespread
devastation in the city and severely damaged Church properties
in 1898 and 1903. The work of the Church was disturbed by
these visitations and great expense was involved in reconstruct-
ing the buildings, Stokes Street church having to be recon-
structed and an entirely new parsonage built. Despite these
interruptions, Stokes Street (now known as Central) has main-
tained a strong Christian witness in the city and has inspired
and directed the opening of new churches and circuits. Every
phase of Church organisation has been attempted with good
success.
Early in its history the Church was supported with generous
service by the families of Dean, Tunbridge, Hannaford, Ben-
netto, and Castling. Their work has been continued with
similar devotion in recent years by Messrs. A. E. Dean, J.
Squires, T. McCahon and H. D. Strange, the Bain and the
Suthers families, all of whom have occupied positions of re-
sponsibility giving their talents and resources with willing
hearts.
The church at West End , one of the first suburbs to be
developed, was built in 1886. This building was destroyed bv
the cyclone of 1898. From the wreckage a small building was
erected which served as a temporary meeting place. The
present church has been a spiritual home for large numbers of
people, its warmhearted fellowship and its gracious atmosphere
being famous throughout North Queensland. The Church was


blessed with godly laymen —preachers, class leaders, Sunday
school workers —amongst whom were the families of Corn-
macks, Cockerill, Charge, Ackers, Cooper, McClelland*
Blakey, Poultney, Hall, Walker, Swails, Popham, Phillips*
Mathers, Camp, Webb, Beet, Bennetto and Trollope. Their
work has been maintained during the past quarter of a cen-
tury by devoted followers who entered into a rich heritage*
amongst them Messrs. W. H. Green, W. S. Mather, W. and B,
Phillips, M. J. Green, A. Kennedy, C. and A. Lonsdale and A.
Maguire, together with their families.
To maintain a progressive youth work a hall was opened on
an excellent site opposite the church where it is intended to
build a handsome new church as a memorial to the Methodist
pioneers. The parsonage, a fine modern building, was opened
in 1934.
Methodist services were commenced at South Townsville by
Mr. George Camp in 1881. His industry and fervour led to
the formation of a group of Christian people who made great
sacrifices to secure a church building at the corner of Allen
and Davidson Streets. This was partially wrecked by the
cyclone in 1898. The building was restored and in 1921 re-
moved to its present site. An aggressive Christian witness has
been given here in which the families of Ogden, Pengelly, Han-
cox, Bailment, Johnson, Blyth, and Miss C. Parsons and Mr. V.
Woolcock, have cheerfully co-operated. The young people
have always shown great interest here and as evidence of their
disposition to assist the Church the Order of Knights, at their
own expense, and largely by their own efforts, erected a sub-
stantial brick fence to the property, in preparation for the
building of the new church. The Men’s Brotherhood, which
was formed in 1933 and has been supported by the men from
all the churches in the circuit, has been a very successful
feature at South Townsville.
Other families whose support has made South Townsville
church successful are Weeks, Taylor, Lear and Saunders.
Services have been held at Aitkenvale since 1899. The first
church was completely destroyed by a cyclone and until 1914*
when the new church was built, services were held in private


homes. Mr. and Mrs. Gervis Walker and family have given
unstinlingly of their time, energy and resources to Aitkenvale
church, and through difficult and anxious times were a source
of encouragement to the members.
The church at Oonoonha was originally situated at Idalia
Estate. Here the services and the Sunday school were main-
tained by Mr. W. Swails, a local preacher from Townsville.
When the population of Idalia decreased the church was moved
to Oonoonha in 1924. The Sunday school and other young
people’s activities have constituted the principal work here and
much credit for its success is due to the faithfulness of Miss J.
Ware —now Mrs. R. J. Nielsen of Ayr—and the suppoit of the
CTDonnel family.
Hermit Park became a preaching place as the population
moved out to this new suburb. The Methodist work began in
1923 and and an attractive church was built in 1926 to which
a hall was added in 1931. Mrs. R. Grimmer and the families
of Hall, Ross, Hinspeter, Andersen and Forno have contri-
buted to the prosperity of this church. An excellent parsonage
has been provided by the circuit as the residence of the third
minister.
In recent years regular work has been inaugurated with
much promise of future development at Garhutt , where a
church was built in 1935, Belgian Gardens , Upper Ross , Pim-
lico, Railway Estate and North Ward. At Stuart there stands
the John Vidler Memorial Hall. Mr, Vidler conducted a Sun-
day school in this district with true Christian zeal for many
years and it was his ambition to have a hall built. He died
without seeing the fulfilment of his ambition. As a memorial
to his life and work the Townsville Methodists combined to
erect a hall which was opened in 1934. Through the courtesy
of Mr. and Mrs. Burdell services have been held in their home
at Bohle Vale since 1910. Since 1945 a monthly service has
been held in the railway goods shed at Rollingstone, thirty-two
miles from Townsville. It is hoped to erect a suitable building
here.
The Centenary Year of Queensland Methodism marks the
seventieth year of Methodism in Charters Towers, which was


established within five years of the discovery of the goldfields
there. The first Wesleyan minister to visit the dis-
trict was the Rev. W. B. Mather, then stationed in
Townsville. A meeting was held at which were
present Messrs. J. T. Bytheway, Wm. Wallace, Win. Millett,
R. Hand and W. H. Phiilipson. It was decided to request the
New South Wales-Queensland Conference of 1877 to send a
resident minister and in the meantime regular services were
conducted by Messrs. Bytheway and G. C. Robinson. A house
of stone and plaster was bought to be used as a parsonage. In
1879 the present Gill Street land was acquired, and the first
Wesleyan church was opened in October of the same year. Ser-
vices at Millchester were commenced in 1881, and at Ravens-
wood in 1885. In that year also the block of land on which
the present hall and parsonage stand was purchased, and the
parsonage was built. Shortly afterwards services were started
at Rishton and Black Jack. The work progressed so rapidly
that an assistant was engaged and Rev. J . Brassington was ap-
pointed to Ravenswood, which was constituted a separate cir-
cuit. A new church was built at Gill Street, the old building
serving as a school hall. The Millchester church, which already
had been moved from Black Jack, was removed to a new site
and renamed the Yalland Street Church. The work at Rich-
mond Hill began in 1895 with a Sunday school held in a shed
with bag-covered sides.
Primitive Methodism was launched in 1883 under the minis-
try of Rev. M. Foggon. The first church building was com-
pleted in Mary Street in 1884, and in 1885 a fine commodious
church was built in Hodgkinson Street. Primitive Methodist
churches were built at Sandy Creek and Black Jack, and ser-
vices were commenced at Ravenswood Junction (now Min-
gela), Sellheim and at various places as far west as Torrens
Creek. Although the population of the town has declined and
the work of the Church has suffered accordingly, a strong
Christian witness is maintained. The Blackheath and Thorn-
burgh Colleges are served by this church.
The Ayr Circuit was established as the Ayr and Brandon
Home Mission Station in January 1912 on the arrival of the


Rev. Henry W. Prouse. Three months later the Bowen and
Proserpine Districts were included in the station. The
foundation officials were Messrs. G. P. Jenkins (senior
steward), Arthur W. Farmer (secretary), Thomas Jackson,
Edgar W. Lewis, F. McLauchlan, Alfred J. Green, F. G. Hux-
ley, G. Mackenroth, E. H. Hoyer, H. Highfield, Mesdames T.
Jackson, A. J. Green, G. P. Jenkins, T. E. Smith and Miss
Green.
The closer settlement of Lower Burdekin land attracted
many Methodist families including migrants from the mining
areas of Charters Towers and Ravenswood. Developmental
work necessitated additional pastoral assistance, and in Janu-
ary, 1913, Rev. John J. Wilson took up duties at Proserpine.
The Bowen-Proserpine area was constituted a separate station
in 1914. After six years of gracious self-denying service given
by Missionary James Gist, the Ayr-Brandon station was con-
stituted a circuit in 1923. Since then the boundaries of the
circuit have undergone several changes. A further division
took place in 1937 when Home Hill became a separate circuit.
Half an acre of land centrally situated in Ayr was purchased
in 1912 and the church was opened in 1913. The parsonage
was built in 1929 and a school hall was opened in 1935. Giru
church was opened in 1926.
Methodist families pioneering on the southern bank of the
Burdekin River welcomed the ministration of the home mis-
sionary who visited the settlement from Ayr in 1912. Among
the early settlers upon the Inkerman Estate were: Mr.
and Mrs. Ledger, Mr. Bates, Mr. and Mrs. S. A. Mac-
kenzie, Mr. and Mrs. J. Berryman, Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Lucas, Mr. George Neilson (who later removed to the
Ayr district), Thomas Fowler. Mr. Berryman (at Lower
Inkerman) and Mr. Fowler (at Upper Inkerman) opened their
homes for religious services and Sunday schools, Mrs.
Mackenzie and Mr. Lucas being the respective superintendents.
Outstanding service as local preachers was given by Messrs.
T. H. Lucas and G. Nielson.
The early arrival in the district of Mr. and Mrs. W. Cross-
man and Mr. and Mrs. E. E. Turnbull materially assisted the
work at Home Hill. The site upon which the present church
stands was purchased in 1914 and a small mission hall was


built. The main portion of the present church was erected in
1922, and in 1929 extensions were made. Although the Home
Hill area had been constituted a Home Mission Station in
1923, it was dependent upon the Ayr circuit for pastoral over-
sight until 1928.
It was constituted a circuit in 1937. Owing to disabilities
brought about by war conditions the circuit was worked with
the Ayr Circuit from 1943 to 1946.
The first mention of Ingham in Methodist annals was in
1889, when Revs. W. H. Harrison and T. Ellison drove from
Townsville through the Herbert River District to Cardwell.
On Sunday they conducted the first service in the
Ingham Board Hall, Ingham, going on to preach
at Victoria Estate and Halifax. At the earnest request of the
people they continued their periodical visits, making the trip
to Cardwell by boat. The first home missionary appointed
was Mr. Thomas Turner who was a tower of strength in or-
ganising the building of the first church, in association with
Messrs. Frank Fraser and Kingsbury. Rev. C. C. Truman fol-
lowed and was untiring in his efforts and in March 1899 the
church was opened free of debt.
Mr. John W. Grimes, circuit steward and local preacher,
with his wife and family contributed much to the strength of
the Sunday school and the work among the young people. His
daughter, Mrs. A. Renouf, with her family, carries on the work
to-day. Mr. and Mrs. Albert Luscombe generously bequeathed
their beautiful home for a parsonage in 1923. As it was some
distance from the church, it was sold in 1926, and the “Lus-
combe Memorial” parsonage was built at the rear of the
church. Among the many names prominent in the history of
the church are: Mr. and Mrs. C. Maidens, J. Selby, Mrs. Cum-
mins, Mr. J. Stallan, of Tara, and Mrs. E. Smith, of Cordelia;
these were workers in the early days. With the lifting of the
depression in 1932 the idea of a new church became a live
question and the scheme gradually changed from a wooden
building costing £1,300 to the final decision to build a beauti-
ful brick church at a cost of £3,300. It was opened in 1935.
Services are held in several centres where the population is
engaged in work on cane farms and the sugar mills. There is
a percentage of Italians resident in the area and attempts have


been made to bring them within the influence of the Church.
In 1883 the Rev. E. T. Lloyd opened a Primitive Methodist
Mission in Cairns and either from lack of public support or
the inability of Conference to appoint a minister, it was closed
two years later. Another beginning was made in 1886
by the Rev. R. Newell under discouraging circum-
stances as there were no Church members and no congregation.
Mr. Newell called a public meeting of those who might be in-
terested in the re-opening of Methodist services. A few lay-
men attended and agreed to support the minister in his efforts.
Services were therefore held and increasingly attracted the
people. A site in Abbott Street which had been bought by
Mr. Lloyd, was sold and a new site was secured in Sachs Street
where a useful hall was erected. The building committee
comprised Messrs. Hill, Moody, Blair, Roberts and Mitchell,
men who loyally assisted and encouraged the minister.
By 1910 the work was in a very stable condition with much
promise for the future. A site for the parsonage was bought
and the house erected in the following year. In 1923 another
site for the church was acquired and the building removed
there, enlarged and improved. With the increase of the popula-
tion of the town and the settlement of the sugar cane lands in
the surrounding district, the circuit gained strength. It was
agreed that a new and a modern church was necessary to give
due status to Methodism and to be in harmony with the quality
of the public buildings of the town. During the ministry of
the Rev. C. A. Read the church was organised around this idea
and strenuous efforts and joyful sacrifices were made which
culminated in the opening of the present fine brick church in
1937. It was equipped with a fine pipe organ due to the
leadership of Mr. A, Nicholls, assisted by Mr. Les Little and
Miss E. Stillman, and appropriate furnishings which are an
aid to worship. The undertaking involved an expenditure of
£5,000.
The trustees of the property represent the leaders in the
work of this progressive church: Messrs. W. J. E. Stillman,
C. H. W. Jonssen, T. Edwards, J. P. E. Biggs, T. E. Collis, F.
Bottrell, W. F. Millett, F. R. Ireland, H. E. Dann, S. 0. Still-
man, N. H. Strange.
A church at Draper Street was opened in 1929. The success


of the work has led to plans being made for the erection of a
new and more ornate building and this will be undertaken in
the near future. Freshwater commenced as a Sunday school
conducted in a public hall by Mr. and Mrs. N. H. Strange, who
journeyed from Cairns every Sunday for the purpose. In 1909
a church was built and now it is proposed to build a hall foi
youth activities to be known as a War Memorial, commemorat-
ing the sacrifice of the young men of the district who laid
down their lives. Regular work is also being conducted at
Mulgrave and Edgehill.
Although the first church was functioning in Mareeba
earlier, the first records available are of October 1913, when a
committee consisting of Messrs. M. Briggs, F. Brims, W. Brims
and A. Couper was appointed. Among the mem-
bers who took an active interest were Mr. J. K.
Lawson and his wife. Mrs. Lawson still maintains
a deep interest in the church, though unable to attend the ser-
vices. The preaching places included Atherton, Bibohra,
Dingo Pocket, Waringle, Peeramon, Malanda, Tolga, Barrine,
Russell Pocket, Wells, Dougherty, Butcher’s Creek, Dirran and
Kulara, varying from five to forty-six miles from Mareeba. At
various times the station came under the ministrations ot
Cairns and Herberton Circuits.
In September 1921 an appalling mining disaster occurred at
Mt. Mulligan, when all the men in the mine—seventy-five in
number —were killed. A Methodist Memorial Church was
erected and a Sunday school was started. Other preaching
places opened up were Mt. Molloy, Kuranda, Chillagoe,
Thornborough, Koorboora, Petford, Alma Den, Dimbulah,
Emerald Creek and Julatten. At present the circuit consists of
Mareeba, Mt. Mulligan, Mt. Molloy, Dimbulah and Kuranda
and Mt. Garnet.
Mareeba church is unique, the property being a united
Methodist and Presbyterian church and hall. The Sunday ser-
vices are conducted on alternate weeks by represenatives of the
two Churches. Week days are allotted to the two denomina-
tions. The choir and the Sunday school, of which Mr. A. K.
Lawson was superintendent for many years, consist of mem-
bers of both Churches. The property is under the administra-
tion of a committee composed of an equal number of repre-


sentatives from each Church, and expenses are equally divided.
A very comfortable Methodist parsonage has been built.
The first church at Herberton was erected in 1886, and a
small cause was established. A church, as a memorial to those
who fell in the War of 1914-1918 replaced this building.
About 1924 Missionary and Mrs. F. W. James
opened the parsonage to several children from
country centres attending the High School. This was the com-
mencement of the Herberton Hostel which now has a fine repu-
tation throughout the district. Missionary and Mrs. R. Toft
ably carry on the work at the hostel in addition to the work of
the Home Mission Station. As there are about seventy chil-
dren in residence, the responsibility and labour connected with
this branch of the church’s activity rest heavily on the
shoulders of the missionary and his wife, but the influence on
the lives of these young people makes the effort well worth-
while.
In 1896 Mossman was first recognised as a settlement, and
the Rev. Irvine Weir, Primitive Methodist Minister of Cook-
town, began monthly visits, preaching in Mr. John Thygesson’s
home. He was followed by the Rev. Thomas
Powell who called a meeting to consider building a
church. Mr. T. W. Crawford was appointed secretary of the
meeting, and Mr. T. Garland, treasurer. Other members of
the first committee were Messrs. Lawson, G. R. Rutherford,
Duffing, Barnard, James, Johnston, Lock, Rex, Archbold, A.
Muntz and G. W. Muntz. Later Mr. Crawford was made trust
secretary, retaining the office till 1912.
The arrival of the Rev. R. H. Blamires in July 1899 saw the
institution of regular services at Port Douglas and Mossmaru
the circuit stewards being Messrs. G. W. Muntz and G. R.
Rutherford. Other members were Mrs. Muntz, Snr., Mrs.
Neilson, Misses M. and S. Muntz and Messrs. Neilson, A.
Muntz and T. Smith. The building of the church followed and
it was opened in December 1900. Messrs. G. Neilson, A. and
F. W. Muntz did faithful work for many years as local
preachers. In 1903 a parsonage was built and in 1907 the
appointment of a circuit minister was made.
In June 1912, the Rev. R. E. Bacon was given permission by
the trustees of Saltwater school to use the building for divine


service. Mowbray church was opened in 1911, the trustees
being Messrs. A. Lambert, W. Burdett, T. T. Divine, G. Neilsen
and G. W. Muntz. Associated with these as willing and ener-
getic workers were Mesdames A. Lambert, Robins, Anderson,
Lambert, Allen and Burginake, with the Misses Robins, Ander-
son, Tresise and Stewart. Mount Carbine church also was
opened by Mr. Bacon.
In 1863 a Congregational minister, the Rev. Edward Griffith
(father of Sir Samuel Griffith), commenced a church at Bowen,
but in 1866 he resigned. As no other minister was appointed,
a local preacher, Mr. E. Cocks, requested the Wesleyan
Conference to supply Bowen, and one of the first
ministers sent from England, Rev. Benjamin Dixon, was ap-
pointed. He died two weeks later.
No Methodist service was held from that time until 1934,
when Conference recommended the Home Hill Circuit to take
an active interest in Bowen, and in 1935 a resident minister
was appointed. Mr. A. G. Nielsen laid the foundations of a
permanent Methodist cause. Services were held in the Wan-
garatta Shire Hall until July 1939 when the church was
opened. During this year services were commenced at Collins-
ville., and by courtesy of the Church of England services are
held in the Anglican Church hall. A site has been secured and
the building of a church has been included in the Centenary
Celebrations.
Mr. and Mrs. R. Fischer, Mr. and Mrs. A. G. Bustkie, Mrs.
Dawson and Mr. C. L. McKay are prominent workers in the
Bowen church. Mrs. J. Edwards is the prinicpal worker at
Collinsville and it is through her energy that the church will
shortly be built. Other loyal workers at Collinsville are Mr.
and Mrs. A. Blandford, Mrs. Smedley and Mrs. Gorton.


EPILOGUE
By the Rev. H. M. Wheeler, Ex-President-General.
The record of our first hundred years with its story of faith,
courage and sacrifice is a great challenge and inspiration to
us as we face our second century. We are in the midst of cir-
cumstances far removed from those of our pioneers, but under-
neath there are the same needs and we have the same Gospel.
There are many factors competing for the allegiance of our
people. The Church is no longer the social centre. The motor
car and the week-end escape to the seaside or country, the
world-wide movement away from Church life and the increas-
ing non-observance of the Lord’s Day as a day of worship are
some of the factors against which we have to contend. In the
background there is a world situation full of tension, hunger
and need, and the inevitable disruptions which follow a world-
wide catastrophe. It is obvious that our generation is in a
dangerous condition both nationally and internationally.
We are thus set in circumstances which challenge us. “We
are upon an engagement very difficult.” It is indeed a great
thing to be matched with such an hour. This is a time for
greatness. We are aware, as no previous age was aware, of
the fact of the underlying unity of the world. Australia’s
isolation belongs to the past and can never come back. We
have been caught up into world movements and inevitably we
shall enter into the main stream of the world’s life. What will
be our national contribution to the international realm? What
can our Methodism do for “The Conversion of Australia?”
There is also, for the first time in Christian history, the
emergence of the World Church. We belong to a world fel-
lowship which holds the secret of international goodwill, co-
operation and peace. Methodism must therefore think and
continue her work in the far reaching and all embracing terms
of the Kingdom of God. Christian ideals are vital to every
sphere of life and unless Christian standards prevail our world
will go down into a great darkness.
What then is required of us in this day of opportunity?
Nothing less than what was required of Wesley and his people
in the eighteenth century. In the midst of doubt and moral


evil they demonstrated the power of God in the life of man,
and by their pursuit of perfection they elevated the whole life
of their day.
The moral evils of our day are so firmly entrenched that
nothing less than a great religious movement will overthrow
them. Can Methodism do for this generation what early
Methodism did for the people of England? Is the Spirit of
God less willing to redeem men and women, is the power of
Christ and His Gospel less than in the 18th century? Our
answers to these questions will determine our future.
Our resources are truly in God. There are clear signs that
the flame of divine love is burning, a new zeal is manifesting
itself. Here and there throughout the Church are many devout
people and they know that the hour is striking for another
moral and spiritual advance. The love of God is yearning
over our world, seeking for those who are willing to be "‘high-
ways of the Spirit.”
Here then is where we stand. By the grace of God let the
Methodist people, grateful for a rich heritage, conscious of
large privileges and responsibilities, offer themselves afresh
to God that He may fashion them into an instrument for the
fulfilment of His purpose here under the Southern Cross. If
once again we can lose ourselves in a great venture for God
and bring all that we have under the law of Christ—"‘Whoso-
ever shall lose his life for my sake shall find it” —then will
Methodism again become “a highway of the Spirit.” ""The
Best Of All Is God Is With Us.”


Wholly set up, printed, and bound in Australia by W. R. Smith & Paterson Pty. Ltd.
Kemp Place, Valley, Brisbane
1947




i /
I € ' /
?! *
i >
I
I
Jill
11 I ■ i • : ; fe - i
pB s
•I * 1
Si
I *
S • > i
i ■
I
;
' I
I
’
I


■
■
:
■
■
«# ' •
|H L
.
■
■
\ "
■; *:’j;: :
.
-
i I
feMBni \ I
