





ANNEXATION:
A QUESTION
FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA ANT) VICTORIA.
SOME RESIDENTS IN THE SOUTH-EASTERN DISTRICT OF SOUTH
AUSTRALIA.
“ Bear it
To some remote and desert place, quite out
Of our dominions; and that there thou leave it,
Without more mercy, to its own protection.”
WiNTEa’s Tale. Act ii., scene 1,
MELBOURNE:
HENRY TOLMAN DWIGHT, BOURKE STREET EAST.
1865.




ANNEXATION;
A QUESTION FOE SOUTH AUSTRALIA AND VICTORIA.
Annexation is an ugly word. It reminds us of certain Americanisms
which, perhaps for want of knowing better, we call “ nefarious.”
It reminds us of the large strips and slices added on, piece by piece,
until that great mass of geographical patchwork, formerly known as
the United States, became an immense and unwieldy country. But
we are not going to draw your attention now to that kind of annexa-
tion : whether it was better or worse for all parties concerned it is
not what we mean. It is important that we should not prejudice
our readers by a word ; so we had better say at once that we mean **
something beneficial to every one—something advantageous to every
colonist, but especially so to the two colonies whose names are at
the head of this pamphlet.
South Australia is the largest colony on this continent. Western
Australia used to be, and next New South Wales ; but these were
only made to look so large by extending imaginary boundaries into
country as little known as the South Pole. But South Australia
began to enlarge her boundaries about five or six years ago, and
then in a much more definite manner than any of the sister colonies.
The first extension was made in the direction of Western Australia.
We think it was Sir Richard McDonnell who first called the atten-
tion of the Home Government to the fact, that pastoral occupation
had rolled to the westward beyond the limits of the province, and
he stated that if the Government were to afford police protection to
the new residents they must at least be allowed to exercise a con-
trol over the land. The consequence of this was, that a new
boundary was struck, straight as usual, without reference to natural
boundaries, and in a north and south direction. The next exten-
sion was to the north in consequence, as every one knows, of the
discoveries of Mr. Stuart. South Australia carried her boundaries
right up to the north coast; and from thenceforth the name of the
colony—always inconvenient—became completely absurd. Another


important result of this change was, that the northern boundary of
the colony became a natural one. Previous to this time the
boundaries of South Australia, on the east, west, and north sides
were absolute straight lines at right angles to each other. Unlike
anything seen on maps in any other country in the world, except,
perhaps, in the arbitrary divisions between some of the States of
North America.
At present the east and west boundaries of the colony are meridian
lines. The nature of the country on the west is not known, but the
east is as well explored as it can be, and it is found, as might be
expected, that there is no natural division which at all corresponds
with these lines. Why these were chosen is obvious enough. It
was necessary to declare the boundaries of new colonies somewhere,
and as the nature of the country was not known, straight lines were
the only ones which could be adopted. The plan was simply to
mark out a certain number of degrees roxind a geographical feature
which was known, and to say, this colony shall consist of so many
degrees of latitude and longitude, its boundaries shall be such a line
east and such a line west, that is to say, for the present, until the
country is explored. No one can say that such a course is not con-
venient and necessary. It provides for the exigencies of the case,
and saves the designers the trouble of thinking. But if it was
necessary then, no one in his senses will contend that it ought to be
permanent. If it was convenient then, no one will say that it is in
any way convenient now, at least in those places which are well
explored. If any of our readers doubt why these straight lines
should not be permanent, we shall trouble him to read a few geo-
graphical and political inconveniences to which they may give rise.
As long as the straight line boundary runs through good open
country there is no difficulty about it, at least in one sense, but it
does not divide the country naturally, and it is difficult to preserve
any landmark that may be made. But supposing the boundary to
be struck from the mouth of a river, the line may cut off several of
the loops which the stream makes in the course of its windings,
and it will happen that a sti’eam which has its mouth in one colony
has its channel in another a few miles further up, and thus winds in
and out between the two for the whole of its navigable course.
Persons may say, what matter? And we dare say there are many
so obtuse or so indifferent as to think it an affair of very little conse-
quence. But just consider the thing for a few moments. A vessel
starting with cargo from the sea to some distant portion of the
country watered by the stream we are supposing, would in its jour-
ney be sometimes in the province of one government and sometimes
in that of another. Supposing these two governments to have
different tariffs, and to be as little inclined to accommodate each
other, on such questions, as the present governments of New South


Wales and Victoria, our supposed vessel must either pay duties to
both colonies, or cease to make use of the river. To show that the
case is no hypothetical one, our readers will see that the river
Glenelg has its mouth in the colony of Victoria, and makes in its
navigable course a large loop into the colony of South Australia.
We have just said that straight boundary lines do not, in one
sense, present great difficulties when running through open country,
but here again an exception must be made. Either the open coun-
try is good or it is bad. If bad, the difficulty is in preserving any
boundary at all. An instance of this is seen in the mallee scrub
which lies to the north-west of Victoria. The boundary line between
South Australia and Victoria runs through it, and the country is so
difficult that there is no means of ascertaining where the boundary
is. This may not be of much consequence now, but the fact of
there being no boundary, or one which it is impossible to find, can-
not fail to be seriously felt in the future histories of the colonies.
If the open country through which the boundary runs be good
there is still another considei’ation. This tract of good country
must be continuous with either one colony or the other; it may be
with both, but if only with one, the straight line cuts a portion of
it off from the territory to which it naturally belongs. This actually
occurs on the boundary between South Australia and Victoria. A
large agricultural tract united with the fertile country of western
Victoria, is entirely cut off from it, and equally separated from the
country to which it has to look for its government and the expendi-
ture of its resources.
Now, many will say, what has this to do with annexation 1 Why
simply this, we who write this pamphlet are residents of a district
which suffers more than any other from the consequences of the
straight line boundary system. Circumstances convince us that no
sensible man ever intended these boundaries to be permanent, and
when their evils are so seriously felt, as to impede trade and com-
merce, to sacrifice our resources, and to interfere with the adminis-
tration of justice and the preservation of order, we maintain that
the colonies should try to adjust them anew. If our readers will
have the patience to follow out the case as we state it, we shall fully
substantiate the above list of complaints.
The colony of South Australia is, properly speaking, confined to
the Flinders range, that is to say, the chain of mountains which
runs north from Cape Jervis up into the bend of Lake Torrens.
The good country on the west of this mountain chain is very
limited in extent. On the west it is bounded by the sea or by the
basin of the Salt Lrkes ; on the east side it is still more confined,
a scrub succeeds the slope of the range, and, at any rate, the good
country does not extend beyond the alluvial banks of the river
Murray. Every one knows that just beyond the mouth of the


Murray the coast line takes a sudden turn to the southward, and
as the boundary of South Australia goes two degrees of longitude
beyond that river, it thus happens that a large strip of land is in-
cluded in the limits of the colony lying SSE. from the capital. A
reference to the maps of Australia will show the position of this
tract better than any description could possibly do; and it will
there be seen how arbitrary the straight line is even in a geogra-
phical point of view. But it is not in a geographical point of view
alone that it is objected to. Only the southern half of this territory
is of any value for pasture or agriculture; the northern portion, or
that which connects it with Adelaide, is a complete desert, utterly
unfit for any purpose ; thus the southern half which possesses some
of the finest land in Australia is completely cut off from what it is
obliged to regard as its capital, and to which it is obliged to send its
resources. What makes this state of things particularly tantalising
is that the good land is united with the best agricultural district of
Victoria, and, in fact, forms an almost uninterrupted area of culti-
vation as far as Geelong and Ballarat. On the face of it, it will be
seen that the inconveniences of such a position are neither light
nor trifling. Let any one take the map ; does not what is called
the south-eastern district of South Australia properly belong to
Victoria ? The boundary of the Murray forms the boundary of the
latter colony for nearly the whole of its course, and a boundary so
natural and so simple recommends itself at once to every one.
Why, therefore, should it be cut off suddenly at right angles. It
may have been necessary to make such a division originally,
hut the reasons do not exist now, and if they did, jnust give way
to more important considerations, as we shall proceed to show.
What have we got to complain of? is often asked of us, when we
talk about separation. Why, everything. In the first place, one
of our most serious grievances is that we are between two fires, and
have to pay taxes to both governments. This may appear extraor-
' dinary, but it is a simple fact. We are obliged to get our goods and
everything we consume from Melbourne, because it is nearer to us,
and because the desert makes the difficulties of an overland com-
munication with Adelaide almost insurmountable. We find it
much easier to deal with Melbourne in consequence of our geogra-
phical situation, and therefore we buy goods there, subject, of
course, to the customs’ rates, for there are only one or two articles
which are obtained out of bond. But South Australia, as every one
knows, exacts an ad valorem duty of five per cent, which we have
to pay in addition to the Melbourne tariff. Now, is not this a
hardship ? Is it not a heavy indictment to bring against the straight
boundaries, to begin with ? Would it not alone justify us in assert-
ing what our geographical position entitles us to ? Let the colo-
nists of Victoria or South Australia make it their own case. Sup-


posing they had to pay taxes to the French government as well as
their own, would they not consider it a hardship ? But, it will be
said, why not get your goods round by sea: you have three har-
bours, why not make use of them ? It is true we have three har-
bours. The most convenient one, McDonnell Bay, is the most
dangerous, and the rates of insurance are, consequently, too high
by far to make it profitable at all; the merchants there trade with the
nearest port, which is Melbourne. Lacipede Bay is not convenient
for any part of the district; Guichen Bay is so far from the best
portions of the district that what with freight and cartage together
it would be a dear place to deal with, unless the merchants traded
with Melbourne. But, in any case, the number of vessels running
between these three ports is utterly inadequate to supply the whole
district, and the overland route to Adelaide is, we repeat, out of the
question. As a proof, however, of the facility with which we
communicate overland with Melbourne, many settlers near Penola,
send their wool there in drays, and get back their stores in the
same manner.
This is our first indictment against the present ■ boundaries.
Our next is, that by our isolated position we are cut off from the
resources of our own country.
To understand this, it must be borne in mind, that the proceeds
of the land sales in South Australia are supposed to be exclusively
devoted to benefit the countries from which they are derived. A
certain portion is spent in public works, and another portion in
bringing labour to the country. We shall have occasion presently
to point out how small a share of the public works has fallen to our
district. Let us now, however, deal with the labour, or immigra-
tion. We do not get any share of it. Whatever labour is brought
to the country with the money, of which we contribute a portion,
comes to Adelaide. It is of no benefit to us, unless the immigrants
were brought down into our district; they would not affect our
labour market. Only once since the colony has been established, has
such a thing happened as sending immigrants from the capital to the
outlying districts ; this was in 1855, when South Australia was inun-
dated by an extraordinary consignment of single females. Upwards
of 600 were in the depot at one time, and their number so embar-
rassed the government that they asked the outlying districts to take
some of them off their hands as a matter of favour. In this manner
a few were sent down to us—not, our readers will see, in considera-
tion for what we had a right to expect, but in order to get us to
assist them out of a difficulty. Now, observe, we do not urge this,
as a matter of complaint against the Government. It would be un-
reasonable of us to do so. The difficulties which prevent immi-
grants from coming to us operate equally against the Government
in sending them.


We don’t blame our rulers, then, we blame the makers of the
present boundaries, and we think every one will agree with us, that
it is very hard to be situated as we are. At present the greater part
of our labour comes from Melbourne. We cannot get the labour
that we pay for, and so we are obliged to take that which is paid for
by others. If this were the only result of the arrangement we, at
least, should have no right to complain, but what we get we have to
pay a double price for, for nobody thinks of coming to us, as long
as they can get a better market for their services nearer town. As
a matter of fact wages are higher in this district than either Mel-
bourne or Adelaide, and always have been since the country was
first taken up.
But with regard to the second portion of the land fund, or that
which should be spent in public works, our indictment against the
Government is of a much graver kind. There is, perhaps, in all
South Australia no district which has been so utterly and com-
pletely neglected as this. The public are so much accustomed to
complaints of this kind, that we deem it necessary to give a few
facts to bear out what has been said. Let it be borne in mind that
this district covers an area of 22,000 square miles, is intersected by
creeks and swamps, and yet is the high road of considerable traffic.
It possesses over a dozen towns, one of which is quite as large
as Hamilton, the capital of Western Victoria, and it contains
a million of sheep, 30,000 head of cattle, and 9,000 head of
horses. It supports four banks, four mechanics’ institutes, an
agricultural society, a pastoral association, besides two district
councils, and one in prospect. Now, will it be believed that there is
not in the whole of this district two miles of properly made road ; *
there is only one bridge, and that was built by a private subscription
amongst the settlers. The main line of road used by the mail
carts is such a series of quagmires, gullies, swamps and bogs, that
no one would believe it possible for any conveyance, except a waggon
to travel along it. The large town of Mount Gambler is approached
through a quagmire, unequalled even at the diggings in the early
day. The town of Eobe is surrounded by sandhills almost as bad
as the desert. The town of Penola is encircled by an awful swamp,
to lessen the difficulties of which not one single effort has been
made. Narracoorte, Border Town, Tarpeena, and Kalangadoo, are
towns upon which not cne single sixpence of public money has
* When we say “ made road,” we do not, of course, include the patches made
here and there upon very bad places. Outside Robe, there is about three miles
of way made with shells, “ blinded ” it should be said, and there are other such
patches at McDonnell Bay and the Dismal Swamp. They are very creditable to
the engineer, considering the small sums at his disposal, but they no more de-
serve to be called roads than the few wretched piles at Robe deserve to be called
a jetty.


been spent, or on the main lines of road which run hrough them.
At either of the three ports there is not a jetty at which vessels can
discharge. There are no conveniences even for carrying out the
duties of the Custom-house, while the Government rigorously exact
the duties. The moorings, even, at these ports are of the most
miserable and ineffectual kind. There are no public buildings in
any way worthy of the name—of course we do not speak of public
buildings in the enlarged sense of the term—but the necessary
public buildings, for carrying on the duties of the government
officers employed here. The court-houses are wretchedly unfit for
•the purposes for which they are designed ; we should be sorry to
compare them, or the suspicious-looking lock-ups in the back pre-
mises, to anything intended for a residence. In fact, their resem-
blances are so humiliating that the less said about them the better.
We cannot honestly say that the Government is entirely blame-
less in this, over £500,000 has been raised in this district by the
sale of lands, and, without doubt, we were entitled to receive some
of it back again in the shape of public works. In spite of our dis-
tance from the capital, we should not have been so completely
neglected. But after saying this we must add, that the expenditure
of money, in such an outlying place as this, is fraught with the
greatest difficulties and inconveniences, which plead a great deal for
South Australia. Unless the Government employed a new staff,
the expense of transmitting even officers to and fro makes a serious
inroad into the funds that are to be expended. Then again, the
labourers have to be sent from Adelaide, because they cannot be
obtained unless from the neighbouring Victorian townships ; and
this is a course which Adelaide officials could not adopt. It may be
said also, as another excuse for the South Australian authorities,
that they have no means of knowing what the necessities of this
country are. They do not visit us, neither do we visit them. All
our communications are with Melbourne, and the most of the set-
tlers have come from that colony originally. There is no means,
therefore, for them to know what our wants are. But must we
suffer in consequence ? Must our resources be taken away from us
without any return, because our rulers have no means of knowing
what we want ? Are we to have no roads, and streets, and bridges ;
no public buildings, nor any means of intercommunication, because
a Colonial Secretary, in former times, struck a straight line which
cut us off from our proper government? Come, South Australia and
Victoria—you whose interests will most likely clash, in what we are
now urging—you must admit that our position is a hard one ! You
must own that if the welfare of the colonists is your object we should
not be left as we are. If any position or grievance ever deserved
consideration, ours, no one can deny, is one calling for imme-
diate redress.


We have spoken just now of facilities for communication with
Melbourne which we have not with Adelaide, and this is curiously
illustrated in our postal arrangements. This district receives two
mails a week from Adelaide, while we get three from Melbourne.
Those which we get from Melbourne occupy only two days on the
journey. One which we receive from Adelaide comes to us in four
days, and another in five. The consequence of this is that all our news
comes from Melbourne, even our Adelaide news. Thus it happens that
very few newspapers are seen in the district except from Victoria. This
may appear a trifling circumstance, but it will serve to show how com-
pletely we are alienated, even in sympathy, from South Australia,
and this not from any wish of ours, but from our position. A man
who has spent years in Adelaide, who comes to settle amongst us,
soon learns to forget everything except the sympathies of his adopted
home. He will not be long in contact with the news, the conversa-
tion, and the ideas of its residents before he will regard Melbourne
as we regard it. Its public men will be his ; its politics will be his
politics ; its interests, his too; while South Australia will be only
remembered as we remember it—that is, with earnest wishes for
its welfare, and that it would wish us the same and let us go.
We cannot help this state of things, neither can Adelaide. It
would be utterly impossible to bring the mail overland in a shorter
space of time than four days. Things must therefore remain as
they are ; but again we say : is not this a good instance of the evils
of the present boundaries? For, observe, it is not merely a postal
question, but it is one, of course, which turns the channel of our
trade, and prevents us knowing the people who tax us, or taking
an interest in their proceedings. We trust it will not appear as if
we were anxious to connect our grievances with trifling causes,
because we believe, and it is now generally admitted, that what is
called modern civilization owes its advance principally to the facili-
ties afforded in the intercommunication of distant places.
While on the subject of communication we may as well advert
to another instance of how the meridian line of division has acted
as an effectual barrier to our trade. Not long ago pleuro-pneu-
moxiia was, as it is perhaps still, raging amongst the cattle in Vic-
toria. By an agreeable legal fiction, South Australia was pleased
to legald herself as happily free from the disease. An order was
issued to prevent cattle of any description crossing into the colony
until they had been examined by a competent and experienced per-
son, Now, as all our stores are brought to us in bullock drays,
and as, we repeat, it all comes from the other side of the boundary,
a sudden and effectual stop was put to our trade by this order!
Adelaide cannot afford to maintain a large staff of officers at such a
distance from the capital, and consequently there was only one
competent and experienced person to perform the.duty for the


whole district. If there had been only one main line of road, this
would not have been difficult for him to do, but there happens to be
upwards of forty, with the distance of 140 miles between the most
northerly and southerly. The result was that the whole traffic of
the country was delayed, while the competent and experienced per-
son was riding from place to place. Ten days or a fortnight was a
common delay, and most amusing instances could be given of some
of the consequences ; that is to say, amusing to those who had not
to suffer any inconvenience and loss. Nor was this the worst; the
boundary is so ill defined that only old settlers can show by the
marks on the trees which way it runs. Thus many bullock-
drivers subjected themselves to fines, detention, loss of time, and
legal expenses for crossing into the colony, before they were aware
of it, and before the competent and experienced person had given
them permission.
All the previous accusations which we have had to make against
the present boundary fade into nothing in comparison with what
we have yet to urge. It is generally admitted that every British
subject has a right to protection and justice from the government
which taxes him. No hardship is considered greater than a depri-
vation of either of these two privileges ; no wrong deeper than that
which denies protection for life and security against oppression.
So dearly are these things valued that we can scarcely realize any
community being deprived of them, and it would appear like an
exaggeration to say that such evils result in our district from our
geographical position with reference to Adelaide. And yet such is
really the case. Owing to the causes which we have so frequently
mentioned, South Australia has never been able to support more
than a police force of about thirteen men for the whole of the district.
That this is utterly inadequate must be plain to any person who
remembers its size. The consequences are such as might be ex-
pected. Our mail has been robbed twice, and about half of the
offences against life and property escape unpunished. This can in
no way be attributed to the police ; they are, as a body, as efficient
as it is possible to make them, but they cannot do impossibilities.
The country is much too large for such a handful of men. It is
not surprising that a burglar, or incendiary, or a horse-stealer,
should escape, as they have done recently, if they get 50 or 60 miles
the start of the officers of justice. There is also a difficulty in ob-
taining warrants, as there are only three stipendiary magistrates in
the district, and these three having to move about so much, one is
not always certain of finding them at home. Now, all these evils,
and no one will deny that they are evils of the gravest kind, result
entirely from our distance from the centre of government. Adelaide
cannot afford to give us more protection. But this is poor consola-
tion to give to a man whose house has been broken into, whose


fences have been burned, and whose horses and sheep have been
stolen in large numbers. It may be good enough excuse to state
that the expense attendant upon sending police, clothing, rations,
horses, and accoutrements overland is something enormous, but,
surely, if the excuse is good, it tells equally in favour of some
change being made in the present form of government.
But this is not the whole of our indictment; if half the offenders
escape, we are very far from being able to obtain satisfaction from
the other half which are captured. Until very recently every one
of the more serious offences had to be tried in Adelaide, and, as a
matter of course, every person engaged in the case had to go there
too. Thus prosecutors had to submit to one of two alternatives—
either to be plundered and to allow the offender to escape with im-
punity, or to triple their losses of time and money by attending the
trial. It frequently happened that choice was not left, and that the
prosecutor, very much against his will, was obliged to go into town.
The loss to the individual was greater in most cases than the injury
he had received. But the injury to society was much greater when
any one availed themselves of the first alternative, and allowed the
crime to go unpunished for the sake of avoiding inconvenience and
expense. In either case, the evil was a great one, as nobody will
deny. No man could have justice brought to his own door, and
every one dreaded the protection of the law as much as the law-
breakers. But the evil was not confined to crime. Other kinds of
injustice, which come within reach of civil proceedings only, were
tamely submitted to rather than undergo the expense of a suit in
town. A great deal of useless litigation was thus doubtless spared,
but it was holding out a premium to oppression and wrong-doing,
of which we are sorry to say the district furnishes many instances.
Such recollections are not very agreeable ones for the early his-
tory of our country, and many will be inclined to congratulate us
upon our now having the advantage and privilege of circuit courts,
but don’t let our good readers, in the hurry of their good wishes,
imagine that things are much better than they ever used to be.
We have circuit courts, but every sort of pretence and excuse is
urged and allowed to prevent their regular occurrence, and for a
good reason. The expenses of bringing a judge with the necessary
officials from town is really a great matter, and for a small community
like Adelaide a serious consideration. The number of cases to be
tried is generally very small, and the overland trip is such a very
inconvenient one that we cannot help wondering why they come at
all. It is admitted that such visits are necessary, and it is the duty
of a goverment to provide them. Need we repeat the old argu-
ment ? Need we state again that this affords another proof why
this district should not be considered a portion of South Australia ?
The long and short of it is that Adelaide cannot perform towards


us the duty of a government, while Victoria could in this respect
with the greatest ease. It is very mortifying to us to witness the
judges holding regular sessions within a few miles of the boundary
towns in this district, and yet know that we are unable to share in
the same benefits. The Melbourne authorities can reach the scene
of their jurisdiction in a couple of days without trouble or incon-
venience, and by a few hours’ more travelling could reach any of
our towns ; but we cannot participate in the blessing. Meanwhile,
our witnesses and prisoners linger in suspense or durance, rueing
the day when a Secretary for the Colonies drew a straight line
across the map, and cut them off from the sources of right and
justice, which should be the birthright of every Briton.
The last accusation that we shall urge is a fit corollary to all that
it precedes. As we are taxed by two governments, it is quite in
keeping with such a fact that we should be represented in neither.
In the first place we are allowed to elect two members to the South
Australian Parliament, which is immeasurably below what we are
entitled to in proportion to our population. But even were these two
local men they might be of considerable service to us, but we cannot
get local men as our representatives. Readers will very likely say :
Why, that must be your own fault; but it is not indeed. If a local
man is elected, he must make up his mind to reside entirely in
Adelaide. He must remove his family and dispose of his property,
and thus he ceases to have any interest in the district he represents.
Supposing, however, he does not sell his property, the result is the
same : he is too far away from his district to know its wants, and
time as well as distance soon serve to alienate him completely from
its sympathies. Thus it is that we are not represented ; at least,
this has been our experience hitherto. Our lands continue to be
sold, and the money derived from them flows into the Adelaide
treasury, and we reap no advantage from it at all. Our wants are
not known, and our interests are not studied. Wo have ceased to
feel any interest in our representation, and we are quite confident
that not one in a hundred knows the names of half the members
of the present Parliament, or of those who compose the Ministry.
Here then we shall conclude as far as it concerns ourselves, and
we ask the public : Have we not made out a good case for annexa-
tion ? Is it right that a mere question of boundaries should entas
upon us the evils of which we now complain ? Are our grievance
imaginary ? Is it not a grievance to pay double taxes, to have no
roads nor improvements, to have no returns from our capital, no
labour from the land fund, insufficient police protection, no secu-
rity for life or property, no proper administration of justice, no
representation, and no sympathy or attention from the city which
we are obliged to regard as our capital ? These are grievances, and
if ever people had a right to complain, we have that right.


With all our grievances, however, we wish it to be distinctly
understood that we do not blame Adelaide for having done any
injury to us intentionally. We wish rather to regard it—and we
wish it to be clearly understood that we do so regard it—a necessary
consequence of the present state of things. We cannot repeat it too
often that Adelaide is not to blame for that which she cannot help,
and we need scarcely say again that it is very hard to make us suffer
for evils which, if they can be remedied, ought to be. What then
do you propose ? it will be said. Our answer must be pretty evident.
We want the South-Eastern district of South Australia annexed to
the Colony of Victoria, and the River Murray declared the Boundary
of Victoria throughout its whole extent. The advantages of this
arrangement to us must be obvious from what has been already
said. We shall thus be united with a capital which can easily
communicate with us in two days. We shall thus be connected
politically with a territory to which we are united geographically.
We shall have then a fair opportunity of testing what the fertility
of our lands and the advantages of our position will enable us to
effect.
The advantages to be derived by South Australia from this
arrangement are obvious. The longer she retains the South Eastern
District, the more expensive and burdensome will it become to her.
The population has become too large and too important a portion
of the community to be utterly neglected or put off with a small
pittance. It must be dealt with on a more liberal scale, and that
too at the very time when little or no returns can be expected from
it. Whether Adelaide wills it or no, the trade must go to Mel-
bourne, and so much of the land has been sold by the government
that the future returns from that source must be very trifling.
Already the cry for extensive improvements is loud and unceasing.
Something must be done, and that quickly, to satisfy the continued
clamour for roads and bridges. The South Eastern District has
always been a most embarrassing inheritance to South Australia,
and now it will be a most expensive one. The additional circuit
courts and police protection, of themselves, will be an enormous
burden. We have no hesitation in saying that this district will now
cost the government double the returns to be derived from it. The
government of a country so completely cut off from the centre of
administration, at so great a distance from it, and hemmed in in
the north by such a desert, must be awkward, embarrassing, and
most expensive, in fact, a great deal more trouble than it ever can
be worth. It will save at least one-third of the expenditure to get
rid of us; so that Adelaide will be very foolish to try to oppose this
movement to which we are almost unanimously pledged.
There can be no doubt that Victoria would benefit by the acces-
sion of such a district as this.


The expenses of government would be very small, and the ex-
tended facilities for trade would be almost incalculable. The most
important result of all to Victoria would be its obtaining a frontage
to the Murray during its whole course. Victoria has a right to this
from political considerations, and there can be no doubt that if
she had it, the Murray mouth would soon be a very different place
from what it is now. It must be admitted that it seems in the
highest degree impolitic to cut off the most important colony in
Australia from the largest river in the continent, the upper portion
of which forms a part of her boundary.
That there are other considerations why Victoria should claim
this accession to her territory as a matter of justice. It is scarcely
two years since that colony expended upwards of thirty-five thousand
pounds on the exploration of the continent. South Australia and
Queensland benefited largely by the discoveries thus made—in
fact, all the colonies benefitted more or less except the one which
incurred the expenditure. The boundaries of South Australia have,
in fact, owing partly to Victorian discoveries, been carried in
as far as the Indian Ocean, while Victoria has got nothing, and
remains deprived of what should certainly be her own, for many
considerations. South Australia thought it unreasonable for New
South Wales to object to the extension of its boundary towards
Western Australia. So she cannot consistently object to the exten-
sion of the Victorian boundary, now that her own territory is so
large.
We should not wish it to be thought in Adelaide that this move-
ment has entirely arisen out of the proposal for re-valuing the
runs. That has something to do with it, we admit, but it is only
the last straw which has broken the camel’s back. We will freely
admit that so vast and so exorbitant a proposal of taxation has
spread general alarm throughout the district, because we look upon
it as increasing a burden which we already think excessive for what
we get in return. But this is not all. There has long been grow-
ing a deep impression throughout the whole district that our pro-
perty and our rights are being dealt with in Adelaide by men of
narrow views, or slender information, utterly unacquainted with the
wants of the colony at large, and with this district in particular.
Without meaning anything offensive, we would state firmly that the
incapacity and want of knowledge in those who become members
of the Lower House has shaken all confidence in their administra-
tive ability, and destroyed all feeling of security. We should be
sorry to commit the fault into which they fall, by saying that their
measures are not suited for Adelaide ; but for the whole colony—we
say emphatically—that their measures are unfitting and most ill-
advised. Yet we repeat the new valuations are not the sole cause
of this movement. They have helped to confirm an impression of


which we were sadly convinced before, and it has made us resolve
more firmly to break away from our present government; but let
not the Adelaide people flatter themselves by thinking that this is
our first or only complaint.
Finally, let us impress upon all who are joined with us in this
movement, to continue their efforts as quietly and surely as they
have made them hitherto. For some time now our trade has been
exclusively carried on with Melbourne, and our influence has been
gradually felt there. “ Union” must be our watchword ; and this,
joined to steady, untiring perseverance, cannot fail eventually in
leading to success. We look confidently to Melbourne for sym-
pathy, and we are sure that its efforts joined to ours will bear down
the unreasonable opposition which South Australia may offer to the
measure when the matter is brought, as it will shortly be, before
the Home Government.
Clarson, Shallard, and Co., Printers, Melbourne and Sydney.
16


•


