

ROYAL SOCIETY OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
SYDNEY.
ANNIVERSARY ADDRESS
BY
THE PRESIDENT
RICHARD THRELFALL, m.a.,
Professor of Physics in the University of Sydney.
MAY Ist, 1895.
f ; |




ANNIVERSARY ADDRESS.
By Professor Threlfall, m.a.,
Professor of Physics in the University of Sydney.
[Delivered to the Royal Society of N. S. Wales, May 1, 1895.']
On looking back through the goodly list of twenty-eight volumes
which form the Journal of the Royal Society of New South Wales,
I find that it has been customary for your President in vacating
the chair, to address you in the first place on the affairs of the
Society, and in the second on such matters of general scientific
interest as may have attracted his attention. I propose to follow
the example which my predecessors have set, and shall accordingly
commence with some notes on the history of the Society durin«-
the past year. In this matter I have had the advantage of the
assistance of our indefatigable Assistant Secretary, Mr. W. H.
Webb, for which assistance I desire to thank him.
It is a matter of congratulation, that in spite of the bad times,
our numerical strength has only fallen from four hundred and
forty-five to four hundred and twenty. During the year we
have elected eighteen members ; we have lost twenty-seven by
resignation, seven through default in payment of subscription*;
ten ordinary and one honorary member through death ; the com-
plete list of the last is as follows :
Ordinary Members:
Dixson, Oraig, m.d., elected 1880.
Hall, R. T., elected 1878.
Hills, Robert, elected 1879.
Jones, E. L., elected 1877.
Low,;Andrew.S., elected 1880.
Manning, Hon. Sir W. M., m.1.c., elected 1881,
Montefiore, E. L., elected 1875.
A—May 1, 1895.


Murnin, M. E., elected 1865.
Nowlan, John, elected 1878.
Quodling, W. H., elected 1876.
Hon. President :
His Excellency Sir R. W. Duff, p.c., g.c.m.g.
Sir Robert William Duff accepted the office of Honorary
President of our Society soon after his arrival in the Colony. His
official duties prevented him from taking an active share in the
conduct of our affairs; we can only add our share to the tribute
of sympathy and regret which came from the whole Colony at
the death of a kindly gentleman.
The financial position of the Society may be regarded on the
whole as satisfactory. Our total receipts during the year ending
March 31st, 1895, were £1,234 10s., and we commenced with a
balance of £63 12s. 3d., making in all £1,298 2s. 3d., of this we
spent £1,140 17s. 4d.; we have transferred £lO6 14s. to the
building fund, and carried forward £SO 10s. lid. to next year.
Of the amounts expended we have only been able to devote about
£IOO to the purchase of books and periodicals, though the general
library expenses, including binding, may be put at about £2OO.
The publication of our Journal has cost us a little over £300;
and we may look forward to this source of expense increasing as
time goes on and the influence of the University extends. Those
whose business it is to consult the proceedings of learned societies
must have noticed the enormous rate at which the bulk of these
works increases year by year, and our own journal has swollen
with the rest. It will soon become a matter for consideration as
to whether we are to go on increasing our expenditure in this
direction, or limit it by publishing papers of exceptional interest
only. No great saving can be made in the preparation of plates
and engravings, for we have always employed cheap processes of
reproduction ; financial stress appears to have driven the Royal
Society of London to reproduce plates in a manner similar to that
which we adopt, but this must always be a source of regret to


those who have been used to the artistic beauty of their engravings,
and is in my opinion quite unworthy of the leading scientific
society of a great country.
The prize essay awards have cost us £5O, and in my mind the
time has now come for us to reconsider the whole question of
spending any part of our limited means in this direction. In spite
of the possibly valuable papers which the offer of rewards has
brought us, I am inclined to think that scientific investigation
might be more efficiently assisted by devoting the money at
present spent on awards to the purchase of apparatus or material
for those who require such assistance, or in improving our library.
It is right I should add that this is my individual opinion only,
and that I know my views are not shared by several members of
the Council, whose opinion I value.
An inspection of the Society’s house discloses the fact that con-
siderable repairs will be required during the current year, and we
must expect to have to meet a heavy charge on this account. The
matter is engaging your Council’s attention.
Turning to our building fund, we find that it is increasing
slowly, and now reaches the sum of £1,286, which is invested on
fixed deposit at the Union Bank. The Council has devoted a
considerable time to the question of the investment of this fund,
and it is possible that it may be found desirable to vary the mode
of investment, provided that an eligible security can be found. It
must not be forgotten, however, that our present premises are
becoming too small for the accommodation of the library, which
even now makes the conduct of the office work difficult by trench-
ing on the Assistant Secretary’s room. Some temporary relief
has been afforded by storing books behind the dais in our meet-
ing room, but the time is not far distant when the building fund
will have to be employed in providing us with the actual space
which we require.
The Clarke Memorial Fund and the Abercromby Fund stand
respectively at £360 and £6B, and require no special comment,


During the year we have held seven general meetings, at which
thirty-two papers were read. This is an average of about four
and a-half papers per meeting. On several occasions, if not on
all, the time at the disposal of the writers of papers has not been
sufficient for an adequate presentment of the results of their
labours, and discussion has had to be compressed within very
narrow limits. It appears therefore, that in the event of our
continuing to receive so many valuable contributions, we must
either refer more of them to the sections, or hold more meetings.
The former course is in my opinion rather undesirable, for it must
mean the banishment of perhaps the most important and interest-
ing communications to sectional meetings, while the full meetings
would be occupied in dealing with those subjects only for which
no sections are appropriate. If we increase our general meetings
to two per month, it would I think be easy to arrange for the
division of subjects into two groups, and apportion one meeting
per month to each, in this way an engineer would not require to
sit through a paper on anthropology, etc., in order to hear one
in which he was interested, or vice versa.
I do not propose to append a list of papers read during the year
for out of the thirty-two, twenty-eight will be found published in
the journal, and the other four may be published with those we
shall receive during the current year. The list of exhibits will
also be found in its proper place.
During the year the average attendance of members was thirty-
seven, and visitors four, so that our meetings have certainly not
lost in interest. The activity shown in the sectional meetings,
especially on the Medical and Engineering sides, forms a subject
for congratulation. The engineering section held eight meetings
and the medical three meetings. The interest shown in the
engineering section may be judged of by the fact that only two
papers were read at the sectional meetings, the whole of the rest
of the time being devoted to discussion. It is not too much to
say that the engineering section is certainly the most important
meeting-ground of engineers in the Colony.


With regard to the conversazione held at the University on
December sth last, we may congratulate ourselves on having
achieved a success. At no previous time were the exhibits more
numerous or interesting, though the removal of many of them
from the Great Plall of the University to the Laboratories, natur-
ally rendered the exhibition so large that few people could have
seen everything. Amongst a number of most excellent exhibits
perhaps Mr. Russell’s magnificent stellar photographs, exhibited
by means of a magic lantern, were the most striking. About six
hundred visitors and members were present, and the cost was
only £7O.
Library. —lt was stated above that the cost of the library
might be put at about £2OO, excluding superintendence. The
actual outlay was £173 9s. lOd. We exchanged our journal with
three hundred and ninety-five kindred societies, receiving in
return one hundred and ninety-six volumes, one thousand and
fifty-eight parts, fifty-nine reports, one hundred and fifty-two
pamphlets, one atlas of geological charts, fourteen hydrographic
charts, and fifty-four meteorological diagrams, a total of one
thousand five hundred and thirty-four publications. The “Institut
de Carthage ” of Tunis has been added to the exchange list.
Clarke Medal. —At the meeting of the Council on the 31st
October last, it was resolved that the Clarke Memorial Medal
for 1895 be awarded to each of the following gentlemen : —Mr.
Robert Logan Jack, f.g.s., F.R.G.S., Government Geologist,
Queensland, and Mr. Robert Etheridge, Junr., Government
Palaeontologist, Department of Mines, Sydney.
Hon. Member. —At the General Monthly Meeting of the
Society held 3rd October last, on the recommendation of the
Council, W. Baldwin Spencer, m.a., Professor of Biology, Univer-
sity of Melbourne, was unanimously elected an Honorary
Member of the Society.
Original Researches. —ln continuation of the practice originated
in 1881 to publish yearly a list of subjects peculiar to Australia,


the investigation of which would be of great interest and value
to the Colony, the Council invited original contributions and
offered its medal, together with a grant of £25, for the best
original paper on the following subjects, viz.—
Series XIII.— To be sent in not later than Ist May, 1894-
No. 43—On the Timbers of New South Wales, with special
reference to their fitness for use in construction,
manufactures, and other similar purposes.
No. 44—On the Raised Sea-beaches and Kitchen Middens
on the Coast of New South Wales.
No. 45—On the Aboriginal Rock Carvings and Paintings in
New South Wales.
One paper was received on subject No. 43. Two papers were
sent in on No. 44, the first of which could not be received the
writer having failed to comply with the conditions laid down,
and the Council did not consider the second one of sufficient
merit to receive the reward. One paper was received on No. 45.
At the meeting held 25 th July, the Council awarded the prize
of £25 and the Society’s medal to the writers of the following
papers:—l. “On the Timbers of New South Wales” by
“ Experto crede,” Mr. J. Y. de Coque, Roads and Bridges Branch,
Public Works Department. 2. “On the Aboriginal Rock
Carvings and Paintings in New South Wales ” by “ Caesar aut
nullus,” Mr. R. H. Mathews, L.S., Parramatta.
The list of subjects for prizes now offered is, as follows :
Series XIV.— To be sent in not later than Ist May, 1895.
No. 46 —On the Silver Ore Deposits of New South Wales.
No. 47 —On the Physiological Action of the Poison of any
Australian Snake, Spider, or Tick.
No. 48—On the Chemistry of the Australian Gums and
Resins.
Series XY.— To be sent in not later than Ist May, 1896.
No. 49—On the origin of Multiple Hydatids in man.


No. 50—On the Occurrence of Precious Stones in New
South Wales with a description of the Deposits
in which they are found.
No. 51—On the effect of the Australian Climate on the
Physical Development of the Australian-born
Population.
Series XYI. —To be sent in not later than the Ist May , 1897.
No. 52—On the Embryology and Development of the
Echidna or Platypus.
No. 53—The Chemical Composition of the Products from
the so-called Kerosene Shale of New South Wales.
No. 54—On the Mode of Occurrence, Chemical Composition,
and the Origin of Artesian Water in New South
Wales.
Abercromby Fund. —The prize of £25 offered by the Hon.
Ralph Abercromby for the best essay on “ Southerly Busters ”
was awarded by the Committee to Mr. Henry A. Hunt, Second
Meteorological Assistant, Sydney Observatory.
During the past year considerable activity in the pursuit of
knowledge has been exhibited. Much of the work done has
been reported in the Journal by our Society, and in the pro-
ceedings of the Linnean Society. The following particulars are
appended, but the list does not profess to be complete, as some,
difficulty has been experienced in obtaining information.
In the observatory the regular astronomical and meteorological
work has been fully maintained, owing to the increased sensi-
tiveness of the plates now used, which make it possible now to
do in one minute what used to take eight minutes, when this
work was begun in 1890, thus virtually increasing the size of
the camera eight times. One thousand one hundred and forty
photographs of astronomical objects have been taken. Nine
hundred and forty-six of these were devoted to the photographic
survey of the heavens, and complete the Sydney section of that
work for catalogue purposes. Seventy-nine photographs have
been devoted with very satisfactory results to the investigation


of nebulae and nebulous places, and star clusters, comets, etc.
The transit of Mercury was satisfactorily observed. A valuable
series of cloud photographs of typical forms has also been taken
for the more accurate study of weather conditions in Sydney.
These show that the clouds here come' under the usual classifi-
cations, but have a distinctly local stamp.
During the year the original Kater pendulums were swung
in the observatory by Mr. Love, Demonstrator to the Professor
of Physics at Melbourne, acting for the Gravity Committee of
the Royal Society of Victoria, and the opportunity was taken
to carefully test the stability of the frame on which they are
swung with extremely satisfactory results. The apparatus was
sufficiently delicate to show a flexure in a massive cement-
concrete floor produced by a 141 b. weight, but did not show the
slightest flexure in the pendulum supports when the pendulum
was in motion.
The ten feet standard bar of Queensland has been fully com-
pared with the two standard ten feet bars of New South Wales.
A new chart of southern circumpolar stars has been prepared
and published, and an Act of Parliament providing for the
adoption of standard time on February Ist, 1895, was carried
into effect on that day; and now New South Wales, in common
with Victoria and Queensland, use the time of the 150° Meridian
east of Greenwich.
The results of the study of ocean currents on the coasts of
Australia during the past twelve years have been published, and
a special effort made to interest captains of ships trading to
Australia in ocean currents and meteorology with much success.
At the Technological Museum the Director and his staff have
been engaged chiefly on the following works : —Additions to the
systematic botany of the Colonies, investigation of the chemistry
of some of the vegetable products of the Colony, especially the
eucalyptus oils and the barks of certain trees from Queensland;
classification of the collections of economic geology; economic


entomology ; literary work dealing with the flowering plants of
the Colony.
At the University the following subjects have been investi-
gated, or are in progress of investigation :
Biology. —Development of marsupial teeth.
Physics. —Magnetic properties of bismuth, gravimetric work.
Electrical properties of selenium.
Chemistry. —Investigations on occurrence of gold and allied
chemico-mineralogical matters. On the specific gravities of some
gem stones. On the separation of gold, silver, and sodium from
sea water by muntz metal sheathing. On certain new minerals.
On the occurrence of gold in the Hawkesbury Rocks about
Sydney. On variations in the amount of ammonia in waters on
keeping. On the corrosion of aluminium. On crystallised carbon
dioxide. On the waterproofing of bricks and sandstones with
oils. On the porosity of cements and plasters.
Engineering. —Tests of the strength of materials, chiefly
colonial timbers and cements.
Geology. —Examination of volcanic glasses of the Tweed district.
Geology of the Macdonald Ranges. Evidences of the Palaeozoic
Ice Age in Australia.
Physiology.— The physiological action of snake venom. Coagu-
lation of the blood. Colouring of wool by micro-organisms.
As one of what I may, perhaps, be permitted to call the
current generation of Physicists, I feel that no account of the
history of physical science of the last few years would be adequate
which did not place the death of Helmholtz in the foremost place.
It is, perhaps, impossible for the present generation of Physicists
who have been born and bred in the doctrine of the conser-
I
vation of energy, to estimate at its true value the assistance
they have received at all stages from this all-embracing
generalization. The physics presented to us from our earliest
youth was already a definite structure of which the “ Erhaltung
der Kraft ” was the very corner stone. It is not true to say that


the principle was discovered by Helmholtz—but for some reason
on other his essay seems to have had greater persuasive powers
than the work of other and earlier labourers in the same field.
The reason of this was in my opinion—and I offer it with the
utmost diffidence and every possible reservation—that he was
the first to recognise that change of the potential function is in
a certain aspect the measure of a distinct entity, viz.—that
knowable, but unknown thing potential energy—thus christened
by Rankine. But Helmholtz’s claims to immortality, rest on a
broader basis than is afforded by any one discovery. He laid the
foundation of that science of Bacteriology, which promises to
assist mankind in coping with his environment more powerfully
than any discovery since the steam engine. It is understood
that Ophthalmic surgery is based largely on his work on Physio-
logical optics. Electrical theory is indebted to him not only for
many notable discoveries but for the training and inspiring of
Hertz. To his mathematical powers we owe the theory of vortex
motion, and many important advances in Hydrodynamics. His
great “ Tonenempfindungen ” in which he appears as Physicist,
Physiologist, Anatomist, and Psychologist might well have been
the life work of an ordinary mortal, to him it was a mere
episode. There was a time when we hoped that he had built the
bridge leading from the physical and mathematical theory of
sound to the doctrine of harmony, but fate has been against
this courageous and ingenious effort, and at the present time it is
very doubtful if it can be said to have materially advanced the
position. The energies of Helmholtz’s later life were partly
absorbed in the councils of his country ; and partly devoted to
the organisation of the great testing and standardising Laboratory
at Charlottenburg.
Though it is generally desirable to subdue the personal element
as far as possible ; on an occasion of this kind I feel that perhaps
the members present might like to know something of the
personality of this, probably the most versatile and learned philoso-
pher that ever lived. In the winter of 1888 I presented myself at


the house attached to the Physical Laboratory of the University
of Berlin, armed with an introduction to Yon Helmholtz. I was
contemplating devoting many years, perhaps all my life, to the
investigation of physico-chemical problems, and I wished to hear
what Helmholtz would have to say as to the utility of such an
undertaking. I presently found myself in a study of extra-
ordinary neatness and of a sumptuous yet forbidding aspect, and
in the presence of a soldierly-looking old man. I should have
taken him for an officer of engineers had I not often seen his
portrait. I stated my business without preamble. He con-
sidered awhile, and then declared it to be his opinion that the
next advance must be made in the border land of chemistry and
physics, especially on the electrical side, and that I could not
hope to advance our knowledge better than by doing as I
proposed. He spoke in German, and I in English, for our
mutual convenience, and gave me an indescribable impression of
being before all things a man of business-like habits and rapid,
decisive action—a soldier, in fact, in the best sense of the word.
It was with something not unlike relief that I bowed myself out
of his presence, and, as I walked away, I thought I understood
the man who many years ago criticised the English University
fellowship system, and regretted that so much money produced
so little scientific work “ amongst the well-nurtured youth of the
British Isles.” His theory was that English students had not
during their training been brought in contact with the “ living
spirit of research,” and he recognised that in physical science
stagnation means retrogression, and that the man who has not
the curiosity to attempt to widen our common knowledge is not
fit to set himself up as a teacher, nor are the pupils of such a
man likely to receive any lasting benefit. If Helmholtz’s words,
so fruitful first through Germany and France, and then through
England and America, could find even at this late date some
echo in the Colony, we might be gradually educated up to seeing
that the commercial value of a teacher is not to be measured by
the number of hours of lecture that can be dragged out of him,


nor is a laboratory to be regarded as an expensive luxury to be
blown away at the first breath of retrenchment. The time when
the “ Geist des Forschers ” will be reverenced as the supreme
weapon in the fight of mankind against the forces of nature is
not yet, but it will surely come, and woe to that nation that
learns it last.
I turn to a very different personality in approaching Helm-
great pupil, the simple, gentle, kindly Heinrich Hertz.
Nearly all the electrical work of importance of the last six
years—for I do not include such things as dynamo making, or
transformer testing—has been on the lines laid down by Hertz
in his study of electro-magnetic waves. Ido not propose to
detain you here by referring to those researches, for I gave an
account of them before the Australian Association for the
Advancement of Science in 1890 at the Melbourne meeting, and
shall have something to say about them again presently; rather
will I refer to the man himself. Hertz began life as an
engineer, but his taste for physical work was too strong, and
he gradually drifted into Helmholtz’s laboratory, where his
powers were soon appreciated, and where he began that study
of electro-magnetism which ended in persuading Continental
philosophers of the truth of Maxwell’s mechanical theory of
electricity. I say Continental philosophers advisedly; for in
England and America (for in this matter America is Rowland),
the theory had taken firm root, and though Hertz supplied much
interesting confirmation and opened up an experimental road of
vast interest, it cannot be said that he did more then confirm
what we had always believed. In character Hertz was probably
one of the most kindly and gentle men that ever lived, and just
as his work has that peculiar directness and simplicity that
characterises the work of Faraday and of Darwin, so was he
himself a man of much the same character— i.e., the highest
reached by the human race. He died on New Year’s Day, 1894,
the brightest and best beloved of physicists.
On May 21st, 1894, there died August Kundt, Professor of
Physics in Berlin, formerly in Strassburg. Though I expect his


name is unknown to many present here to-night, that must be
regarded as a mere local misfortune. Kundt was one of the most
brilliant of modern experimentalists, and made great advances
in acoustics, optics, and magneto-optics. It is of interest to
note that the monatomic and probably elemental character of
argon discovered during this year was established (in so far as
it is established) by a method invented by Kundt. Exact inform-
ation has not yet come to hand as to the method employed,
but as Kundt’s method is probably the best available in dealing
with small quantities, it is pretty safe to assume that it was
employed in this instance. To Kundt the rapid rise of the
University of Strassburg is in great measure due, and to his
energy we owe one of the finest physical laboratories in the
world. Before all things, Kundt was what the Germans call
“ gemiithlich ” —a jolly fellow. His method of teaching was
copious and admirable conversation in the laboratory, and there
probably never was a teacher who had so strong a hold upon his
pupils —a hold both of heart and head. There was nothing in
the way of experimenting he could not do ; his spirits were
always at boiling point; he was never seen without a smile on
his face, or heard to breathe an unkind word. He had a magnifi-
cent adoration for the work of Faraday; in all things he was
eager —a great human lion with flowing hair and beard, and
inexpressible good humour. He was a thorough German, too.
His surprise at seeing me, a man who had been to Australia
and actually returned, was exquisite. He was even late for
lecture to celebrate the event. “ Eheu fugaces ” —the least of
all thy servants bids thee adieu dear master, there is no other
man like thee. Helmholtz, Hertz, Kundt—what a gap their
loss makes !
I now propose to give a brief account of some of those
advances which have been made in physical science since I last
had an opportunity of compiling a report, viz., in 1889. It
must be understood, however, that I do not profess to refer to
every research of importance, for no address could contain more


than a bare enumeration of them, nor do I claim anything
except indulgence for the choice I make. I can only deal with
those matters coming under my immediate notice which seem to
me individually to be of the most importance, and I have given
a preference for work done within the last year.
Commencing with electricity, the road marked out by Hertz
has been followed by a host of observers who have devoted them-
selves to the examination of both stationary and progressive
wave fields. The general results up to last year are contained in
a work on “ Recent Researches in Electricity and Magnetism/’
by Professor J. J. Thomson, of Cambridge—a work intended as
a supplement to Maxwell’s immortal volumes, and forming, in
fact, a “ third volume ” worthy of the other two. The pro-
duction of this work is probably the most important electrical
event of the last five years.
In order to take up the story of electrical developments I must
briefly refer to the state of the subject where it was left by
Hertz. Maxwell had given sound reasons for believing that
electric force is a quantity propagated, not instantaneously
through space, but at a finite though very rapid rate. If a
conductor, therefore, could be charged, discharged, and charged
again in an opposite manner each feature of the process could be
followed at a distance—a sufficient interval of time being allowed
to elapse for the propagation from the source to the point in
question. If this process can be repeated regularly, we shall have
a succession of corresponding states at the point of observation,
in every essential similar to the succession of states as to vertical
position passed through by a cork floating on water over which
a train of waves is passing. If the regular process be repeated
very rapidly, we have according to Maxwell, a series of electric
waves —or periodically varying electric conditions—propagated
outwards with the velocity of light and, in fact, constituting light
itself. Now this electrical theory of optics, the electro-magnetic
theory as it is generally called, was found to fit in with observation
on light, very well indeed on most essential points, but it


undoubtedly seemed to be opposed by other results, almost
equally trustworthy and important. In consequence of this
discrepancy—for without it the theory must have been only read
to be accepted—many philosophers waited for “ more light ” and
in the meanwhile worked at matters not immediately depending
on any theory, such for instance as the exact fixation of the
electrical units. I will not detain you by referring to the process
of thought by which Hertz was led to study electrical waves
produced by purely electrical means, and of a length enormously
greater than the vaves of light: suffice it to say that he discovered
a means of producing such waves and was able to show that they
actually existed and behaved as Maxwell had indicated. At the
same time, being anxious to establish the main points, Hertz,
with that rare insight which in experimental work is the chief
test of genius, laid aside a number of anomalies and unexplained
results. His followers naturally took up these points and ran
them down. The first thing was to get some means of detecting
the nodal points more simple and convenient than the spark gap
used by Hertz, and accordingly we now have an abundance of
such means. The latest, the simplest, the most delicate is
probabably a tube of filings regarded as constituting part of an
electrical circuit and whose resistance, viz., that of a large
number of bad or “ microphone ” contacts is found to be affected
by electrical waves. It was observed by M. Edouard Branly in
1890* that a bit of glass covered with “ porphyrised ” copper had
its resistance enormously diminished if it was placed near to a
discharging Leyden jar. A similar observation as to the improve-
ment of a shaking contact under the influence of electrical waves
had been noticed in 1889 by Prof. Lodge.
If a tube of filings be arranged as one arm of a Wheatstone’s
bridge, then it is found that the resistance is diminished by the
impact of even feeble electrical radiation. On tapping or
shaking the tube, the old resistance approximately reappears.
It has long been known that commercial selenium in the
* C.R. 11], page 785, and 112, page 90.


crystalline or dull grey form, has its resistance altered by the
incidence of light waves and recovers somewhat slowly, and that
it is sensitive to radiation of somewhat limited range as to wave
length. Curiously enough, Professor Lodge has noticed that
tubes of filings are sensitive also to waves of a more or less
definite wave length, but of course on a much larger scale. This
gives us incidentally a hint as to a possible cause of the light
sensitiveness of selenium.
In addition to the loose contact method we now have a large
number of others, some on the “ trigger principle,” in which a
small spark precipitates a greater from a convenient source, some
involving the use of a galvanometer, some an electrometer, some
using vacuum tubes, others the heating of wires—a whole host of
methods whereby the study of electrical waves may be facilitated.
Among the phenomena discovered by Hertz, none have given
rise to so much uncertainty as the apparently contradictory
results obtained by different observers as to the velocity of waves
concentrated in space by means of wires. These doubts have
practically been set at rest by investigating the expectedly large
influence of the walls and floor of the rooms in which experiments
have been made. The ambiguity from this cause was removed
before Hertz’s death. Another trouble arose as to the question
whether the waves observed had a wave length depending on
the natural period of the oscillator, or on that of the receiver.
These questions have been considerably elucidated by a consider-
ation of the general conditions of a vibrating system subject to
damping, whence it appears that a heavily damped oscillator or
exciter—or, in other words, one which emits energy very fast—
can only give one or two waves appreciably affecting the resonator,
whose “free’’period then becomes of chief importance. The
wave length observed in experimental work accordingly depends
on whether the exciter or receiver is the more heavily damped.
If we look at the matter from the point of view of the resonator,
we see that a resonator will respond almost equally well to vibra-


tions of widely different periods if only it be of such a type that
when speaking itself it is heavily damped. The sounding board
of a piano or the body of a violin, or indeed the air in the ear
passages of any animal, is such a body. If on the other hand the
resonator be only slightly damped, it will require much greater
accuracy of tuning to set up resonance, but when once this is
attained the resonance will be much stronger. In acoustics a
tuning fork or closed organ pipe is a resonator of the class to
which I allude. In the electrical case, so far as I understand it,
the matter is made more complex by the fact that both electric
and magnetic energy are radiated, and one kind of radiation may,
and generally does, proceed faster than another, so that a vibrator
may be heavily damped as far as electrical radiation is concerned,
and only slightly so far as magnetic energy is concerned, and
vice versa. Ultimately the energy per unit volume of both kinds
will be equal in the wave field, but meanwhile the effects may
become too attenuated for observation. We owe a good deal to
Bjerknes* in this connection. A clear but brief account is also
given of the leading results in the Archives des Sciences Physiques
et Naturelles de Geneve—a most useful and pleasant publica-
tion. By the application of the principles just referred to, the
study of electro-magnetic waves as produced by resonators of
varying form is greatly assisted, and most if not all of the out-
standing difficulties have now been removed. This brings me
naturally to a consideration of the brilliant work of Nikola Tesla
in this field—work which exhibits the highest genius at every
step. The advance made by Tesla is briefly this. Hertz worked
with comparatively short waves which damped down after a very
few vibrations, occupying a time perhaps in all of the order of the
ten millionth of a second. With the apparatus used by Hertz
the phenomena only occurred perhaps forty times a second, so
that the time occupied by the phenomenon itself was only a very
small fraction of the whole time involved, just as if one were to
ring a bell for a minute every year and endeavour to deduce
* Wied. Ann. 44, p. 74.
B—May 1, 1595.


acoustical principles from its performance. Tesla, with immense
experimental resources behind him, succeeded in constructing
apparatus which, while emitting longer waves, and waves which
were less damped, repeated the process much oftener, so that
referring to the analogy again, the bell might be supposed to be
kept ringing a considerable fraction of the time. With this radi-
ation Tesla was enabled to perform experiments of a quite new
order —especially in high vacuum lamps—where an electrostatic
discharge (in old fashioned language) was caused to converge on
infusible bodies, such as carbon or carbon silicide. Incidentally
it turned out that air ceases to act as an insulator for such high
frequencies, and this is probably the greatest drawback to the
utilisation of such radiation for lighting purposes. Within the
last two or three years the matter has been taken up by E.
Wiedemann and Ebert, who find that in a high vacuum the dis-
charge produced by almost continuous but individually feeble
oscillations is capable of exciting the phosphorescence of certain
substances in a most remarkable manner. As I believe that it
is legitimate to hope for improved means of illumination in this
direction, and as I know that this is a subject interesting to most
people, I will refer to Ebert’s arrangements rather more closely.
A description of the apparatus employed is given in Wiedemann’s
Annalen, Yol. liii, fig. 144, and it may be regarded as a simple
arrangement of a Tesla apparatus for small output combined with
an arrangement for securing very persistent oscillation. It may
be mentioned in passing, that though the energy of an electrically
vibrating system is greater, the greater the capacity—still the
damping is in general greater also —so that if one wants to
keep the oscillations going, one must not use too great capacities;
while on the other hand too small capacities must not be employed,
or the energy available becomes too small. This is independent
of the frictional damping or loss in the apparatus itself which
depends directly on the resistance. The apparatus on the table is
an exact copy of that described by Ebert. It consists of a “spark
gap” fed in any suitable manner, (by a Wimshurst machine in this


case) and two primary condensers arranged in Lodge’s manner, the
“ outer coatings ” forming the terminals of the primary of a small
induction coil. The secondary of the coil terminates in another
condenser, from which the leads pass to the lamp. All the con-
densers are adjustable. Another point about it is that in order
to secure a minimum of damping, the primary and secondary cir-
cuits are turned to respond as closely as possible, as indeed must
follow from the general principles laid down above. The oscilla-
tions are produced by the discharge of the primary air condensers
arranged in the most symmetrical fashion. Ebert considers that
the loss observed in condensers having dielectric materials other
than air is due to what is now generally called the “ hysteresis ”
of the dielectric. Ido not think that this is necessarily the case,
but it may pass. The ends of the secondary circuit are connected
to external electrodes surrounding or partially surrounding an
exhausted globe in which is placed the phosphorescent substance.
This substance is then excited by the radiation from the electrodes
or rather by the kathode rays starting from inside the glass under
the electrodes and falling on the luminous paint.
The phosphorescent substance which Ebert uses, he describes as
the “ blue-green luminous paint,” made by a firm of German
chemists. The most interesting point in connection with the
matter to the general reader, is the extraordinary efficiency of
such a lamp, as claimed by Ebert. Everybody who pays for
his electricity by meter knows that an ordinary 16 C.P. lamp
uses up energy at a rate of about sixty watts ; or say one-twelfth
of a horse power. In other words, if no energy were wasted
between an engine and the lamp, each horse power developed by
the engine would keep about twelve lights of 16 C.P. going ; of
this energy however, vastly little affects our eyes—not more than
say five per cent. But all energy affecting the eye does not affect
the eye equally; it takes, according to Langley, about one
hundred thousand times as much energy to produce perceptible
vision with red light as with yellow-green light. The ordinary
incandescent lamp however is rather poor in yellow-green rays,


so that not only does ninety-five per cent, of the energy coming
from such a lamp refuse to affect our eyes at all, but the greater
part of what does so affect them does it by means of rays to which
they are only slightly sensitive. That a much higher efficiency is
attainable we know by Langley’s study of the glow worm, the
most efficient lamp in existence, for the heating power of the
energy emitted is too small to be measured by ordinary means, or
a glow worm “ burns cold.” Ebert claims that his lamp will give
a ‘ serviceable ’ light for an expenditure of a millionth of a watt.
Suppose £ a serviceable light ’ means half a candle power, then for
a fifteen candle power lamp we should require only three
hundred thousandths of a watt, instead of the fifty watts say we
require at present; of course further experience may show that
this estimate of Ebert’s is too small, but it is possible, and in any
case there is no doubt that an enormous efficiency is gained. This
is not quite’new by the way, we always knew that phosphorescence
was an efficient form of illumination, but the figures given, are
I believe, the first to have been anything like fairly estimated.
In connection with this I might remark that incandescent burners
of the Welsbach type, using gas, probably work in virtue of the
substance of the mantle being rendered phosphorescent by rise of
temperature. Whether anything will come out of Ebert’s lamp I
cannot say, for the practical difficulties appear insuperable at
present.
Before I leave this subject, I will mention a result I got some
years ago in a discussion on sensitive galvanometers. I found
that I could make an instrument so sensitive that a definite
-9
motion of the mirror corresponded to an energy supply of 10
ner second. This I have now increased so that an effect is
produced by a supply of 10 ergs per second, or, say, 10
horse power. Langley’s numbers for the most efficient light
required to produce vision are about 10 ergs per second.
Consequently, the human eye must look to its laurels, or its claim
as the most sensitive mechanism will have to be rejected.


Though not exactly a matter of the last year or two alone, I
feel I ought to refer to the work done by Wiener and by
Lippmann in photographing the effects of standing waves, by
which I mean the interference effects produced near to a
reflecting surface by the incident and reflected trains. The
objects of the two experimenters were by no means identical.
Wiener deliberately tried to reproduce the experiments of
Hertz, using light waves and a photographic film, instead of long
electro-magnetic waves and a resonator. He succeeded in
making a sensitive collodion film with a thickness of only one-
thirtieth of the wave length of sodium light— i.e., about one five
hundred thousandth of a centimeter. By tilting this film with
respect to the reflecting surface, Wiener was enabled to obtain
evidence of the nodes and anti-nodes of the chemically active
vibrations, in the form of interference striae; and, moreover,
was able to show that the striae were standing wave effects, and
not the ordinary interference effects of thin films. By applying
the results of Trouton on the laws of reflection at the polarizing
angle of electro-magnetic radiation, and assuming that the
chemical effects are the outcome of the electric rather than the
magnetic vibration, Wiener has been able to show that the view
taken by Fresnel as to the “ direction ” of vibration refers to the
electric vector. It has been suggested that the photographic
film may be affected by the magnetic component, but most
physicists would, I think, take Wiener’s view of the matter, as
being the more probable.
Lippmann, on the other hand, uses ordinary thick but trans-
parent films, and obtains many nodes and antinodes in the film
thickness. In this way he is able to produce a photograph of
the nature of a diffraction grating, and by a train of reasoning
which is exceedingly acute, though a good many hypotheses
are involved, he shows that this grating photograph will yield by
reflected light a colour which will correspond more or less closely
with the colour of the light falling on the film originally, and this
whether the colour was pure or not. Success is the only test of


work of this kind, and M. Lippmann appears to have had a
fair share of it, and has actually photographed simple objects—
such as a pot of geraniums, the photographs (negatives in the
ordinary sense) exhibiting the colours of the original. So far as
I know, he has not succeeded in printing in colours. The
suggestion of the method appears to have been due to Zinker in
1868, and so is of considerable antiquity. I see no reason why
we should not have coloured photographs of some kind within a
reasonable period.
The next point on which I will touch refers to the use of
the electric furnace, for within the last few years a magnificent
series of researches has been carried out with its aid by
Moissan on hitherto infusible substances. The simplest form of
electric furnace merely consists of a lime block hollowed out and
provided with a lid. Two carbon poles meet in the centre of the
cavity, and are the seat of an arc light whose power is only
limited by the engine power available. The end result is that
a considerable fraction of the energy of the boiler fire is con-
centrated in the space of a few cubic inches, and the temperature
attained is correspondingly high. By this furnace Mr. Moissan
has not only been able to produce small diamonds, but he has
been able to prepare considerable quantities of the metals of the
chromium group, (and lately with an improved furnace of titanium),
which, it is not too much to say, were unknown hitherto in any
thing approaching an ingot form. The latest development appears
to be the manufacture of calcium carbide from lime and coal dust.
This process we owe to Mr. Willson, an American, and it appears
likely to have some influence in the arts; for the massive
calcium carbide, when acted on by water, yields acetylene in a
very pure state, and this either as a means of enriching gas, or as a
starting point for organic synthesis is a very valuable substance.
Some years ago Mendelejeff advanced a theory of the production
of petroleum from its elements under the influence of high tem-
peratures, so that Mr. Willson’s discovery will come as cheering


news to those who still think that rock oil is of organic origin,
and therefore not likely to exist in unlimited quantities.
A good deal of work has been done recently in improving our
means of measuring temperatures. Many people think that as
temperature measurements have been made for so many years
they must necessarily have been carried to a.high point of accuracy.
In special cases such as the experiments of Regnault this is no
doubt true, but the temperatures investigated did not lie much
outside the ordinary range— i.e. up to 300° Centigrade—and the
apparatus was quite unmanageable under ordinary conditions of
work. Improvements have been made in two ways. The electrical
resistance of platinum has been accurately determined as a func-
tion of the temperature, and it has been shown that different
samples of commercially pure wire behave similarly. Platinum
wire resistance thermometers are now articles of commerce. The
thermoelectric couple has also been investigated by Le Chaletier
for hiyh temperatures, and a junction of platinum and a ten per
cent, alloy of rhodium and platinum has been made to yield reliable
results. On the other hand a most extraordinary improvement in
the detail of correcting ordinary thermometers has been achieved
by M. Guillaume of the Bureau International des Poids et Mesures:
with the result that thermometers can now be made by a skilful
Parisian maker, which after passing through the hands of M.
Guillaume’s assistants, will give correct readings on an actual
scale of temperature to within one two-hundredth of a degree
centigrade. I have such instruments in my possession.
The crowning discovery of the year however, has been that of
a new component of the atmosphere by Lord Rayleigh. This gas
was virtually discovered some two years ago and has now been
isolated by Lord Rayleigh and Prof. Ramsay. About 1885 Lord
Rayleigh began to redetermine the density of gases with a view
to testing Prout’s hypothesis. As a result there is now no doubt
that the ratios of the atomic weights of oxygen and hydrogen do
not accord with the hypothesis in question ; a result which had
been provisionally established by Stas for other substances.


While weighing nitrogen Lord Rayleigh found he got one density
when the nitrogen was taken from air, and another when it came
from chemical sources. The results of each set of observations
were consistent, and after trying to explain the discrepancy in
every way, Lord Rayleigh fell back on the conclusion that there
must be some constituent of air hitherto unrecognised. An
investigation of the basis of our knowledge of the composition of
air showed that there was a possibility of a small quantity of
some other substance existing in it, besides those usually considered.
Accordingly the nitrogen and oxygen, water vapour, and carbonic
acid were successively removed, and Raleigh and Ramsay isolated
the new substance, to which they have given the name of “argon.”
It appears to be a singularly inert gas, (to which property it owes
its late discovery), heavier than nitrogen, and most probably an
element, since there is strong evidence that it is monatomic.
Should this be the case, room will have to be made for it in
Mendelejeffs’ series—one can only pray that it may fit a vacant
place and not turn the whole of chemistry upside down by refus-
ing to come in under the periodic law. It would come in if its
atomic weight were twenty, but the discoverers think it is forty.
However, out of such catastrophes, advances are apt to be made,
and if we have to amend our periodic law we shall probably get
something better in its place, perhaps some light on the dynamics
underlying it. I cannot close this brief notice without directing
your attention to the magnificent triumph which this discovery
has obtained for the method of enquiry by means of prolonged,
laborious, and exact measurement, as opposed to the method of
happy inspiration. Contrary to the popular idea, the vast
majority of discoveries have been made by the methods employed
by Lord Rayleigh, of which the essence is that no obscurity,
however small, is to be passed over until it is completely sifted.
Another reflection is as to whether this discovery does not illus-
trate the deleterious effects of scientific instruction out of text
books, from which all of us have suffered. It is impossible to go
into full detail in a text book, and consequently investigations as


reported therein are usually made to appear much more absolute
in their results than is actually the fact, and a reader gradually
gets to accept their conclusions as quite beyond question. In
England there is a rare white butterfly which is seldom or never
captured, except by little boys, for it cannot be immediately
distinguished from the ‘ white cabbage ’ butterfly, and so is only
taken by those who are inexperienced in butterfly hunting.—
Verbum sap.
I have hitherto spoken entirely of matters involving new prin-
ciples and capable of enlarging our general ideas. I now turn to
the humbler task of referring briefly to some of those applications
of science—which too frequently pass for science itself. No
mistake is more fatal to progress than the idea that the discovery
of application is as important as the discovery of principles, or
of facts of general significance. The first matter I shall refer
to is one on which an enormous amount of scientific knowledge
has been brought to bear. I refer to the polyphase current.
Within the year we have witnessed not only the approximate
completion of the first instalment of the Niagara Electric Works,
but the successful introduction of two and three phase plants
elsewhere. Happily for the inventors, the greater number of
the problems had been already worked out for optical purposes
and form a part of the theory of “ harmonic motion.” The
works at Niagara will always be remarkable for the extreme
care which has marked every step of the undertaking. The
Corporations involved have from the beginning spared no pains or
money in calling to their assistance the best advice available, both
for their hydraulic and electric works. Most of the machinery
is novel at all events in its magnitude and in its structural detail.
The most interesting point to me was the arrangement for “ float-
ing ’’ the long vertical turbine shaft, and so dispensing with a step
bearing. Prof. George Forbes, who has had to stand a rather hot
fire of criticism, is to be congratulated on the success of the under-
taking. Though on a very much smaller scale, a transmission of
power works is now almost completed within this Colony. In


this case arrangements have been made for the transmission of
about five hundred horse power from the falls of the river Gara to
the mining town of Hillgrove, distant some seven miles. The
system adopted in this case is the three wire direct current system,
but the voltage employed, 1600, is such as has never been used
before with currents of the magnitude here involved. The mere
fact that a contractor was found willing to guarantee the perform-
ance of machines yielding, say 250 h.p. at over 1,600 volts, is the
strongest evidence of the immense advance which has been quietly
going on in the design of direct current dynamos. One of these
developments of great interest is what is known as the “ Sayer’s
winding,” by which means practically no field winding is required
—a most original idea.
Late last year (too late for reading at our last meeting), a
paper on Cellular Kites was sent into us by Mr. Lawrence
Hargrave, and I cannot let this opportunity pass without
expressing my strong conviction of the importance of the work
which Mr. Hargrave has done towards solving the problem of
artificial flight. Mr. Hargrave’s work is so well known here
that I need do no more than allude to it with the remark that
we may expect to see Mr. Maxim adopt the cellular principle,
and thus reduce the space occupied by the aeroplanes of his
machine. The problem of flight is one which requires for its
solution not only a great deal of inventive capacity, but a sound
knowledge of the properties of materials, and the fact that both
these qualifications appear to be possessed in a high degree by
those working at the subject, allows us to indulge in the most
sanguine anticipations. In connection with this matter the
soaring of birds has for many years formed an interesting
subject of speculation. A solution of the problem has been
recently obtained by Mr. Langley working on a suggestion made
by Lord Rayleigh. I can say nothing about it here, except that
the essence of the explanation lies in the fact that even in what
one would call a steady wind there are much more important
fluctuations than is generally supposed— i.e., that all winds are


gusty to an unexpected degree. Lord Rayleigh supplied the
idea of the use of intermittent wind, and the evidence showing
that winds are, in fact, extremely intermittent has been put
together by Langley, if not indeed originally discovered by him.
Before I conclude I should like to make a few remarks on that
particular branch of physical chemistry in which I am chiefly
interested. I refer to the electrical properties of substances.
Both electricity and chemistry are in this state. Neither science
can make much progress in fundamental principles without the
assistance of the other. It has long been a truism that when we
know the nature of electricity, we shall know a little about the
fundamental mechanism of chemical action and vice versa. The
extraordinary definitness of the relation between the time integral
of an electric current and the amount of decomposition in an
electrolytic cell through which it passes, shows how necessary a
theory of electricity is to chemistry. Within the last few years
a number of experimenters have been busy on the passage of
electric currents through gases, with the result that there is now
little or no doubt but that gaseous conduction is also electrolytic.
We have no means of deciding at present whether conduction
through metals is electrolytic or not, and I shall show, if time
permits, that with bad conductors the probability is in favour of
electrolysis. We, therefore, have the fact that, setting metallic
conductors aside as ambiguous, whenever we get a conduction
current we get, not only magnetic effects, but chemical effects as
well; and any respectable theory of electricity must embrace them.
We see, therefore, that this road, like all others, leads to our
requiring to examine the relation between ether and matter, or,
in other words, all physical roads in the long run lead equally to
chemistry. It has been my endeavour, therefore, for many years,
to elucidate some of the relations involved, but I was stopped on
the threshold of enquiry by the difficulty that the electrical
properties of elemental substances with the exception of metals
were unknown. With the assistance of IMr. Pollock and two of
my students, Messrs. Allen and Brearley, I made a beginning by


examining the properties of sulphur —a substance chosen for
reasons I do not need to go into here—but which ultimately
turned out to have the immense practical advantage of being
commercially obtainable in a state of extraordinary purity. Most
Leblanc alkali makers now recover their sulphur by the Chance
process, which consists in liberating sulphuretted hydrogen from
the waste and then half burning it, so as to oxidise the hydrogen
and deposit the sulphur. This sulphur is generally pure to about
one part in ten thousand, the residue consisting of a trace of water
and dust. By melting and filtering, the dust may be removed,
and then a single distillation yields a substance so pure that no
tests I have been able to devise will indicate any impurity. It
is well known that sulphur exists in two main modifications ; one
of them is the form in which it is deposited by the electrolysis of
sulphides, the other by the electrolysis of its chloride or bromide.
This important observation we owe to Berthellot. I considered
it of the first importance to examine the relations of these two
forms of sulphur, and to make a very long story short I found
that one modification certainly and the other probably, refuses
to conduct electricity at all. On the other hand a mixture of
these substances conducts, not well, but distinctly, and the
evidence, so far as it goes, tends to show that the conduction is
electrolytic in a sort of way—for it is accompanied by the
phenomenon of electric absorption, which is most satisfactorily
explained on the whole by a sort of electrolysis. There are a large
number of subsidiary phenomena also tending to support this view.
We are then in this position. The two sorts of sulphur insulate
separately but conduct when mixed, that is they combine, for
the mixture has different properties from either of its constituents.
If this is granted, what is there to prevent us from assigning to
each of the two modifications something of an elemental character ?
Similar results have been attained by totally distinct means by
chemists working on the metals of the rare earths and on
Beryllium. Is it possible that the idea of an absolutely hard and
fast element may have to give way, and that we shall have to


modify our views as to elements by “correcting terms”? Long
ago, Faraday drew attention to the supposed absolute similarity
of molecules in the phrase that they behave like “ manufactured
articles.” This phrase has been worn rather bare in the course
of its use in theological argument, and was long ago shown by
Clifford to be a statement going beyond what is known of the
facts. In the case of sulphur, so far from the molecules being
almost identical, they have no more than a family likeness, and
form groups with properties gradually changing from the most
stable amorphous variety on the one hand, to the quite stable
crystalline variety on the other. lam persuaded that the high
and dry view of the absolute similarity of molecules as roughly
taught in text books has done much harm as well as good, and
the science of chemistry is now sufficiently advanced to allow
the more correct view to be habitually used without disadvantage.
One consequence of the chemical theory of electricity—we will
not quarrel as to the name, though, as a matter of fact, there
must be a new science lying equally behind both electricity and
chemistry—is that the possibility of charge without the interven-
tion of free atoms cannot be admitted. It was for this reason that
in 1889 I suggested a purely chemical theory of the action of the
ordinary frictional machine, in which I postulated the decom-
position of glass or water or both as a consequence of mechanical
friction. The idea was new to me at the time, but it has probably
been advanced before. At that time I had made a few experi-
ments on the change of composition produced by pressure on
complex substances, with the result that the majority of the
substances I examined had their melting points changed when
pressed with as high a pressure intensity as soft steel will bear.
Since then I have made a good many more experiments which
I have not published hitherto, as they were perhaps too informal
and intermittent, but the general result has been with some
exceptions the same. Since then Mr. Carey Lea, in America,
has succeeded in decomposing substances by rubbing them in a
mortar, and that in at least one case where rise of temperature


would not account for the result. Consequently, the chemical
theory of the frictional machine may be said to be placed on a
sound basis. At the same time it is only fair to say that Mr.
Lea’s experiments have not yet been confirmed. A year ago I
began to conduct a check series of experiments by another method,
but I have not had time to carry them through.
I ought perhaps to have curtailed my remarks on my own
work rather more, but I wished to show that problems of the
very first importance are to be approached in the domain of
physical chemistry, and I naturally took that part of the subject
with which I am best acquainted, to form a basis for my
remarks.






