

Hon. PROFESSOR SMITH, C.M.G., &c., &c.,
President of the Royal Society of N.S.W.




ANNIVERSARY ADDRESS.
By the Hon. Professor Smith, C.M.G., &c., &c., President.
[.Delivered to the Royal Society of N. S. Wales, 4 May, 1881.]
Gentlemen,
At this the close of my Presidential year—the first year, I
may remind you, in which the Chair has been occupied by an elected
President—it becomes my duty to go through the form of an
Annual Address, before proceeding to the more pleasing ceremony
of laying down office and introducing my successor. It is a wise
provision in our by-laws that the President can hold office for
only one year ) but in spite of that, I fear that this annual address
will tend to become more and more irksome, and may on some
occasions stand in the way of desirable members taking office,
members who may not have much leisure nor much fluency, and
who might look upon the task of composing an address as more
than counterbalancing the honor of the position, and the gratify-
ing sense of enjoying the confidence of their fellow-members. I
now throw out the suggestion for the benefit of my successors,
that while the Society is comparatively young, and its forms and
routine yet in the plastic condition, it might be well to accept as
an annual address a mere statement of the condition of the
Society and its work of the preceding year. Occasionally, no
doubt, the President might be glad to embrace the opportunity
of stating his views on some questions of general interest,
not perhaps well suited for a paper of the usual character at a
monthly meeting, and not intended for discussion ; and in such a
case as that, when the President has really something to say,
the members will doubtless be pleased to listen, but in ordinary
5e 11-81


cases I believe the members would be glad to let the President off
with a brief formal statement of the character indicated. lam
unwilling however to be the first to break in abruptly upon an
established custom, and in looking about for some appropriate
subject on which to found an address, it has occurred to me that
now we have completed a quarter of a century of continuous and
active existence, a brief review of the work accomplished might
not be uninteresting—the more so as the Royal Society is
occasionally twitted with indolence, and even the members them-
selves probably do not realise that on a fair view of the case, and
making due allowance for unfavourable circumstances, the Society
has been the means of giving publicity to a large amount of
intellectual effort, and of persevering and laborious scientific
research.
Review of past History of the Society.
I have said that we have had a continuous active life of five-
and-twenty years ; that estimate includes of course the Philo-
sophical Society that preceded us ; hut as there was a mere change
of name effected in 1866, without any interruption of business,
we have a right to go back to 1856, when the Philosophical Society
began its work. It would not be unfair indeed to claim an
existence of sixty years, for undoubtedly the first beginning of
this scientific organisation is to be traced back to 1821, when the
Philosophical Society of Australasia was constituted, with ten
members, under the presidency of Sir Thomas Brisbane. But
that original Society did not long survive. It is mentioned
among the Institutions of Sydney in the Australasian Almanac for
1825, and not afterwards. The only record known of papers read
before it is in the Geographical Memoirs of New South Wales,
by Mr. Justice Pield, published in 1825. In that volume four
papers are reprinted in full, the titles of which are given in the
Inaugural Address of the Rev. W. B. Clarke, in 1867. Besides
the reading of papers, that Society engaged in another public
act which has better served to perpetuate its name. In March,
1822, it caused a tablet to be affixed to the rocks on the South


Head of Botany Bay, to commemorate the landing of Captain
Cook. The inscription is given in the Gazette of 22 March, 1822,
as follows - /
A.D. MDCCLXX.
Under the auspices of British Science,
THESE SHORES WERE DISCOVERED
JAMES COOK AND JOSEPH BANKS,
The Columbus and Maecenas of their time.
This spot once saw them ardent
IN THE PURSUIT OF KNOWLEDGE ;
NOW,
TO THEIR MEMORY THIS TABLET IS INSCRIBED,
IN THE FIRST YEAR
The Philosophical Society of Australasia,
Sir Thomas Brisbane, K. C. 8., F.R. S. L. and E.,
(corresponding member of the institute of France),
PRESIDENT.
A.D. MDCCCXXI.
In Mr. Clarke’s inaugural address in 1867, particulars are given
of the resuscitation in 1850 of the old Society, under the name of
the Australian Philosophical Society ; but there must have been
an attempted revival at an earlier date, for in the New South Wales
Calendar, of 1832, I find mention made of an “Australian
Society” for promoting colonial products and manufactures, under
the presidency of Mr. Samuel Terry. I cannot, however, find
any other reference to it. The 1850 Society began under favour-
able auspices, and with influential leaders \ but the gold fever of
1851-2 seems to have sapped its vitality, and for two or three
years nothing is heard of it, until in July, 1855, it met once more
and resolved to make a fresh start, under the name of the
Philosophical Society of New South Wales. It seems that twenty-
two Members passed over from the old Society to the new, and
they brought with them £BB to start the funds of the new


Association. Under the active presidency of the Governor-
General, Sir W. T. Denison, the Philosophical Society speedily
attained a considerable amount of popularity. It held its first
meeting in the School of Arts, on 9th May, 1856, and at the next
meeting ninety-one new Members were elected. About, forty
more were added during the remainder of the year; and fourteen
papers were read, two being by the President. The place of
meeting was speedily changed to the hall of the Australian
Library, now the Free Public Library, where it remained, with
occasional migrations to the Exchange, till the formation of the
Royal Society, which also continued its meetings at the Library
till 1869, when it moved to the Exchange, and continued there
till May, 1875, when it occupied the present building, first as
tenant of the Academy of Art, and finally as proprietor in 1878.
The early prosperity of the Philosophical Society yielded after
a few years to the usual reaction that we are only too familiar
with in all new organisations attempted in Sydney. Perhaps
also it suffered from the partial withdrawal of vice-regal patronage,
if that, however, was not rather an effect than a cause of waning
popularity. Sir W. Denison was not only largely instrumental in
starting the Society, but he continued during his term of office to
attend the meetings and to take a lively interest in the proceedings.
On his leaving the Colony at the close of 1860, the Society
presented him with an address, in which the following words
occur:—“We desire to express our warm acknowledgments for the
services you have rendered to the Society, and to the cause of science
generally. * * * * To your successful exertions at an early
period after your arrival in the Colony we are indebted for the
reorganisation of the Society on a satisfactory basis, &c.” His
successor, Sir John Young, afterwards Lord Lisgar, frequently
presided over the monthly meetings, but as the attendance
dwindled away he came to the conclusion that his presence was
not beneficial. In his remarks at the close of the Lev. Mr.
Clarke’s inaugural address to the Royal Society, in July, 1867,
he is reported to have spoken as follows :—“ His Excellency


expressed his sincere hope that the Society would be more
successful under its new name than it had been under its former
designation. He had regularly attended the monthly meetings of
the Society for some time after his arrival in the Colony. He
observed, however, as time went on that the attendance became
‘small by degrees and beautifully less,’ until on one occasion that
he had come there to preside, he found himself the only person
present to hear a paper which some gentleman was there to read.
He believed that Professor Smith was sent for, and formed with him
the sole audience. After that he had rather held back, being under
the impression that vice-regal patronage was not quite so beneficial
to the Society as could be wished.”
Sir John Young was succeeded in the presidency by the Earl
of Belmore, who took the Chair two or three times at monthly
meetings, and since then we have not been favoured with the
vice-regal countenance.
I have stated that in the first year of the Philosophical Society
about 130 new members were admitted. In the second year there
were only thirty-nine; while in the third the number dwindled down
to seven. After that there was some improvement for two years, but
in 1861 the number again dropped to six, and in 1863 only one new
member joined. In each of the following years nine joined, and
lastly in 1866 (the transitional year) only one.
Not only did new members fail to come in, but the old dropped
steadily off, as shown by the decreasing amounts paid as annual
subscriptions. In the first year the income of the Society was
£316, in addition to the £BB brought over from the old Society.
In the second year the income was £205 ; in the third, £lO6 ;
after which it kept higher for a few years, till in 1863 it dropped
to £BB, and in the last year of the Society (1866) it reached its
lowest depth at £43. If the expenditure of the early years had
not been very moderate, so that a surplus was preserved for bad
times, the Society must have died of inanition. Indeed, it fre-
quently became a question whether it was yrorth while continuing


what seemed a hopeless struggle; and it was sometimes
suggested that the Society should be dissolved, and the remaining
assets used up in a picnic or a dinner.
For several years the expenditure, although rigorously kept
down, was considerably over the income, and the Society lived on
its early savings. In such a state of the finances, it was of course
impossible to undertake the publication of the Transactions. In
the first years the Society was entirely dependent on the news-
papers for giving publicity to its proceedings ; but these were
frequently of too abstruse a character for such a mode of publica-
tion. Afterwards, when Mr. James Waugh started the Magazine
of Science and Art, the papers of the Society were regularly pub-
lished in it ; but that magazine lasted only a few years, and then
the Society published one volume of Transactions, containing a
selection of papers read from 1862 to 1865. A complete list of
the papers read before the Philosophical Society has never hitherto
been made public, and I have thought it worth while to make
such a list from the minutes and put it here on record. It will
be seen that, in spite of failing membership and income, a large
amount of useful scientific work was accomplished.
Philosophical Society Papers.
May 9. “Development of the Railway System in England, with
suggestions as toits application to the Colony of N. S. Wales.”
His Excellency Sir W. T. Denison, Governor-General.
June 13. Two papers on “Steam Communication with England.”
Hon. E. Deas-Thomson, C.B.
July 11. “Means of constructing Railways, financially considered.”
W. G. Pennington. “Application of certain principles of
Political Economy to the question of Railways.” Professor
Pell.
August 13. “On the action of Sydney Water upon Lead.” Professor
Smith. “On the Iron-making resources of N. S. Wales.”
Mr. Thomas.
Sept. 10. “Electric Telegraphs and Railways between Sydney and
London not impossible.” John Thompson, Deputy Surveyor-
General. ‘‘ On Sanitary Reform. ” Dr. Aaron.
Oct. 8. “On the Parramatta Waterworks.” E. 0. Moriarty.
Nov. 12. “On Irrigation. ” Sir W. T. Denison.
Dec. 10. ‘‘ On the necessity for a further exploration of the Interior of
the Australian Continent.” John Thompson. “The Science
of Statistics.” C. Rolleston. “On a new Grate for burning
Wood.” Thos. Woore.


June 10. ‘On Pavements.” Lieut. Vigors. “On the Sanitary con-
dition of Sydney.” C. Rolleston.
July 8. “On the Moon’s Rotation.” Sir W. T. Denison. “On a new
Sun-gauge.” W. S. Jevons. “On Sanitary Reform. Dr.
Aug. 12. “On Railways.” Sir W. T. Denison. “On Railways,
with reference chiefly to the motive power.” F. S. Fepper-
come. „ „
Sept. 9. “On the Waxed-paper process of Photography. h. llaes.
Oct. 14. “On the Poison-apparatus of Venomous Snakes. Alfred
Roberts. “On the Meteorology of N. S. Wales.” Rev. W .
Scott. _ .
Nov. 11. “On the use and abuse of Tobacco.” Dr. Berncastle.
Dec. 9. “On the Formation of Clouds.” W. S. Jevons.
May 12. “On the strength and elasticity of Wood* of N. S. Wales
and New Zealand.” Captain Ward, R.E.
June 9. “ Abridgment of a book of papers relating to the history and
practice of Vaccination.” Dr. Greenup.
July 14. “On the Poison-apparatus of Venomous Snakes, with a
description of some of the species found in this Colony. ’ Alfred
Aug 11. “On the Meteorology of N. S. Wales.” Rev. Wm. Scott
“On the Clunes Mine, Victoria.” H. A. Thompson. Gold
Deposits of Victoria.” H. A. Thompson. “Outline of apian
for the formation and working of a Mining Company to open
out the Quartz-fields of N. S. Wales.” H. A. Thompson.
“On the Mortality of Sydney.” C. Rolleston. „
Sept. 8. “On the present state of the Supply of the Ores of Mercury.
Rev W. B. Clarke. “On the filtration of Water through
Sand.” Sir W. T. Denison. <<n
Oct. 13. “On the Construction of Dams. Professor Pell. Dn
Currency and Banking in N. S. Wales.” Edward R. Drury.
Nov. 10. “On the Plurality of Worlds.” Rev. W. Scott.
Dec. 8. “On the Progress of Photography.” James Freeman.
June 8. “On the construction of Specula for Reflecting Telescopes.”
H. A. Severn. “On Atmotic Navigation.” Dr. Bland.
Julv 13. “On the means of deodorizing and utilizing the Sewage of
Towns.” C. Rolleston. “On a new mode of using Canada
Balsam, &c., in mounting microscopic objects. ’ Alfred
Roberts. . „ „
Aug. 10. “On the Observatories of the Southern Hemisphere. Bev.
W. Scott. “Analyses of certain Colonial Coals.” Captain
Ward. “On the Adulteration of Milk in Sydney.” Members
of Microscopical Committee. „
Sept. 21. “On Telegraphic Communication with England. x. Gis-
borne.
Oct. 19. “On the Sydney Observatory.” Rev. W.Scott. _ ?
Nov. 16. “On the Separation of Gold from Mundic Quartz. rro-
fessor Smith.


June 20. “On the Sydney Observatory.” Rev. W. Scott.
July 18. “ Memoranda referring to the destruction of the dam at
Liverpool.” E. 0. Moriarty. “On the detection of spurious
gold.” F. B. Miller.
Aug. 15. “On the Quartz Reefs of Upper Adelong.” Prof. Smith.
Sept. 19. “On Bridge-building.” Sir W. T. Denison. “On a Dial
to prevent collisions at Sea.” C. J. Perry.
Oct. 17. “On compass-deviation in Iron Ships.” Rev. W. Scott.
“On Ozone.” Mr. Proschel.
Nov. 21. “On the Mundic Quartz of Adelong.” Dr. Leibius.
June 19. “On the Census of 1861.” C. Rolleston.
July 17. “On the Sydney Observatory, &c.” Rev. W. Scott.
Aug. 14. “On a new species of Foraminiferous Shell from Ovalau,
Fiji.” Alfred Roberts. “On the improvements in the navi-
gation of the Hunter River.” E. 0. Moriarty.
Sept. 11. “A brief notice of a few of the little known scrub timbers
of the Colony. ” Charles Moore. ‘‘ On a new mode of con-
structing timber Bridges.” Thos. Woore. “On a new
method of giving support to Railway Bars.” Thos. Woore.
Oct. 9. “A short description of the new works now being carried out
for the improvement of Wollongong Harbour.” E. 0.
Moriarty.
Nov. 20. “On some recent geological discoveries in Australasia, and
the correlation of the Australian formations with those of
Europe.” Rev. W. B. Clarke.
June 11. “On the Cave Temples of India.” Dr. Berncastle.
July 9. “ Geometrical Researches, in four papers, comprising numer-
ous new theorems and porisms and complete solutions to cele-
brated problems.” Martin Gardiner. “On the Wambeyan
Caves.” Dr. J. C. Cox.
Aug. 13. “On the desirability of a systematic search for, and obser-
vation of, variable Stars in the Southern Hemisphere.” John
Tebbutt. ‘‘ On the performance of the steamer ‘ Diamantina’
between Sydney and Brisbane. ” Commodore Seymour.
Sept. 10. “On the Vertebrated Animals of the Lower Murray and
Darling; their habits, economy, and geographical distri-
bution.” Gerard Krefft.
Oct. 8. “On the Comet of Sept., 1862.” John Tebbutt.
Nov. 12. Second paper on the same subject, by John Tebbutt.
1863.
May 27. “On Snakes observed in the neighbourhood of Sydney.”
Gerard Krefft.
June 17. “On Snake-bites and their Antidotes.” Dr. Berncastle.
“ A complete solution of a celebrated problem.” Martin Gar-
diner.
Aug. 12. “On the correct scientific method of forming Railway Curves.
&c.” Martin Gardiner.
Sept. 17, “On the Vertebrated Animals of the Lower Murray” (second
paper). Gerard Krefft.
Nov. 11. “On ancient flint Implements found near Abbeville.” Prof.
Smith. “ Description of a new Fish from the Hawkesbury.”
Gerard Krefft.


Aug. 17. “On improved analytic Geometry.” M. Gardiner. “On
the probable reasons that led Fahrenheit to the adoption of
his peculiar thermometric scale.” Prof. Smith.
Sept. 7. “On Australian Storms.” John Tebbutt. “Remarks on
the preceding paper.” Rev. W. B. Clarke.
Oct. 5. “On Fibre-bearing Plants indigenous to the Colony.” Chas.
Moore.
Nov. 2. “On Osmium and Iridium obtained from N. S. Wales Gold.”
Dr. Leibius.
Dec. 7. “On the prospects of the Civil Service of N. S. Wales under
the Superannuation Act of 1864.” Colonel Ward. “On the
distribution of profits in Mutual Life Assurance Societies.”
Professor Pell.
May 10. “On the Transmutation of Rocks in Australasia.” Rev. W.
B. Clarke.
July 5. “On the Oology of Australia.” Ed. Ramsay.
Aug. 2. “On the theory of Encke’s Comet.” G. R. Smalley. “On
the Manners and Customs of the Natives of the Lower Murray
and Darling. ” Gerard Krefft.
Sept. 6. “On the Defences of Port Jackson.” G. A. Morell. “On the
geological position of the Petroleum Coal.” Wm. Keene.
Oct. 11. “On certain possible relations between Geological Changes
and Astronomical Observations.” G. R. Smalley.
Nov. 8. “On the Geology and capabilities of the Cape York Penin-
sula.” Dr. Rattray.
Dec. 6. “On the present state of Astronomical, Magnetical, and Me-
teorological Science.” G. R. Smalley.
July 4. “On the Ornithology of Lake George.” Ed. Ramsay.
Aug. 1. “Preliminary remarks on the Magnetical Survey of N. S.
Wales.” G. R. Smalley. “On the Dentition of Thylacoleo
carnifex.” Gerard Krefft.
Sept. 12. ‘ ‘ Remarks on the support of the Young of Marsupial Animals
in the Pouch.” Ed. Bedford.
Oct. 3. “On the genus Trigonia.” Dr. J. C. Cox.
Nov. 7. ‘ ‘ Remarks concerning a new species of Fagus.” Charles Moore.
“On the Classification of the small Marsupial Insectivora.”
Gerard Krefft.
Dec. 12. “On the condition and resources of the Colony.” C. Rolles-
In the eleven years of the Philosophical Society’s existence it
held eighty-three meetings, at which 107 papers were read by
forty-three members. The largest number (eight) was read by the
Revd. W. Scott, who long held office in the Society. Mr. Krefft,
at that time Curator of the Museum, read seven ; Sir William
Denison and Mr. Polleston, each read six ; I read five ; Pevd.
W. B. Clarke, Mr. Smalley, Mr. Alfred Poberts, Mr. Moriarty,


Mr. Tebbutt, and Mr. Gardiner, each four ; six members read
three each ; seven members two each ; and nineteen members one
each.
Besides the reading of papers, other means were tried to keep
up the interest of the members. A Microscopical Committee was
formed, and held several meetings, some at Government House,
with fair attendance, but it soon collapsed. Conversaziones were
frequently held, at first on a modest scale, in the Australian Library,
but soon expanding so as to require the Chamber of Commerce,
which ultimately became overcrowded with the numerous objects
of interest and with visitors. The Royal Society has carried on
these gatherings with great success. This branch of our operations
has indeed always been very popular. It furnishes the only
opportunity we have as a Society of enjoying the presence of
ladies, but at the same time it is increasingly troublesome and
expensive. We were driven from the Chamber of Commerce to
the Masonic Hall, and from that to the great Hall of the Univer-
sity, and even there we were seriously cramped for room, the
Striking display of scientific and artistic objects requiring a great
deal of space, and the visitors numbering over 800. Last year
the Council did not see their way to attempt a conversazione on
an extended scale, but they invited the members to a similar
gathering (although without ladies) in the Society’s rooms, and
they have reason to believe that a pleasant evening was spent. It
is hoped that during the present year (probably in September), we
may have the pleasure of again meeting the members with the
ladies of their families, at a conversazione of the former character,
in some capacious and central building.
But to return for a little to the old Philosophical Society. In
1865, when the income had dropped to £SB, which was £3O less
than the expenditure, the necessity for some change of organiza-
tion became apparent, if the Society was to be saved from total
extinction. The Council, after discussing the matter, appointed a
sub-committee, consisting of Mr. Smalley and Mr. Bedford, to
draw up a report for submission to tbe general body of members.


This report having been first agreed toby the Council, was brought
up at the monthly meeting on lltli October, and there discussed
and adopted. Its preamble states :
“ Considering the languishing condition of this Society, we are of
opinion that some effort should be made to restore its vitality and
raise it to the important and useful position that it ought to occupy. ’
The report goes on to say that it is not easy to account for the
decline of the Society, but that it may be partly owing to its name,
which conveys the impression that the subjects discussed are of an
abstruse and exclusive character. The Report recommends that
the name should be changed to “ Royal Society,” and an outline is
given of a proposed constitution.
A Committee was then appointed to draw up rules, and appli-
cation was made to the Governor for sanction to the change of
name, but the answer received was that the application must be
forwarded to the Secretary of State for the Colonies. It was not
till the last meeting of 1866 (December 12) that a copy of Lord
Carnarvon’s despatch, dated 24th September, was laid before the
Society. It contained these words—“ Her Majesty has been
graciously pleased* * *to sanction and approve of the Philosophical
Society in future assuming the title of the Royal Society of New
South Wales.” Thus the change was finally completed, and the
name Philosophical, which had been considered inappropriate, was
dropped.
Prosperity however did not come with a rush to the new organi-
sation. Stili there was a decided improvement, for in 1867 the
new accessions were twenty, and the income got up to about £BO.
If we compare this sum with the published list of members for 1867,
which contains 108 names, we are obliged to infer that nearly half
the members had not paid their subscriptions. In 1868 the new
members were thirty-seven ] in 1869 only fourteen ; in 1870 they
rose again to twenty-one, and the income was £ll2 ; but in the
following year only five new members joined, and the income fell
to £BO, while the expenditure was £lll.


The printing of the Transactions was a great burden in those
years, and the want of means prevented some of the papers being
properly illustrated; but in 1872 the Government liberally con-
sented to have the annual volume brought out at the Government
Printing Office, without cost to the Society, except in the matter
of certain illustrations.
The tide of prosperity in the affairs of the Society which we still
enjoy first set in when we took possession of this building in 1875,
and appointed Professor Liversidge and Dr. Leibius to act as our
Secretaries. To the enlightened zeal and indefatigable labours of
these gentlemen we owe much of our present position. In 1875
the income rose suddenly to £222, and in the following year to
£413. In that year (1876) amended By-laws were passed ; Sec-
tions were organized to represent such branches of scientific study
as were thought likely to bring members together for quiet con-
ference and mutual aid ; and arrangements were completed for
exchange of scientific publications with kindred Societies in dif-
ferent parts of the world. Last year we sent out 1,013 copies of
our Transactions and certain Colonial reports to 284 Institutions
and representative persons in 116 different places throughout the civil-
ized world ; and from 167 of these Institutions we received publi-
cations in return to the number of 749, some of them of great value.
In addition to these gifts we have been in regular receipt of a con-
siderable number of leading periodicals, and we have been buying
scientific works as our funds would permit ; so that our library is
now fairly stocked with standard books and periodicals in science,
literature and art.
In 1877 we began to collect funds for the purchase of our
present building, obtaining also the promise of the Government
to grant £1 for every £2 subscribed. The Government at the
same time liberally agreed to augment at the same rate our ordinary
subscriptions, to meet current expenses.
In 1878 the accounts show for the first time a Government
grant of <£2oo, in addition to the ordinary subscriptions of £433-
The special subscription for the building amounted to £l,OOO, which


1875
... £222
—
£214
41
1876
... 413
—
389
132
1877
... 433
£200 ...
703
62
1878
... 516
250 ...
581
78
1879
... 463
236 ...
682
51
1880
... 605
250 ...
812
38
enabled us to claim £5OO from Government. We then completed
thepurchase for £3,525, paying down £1,525, andborrowing£2,ooo
on mortgage. It is highly desirable that this debt should be paid
off, and I trust the members will make an effort towards that end
during the present year. Were that accomplished, there would be
£l2O additional for promoting the proper objects of the Society.
It is the more necessary to get rid of this annual charge for interest,
inasmuch as, without the Government subsidy which we now enjoy,
it would be necessary to economise to such an extent as to endanger
the efficiency of our operations. Now the Government subsidy is
obviously of uncertain duration—it depends upon an annual vote
of the Legislature ; and should bad times come, so as to diminish
materially the public revenue, we must expect to be among the
first to suffer from the inevitable cutting down of expenditure.
There is still another reason why something should be done this
year to add to the building fund. Hitherto a vacant space has
adjoined the Society’s house on the south side; it is probable that
this will now be built upon, and it may be expedient for the
Society to buy a few feet of the frontage in order to preserve the
light and ventilation of this hall in which we meet. But without
additional subscriptions such a purchase could not be made.
Might I venture to suggest that the old members who pay only
one guinea per annum should for at least this year double their sub-
scription to help us in reducing our debt.
To conclude now what I have to say on the financial progress
of the Society, I will state the ordinary income and expenditure
(omitting building fund) for each of the past six years, being
the time that we have occupied the present building ; and to that
I will add the number of ordinary members elected each year. I
throw these statistics into tabular form :
Income —
Year. From Members. From Government. Expenditure. New Members.


The falling off in new members last year may partly be
accounted for by the fact that the entrance fee and annual
subscription had been doubled by a resolution adopted towards
the close of the previous year ; but that this was not the only
reason, or even the chief reason, is made probable when we com-
pare 1879 with 1878, the falling off between these two years
having been greater than between 1879 and 1880. The accession
of new members fluctuates very considerably year by year, and no
special reason can be adduced. In September last the Society
adopted a resolution to limit the number of members to 500, and
as the number on the roll is now about 460, this resolution may
become operative before long. It is difficult, however, to
state exactly the effective membership, as names are kept on the
roll for one year after a subscription has been paid, unless it is
definitely known that a member has retired.
Work op last Year.
In regard to the proper work of the Society during last year I
find that ten meetings were held (including two adjournments)
besides a special meeting to hear a lecture from Mr. Lant
Carpenter on recent practical applications of Electricity in
America ; and a social meeting or Reception by the Council. No
fewer than twenty-eight papers were read by thirteen members, of
which our Hon. Sec., Professor Liversidge, contributed nine, and
our Vice-President, Mr. Russell, contributed five. The year is re-
markable not only for the number of papers but for their quality,
many of them involving much hard work and troublesome
research. The following is a list of the papers under their respective
dates :
12 May. Annual Address, Charles Moore, Vice-President.
2 June. “On the Longitude of the Sydney Observatory.” John
Tebbutt. “On the Opposition and Magnitudes of Uranus
and Jupiter.” John Tebbutt. “On the Acids of the Native
Currant.” E. H. Rennie. “On some new double Stars, with
remarks on several Binaries.” H. C. Russell, Vice-President.
7 July. “Catalogue of Plants collected during Mr. Alex. Forrest’s
geographical exploration of N. W. Australia in 1879.” Baron
Von Mueller. “ The Orbit elements of Comet I, 1880.” John
Tebbutt. “On Ringbarking and its effects, ’ W. E. Abbott,


4 Aug “ Notes on a collection of Fossils from the Palaeozoic Rocks
of N. S. Wales.” R. Etheridge, jun. “On Geological
Observations made in 1876, in Queensland, N. S. Wales,
Victoria and Tasmania.” Dr. Feistmantel. “A new method
of Printing Barometric and other Curves.” H. C. Russell,
Vice-President.
1 Sept. “On Hot-spring Waters from New Britain and Fiji.” Prof.
Liversidge. “On the Composition of Cast Iron acted on by
sea-water.” Professor Liversidge. “On a new Barometer
Table.” H. C. Russell, Vice-President.
6 Oct. “On the Composition of Coral-limestone.” Professor Liver-
sidge. “On the inorganic Constituents of the Coals of N. S.
Wales.” W. A. Dixon. “A comparison between the
Prospect and Kenny Hill schemes of Water Supply for
Sydney.” F. B. Gipps.
3 Nov. “On some N. S. Wales Minerals.” Professor Liversidge.
“On Piturie.” Prof. Liversidge. “On Salt-bush and
Native Fodder Plants.” W. A. Dixon. “On Wells on the
Liverpool Plains.” T. K. Abbott.
IDec. “On some recent changes on the surface of Jupiter.” H. C.
Russell. “On Thunder and Hail Storms.” H. C. Russell.
“Remarks on the Colours of Jupiter’s Belts, and some changes
observed thereon during the opposition of 1880.” G. D.
Hirst.
8 Dec. “On a specimen of Fossilized Wood.” “On the Composition
of some N. S. Wales Coals.” -‘On the composition and
microscopic structure of some N. S. Wales Rocks.” “On the
Barratta and Bingera Meteorites.” All by Professor Liver-
sidge.
At the same meeting of Bth December, it may be remembered
that a draft Act of Incorporation was submitted and adopted.
Circumstances have hitherto prevented this being presented to the
Legislature, but the Council will endeavour to get it passed in the
next session of Parliament.
Since the commencement of the Royal Society there have been
102 general monthly meetings, besides numerous adjournments.
We have had 166 papers at the general meetings, and about 40
more at the Sections. These papers represent a very fair amount
of scientific labour, quite as much as could reasonably be expected,
considering our circumstances and the busy lives that most of us
lead. At all events our existence as a Society, and our claims to
public support, are sufficiently justified by these results. I have
not considered it necessary to bring together a complete list of the
papers, as I did for the Philosophical Society, as they are all to
be found in the successive volumes of our Transactions.


The Clarke Memorial.
The steps that were taken in 1878-9 to commemorate our late
Vice-President, the Rev. W, B. Clarke, must be fresh in your
recollection. It was determined that a bronze medal should be
struck, and presented from time to time to men of science, who
have made valuable contributions to our knowledge of the Geology,
Mineralogy, or Natural History of Australasia. The execution of
the medal was entrusted to Messrs Wyon, of London, and we
have lately got from them the first specimen, which is now
exhibited. It is a creditable work of art, and will, we trust, be
esteemed by its recipients. Through the kindness of Mr. Hunt,
copies will hereafter be struck at the Sydney Mint as required.
The Council has now made four awards of this medal as follows :
i—For 1878, to Professor Owen, for his long-continued researches
on the Palaeontology of Australia, especially for his series of
papers to the Royal Society of London, on the Fossil Mammals of
Australia. For 1879, to Mr. George Bentham, for his splendid
work in conjunction with Baron Von Mueller, on the Botany of
Australia. For 1880, to Professor Huxley, for his contributions to
the Natural History of this country ever since he visited our
shores in the “ Rattlesnake”; and, for the present year, to
Professor M‘Coy, of Melbourne, for his numerous contributions to
the Palaeontology and Natural History of Australia. We have
not yet been able to actually present the medal to any of these
gentlemen, but trust this will be accomplished very soon.
Biological Laboratory for Sydney.
I have now to request your kind attention a few minutes
longer, while I bring before you a matter for which I wish to
enlist your sympathy, in the hope that there may be a practical
outcome of that sympathy in the shape of pecuniary contributions.
I have already placed before you our need of further contri-
butions in aid of the Building Fund, and I feel some reluctance in
pressing the claims of any other scheme, even although it is one
very closely connected with, and directly intended to further the
objects of this Society. It is probably within your knowledge


that the well-known Bussian naturalist, Baron Maclay, has for
two or three years been endeavouring to establish a Zoological
Station in the neighbourhood of Sydney. He has so far succeeded
in his efforts that an eligible site at Watson’s Bay has been
obtained from the Government, and considerable progress has
been made with the building upon that site. The Government
has also liberally engaged to double the subscriptions up to £300;
but the necessary sum of £3OO has not yet been .made up, and
what I have to ask of you to-night is to help to make it up, so
that the corresponding sum may be claimed from the Treasury. I
am assured by Baron Maclay, that for £6OO the building can be
fitted for use —not well fitted certainly—and more would have to
be done afterwards ; but it is thought that when the public utility
of the establishment is proved, there may be less difficulty in
getting further contributions towards perfecting the arrangements.
I must, however, say at once that it is my hope and expectation
that the Royal Society will not only assist in completing the
building in the first instance, but that they will agree to devote a
fixed sum annually towards its future support.
It may, however, be asked by those not familiar with the idea
of a zoological station, what claims it has on a Society like ours.
An answer to that will involve some account of the purpose of
such stations, and what has been done in them in other parts of the
world. In a paper read before the Linnsean Society of New South
Wales, by Baron Maclay, in 1878, he defines a zoological station
as “ a laboratory established for conducting investigations in
Anatomy, Embryology, Histology, and if possible, Physiology as
well.” As plants as well as animals may be thus investigated, the
Baron would prefer the name “Biological Laboratory” to that
hitherto in use. He points out that “ most scientific travellers
have hitherto devoted their time and energies to collecting, and
that often in the field of several sciences,” and thinks that “ the
time has arrived when this method should be abandoned, and that
in place of mere collecting, the great aim of travel should be
observation and investigation, exercised immediately and upon the
spot.” He recounts his own experience in different parts of the


world, and shows how time and opportunities may be lost through
the want of a suitable place for undisturbed work. It was, indeed,
from the personal experience of Baron Maclay and Dr. Dohrn, while
working together at Messina in 1868, that the idea of establishing
zoological stations first arose. In the following year the question re-
ceived a further impulse at a Congress of Naturalists at Moscow; and
under the care of Dr. Dohrn, and chiefly at his own expense, the
first practical realization of the idea was obtained at Naples,
where a zoological station was opened in 1875. Other stations
followed in Europe and America, but even yet there are only about
half a dozen in all. The success of the station at Naples has been
most marked. It is now a large establishment with a very com-
plete equipment, not only in the building but in out-door appli-
ances as well, such as boats (including a steamer), dredges, diving
apparatus, &c., and in the early part of this year, as I learn from a
letter addressed to Baron Maclay by Dr. Dohrn, there were twenty-
five men of science carrying on original investigations with paid
assistants to the number of thirty-four. Three scientific periodicals
are kept up by contributions from that station. The expenses
of such an establishment are necessarily large, and are met partly
by payments for tables used, and partly by liberal donations from
the German Government. The charge for a table is £75 per
annum. Several of these tables are subscribed for by scientific
bodies, who then acquire the right of nominating a worker. The
British Association, for example, pays for a table, and sends from
time to time naturalists who have to report to the Association the
results of their labours. A committee of the Association makes
an annual report on the subject and summarises what has been
done during the year. In the report presented last year it is
stated that the establishment had been placed upon a more secure
footing than previously by a grant from the German Government
equivalent to £1,500, and which was understood to be annual. No
return is asked for this liberal grant, and separate States pay for
the hire of tables in the usual way. Prussia pays for three tables
and five other States one each. Prussia also votes £l5O annually
towards the publications of the station ; and the Berlin Academy-


voted £IOO last year for the same purpose, making altogether
£2,350 from Germany alone —“ a truly noble support,” remarks
this report, “ when it is borne in mind that the nation has no
greater direct participation in the advantages of the station than
any other country or association that may hire a table.
The report further states that arrangements were being made for
the establishment of a small station at Messina as a dependency
of the one at Naples, and that for this additional advantage several
lessors of tables have agreed to raise their contributions from £75
to £9O, and the Committee recommend the British Association to
follow this example.
As many working naturalists have very little money to spare
for travelling, Hr. Hohrn has set on foot a scheme for the founda-
tion of a travelling fund for the benefit of naturalists who may be
nominated for the tables, and in his recent letter to Baron
Maclay, he expresses a hope that something of the same kind will
be done for the proposed station at Sydney. The report to the
British Association concludes with a list of eighteen papers that had
been published during the year by workers at the Naples station,
together with a long list of naturalists to whom specimens and
microscopic preparations had been sent from the station.
From this brief notice of the zoological station at Naples
the first and best of these modern institutions for the
practical study of living organisms I turn again to the
more modest establishment that Baron Maclay has initiated
here. He has pointed out in his paper to the Linnsean Society
that Australia is a tempting field for a zoological station. He
says—“ Next after the tropics (which are the richest in animal
life) the widest field offered to the investigator of nature, and
consequently the most suitable region for the establishment of
zoological stations is Australia, with a fauna so interesting, so
important, and so very far from sufficiently known, especially as
regards anatomy and embryology. Such a country would be the
place for a zoological station, or to speak more correctly, for several
such stations.” And for beginning the work in Australia, the


20 ANNIVERSARY ADDRESS.
to contribute a small sum, say ss. a week, towards paying a care-
taker. It is not supposed that this will meet current expenses,
station or biological laboratory in the southern hemisphere.
Conclusion.
With this address my duties as President come to an end; and as
soon as I have read to you the report of the scrutineers on the ballot
just taken I will cede the Chair to my successor. I will simply
in conclusion express the pleasure I have had in presiding over
your meetings, and my hope that your newly elected President
will have an equally pleasant year of office, and have as much
solid work to pass in review as has been accomplished in the past
year.
Ta fp
nlDUll/
Sydney: Thomas Richards, Government Printer.—lBBl.
most central and suitable place he considers is Sydney. The site
granted by the Government is in a pleasant and convenient situa-
tion at Watson’s Bay. The building, now approaching completion,
is a neat cottage providing five work-rooms and two bed-rooms,
besides store-room and bath-room in the basement. It is not in-
tended to make a charge for each table or work-room, as at Naples,
but every naturalist making use of the building will be expected
and I have ventured to express the hope that this Society will not
only contribute at present to the cost of building, but will here-
after grant an annual sum for maintenance. The first should be
done by individual members, the second by the Council on behalf
of the Society generally. The Poyal Society of Victoria, in con-
junction with members of other three Societies there, have agreed
to give a subscription for the building, and an annual sum for
maintenance, and the Poyal Society of N. S. Wales will not, I
trust, be behindhand in this scientific enterprise, especially as. our
metropolis will have the honor of setting agoing the first zoological




