

ANNIVERSARY
OF THE BIRTH OF
Sir HENRY PARKES
G.C.M.G.
Born in. England on May 27th, 1815
Landed In Australia. 1839: died, 1896
ADDRESS
delivered at the
ANNIVERSARY COMMEMORATION
at the NATIONAL CLUB, Sydney
on May 28th, 1923
SIR JOSEPH CARRUTHERS
LL.D.. M.L.C.
Vice-President of the Legislative Council of New South Wales
SYDNEY;
The H. H. Watson Printing Co.
Corner Druitt and Kent Sts.




JAF f
ANNIVERSARY
OF THE BIRTH OF
SIR HENRY PARRES
G.C.M.G
Born in England on May 27, 1815;
landed in Australia, 1839; died, 1896.
Address delivered at the Anniversary
Commemoration at the National Club
Sydney, on May 28, 1923.
Sir Joseph Carruthers, K.C.M.G., LL.D., M.L.C.,
Vice-President of the Executive Council of New South
Wales. .
Members of the last Parkes Government of New South
Wales—March, 1889 —October, 1891 —present:—
Hon. Sir Joseph Carruthers, K.C.M.G., LL.D., M.L.C.,
Minister for Education.
Hir Sir William McMillen, K.C.M.G., Col. Treasurer.
Hon. Sir Albert Gould, Kt., V.D., Minister for
Justice.
Hon. Sydney Smith, Minister for Mines.
Chairman: Hon. W. A. Holman, K.C., ex-Premier of
New South Wales.


“The crimson thread of kinship runs through us all,
even the native-born Autralians are Britons, as much
as the men born within the centres of
Glasgow.”
London
“This young country will arise under
the Southern
Cross and, as years roll on, will hold its head higher and
higher, and grow brighter and brighter, until it takes
its place amongst the greatest powers in the world.”
SIR HENRY PARKES
at Federal Conference, Melbourne,
6th February, 1890.


SIR JOSEPH CARRUTHERS said:
TN my lifetime I have met many men who have
attained high rank in public life, high positions in the
community, or great success in their walks of life. Fre-
quently I have sorted out in my mind these so-called
great men of my days with whom I came in contact, so
as to place them in their class.
Three Great Men.
Naturally, I place such men as Sir Edmund Barton,
Sir Samuel Griffith, Sir George Reid, Richard O’Connor,
Alfred Deakin, and some others with whom I actively
associated, in the class of the great and able men of
my time.
But I have never wavered in my belief that the three
men who stood out as the greatest were:—
SIR HENRY PAREES,
PROFESSOR CHARLES BADHAM, and
GENERAL BOOTH, of the Salvation Army.
Each of these three men possessed to a high degree that
magnetic influence which seemed to penetrate into one’s
soul, and to create an affinity between themselves and
those who came into association with them.
General Booth I met on several occasions, and on two
of those he took lunch with Ministers of the Govern-
ments of which I was a member.
No matter how we contrived to entertain him or treat
him, he held the power and the sway. On each occa-
casion I was impressed by his intense earnestness for,
and whole-souled devotion to the uplifting of, the sub-
merged masses of human society. His speeches were
masterpieces of logic and fact arrayed in words that elo-
quently and forcefully unfolded a mission that seemed
almost inspired. He was a born natural leader of men,
and has been a great force for good in this world. He
simply gripped one with his enthusiasm, and made one
share in the intensity of his purpose in life.
Professor Charles Badham exercised over my life an
increasing influence. He has ever been my beau ideal of
the cultured gentleman and of the teacher.
I have never heard an orator to compare with Bad-
ham, either in diction, arraying of facts, logical argu-
3
SIR HENRY PARKES, G.C.M.G.


ment, or splendour of delivery. Above all that he pos-
sessed wisdom. One came to realise that he was one of
the world’s wise men whose advice could always be
treasured as more precious than rubies or gold.
He moulded the character of many hundreds of Uni-
versity graduates who shewed, in their lives, how deeply
his words of instruction and his high example had sunk
into their hearts.
Australia but little realises what a splendid stranger
it admitted to its heart when Charles Badham volun-
tarily gave up his English home and society to partici-
pate in the work of Education in Australia. He ranked
high in the literary circles, not only of Great Britain, but
of Europe, and it is marvellous to realise that Australia
had so great a good fortune as to secure his services.
A Statesman of the Empire.
Then I come to Sir Henry Parkes —a man of little or
no education, of the humblest parentage and upbringing,
a labourer and a mechanic; but gifted with a colossal
brain power, a well balanced mind, marvellous courage,
lofty ideals, and a natural gift of eloquence that enabled
him to sway multitudes.
Parkes became a Statesman of the Empire, but be-
fore he could even enter public life he had to spend
nearly forty years in a bitter and unceasing struggle for
the bare necessaries for himself and his family. Even
when success did come to him, he was ever haunted by
the “res angusta domi,” the spectre of poverty always in
his home.
His Magnetic Influence.
His was a magnetic influence. I was warned by Sir
George Dibbs when I entered Parliament to “beware of
the Old Man —he will convince you against your will if
you don’t mind.”
The late Joseph Greer, M.L.A., one of the miners’
representatives for Northumberland, often said to me:
“I always feel as if mesmerised when Parkes is
addressing me. I have to tune myself up against
his magnetism, or else he holds me against myself.”
As a matter of fact, Joseph Greer in after years be-
came one of Parkes’ greatest admirers.
Or take the late Hugh Taylor, Member for Parramatta,,
4
SIK HENRY PARKES, G.C.M.G.


who started out in politics a sworn and implacable enemy
of Parkes. He attended every meeting to interrupt and
to heckle Parkes. That was his undoing. He came to
curse, but remained to pray, because he got gripped by
the eloquence and irresistible logic of Parkes. In the
end he became the most faithful friend that Parkes ever
had.
It is said that Australians have too little of the spirit
of veneration. Certainly it is true that by too few is the
real story of Australian colonisation and development
known or appreciated. Hence the life work of those men
who won for us our rights and privileges, and who
moulded our wise legislation, and who administered our
affairs, is not prized at its real value. The reason lies
in the fact that we do not properly teach history in our
schools, and we too seldom tell to the young what we
ourselves know of the great men who have passed away.
Celebrations, like this of to-day are far too rare and
too localised.
It is related that in one campaign for the electorate of
Central Cumberland, Hughie Taylor attended every
meeting addressed by Parkes, sat in the front row of
seats, heckled the speaker, and voted against the reso-
lution of confidence. One bitterly wet night came, and
the meeting was in an outlying centre. Parkes and his
Chairman entered the hall, but at 8 o’clock there was
only one elector present, and it was Hughie Taylor, sit-
ting in the same old place in the front row. Parkes, with
a sense of humour, started to address his audience.
Taylor shifted uneasily in his seat, and looked round to
see where the “fellow electors” were that Sir Henry was
addressing. Finding that he was the only “fellow
elector” present, Taylor blurted out, “Don’t address me,
I’m agen you.” Still Sir Henry persisted, and still
Hughie Taylor shuffled and protested. Then Sir Henry
with a twinkle in his eye, said, “My dear Sir, the night
is wet and stormy, and it is more pleasant here inside the
hall than outside. I suggest that we make the best of
the occasion, drop our political differences, and have a
little friendly talk together. Then perhaps we may find
out that neither of us is so bad as the other imagines!”
Taylor thought that was quite a reasonable view to take,
and so he listened to some good stories told by Sir
5
SIR HENRY PARKES, G.C.M.G.


Henry, and in his turn he capped them with others. Be-
fore they parted, Hughie Taylor softened, and finally
made friends with Sir Henry, saying, “I think I’ve mis-
understood you, Sir. I’m glad to have had this oppor-
tunity to meet you in this way, and to know you as I
now do, man to man. I promise you I won’t oppose you
any longer in the way I have in the past.”
Taylor not only ceased to oppose, but he became the
warmest friend and admirer of Parkes, and when he en-
tered Parliament, a Member for Parramatta, he was his
most steadfast supporter.
It is not my desire to-night to attempt a biographical
sketch of the life of Sir Henry Parkes. What I shall
say will be to emphasise some lessons which his life’s
story teaches to Australians and Britishers.
We meet to-night to commemorate one of the greatest
Englishmen of the 19th century, who, for fifty years,
shared very largely in the building up of Australia.
In the past century of Australian history two names
stand out, those of William Charles Wentworth and
Henry Parkes, the men who did most for the cause of
representative Government in Australia. They also were
the authors of separate parts of the fine system of edu-
cation which begins at the Public Schools, and ends at
the University.
It is a sacred duty of all true Australians to cherish
the memory of men like these, who laid the foundations
upon which we are building the Australian nation within
the British Empire.
“Of those who in the dust do dwell
May there kindly mention be
When the birds that build in the branches tell
Of the planting of the tree.”
Associated with the names of Parkes and Wentworth
we could place scores of others who nobly aided in the
work which resulted, at the end of the last century, in
the Federal Union of the Australian States in one Com-
monwealth.
But it is no derogation from the merit of others whose
names we delight to honour, to give pre-eminence to
Wentworth and Parkes, as the real founders of the
States and Commonwealth.
6
SIR HENRY PARKES, G.C.M.G.


Early Australian Hardships.
Henry Parkes came to Australia in July 25, 1839, with
his wife and a baby girl, who was born on the voyage.
Sir Henry himself says in his first letter home to his
sisters, that “he landed with but two or three shillings
in his pockets, and the first news he received on board
the emigrant ship Strath fields aye in Sydney Harbour was
that a 4lb loaf of bread was selling at 2/6.” After a
few days the emigrants were sent off the ship. Parkes
rented one small room at 5/- per week, and to pay that
rent, and for support, he had to sell one thing and
another from his slender stock of goods, most of them
cherished gifts from his parents and sisters. Then, to
use his own words:—
“At length, being completely starved out, I en-
gaged as a common labourer with Sir John Jamison,
Kt., M.C., to go about thirty-six miles up the coun-
try. Sir John agreed to give me £25 for the year,
with a ration and half of food. This amounted to
weekly:—
10-| lbs beef —sometimes unfit to eat
10-| lbs rice—of the worst imaginable quality
6f lbs flour —half made up of ground rice
2 lbs sugar—good-tasted brown
J lb tea —inferior
\ lb soap —not enough to wash our hands
2 figs of tobacco —useless to me.
“This was what we had to live upon, and not a
leaf of a vegetable, or a drop of milk beyond this.
For the first four months we had no other bed than
a sheet of bark off a box tree, and an old door,
laid on two cross pieces of wood, covered over with
a few articles of clothing. The hut appointed for us
to live in was a very poor one. The morning sun-
shine, the noontide shower, and the white moonlight
of midnight, gushed in upon us alike.”
Years afterward I was one of the subscribers to the
publication of a book called “An Emigrant’s Home
Letters,” of which a limited issue was published. They
comprise letters from Sir Henry to his parents and his
sisters from the time when he left. These letters can
only be described as pathetic to an extreme, and they tell
7
SIR HENRY PARKES, G.C.M.G.


the story of an anguish, poverty and privation which
might well have broken the spirit of any but the
strongest man.
It might justly be said of Parkes that in his life he en-
dured more hardships, more poverty and privation than
falls to the lot of most emigrants who leave England or
their Motherland to face a new life in Australia. Thus
in all his public career he was keenly sympathetic to the
sorrows and sufferings of others, and was ever helpful
with his last shilling, to alleviate misery.
“Kindness in another’s trouble—”
It is ever remembered against the memory of Parkes
that he was poor, always in debt, and embarrassed.
But the main cause of that lay in the fact that he had
absolutely no commercial instinct, and prized money
very little. Whenever he had money it passed through
his hands like water through a sieve, and again he
would be penniliess.
I remember that once, the late Mr. Critchett Walker
(then the Under-Secretary to Sir Henry as Chief Sec-
retary) bewailed to me that Sir Henry would ask him
to cash a cheque for £5, and getting the money Sir Henry
would walk up from the Chief Secretary’s office to the
House, and arrive there without a shilling; because on
the way up men had accosted him, and told pitiful stories,
and he had given away every shilling from his pockets to
them.
I remember about 1892 receiving a letter, which I
still have, from Sir Henry asking me to cash his cheque
for £3 which he had given to the bearer. The facts were
that a journalist, and at that not a political supporter,
was down on his luck, and short of the price of a meal for
his family. He appealed to Sir Henry, who promptly
gave him his cheque for £3, but on presentation, it was
found that the account was not in funds. Thus he was
again appealed to, and so he wrote and asked me to cash
his cheque, and give the money to the bearer.
Remember that probably Sir Henry was in similar
circumstances to the man he was helping; and you will
realise that he never was too lame but what he tried to
help another lame dog over the stile!
Much ado has been made of the fact that Parkes
was always in debt, even when holding high office; but
8
SIR HENRY PARKES, G.C.M.G.


the simple explanation was that he sacrificed everything
to his service to the State, and was like a child where
money was concerned.
It was a great shock to some of his old friends and
colleagues to learn in the last year of his life at Annan-
dale that sometimes he and his household were abso-
lutely without food in the home, and without the means
to purchase it.
In December, 1895, at the close of the first session in
which Sir George Reid was Premier, a number of Sir
Henry’s friends asked the Government to obtain a vote
from Parliament to provide for him and his family. Un-
fortunately, only two or three days of the session re-
mained, and some members of the Assembly intimated
that they would oppose the proposals, and keep Parlia-
ment sitting into the next year. So the matter was tem-
porarily dropped, but the Government at once took steps
to provide for him and his family for the little while
that he lived.
On April 27, 1896, he passed away, poor in what the
world counts wealth, but rich in a sympathy and sorrow
that was almost universal amongst all classes of men in
Australia.
After fifty-five years of life spent in the land, to which
he had emigrated with but two or three shillings in his
pocket he died just as poor as when he arrived, although
he had attained to high positions, and had won the
highest honour of public life.
It is useless to say that Sir Henry did not suffer from
his persistent poverty. Undoubtedly he did; and whilst
it may be a striking testimony to his high probity, it is
not to the public credit or interest that a great public
servant should have had to face continually the spectre
of poverty as a reward for the sacrifice and service given
to the State.
In Politics and Journalism.
Sir Henry Parkes was in the Colony for over ten
years before he took any active part in politics. Then
in 1850 in Barrack Square (now Wynyard Park) he
seconded a resolution moved by the late Thomas Sut-
cliffe Mort to form an association to prevent the revival
of transportation of convicts. In 1852 the agitation suc-
ceeded and the Orders in Council permitting transpor-
9
SIR HENRY PARKES, G.C.M.G.


tation were revoked. Probably the most influential and
eloquent contributor to this result was Henry Parkes,,
whom Wm, Chas. Wentworth denounced in the Council
as an arch-anarchist, because of this and other actions
on his part.
In 1849 Sir Henry established the “Empire” news-
paper, which subsequently passed into the hands of the
late S. Bennett, and which is now represented by the
“Evening News” as its successor.
In 1854 Sir Henry Parkes was elected as Member for
Sydney on the retirement of Mr. W. C. Wentworth, who
was about to visit England to support the passage of the
Constitution Bill through the British Parliament.
Parkes’ opponent was Mr. Charles Kemp, one of the
proprietors of the “S.M. Herald.” The election was by
open voting on the £lO household qualification. The
contest surged round those provisions of the Constitution
which limited the franchise to a minority of the people
and sought to impose a hereditary nobility of mush-
room growth on this young country.
Parkes was elected on 1427 votes against Kemp’s 779.
An Early Champion of Immigration.
The first motion moved by Parkes in the Legislative
Council was in favour of a more liberal system of Immi-
gration: but his motion was defeated by a large ma-
jority, who did not share in his views that there should
be liberal aid offered to men of the old lands to come to
Australia and share in the benefits of the new lands.
On July 3, 1855, Sir Henry moved for a Select Com-
mittee “to inquire into the state of agriculture in the
Colony.” The importance of this motion is increased
when one recalls the fact that one of the first witnesses
was John Robertson (afterwards Sir John Robertson).
He strongly testified to the agricultural capabilities of the
land, but showed how the squatters monopolised the land
and prevented agricultural settlement. A written state-
ment was handed in by him in which he advocated Free
Selection before Survey, a system ultimately adopted on
his initiative a little later on.
These were the days before the Constitution and Re-
sponsible Government.
In 1856 there was elected the first Legislative Assem-
bly, and Sir Henry Parkes, Charles Cowper, Robert
10
SIR HENRY PARKES, G.C.M.G.


Campbell and J. R. Wilshire were elected as the four
members for the City of Sydney.
In 1861 Sir Henry Parkes and Mr. W. B. Dailey were
appointed Commissioners for Emigration to visit Eng-
land, but no provision existed for passage money for
migrants.
In his own words he said that easily he could have
procured 10,000 good emigrants as the result of his
labours if only there had been assistance towards the
passage money.
He had a remarkable interview with Thomas Carlyle
at Chelsea, England, in October, 1861, when the latter
said:—
“For instance, he contended that, if governing
men could only free themselves from the trammels
of custom and be truly wise, they would remove the
Sovereign of the Court, and all the machinery of
Government to Australia, where the field for national
life was so wide, attractive and unencumbered, and
leave the contracted spaces and the murky atmos-
phere of England behind them.”
Students’ Hero-Worship.
When I was a mere stripling, 16 years of age, and
an undergraduate of Sydney University in the early 70’s,
I frequently attended to hear the debates in the Legis-
lative Assembly. Sometimes I joined the strangers in
the gallery reserved for the “oi polloi,” and sometimes
I was honoured with a 'seat in the “Members’ Gallery”
by the grace of one of the Members —generally the late
Thomas Garrett or Sir George Wigram Allen (the
Speaker), both of whom had sons at the University.
I used to sit and stare at the leonine head of Sir Henry
Parkes, and I remember how we undergrads were wont
to compare him with the old Greek authors with whose
works we were then mentally wrestling. It seemed to our
young minds as if he were physically a product of those
classical ages when Cicero and Demosthenes swayed the
impulse of the people in great affairs of State.
Certainly Parkes, by his very appearance and by his
marvellous powers of speech was a fit subject for hero
worship by young students like myself.
I was never fortunate enough then to have had the
opportunity to have heard Sir Henry Parkes in any great
11
SIR HENRY PARKES, G.C.M.G.


debate in Parliament in those days. But I attended
many public meetings which he addressed and I never
missed on any occasion the nomination day or the dec-
laration of the poll at the public hustings when Sir
Henry Parkes was a candidate.
Rightly, or wrongly, I was a Parkesite because I felt
that his was the master-mind and the master-hand that
this State needed in those times.
Sometimes I did not agree with every detail of his
policy, but it was enough for me that he was a true
patriot, a born leader of men, and a courageous fighter
for sound and honest administration and legislation.
Parkes and Reid.
In those days I played much Cricket with my old club,
“The University,” and I can well remember young
George Reid dressed immaculately in his flannels with
the colours of our rivals, “The Alberts,” taking his place
at the wickets, whilst I bowled for our side, and Toby
Barton, as we then called him (the late Sir Edmund
Barton), took the place of short stop or wicket-keeper.
George Reid was not a brilliant cricketer, and he was
then tipped as a coming man with high aims, and a fu-
ture in politics.
A httle later George Reid entered Parliament as a
member for East Sydney, and in opposition to Parkes.
The two men should have been staunch friends and allies,
but “it was not to be.” They gradually became estranged.
The brilliancy of Reid, perhaps, contributed to increasing
the estrangement as Parkes felt his own influence on
the wane as the years pressed heavily on him —and he
was not one easily to “brook a rival.”
But just before he died the two met at Kenilworth, and
Sir Henry said afterwards, “I have misunderstood him,
and I am very sorry.”
A Democrat and White Australian.
No man in public life understood the working classes
and their difficulties and struggles as Parkes did from
bitter experience in his own life. Yet in 1890, after the
Maritime strike, which brought the Labour Party into
existence, the Labour members assailed him as opposed to
their class. In a memorable speech he replied and said:
“If the party of labour in this House claim
12
SIR HENRY PARKES, G.C.M.G.


that they are acquainted with labour, so am I. If
any of them have worked hard, so have I. If any
of them have gone through hard and necessitous
circumstances, so have I. I worked at as hard
labour as a man could put his hand to in this
country for 5/- a day, when the price of a four
pound loaf was 2/8. That ought to have taught
me what my sympathies should be in reference to
my fellow creatures. I believe that to the best of
my strength I have struggled for their good.
“I am not conscious that I have had any single
occasion when I could serve the cause of the great-
est number of ray fellow creatures and have failed
to serve it. If anyone should reply to me that I
did such and such a thing at a time of commotion
and tumult, my answer would be that charged with
the responsibilities of Government, I should do the
same again to-morrow. But I have, to the best of
my power, tried to serve the masses of my fellow
men since I have occupied a public position in this
country.”
Sir Henry Parkes was a real democrat in the sense
that he believed in the rights of men and in the principles
of self-government by the people, of the people, and for
the people.
He insisted on equality of rights, and refused to con-
cede to any section a claim to rob men of their liberty
and their freedom simply because of union or any other
rule or law not sanctioned by Parliament.
He was a fearless upholder of law and order under
the Constitution whilst at the same time he was for-
bearing and moderate in regard to men carried away by
their emotions in times of industrial strife.
If ever a man had the right to claim to be the author of
the White Australia Policy, it was Sir Henry Parkes by
his action in restricting Asiatic immigration to Australia.
Author of Education System.
Probably Sir Henry Parkes is more remembered as
being the author of the Public Instruction Act than by
reason of any other achievement of his life.
Having been Minister for Public Instruction in his
last Government for three years, I had frequent oppor-
tunities of talking with him on the subject of education.
13
SIR HENRY PARKES, G.C.M.G.


He told me that his motives were not understood by a
large section of the community, inasmuch as they re-
garded him as hostile to any system of religious edu-
cation, which, he said, was not correct. He had drafted
many clauses of the Public Instruction Act himself, and
the following clause relating to religious instruction was
written in his own handwriting, and was never altered: —
Section 7. In all schools under this Act the teach-
ing shall be strictly non-sectarian, but the words
‘secular instruction’ shall be held to include general
religious teaching as distinguished from dogmati-
cal or polemical theology, and lessons in the his-
tory of England and in the history of Australia
shall form part of the course of secular instruction.
In 1866, when Sir Henry first moved in the matter of
education in Parliament, there were 150,845 children
under the age of 14 years in the State. There were
53,452 attending schools —national, denominational or
private—and there were 97,393 not attending any
school or receiving any education. In round figures
two-thirds of the children of school age were not
receiving instruction. The total expenditure on educa-
tion then was £134,858 per annum. Crime was ram-
pant, and altogether the affairs of the community were
getting into a deplorable condition in so far as regards
morality and crime. The cause of this undoubtedly was
attributable to the fact that there were so many competing
agencies in the educational field, and with a scattered
population in the Colony—-less than 600,000 together—
the waste of energy and of money could not be averted. In
many districts there were three competing schools, all
receiving Government aid, with an average of 75 children
in the district attending school!
Fancy three schools in a town or district to attend
to 75 children! It stands to reason that they could
not be properly staffed, that the children could not be pro-
perly taught, and that much money must have been wasted
in three school buildings and in the salaries of three
sets of teachers. Many other districts had two schools
with an average of from 50 to 60 attending as a total.
These cases were not uncommon; unfortunately they
were practically the rule outside of the large centres.
I myself attended first of all a dame’s school, after-
14
SIR HENRY PARKES, G.C.M.G.


wards a denominational school in York Street, Sydney,
then a national school, and later on a public school. I
was therefore able to compare the methods of each, and
undoubtedly the national school and public school were
the most efficient.
In the public schools that I attended, Scripture lessons
were part of the regular course. These Scripture lessons
were those which were authorised and approved by the
heads of the Catholic and Protestant Churches in Ireland,
thus proving that there could be nothing in them to
which either creed could take exception.
Parkes emphasised the fact that he believed in religious
instruction, and in devising the Bill he provided the
right for priest or pastor to attend and to give such
religious instruction as his Church might require.
If the Churches have failed to avail themselves of
this provision it only shows that they have served man
more than God and have neglected their obligations.
Yet, forsooth, many of these same clergymen do not
hesitate to blame Parkes as if he were the author of an
irreligious system. They, themselves, really are the
authors of it, if such exists, because they have neglected
to meet their responsibilities and to perform their duties.
The record of his life.
I cannot, in this brief address, go as fully into the
life of Sir Henry Parkes as the occasion perhaps deserves.
One or two facts, however, should be associated with
his name on this occasion as they serve as reminders.
He was born on the 27th May, 1815 (the year of
Waterloo), at Canley, in the old moated grange house
at Stonleigh, Warwickshire. His mother’s maiden name
was Faulconbridge. We have these two names per-
petuated in this State —at Canley Vale (I think there is
a little park there which was the gift of Sir Henry
Parkes to the district), and we have the name of Faul-
conbridge associated with his home on the Blue Moun-
tains.
In his boyhood days, Parkes attended school in his
village until he was the age of 10 years, and he only
had three months’ schooling later on. At the age of
11 he worked as an agricultural laborer’s boy, and at
12 he was apprenticed to a turner. His first employers
15
SIR HENRY PARKES, G.C.M.G.


in New South Wales were Sir John Jamison at Regent-
ville, and Mr. Burdekin in his iron store in Sydney, and
afterwards he worked in Russell’s foundry.
It will thus be seen that the earlier part of his life
was spent in the midst of the working classes, partici-
pating in their toil and in their difficulties and hardships.
Undoubtedly he understood the masses of the people and
he devoted his political life to their uplift.
A big, broad-minded man.
In his political career of 42 years he formed five
Ministries, was 15 years in office, and was Premier for
12-| years.
He was a big man mentally and in his outlook; especially
in politics, he took the broad view. He never stooped to
petty things, and it would be well if his example were
more copied. Too frequently nowadays, men in public
life, especially the younger men, waste their time and
their opportunity with their eyes cast down looking for
what is mean and petty, instead of holding their heads up
and looking to the bright sky, taking a broad and sweep-
ing view of the world in which they live. I would
strongly advise the younger generation of men in public
life to copy Sir Henry Parkes in this respect and to pay
more attention to the big things that matter and to give
less heed to those petty things which demean and do not
uplift.
I can say for myself, and of my colleagues who were
in the Parkes Governments, that we learned to respect
and to love the Old Man. He had his faults, as every
man has, but against those faults there stood his magni-
ficent courage, his great wisdom, his unbounded patriot-
ism, and his love of humanity. He was a Statesman;
and if he had been in the Parliament of the Motherland
he would have stood amongst the giants there and
occupied no mean place. My humble opinion is that
Sir Henry Parkes could fairly be placed as the equal
of any statesman in any country during the latter half
of the last century.
It is to me to-night a pleasure to be here amongst so
many of you, his friends and admirers, to testify, as I
have done, in honouring the memory of so great a man.
16
SIR HENRY PARKES, G.C.M.G.






THE LAST PARKES MINISTRY
SURVIVING MEMBERS OF THE LAST PARKES MINISTRY
AS THEY APPEAR TO-DAY
Left Inset. —The late Sir Henry Parkes, the 108th Anniversary of whose birth was commemorated at the National Club on May 28th, 1923
Sitting.— Four surviving members of the last Parkes Ministry (1889-91), photographed at Parliament House on May 28th, 1923. Left to right,
Sir Joseph Carruthers (Minister for Education), Sir William McMillan (Colonial Treasurer), Sir Albert Gould (Minister for Justice)
and Mr. Sydney Smith (Minister for Mines).
Right Inset. —Mr. Bruce Smith who was Minister for Works, and later (on the resignation of Sir William McMillan) Colonial Treasurer in
the last Parkes Ministry.
AS THEY APPEARED WHEN MEMBERS OF THE LAST PARKES MINISTRY
Left to Right—Sir Joseph Carruthers, Sir William McMillan, Sir Albert Gould, Mr. Bruce Smith, and Mr. Sydney Smith
