

POLITIC At LABOR
(gin gLncQvpcivation of tlje &*&*&* ant* QM.Q.).
ANNUAL CONFERENCE,
TO BE HELD AT THE
Sempemnce 13011, Pitt Steeef, Sydney,
ON
Jan u a r
|||
The Conference will meet at 3 p.m. on Saturday, January 28.
of :
Credentials Committee.
Appointment of Committees
Election of Two Auditors.
Standing Orders Committee.
Annual Report and Balance- heel of Executive
Nomination of Officers
alterations of consfiTUfion.
a7, 1896.
1. (Pyrmont Branch.) —No elector can become a member of any Branch of the League, or be nominated for selection by the
League for Parliamentary representation, who has opposed a Labor Candidate at one or more election.
2. That the word “ Colony ” in Clause 0, Rule 2 (Membership), be struck out, and the word “ Electorate ” be inserted.
3. (Redfeen Branch.) —That Clause 29 of the Constitution be amended to read as follows :—“ All proposals to add to or take
from the Platform, Pledge, or Constitution must receive the approval of a Branch League, and must be in the hands of the Executive
Committee at least two months prior to the Annual Conference, and shall at once be forwarded to Branches. Proposed alterations
carried by a two-thirds majority of the whole Conference shall at once come into force ; but in the event of any proposals being carried
by less than a two-thirds majority, they shall be submitted by the Executive to the Branches for their final decision by a majority vote
of the Electorates.”
4. (Redfeen Branch.) —That Rule 13 be amended to provide—“ That the Chairman and Secretary of the Parliamentary Labor
Party be ex-officio members of the Executive Committee of the Political Labor League.”
5. (Redfeen Branch.) — That Rule 22, under section Parliamentary, be omitted for the purpose of inserting the following :
“ (i.) For the purposes of G-eneral Elections, candidates for Parliament shall be selected by an aggregate vote of each
District in the following manner :
1 (a) Each Electorate Branch may nominate not more than two Candidates, who shall have previously signed the
Pit dgo adopted by the League, and forwarded a signed copy to the General Secretary.
‘ ( b ) All qualified voters shall have one vote for each Electorate to be contested within their District.
‘ (r) Every voter must vote for the full number of Candidates required, otherwise the ballot paper shall be informal.
‘ (d) Those Candidates obtaining the highest number of votes shall be deemed selected to contest the election. In the
event of a tie, the local District Assembly shall decide upon the Candidate.
‘ {e) Should a vacancy occur after selection by death, withdrawal, or any other means, such vacancy shall be dealt
with according to the method laid down for Bye Elections.
‘ (/) The voting for the whole District shall take place upon the same day, which shall be fixed by the Executive
Committee, and shall be as nearly as possible about twelve months before the date of the General Election. All
further arrangements shall be in the hands of the local District Assembly.
‘ (g) No Electorate Branch shall have the power to declare that a Candidate shall not be selected for that Electorate.
But it shall be within the power of the Distiict Assembly to so determine.
‘ (h) The distribution of the selected Candidates shall be by mutual arrangement between the Candidates and the
Electorate Branches. Any difference existing fourteen days after selection shall be decided by the local District
Assembly.
(ii.) For the purposes of Bye Elections all matters connected with selecting Candidates shall be in the hands of a Special
Committee, which shall consist of—
[a) The Executive Committee ;
[b) Two Delegates elected by the Assembly of the District within which the vacancy occurs ;
[c) One Delegate from the Electorate Branch concerned.”




? n nj
6. (Redfebn Branch.) That Rule 26 be amended to read as follows :—“ No member of the League shall have the right to vote
in the selection of Candidates unless he has resided in the district for a period of three months prior to selection or holds an elector’s right
for an electorate within the District, and has also been a member of the League for one month prior to selection.”
7. (Recommendation by the Executive Committee.) —That the Executive be empowered to fill vacancies in its membership,
giving preference to those members who follow next in order to those successful in the ballot at the Conference.
OF fli P&47TORH.
8. (Denison Branch.) —The settlement of the Tariff Question (Freetrade v. Protection) by a plebiscite vote of the people as to
which policy they favor, and to be fixed for a term of (say) five years. Whichever policy the majority decide in favor of Parliament to
frame a tariff on those lines, and submit the same to a referendum of the people for their acceptance or rejection.
9. (Campeedown Branch.)— That a new plank be added to the Platform, viz.: State pensions for old age and the infirm.
10. (Tbntebfield Bbanch.) —Universal Suffrage.
11. (Recommendation by Executive.) — That Womanhood Suffrage be made a plank in the Labor Platform.
12. (Randwick Branch.) — That the following be made the Fighting Platform of the P.L.L,
Object : Socialism in oue Time.
(a) Referendum.
(4) Free Education —high and elementary.
(c) State Farms or Colonies as a remedy for the unemployed.
(, d) State Resumption and Management of the Liquor Traffic.
(e) Abolition of the Defence Forces and substitution of a Citizens’ Army.
(/) Nationalization of all Coal Mines.
13. (Phillip Branch.) —That the following four planks be the Fighting Platform of the P.L.L
(a) The Abolition of the Upper House and the Introduction of the Referendum.
(4) All Government Work to be executed in Government Workshops.
(c) All Iron required for State use to be of local production.
(, d) All future Gold, Coal, and other Mines to be worked by the State.
11. (Denison Branch.) —Conference to define what is meant by a “Local Government Bill on a Democratic basis.” This
Branch proposes to amend Clause 1 with reference to revenue : —“ That the Municipalities be given power to raise revenue on Unimproved
Land Values and other forms of wealth which it may deem expedient for carrying out and maintaining Municipal works and institutions
in the interests of its citizens.”
15. (Annandale Branch.) —That in Plank 1, Clause B, the words “ Without exemption ” be inserted after the word “Taxation.”
16. That the Plank Ro. 5 relating to Local Government be struck out, and the following be Plank 5
“ Local Government to provide for—
“ (a) The establishment of Local Government throughout the colony.
“ (4) Each adult resident to have one vote only.
“ (c) The abolition of the Taxation of Improvement, and also abolition of the subsidising of Local Councils with
National revenue.
“ {d) All revenue required for local purposes to be obtained by the uniform taxation of the whole of the capital
unimproved land values within each district, and the amount per £ value to be at the discretion of the Local
Council.
“ [e) Local Councils to be empowered to establish and to directly conduct any industry or institution they may deem
advisable.”
17. (Annandale Branch.) — That in Plank 7 the words “ Higher and technical ” be struck out, and the plank to read :
“Elementary Education to be absolutely free.”
18. (Recommendation by Executive.) —That Plank 6 be altered by the insertion of the word “State” in place of the word
“ National.”
19. (Recommendation by Executive.) — That the following be planks of the Platform :
(a) The establishment of State Mills for sugar, grain, and produce.
(4) The establishment of a State Export Department.
20. (Recommendation by Executive.) — That the Conference take into consideration the question of nominating Candidates for
he Federation Confertuce in the event of the Federal Enabling Bill becoming law.
21. (Redfern Branch.) —That the necessary clause be added to the Federation Plank defining our position thereon.
22. (Tbntbrfield Branch.) —The introduction of Prohibition when essential.
23. (Denison Branch.) — That a headquarters for the movement is an absolute necessity, and the Conference be urged to devise
ways and means for the establishment and maintenance of same.
24. (Pyemont Branch.) —That no Electoral Act is complete without compulsory resignation clause. Such resignation can be
demanded by two-thirds majority of electors on roll of division.
THOMAS ROUTLEY, General Secretary.
Erskiue-street, Sydney.
Printed at the “Worker ” Office, 215 Palmer-street, Sydney.


t
* _
TAF f
6i6i-©
'#^ VV: ' "
.
J ■ ■ r ■ji
••> ' ■ r 1
". ■ ! I
If
■ , ' ■• ..-, f - v r 4 r r ,. ,..r * ,,v-,<r » - r ••’ ■ m£- ~~. ~ t v*
•■-* —>• ■- - . .); . • - , .r>j ; 1 ,■. ) )
-
f ..... r . 1
■ 4-
. :»
- '
/
, ■ - •'■' -■ { . ■ -i ...
q APR 1993
: ■ -y
• * * ■ C. -
•. !,-.<■ ,.■ • mx-..: : - ; . 5 j Vm ;r : r
• * I ; . . .
fi- .
.. ci
C. V
f V
• • • V.» ; ■ . 2,1 V- ' ■' !’ . , ( / v • . ■ •• . .
. . ( ■*,-•■ , ‘ ~ ’*O0V.
*
•
♦
5
•
* '
*
*
• »'
%
• ■ - - ■
. .
: i\
V .o :•.
i * ... i , . _ . jd. '' ... , . . i a ■•••■
f (,iU k> c•-;.!•] i °
|
■ ■ i . . j I • i .. : ; ■ ■}. •
•
-. ‘ 5i* v Ns** ° - ■ * ■ ■***■ ■ • - >.. v * '
i, -a. ■ (j 4 ; • • ; ■*.. $£| 4 fr ■, - .
•
■
■ f « ' : v.t ■ :.( .
•
. ’, ‘ ■ .: , -j i i _ v> # ■ ; ■.
t
t . ■* ‘ - • . ■*.
* 1
*-d
’
t .
,'wU'i d. - i- . •**
•
« *
• % Wjk %
%’ -
♦ . > .
[ 1 . - i
