

ROYAL GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY
OF AUSTRALASIA.
XML W SOUTH WALKS HRA.VCH.
Year 1.888-9.
ANNUAL ADDRESS
E. C. MB RE WETHER, ESQ., E.R.G.S.,
PRESIDENT OP THE NEW SOUTH WALES BRANCH.
SYDNEY
Geo. Murray & Co., Printers, 91 Clarence Street.
MDCCCXC.




ROYAL
"* 1 RAPHIOAL SO'''”: TY
OF AUSTRALASIA.
New South Wales Branch.
1888-9.
ANNUAL ADDRESS.
E. C. MBREWETHEE, ESQ., En.R.Gt.S,
TN pursuance of the custom of reading an Annual Address, I have
"*■ now the honor of presenting to you a short epitome, which in
as brief a form as possible, records the results of the many highly
important and interesting journeys which have been made by various
distinguished explorers in several parts of the world since our last
meeting, and also refers to the transactions and proceedings which
have occupied the attention of your Council since date of last
meeting—27th June, 1889 —to the present time.
Our late President, Sir Edward Strickland, K. 0.8., P.E.G.S.
Before referring to the transactions for the past year, it will be
necessary to allude to the great loss this Society has sustained by the
death of its honoured Vice-President, Sir Edward Strickland, K.C.8.,
E.R.G-.S. The distinguished career of this officer in the service of his
country —which embraced a period of over forty years’ active service in
all quarters of the globe—enabled him to secure a vast amount of most
valuable information, especially as regards geographical science. So
impressed was he with the interest and importance attached to the
study of this subject, that he not only devoted a considerable amount
of time to its investigation, but exerted himself by inducing others to
follow a similar course. He accordingly, on the establishment of this
Society, devoted his energies towards its success and took a keen


interest in all its proceedings. His loss is, therefore, doubly felt, and
his intimate association with the interests and objects of this Society
will long be held in grateful remembrance by its members.
The Rescue of Emin Pasha.
Undoubtedly the most memorable event in the annals of
exploration has been the journey of Mr. H. M. Stanley through the
African continent to relieve the beleaguered Governor of Equatorial
Africa—a feat accomplished in defiance of almost insurmountable
difficulties and terrible dangers—and his return to England to become
the recipient of the admiration of the whole civilized world. The last
letters from Stanley gave particulars of the experiences of the
Expedition, the constant onslaughts made by the forest tribes, the
deadly jungle fevers, starvation and misery endured with the most
determined resolution and undaunted courage. He has now given to
the world full particulars of his journey through that great African
forest, 1600 miles of which was traversed by the expedition. Erom
Kabambarre in South Manyuema to Bagbomo is its greatest length—
-621 miles, while its average breadth is 517 miles—giving the enormous
square area of 321,057 miles. The wh6le of this vast extent is
“crammed with trees,” varying from 20ft. to 200 ft. in height, and so
close that the branches interlace and form an umbrageous canopy. In
speaking of this mighty forest I cannot do better than quote the words
of Stanley himself: “It is absolutely impenetrable to sunshine.
While the sun scorches and dazzles without, a little dust of white
light flickering here and there only reveals the fact. Generally it was
a mystical twilight, but on misty or rainy days the page of a book
became unreadable ; at night one fancied that the darkness was solid
and palpable. The moon and stars were of no avail to us.” After
describing the extraordinary forms of vegetation revealed to the
Expedition the explorer says: “ I have sat at the door of my tent
watching the twilight deepen into a sepulchral gloom, knowing that the
elements were gathering for a war with the forest. I have heard the
march of the storm advancing with the speed of a hurricane, and the
sullen roar of the forest, as with nerves collected it swung its millions
of giant heads to wrestle with it. The groaning, and rending, and
crashing! I have seen the mighty swaying and surging of a countless
army of tree tops, and their leaves all quivering and rustling, and the
undergrowth dancing as though in approval of the strength of its grey
sires; and then I have heard the rain follow in a torrential downpour,
hushing the storm and the strife, and descending in cascades from the
drowning trees.” Stanley computes the area of this forest at about
224,000,000 acres, and allowing each tree a space of 30ft. around, “we
have,” he says, “ the colossal figures of 10,752,000,000 as its total
number,” and if the plants and saplings of a smaller growth were
calculated we should be among “ the incalculable billions.” One of
the most interesting features of the journey was the discovery of the


pigmy tribes inhabiting the tract of country between the Ihuri and
Ituri Rivers. Nine centuries before the Christian era these people were
known to exist and are familiar to us in the pages of Homer, Herodotus
and Hekatseus. By these and other ancient writers they were located
in the heart of Africa, under the shadows of the Mountains of the
Moon. The first two of these dwarfs captured by Stanley’s men
were a man and a woman ; the man was 4ft. high and weighed
about 85lbs; the woman was less in both respects. Further
association with these people showed that they were adepts in the
mysteries of woodcraft and greatly feared by their neighbours on
account of their vindictive nature and use of deadly poisons in
warfare. Over 100 dwarfs’ villages were passed through by Stanley;
every soul fled, however, as the gigantic strangers approached. Of 50
captured by Stanley’s men only one reached the height of 54 inches ;
their height varied from 39 to 50 inches ; but they are yet a well-
proportioned race. The tract of country tenanted by these pigmies
includes about 2000 families, “ living a nomadic and free life, in the
perpetual twilight of the great and umbrageous forest of Equatorial
Africa.”
The Mountains of the Moon.
Well might the great explorer have stated his hesitancy to
mention the discovery of the famed Mountains of the Moon ; but his
inspection of the maps of the ancients —Greeks and Arabs —both
fortified and finally confirmed him in his assertion. Homer had heard
of these mountains and the race of pigmies; and Hekataeus, Hipparchus,
Ptolemy and other ancient writers made frequent mention of them,
but in such a vague manner were they located in their minds, and so
frequently have Dutch, French and Portuguese cartographers either
ignored their existence or shifted their location on the map of Africa
that the modern world looked upon these mountains as a mere dream
of the ancients, as visionary as Ponce de Leon’s Fountain of Youth.
But for Stanley was reserved the honour of verifying—after long
centuries of scepticism and ridicule had caused the mere mention of
this mountain range to be laughed at by travellers—the statements of
Homer and other writers of past ages.
The Results of the Expedition.
The most important discoveries made by Stanley were the con-
nection between the Lake Albert Edward and Lake Albert; the long-
famed and supposed mystical Mountains of the Moon ; the extension
of Lake Victoria to the south-west; and definite knowledge of the
magnificent river system of what can no longer be called the “ Dark
Continent,” “The question has been asked by stolid and thoughtless
people,” said Stanley when addressing a meeting in the Albert Hall,
in London, in May last, “ ‘ What good has come from the late expedi-
tion ?’ ” And the great traveller gives a lucid answer : “To humanity
the gain has been great. The world is richer by the knowledge that


there are ten thousand million more trees in it than we knew o£ before;
that there are exhaustless quantities of rubber and gums, and dye-
stuffs ; that there is navigation furnished by nature by which those
interested in such treasures can proceed to collect them; and that by
these vegetable products the millions of degraded human beings within
that great forest will in process of time learn that their fellow creatures
have far vaster value in view than the value of their flesh. As a
Christian nation you should rejoice that the few thousand pounds
that you lent for this service rescued over 400 men, women and
children from slavery ; that you restored 290 people to their homes in
Egypt; that you restored the late Governor, stagnating among the
impossibilities, to active service for a friendly nation; and a gallant
explorer and captain to his countrymen of Italy ; and a merchant
Greek to his family ; and I am sure you begrudge your bounty as
little as we our service. As geographers you must be gratified with
the wide extension of geographical knowledge gained. The Aruwimi
Eiver is known throughout its entire length ; you know the extent of
that immense forest; you know the connecting link of water between
the two lakes along the course of the Albertine Nile ; the classic river,
the source of which Alexander, Cambyses, Caesar and Nero desired to
know, you now know to its very fountain head ; those lofty Mountains
of the Moon, which have been so anxiously sought for since Homer’s
time, have now been surveyed and located. The most glorious portions
of Inner Africa have been traversed and described for the first time ;
and we know that throughout the area there is scarcely an acre but is
a decided gain to our earth ; and I assert that every mile of new lands
traversed by us will serve in the coming time to expand British
commerce, and stimulate civilised industry.”
The Ascent of Kilima-njaro
Brief allusion must be made, while on the subject of African
exploration, to the return to Europe of Dr. Hans Meyer, after several
successful ascents of this great mountain. .Stanley, accompanied by
the rescued Emin Pasha, had arrived but four days previously at
Bagamoyo when the intrepid German doctor reached Zanzibar from
the interior. Kilima-njaro is the loftiest mountain in Africa, its
heighest peak is 19,700 feet —being 2300 feet in excess of even the
mighty Euwenzori of Stanley’s journey. Ever since its existence
became known in 1848 it has proved an object of exceeding interest
and much speculation. After reaching an altitude of 9200 feet Dr.
Meyer here formed a base of operations. Three days afterwards,
accompanied by five companions, he reached 14,270 feet. Three of
the men were then sent back, only one negro remaining with Dr.
Meyer and his white companion, to share with them uncomplainingly
their sixteen days’ sojourn on the bitterly cold and barren heights.
After some days of exhausting climbing the base of the ice-cap of
Kibo Peak was reached —18,270 feet above the sea. Under terrible


difficulties 19,000 feet was gained, with the temperature exceeding
freezing point, and the difficulty of breathing becoming so pronounced
that at every few paces they had to halt, bend their bodies forward and
gasp for breath. At two o’clock in the afternoon of the 3rd October,
after a climb of eleven hours, the secret of Kibo was revealed—the
precipitous walls of a gigantic crater yawned beneath them. But the
highest peak of the crater yet towered above them, and they returned to
a sheltered spot at 15,000 feet to recruit for a final attempt. This, at
half-past ten in morning of the 6th October, was accomplished, and
the undaunted German standing upon the ragged lava summit—the
loftiest spot in Africa—at a height of 19,700 feet, proudly planted
the banner of his country and christened it Kaiser Wilhelm’s Peak.
Of the interesting flora and fauna of this mountain we have not
the time to speak, and I will conclude the subject by quoting the
ardent explorer’s own words: “ Kilima-njaro is settled—the African
giant is vanquished. But still, for long years to come, it will prove
an ample field for detailed exploration ; and until the time when it too
shall dissolve and pass away, it will afford, by its majestic solitude,
its grandeur, and its beauty, an unfailing source for exiting the
feelings and fancies of everyone who can trace an eternal Godhead in
the silent language of Nature.”
The Great Central Asian Trade Route.
To Colonel Mark Bell, R. E., Y.C , A.D.C., is due great praise
for an undertaking of a most arduous nature—his venturesome journey
along the Great Central Asian Trade Route from Pekin to Kashgaria.
This route he describes as a “ cart road,” passing through the Province
of Shansi to the Wei Valley, and thence through Shensi, Kansu and
the Sin Kiang province of Kashgaria. Colonel Bell has the honour
of being the first Englishman who has ever traversed this great route
in its entirety. From Peking there is, however, another route to
Kashgaria—one usually travelled by camels —and this latter was
journeyed over at the same time by his comrade, Lieutenant Young-
husband, who separated from him at Peking. In this case, also, the
latter gentleman was the first Englishman who ever travelled the
camel route. The great length of Colonel Bell’s journey—3,500
miles—and the somewhat slow progress made, allowed him to gather
a vast fund of information relative to the various peoples inhabiting
the countries traversed, their cities, customs and mode of life generally.
To those who read the tale of this journey there is one thing that is
made very evident, and that is that unless Britain is prepared to
altogether lose her prestige among the nations through which the great
Asian trade route passes, she must take quick measures to protect the
interests of those of her Indian subjects who have penetrated to
Kashgaria and Mongolia on trading enterprises, only to be disheartened
and dismayed at the rapid and unmistakable advance of Russian
commerce, the enterprising agents of which have radiated to every


portion of Western China. For the first 218 miles Colonel Bell
passed along a good road through a thickly populated and wealthy
country, and thence to ISin-gan-fu, the capital of Shensi —418 miles—
the whole extent of country is well populated with an industrious
agricultural class, settled for the most part on the loess hills. The
loess formation, which extends for 1400 miles along the route, is a
solid hut friable earth of a brownish-yellow colour, highly fertile and
requiring only a top-dressing of its own dust for manure. For many
days after leaving the capital of Shensi the traveller passed through
one vast wheat field. The contiguous province of Shansi is rich in
and exports coal, iron and salt, and imports Eussian cotton goods,
wheat, tobacco and opium ; Shensi exchanges with her these latter for
the former. For some hundreds of miles villages were met with every
three or four miles and towns every ten or twelve miles. The archi-
tecture and masonry of these latter were in good taste; the basins
and valleys crossed by good sunken roads, and there were general
evidences of a state of industry and energy among the people. In
many places the road was a fine highway, 100 feet wide ; at others,
for miles and miles, it was Bto 10 feet wide. Yet it must be remem-
bered that for the two millions of people* now living along the first
1300 miles of the route, there were in 1860 quite fifteen millions ; but
the Mohammedan rebellion, which lasted seventeen years, almost
depopulated the country, and confidence has not yet returnd to the
people, and the greater part of the land is still untilled. In the
province of Kansu Colonel Bell found the country unfilled, treeless,
and depopulated ; occasionally a poor inn, and the road ankle-deep in
dust. About here he found that his adoption of Chinese dress saved
him from much ill-treatment as a “ foreign devil.” As Kashgaria was
approached the change in the facial features of the people became
marked ; the nose became larger and more prominent, the eyes more
open, and the general expression more pleasing to the European eye.
From the city of Kan-chau the route ran along within view of the
snowy range of Kan-shan mountains, and passed through a rich agri-
cultural country till the city of Su-chau was reached. At this place a
great trade is done in Eussian manufactured goods, cottons, cloths,
clocks, soap, candles, and all manner of odds and ends ; everywhere
the Eussian agent makes his way, and goods of English or Indian
manufacture are (unknown. For the next few weeks the traveller
proceeded steadily on his journey, and entered the province of Kash-
garia without mishap, passing through country consisting of forests,
deserts, oases some of the latter of great extent and tlr’ckly populated.
Time forbids further allusion to this subject. Colonel Bell makes out
a strong case for the necessity of pushing British commerce into these
almost unknown lands, and it is indeed to be deplored that England,
that has for centuries been regarded by the whole world as foremost
in developing the trade and resources of new countries, should have
apathetically permitted Eussia to outstrip her in the vast field for
commercial enterprise to be found in the heart of Central Asia.


New Guinea.
One of the most important exploratory undertakings of 1889 was
Sir William Macgregor’s ascent of the Owen Stanley Range. Having
ascended the Yanapa River as far as practicable, Sir William, on the
27th April formed a depot on the river bank, and thence proceeded to
the interior in the direction of the range. The difficulties of transport
were very great, the route traversed being either precipitous or
impenetrable jungle in many places, and the native Papuan carriers
unreliable and very timorous of meeting with any of the mountain
tribes. Prom the 22nd to the 24th May, although the utmost efforts
were made only two and a half-miles were covered, and the attendant
natives made several attempts to bolt-back to the depot on the Yanapa
River. However, by various methods Sir William induced some of
them to remain and the now diminished party struggled bravely
onward. At 10 a.m. on the 27th 5000 feet was reached. Here was
found a deserted native hunting lodge, in which was a dog. This
house was about 25 feet long, 10 feet wide, and 6 feet high, and was
roofed with pandanus thatch. From this spot they were able to
obtain a good view of the object of their mission—the Owen Stanley
Range —and after deliberation with Mr. Cameron, the next in
command, Sir William decided to make for Mount Yictoria —the
highest peak of the great range —along the crest of Mount
Musgrave. Here also was held their first communication with the
mountaineer people, who, about nightfall, arrived at the camp in great
numbers and manifested a very friendly disposition; and indeed
throughout the journey Sir William’s party were in constant associa-
tion with them. He describes these people as physically stronger than
the coast men, with long and strong bodies and muscular legs. No
nose or ear ornaments were worn and no tatooing was noticed. Caps
made of cuscus fur were worn by the full-grown men, with a frontal
ornament made of white shells ground down to thin plates and then
sewn together, and with cheek pieces of black cassowary feathers.
Others wore caps of more elaborate design, trimmed with boars’ tusks
and dogs’ teeth. They all wore the perineal band,and every man and
boy was clothed in a girdle of paper mulberry cloth about ten inches
deep, but cut up into lappets. On the neck, arms, and legs, were rings
of cane, sometimes plain, sometimes twisted. They possessed decidedly
good features. In a few the cheekbones were broad and prominent,
and the nose was generally of the Semitic type. All were exceedingly
voluble, and not very shy of the white men. Although they carried
no weapons they said they used the bow and spear. At nightfall they
always returned to their villages, after exchanging native food for salt,
beads and cutlery. Tobacco they did not seem eager for, as they grew
an excellent leaf themselves. Tams, bananas and sweet potatoes are
their chief vegetable food, and of these there is abundance. On the
Ist June Mr. Cameron being ill, returned to camp, and Sir William
was left to continue the journey with Mr. Belford, two Polynesians,


and six Papuans. The next day the party reached the Vanapa River
at the foot of Mount Knutsford. The river bed was full of immense
boulders and it was found impracticable to ascend the river in that way,
and Sir William then decided to ascend Mount Knutsford, and from
that point endeavour to reach the summit of the range, as that moun-
tain is the first directly connected with the Owen Stanley Range.
Sir William gives a vivid picture of the death-like stillness that
surrounded his party during the climb up Mount Knutsford: “ Hardly
a bird uttered a ‘ call,’ not a leaf rustled, and the men spoke in
whispers when they spoke at all, which was seldom. The feeling of
loneliness was increased by the striking appearance of the trees ; roots,
trunks and branches were wrapped in thick coverings of moss, even
the leaves were not free from it.” On the 6th the summit of
Mount Knutsford was reached—ll,loo feet. About 500 feet from
the summit the first Alpine plants and flowers were met with—only a
limited number of species. On the 9th the top of Mount Douglas
was reached after a terribly arduous climb from Mount Knutsford,
and here at an altitude of 1i,976 feet were found excellent strawberries
in great quantities ; and that night Sir William pitched his camp some
four hours’ march from Mount Victoria—the name he gave to the
highest peak of the great Owen Stanley Range. At eleven o’clock on
the following morning the summit of N.W. peak of Mount Victoria
was reached, and Sir William immediately set about collecting geo-
graphical data, and botanical and other specimens. Within 1500 feet
of the top there was no timber, and only a few bushes growing within
1000 feet. The flora he found disappointing except as regards grasses,
■which were numerous beyond his expectations. There were several
varieties of daises, buttercups, forget-me-nots, heaths, etc. But few
birds were seen, and only three new species were obtained. Sir
William camped for two nights on Mount Victoria at an altitude of
12,452 feet, about 670 feet from the summits of the highest peaks, and
can therefore speak definitely of the climate. The temperature when
the sun was shining on the peaks gradually rose at noon to 70 deg.,
in the morning the glass was quite white with frost before the rays of
the sun reached it. Icicles were observed on the first day; one of
these was more than an inch in diameter and seven or eight inches long.
From 10 a.m. till 4 p.m. the temperature in the shade was between
50° and 60°. The sky was blue and cloudless generally, sometimes hazy.
Not a single cataract or waterfall of any kind was visible; nor even
was there heard the murmuring of a mountain stream to break the
deep impressive silence that reigned supreme on this mighty mountain.
The crest of Mount Victoria is composed of six different peaks, two
of these being a few feet higher than the others. Up the sides of
these two peaks there are great breaks in the rocks, filled up with
debris and growing grass, up which one can walk without any difficulty
if sure of one’s head and feet. The tops of these peaks are made up
of decomposed rock, on which grew flowering moss and heath. After
recording carefully-taken angles, and making outlines of the mountain


chains and obtaining collections as complete as possible, Sir William
commenced his descent on the morning of the 13th June, and after a
journey of twelve days reached the coast safely. Too much praise
cannot be awarded to Sir William for his untiring energy and per-
severance in the face of great difficulties in successfully accomplishing
the object of his journey. By his discretion and firmness in dealing
with the natives no tragedy has marred his feat, and his important and
valuable contributions to our scanty knowledge of the once mysterious
island will be rightly estimated by thinking people.
The Solomon Islands.
Anything further extending our knowledge of this splendid group
of islands cannot fail to interest Australians particularly, as well as
the scientific world in general; and we are indebted to Mr. C. M.
Woodford —who has already contributed a vast amount of informa-
tion obtained during a former residence in the group —for further
explorations made by him in the latter portion of last year. His
object in returning to the sphere of his former travels was to
identify the places visited by the Spaniards in the expedition under
Mendana in 1568. In this Mr. Woodford was eminently success Eul,
and a most graphic and interesting report of his quest will be found in
the English “ Proceedings of the Eoyal Geographical Society for
July, 1890.”
Dr. Nansen in Greenland.
At the present time when we have before us the proposed
expedition to the Antarctic regions, a brief outline of the daring exploit
of the gallant young Norwegian explorer —Dr. Eridtjof Nansen —in
crossing the inland ice of Greenland from east to west will be of
interest. When Dr. Nansen first announced his intention of under-
taking this adventurous task he was looked upon as a madman, or tired
of his life. Nothing daunted, however, he went on with his preparations,
and in May of last year he, with five hardy companions sailed from
Iceland for the east coast of Greenland. Many attempts had been
made by former explorers to cross from the west coast, but none had
advanced more than 100 miles. In Dr. Nansen’s opinion to start from
the west coast would be a bad plan, as on that side are all the settle-
ments, and in front of him would be the ice desert and the east coast,
which is no better, and when this was reached he would again have to
cross to the west coast to find a ship, and although he was confident of
his own strength of spirit, he thought he might not be able to force
his men forward when food began to run short. He therefore decided
to penetrate the floe ice and land on the desolate east coast between
65 deg., and 66 deg., N. lat, and thence make his way to the inhabited
west coast. Eor six weeks the ship was knocking about the ice between
Iceland and Greenland, but at last on the 17th July Dr. Nansen’s
party left the ship outside the Semilik fiord. With strange feelings
the six men parted from those on the ship and steered their two boats
into the desolate ice-world. Eor twenty hours they tried to effect a


landing, but the fierce currents that swept around the icefloes thwarted
every attempt, and they turned away to try another spot. From then
till the 29th July were these brave fellows struggling against adverse
fortune in the boats, exposed to terrible weather even tor that desolate
clime, and frequently in imminent danger of death, when at length they
succeeded in landing at Anoritob, a point not far from the south end of
Greenland, and 250 miles south of the place where they had at first
intended to commence the overland journey. The season was now late,
the best of the brief Artie summer had passed away and there was but
little left. But the doctor had no thought of abandoning his plans,
although they were now near the Danish settlements about Cape
Farewell. To the south was rescue, warmth and life ; to the north lay
—perhaps death. And his comrades stood to him, and without any
fear they steered northwards along the clear strip of water that lay
between the pack ice and the shore for a considerable distance.
Steadily they kept along, and though the weather now changed and
the ice floes beset them on every side, they at last reached a place
called Umivik and from there commenced the journey overland. The
doctor determined to attempt to reach the Danish settlement in Disco
Bay, to the N.N.W. of Umivik. They had-five sledges, each carrying
200 lbs., and notwithstanding the steep slopes and many crevasses they
made rapid progress for two days, when a heavy storm set in, and
they had to lie down in their tent in their sleeping bags for three days,
while the ice melted under them and the rain poured down above. As
they advanced to the interior the difficulties increased and pulling was
hard work, with a continuous snow storm beating dead against tliem ;
and it became clear to Dr. Nansen that there was no hope of reaching
Disco Bay before the middle of September when the last ship would
have sailed for Europe. He, therefore changed his route and headed
for Godthaab—a point almost due west from their starting place.
This was on the 27th August and the party were then 40 miles from
the coast, at an altitude of 7000 feet. The wind was now favorable,
so sails were used on the sledges, and gave great help. Early in
September they reached a vast plateau, which resembled a frozen
ocean. Its height was about 9000 feet, and over this plateau they
travelled for more than two weeks, during intense cold. And then
followed some terrible experiences, endured with unfailing fortitude
and courage by the doctor and his comrades. At last, on the 26th
September the terrors of the icy desert were passed and the party
reached the Ameralik fiord, 50 miles from Godthaab, on the west
coast. The distance travelled over the inland ice was 260 and
the interior of Greenland had thus been explored in one direction at
least. On the 3rd October the settlement at Godthaab was reached
and the daring explorers were heartily welcomed, and thus the expedi-
tion was finished and Greenland crossed for the first time. In
geological and meteorological respects, the knowledge gained by Dr.
Nansen is very prominent, and his work on the subject has thrown a
flood of light on the climatic conditions of this region of eternal ice.


Various Explorations and Travels.
Among the minor events in the African field may be mentioned
Mr. J. W. It. Pigott’s interesting journey to the upper Tana, undertaken
in the interests of the British East Africa Company; explorations
along the Chinde River and Zambesi Delta by Mr. D. J. Rankin ; the
arduous journey of Mr. Selous through Mashona Land ; Mr. Alfred
Sharpe’s trip from the Shire River to the country lying
between the Shire and Loangwa Rivers; and also the extensive
journeys and surveys made by Mr. J. T. Last in Eastern Africa,
between the Rovuma and the Zambesi Rivers. In Asia the Russians
are energetically pushing forward the work of exploration. Their
principal undertaking at present is the expedition under Colonel
Pievstoff, regular reports of the progress of which appear in the
European press.
In concluding this very brief account of some of the most
important expeditions made during the past year, I would desire to
draw attention to the very important information obtained, both
commercially and geographically, by the Hon. G. Curzon, M.P.,
during his journey to the Karun River in south-west Persia. Also to
the very interesting accounts by Mr. and Mrs. Littledale of a journey
to the Hindu Kush mountains in Central Asia.
We are now on the eve of two great scientific and commercial
undertakings. I allude in the first instance to the contemplated
Swedish-Australian Antarctic Expedition, under the able leadership of
Baron Nordenskiold. Baron Oscar Dickson has most generously
offered to furnish a steamship and funds to the amount of £SOOO,
provided the Australian colonies contribute a similar amount (£5000).
Considerable interest is taken in the matter by the Royal and Royal
Geographical Societies of Australasia, and the proposed expedition
formed the subject for a conference between certain members of the
two societies in the sister colony of Victoria, where great enthusiasm
has been shewn, and the names of many influential men appear on the
list of the committee—foremost being that of Baron Eerdinand von
Muller—formed for the purpose of obtaining funds and carrying out
this great work, the results of which will be of undoubted advantage
to science and likely to prove of great commercial benefit to these
colonies by leading to the establishment of a lucrative whale and seal
fishery.
A munificent offer from Sir Thomas Elder, who undertakes to
provide funds for the entire cost of a thorough exploration of the yet
untrodden parts of Central Australia, has been the subject of
correspondence between Baron von IVI uller, President of the Victorian
branch of the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia, and the
Administrative Council of tins branch. Sir Thomas Elder has desired
that the various branches would suggest, through Baron von Muller,
the name of the most suitable leader and other particulars relative to
the subject, to be submitted to him for his approval. Energetic


measures are now being taken in this important matter, and it is
hoped that at the commencement of the next year the expedition will
be ready to start.
The Council of the International Congress ot b-eographical
Sciences, the first sitting of which was held in Paris during the recent
Exhibition, and which met with marked success, intimated to this
Society the intention of holding these Congresses annually at various
places, and suggested the feasibility of Sydney being fixed upon as the
meeting place for the Congress of 1890. This important subject was
fully discussed by the Administrative Council, and a reply was sent to
Paris stating that whilst the Society desired to congratulate the
members of the International Congress on the results of their first
meeting, and acknowledging the advantages to be derived by the
dissemination of the large amount of valuable information to be gained
by holding such Congresses, it regretted its inability to meet their
flattering request, the subject being of such importance as to require
further deliberation ; also in reply to a further wish that this Society
would appoint a resident delegate in Paris, the Administrative Council
expressed its regret at being unable at present to comply with the
request, owing to its inability to name any gentleman to undertake
the duties of such a position.
et&uo
ri Agfio




