

GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY OF AUSTRALASIA.
NEW SOUTH WALES BRANCH.
1885-86.
ANNUAL ADDRESS
BY
SIR EDWARD STRICKLAND, K.C.8., F.R.G.S,
VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE SOCIETY,
AND
PRESIDENT OF THE NEW SOUTH WALES BRANCH.
SYDNEY:
HUNTED BY JOHN WOODS & CO., LIMITED,
13 BRIDGE STREET.




ERRATA.
fS k V instructive."
f age 4, par. 6, line 3, fo“ ‘ eves ™ d iatorm ’’
T ’P:l: iS &:: B .„ g weoi.„.»
Psge 6, side-note I, for”
|s: “ Shlre ”- sh^-”
“ Isangila. ”' ’ and Slde ' note 3 > “Imangila” read
Sl : pl£r^«- r 8"


GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY OF AUSTRALASIA.
NEW SOUTH WALES BRANCH.
1885-6.
ANNUAL ADDRESS
BY SIR E. STRICKLAND, K.C.B., F.R.G.S,,
Vice-President of the Society.
In the Science of Geography many important events have to be
recorded within the year 1885.
Those belonging to the first months have already been noticed in
the address which I delivered on 18th August, in which I brought
geographical matters up to the end of June, 1885. Starting now from
July, 1885, I propose here to complete my geographical records for
1885, leaving all appertaining to 1886 for the next annual meeting
of the Society : this we hope to hold in the early months of 1887,
after the arrival of the last mails of previous December, and in future
it is propesed to deliver the annual address within the first quarter of
each year. There is laid before you now the report of Captain
171 «rill on the expedition which he recently commanded in the
interesting island of New Guinea. This, the New South Wales
branch of the Geographical Society of Australasia, has much reason
to rejoice at the success which has attended their first efforts at
exploration. Our geographical knowledge of New Guinea has been
considerably added to, and some highly instructing collections have
been brought home of plants, woods, fruit, butterflies, beetles, birds,
shells, and technological curios. With a view to allow them to be
seen by the public to the best advantage, all were arranged at con-
siderable trouble and expense by the Society in the old Art Gallery,
and this was thrown open to the public free of cost during the
Christmas holidays.
This collection proved eminently attractive, as many as 9000 i
having visited it on one day, and never less than 3000 or 4000. The 1
exhibition was a source of heavy expenditure to the Society, which
was quite unforseen, and this, amongst other circumstances, has
helped to cripple our financial resources as regards the expedition.
These are, however, quite separate from the finances of the Society
proper.
Although Captain Everill penetrated into the far interior of (
British territory, by the route of the Strickland River, as president
of this Society in New South Wales, I am proud to be able to say
that the expedition returned to Sydney up to time, guiltless of the
death of a single native, and without losing a single one of the party
except one Malay, from consumption.
Introduction
Dates
Collections of
Curios
Cost of Exliibi-
tiou
Ca tain Everill


Native difficul-
ties
Strickland
River
A new race of
men
Whaleboat ex.
ploration
No natives
killed
Capt. Everill’s
report
Country be-
tween Fly River
and sea
Nature of soil
and climate
Captain
Strachan
To sum up about
New Guinea
Resources, Cli-
mate
encieT’
Prospects
Great difficulties were experienced in communicating with the
natives, the large majority of whom could never before have seen a
white man. _ „ ~
At the head of the Strickland River a race of natives was dis-
covered, living in comfortably built houses, often with verandahs,
and they were a fine stalwart race, copper-coloured, with aqueline
features, and they showed more fear than hostility to the ex-
plorers. , . V
The river was throughout a grand broad river, except towards tne
end of their tedious struggle up it, when it became narrow and
difficult of navigation, thus exposing the crew perpetually as targets
to many natives who followed in the wake of the whale boat, con-
cealed by the thick scrub on the banks of the river ; nevertheless, not
one single act of hostility was perpetrated. Wherever any explorer
landed the natives fled from him, and a liberal allowance of “ trade,
especially looking-glasses and tomahawks, were always left in any
house or hut that was visited.
Captain EverilL’s report will speak for itself ; and I beg to
recommend it to the perusal of those interested in the exploration of
New Guinea, scientifically or otherwise.
The scientific knowledge gained is important, inasmuch as we
learn from the description given of the banks of the Fly river that
the intervening country between the sea coast and the lower hills of
the Cordilleras of New Guinea closely resembles, for most of the
distance, the Hooghly district in India ; the land is low, and is
covered by an impenetrable forest, and vegetable growth similar to
the dense jungles of the Hooghly, and it is intersected by numerous
rivers, making it difficult to determine the main stream. _
This leads to the conclusion that though the soil is very rich and
productive, and that though the forests may offer large inducements
for enterprise to the timber trade, yet that jungle malaria may prove
an obstacle to colonisation in many of the low lving swamps which
abound between the Fly river and the ocean especially.
Captain Strachan reports his having made some important
geographical and scientific discoveries in the neighbourhood of the
Baxter river. Unfortunately the Society has not been favoured with
a copy of his voyage or any account of his proceedings ; it is, there-
fore, impossible further to notice the expedition in this record.
To sum up briefly here the knowledge now acquired of New
Guinea, it is eminently encouraging as regards its future, and as it
is in such close proximity to Australia, the commerce of these
colonies must in the near future benefit by our acquisitions in that
island. ... . ,
Even now, before a single plough has upturned its rich soil or
science or civilisation have done anything to develop its great
resources, we can obtain from it an unlimited supply of rare and
most useful timber. Sago, and various fruits abound in many
localities, and the fisheries for pearl shell, and beche-de-mer or
trepang are increasing in value every year. The climate proves to
be far better than was anticipated. .
Mr. Forbes, we are informed, finds the natives docile, Inendiy,
and very honest, and they are always nady to help if needed, uheie
fore we have good reason to hope that, if well treated, they will
prove useful labourers, and the first settlers in the rich valleys and
plains of New Guinea ought to experience no difficulty in develop-
ing the recources of the country, in establishing civilisation therein,
and forming for themselves an enviable home. Once this great work
of colonisation is fairly entered upon, it will doubtless proceed with
giant strides, and Australians need not be reminded how completely


and how rapidly the face of a country, even its climate, is changed
by the application of skdl and machinery and civilised industry.
For myself, I hope to see the railroad at work in New Guinea, and
all their mountain barriers made to yield to science, the pick-axe, and
the navvy.
Our last news of Mr. Forbes was good. His second in command,
Mr. Hennessy, informed me recently, that Mr. Forbes lives some
fifty miles from Port Moresby, on the lower slopes of Owen Stanley
Ranges. He is constantly surrounded by natives, with whom he
lives on very friendly terms, and through whom he is cultivating the
acquaintance of other native dwellers on the Owen Stanley Ranges.
Of these, many come to visit Mr. Forbes, and all promise aid to carry
out his plans as porters or otherwise.
Mr Hennessy has not the slightest doubt of the accomplishment
by Mr. Forbes of his intended journey across the Owen Stanley
Ranges.
Everyone here present will, 1 am sure, most heartily wish success
to the gallant explorer, and anxiously look out for the account of a
journey of such vast importance to New Guinea, and which cannot
fail to exercise a great influence in the future of that island.
It may not be uninteresting here to give some important explana-
tion regarding the partition of a portion of New Guinea between the
German and the British. I will add a few statistical figures in
further explanation of the re-pective acquisitions.
The British possessions are marked out clearly on the map before
you.
Starting from the coast in the neighbourhood of the Mitre Rock,
on the Bth parallel of south latitude, and following this parallel
to the point where it cuts the 147th degree of east longitude,
there is a straight line in a N. W. direction to the point where the
4th parallel of south latitude cuts the 144th degree of east longitude,
and continuing in a west-north-west direction to the point of inter-
section of the sth parallel of south latitude and tne 146th degree of
east longitude.
The British possessions lie to the south of the line thus defined,
the Germans to the north. Thus nearly the whole of the south-east
peninsula is retained under British protection.
According to a German map recently prepared, the area of the
German Protectorate on the main land of New Guinea is 68,785
English square miles.
lhat of the English Protectorate is 86,360 square miles, and of
Hutch New Guinea 150,755 square miles. The total area of New
Guinea would thus be 305,9 0 square miles.
This useful information is, I may be pardoned for saying, very
properly given to the public here through our Geographical
Society.
It is right to I inform you that on the N.W. coast of New
Guinea the Dutch have recently explored in their territory to a con-
siderable extent They only rep >rt having found one river of any
importance; other smaller rivers were seen, but passed unnoticed.
The Germans have now equipped a party and despatched it to
explore German New Guinea. I am sure you will all share with
the anxiety to learn the result of this expedition. Possibly it may
meet Mr. Forbes as he descends the northern slopes of the Owen
Stanley Ranges. Such an event would be a pleasing triumph to our
explorations.
r Dr Finsch, a well-known German explorer, traversed recently the
North Coast of New Guinea a distance of 1000 miles from the East
Cape to 141st east latitude.
Mr. Forbes’
home
Mr. Forbes’
programme
Partition of
New Guinea
Our limits
Our area
German and
Dutch areas
Dutch Explora-
tions
Finsch


Soil Fertile
Dr. Finscli on
natives
Stanley and the
Congo
King of the
Belgians
Missionaries
Officers
Hailway
How Stanley
succeeded
Future of Con-
go and New
Guinea
Contributors
Several good harbours were discovered, and a large navigable-
river. Dr Finsch speaks very favourably of the climate of German
New'Guinea, and tells us it is well suited for European colonisa-
tion.
He ascended the river thirty miles, and he named it after the
Empress Augusta. Other smaller rivers exist along the coast, but
they were not explored. The soil (he says) is of the richest fertility,
and well adapted for agriculture and cattle. The natives cultivate
large extents of land with sugar cane, bananas, and yams. Dr.
Finsch speaks of the natives as being very friendly, and possessing
intelligence. He has the best hopes of the future of the new
German colony.
As yet scarcely ten years have elapsed since Stanley, whom I have
already introduced to you in a previous address as the king of
explorers, discovered to the world the great Congo River, fed by
numerous other rivers, some of considerable magnitude, and flowing
through populous and fertile countries for a distance of over 3000
miles, opening for the first time a region of magnificent wealth.
Religion and Christianity have since been firmly established therein,
linked as it were to commerce by the energy of explorers and mis*
sionaries, both influenced by the master mind of Stanley.
This great geographer enlisted all Europe in his cause; capital was
liberally subscribed. The King of the Belgians gallantly and
liberally headed the movement at every step of its progress, and
with thorough success. European settlements were soon formed on
the banks of the Congo, steamers ploughed its waters, buildings of
all kinds were erected, and very Soon the African Association, as it
was at first called, gave to itself a form of Government, and of course
a Governor.
Active missionaries and intelligent officers were dispersed through
out the length and breadth of the newly discovered region. Fresh-
explorations were made, commerce was established, and recently
railways have been begun, to avoid the cataracts, 200 miles in
extent, which separate the Upper Congo from the sea, much as the
long distance of cataracts on the Nile separate that river from the
Mediterranean Sea and European civilisation. The whole story now
summarised seems more like a fairy tale than a reality ; yet, as a
matter of fact, a free State has been founded in the Congo such as
the world has never known before,
It may be said that all this wonderful result has been obtained by
Stanley, and his co-labourers through private enterprise, entirely
under the eyes of His Majesty the King of the Belgians of the Royal
Geographical Society ol London and other foreign institutions. If
we could but find another Stanley to explore New Guinea and intro-
duce her to the world as another Congo legion, only on a much
smaller scale, then indeed we should soon find our great preliminary
difficulties of settlement conquered, and the Anglo-Saxon established
upon a virgin soil, once more working out the great mission of colo-
nisation for which he seems to have been created. The consummation
of so wild a dream, even in its very mildest form, needs Imperial
and Colonial support. Verily, the Congo is a wonderful story, and.
makes one hope even against hope, that one day a great future may
open out also to New Guinea.
Stanley’s widely extended discoveries have been vastly added
to within the last few months, and it will now be my duty to-
record the names of the chief contributors to the rapid acquire-
ment of knowledge throughout Africa, especially in the Congo
Free State in Eastern Africa, in the Somali country in North.


Africa, Equatorial Africa, Eastern Equatorial Africa West
Africa. I cannot do better than commence my task with a brief
from the annual address of the Right Hon. Lord
Aberdair, F.R.S., President of the Royal Geographical Society,
1884-1885, delivered at the anniversary meeting June Bth, 1885: —
“ I cannot within the reasonable hounds of an address enumerate all
the numerous explorations which have been completed during the
year in different parts of this great continent. Some, however,
have excited great interest either in our own or other countries, for
Africa is now, and has been for some years past, a great field for
enterprise—political, philanthropical, and ccientific—open to all
nationalities.”
M. Giraud has returned this spring from his explorations of Lake
Bangwello and its outlet, and has unsuccessfully attempted to cross
Africa by way of the Upper Gongo. M. Aruott has crossed from
Natal to the Bikie plateau by way of the Upper Zambesi. M.
Montague Kerr has crossed Matabele land, and the Zambesi, and
penetrated by a new route to the south-western shore of Lake
Nyassa ; and Mr. Richards has reached from Inhambone, the
southern districts of Umzila’s kingdom.
I wish especially to point out the important part which our brave
geographical explorers have taken in the success which has been
achieved. The scientific knowledge and courage of these grand men
have added materially to revolutionize the Congo Free States, and
to supplant dark and cruel barbarism—even cannibalism—with all
the brilliancy of a Christian religion, and the gentleness which
it stamps on the impressive savage. The lovers of the science of
geopraphy have materially aided to shed a bright ray of light, of hope,
of Christian faith, over the dark races of the Congo Free State,
and far beyond its limits, as a consequence we now see peace
where war was perpetual. And the power of the cruel slave-
dealers is rapidly fading away.
Their field of operations is shrinking from their grasp. What-
ever is lost to them, of former prestige and power, is gained by the
dark African. All honour to such men.
First in order we will name the Rev. G. Grenfell, by whom very
extensive discoveries were made. Accompanied by Mr. Comber, in a ■
small steamer, The Peace, he reached the Stanley Falls, and
then after exploring and surveying many important tributaries, he
reached the river Mogambi. This he ascended for more than 5
degrees of latitude, and found it a magnificent navigable stream,
the sources of which are not improbably connected with some
eastern branch of the Niger. All the country lying beyond the
point reached by Mr. Grenfell and by Comber, excellent and re-
liable explorers, is to geography still a terra incognita.
The discovery of this great river Mogamby is likely to prove of ■
cardinal importance in the cartography and on the future of
Uentral Africa.
Stanley’s wonderful explorations vrere otherwise materially added
to—not only by the Rev. Mr. Grenfell and Mr. Comber—but also
by other enterprising explorers, who, besides the great Mogamby
-extending through the heart of Africa, a grand navigable river, dis-
eovered and mapped off other vast tributary rivers all flowing
into the Congo.
Thus a vast fluvial system, hitherto unknown, has been brought
to light in the western portion of Central Africa.
There is good reason for supposing that the Mogambi has its rise
at no great distance from waters communicating with the eastern
branch of the Niger, and an idea now prevails in geographical
Lord Aberdair
M. Giraud and
other African
travellers
New Guinea and
other African
travellers
Effect of con-
duct of explor-
ers
Slave trade
crushed
Grenfell and
Comber
Terra incognita
Mogambi
Pluvial system


Opening up
Central Africa
Lieut. Wiss-
mami
River Kassai
Kwamouth
Capello ancl
vens
Lualaba River
Luapula River
Chief Muxiri
Copper mines
Chief of Ka-
tunga
Chibali Hills
Death of Dr.
Bohm
Reischardt
circles that if this be correct, not impossibly the Atlantic may in.
time be connected with the Upper Congo, and the Red Sea with the
Upper Nile, thus thoroughly opening out the fertile and popular
regions of Central Africa.
This indeed would be dealing a crushing blow to slavery, and
must help materially to open up in the heart of the Soudan a wide
path for legitimate commerce and the sale of European manufac-
tures.
Practically the Congo has now become of the first importance
politically, geographically, and commercially, and the Congo Free
State has a future before it which may exceed even our wildest
dreams.
Lieut. Wissmann, a persevering and intrepid explorer, discovered
about the same period on the opposite or southern side of the Congo
another river of somewhat similar importance.
This skilful explorer, on a second expedition, discovered the great
tributary river Kassai, flowing for several hundred miles through a
fertile, populous, and previously unknown region to its junction with
the Congo. He found several large rivers, including the Quango, all
tributaries of the great Congo, disemboguing their collective waters
in one large stream, the mouth of which is known as Kwamouth.
This second journey occupied 45 days. A vast amount of know-
ledge of the hydrography of the new region was gained.
At the head waters and sources of the Congo other explorations
were made—notably by the eminent Portuguese travellers, Messrs.
Capello and Ivens. They started from Mopamedes on the Atlantic
coast in March, 1885, and crossing the Continent reached Quilimane
in the Indian Ocean, in July, 1885. The chief objects of this
journey were to define the watershed of the vast unexplored central
tract between the source of the Congo and the Upper Zambesi, and
also to visit a great trade mart reported to exist in this direction.
They accomplished both objects, and carefully examined the sources
of the Lualaba and the Luapula of Livingstone ; and they visited
the Chief of the Katunga country called Muxiri, by whom they were
permitted to inspect the rich copper mines of his territory, of which
so much had been said by Livingstone, speaking from report only, for
he never visited the locality.
Messrs. Capello and Ivens had been preceded in this wild, unex-
plored country by the German Expedition, under Herr
Reischardt and Dr. Bohm.
After five years of continued exploration to the east of Lake
Tanganyika, these brave, persevering travellers crossed the lake,
and travelling over the unknown central region to the south-west,
they reached the Chief of Katunga—afterward visited by the Portu-
guese explorers. The result of these two expeditions will very pro-
bably be to give us a satisfactory knowledge of the various streams
and lakes, and water system which together form the sources of the
Great Congo, in the near neighbourhood of the Chibali Hills.
These brave scientists underwent great hardships and privations.
They had to fight their way through warlike tribes at one time. At
another time they were reduced almost to starvation, and lived on
roots and mushrooms. Their progress was frequently arrested by a
continuous struggle against hostile natives and a dangerous climate.
Dr. Bohm died after ten days’ suffering. He had been obliged to
abandon his valuable collections.
Herr Reischardt, with a courage worthy of the nation to which he
belongs, continued the exploration alone, and eventually reached the
hospitable station, Impala, on November 30th, 1884.


This brings one to the scientific and very hazardous voyages of
Mr. Consul O’Neil, some of them near the very country traversed by
Herr Reischardt and Dr. Rohm
Consul O’Neil is always distinguished by the accuracy and
frequency of his observations, and the correctness of his cartography.
In the region between the Mozambique coast and Lake Nyassa, our
knowledge has recently very rapidly increased. It has been
acquired from the journeys of the Rev. Chauncery Maples, and Mr.
Joseph Thompson, and the Rev W. P. Johnson, who for several
years continuously explored the eastern shores of Lake Nyassa, the
banks of the Upper Rovuma and its many tributaries.
But Mr. Consul O’Neil (a gold medallist of our Society), stands
prominent amongst those who had contributed to furnish information
of the wild region in question.
By his systematic exploration, we are told that Mr. O’Neil has
for the first time given to us a “ fairly satisfactory knowledge of a
region varied in its physical configuration, well watered, and fertile,
which has hitherto remained a blank on our maps, notwithstanding
the occupation of the coast by the Portuguese for nearly four
centuries.”
The other geographical exploits of this highly scientific geographer
are well worthy of mention. My great regret is that lam quite
unable in this paper to enter into any detail, or convey to you even a
small portion of the wonderful knowledge derived from his very
admirably written papers, which secured to him praise from all sides.
He journeyed from Quillimane to Blantyre, far into the interior,
almost solely to secure to cartographers a reliable meridan in the
Central Lake districts.
In the journey, he tells us, that when he expected to find
barbarous and savage tribes, he met with a people of a peaceful and
industrious disposition, and instead of depopulated and desert
wastes, he found large tracts of cultivated country, as densely
peopled as any parts of Africa.
Of the climate also, he speaks very favourably, and he tells you
that already there are several commercial houses established in the
country into which he penetrated, and five steamers already plough
the waters of the Shire, the great Lakes Nyassa and the Tanganyika.
For his survey of the coast from Zambesi to the Rovuma River,
where coal was found, the highest praise was extended to him.
Time will not permit me to allude to his other and shorter journeys,
in each of which our geographical and scientific knowledge was
increased both of the coast of Eastern Africa and of the iuterior,
between the coast and Eastern Nyassa. Consul O’Neil relates the
discovery of ancient ruins and an ancient town at Ziinbabye. These
he attributes in prehistoric times to a then civilized people. He
argues that it is certain “ Greek, Egyptian, and Phoenician mer-
chants, in sailing 20 or 25 days bef we the N.E. monsoon, must
have reached points many degrees south of the line, and it is im-
possible to think that a colony of such extent and advancement
could have existed in a state of complete isolation from the then
known world.” Further on he tells us “ recent discoveries have
brought to light many traces of an ancient civilization, of the origin
of which we know nothing.” A vast and highly interesting field
for enquiry and research is here opened up, and doubtless it will
not be lost sight of.
The French have been active on the Ogow6 and the northern
tributaries of the Congo. The indefatigable M. De Brassa, a compeer
of Stanley, has descended the Alima to the Congo, and the result
of his labours has been, after discovering a navigable tributary to
Consul O’Neil
Blantyre
Steamers on the
lakes
Coal at Rovuma
Ancient ruins
French on the
Ogowe


De Brassa
Lieut. Giraud
Congo flows
through Lake
Bangweolo
Kiwauda
Mirambo
Lieut. Giraud a
prisoner—lie es-
caped at night.
Luapula River
Kazembi
Jendwe
German African
Society
the Ogovve, to shorten the route to the Alima, and upon this river he
launched a small steamer, of whieft we hope to hear more hereafter.
De Brassa reached Paris on 18th November, 1885, and he gave
glowing accounts of the prosperity of the French possessions in the
Congo. “ The whites and natives,” he stated, are on the best of
terms. “The germs of a definite organisation had been formed,”
whilst natives were being recruited to form an army.
The explorations of Lieutenant Giraud, of the French Navy,
take rank amongst the most important adventures of recent days
in Africa.
Lieutenant Giraud has chiefly been distinguished by his hardy
and hazardous journey to Lake Bangweolo, of which he has given
delineations, differing widely from those originally given by
Livingstone. He also traced the Luapula and disentangled a good
deal of what was but confusedly known of Lake Bangweolo and the
country below it, towards the real sources of the Congo, which flow
through the Lake Bangweolo.
In December, 1882, Lieutenant Giraud reached the northern
extremity of Lake Nyassa ; by an entirely new route he then
ascended to Kiwanda. Then he struck off to the south-west and
found the Lake Bangweolo ; he launched his boat thereon, and forced
his way through swamps swarming with antelopes. The Luapula
leaves the lake at Kiwanda. He experienced great difficulty in
making any progress through the gigantic rushes on the barnks of
the river. After considerable toil he emerged from these difficulties
and reached the river, where the banks were dry and wooded.
An army was sent to arrest his progress. With only eight men
he commenced a running fight, but was at length compelled to
surrender, and he was taken to the great Chief Mirambo a prisoner.
There he saw large stores of ivory accumulated. There were no
purchasers, owing to the wars in which the King was engaged with
the neighbouring tribes.
By them the usual caravans were prevented visiting the country,
as was their custom. .
After a tedious detention, in daily fear of being murdered by Ins
savage jailor, and when his conduct became quite unbearable, the
gallant officer escaped at night when the fear of wild animals con-
fined the inhabitants to their tents.
He struck the Luapula, and after a very perilous journey he
reached Kazembi, where he had left his depot and caravan.
Here fresh troubles awaited him. Again he was compelled to fight
his way through hostile tribes, but at last reached Jendwe, on the
Tanganyika, a friendly missionary station. He was thoroughly
exhausted on arrival, and nee ied the hospitality which was
generously extended to him. The country he had lately passed
through was suffering from famine to such an extent that grass-
hoppers were being collected by the natives for food, and many had
died of hunger.
Here his carriers deserted him, and he was obliged to fall back on
Lake Nyassa, where friendly stations were established.
His explorations were now ended. They have resulted in
materially important additions to our geographical, knowledge,
especially as regards Lake Bangweolo, the true position of which
he correctly laid down, and he confirmed the statements of Messrs.
Capillo and Ivens that a large portion of Lake Bangweolo is a marsh
connecting two other lakes lying north and south of it.
The German African Society have been seriously and successfully
occupied in explorations on the Continent of Africa.


The brothers Denbardt, on the N.E. of Africa, have followed up
the explorations of Mr. Thomson in that country, but as yet we do
not precisely know with what success. One of the most interesting
and difficult feats of African travel has been performed by two
brothers, F. L. and W. D. James, both skilled African explorers.
With their companions, they organised an expedition, and, crossing
the north-eastern angle of Africa, from Berbera to Mogadore, they
penetrated to the south through the Somali tribes to Bani on the
River Webbe, 215 miles distant from Mogadore. Heretofore the
Somalis have placed invincible obstacles to the exploration of their
country. These have now been for the first time removed, and a
wide region of new country has been opened out to the world.
The old Calabar or Cross River, ancient scenes of exploration on
the west coast of Africa, and once a principal seat of the slave
trade, has been ascended by the Rev. Hugh Goldie. He gives us
some interesting information regarding the people now released from
the dread of slavery, and industriously cultivating their country and
adopting Christianity.
The Galla countries were visited by a German expedition, well
organised, which set out from Zugla, on the Gulf of Aden. Passing
through a portion of the Somali country, they reached Heraz and
the Galla countries. This expedition has furnished much useful
information on geography, and the explorers describe a very extra-
ordinary country and people hitherto unknown, except to Arab
traders.
In the Mapanga country in the Cameroons, 20 square miles of
country have been purchased and occupied recently by some Swedish
merchants. The climate, they state, is good, and the land fertile,
yielding corn, coffee, sugar, rice, and Indian rubber in large
quantities.
An Austrian expedition has ascended the Cameroons River, and
visited Liberia and Akkra. An interesting report is furnished of the
present conditions of these countries and of the missionary labours
being carried on therein.
Again, on the west coast of Africa, a French traveller, M. Leon
Guiral, explored the San Benito River, lying 70 miles north o
Gabon. The river is navigable only for about 22 miles from its
mouth ; it flows through a portion of western equatorial Africa.
The home of the cannibal Fans and the gorilla is but very
little known. M. Guiral performed his journey almost wholly by
land. He reached Lake Ediba, a small lake but 87 miles from the
coast. He found at this place that war was being waged between
certain tribes on his route, and this rendered his further progress
impossible. He therefore returned to the coast. M. Guiral was
probably the only white man who had ever penetrated so far up the
River San Benito, and he was the only white man ever seen by the
aged chief, Nyombe.
The Nyassa region has been explored recently by Mr. Goodrich,
Acting-Consul for the country. He reached the west side of the
lake. He was kindly received by the inhabitants, as is ever the case
in Africa where Livingstone has been—the only previous white
visitor. Mr. Goodrich’s chief object was to wean the chiefs from
slave trade. A large portion of the country he passed through from
Badawe to Kasungo was entirely uninhabited, but abounded in
game. The chiefs expressed themselves as anxious to see English
traders in their midst, and Kalami, the paramount chief, offered to
sell to Mr. Goodrich 100 tusks. The soil is good, and grass abundant.
The tsetse fly does not exist, and cattle thrive.
Brothers Den-
bardt
Brothers James
Somali country
Eev H Goldie
Galla country
Mapanga coun-
Swedish
purctLase
Austrian expe-
dition
M. Guiral
River Gabon
Pans and gorilla
San Benito
Chief Nyombe
Mr. Goodrich
Prom Badawe
to Kasungo
Kalami


Richards
Limpopo
Umzila
For savages and
gorillas
Dr. Pelkin
Darfur
Religion
Lying
Major Servia
Pinto
St. Paolo di
Loanda
Dr. Aurel
Schulz
Chobe River
Kubano-o
Ngami
An American missionary, Mr. E. H. Richards, has accomplished
a journey in East Central Africa, which merits mention here.
The chief object of his mission was to discover as much as
possible of a Zulu speaking people said to exist on the Limpopo,
and to be subject to Umzila, a chief of great power in a large
district in East Africa. Mr. Richards describes several tribes
through which he had travelled, and he tells us that they are so
frequently robbed by Umzilan soldiers that they live chiefly on wild
fruits rather than attempt to cultivate. Many lakes were dis-
covered, and the Limpopo was the recipient of the overflow of these
lakes.
He passed through the watershed between the sea and the
Limpopo, on his return journey, and this country, situated 57 miles
from the sea and 78 from the Limpopo, he described as inhabited by
an industrious people, possessing cattle and sheep and large gardens.
He does not appear to have found a Zulu people, although remnants
of a Zulu race left behind at the time of the invasion of East Africa
by that wonderful tribe are still extant. Geographically and
ethnologically the journey was highly interesting, and added much
to our knowledge of the country.
The For tribe of Central Africa have recently been brought into
notice by Doctor Robert William Eelkin.
They are a race of pure negroes and are the most northerly tribe
in the eastern part of Central Africa, and number about 1J
millions. The social condition of the people is of considerable
importance and interest. An advanced stage of civilization has
already been reached by these pure negroes. Although the women
constantly associate with the men in all daily pursuits, they are
considered as quite inferior beings. They are nevertheless good
mothers, and bring up their children in strict discipline, never
sparing the rod to spoil the child.
Porridge is a favourite food and is eaten with the hand.
There appears to be no idolatry in Darfur, the country they
inhabit, but one God is acknowledged, Mola by name, and he is sup-
posed to live in the sky, and is worshipped.
They have peculiar marriage customs, savouring much of civilized
customs, and crime is singularly rare amongst them.
Wilful homicide is punished with death, and suicide is unknown in
Darfur.
Lying is held to be a great crime. The youngest children are
beaten for it. Anyone over 15 or 16 who is an habitual liar suffers
the loss of one lip as a penalty.
The failure of the mission of Major Servia Pinto has recently
been reported. He had proved himself to be a talented, brave and
determined explorer. He had crossed the continent from St. Paolo
di Loanda on the Atlantic, to Durban in Natal, on the Indian Ocean,
at a cost of £6,000. This expedition was fitted out in Portugual,
and Major Pinto was placed in command of it, with a view to
explore the Nyassa territory, already visited by the English consul,
O’Neil.
The immediate cause of his failure was the desertion of his
carriers, and his own illness.
Dr. Aurel Schulz, son of a German colonist in Natal, has quite
lately returned from a successful journey into the interior.
He advanced up the Chobe for a considerable distance, thence
proceeded to Kubango, and returned to Natal by way of Lake
Ngami, and the Transvaal.
On the Rubango, which flows into the Zambesi, a very strange tribe
called the Marubo was discovered. They are well built, stalwart


men, very aquatic in their habits, and corn growers to a large extent.
They have a singular horror of shedding blood, and the Chief
Khama will not permit alcohol in any shape within his dominions.
Dr. Hugh Zoller writes an interesting account of his ascent of :
the Betanga or Moanya river in the German Cameroon territory, on
the west coast of Africa, and which flows into the Bight of Biafra.
He found a considerable stream, which had only been explored for
a short distance. He halted at King Zopiti’s town, and took with
him thence his son as a guide and interpreter.
They experienced much difficulty in advancing up the river, but
by promises, firmness, and a display of firearms they managed to
traverse a considerable territory called the Bakoko, which had never
before been visited by white men.
He does not speak unfavourably of the inhabitants, and they con-
ducted him to a picturesque waterfall about equal to two-thirds of
the 1 thine at Schaffhausen.
The river is reported to run far inland, in an east-north-east
direction.
Much time has been occupied in treating of Africa, yet I have
only selected the most important journies or explorations, and have
spread them over the whole of the vast continent, north, south,
east, and west, thus affording proof that during the last year
explorers of all nations have visited Africa, and, thirsting for
geographical knowledge, regardless of all dangers and sickness, they
have found their way into many regions heretofore unknown, and
made discoveries of incalculable importance, not alone in a scientific
point of view but also as regards the future of Africa and its
civilization.
There is a greed for the acquisition of territory on the African
continent apparently pervading all nations, and we invariably find
that the means adopted to satisfy this greed are through the agency
of geography. The geographer and explorer take the lead, and are
rapidly followed by commerce and a civilized form of government.
Thus is Africa destined to throw off savagedom, and assuming the
garb of civilization and Christianity, it must then become a large
and important consumer of European manufactured goods.
The same sound system is being silently and imperceptibly, as it
were, followed out as regards New Guinea. One great result of the
enploratory expedition to New Guinea and the gallant and rapid
•advance of the rescue expedition from Thursday Island has been to
make the Fly river perfectly safe in the future for settlement. The
natives have now learnt that the white man has protection near at
hand, and that it will be promptly utilised.
Neither time or space will permit me to dwell further on African
explorations. A reference to the proceedings of our Royal
Geographical Society, the Scottish Geographical Magazine, or the
Bulletin de le Societe de Geographic, de Marseille, from which I
have collected a great part of my information, will always
serve to furnish any knowledge which may be required regarding
African or other geographical discoveries or explorations.
I shall, I trust, be pardoned if before I proceed to other subjects
I very briefly summarise for general information “The Congo,” as
described by Stanley. A very necessary knowledge may thereby be
acquired by those who really are interested in the wonderful
events now passing on the Congo and throughout Africa, implanting
therein the germs of changes greater even than we dare as yet
to imagine.
Kliama
Dr. Hugh Zoller
Betanga
Bight of Biafra
Zopiti’s town
Bakoko
j^ ue
Schauffhausen
Selection made
Settlement of
New Guinea
Stanley on
Congo


Extent of Congo
Vivi
Imangila
Manyanga
Leopoldville
Livingstone
Falls
Nyangwe
Nevern
Chibali Hills
Chambesi
Bailway
Australian
markets
Geo'wa ikei-s
eo„itip eis
Burmah area
Produce
1 The Congo River is over 3000 statute miles in length, measured as
follows :
From the Atlantic Ocean to the Station of Yivi 110 miles navig-
able, thence upwards to Imangila 50 miles, and another 88 fairly
navigable miles to Manyanga, thence to Leopoldville, another 85
miles passing through upper series of Livingstone Falls.
From Leopolds ville to Stanley Falls we have 1068 navigable miles
in a splendid waterway. From the lowest fall to Nyangwe, there
is a stretch of 385 miles, and from Nyangwe to Mwera the river
course extends 440 miles. Thence to Bangweolo is 220 miles.
The length of Lake Nevern is 67 miles.
This lake is 161 miles long. From there to the sources of the
Congo in the Chibali Hills, the Chambesi has a length of 360
miles, making a total of 3,034 miles.
The superficial area drained by the various tributaries exceeds
2,009,000 square statute miles, and into this civilization has found
direct navigable excess by steam over 5,250 miles.
This was written before the discoveries herein related of Messrs.
Grenfell and Comber had been made. These must increase much the
figures above given.
The population is estimated at 42 millions. The navigable rivers
are 7,250 miles (excluding the discoveries of Messrs. Grenfell and
Comber), and the area of the lakes 35,694 square miles exclud-
ing the above discoveries and many others recently made, as I have
related herein. At a cost of £940,000, raised in the London market,
a railway is in course of construction between Yivi and
Leopoldville, a distance of 235 miles, to connect the Lower with the
Upper Congo. And on January Ist, 1886, the Congo Free State
was permitted to enter the Postal Union. I may add that a national
flag has been adopted by this great free State, with the full consent
of the maritime Powers of Europe, and entirely recognised by them.
Australians ought indeed to rejoice at the market now being
opened up, where least expected, for their wools and other produce,
thus verifying the well-known proverb that nothing is more
certain than the unexpected.
1 shall point out hereafter that other vast, even unlimited markets,
are opening out at “ Burmah ” by opening the land routes of South-
Western China, hitherto closed to European commerce.
And I quite believe that these two great events will be found to
exercise a very great influence in restoring commercial prosperity to
Australia, and providing to her a demand for her products quite,
equal to all she can supply.
We owe a great deal to geography and to geographers for these
rich acquisitions to the Australian colonies. In both cases
geographical explorers paved the way to commercial success. In
Burmah this has been eventually obtained by force of arms. In
Africa, although arms were resorted to when needful, commerce
has been introduced, and civilization has made its way under
the influence of milder measures, and a spirit of mercy and
conciliation.
Burmah has a length of 540 miles, a breadth of 420 miles, an
area of 190,500 square miles. The manufactures are chiefly of
cotton, silk and iron. The country is fertile, and the forests pro-
duce a great variety of valuable timber trees, rice, maize, wheat,
pulse, indigo, cotton and tobacco are grown to a considerable
extent ; also fruit trees in great variety. Iron is found in large
quantities, coal only in small quantities, while tin, copper, plum-
bago, gold, silver, bismuth, jade and other minerals exist, as also
petroleum.


The chief exports from Burmah are petroleum, nitre, lacquer
ware, hides, sepanium seed and oil, cotten, raw sugar, grain, ]ade
and tamarisks. The chief imports are rice, silk, salt, metals,
pickled and dried fish, foreign commodities from British Burmah,
Europe and elsewhere, especially cotton and wollen goods.
Formerly there was a great trade with China, but recently this has
This rich country is now annexed to British India, and we cannot
well over rate the importance of the advantages we shall derive from
opening up to European commerce not only Burmah, “nt the
Chinese Empire, for we are assured on very high authority that
this end an understanding exists between the Chinese Govermen
and our own. , t t
To the geographical explorers Margary, who penetrated far into
China, and lost his life on his return journey, and to poor Gill, since
dead, and Mr. Colquhoun, who, with great intrepidity, journeyed
through Burmah and South-Western China, and Hallett, who laid
down a railway system which will not improbably be, at least,
partially adopted, we are indebted very largely for the rent vidi via,
manner in which the conquest of Burmah has been accomplished
We have nothing comparable to it in the annals of our Mars. L
explorers had mapped down and studied, and learnt the whole country
so carefully, and so accurately, that our army dashed into the heart ol
the country with the utmost confidence, and Mandalay, the capital,
was in our power, the king was shipped to an Indian fort, and the
people were at our feet before they had time to recover from their
first surprise. It was a grand feat of arms, and redounoed large y
to the glory of the British nation, and secured to us an unlimited
market for our manufactured goods.
Mr. Hallett, a civil engineer, surveyed a path for a railway in-
tended to connect India and China the two most populous empires in
the world, and speaking of our conquest of Upper Burmah he
says : “We are now placed in such a position that no political
hindrance remains to our driving the iron horse up to the gates
of China, and opening up to our trade the western provinces of
that rich and populous empire.” We now stand upon the first
stepping stone to the vast Indo-Chinese region, whose trade is a
prize coveted by all Europe. This must now be ours for generations
to come, and the value of this great acquisition is actually of more
importance to the Australian colonies than to the mother country.
It is a merciful interposition of Providence that it has come at such
a time. Foreign intrigues and foreign arms threatened our interests,
and the near neighbourhood of a European rival m Burmah would
have been intolerable, therefore the annexation of the kingdom was
forced upon us, and we are already amply recouped for our losses
and expenses. Besides, we had learnt by experience, that, by
. annexation alone could we ever hope to make the third Burmese
war the last. . , . - ,
Four Artie expeditions are said to be projected for next yea
two in Portugal, one in Holland, one in Denmark. They all pro-
pose to visit the islands of the glacial ocean, which belong to Russia,
but the Danish expedition will specially explore the Kara sea and
the northern waste of Siberia. An interesting description took
olace on October 19th at the United States Naval Institute at
Annapolis, on the subject of Arctic exploration. Amongst others
Lieutenant Greely was present. The tenor of the description
was against any further Arctic expeditions being undertaken
iiist now by either the United States or England, and the
meeting wound up not inaptly by recording an opinion
X P°’ *
Annexation
Explorers
Hallett railway
Arctic


Greely, rescue
of
H.M.S. “Alert”
Stalknecht
Discovery of
party
Lieut. Colwell
Long found and
spoken to
“ that the crown of the sphere shall he left to solitude and
the auroras, while science with her questions and man with his
ambitions co-exist upon this planet is a proposition requiring no
refutation.”
I am unwilling to close the subject of Arctic exploration without
relating here the thrilling story of the rescue of Lieutenant Greeley,
which has only recently been published in the monthly record of the
Scottish Geographical Society :—“On 7th July, 1881, Lieutenant
Greeley, with his command, left the port of St. John’s on board the
Proteus, fully equipped for a protracted Arctic exploration. They
reached Fort Conger on August 12th. There the party disembarked
and unloaded their vessel, which set sail on her homeward voyage,
leaving the gallant band of explorers to accomplish the task they had
undertaken. Relief expeditions were sent out in 1882-1883, and
most careful preparations had been made to establish caches at
fixed places, and to provide, as best possible against all eventualities.
For the second expedition Her Majesty’s Government placed
the Alert at the disposal of the United States Government.
She was a well-tried Arctic ship in Sir G. Nare’s Arctic explorations.
The other two ships forming this second expedition were the
Thetis and the Bear. These vessels proceeded in company
through the gateway of the Polar Sea. Many dangers and
difficulties were encountered and overcome ; but for these they were
more than rewarded, when eventually, on Stalknecht Island, they
discovered a cairn which had been erected by Greely. You may
easily imagine how quickly and eagerly the papers were turned over
and read aloud ; all at first was joy, but it was soon discovered with
horror that the latest date borne by any paper was October the Ist,
1883, and that but 40 days’ complete rations were then left to live
upon. Eight months had elapsed since October, and the belief
forced itself upon the whole relief party that the unfortunate
explorers must have perished during the terrible period of waiting
and watching for succour. A wonderful story was related in these
papers. In very desperation prompt steps were taken to ascertain
where was Greely’s party. A cutter was started under command of
Lieut. Colwell, an experienced Arctic sailor, and he was directed to
search for the explorers, and if any found alive, to tell them relief
was close at hand. The story of the rescue is very movingly de-
scribed. Colwell started on his mission of mercy. He steamed past
Cape Sabine and reached the scene of the wreck of the Proteus two
years before. Onward he went in a pitiless storm, eagerly scanning
every nook and bay—the long sweep of the rocky coast withits ice foot
spanning every cove, the snow gathered in the crevices, the project-
ing headlands, and the line of the ill pack which had ground up the
Proteus dimly seen in the mists to the north, across the tossing
waters of the Kana sea. At last the cutter rounding a point, opened
out a cove beyond. There, in a little ridge fifty or sixty yards above
the ice foot was planly outlined the figure of a man. He came
tottering down the steep and rocky slope, falling down at times.
Colwell jumped on shore and met the man. He was a ghastly sight;
his cheeks were hollow, his eyes wild, his hair and beard long and
matted, his utterance was thick and mumbling. He told the rescue
party that there were seven left of the exploring party. This un-
fortunate man, Long by name, was taken into the cutter and
cared for, and Colwell, with two of his crew, having filled their
pockets with food, started to find the rest of the sufferers.
They were soon found in a tent to which there was no en-
trance except under the flap opening, which was held down by
stones. Colwell called for a knife, cut a slit in the tent-cover, and


looked in. It was a sight of horror. On one side, close to the
opening, with his head towards the outside, lay what was apparently
a dead man. His jaw had dropped, his eyes were open, but fixed
and glassy ; his limbs were motionless. On the opposite side was a
poor fellow, alive, to be sure, but without hands or feet, and with a
spoon tied to the stump of his right arm. Two others, seated on
the ground in the middle, had just got down a rubber bottle that
hung on the tent-pole, and were pouring from it into a tin can.
Directly opposite, on his hands and knees, was a dark man, with a
long matted beard, in a dirty and tattered dressing-gown, with a
little red skull cap on his head, and brilliant, staring eyes. As
Colwell appeared, he raised himself a little, and put on a pair ot
eye-glasses. ‘Who are you?’ asked Colwell. The man made no
answer, staring at him vacantly. ‘ Who are you, again ? One of
the men spoke up—‘ That is the Major—Major Greely. Colwell
crawled in and took him by the hand, saying to him, ‘ Greely, is
this you ?’ ‘ Yes,’ said Greely, in a faint, broken voice, hesitating
and shuffling with his words. ‘ Yes; seven of us left; here we are,
dying like men ; did what I came to do—beat the best record.
Then he fell back exhausted.” . , ~ ...
The life of Lieut. Greely hung upon a hair for a long time, but he
recovered eventually, and has already lectured several times on the
wonderful rescue of himself and those few who shared in his good
f °ln America several important explorations are on foot, notably as
° Lieut. Henry Allen, U.S. Army, ascended the Copper
River until he reached the Alaska chain of mountains. These he
crossed over in snow-shoes up to the source of the River lennah.
He descended this river for 800 miles, to its junction with the
Yucon, the great northern river. This last he followed down to its
mouth, a distance of nearly 500 miles from its joining the Tennah.
Lieut. Allen then proceeded to Fort Michel, in Behring b traits,
where he embarked on board the steamer Corwin, and returned
home. When Alaska belonged to the Russians they made several
ineffectual attempts to explore the rivers Tennah and Yucon. The
Americans also have made similar fruitless attempts. Lieut. Allen
had for his companions a sergeant, an officer, and a few Indians.
Lieut. George Storey, U.S. Army, has made some good explora-
tions in Alaska, adding much to our geographical knowledge ot the
C °From France an expedition has been sent to the Orinoco, chiefly
to study the river systems of that region, and especially to ascertain
how water communication is kept up between the Amazon and
Orinoco by the channel of the Cassaquari River, a question never yet
solved by any traveller. .. , , .
In North America, at that point where the respective boundaries
of Brazil, Yenezula, and British Guiana meet, there stands a
wonderful mountain called Roraima, hitherto deemed inaccessible.
It has excited great interest amongst scientific men. home hall-
dozen men have reached its foot, only to return with renewed stories
of the wonder and its inaccessibility. .
Everard Finn Thurn has successfully accomplished the impossible,
and has reached the summit of the mountain. He gives a long de-
scription of his journey and his discoveries, far too long even to be
summarised here. “ His difficulty lay not so much in the height of
the mountain, which is but 5000 feet from the level of the plain,
from which it rises, but its extraordinary formation and apparent
inaccessibility. To understand this latter he tells us to imagine a
Discovery of
Greely in tent
Alaska
Lieut. Allen,
U.S. Army
Tennah and
Yucon
Lieut. Storey,
U.S. Army
Orinoco
Cassaquari
Roranna
Finn Tliuru


Asia Ifinor
Himalayas
Kaliin, Sikkim
Dunagiri, Guib-
wal
Krishna
Saupo
flat topped pillar itself some 2500 feet in height, set on a very
steeply-sloped truncated cone of another 2500 feet in height, or
rather first imagine a flat-topped mason wrought pillar but 2o feet
in height, set on a steeply-sloping pediment of another 25 feet. It
would be rather difficult if unaided by ropes or mechanical appli-
ances to ascend that pillar— much more difficult than did it seem to
ascend the natural pillar in all some 5000 feet in height, formed, by
Roraima, and even yet more difficult did this feat seem when it is
remembered that the sloping base on which stands the pillar-like
portion of Roraima is over the greater part of its surface rendered
but just barely passable, by reason of a complete covering of huge
boulders and rocks such as would present the appearance of an
enormously magnified moraine, and that it is clothed, obscured, and
rendered yet more impassable by one of the densest and most tangled
forests to be found even in the tropics.” Thurn was well repaid for
his severe trial and success by the magnificence of the scene which
lay before him as he stood on the summit of Roraima, where man
had never before placed a foot. The whole is graphically described
by the traveller, but it cannot be entered upon here.
Since last I had the honour of addressing our Geographical Society,
the railway has been completed through British territory in North
America from the Atlantic to the Pacific, and it is proposed to
establish a line of steamers from the Pacific terminus to Australia.
Even a telegraph wire is spoken of as likely to be laid ere long
between those two points.
The classic lands of Asia Minor are once more being explored.
The cost is defrayed by private subscripton. Mr. W. M. Pamsay is
entrusted with the execution of the scheme, which is to throw some
fresh light on the antiquities and early history of the region. As a
preliminary labour it became necessary to compile a topographical
map before it was possible to study up the history of Asia Minor.
This work was so well carried out during the first year that the
scheme was supported by the Royal Geographical Society and the
Ottoman Railway Company. The antiquarian and historical results
of the second year’s work induced the Society for the Promotion of
Hellenic Studies and the Society of Antiquaries further to aid the
fund. In the summer of 1884 Mr. and Mrs. Ramsay travelled
through the western parts of the central plateau of Anatolia. 1 hey
took many photographs of ancient monuments and buildings of high
interest, and by the end of the second year Mr. Ramsay was able to
prepare a magnetic map of the whole of ancient Phrygia with the
border districts of Pamphylia. Pisidia, Lydia and Galatia. I need
not remind you how deeply interesting to both the. scientist and the
scholar must be the carrying out of this well-conceived scheme.. In
Asia, including India, geographical researches are being actively
carried on, and they cannot be passed over in silence.
Mr. Graham, an Alpine climber of note, has attracted considerable
attention by his account of his assent of certain peaks in the Hima-
layas. He reached within 80 feet of the summit of Mount Kabin, in
Bikkim, 24,035 feet, and within 500 feet of the summit of Dunagiri,
22,700 feet, in Guihwal.
The Pundit Krishna, to whom I referred at some length in a
previous address, has solved an important question regarding the
course of the Banpo River, which positively is not, as was once sup-
posed, the upper stream of the Irrawadi. This has been brought to
light by the rectifications made in the map originally published with
the report of the Pundit’s survey.
To give you a right idea of the importance of the work performed,
and still being performed by the British Afghan Boundary Commis-


sion, I will quote from Lord Aberdare’s address to the Royal Geo-
graphical Society at the anniversary meeting of June Bth, 1885: -
“ Whatever else may result from this great political dispute, a great
gain has accrued to our geographical knowledge of the region. The
preliminary map sent home by Major Holdich rectifies, in many
important points, the erroneous topography in all pre-existing maps,
and gives us a clear idea of the surface configuration and physical
condition of one of the most interesting districts in Central Asia.
As far as regards the Upper Murghab Major Holdich’s information
is in advance of that derived from Russian resources, but with
regard to the Lower Murghab and the oases of Merv and Sarakhs, and
the intervening descent, we are dependent solely on the Russian
work. M. 1 essar has generously submitted to the Society copies of
maps, the result of a topographical survey of the region by a party
of Russian officers extending over a period of twelve months.’’ From
other sources we learn that a map of the Merv oasis has been care-
fully prepared, showing the extent of the oasis to be 2,500 square
miles.
The indefatigable Colonel Prijevalsky actively continues his explo-
rations. Lately he has been heard from, having explored the
sources of the .Hohang Ho and the Upper Yangtze. Thence he turned
north-west and visited Western Tasidam, crossing a previously
unknown middle range of the Kuen Lun, and the ancient route
leading to China. He purposes traversing Northern Tibet, and then
returning to Russian Turkestan.
The Russians have been busily exploring the Ural mountains,
chiefly with a view to discover a pass to facilitate a communication
with the large river Petchora and the Obi, which is considered a
great artery in Siberia.
It may be mentioned here that in the Scotch Geographical Magazine
most interesting notes are recorded of geographical discoveries and
explorations throughout Asia, especially India. A few only have
been selected as likely to be the most interesting to the audience.
Accounts are also given of the many small expeditions fitted out in
America, and returning home with knowledge and information con-
stituting highly valuable additions to our geographical and scientific
knowledge of places and people, but seldom reached by civilisation.
From these also I have to be contented with only a selection. The
spirit of inquiry is indeed abroad, and to no science is it so
thoroughly directed as to geography, in proof of which one may
adduce the painful and protracted hardships endured by brave
geographical explorers all over the world, in their efforts to satiate
their thirst for knowledge, and to add their acquisitions to the great
general store already in their possession, and added to every day.
Our own country, Australia, has but little to add in the way of
exploration. Mr. Lindsay has been out now, with a well-provided
party, for nearly one year. His mission was to trace the final course of
the Finke River, and to ascertain whether in times of high flood its
overflow reached Lake Eyre, or becomes lost in the sandy waste
which stretches from latitude 22 deg. to 28 deg. south. He was
also to determine the western extension of this sandy waste, for it
has not been once explored since J. M‘Dowall Stuart first discovered
that important watercourse. His instructions were to make every
possible search for the unfortunate Leichhardt and his party. Some
men were sanguine enough to hope that some relic might yet be
recovered of this lost party—a shred even of clothing, a button, a
spoon, something of metal, or even a bone, to set at rest the question
of where the party perished. The whole probabilities weie
exhaustively and clearly explained by the very worthy and learned
Holdich
M. Lessai-
Merv
Prijevalsky
Hohang Ho <
Yangtze
Tasidam
Kuen Lun
Lindsay
Finke
Leichhardt


Baron von
Mueller
Dalhousie
Macumba
Stockdale
Mr. Hardman
Gold discov-
eries
Future explora-
tions
G v ,
study of ’
Keltie’s report
and opinions
President of the Victorian branch of the Geographical Society, Baron
von Mueller, K.C.M.G., in his recent annual address. So far his
hopes have not been realised, and I must admit that I am one of
those who despair of ever solving the mystery of the fate of the
Leichhardt party. We have recently received news of Mr. Lindsay.
It is so far of a satisfactory nature, that all was going on well with
his exploring party. He had gained fresh and useful knowledge of
the Finke River. He states that the River Finke loses itself in the
sandhills east-north-east of Dalhousie, but at times of very high
flood the surplus waters reach Spring Creek Flat, and thence
reaching Macumba, they flood out into large box flats. He found
many waterholes and a well-grassed country, but he had not
succeeded in finding any traces of Leichhardt.
Mr. Stockdale has returned to Cambridge Gulf twice during the
last ten months, and he confirms all his previous statements of the
six magnificent rivers which he discovered between Cambridge Gulf
and Prince Leopold Range. Rich goldfields are stated to have been
recently discovered, precisely where indicated by that skilful geo-
logist, Mr. Hardman, last year. He directed attention to the
Margaret-Panton and Orde Rivers, and miners are now at work
there, finding rich returns. If all accounts received be correct, there
certainly is a great future in store for the rich, fertile, and well-
watered country of which we are speaking. Other explorations are
being spoken of, and are only deferred on account of drought and a
difficulty in obtaining what are the sinews of exploration as well as
of war.
I shall be disappointed indeed, if, when the country has resumed
its normal state of prosperity, some one at least of the important
fields of exploration in our inland continent are not entered upon.
But it may very truly be said of Australia that exploration is per-
petually going forward, carried on now by a small party of
adventurous squatters in search of fresh fields or water courses, and
again by the hardy, intelligent stock drivers, or boundary riders, or
mineral prospectors.
It has already been stated in a previous address that the Times
and the Royal Geographical Society had taken up the question of
improving the geographical education of students, by the establish-
ment of either lectureships or professorships in our Universities.
The idea has taken deep root at home, and efforts are being made
to promote the study of geography in our schools and colleges. An
inspector has been appointed to enquire into, and report upon the
state of geographical education, both at home and abroad.
Mr. Scott Keltie was appointed. He has completed his report,
and has submitted it to the Royal Geographical Society. Up to the
end of December, 1885, it has not been made public, but it is known
that it contains statements and recommendations of high interest and
importance. Of the state of geographical education in Great Britain
Mr. Scott Keltie draws a very miserable picture, and quite the
reverse as regards Germany, France, Italy, Switzerland, and several
other European countries. Germany takes the lead ; a systematic
study of geography prevails in 12 out of 20 universities. It is
sought to establish a continuous course of geographical instruction
from the youngest school year up to the university. A new spirit
has been infused into the intelligent German people by what we may
now call national studies in Germany. Every month almost brings
with it news of some additional territory acquired by the Germans,
and, pari passu, with the acquisition of territory their commerce is
extend ng. In those States in Europe which we have mentioned
Mr. Keltie tells us that the geographical curriculum is defined and


insisted upon by the State, which, being master of the purse strings,
dictates the course of instruction. We have no such power over our
schools or universities; we must therefore wait to enlist public
opinion in our good cause. Through this agency we must hope that
it may be made apparent to our educational authorities that Great
Britain must not be permitted to become inferior in education and
geographical knowledge to our political and commercial rivals.
Mr. Keltie has brought with him an exhibition of great practical
value. “He has collected specimens of the best text books, maps,
globes, diagrams, models, and other apparatus used in teaching
the various branches of geography, physical, political, and
historical.” Spacious galleries have been hired to contain this
exhibition at 53 Great Marlborough-street. This will be opened to
the public in due course by the Marquis of Lome, now president of
the Royal Geographical Society. Meantime, the council of our
Society has abandoned their system of geographical prizes, offered
annually for competition to the chief public schools, and in lieu
thereof a substitute will be adopted in keeping with Mr. Keltie’s
report. I cannot well exaggerate the large amount of public interest
which has been awakened regarding the geographical education of
public school students. I have written home for a copy of Mr.
Keltie’s report. When received, I shall hope to make it the subject
of a special public lecture, and I hope also at the same time to give
an account of the opening of the exhibition in Marlborough-street.
PuHic opilliou


OBITUARY.
Seratcklev
It is my painful duty to record the death of a gallant
and accomplished soldier in the person of Major-General
Sir PeterScratchley, HighCommissionerin New Guinea.
He was the true type of an admirable kind of official.
He proved himself a brave and excellent soldier and a
wise administrator. He had been always actively and
usefully employed either in the army or on colonial
service, and he had always acquitted himself highly,
honourably, and to the entire satisfaction of his
superiors. His appointment to New Guinea was in
all respects a prudent and wise one. He threw himself
into his work with his usual earnestness, and although
not a Fellow of our society, he extended to us the
hand of friendship, and strained every point possible to
him to advance our interests. To Mr. Forbes he was
generously and fraternally kind. He leaves many to
mourn his loss, both in the army and in the colonies,
where he was so well known and so highly re
spected.




