

ANTARCTIC EXPLORATION.
Baron Nordenskiold’s proposal for further Antarctic Exploration.
With Notes on the same by Alfred J. Taylor.
Those who take an interest in the
question of Antarctic Exploration, and
among whom may be included, I trust,
every Fellow of the Royal Society of
Tasmaniaj will be glad to know that
something practical is likely to be done
this year towards solving the many
questions of scientific interest, the
answers to which have hitherto re-
mained locked up in the “ unexplored
wastes beyond the Antarctic Circle.”
Proposals have been made for further
exploration, in defraying the cost of
which the Australian colonies are invited
to co-operate,andasthe amount required
is considerably below the sum pre-
viously asked for, I have little fear
that the colonies will stand out of an
arrangement that will give them a share
in the glory that must attach to such
an expedition as this.
In order that the nature of the pro-
posals referred to may be fully under-
stood, I feel that I cannot do better
than give the words of Baron Norden-
skiold as they were delivered before
the Royal Swedish Society of Science
at Stockholm on January 8 last.
The address was as follows :
“ As the members of the society may
remember, the society has lately for-
warded a letter from His Excellency the
Foreign Minister, to Baron Dixon and
myself. In this, the Minister fur-
nishes the society with a reprint of a
speech delivered by Baron Ferdinand
von Mueller, on the 2nd of September,
1889, before the Royal Geographical
Society of Australasia, in which,
amongst other things, it is said that
the expedition to the Antarctic Seas
planned by the said society, had not
been realised on account of the want of
a suitable vessel. In addition, the
Minister’s letter partly gives an extract
from a letter from the consul in Vic-
toria, saying, or suggesting, that an ex-
pedition formed jointly by Sweden and
Victoria might expect a subsidy of
£5,000 from the Australasian Royal
Geographical Society.
“In connection with this I beg to
call your attention to the fact, that
already in 1887 I received a letter from
the Agent-General for Victoria, giving
a programme for a similar expedition
planned by the Antarctic Exploration
Committee of the Royal Society of Vic-
toria, and also a telegram from the
same committee, of the following con-
tents, dated Melbourne, May 9, 1887 :
‘ Antarctic. —Communicate direct with
Baron Nordenskiold. Would he feel
disposed to co-operate local society*
each furnishing one vessel, Baron Nor-
denskiold commanding? If so, what
conditions ? Could he be here by Octo-
ber 1 Our expedition would be com-
mercial as well as scientific. Would
his be the same V
“ I presume that many of the mem-
bers of this academy have been, and
probably still are, of the opinion that
we Norsemen, on account of the geo-
graphical position of our country,
ought to direct our explorations to the
Arctic and not the Antarctic regions*
and that we, in this field at least for
the present, have done our duty, as
the scientific expeditions which have
started from Sweden have more
thoroughly explored these northern
regions, with respect to natural history,
etc., than those from many of the
older countries on whom the duty
might also seem to devolve.
“ Yet I say that just this fact makes
an Antarctic expedition from Sweden
all the more imperatively necessary.
“ Anyone who has himself taken part
in Arctic exploration, or who has even
given a passing thought to or con-
sidered any of the more important
problems in geology, geography,
physical geography, or also in the
science of botany and natural history,
is bound to have met with questions
which could not be solved except by
explorations in the Antarctic regions,
similar to those that with such energy
have been prosecuted year after year
in the far north.




“ It is to be supposed thrt these beds
belong to the miocene period—that is
to say, the same geological period
during which most of the beds contain-
ing botanical fossils in Spitzbergen and
Greenland were formed. As is well
known, these countries had then a rich
and beautiful vegetation even up to the
near neighbourhood of the Pole, very
like the present vegetation of the Italy
of to-day. What like was the flora of
the same period at the South Pole 1
This alone is a question of such im-
mense scientific importance that the
solution of the problem would in itself
be a rich compensation, if no other was
obtained, for even an expensively fitted
out South Polar expedition.
“ Great attention should likewise be
paid to the taking of new observations
with respect to the original formation
of the basalt, which is by no means so
clearly demonstrated as most geologists
seem to think. The members of the
Academy are aware of the fact, that on
several occasions I have given reasons
which tell against the supposition that
the layers of basalt have been formed
through eruptions of glowing melted
lava. Once in Greenland I saw a
phenomenon which, if it had been fully
investigated, would have been of great
assistance in the solving of this question.
Namely, I once met with a thick 1 moja ’
stream, which was slowly rolling down
a steep headland on the north-eastern
coast of the Nuorsoak Peninsula, and
which seemed to come direct from the
basalt mountains. I had great diffi-
culty in crossing this stream, which
consisted of a sticky substance. Only
after returning home my attention was
called to the fact that this substance
when hard, might probably form the
basaltic layers. Such phenomena seem
often to take place in some Antarctic
lands, for instance, Kerguelen Land,
wffiere these streams form a consider-
able obstacle in going from one side of
the island to the other. Here is also a
scientific problem, on which an explor-
ing expedition in the South Polar tracts
ought to be able to throw considerable
light. Of great importance would it
be to procure a collection of ice
dust, which, without doubt, will be
found in the same way to be scattered
over the ice of the South Polar lands as
it is over the inland ice of Greenland.
The scientific cosmography resting on.
real observations, and not only on
cleverly-invented fantastic combina-
tions, ought here to receive valuable
assistance in proving one of its most
vital principles. A number of geo-
detical, hydrographical, meteorological,
earth magnetical, and other geophysi-
cal questions, for the solution of which
very exact and trustworthy observa-
tions in the Antarctic regions are abso-
lutely necessary, must be added to the
list of benefits which should result from
the proposed expedition.
“ The cost of an Antarctic expedition
ought to be as nothing when compared
with the enormous gain to science, or
even —taking into consideration the
supposed richness of the sea in fish and
animals valuable for commercial pur-
poses—when looked at from a purely
practical point of view.
“ When I arrived in Gothenburg I
placed my views before Baron Dickson.
He took great interest in the question,
and after we had talked the matter
over, he declared himself willing to
defray the expenses of a South Polar
expedition, provided that Australia’s
half of the amount, not exceeding
£5,000, was forthcoming, and that the
fitting out of the expedition was to be
under his and my direction.”
It will be within the recollection of
Fellows of the Royal Society that
when the late Mr. C. R. Sprent read a
very able paper on Antarcti c Explora-
tion in September, 1886, the following
resolution was unanimously adopted :
—“ That in the opinion of this Society
it is desirable in the interest of
science and commerce that the explora-
tion of the Antarctic regions should be
continued, and that Tasmania should
co-operate with the other Australian
Colonies in the despatch of an expedi-
tion for that purpose.”
The deputation that afterwards
waited upon the Premier was met
with a suggestion that Parliament
should be asked to vote £1 for every
£l subscribed in aid of Tasmania’s
share of the cost of further exploration.
Personally, the Premier expressed his


“ I therefore thought that the present
occasion which here offered itself to get
together a Swedish Antarctic expedi-
tion ought to be made use of. I con-
sequently went to Gothenburg in order
to get the advice of Baron Dixon about
this (to us at least) so very important
question.
“ With the knowledge I have of his
grand way of taking in the exploration
work in the North, I was convinced
that he would consider the question
from the same standpoint as I did.”
After giving a short resume of pre-
vious explorations and of the various
views which have been current with
respect to the geographical and natural
conditions in the Antarctic, the Baron
went on to say But in spite of all
these explorations, there is still round
the Southern Pole an immense space to
which the before-named inscription,
Terra Australis incognita, aptly applies.
Only here and there out of the un-
known extend points and coast lines,
but whether these really are land or
only floating ice is in many cases still
unknown and unproved. Thus we see
that in the South Polar tracts, there
exist great and important geographical
problems which still await solution, and
which cannot be solved except by a
whole series of expeditions. These
will have to fix the frontiers of the
ice, and decide whether the country
represented on the modern charts
consists of ice resting on firm
ground, or a floating ice-field of varying
extent. But it is not, in the first in-
stance, only this geographical problem,
so old and important as it may seem to
be, which ought to be the principal aim
of the expedition which, according to
my hopes during the next year wiil
start from Sweden to the Antarctic
seas. First on the programme no efforts
should be spared to make as extensive
contributions as possible to the solu-
tion of the problems of physical
geography and natural history, which
there ought to meet the seeker after
knowdedge. Naturally, the limited time
which I can use for a lecture like the
present does not allow me now to give
an extensive report of the working plan
of the intended expedition, which is
not yet by any means fully worked
out, occupied as I have been with
other labours. Some of the more im-
portant aims of the expedition ! must,
however, be allowed to mention. As
you well know, the bottom of the seas
of the far North contains an immensely
rich animal life, which, no doubt, may
be expected to be found, more or less
unaltered, also in the Antarctic waters.
I, therefore, presume that our zoologists
will be specially interested by the
dredgings we purpose making there, to
the same extent and with the same
care as those which during the last 30
years have been made on the coasts of
Spitzbergen, Greenland, and Nova
Zembla. Like the northern seas, the
ocean round the South Polar regions is
the habitat of a number of the larger
specimens of animal life, which, in con-
sequence of hunting, are becoming more
and more rare. Every new experience
which can enlarge our knowledge of
these animals, must be looked forward
to with lively interest by the zoologist;
in this matter a smaller scientific result
may be expected from direct hunting
than by a careful investigation of bones,
skeletons, etc., which for certain are to
be found thrown up on the coasts of
the South Polar lands in the same way
as they are found on the coasts of the
North Polar seas.
“An extensive comparison between
the flora of the Antarctic region with
the now well-known flora of the North
Polar tracts ought to be of the greatest
importance, not only for the study of
botany pure and simple, but also for
botanical geography and botanical
biology, and also for the geographical
science as a whole. It is to be regretted
that the chance of finding any fossils
in the beds of basalt, of which nearly
all the Antarctic countries seem to be
composed, can only be reckoned upon
as very exceptional. It is not probable
that the basalt should contain beds of
chalk or schist containing marine
fossils; but it is known that the
basalt beds, in some places in the
Antartic, contain fossils of wooden
stems and coals, here and there sparingly
accompanied with schist , in which un-
doubtedly botanical fossils ought to be
found, as is the case in similar forma-
tions in Iceland and Greenland.




warm sympathy with the object of the
deputation, but urged that the com-
mercial, scientific, and other portions
of the community should do some-
thing to show that the public
took some interest in the matter.
I think it will be agreed with me that
this is not the spirit in which such a
question as this should be dealt with.
The people of Tasmania should be
called upon to take their share in an
enterprise that must redound to the
credit of all who take part in, and
this can only be done by a direct vote
by Parliament of the proportion that
Tasmania would be called upon to bear
should the other colonies decide to pay
“ Mercury ” Office.
their share towards the sum of £5,000
required. Parliament is now sitting,,
and there can be no better time than
the present for testing how far the
representatives of the people are pre-
pared to keep up the traditions of the
past as far as this colony at least is
concerned.
Already it has been proposed in the
Victorian Press that Victoria alone
shall “ take up the burden, and alone
have the glory of assisting in ” this
“ world famous enterprise.” It remains
to be seen whether the people of Tas-
mania are prepared to stand quietly
by and see such a proposal given effect-
to.
