

ANTHROPOLOGICAL NOTES ON THE WESTERN COASTAL
TRIBES OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY OF SOUTH
AUSTRALIA.
By HERBERT BASEDOW.




ANTHROPOLOGICAL NOTES ON THE WESTERN COASTAL
TRIBES OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY OF SOUTH
Australia.
By HERBERT BASEDOW.
[From Transactions of the Boyal Society of South Australia ”
vol. jLXxi., 1907.)
[Read October 2, 1906.]
Plates I. to XIX.
The following facts, relative to the characteristics and
customs of several native tribes of the Northern Territory, 1
gathered while acting as Assistant to the Government Geo-
logist, Mr. H. Y. L. Brown, on geological explorations dur-
ing 1905. The accompanying figures are reproductions of
my original field-sketches.
The tribal distribution, and, simultaneously, the extent
of tribal territory, of the native population of the north-
western coastal districts of the Northern Territory vary
directly as the natural resources of the particular locality.
The Daly River, as an example, is bordered by fertile flats
on either side, with numerous backwaters, or bdlabongs, that
teem with abnormal game. Hence it is that, along the
lower reaches of that river, a number of distinct tribes are
congregated within a comparatively small area; while west
of it, in the absence of any considerable fresh-water stream,
two coastal tribes are spread over a great stretch of com-
paratively poor country.
The Larrekiya* the best known, on account of Port
Darwin being included within their domain, occupy a
territory extending southwards between the Howard River
on the east and the Finniss on the west, a subdivision or
clan, the Marri , having a local distribution near the
mouth of the Blackmore River and forming the southern
boundary at about twenty-five miles inland. The Larrekiya
further separate themselves into coastal and inland groups,
the former being called the Binnimiginda, the latter the Gun-
ma jerrumba.
A
* This is how the pronunciation appears to me. I am aware
that other authors have alluded to the tribe, and adopted slight
variations in their spelling. Vide Foelsche : Trans. Roy. Soc.,
S.A., vol. v., 1882 (Larrakeah)\ Coppinger: Voyage of the
“Alert,” 1883 (Larikia); Curr : The Australian Race, 1886, vol.
i. (Larrakia and Larragea); Macki'llop : Trans. Roy. Soc., S.A.,
vol. xvii., 1893 (Larrikiya); Parkhouse: Trans. Roy. Soc., S.A.,
vol. xix., part 1, 1895, and Austr. Assoc. Adv. Science, vol. vi.,
1895 (Ldrraki’a, Larrakiha, Larrikia, Larrakeeha, and Larree-
keeyah).


They are joined on the west by a coastal tribe, the
T Vogait,* who claim country across the Daly River to about
Cape Ford, and on the east by the Wulna] tribe. Between
the Wo gait and Larrekiya , and passing south of the former
to the Daly River mouth, lies the country of a small tribe,
the Sherait, or ' Paperbark natives,” closely related to the
Larrekiya. East of the Sherait border the Gunerakan. The
Ponga-ponga tribe lives to the south of the Wogait, on the
Daly River; and still further south the Mulluk-Mulluk,% a
powerful tribe, holds a large area, which is subdivided and
allotted to individual dependent clans, as the Ujiramo , on
the west bank of the river, south-west of Mount Litchfield,
and the Komorrkir , living on the same bank, south of the
Bjiramo. With a more local distribution, the Marranunga,
another strong tribe, occupies the country around Hermit
Hill.
The Wo gaits are bordered on the west by the B err in-
gin, whose domain extends from Cape Ford to a point about
18J miles north of Point Pearce, known to them as Allait-
perra. They are bordered on the south by either a distinct
tribe or subdivision of their own, known as the Kujera, who
were not seen personally. The Ginmu are the next on the
west, extending, roughly, to the boundary of Western Aus-
tralia.
Southwards from Port Darwin, along the mining centres,
the original tribes have been disarranged by European and
Asiatic interference, and it is difficult to secure authentic
information concerning their former possessions and rites.
One large tribe, called the Awarrai,s has existed south of
the Larrekiya , extending from Mounts Charles and Gun south
to about the latitude of Mount Wells. To the south-east,
beyond the Mary River, are the Agiwallem, the valley in
which Burrundie now stands forming neutral ground.
The tribes east of the Adelaide River were not visited;
but through the kindness of Mr. F. E. Benda. Secretary to
the Hon. Minister controlling the Northern Territory, I
have received the names of tribes of the MacArthur River
district, which were collected by the late Cornelius Power,
Corporal of Police, stationed at Borroloola. The majority
of these names, allowing for slight phonetic variations, have
* Various synonyms for this tribe exist, such as Wag gait ,
Waggite , Worgiie, and Waggote.
t Sometimes written Woolner.
X Knot Dahl spells this name Mollak Mollak: Trans. Koy.
Soc , S.A., vol. xi'x., 1895, p. 122.
§ Awdrra of Parkhouse: Trans. Roy. Soc., S.A., vol. xix.,
1895; and Austr. Assoc. Adv. Science, vol. vi., 1895.


already been published by Messrs. Spencer and Gillen* but
I, nevertheless, reproduce them here, in confirmation of the
statements of these writers. In this list I adhere to the
original spelling by Power, which is according to the English
pronunciation; while the names in parentheses, immediately
following, are those given by Spencer and Gillen in the
system of orthography established by the Royal Geographical
Society of London.
The Anyoola tribe (Anula) inhabits the McArthur River
district, from about Borroloola to the coast, as well as the
Pellew Islands at the river mouth.
The Korraua (Karaxva) is a very large tribe, living
about the watersheds of the Robinson and Calvert Rivers.
The Binbinga (Binbinga), a peaceful tribe, occupies the
Me Arthur River district for forty miles south of Borroloola.
The Godangee (probably a branch of the Gnanji), adjoins
the Binbinga on the east.
The Yumpia (TJmbaia) lives in country extending south
of the Binbinga. to the tablelands. Both this tribe and the
former are noted for cattle-killing.
The Alowa (Allaua) territory lies west of the Binbinga,
in the Limmen River district.
The Mavra (Mara) is a large tribe, occupying the Lim-
men River, north of the Allaua, to the coast, and west of the
Anula.
The Willongera (Wilingura) is a small and peaceable
tribe, to the south of the Mara.
The Anger and Anga (no doubt branches of the Xganji)
are small, hostile tribes, living south and west of the Allaua,
at the head-of the Wickham River.
The Chingalee f (Tjingilli) holds territory to the west,
and the Laytha to the south, of the TJmbaia.
The Goonanderry is distributed along the Robinson and
Calvert Rivers, south of the Kara wa; and, lastly, the A'anee
tribe borders the Goonanderry, on the south, and extends to
the head of the Nicholson River.
Although the dialects of the Larrekiya, Wogait, and
Sherait are distinct, it is usual for members of any one tribe
to be familiar with the languages of the other two, the
Wogaits, in addition, having a fair knowledge of that of the
Berringin. The Mullvk-Mullvk dialect is that most gene-
rally understood among the various tribes grouped near the
aS
* The Northern Tribes of Central Australia, London, 1904.
t See also A. G. B. Ravenscroft: Trans. Roy. Soc., S.A.,
vol. xv., 1892. p. 121.


territory of the latter. Short comparative vocabularies of
four tribes are appended.
The Larrekiya and IF ogait are, so far as my observation
went, ' friendly with one another, and tribal intermarriage
is not infrequent.
Amongst the Larrekiya, given that a man marries the
daughter of his mother’s sister—the husband of this (his
aunt) is unnya to him, she being ngalling to him, and halle-
(hk to his unnya . The daughter of his ngalling then becomes
his halledik, and he is ngau to her. If by the union of unnya
and halledik the offspring is a female, she is ullmurruk to the
former and ngalle to the latter. This ullmurruk becomes the
property of the corresponding male offspring of his sister,
and is to him nugganyi; ullmurruk of unnya thereby becom-
ing halledik of unnya'B nugganyi. The female offspring of
this union is allitmit to unnya, and may be given to the cor-
responding offspring of the male child of the nugganyi's sis-
ter, f
According to the legends of the Larrekiya it happened
many years ago that a baby boy rose suddenly from the
ground out of the burrow of a bandicoot (Perameles sp.).
He was seen by the people of the Larrekiya , who invited him
to come to their camp, but he refused. Some time after,
w T hen he had become a man, they again met him. Again he
was asked to join the Larrekiya men in camp, but once more
he declined. Thereupon the men became angry, and dragged
him to a waterhole, and threw him into it. The stranger
immediately sank, and five bubbles of air arose to the sur-
face as he disappeared. The men sat down and watched the
water, when suddenly the face of the man reappeared. The
Larrekiya hurled a spear at him, and he was killed, because
he had no father and no mother, but was an accomplice of
the evil spirit, who, it is asserted by the old men of the
Wogait, makes a big fire, from which he takes an infant and
places it at night in the womb of a lubra, who must then
give birth to the child.
In the ordinary course of events, if a man, when out
hunting, kills an animal or collects any other article of diet,
he gives it to his gin, who must eat it, believing that the re-
spective object brings about the successful birth of a picca-
niny.
* Cf., “ . . . the Wag gait, whom both the Larraki'a
and Awarra detest . . T. A. Parkhouse: Austr. Assoc.
Adv. Science, vol. vi, 1895, p. 638.
f Parkhouse explains this apparent marriage within the
blood-tie, by stating that the relationship is not so close, the
line of descent only and not the number of degrees being indi-
cated : A.jstr. Assoc. Adv. Science, vol. vi., 1895, p. 641.


In other words, conception is not regarded as a direct
result of cohabitation. The child, on no account thed
take of the particular food until it has successfully teethed.
At childbirth the navel cord is twisted off What may
be the consequence of this treatment is the fact that abn -
mal swellings were frequently seen in the region o ie n
in grown-np individuals.
During the menses of a woman the man must not re-
ceive any food from her, or she from him; otherwise it is
believed that a serious illness will result on either side, which
no medicine-man could alleviate. If, however, by accident
or misunderstanding, food has passed from man to woman, or
rice versa, the medicine-man may be summoned, who remo\es
the pain by gestures and by pretending to remove an offend-
ing body by" sucking, eventually shewing a piece of meat
covered with blood to the sufferer.
If a medicine-man has a bad case of sickness to deal
with, he pulls out a few hairs from his armpit, burns them,
and places the ashes in the nostrils of the patient, over which
he holds his hands in the shape of a funnel and blows
thereon.
When a dugong has been captured by the men. all women
are kept at a distance, and not allowed to witness the cutting-
up of the spoil; but they may subsequently take part m the
feast. If they were present all the flesh would pass from
their bodies, and they would become barren.
The aborigines make the statement that when they kill
a dugcng (which is said to be often done by forcing small
rods into its nostrils) it wails and whines pitifully like a
human being. The female animal, further, is said to carry
her young on her fin like a lubra carries her infant,* and,
swimming with the other fin, suckles it. tired, she
changes about from one fin to the other.
According to their traditions, long ago a blackfellow
ate a certain berry, when some of the juice squirted into his
eyes. The pain was intolerable, and he became blind. In
his agony he tossed himself about until he fell, and began to
roll down the hill-slope on which he had been sitting. His
body continued rolling over and over until he reached ths
cliffs on the coast, and fell into the sea. The rolling motion
continued until he was gradually converted into the form
of a dugong.
* Cf. Keppel’s remark on the motherly affection of the fe-
male duigong: A Visit to the Indian Archipelago, 1853, vol. ii.,
p. 179.


Funeral Ceremonies.
W hen a man dies, the corpse is kept for a day, and paint-
ed over with ochre. The fat of the deceased is rubbed over
the bodies of the mourners, the gins included. In former
days the general custom, now only retained by the
furthest-out tribes, was to construct a platform of
boughs and bark in the forks of trees, upon which
the body was left until all the soft parts had been re-
moved by birds of prey.* See pis. v. and vi. A bonef
(radius) of the left arm of the deceased is then taken, tied
to a necklace, and w T orn round the neck of a relative, who
thereby is supposed to acquire the strength and qualities of
the deceased. The remaining bones of the skeleton are
wrapped up in paper-bark (Melaleuca leucodendron) and
buried.
The bodies of old men and old gins are buried in the
ground without having been previously placed in a tree.
The interment is carried out by four men, who stand
above the grave (which is about 5 feet deep), and hand the
corpse to two men down below. The latter place it in a
recumbent posture on its right side, with the legs tucked
up-wards, and the head resting upon the hands. The female
mourners gash their scalps with the points of yam-sticks,
and scar the backs of one another. See pis. iii. and vii. The
men cut their upper arms and thighs transversely with stone
knives, or gash their foreheads with the sharp edges of their
spear-throwers. Both parties cover their bodies and hair
with pipeclay and ashes. Songs of wailing are sung by both
males and females, those of the women resembling the sounds
expressed by:
Nge e n’
Ho ho un un.
* Cf. J. L. Stokes: Discoveries in Australia. 1846, vol.
ii., p. 295, et seq., and plate; E. J. Eyre: Journs. Expedition;
of Discovery into Central Australia, 1845, vol. ii., p. 345, and
plate; H. Keppel: A Visit to the Indian Archipelago,
1853, rol. ii., p. 181, and plate; J. D. Woods:
Trans. Phil. Soc., S.A., 1879, p. 84; P. Foelsche:
Tram. Roy. Soc., S.A., vol. v., 1882, p. 5; Curr : The Australian
Race, 1886, vol. i., pp. 255 and 272; W. G. St ret ton : Trans. Row
Soc., S.A., vol. xvii., 1893, p. 237; T. A. Parkhouse : Austr.
Assoc. Adv. Science, vol. vi., 1895, p. 643; W. E. Roth: Ethno-
logical Studies among the N.W. Central Queensland Aborigines,
Brisbane, 1897, p. 165, pi. xxiii., fig. 406; T. Worsnop : The Pre-
historic Arts, Manufactures, Works, Weapons, etc., Adelaide,
1«892, p. 66, pi. xxxiv.
t Cf. Spencer and Gillen: The Northern Tribes of
Central Australia, 1904, cap. xvii. The Port Essington natives
are said to have carried all the bones about with them in baskets.
Foelsche: Trans. Roy. Soc., S.A., vol. v., 1882, p. 6.


The response on part of the men is equivalent to long-drawn :
He e o, He e o, He-e o;
the n ’ and an, above, and the 6, below, sounding like sobs.
Seeds of the Cycas media * are collected, and stored in water
for three days, when the mourners congregate and feast upon
them.
After the body has been interred a sign-post is erected
at some distance from the mound upon which the spear-
thrower of the deceased is stuck into the ground. It consists
of an upright pole.f to the top of which a bundle of grass is
fixed; just beneath it is fastened a cross-piece, projecting to
unequal lengths on either side, round each end of which is
wrapped a bundle of grass; the whole resembling in appear-
ance a scarecrow with outstretched arms. The longer of these
horizontal arms has inserted into it a rod which points
directly to the site of the grave. Suspended from the end
of the opposite arm are feathers or paper-bark, in such a way
that they swing in the wind, and so serve to attract the atten-
tion of passers-by, who can recognize the spot, and pay their
respects to the departed. In the meantime the main camp
has removed from the locality.
During the mourning ceremony the spears of the de-
ceased are placed across a frame, consisting of two branches
of trees resting in the forks of two pairs of upright stems
driven in the ground.
In the Mullnk-MuUuk , when a man dies outside his
tribal country he is buried immediately. A circular space
Fig. 1.
is cleared for a radius of about
eight feet, in the centre of
which the deceased is interred.
Over this a mound of earth is
made, which is covered with
sheets of paper-bark, kept in
place by three or four flexible
wands stuck into the ground at
their ends, and passing over the
mound transversely to its
length. Stones are laid along
the border of the grave, and one or two upon the mound.
See fig. 1.
* Foelsche mentions the eating of yams during the mourn-
ing ceremony of children: Trans. Roy. Soc., S.A., vol. v., 1882,
p. 5.
t Similar, no doubt, to the painted pole described by Foel-
sche: Trans. Roy. Soc., S.A., vol. v., 1882, p. 5.


The corpses of well-nourished children up to the age of
two or three years were primarily disposed of by eating them,*
but this custom is not at the present day strictly adhered to
by the semi-civilized peoples.
Every native believes in his re-incarnation after death
in the form of some living being which is always held in
respect tbv him. This belief, however, did not appear to be
general amongst the Larrekiyas that were questioned.
Personal Mutilations.
Female infants are subjected to mutilation by removal
of two joints of the right forefinger. J In the western tribes,
Ginmu, the finger is cut off with a stone knife. Elsewhere it
is amputated at a later age by binding tightly round the
joint a ligature made of cobwebs of a spider that lives in the
mangroves, the limb withering away gradually. It appears,
also, that in certain instances the joints are removed by
biting, and in the Wogait the amputated segment is
buried in an anthill. The operation takes place without cere-
mony, and does not seem to be strictly adhered to by the lat-
ter tribe A singular case came under notice in the Ginmu
tribe, where a young girl had had the tvro joints of her finger
imperfectly removed, and upon the mutilated stump a horny
growth, which resembled a diminutive finger-nail, had grown.
When a child of either sex has reached the age of about
six years its nasal septum is perforated. The operation is
performed by an old man, who seizes the septum with thumb
and forefinger, draws it forward, and pinches a hole through
it with the nails. Through the perforation a small, sharpened
bone of a kangaroo is inserted, and the hole made larger by
gradually expanding it with a peg. During the operation
another man holds his hands firmly over the ears of the child,
which is thus not supposed to perceive the pain. When the
hole is large enough, a single small smooth segment of bamboo
is inserted by passing it over the kangaroo bone. The child
must sleep upon its back until the wound has healed. The
bamboo is replaced from time to time by a larger one, and
if, by chance, the rod should become fixed by clotting of blood
or otherwise, a strong blade of grass is inserted between the
* Cf. Foelsche : Trans. Roy. Soc., S.A., vol. v., 1882, p. 5.
f Cf. Parkhouse : Austr. Assoc. Adv. Science, vol. vi., 1895,
p. 640, second paragraph.
XCf , Foelsche: Trans. Roy. Soc., S.A., vol. v., 1882. p. 7:
Mackillop: Trans. Roy. Soc., S.A., vol. xvii., 1893, p. 257. Dr.
W. E. Roth informs me that the practice of mutilating the little
finger is still in vogue in Queensland, and in early days was preva-
lent down the coastline, certainly as far south as Sydney.


rod and edge of the hole, and, being held by either end, diawn
round the rod circumferentially to scrape or saw through
the adherent parts. The operation takes place without any
particular ceremony, and men and women, alike, may be
present. The nose-stick is not usually worn except during
corrobborees, and when neighbouring tribes are visited.
See pi. ii.
Bamboo nose-stick: Lav ., Damorrenelle; Hop., W idja-
dol; Slier., Yinnung delluk.
Wooden nose-rod: Lcir., Mamalolma; Hop., Barrong
nget.
Body Scads.
As a very general rule, the raised cicatrices are less pro-
nounced than in Central Australia, and are, except in certain
cases, developed to a less extent in the coastal than the inland
tribes. In the Larrekiya low cicatrices are favoured; abnor-
mally-developed scars being associated with an early death.
Among the Larrekiya and T Yogait it was rioted that the
chest incisions, particularly in the case of the younger gene-
ration, were not treated, as is generally the custom, by the
application of ashes into the wound.
The scarring of a Woyait boy is for the purpose of pre-
paring him for the rite of initiation. If he can endure the
cutting or scarring of his chest with fortitude, and without
showing signs of pain, he is ready for the ceremony of circum
cision.
In the Ginmu tribe the scarring (ngeri) of a boy is done
at an early age by degrees, commencing on the upper arm,
and ending on the chest, with the same object in view as
amongst the Woyaits, viz., to make him hardy before circum-
cision. Among members of this tribe were noted one initi-
ated youth with upper-arm scars and two chest incisions,
Fig. 2.
another with four of the latter, a man with
two chest and ten abdominal scars (the latter
being interrupted centrally), a warrior with
twenty-five abdominal and chest scars, and
red-ochred bands across either shoulder. A
girl about eight or nine years of age was cica-
tricised in the manner shown in fig. 2. The
asymmetrical character of the abdominal
scars is possibly related to the age and sex
of the child. Two joints of her right index
finger had been removed.
* Stokes mentions that the Port Darwin blacks “had a
piece of bamboo, eighteen inches long, run through the cartilage
of the nose.” Discoveries in Australia, vol. ii. f p. 19.


Another form of self-mutilation which men or women
may inflict upon themselves at any time is produced by the
application of the heated end of a fire-stick four or five times
to the upper arm, and diagonally down the middle of the
chest from either side. See pi. ‘ii. This also gives rise to
elevated scars.
First Initiation Ceremony of the Larrekiya Youth—
The Bollier.
When the Larrekiya boy is to be initiated, his body is
decorated with bands of white that are made by sticking on
to him vegetable down from the seed-pods of a large tree,
locally called the silk-cotton tree ( Bombatt malabatrica),
and feathers. A horseslioe-shaped band is thus formed, pass-
ing from ear to ear, down the cheeks, and below the chin; the
upper ends of this figure being connected by a horizontal band
passing across the nose below the eyes. A similar band extends
in front from shoulder to shoulder, above the nipples, and
from this, two bands pass downwards over the abdomen and
thigh to the knee, where each unites with a circle round the
joint. From both shoulders a white line is drawn along the
upper arm to the plaited arm-girdles at the elbow; additional
bracelets being worn at the wrists.
Round nis forehead is tied a band, known as galambaua,
made of numerous twisted strands of opossum-fur, woven
closely together, and coated with pipeclay. See pi. ii. The
ends of the strings of this band are tied together at the back
of the head by means of human-hair twine. Underneath the
galambaua, at the centre of the forehead, is inserted a plume
of feathers of the Nankeen night-heron ( Nycticorax Caledoni-
ans) or emu, attached to an ironwood stick, the plume being
downwards, while from either side of the head a fur-tassel
(Giuiyarum gauliipmagga) is hung by string. Identical appen-
dages are fastened to the armlets. A necklace made of seg-
ments of grass stems threaded together ( mangulma ) is worn,
and a broad belt ( d-anbidjtdu) of stringybark (Eucalyptus sp.),
which, by virtue of its coiled form, can be adjusted to a waist
of any size. The latter is made secure by tying the outer
overlapping end with fur string, which is then wound con-
tinuously and spirally round the belt for its whole length and
back again, thus producing a lattice-like effect. See pi. ii.
The usual human-hair belt (berelgma ) is tied over this, and
from it the pubic tassel ( doi-ira ) is hung.
The boys—several pass through the ordeal at the same
time —are separated, and made to sit in a row before the old
men, holding their eyes shut with their right hand. The war-
riors, with the variety of spear afterwards to be described as


raulligirrima poised, stamp their feet in front of the boys
uttering harsh cries of drr-re! drr-re! and gorci! On the con-
clusion of this performance the boys, upon a given signal,
look at the men. This finishes the first part of the ceremony.
For the next few months the boys, who are now styled
Bollier, are kept away from the women and camp. They are
led away into the bush by the men, whom they must assist
by gathering food, and in other ways. At intervals they are
submitted to severe blows between the shoulders by the old
men in charge, and given to understand that they must, on
peril of death, preserve strict silence as to all that has passed.
Upon his return to camp, the Bollier usually has additional
cicatrices inflicted upon his upper arm and thigh.
The Larrekiya does not circumcise, though they say that
in early days the rite was practised until, at one ceremony, a
subject died from the effects. Their belief is, now, that if
anyone of the Larrekiya were to be circumcised he would die.*
The Melville Island natives, also, do not circumcise, f
The Initiation Ceremony of the Wogait Youth.
At the initiation of a Wogait, after his fortitude has been
tested by scarring the chest, he is thrown on his back over
Fig. 3.
the legs of four meu, who sit close
together two and two, facing one an-
other, with their legs alternately
spaced, so that the toes of one are
next to the buttock of the man oppo-
site ; the legs of the four men form-
ing, collectively, a continuous plat-
form. 1 This stage is shown in fig. 3.
A fifth man then sits upon the vic-
tim s chest, facing the operator;
while another holds his head. The
boy is gagged with a bundle of fur, which further serves the
purpose of allowing him to bite upon it during his pain; his
ears are stuffed, and his hands kept at his sides. The operator,
smeared all over with pipe-clay, approaches from behind, and’
kneeling upon the boy's thighs, draws the prepuce well for-
ward, and cuts it off with a quartz flake. The wound is
, r*" so ?. w » 8 given for tlle custom falling into
desuetude that the skin became too tender.'’ Parkhouse- Austr
Assoc. Adv. Science, vol. vi., 1895, p. 643.
t Vide Foelsche : Trans. Roy. Soc., S.A., vol. v., 1882, p. 17
X “In the ceremony of the Acjgrakundi , a tribe south of
the Awarrau eight men lay on the ground, their faces in their
folded arms head and feet alternating, the backs forming a
platform. upon the buttocks the bov was laid ” Parle
house, op. cit., p. 645.


covered with paper-bark and ashes,* and the sufferer, who
usually faints during the operation, is led away to the bush
for about three weeks. Upon his return to camp he shows
the operated part first to his mother, and then to the girl
who has been selected as his wife; these scar their heads with
a pointed yam-stick. The excessive degree of excitement and
fear apparently makes the lad practically unconscious to pain,
and after the event he is usually quite oblivious to what has
happened.
The detached prepuce (garijet bar re) is held against the
bellies of those who have been present at the operation, then
placed in a small dilly-bag (garad), and worn round the neck
of the operator until the wound has healed, when it is thrown
into the fire. The cutting-flake used for the operation is em-
bedded at one end in the wax of wild bees, which is heated
and moulded round a bamboo. Into the groove thus pro-
duced the stone is thrust, and firmly embedded by squeezing
the wax with the hand.
Although the Larrekiyas do not circumcise, yet when a
performance of this nature is about to take place amongst
the Wogaits, invitations to be present are sent to the former
tribe, and the members of the two hold a joint corrobboree.
The following are some of the chants of this joint corrob-
boree :
1. Narraya injala, bannaya injala, bannaiyaka injala
bana; injala bannaiyaka injala, bannaya injalo
bana.
2. Narraya kaninba, larrambana kanimba, larranbar-
raya kaninba, larrambana kanimba.
3. Anna yan na na ranga banana ya ni ba, en kara
bana, kara gan dome, di di di di.
The corresponding accompaniment that is into the
wooden trumpet or kanbi of the Wogaits , sounds, in the first
chant, like:
Didnodiddo diduadu didnadiddo diduadu - -
------ didnarib;
in the second :
Didjuadeldo, didjuadeldo didjnadelrip;
and in the third :
Tid ja ru du, tid ja ru du, tid ja ru du
None of the north-western coastal tribes cited practise the
rite of sub-incision, but it is well known that the tribes border-
* Cf. Knut Dahl : Trans. Roy. Soc. S.A., vol. xix., 1895,
p. 122.


ing the Gulf of Carpentaria,* such as the Anula, Mara, and
Binbinga, do sof to the same extent as in the Central Austra-
lian tribes. The rite was not observed in the tribe at the
mouth of the Victoria River. J
The Initiation Ceremony of the Larrekiya Girl.
Although the girls of the Larrekiya and 11 ogaits are
given away to men at a very early age, no cohabitation must
take place until after the “smoking ceremony” of the girl,
which is known as Mdnniugu by the Larrekiyas , and 3 itkur-
rum by the Wogaits.
When the menses have commenced she must undergo the
following ceremony, which takes place at night-time, and at
some distance from the main camp, though not necessarily
out of sight of it. Men do not attend, but may witness the
proceedings from the camp at a distance.
Fig. 4.
The girl, being decorated after the
fashion of the Bottler , is seized from
behind by an old gin (under whose
care she has been), who places her
hands upon the novice’s shoulders. See
fig. 4. Another woman places her
hands upon the shoulders of the old
gin in a similar manner, and the same
thing repeated by the array of females
taking part in the function, one stand-
ing behind the other
A chant, a long-drawn, continuous
“Ya , Ya, Yci,” is commenced; the old
gin at this stage, stamping on the
ground with her feet, moves forward
and pushes the girl in front of her,
while all the other women respond simi-
larly, and follow in a line.
This chant suddenly ceases, and is replaced by another
sounding like “Ten dci min ,” the old gin stopping at this
stage and imparting three smart blows upon the girl’s back.
* Cf. W. G. Stretton : Trans. Roy. Soc., S.A., vol. xvii., 1893,
p. 232.
t Cf. Foelsche: Trans. Roy. Soc., S.A., vol. v., 1882, p. 17.
Tribes inhabiting the western coast of the Gulf of Carpentaria,
between the Roper and Nicholson Rivers, have a practice of
slitting the penis along the urethra; Spencer and Gillen : The
Northern Tribes of Central Australia, 1904, p. 133. From the
Urabunna in the south, right through the centre of the continent
to the western shores of the Gulf of Carpentaria, sub-incision is
practised upon the young men.
t Cf. MacKillop: Trans. Roy. Soc., S.A., vol. xvii, 1893,
p. 257. ’


The stamping motion, and the “ Ya, Ya, Ya,” are com-
menced afresh, to be again changed to “Yen da min ” and three
blows on the girl’s back. This procedure is kept up for
the greater part of the night.
At the first glimpse of day the second item in the pro-
gramme is started; it consists of the washing of the girl in
the sea.* She is led to the water, and all taking part in the
ceremony wade out with her to some depth. On gaining
deeper water the whole party go through a grotesque ‘‘goose-
waddle-like” dance, flapping their arms, which are kept bent
at the elbows, alternately at either side, and, in so doing,
splashing the water up over their bodies with the production
of a peculiar hollow T -sounding noise.
Another refrain is now chanted: “ A-10-10-ld,” and when
the last syllable has sounded all the bathers dip under the
surface of the water, the same thing being repeated many
times.
The third part of the programme, following directly
upon the washing, is the smoking of the young gin. A fire
is made on shore, and when a good blaze has been secured,
a large heap of green grass and leaves, previously
steeped in water, is piled upon it. On this the
old gin seats herself, and on her lap, with legs astride,
the young gin. More grass and leaves are piled on the
heap, and the vast volumes of smoke that are generated com-
pletely hide both women from view. The object is that
the smoke shall thoroughly play upon the genitalia of the
girl, the process being facilitated by the manipulation of the
old gin upon whose lap she is seated. This event finished,
the principal ceremony of initiation is concluded, and the
novice is led into the bush by the old women, returning with
them to camp the same day. Through the period the girl’s
diet is restricted during the pleasure of the old gin. She is
not allowed to eat snake, dugong. monitor (Varanus sp.J,
turtle, etc., but may have crab.
No cohabitation takes place between the young gin and
her husband for about four months after her initiation, but
at each recurrence of the menses she cleanses herself with
water, without repetition of any ceremony. The man must
not receive food from her during these periods, as otherwise
he would become subject to severe pains in the stomach, and
become readily susceptible to injury. If, for instance, in
their excursions hostile blacks were encountered, he would
* It is interesting to not© a similarity of these proceedings
recorded from the western islands of North Australia : Reports
Cambridge Anthropological Expedition. Torres Straits, vol. v.,
1904, chap, vi., pp. 201 et seq.


be certain to become the victim of any spear tnrown by
them.
A subsequent secret corrobboree of initiation, about which
very little is known, takes place several years later, and cor-
responds to the Mollinya ceremony of the men, which is
described below.
In conformity with the absence of sub-incision among
these western tribes, the corresponding mutilation of the
female is not in vogue.
Second Initiation Ceremony of the Larrekiya Youth —
The Mollinya.
Some years after the Boilier ceremony comes the Mol-
linya, after which the subject becomes entitled to join in the
discussions of the old men. On this occasion the youth is
under the care of an old man, and is decorated in a somewhat
similar way as in the first ceremony. The broad, white fore-
head band, or galambaua, marked transversely with four
stripes of red ochre, and the similar appendages from head,
elbow, and waist are worn. He carries, in addition, a plume
of cockatoo feathers, known as biamorre, in his hair. See pi. ii.
The performance —at which only the old men (all initiated
Mollinyas) are present, while no mention of the ceremony is
made to the women —commences soon after sundown, and
ends before midnight. The youth, in the presence of his
guardian, must remain silent, and with downcast eyes. A
wailing chant is sung in low, broken accents : u Makolar manga ,
makolar , a dr, makldr , /m manga.” No beating of sticks or
hands accompanies the tune, and no definite ceremonial dance
follows.
After the Mollinya ceremony, cicatrices may be added on
either side of the abdomen, each cut extending to under half-
way across the front.
During the time between the Bollier and Mollinya rites,
bustard, flying-fox, and yam are forbidden as articles of diet,
but at the latter corrobboree he is invited by the old men
to eat. The man believes that even if he ate one of these
foods secretly during the forbidden period, the medicine-man
would, on his returning to camp, at once detect it in his
stomach. And having thus disobeyed, the medicine-man
would have perfect right to run a spear through him, or com-
pel him to eat certain things, from the effects of which he
would die. But, although he must not eat the forbidden
foods, the youth is not forbidden to hunt them, so long as
he delivers up the spoil to the old men. These rules are
strictly observed, and, whenever privileged members have
eaten flying-fox, the bones are carefully collected and burn


ed, to make certain that no boys could possibly have access
to them.
CORROBBOREES AND FRIENDLY MEETINGS.
At ordinary corrobborees, other than those connected
with the initiation ceremonies, a tall, conical headgear is made
with grass, bound round with fur-string, the outside being
smeared with pipeclay, to which vegetable-down is made to
adhere with viscid sap. This conical structure fits over the
hair, which is drawn up into a point and smeared with pipe-
clay; over it the grass-binding fits like a helmet. A small,
pointed stick, or bone, carrying a plume of emu feathers, is
inserted into the top, and the whole of the wearer’s face, with
the exception of the eyelids and lips, is covered with vege-
table-down. The helmet is known under the following names
in the different tribes :
Larrekiya — medlemo .
W ogait— iirak.
Sherait— wennu.
Berringin — nurd.
The plume at the apex as gnrrumb erring, murun, mokul-
Ung, and ngocleji, respectively.
At various friendly gatherings of groups and tribes,
chants imitative of other events, sounds, and objects form
a prominent feature. Of these a few typical cases will be
mentioned. A corrobboree of the wailing of women is one
of the most popular amongst the Larrekiya and Wogaits. It
runs: —
Arada kadji mara uda kayan yan; arada kadji mara uda
kayan molle ulpidulu molle, jangaji karra kanjin mada
da nga la ulmin ja jandadbi karra kun kun mukale la
enbidukdi bana molle mara kanjinmada da bulnk di
bolle arada kadji balla.
IjO—e Id lo —e lo —o lo —o la Kanjin mada dano wudningi
juan madji karra kunkul mukana molle enbuluk di bana
molle kanjin mada .
In the above, the line commencing with Id —e is sung in
a plaintive manner, and is strongly suggestive of the wailing
of women at a mourning ceremony, which, indeed, it is in-
tended to represent. As a marked contrast to these seem-
ingly solemn proceedings, the termination is one of merri-
ment and laughter, in which there are many interjections and
criticisms as to the imitative skill of one another in the pro-
duction of effeminate sounds.
An accompaniment is performed by one member on the
wooden trumpet,* into which he makes droning sounds that
* See description p. 48 and fig. 63.


may be represented by the syllables, “Tib bn, tib bu, tib
bu a.” Other performers beat time with their '‘music-sticks,
one long beat being followed by three short taps in quick suc-
cession.
In the corrobboree of the frog the following un-
usually pleasing chant is frequently repeated*:
Iwoggiama ivogien, woggiamana wogitn, immangana jtlltr-
rima wogien. Imbaka kwuerakwa wogien. Imbtlluolu-
oclo wogitn.
Ti kwa e kwa, yi kwa e kiva. 1 wogitn. Immangana jtlltr-
rima wogitn. Imbak kwuerakwa wogien. Imbalualuodb
wogitn.
Up to the second repetition of “ wogitn ” the syllables are
uttered with subdued voices, then all members join in heart-
ily. The verse is sung and immediately repeated, with
the omission of the initial Iwoggiama wogien and the final
wogitn , the voices, moreover, subsiding to almost inaudible
softness at the finish.
The “Ti kwa t kwa” is sung in imitation of the croaking
of a frog, the following “I wogien” being extended to five syl-
lables by reduplication of the final syllable.
The accompaniment on the trumpet is “Tip bu, tip bu,
tip bu, tip pau, a, tip pau a, tip pau d” the last of which
sounds something like a “Hoop la!” Music-sticks are used
by all, the taps being equally spaced and of uniform strength.
Corrobboree of the arrival of a boat:
Ima di mana, ima di mana, ima cli mana , ima di mana nga
kara ra ungoni di ma di.
Corrobboree of the visit to a strange tribe or country:
Ana ni lai, ni lai; ana li lai, ni lai laie 6 kondbn linmai tndo;
di-di, di-di, di-di, di-di, di-di, dia.
The latter chant is accompanied on the “trumpet” with
“Tidjnaror tebor,” ad infinitum. It is succeeded for some
considerable time by the clinking of the musical sticks alone.
To become gifted with a sonorous voice is one of the
ambitions of native youth. The large Cicadce are admired
for their vocal powers and endurance in song. They are, at
times, caught and sucked, in the hope that similar virtues
may in this way be acquired.
When a man who has been absent on a mission returns
to his camp, or arrives at that of a friendly group, he sits
isolated from the men for some time, everyone present main-
* Cf. Report Government Geologist: Pari. Paper No. 55, Ade-
laide, 1906 (Journal by L. C. E. Gee, p. 23).


taining strict silence. Eventually the most influential mem-
ber begins conversation in a low voice, in which other mem-
bers join one by one. The event culminates in singing
and dancing.
Fig. 5.
Fig. 6.
Often the visitor displays, for the
information of his friends, the emblem
of his mission, or person, painted in
pipeclay and ochre upon his chest. If,
for instance, he has been about on a
turtle-hunting expedition, he returns
ornamented with a large design re-
presenting a turtle. A striking dif-
ference of design is made in distin-
guishing between a fresh-water (fig. 6)
and a salt-water turtle (fig. 5). The annexed figures are
facsimiles of native sketches.
Superstitious Belief in a Nocturnal Monster. —All the
tribes encountered believe in the existence of a creature that
roams about, principally at nighttime, and is the terror of
the blacks, stealing upon them in their sleep and squeezing
their ribs from behind. The term ‘‘devil-devil” has been
generally assigned to this being by the whites, and has be-
come of common use among the semi-civilized tribes. Among
themselves, they speak of it as “Birrawulidda” in the Larre-
kiya, “Winmallon ” in the Wo gait, “Barang” in the Sherait,
and “Ngauit” in the Bemngiri. The “devil-devil” is sup-
posed to possess no nose, two blanks for eyes, and two addi-
tional, powerful visual organs at the back of the neck, by
means of which he can see a very great distance. When he
makes a corrobboree with his companions, he is supposed to
use his shinbone as a wooden trumpet, which, after the cere-
mony, he replaces in its proper place. At daytime he usually
camps in holes, or caves, and his tracks are often found by
the blacks, who, when they imagine he is near, become stupi-
fied, as though intoxicated. When a man has been visited
by the evil being, and has had his ribs squeezed, the medi-
cine-man is summoned. The latter ties a stick along the suf-
ferer’s back, and requests him to remain lying on the ground
until the pain has passed away.
Some of the powerful old men of the tribes profess to
have stood face to face with the spirit, away from camp, and
to have asked him his name, whereupon he replied, “Me
devil-devil,” and disappeared.
When a blackfellow has been visited, imaginatively, dur-
ing the night by the spirit, he does not inform his camp mates
of it until the morning. At times the magic influence exert-
ed by the monster over the blacks has the effect that they


fall into a stupor, during which they cannot recognize men
of their own clan; and. if such a one were to endeavour to
enter the camp of a man in that condition, the latter would
threaten to kill even his father, unless awakened from his fit.
Meeting Strangers. —The approach of a tribe to a party
of strangers, such as white men, is made in a definite and
formal manner, that is also in practice in Central Australia,
and appears generally adopted throughout the continent.*
One or two of the most influential old men draw near to the
strangers, and, in so doing, push before them a defenceless
child, upon whose shoulders both men place a hand, as
though guarding their bodies behind the exposed figure of
an innocent.
Wilson, in 1835, wrotef that Captain Barker used
every endeavour to induce the natives to come into the
camp at Raffles Bay, but without success, until a little child,
belonging to one of the soldiers, went and led in the chief,
who was evidently under great alarm, by the hand.
While out on a flying trip in the Tomkinson Ranges, in
Central Australia, our party came unexpectedly upon three
women, who were busily engaged in cooking a snake, and
had not heard the approaching camels. On seeing them in
close proximity, two gins immediately fled. The third, with
an expression of most pitiable terror in her face, seized her
breasts, one with each hand, and forcibly squirted her milk
in the direction of the white men.
Asking later the meaning of this strange act, we found
that she wished thereby to demonstrate that she was the
mother of an infant, in the hope that the white men would
not, under such circumstances, do her any harm.
As an important geographical extension, I add that Dr.
Roth and Mr. Chas. Hedley have informed me that when
they traversed Mornington Island, in the Gulf of .Carpen-
taria, they also came suddenly on a camp. All natives fled,
except some helpless pregnant women, who immediately began
to squirt milk from their breasts, as I have described. It,
too, was evidently an appeal for mercy, and an advertise-
ment of their condition. Apparently, therefore, the custom
is widespread.
Hunting.
When hunting, the ochred bodies of the persons act as
a protective colouration. The “black boys” employed by
bushmen well know the value of the inconspicuous colour
* Cf. T. L. Mitchell: Three Expeditions into the Interior of
Eastern Australia, vol. i., pi. xii., p. 194.
f Narrative of a Voyage Round the World, 1835, p. 74.


of their skin when trying to creep within range of game,
and they always take the precaution to remove any articles
of civilized clothing. The effect is increased by smearing
their bodies with the mud of the adjoining country.
The assimilation of the colour of their natural skin to
that of “rust-coloured” boulders of granite and other rock is
marked, not only in these tribes, but throughout the conti-
nent. At Opparinna Spring, in the Musgrave Ranges, one
day, had it not been for the alertness of my camel, I should
have ridden over the huddled figure of a girl who was hiding
from her mates among the numerous rocks, which she endea-
voured to resemble by assuming the recumbent position and
tucking her head and arms between her knees. The colour
and form of her back corresponded so nearly with those of
the rocks, that it required more than a casual inspection to
recognize a living human figure.
A hunter often awaits his prey in ambush in a water-
hole by concealing every part of his body under water, except
his head, and, when occasion requires, with nothing but his
nose visible above the water. When pursued by foes, he
seeks refuge in a similar manner, and in that case takes every
care that his breathing does not betray his presence by caus-
ing a ripple upon the surface of the water. After the Daly
River massacre* the few natives that escaped the rifle-bullets
of the avenging whites saved their lives in this manner.
The kangaroo is hunted with the spears, known as mal-
ligirrima and dawingvja. Four or five men post themselves
in concealment along a well-known and frequented pad that
is utilized by the game on its way to a waterhole, or cover.
A large party, including men, women, and children, disperse
in the direction where kangaroos are known to be grazing.
On drawing near to the animals, all the beaters begin to
sing and shout, “Ye-wo o-ho, ye-wo-o-lio” as they dart along
through*the bush, and continue until a kangaroo is sighted,
which is immediately pursued with excited cries of “Yakau,
yakau On hearing this shout, the men in ambush become
alert, and as the prey leaps by, along the pad, the nearest of
them instantly rises to hurl his spear.
If he is successful in his aim he raises a loud and shrill
shout of “Kau,” as a signal to the driving party, who then
assemble at the spot.
A native considers that the most effective part in which
to wound a kangaroo is in the hind leg, particularly if the
bone should be broken. If struck in the upper part of the
* See Report Government Geologist: Pari. Paper, No. 55,
Adelaide, 1906.


body tbe animal travels for some distance, and requires track-
ing to secure it.
The large frugivorous bats (Pteropus gouldij, known as
flying-foxes, which are nocturnal in habit, are fond of con-
gregating during the daytime in very large numbers in the
foliage of bamboos and mangroves, where they hang, head
downwards, until dusk. It is an easy matter for the blacks
to approach them, and fell a sufficient number with sticks
and stones to make a feast. The animals that fall stunned
to the ground are gathered and bitten, one by one, in the
neck and rump, by the hunters—in the former spot to kill,
in the latter as a preliminary test of condition. The restric-
tion of this diet from the uninitiated has already been men-
tioned.
Emus are most readily killed by climbing into the
branches of a tree, the fallen seeds of which are known to be
eaten by the birds. The blackfellow ascends the tree in the
early hours of morning, and awaits his chance, keeping per-
fectly silent and motionless when an emu draws near. A
special, heavy spear, of the malligirrima type, known
as nimmerrima, is held in readiness. If the bird comes to
a spot immediately below the concealed native, the weapon
is thrown (without a spear-thrower) in the manner depicted
in fig. 7; if, however, it is at some distance off, the spear
is held in a slightly different manner, as is shown in fig. 8.
Fig. 7.
Fig. 8.
Large flocks of wild semipalmated geese (Anseranus
melanoltuca) visit the same localities periodically. The
blacks have got to know these localities well, and, during the
absence of the birds, make an excavation in the ground, and
cover it over with twigs, paper-bark, grass, and soil, leaving
only one or two small lookouts open. A couple of natives
sit in this hole and await the return of the geese. As soon
as a head or leg of a goose comes near to the window, it is
seized, drawn below, and its neck wrung. In this way many
birds may be secured.


After the first appearance of wild geese at the billabongs
and lagoons, the women are not allowed to eat of their meat,
believing that if they did so the geese would become lean and
bony.* Only after the geese have settled for some consider-
able time in a certain locality are the gins allowed to par-
take of this food.
The clever imitation of the cries and calls of these birds,
a “ ngd ngdng , ngang-ngang-ngavg ” induces large numbers
of them to be attracted, at dusk, close to the native, who sits
in the branches of a tree, and kills the birds with a stick.
These birds can also be lured, by imitating their call, so
close to a native seated motionless in high grass that they
can be actually grasped by hand.
The note of the whistling duck (Denclrocygna eytoni) is
also accurately reproduced, by which flocks of them are at-
tracted and killed with a throwing-stick while hovering round
the hiding native. Cockatoos, plovers, and other birds are se-
cured in a similar manner.
The presence or whereabouts of crocodiles (G. porosus)
and dugongs (Halicore australis) in water is traced by the
swirl and bubbles produced at the surface, and they are spear-
ed from a raft or canoe. A dugong is further detected, when
feeding below the surface of the sea, by noting the nibbled
portions of seaweed rising to the top. Young crocodiles are
caught by hand from the bows of a canoe by cautiously
drifting upon them as they float in the water.
The natives explain that the teeth of young crocodiles
have not hardened sufficiently to do harm, and they even
show no fear while swimming about among full-grown in-
dividuals.
When a dugong has been killed by being speared from
a canoe, the craft is submerged, the occupants swimming
alongside and pulling it under the floating carcass of the
prey. The water is then bailed out of the canoe, which
rises, and lifts the dugong with it, and it is rowed ashore
by the hunters.
A turtle is caught by diving after it from a canoe, with
a line, and passing a slipknot round one of its paddles, when
it is hauled to the surface. If the head of a swimming turtle
be seized and held upwards towards the surface of the water
it is helpless -so far as escape by diving is concerned. Har-
pooning is also widely practised.
In the folklore of the Larrekiyas the fresh-water turtle,
known to them as pennimell, once lived in the sea; and the
* Cf. Stretton’s remarks on the eating of flying fox: Trans.
Roy. Soc., S.A., vol. xvii., 1893, p. 240.


salt-water species, which they call dorl-lurre , in fresh water.
One day the long-necked ptnnimell came out of the sea, and
said to the then fresh-water dorl-lurre , "I can find nothing
to eat,” to which the latter replied to the same effect. A
mutual exchange of territory was therefore agreed upon.
Fishing.
Fishing is one of the principal occupations of these coas-
tal tribes, consequently a variety of methods are in use.
Fish are caught by building barriers* of rock across the
entrance to small, shallow bays, which, upon recession of the
tide, retain at times large numbers of fish, either high and
dry, or in very shallow water. Such structures were noted
particularly at Cape Ford and Hyland’s Bay, in Berringin
territory. As a modification of this device, barriers of paper-
bark and branches, stayed by vertical rods driven into the
sand at short distances apart, are erected across the beds of
temporarily-flowing waters, such as the McKinlay and Cul-
len Rivers. After the passing of flood-waters many fish are
retained by the obstruction. It may be mentioned that these
fish, which are often of very considerable size, live, during
the dry seasons, in the permanent waterholes that occur at
intervals along the river courses.
Those fish which are left behind in comparatively shal-
low holes are captured by a party of natives, who enter the
pool at one end and, as they move in a body towards the
other end, with much splashing, shouting, and beating with
sticks, drive the fish to the shallow water there. Then, with
a sudden rush, and before the fish can regain deeper water,
many are retained by mud and captured. See pi. viii.
When the water becomes very turbid by this agitation
the barramundi (Ceratodus) has the peculiar habit of rising
to the surface and throwing itself upon the mud banks, to
fall a prey to the native. This turbidity is very apparent
after a mob of wild cattle have visited a comparatively small
water, when these fish can be gathered in large numbers,
or else they fall victims to numerous birds of prey.
In the holes left along the seashore they are caught in
a slightly different manner. Several natives sit at one end
in shallow water, with their legs bent at the knee, spread
apart, and feet drawn in under their buttocks. Another
party walk towards them from the opposite side, driving the
fish before them in the manner described. The fish endea-
vour to pass or hide underneath the limbs of the sitting
i *£/-W.E. Rot,}l: Ethnological Studies, p. 95, pi. xi., fig. 224;
and I\. G. Stretton : Trans. Roy. Soc., S.A., vol. xvii., 1893, p.


party, but as soon as one comes in touch with the naked
body it is cleverly caught by the native’s hands, killed by
crushing its head between his teeth, and thrown on to dry
land. This method was observed among the Ginmus.
When sawfish (Pristis sp.) are seen in shallow water off
the beach, the natives cleverly seize them by the tail with
their hands, and before any harm can be done hurl them
high on to shore.
Fishing-nets are made by first forming a ring, about
five feet in diameter, from the long shoots of Spinifeoo grow-
ing in the sand-dunes on the coast. Two pairs of these
shoots are twisted, two-and-two, one about the other, and
bent into semi-circular shape, the two ends of each twisted
Fig. 9.
pair being tied together with vege-
table string, thus completing the
circle (as shown in fig. 9). Round the
inside of this hoop is tied a circular
net, which is made of long vegetable
strands, usually derived from hybis-
cus bark. The knitting of this
meshwork is done by hand, without the aid of tools. The
successive stages in the manufacture of the net are most
readily explained diagrammatically, and are given in the fol-
lowing figures, the knitting in the last case being repeated
indefinitely from mesh to mesh, until the required dimen-
sions have been attained.
Fig. 10.
Fig. 11.
Fig. 12.
Fig. 13.
When this net is employed for fishing, two natives,
usually females, seize a side of the rim each with one hand,
wade out to a suitable depth, pulling the net along between
them, its mouth being inclined at an angle so that the lower
side projects beyond the upper. See fig. 14. The natives all
the whiie beat the water on either side to drive the fish into
the net, the mouth of which, as soon as one is noticed to have
entered, is quickly turned up into a horizontal position, and
the fish bagged.*
* Cf. W. E. Roth ■ Ethnological Studio, p. 9


Fig. 14.
Two types of fish-hooks are employed, but their use is
becoming more or less obsolete from the use of metal hooks
obtained by barter. The simpler form is cut from a flat
bone of kangaroo, or from pearl shell, and has a slight notch
at its upper end to permit of the string being securely tied
to it.
In the other pattern two bones are tied at an acute
angle with vegetable string secured with resin or wax. See
Fig. 15.
Fig. 16.
Fig. 17.
fig. 15. The shorter piece is
previously pointed at its
free end; the longer possesses
an enlargement at one extre-
mity, to which the line is
fastened, usually as follows:
—The string is folded at one
end into a loop, through
which the bone is passed (see
fig. 16), and it is kept in place
by binding another string, as
shown in fig. 17. The line is
attached to a long rod.
The common form of fish-
spear measures from ten to
eleven feet in length, and con-
sists of a single shaft of bam-
boo, tapered slightly at its thicker end, into which three slen-
der, pointed rods of ironwood (Erythro'phlaeum labouclieri)
(or, in the semi-civilized tribes, fencing-wire) are inserted, the
attachment being tightly bound round with string. Large
fresh- and salt-water fish are speared with this weapon, includ-
ing the barramundi (Ceratodus) and stingray (Trygon sp.).
No spear-thrower is employed, the spear being held poised
until the prey comes within close range.


As a convenience in carrying large fish some distance to
camp, special carriers are constructed by bending five or six
dry reeds into loops, and binding the free ends together cir-
cumferentially into the form of a handle. The fish is inserted
lengthwise into the loops, which are spread apart to receive
it. See fig. 18. Shell-fish and crustaceans form daily meals.
Fig. 18.
Fig. 19.
An ingenious device is resorted to for collecting the honey
of wild bees from inaccessible fissures in rocks and hollow
tree-trunks. A long, thin rod is chosen, and to one of its
ends a tassel of vegetable-strands is tied. See fig. 19. Hold-
ing the stick at the opposite end, it is inserted into the cleft


or hollow containing the honeycomb, and worked about in it
until an appreciable amount of honey has been absorbed by
the fibres, when it is withdrawn and the honey eaten, after
which the process may be repeated.
Wilson observed* a native of Raffles Bay squeeze into a
basin of water honey out of a meshy, fibrous bundle, formed
from the inner bark of young trees, then dip the bundle into
the water and suck it. No doubt this bundle of fibres was a
modification of the form I have just -described, and is known
as galmarrua to the Larrekiyas. It was observed on the Vic-
toria River.
When about to burn down tracts of dry grass and reeds
to obtain snakes, lizards, and other small game, the men cut
a stick from a tree, with a branch at one end cut short so as
to form a hook. Into this hook they wedge a little straw
and set fire to it; then, holding the burning end to the dry
grass, they run along, pulling the stick after them, the hook
being held so that it continually gathers fresh fuel as he
proceeds.
Cooking of Game.
The legs of an animal to be cooked are broken and tied
together in pairs with hybiscus fibre. The carcass is opened
at the side to remove the entrails, and an incision made in
the anus to clear it. In the case of a kangaroo, the tail is cut
off and cooked separately in ashes. When thus prepared, the
carcass, the skin of which is not removed, is placed in an oven
constructed as follows :—A fire is burnt over a shallow excava-
tion in sand, and upon the red-hot coals are placed lumps of
ant-hill earth to be heated. On them the animal is laid,
covered first with paper-bark, then with sand, when it is
allowed to cook.f
Fire-Making.
When by accident, such as a sudden tropical deluge, the
“fire-stick 7 becomes extinguished, a fnesh flame is kindled by
the ordinary frictional process of twirling a rod of dry wood
between the palms, with its lower, slightly-pointed end against
another piece of wood held to the ground with the feet, the
operator being in a seated position. See fig. 20. A little
* Narrative of a Voyage Round the World, 1835, p 99. See
al>o, Keppel: A Visit to the Indian Archipelago, 1853, vol. ii.,
p. 168.
t A similar method is reported to have been used by the
extinct Adelaide tribe. J. P. Gell: Tasmanian Journ. National
Science, etc., 1841; reprinted in pamphlet form.


Fig. 20.
powdered material is usually strewn upon the hole in the basal
piece of wood. Seeing that this method of producing fire
depends upon friction, 1 was surprised to notice a curious
practice amongst the Larrekiyas. When, with the twirling
stick, the operator had bored out the depression in the hori-
zontal piece, he squeezed the tip and sides of his nose with
the finger and thumb, by which means a quantity of greasy
matter was expressed from the sebaceous glands. This he
scraped together under the nails of his index and middle fin-
gers, and placed the mass upon the ankle of his left leg.
Then, after resuming the rotating movements, so soon as the
end began to smoke, he. touched this against the greasy lump
on the ankle, and continued the twirling.
The “sawing process,”* in which the edge of a flat piece of
wood is worked by hand backwards and forwards along a
groove, transversely to the length of a split piece, in the cleft
of which easily ignited material is packed, is also in practice.
See pi. x., fig. 1. A peg passing through the cleft pins the
basal part to the ground at one end, while the other is held
* See W E Roth: Ethnological Studies, p. 105, pi. xii.,
fig 245. H. Basedow: Trans. Roy. Soc., S.A., vol. xxvin.,
1904, p. 27.


by the operator’s foot. The method is very apparent in pi. x.,
fig. 2, the original of which was given to me by Mr. W.
Holtze.
Smoking.
The habit of smoking in these districts, as elsewhere in
Australia, has become a passion among the tribes that come
into contact, directly or indirectly, with Europeans and
Asiatics. When the original supply of tobacco has run out
the pipe of one of a group of men is crushed between two
stones, and the powder and ashes thus obtained smoked in
other pipes. This is repeated down to the last pipe, when it.
too, is crushed, and the powder rolled up in dry palm-leaf
and smoked like a cigarette.
They have also invented a pipe of their own by breaking
off the protoconc of Turritella cerea, and filling tobacco into
the mouth of the last body-whorl of the shell. The smoke is
then inhaled by suction through the convolutions of the shell.
Opium pipes are made out of empty bottles. Having
secured a bottle, a native will patiently tap round a certain
spot with a pointed implement until he has drilled a small
hole through its side. A little opium (usually the third-hand
remnants from the pipe of a Chinaman) is placed beside the
orifice, ignited, and the smoke drawn into the mouth through
the neck of the bottle.
Habitations.
As in Central Australia, habitations are only used under
extreme climatic conditions.
The usual plan is to construct a dome-like framework or
skeleton of flexible branches as depicted in the sketch (fig.
Fig. 21.
21), the joints at each intersection
being made secure with strands of
hybiscus bark. This structure* is
covered with paper-bark and grass,
leaving the one side open for access.
See pi. ix. The floor of the interior,
too, is carpeted with the same
material, with the exception of a
small space left for the fire. The
structure measures 5 ft, by 5 ft. by 4 ft. high, and is called
* Stokes found similar structures at Cape Hotham, and also
at king’s Sound: Vide Discoveries in Australia, 1846 vol i
p. 406. Wickham observed huts on Denuch Island, off the north-
west coast of Australia, which “were constructed by fixino-
boughs and twigs in the ground in a circular form, and joining
the smaller ends overhead in the form of a beehive” : Journ'
Kov. Geogr. Soc.. London, vol. xii.. 1842. See also W. E. Roth •
Ethnological Studies, pp. 105 to 107; pi. xii.


albirrekpin by Lariekiyas, bijijilkminit by Wogaits, and
enduk by Sheraits.
In camping-places where mosquitoes are very troublesome
the dome is completed by bending the rods down to earth on
all sides, and covering the whole surface with bark. Four
small openings are left along the base to serve as doors,
and a hole made in the top to allow passage of the smoke
that is accumulated in the hut for the purpose of keeping out
the insects.
Provisional shelters against rain are made by cutting a
big sheet of bark from the stringy-bark. To do this the
Fig. 22.
bark is chopped through cir-
cumferentially in two places
about seven or eight feet apart,
and slit longitudinally between
the two incisions, after which
it is easily removed by lever-
age. See fig. 22.* The sheet
is folded transversely along
its centre, and stood on sand
in tent-like fashion.
Sun-shades are formed by
erecting two vertically-forked
poles, in the forks of which a
horizontal rod is placed.
Against the latter, green
branches are piled at an incline
of about 45 degrees, and the fires lit beneath.
As a variety may be mentioned that found by Stokesf
north of Roebuck Bay, and described as a slight, rudely-
thatched covering, placed on four upright poles, between
three and four feet high.
Stokes writes of natives covering their naked bodies with
sand for warmth. A more usual method is to lie upon, and
cover themselves with, paper-bark. I have, however, noticed
them cover their naked forms with sand as a protection
against the attacks of mosquitoes.
Weapons and Implements.
The spears that were observed in use by the North-
western coastal tribes will be considered under the scheme
* Cf. R. Brough Smyth: Aborigines of Victoria, 1878, vol. i.,
fig. 239, p. 409.
t Discoveries in Australia, 1846, vol. i., p. 101, figured.


of classfication of main types of Australian spears, as de-
scribed by Spencer and Gillen.*
Type (£). —Single-pronged, multi-barbed spears, with
the barbs on one side only. The shaft of heavy or light
wood :
This is one of the most common types, and usually has
the shaft of light wood. See fig. 23. The variations in length
Fig. 23.
of the barbs are marked; the longer they are the less effec-
tive is the weapon for hunting purposes, but the more prized
as an article of show on special occasions. They measure
from a fraction of an inch to several inches, while the length
of the spear is from ten to eleven feet, of which the barbed
head occupies about two feet.
The shaft is almost invariably made of bamboo, the
head being of heavy dark wood, the latter being inserted
into the cavity of the thicker end of the slightly-tapering rod
up to a small shoulder cut into the head as a short, blunt
barb. A firm attachment is effected with beeswax. At the
opposite end a small hole is left by cutting the reed a short
distance beyond a septum. Sometimes this end is coated
with a thin layer of beeswax, and wound round with vege-
table fibre or fur-string. In the Wogeeit and Berringin the
hole is lined on the inside with paper-bark, which is further
firmly pressed down into it. This acts as a cushion, saving
the point of the spear-thrower from wear. The Larrekiya do
not take this precaution, but. on the other hand, make the
points of their spear-throwers blunt; the former two tribes
using a sharp one.
The spears are covered with red-ochre, and during special
ceremonies are ornamented with white and yellow patterns.
Type s. —Single-pronged, multi-barbed spears, with shaft
of light wood or reed. The barbs are arranged along two or
more sides of the head.
Spencer and Gillen, in describing a form of this type,
state that it has evidently been derived from an original form
with a long, simple-pointed head. This evolution is apparent
* The Northern Tribes of Central Australia, 1904, pp. 671
ct ffpq. Cf. also the types described by Etheridge, from the Alli-
gator River tribe: Macleay Mem. Yol., Linn. Soc., N.S.AV. 1893
pp. 229-235.


in the following figured specimen (fig. 24) which may be
the next stage to an unbarbed spear, with separate head, as
defined by the above authors in type 3.
Type 6. —Multi-pronged, multi-barbed spear, with shaft
of light wood or reed.
Fig. 24.
Fig. 25.
Fig. 26.
Fig. 27.
A spear eleven feet in length, with three equally-cnt
barbed prongs of ironwood attached to a reed shaft with resin
and paper-bark.* The barbs are comparatively small, each
prong containing from eight to eleven. See fig. 25.
An allied weapon is used by the Larrekiya and Port
Essington natives, but it possesses only two prongs, which
are of equal length, barbed on one side, the heads being so
attached to the shaft that the sets of barbs point in opposite
directions.! See fig. 26. The prongs measure fifteen inches
in length, possess thirteen barbs, and are fastened to the shaft
with beeswax and vegetable-fibre string.
Type B. —Stone-headed spear, with the head made of
flaked quartzite, and the shaft of reed.
This type is common. The spear is eleven feet long,
the stone head varying in length from two to six inches.
The stone is chipped from Ordovician quartzite that occurs
in extensive outcrop on the Victoria River and elsewhere.
The stone is attached with beeswax, resin, and vegetable
string.
Type 11. —Short, light spears, with a thin, tapering
point of hard wood and a reed shaft.
Common among all tribes on the north-west coast.
Those of the Larrekiya and Wogait are decidedly more
neatly finished than those of the Berringin and Ginmu. See
* Cf. E. J. Eyre: Journs. Expeds. of Discov. Centr. Austr.,
vol. ii.. pi. vi., fig. 2: and R. Etheridge: Macleay Mem. Vol..
Linn. Soc., N.S.W., 1893, pi. xxxi., fig. 5.
t Cf. E J. Eyre: Op. cit., pi. v., fig. 3.


fig. 27. The spear measures five feet in length; the head or
prong is made of mangrove wood* It is employed principal y
Fig. 28.
for settling minor quarrels between two
individuals, in which the opponents skil-
fully dodge the missiles, each dancing
grotesquely in defiance to his opponent, by
jumping from foot to foot, and holding
the arms half-erect and bent at elbow
and wrist, while the body is thrown for-
ward and the head back.f See fig. 28.
A “close shave” is greeted with a pro-
nounced “irr.”l
This light spear, on hitting the ground,
skips along the surface, and may be re-
covered uninjured. A large number of
these spears is always available, owing to
their easy construction.
Messrs. Spencer and Gillen state that
this form of spear “is thrown by the hand,
and never with a spear-thrower.” § This
must not be regarded as applying to all
tribes alike. So far as my observations
went, spear-throwers of the type described on page 35
were used specially for spears of this type by all the north-
western tribes, with the exception of the Ginmu, but there
is no reason to doubt that these also use them.
Two varieties of this type must be added:
One is identical with the above in shape and design, but
twice as large; the reed shaft measuring four feet and the
mangrove head five feet in length. It is used for hunting
and fighting; in the latter case, particularly, when a lubra
is concerned.
B
* Macgillivray defines this type as spears, shafted with reeds,
the smallest of which are no bigger than arrows: Narrative of a
Voyage of H.M.S. “Rattlesnake,” 1852, vol. i., p. 147.
f Cf., “A single black would hurl his spears one after ano-
ther at an opposing blackfellow, who would as adroitly avoid
them, ducking his head, bending his back, or shifting slightly to
one side.” Parkhouse: Austr. Assoc. Adv. Science, vol. vi., 1895,
p. 642.
X This exclamation seems general. Stokes records it of the
Port Darwin natives as indicative of fright ; also of the King’s
Sound tribe. Cf. Discoveries in Australia, vol. ii., p. 22, and
“Muttered signs o*f approval . . . were given at any good
throws or a particularly clever avoidance of the spears.” Park-
house: Op. cit p. 642. See also H. Basedow: Trans. Roy. Soc.,
S.A., voi."xxviii.* 1904, p. 24, “a subdued ‘irr,’ partly expressing
pain, and partly disgust or temper.”
§ The Northern Tribes of Central Australia, p. 676.


In the second variety, a rare form, used by the Mulluk-
Midluk? , the reed shaft and hardwood head are repeated,
with the addition of a small, chipped chalcedony blade fixed
with resin to the end of the latter.
Shafts of spears, if crooked, are straightened by hold-
ing the bent portion over a block of heated ant-hill earth,
on which water is thrown to generate steam.
Fig. 29.
Spear-throwers.
The prevailing type of spear-thrower among the north-
western coastal tribes is that shown in fig. 29. It is cut out of
light wood, measures four and a-half feet in length; is flat
and of uniform thickness (about an inch), both sides being
slightly convex. Its breadth is over two inches at the handle,
and tapers off to half-an-incli at the end to which the
wooden peg is attached with resin. The haft is formed by
rounding off the edges, and cutting into the sides of the
blade at about four or five inches from the end; round this
‘‘grip,’ - kangaroo tendon is often wound. The whole surface
of the spear-thrower is coated with beeswax, charcoal, and
red-ochre.
The implement is used in throwing all the larger types
of spears, with the exception of No. 11, the thrower and
spear being clasped by the right hand in such a way that
the spear-shaft passes, and is held, between thumb and fore-
finger, the remaining fingers holding the handle of the
thrower. See figs. 30 and 31. ,
Fig. 30.
Fig. 31.
A similar though smaller pattern, cut out of light, soft
wood, is not uncommon. It is not painted over with ochre
or other material.
Another type is four feet in length, two inches wide,
and very thin and flexible; the side that rests adjacent to the


spear being flat, the opposite slightly convex. The peg that,
in throwing, fits into the pit at the end of the spear is pear-
shaped, and made of hard wood, being attached to the blade
with vegetable string and beeswax. The handle is thick, circu-
lar in transverse section, tapers, and is covered with resin
or wax, applied while warm. It is ornamented with rows
of small holes pricked out with a fish-bone or small stick,
as shown in fig. 32. Experienced men only use this type of
“thrower.”
Fig. 32.
The next form is used exclusively for throwing the small
reed spears of type 11. It is known as billiloa (Larrekiya),
dun (Wogait), or jun (Berringin). It consists of a rod of
hard wood, four feet in length, tapering slightly at either
end. At one end a lump of resin is attached, and,‘while
warm and soft, it is worked by hand into a blunt point, which
fits into the hole at the end of the spear. At about five
inches from the handle end a rim of resin is fixed, and from
it towards the adjacent extremity a decreasing thickness of
similar material. See fig. 33.
Fig. 33.
Fig. 34.
When throwing a spear, the hand is placed above the
resin rim in the position indicated in fig. 34, the shaft in
this case being held by the thumb upon the outer surface of
the middle fingers, without the aid of the index finger. The
handle end is frequently used to produce fire by the usual
rotation process.
The type of spear-thrower described* by Spencer and
b 2
* The Northern Tribes of Central Australia, pp. 670 and
671, fig, 224.


Gillen as belonging principally to the Gnanji and Umbaia
tribes, and consisting of a straight stick, with a human-hair
tassel as a handle, is comparatively rare among the Larre-
kiyas and Wogaits, but has been reported to occur also at
Port Essington by Macgillivray.*
Fig. 35.
Native Sword.
A weapon whose function may be compared with that of
a modern sword is constructed of hard-wood in the shape
shown in fig. 35. It is flat, with sides slightly convex, and
the edges sharp, the length being about four feet. The con-
stricted portion, serving as the haft, may be bound round
with vegetable fibre and covered with beeswax to prevent
the hands from slipping. This weapon is used both to strike
and to ward off blows. When about to receive a blow, a
combatant takes the precaution to keep his elbows down
close to his body, as otherwise the force of his antagonist’s
blow may be sufficient to break his guard and cut his arm.
His legs, too, he draws in to underneath his body. If his
opponent strikes at his hands, he quickly shifts his weapon
sideways to receive and guard off the blow.
This is, no doubt, the weapon described from Port
Essington by Macgillivrayf as a club of compressed form,
resembling a cricket bat, with sharp edges, and used only at
close quarters.
A fighting-stick, used as a two-handed weapon, from
four to five feet in length, circular in section, and tapering
Fig. 36.
towards the handle end, is also used. See fig. 36. It is
made of heavy wood, and covered with red ochre and various
designs in white. The Larrekiyas call this weapon gwanda,
the W o gaits wangurre , the Sheraits jendonn , and the Ber-
ri n gins mileri.
* Narrative of a Voyage of H.M.S. “Rattlesnake,” 1852,
vol. i., p. 147.
t Narrative of a Voyage of H.M.S. “Rattlesnake.” 1852,
vol. i., d. 147. See also Brough-Smyth : Aborigines of Victoria,
1878, vol. i., p. 308; E. J. Eyre: Journs. Expeds. Discov. Gentr.
Austr., 1845, vol. ii., pi. vi., fig. vi; and R. Etheridge: Macleay
Mem. Vol., Linn. Soc., N.S.W., 1893, p. 238, pi. xxx.


Although boomerangs are not known to these tribes, a
small throwing-weapon (damatba) of a flat, spatulate shape,
with small handle and sharp edges, is made of heavy iron-
wood, from six to twelve inches long. It is gripped by the
handle with the right hand, and hurled edgeways, when it
flies through the air with revolving motion, to hit its mark
with either end; it is capable of making a severe wound on
the victim. It is also sometimes used for killing game.
Food and Water Vessels.
The strong coolemans or pitckis of Central Australia, made
of wood or bark, are not used by these coastal tribes, but are
replaced by less durable articles made of paper-bark. Boat-
shaped vessels of simple design are common. Sheets of paper-
bark are folded once along the centre longitudinally, and the
ends tied up with vegetable string* See fig. 37.
Fig. 37.
In a more permanent type, made of stringy-bark, the
ends are sloped and stitched together with cane, the sides
stayed by three inverted hoops of flexible twigs, and bound
crosswise by an equal number of vegetable-fibre ropes. The
sides are kept rigid along their central edge by stitching
rods to them. See fig. 38.
Fig. 38.
Provisional carriers are fashioned out of a long piece of
bark by folding it once upon itself longitudinally, then twice
across its length into the shape indicated by fig. 39. The
women carry this implement either under their arms or by
means of the sling described and shown on page 26. In it
are stowed the gatherings of the day, such as roots and
seeds.
* Cf. W. E. Roth : North Queensland Ethnography, Bulletin
No. 7, Brisbane: by authority, 1904, p. 30, fig. 220.


Small articles are rolled up in paper-bark, the roll
folded in its centre and tied together at the open ends
with grass or fibre.
Infants, too, are wrapped in paper-bark and carried
under the arms of their mothers.*
Fig. 39.
Fig. 40.
Fig. 41.
Water-vessels and baskets are constructed out of the
leaves of the fan-palm. A leaf is folded at the edge oppo-
site the stalk in the manner shown in figure 40, the overlap-
ping folds b and b' being stitched together along the outer
edge. The opposite side, containing the stalk, is treated simi-
larly. The stalk is next bent round, and its end passed
through the gap a, formed by the union of b and b', when the
end is turned back and tied to itself higher up, thus form-
ing a convenient handle. See fig. 41. A similar type has
been recorded from Port Essington by Macgillivray, + and a
basket containing water from Luxmore Head by King. }
Large shells of Melo diadema and Megolatractus arua-
nus§ are generally employed for drinking cups, small water
vessels, and for bailing purposes; in the last-named case, both
for scooping the water from a native well, and for removing it
from their small canoes.
A hole is knocked in the body-whorl of these, and may
be subsequently enlarged by grinding, so that part of the
hand can pass through and grip the columella as a handle.
The latter go by the names maraba (Larrekiya), jinbi fJVo-
Cf. "V\ . E Roth: Ethnological Studies, p. 183, pi. xxiv.,
fig. 436.
t Narrative of a Voyage of H.M.S. “Rattlesnake,” 1852,
vol. i.j p. 146.
I Survey of the Intertropical Coasts of Australia, 1827. vol.
i., pp. 11l and 112.
§ Cf. W. E. Roth : North Queensland Ethnography, Bull. No.
7, Brisbane: by authority, 1904, p. 29.


gait and Berringin), and jinbiwa (Sherait); the former by
malarinda (Larrekiya), ngaremang (W ogait), ngaremuk
(Sherait), and Oanga (Berringin).
Domestic Utensils.
An implement used for cracking the nuts of Cycas media
consists of a piece of hard wood, about one foot in length,
shaped like a cricket-bat. The nuts are held against some
resisting surface, such as a rock or tree-root.
Pointed yam-sticks, similar to the Central Australian
type, are among the belongings of the women of all tribes.
Open-mouthed, cylindrical baskets, with straight sides
and curved bases, projecting upwards to a blunt cone in-
wardly, are plaited of flexible twigs after the pattern repre-
sented in fig. 42. The edge of the mouth is strengthened on
the inside by a stouter twig, and by several vegetable strands
on the outside, the upright bars of the pattern terminating
between the two series, to which they are attached by cross-
Fig. 42.
Fig. 43.
Fig. 44.


winding. See fig. 43. To one side of the rim a long band,
consisting of several strings, is tied at two points in the shape
of a loop. This is hung over the crown of a gin’s head, the
basket hanging down behind. See fig. 44.
Large, flat-folding “dilly-bags,” with long carrying-
bands, and the common chain-twist pattern in vegetable
strands, are usually carried about in the same way as that
just described. At times, however, they are suspended from
the neck, or if they are very heavy they are carried on the
head. When laid flat they measure one foot four inches in
length, and decrease in width from the base (one foot) to
the mouth (nine inches). There is no separate base, but
the two sides of the folded bag are merely knitted along the
bottom.
The mouth-edge is neatly finished off by transverse wind-
ing, and a carrying band is attached at either corner of the
folded bag.
Smaller bags of a somewhat similar construction are
worn round the neck by the men, to carry small, useful
articles. They measure, when folded, eight inches in length,
and four inches in breadth at the base.
Vegetable-fibre Strings.
String made of twisted vegetable-fibre has frequently
been mentioned. This is often made by gins from palm-leaves
in the following manner:
Fig. 45.
One of the long serrations of
the fan-shaped leaf is folded
sharply near its end, the
folded part seized between
thumb and finger, and, with
a sudden jerk, snapped off.
See fig. 45. The outer epi-
thelial covering of the frond
thus locally detaches itself at
the fracture, and curls up into
several narrow strips that project beyond the break. These
are stripped downwards as long, narrow pieces. Two of such
are held, side by side, between thumb and forefinger of the
left hand, and rolled with the palm of the right hand on
the thigh, each strip rolling up separately. When released
by the left hand (but still held by the palm of the right),
the rolled lengths twist loosely round one another, and are
more firmly coiled by a backward roll of the right hand.
Short lengths are thus made, junctions with fresh strips being
made by holding the ends of old and new lengths together,
and applying the same manipulation. Two strings thus pro-


duced are generally knotted at one end, and twisted by a
similar method into one. Women invariably perform the
rolling action on their thighs; some men use the soles of their
feet on account of the growth of hairs on their legs.
Personal Ornaments.
Head-bands— String made from fur, human hair, and
vegetable-fibre are used in the making of head-bands which
are worn as a fillet round the head by young and old. They are
made of long lengths of string, coiled into a ring, and bound
round by more string for a short distance. Those ol the
men are often made of opossum fur covered with red-ochre.
The head-bands of the women consist of about four circ-
lets (three and a-half feet in diameter) of vegetable-fibre, tied
together by transverse winding for about two inches. These,
by & being twisted figure-of-eight fashion, form a head-band
of eight strands. When dancing at corrobborees the bands
are unfolded to the original size, and held in the hands by
passing an end under each thumb, much as a skem of wool
is held to be unwound.
This form is also worn by children, and they, in addi-
tion, construct simpler forms by bending long, slender root-
Fig. 46.
lets of the banyan or other tree spirally, three
or four times round one another, and knot-
ting the ends together. See fig. 46. An
ornamental appendage is sometimes tied to
the head-band, so that it rests over the fore-
head. One consists of the tip of a wild-dog’s
tail fastened with human-hair string and
beeswax; another of the shell of a pearl
oyster (Meleagrina mar gar it if era), similar in
construction to that of the pubic appendage described on
page 45.
Forehead-bands are made by joining about twenty-five
opossum-fur strings closely together to form one flat band
measuring nearly one foot in length and one and a-half inches
in breadth. The opposite ends of the component strings are
divided into two lots respectively; each pair, at either side,
being tied into the form of a loop, to which string is attached
to be knotted behind the head. See pi. ii. The band is
coated with white kaolin, and decorated with vertical bars of
red ochre.
Ornate forehead-bands are made with teeth of kanga-
roos. A number of incisors of these animals are cleaned
by rubbing their enamel surface against the cutting edge of
the native’s teeth, then a long string, twisted from the
fibre of palm-leaves, is wound in succession from the root
of one tooth to the other in a row; the string, after passing


backwards and forwards three times, having its ends fixed at
either side by separate ties. The intervening spaces between
the teeth are interwoven and filled with beeswax. Thus the
white enamel-surfaces only are exposed at the base of the
black band, their roots being embedded in the wax. See pi. i.
Single teeth of the kangaroo are utilized somewhat simi-
aiiy. After cleansing the enamel face as described, a lump
Fig. 47.
of beeswax and a tooth are warmed at a lire; then
the requisite amount of wax is scooped up with
the root of the tooth, and worked with the fingers
into a small globular mass round that end; the
fingers during this process being kept greasy by
rubbing them over the nose, thus preventing the
wax from sticking to them. A little charcoal is
next crumbled between two fingers, and pressed
into the surface of the wax. A central lock of
hair is squeezed into the wax of the ornament,
which is worn over the forehead. See fig. 47.
The curls of warriors are at times partly em-
bedded in beeswax and ochre, the head thereby becoming
covered with numerous cylindrical bodies, from the lower ex
tremities of which the ends of the bundles of hair spread out
and curve upwards.
Necklaces— Reference has already been made to the
grass necklaces worn during initiation ceremonies (page 10).
Fig. 48.
They are made by thread-
ing short segments of
dry flower-stalks of grass
upon thin fur* strings.
About ten of such
threaded strings, about
eight inches in length,
and bearing loops at the
ends, are tied together at
both ends by single
pieces of human-hair
string, which serve to tie
the ornament round the
neck. See fig. 48 and
pi. ii.
Closely allied forms are
made by substituting the
grass segments by truis-
cated shells of Dentalium , when as many as twenty-six strings
are grouped together.
* Cf. J. Macgillivray: Narrative of a Voyage in
“Rattlesnake,” 1852 yol i. p. 146; and W. E. Roth; Ethnolo-
gical Studies, p. 3, pi. xm., fig. 264.


Chest-bands. —About forty thin vegetable-fibre strings
are wound into a skein, like that used in the head band pre-
Fig. 49.
viously described. The
circumference of each
circle thus produced
measures from three and
a half to four feet, a cer-
tain proportion of which
(nine to twelve inches) is
bound round, circumfer-
entially, so that it be-
comes a solid cord. The
strings are divided into
two lots, each of which
is tied round near the
main rope at either end
for a length of about one
inch, to keep the two
halves separate. (See
fig. 49.) The ornament
is worn principally by
women in the manner
shown in figs. 50 and 51.
The bound portion rests
vertically along the back,
and each of the two
halves passes over one
shoulder, diagonally
across the chest and under the opposite arm. to meet the
lower end of the vertical cord.*
Fig. 50.
Fig. 51.
Smaller forms of this ornament are worn round the
neck, most often by men. (See pi. ii.)
* Cf. R. Etheridge: Macleay Mem. Vol., Linn. Soc., N.S.W.,
1893, p. 247; and Spencer and Gillen : The Northern Tribes of
Central Australia, 1904, p. 694.


Armlets. —Reeds are split longitudinally into long, thin
strips, which are scraped into pieces of uniform breadth with
stone knives. In the latter process, one end of the strip is
tied round the great toe of the right foot, from which it is
passed between that toe and the next of the left foot, and
the other end held in the left hand. The right hand is thus
free to do the scraping. See fig. . 52. The prepared strips
Fig. 52.
are neatly plaited into armlets that are worn by male and
female round the upper arm above the elbow. See pi. ii.
With age, these armlets become very tight-fitting, often press-
ing deeply into the flesh, and at times have to be cut on this
account. The armlet has the following tribal names : —Mir-
rakma (Larrekiya), tchellorra ( Wogait and Berringin), and
pinbin (Sherait).
A broader armlet is used during certain ceremonies. It
is one and three-quarter inches broad, and consists of about
twelve narrow series of five plaited strips of cane, subse-
quently knitted into one by a close meshwork of opossum-fur
strings, passing transversely from one series to the other,
alternating over one and under the next.
Waist-girdles. —Waist-girdles are worn by men, and are
made of twisted human-hair string. About thirty string
circles are tied together at opposite ends of a diameter, thus
forming, when pulled out, a bundle of sixty parallel strings.
These are loosely twisted together to form a coil about two
feet in length, which is tied round the waist by a similar


Fig. 53.
piece of string. This article serves, not
only as an ornament, but is also used
as a belt, in which various imple-
ments and weapons are carried, by
thrusting them between belt and body.
A warrior was observed carrying a
stone tomahawk in this manner, and, in order
to stop the swinging of the dependent handle
in his movements, it was made to rest in the
cleft of his buttocks. See fig. 53.
The spiral belts of stringy-bark have already
been alluded to. Their length, when uncoiled,
measures up to eight feet, their width three
inches. See pi. ii.
Pubic 7'assel. —ln the description of various ceremonies
the pubic tassel has been mentioned. It consists of a great
number of twisted strands of opossum fur,
Fig. 54.
bound to a central piece, which is tied to
the waistband, either by two separate ter-
minal strings, or by means of a thick, single
one, passing from the top of the tassel. See
fig. 54. In the latter case, the string ends
in a large knot, that is simply tucked under-
neath the waistband.
The tassel it>, at times, replaced by the
shell of the pearl oyster (Meleagrina mar-
garitifera), two holes being, for this purpose,
drilled near the hinge-line, to receive a
string, whose ends are attached to a thick
knot or small rod, passed under the belt.
The shell is usually worn with its edge and
rough exterior surface ground smooth.
Tribal Communications.
“Message-sticks —A tribe, desirous of carrying on strife
with its rival, sends to them a well-known message-stick by a
messenger. Among others, two types prevail that are used
according to whether the trouble is the result of disagree-
ment between the men from sundry causes, independently
of the women, or whether it has been caused by a woman —
e.g., a case in which a man has stolen a wife from a strange
tribe, and the rightful owner wishes to avenge the theft.
In the former case, the 'message-stick” consists of two
equal internodes of reed, about one inch in length, squared
off at the ends by cutting and subsequent burning on a red-
hot piece of charcoal. These are tied together, side by side,
with fur-string, which passes through the length of both
Teeds, and is knotted into a loop at one end. See fig. 55.


Fig. 55.
Fig. 56.
In the second case, where a woman is concerned, the
‘■'stick” is so far similar; but, in addition, has a longer and
thinner internode passed through one of the other two,
fitting securely into it. See fig. 56.
The messenger, dispatched by the tribe, fastens the stick
underneath his forehead-band by its loop, and hurries to the
party concerned. After it has been noticed by all present, he
hands it to him who should receive it.
Fig. 57.
Fig. 58.
Other ‘ message-sticks’’ that are known, at least to the
Larrekiyas, Wogaits, and Berringins , serve principally for the
summons and invitations to initiation ceremonies. One form
(fig. 57), measuring from three to four feet in length, tapers
to a point at one end, while at the other it has a piece of
fur-string attached. The other (fig. 58), about eighteen inches
long, consists of two segments, the base of one being made
to fit into the other. They are both made from wood coated
with red ochre, upon which designs are painted in white, in
the patterns figured.
The call to initiation ceremonies of the Wogaits is the
“dell” (or diya of the Berringin) —a message-stick of bam-
boo, from four to five feet long, painted transversely with
alternate bands of red ochre, the glossy surface of the bam-
boo having been previously scraped in the parts that are
to take the paint.
Silent Correspondence.
A conventional system of signalling and communicating
with one another, at distance, by gestures, is understood by all
the tribes.


Firstly, when the attention of a person a long way off
is to be attracted for parley, the native stands erect, with
his legs astride, throws his arms outwards, and continues wav-
ing them from a position in which, with elbow T s bent, the
hands rest on the head, to that in which the arms are ex-
tended down either side of the body. While he is executing
these movements the native keeps up a shrill, piercing shout,
no matter whether the other party be within hearing dis-
tance or far beyond it.
Next, if he wishes him to approach : Maintaining the
erect posture, both hands are thrown up above one shoulder,
then swept, in extended condition, before his body to well be-
hind it on the opposite side, and, in so doing, he bends his
head and body forward from the hips.
If he means to indicate that he intends going to the
stranger, the arms are thrown outwards from his chest in
the direction of the latter person. Lastly, if the stranger is
to remain where he is, both arms are held, bent at the elbows,
with the open palms, which are directed towards the distant
party, resting at about the same level as his head, or slightly
above it. They are then swept round in a vertical plane to
a positi6n directly below the starting-point.
In every case the actions are repeated until the distant
man has responded.
Fig. 59.
Fig. 61.
Fig. 60.
Fig. 62.
Musical Instruments.
The music-sticks that are used to beat the accompani-
ment of corrobboree chants consist of two pieces—one, about
nine inches long, flat, rounded off at one end and notched at the
other, is made of ironwood (Erythrophlaeum laboucheri).


See fig. 59. This is held in the left hand, as shown in fig. 60.
The other, the beating-stick, is simply a smaller rod of cir-
cular section, made of mangrove-wood (Rliyzophora sp.).
See fig. 61. It is clasped by the right hand in either of two
ways: In one, the end of the rod is pressed against the little
finger, all other fingers holding it, wfith the thumb under-
neath. See fig. 62. In the other, the end rests against the
side of the middle finger, the thumb and index finger only
holding it.
In performing, the ironwood is struck by the mangrove
rod at about two-thirds its length from the notched end, pro-
ducing a loud, ringing note.
Fig. 63.
The bamboo trumpet, or drone-pipe, is made by cutting
a fairly thick bamboo (Bambusa arnhemica), either curved or
straight, into a length of from four to five feet, and breaking
out its diaphragms, while green, with a rod and heavy
stone. What remains of the septa is subsequently burnt out
with a fire-stick. The outer surface is decorated by scratch-
ing designs upon it with a stone knife. See fig. 63.
When a bamboo is not available, a provisional “trum-
pet” is constructed by breaking the stem of a hybiscus and
carefully removing the bark intact, in the form of a long
pipe. This form does not last for more than a night.
The instrument is used as an accompaniment for cor-
robboree chants, the operator blowing into one end with a
vibratory motion of his lips. Examples of the sounds pro-
duced are given on page 12. A droning, mournful succes-
sion of notes is emitted, and kept up without a break, the
performer breathing all the time through the nostrils, as
when a blowpipe is used. Before play, the pipe is usually
moistened on the inside with water, which is said to improve
its tone.
It is interesting to note that Wilson, in 1835, in refer-
ring to a native dance at Raffles Bay, wrote* that the music
on that occasion was produced by one of the performers from
a hollow tube.
Stokes found the instrument, referred to as “ ebroo ,” in
* Narrative of a Voyage round th© World, 1835, p. 87.


use among the natives at Port Essington in 1838, and wrote*
that they blow through it with their noses. This, in all pro-
bability, is a mistake.
Leichardt also found it at Raffle® Bay in 1845. He callsf
it ‘eboro,” and describes it as a long tube of bamboo, by
means of which the natives variously modulated their voices.
The same instrument is also recorded from Port Essing-
ton by Macgiliivray! as the “ibero,” a piece of bamboo, three
feet n length, which, by blowing into it, is made to produce
an interrupted, drumming, monotonous noise, and by Kep-
pel§ as a bamboo tube through which a monotonous sound is
transmitted by the performer’s breath; and in
the vicinity of Port Darwin, observed a hollow reed, about
four feet in length, that was used like a “cow-horn,” with
the production of a rude burlesque of music.
More recently, Etheridge has described|| these bamboo
trumpets from the Alligator River tribes, of the Northern
Territory.
The instrument is known to the various tribes as mamil-
lima ( Larrekiya ), kanbi fTT ogait), molk (Sherait) f and kcinbi
(Berringin).
Manufacture.
The shells** of large helices (Xanthomelon pomum) are
much used in the making of weapons and implements. A
hole is carefully tapped into the main whorl, leaving the edges
of the fracture as sharp and abrupt as possible.
For rasping and smoothing surfaces of wood, the shell
is held, by the little finger of the right hand, at the open
end of the body whorl, so that the made aperture rests below
the finger. Held in that position, the lower edge of the hole
:i Discoveries in Australia, Voyage H.M.B. “Beagle,” 1837-
1843 (London, 1846), vol. i., p. 394.
t Journ. Overland Exped. in Australia from Moreton Bay
to Port Essington, 1844-1845 (London, 1847), p. 534.
X Narrative of a Voyage of H.M.S. “Rattlesnake,’’ 1852,
vol. i., p. 151.
§ A Visit to the Indian Archipelago, vol. ii., 1853, p. 163.
IT Voyage of the “Alert,” 1883, p. 204.
|| Macleay: Mem. Vol., Linn. Soc., N.S.W., 1893, p. 242, pi.
xxx., fig. 7, and pi. xxxi., fig. 6. See also T. Worsnop: Pres.
Address Sect. Ethnology, Austr. Assoc. Adv. Science, 1895 ; vol.
vi., p. 145, and “The Prehistoric Arts, Manufactures, Works,
Weapons, etc., of the Aborigines of Australia,” Adelaide, 1897,
p. 155.
** Cf. W. E. Roth: North Queensland Ethnography, Bull.
No. 7, 1904, p. 21, and figs. 109 to 115.


forms the rasping surface, which is only worked upwards.
The main portion of the shell during this process, therefore,
lies against the outer side of the palm. See fig. 64.
Fig. 64.
Fig. 65.
When the point of a spear or other weapon is to be
sharpened, the prepared shell is held by the index and middle
finger of the right hand, so that the puncture is underneath.
The point of the weapon is then placed between the shell and
thumb, which latter presses the point against the shell, the
rasping being done only towards the body, in the direction
indicated by the arrow in fig. 65.
A strong bivalve shell (Cyrena essingtonensis) is also
used in the final process of chipping stone spearheads and
knives. The umbonal portion of the shell, with the convex
surface outwards, is held firmly by all fingers of the right
hand, in such a way that the ventral edge is away from the
palm of the hand. The latter border is pressed against the
chipped edge of the stone head, gripped by the left hand, and
by a careful wrenching of the right hand, in such a direction
that the thumb moves downwards, the requisite chipping is
accomplished.
For this final process, a fragment of quartzite or flint is
often used, instead of the shell—that is, after the preliminary
flaking of the stone. This is used in the same way as the
shell.
A bivalve shell is also used for cutting wood. For this
purpose the shell is held, dorsal surface upwards, between
thumb and middle finger, the index finger passing round the
umbo and convex surface. The ventral edge is placed against
the piece of wood, which is held with the remaining two fin-
gers. By combined pressure and half-circular forward
motions of the right hand the wood is cut through. See fig
66.


Fig. 66.
Fig. 67.
Fig. 68.
It is curious to note that if a native be given a steel
knife, it will be used for cutting in much the same manner aa
the shell. The handle of the knife is held by the thumb
against the base of the index finger, while the blunt edge of
the blade rests against the palm. All fingers grasp the rod
and help to press the stick against the cutting edge, and im-
part the upward, half-circular motion to the hand. See fig.
67.
So, too, when chipping a rod, not the handle, but the
blade of the knife is held in the hand, the weight of the
former giving momentum to the movements of the knife. See
fig. 68.
Miscellaneous.
The most general mode of carrying an infant is to sit
it astride on its parent’s shoulder, the child holding on to
the parent’s head for support. On the march, a child often
falls asleep in this position, and then the bearer may be seen
holding one of his hands up as a cushion, upon which the
child may rest its head.
Less frequently to be seen is the method usually adopted
by whites, in which the child is held by both arms. The fact
that the hands are thus preoccupied no doubt accounts to
some extent for the limited use of this method, which is rarely
seen further south. See fig. 69.
It has already been stated that infants are wrapped in
bark of trees, and carried under the arms of their mothers.


Fig. 69.
Fig. 70.
As among other primitive people, the strange habit of
standing at ease on one foot prevails. One leg is bent, and
its foot placed with its heel above the knee of the other,
while the body is steadied by a stick or spear-thrower, held
in the hand. See fig. 70. It may be mentioned that a man
is rarely encountered without this implement. To be without
it is not regarded as correct.
When a waterhole or billabong is reached, a decidedly
animal-like method of drinking is often resorted to: The
Fig. 71.
native wades into the water
for some depth, then, plac-
ing his hands on the knees,
he stoops down, places his
mouth to the water, and
drinks. See fig. 71. On a
hot day, after he has
quenched his thirst, he will
usually cool his body by
pouring water on to his head.


Rivers have frequently to be crossed by swimming, not-
withstanding the numerous crocodiles that abound. Any per-
sonal belongings, that are not to be wetted, are wrapped in
paper-bark, and the parcel held high and dry in the left
hand, while the right arm propels. When long stretches of
water have to be crossed, a log of wood is pushed along in
front of the swimmer, and on it the belongings are carried.
With conditions so favourable, it is surprising that these
coastal tribes have not developed greater power of naviga-
tion* and become capable of fashioning more seaworthy crafts
than were observed; and, indeed, the tribes that have come
into contact with Europeans and Asiatics have proved them-
selves to be well adapted for the art. But it is very doubtful
whether the well-shaped dug-out canoes of the Larrekiyas
near Port Darwin and those of the Wogaits beyond Point
Charles are of native origin. Probably their manufacture is
a product of the contact with Malays, or some other race.
Macgillivray, in 1852, wrotef that "formerly bark canoes
were in general use, but they are now completely superseded
by others, hollowed out of the trunk of a tree, which they
procure ready-made from the Malays, in exchange for tor-
toise-shell and in return for assistance in collecting trepang.”
Both Flinders]; and King§ have described bark canoes
from the north coast of Australia.
Stokes relates IF how Captain Wickham, when he discov-
ered Bvnoe Harbour, found, opposite the small projection of
land he subsequently called Raft Point, “a raft carrying two
women and several children, which was being towed by four
or five men swimming alongside and supporting themselves
By means of a log of wood across their chests/’ By buoying
their body with the same means, several natives attempted to
swim out, against a strong tide, to our luggen, the “Venture,”
when at anchor in Treachery Bay. The same has been re-
corded by His Excellency the Governor, Sir George R. Le
Hunte.!: from Treachery Bay, also. His Excellency points out
* Professor Klaatsch has recorded the entire absence of the
knowledge of navigation among the north-western tribes of West-
ern Australia : Zeitschrift fur Ethnologic, 1906, p. 794.
t Narrative of a Voyage of H.M.S. “Rattlesnake,” 1852,
vol. i., pp. 146 and 147.
I Voyage to Terra Australis, 1814, vol. ii., p. 198.
§ Survey of the Intertronical Coasts of Australia, 1827, vol.
i., p. 90.
IF Discoveries in Australia, vol. ii., p. 15.
If Rep. Visit to Northern Territory: Pari. Paper, No. 49,
Adelaide. 1905, p. 4. See also P. P. King: Survey of the Tnter-
tropical Coasts of Australia, 1837, vol. i., p. 38.


that the Fijians in a similar way employ the trunks of banana-
palms to assist them in their swimming.
Native Aut.
Hock Drawings. —ln 1841 Sir George Grey published*
reproductions of drawings he found in sandstone caves on
the Glenelg River in the north-west of Australia, and about
these much discussion! has taken place as to whether they were
the work of aborigines or not. The recent discovery, however,
of similar designs, in the Kimberley district, by F. S. Brock-
man: and party places the question beyond dispute. The
drawings certainly demonstrate, a greater development of
talent than the average Australian blackfellow is usually
credited with; and that this fact may be originally due to
contact with shipwrecked sailors is supported, among others,
by Dr. F. M. House § and Professor Klaatsch.^j
As a very general remark, the drawings of the natives
under consideration in the present paper, though of the
same type as found throughout Australia, may be classed a
step in advance of those of the central and southern tribes, so
far as they have been placed on record. In the same way, the
music and rhythm of the chants of the northern tribes may
be said to be a little more pleasing to the ear than those of
the Central Australian.
At Blunder Bay, on the Victoria River, east of Endea-
vour Hill, a low cave, or rock shelter, was discovered in the
quartzite range on the river frontage. The numerous mortars
fashioned on the slabs of rock for grinding ochre, utensils,
soot-covered walls, and food remains showed that this cave
has been, and is still, a frequent meeting-place of the blacks.
The sides and roof of the cave were covered with many rock
drawings, the mqst conspicuous of which are represented on
pis. xi. and xii.
* Journals of Two Expeditions of Discovery in North-West
and Western Australia, London, 1841. Plates republished by T.
Worsnop, Presidential Address, Section Ethn. and Anthrop.,
Austr. Association Adv. Science, vol. vi., 1895: and The Prehis-
toric Arts, Manufactures, Works. Weapons, etc., of ihe Abori-
gines of Australia, Adelaide, 1897.
+ Vide Remarks on the Probable Origin and Antiquity of the
Aboriginal Natives of New South Wales, by a Colonial Magistrate
(Hall), 1846: Brough-Smyth : The Aborigines of Victoria, vol. i.,
1878, p. 289; J. Matthew: The Australian Aborigines: Journ.
Roy. Soc., N.S.W., 1889. vol. xxiii., p. 414.
1 Kep. Expl. N.W. Kimberley. 1901, Perth: by authority,
1902.
§ Appendix C. of Rep. Expl. N.W. Kimberley, 1901.
IT Zeitschrift fur Ethnologie, 1906, p. 787.


Of this series, perhaps, the most striking is fig. 1 of pi.
xi., which measures about twelve inches in height, and is
painted in white pipeclay, such as is used for personal orna-
mentation at ceremonies. It represents a woman in a pecu-
liar attitude, with her arms thrown apart, and one leg in a
position strongly suggestive of the stamping movement of
corrobborees. The arms and hands, too, look as if the artist
had intended them to convey the same idea; for, as has been
already alluded to on page 41, in the corrobboree dance of
the gins, a long skein of vegetable strings is often held be-
tween the hands and worked backwards and forwards in a
way which, from a distance, resembles the action of a fiddler’s
bow. No facial or other detailed features were discernible
on the figure, and it is, therefore, doubtful whether the draw-
ing is intended for a front or back view. The extraordinary
large breasts suggest that it represents an adult. It will be
noticed that three fingers only are given to each hand, while
the toes are not differentiated.
Large drawings of crocodiles are plentiful. The best
finished is shown in fig. 2of pi. xi. It measures five feet
three inches in length, and is drawn in red ochre, while its
outline is defined with white pipeclay, made into a paste
with water, and dabbed on with the finger. The head and
tail are decidedly apparent, the latter tapering, the former
being marked by a bulge on the upper surface to indicate
the prominent frontal bone of those reptiles. The limbs are
not divided into separate segments, but are shown as straight,
outwardly directed members of unequal length, and termin-
ating in each case in five claws, this number being correct for
the fore, but one too many for the hind, limbs.
Fig. 3 of the same plate delineates the same animal in
red ochre only, but it is more crudely drawn. The limbs are
without claws, and resemble more the paddles of a turtle in
shape.*
Several other forms of a similar type, with very slight
modifications in design, and varying in length from three to
five feet, are among the group. Figs. 1 and 2of pi. xii. are
identical with that last described, except that, in the latter,
transverse bars have been drawn in yellow ochre, probably to
represent the rows of horny scutes. The alternate placement,
too, of the forelimbs of this design suggests motion.
Fig. 3 of pi. xii. represents two crocodiles, the smaller,
done in yellow, being placed within the outline of the latter,
which is in red.
* A “saurian type” of figure in red ochre on granite has
been recorded from Cloncurrv. Queensland, by W. E Roth:
Ethnological Studies, p. 116. pi. xiv., fig. 280.


In fig. 4 of the same plate we have a sketch, three feet
in length, in red, of what is no doubt intended for the head,
body, and tail of a crocodile, with transverse bars across its
length, as in fig. 2. The legs, however, are missing.
Fig. 5 of pi. xii., measuring two feet in length, is drawn
in red ochre, and depicts the lower portion of a limb of a
crocodile, which, if the number of claws is correctly drawn,
is a hind leg.
Fig. 4 of pi. xi. is of doubtful nature. It is painted in
yellow ochre, while at its lower extremity, a peculiar subsi-
diary design in red surrounds it. The red portion may have
belonged to a previous, and, now, partly obliterated, drawing.
lam unable to offer any suggestion as to its meaning. A
Larrekiya youth traced its resemblance to a frog, and, no
doubt, the general squat shape and broad, round end does
suggest this view.
In fig. 6 of pi. xii. we may find an interest in spite of
the design having become considerably obliterated through
long exposure, from the fact that' the radial markings of the
little that remains remind one slightly of a feature in some
of the paintings figured by Grey* The only other explana-
tion I can offer is the small ornament constructed of fur and
beeswax, worn under the forehead-band of the men.
On the walls of this cave, also, are numerous reproduc-
tions of negative imprints of hands, made in the manner that
has been previously recorded. The palm of the hand is held
flat against the rock-surface, the mouth filled with a thin
paste of pipeclay, or ochre, suspended in water, and these
contents squirted around the hand. The result is that a
patch of rock is stained red or white, as the case may be,
except where it has been protected by the hand. In many
instances the imprint is subsequently tinted with a different
pigment, or in some cases a ground colour is given to the
rock before the imprint is made.
Figs. 7,8, and 9 of pi. xii. demonstrate these productions,
which show that imprints are made both from the right and
left hand.
Fig. 10—a long yellow, sinuous curve —may possibly
have been suggested by the form of a serpent; but it is doubt-
ful. As to the remaining figures on this plate, Nos. 11 and
12, I have no suggestion to offer.
I am indebted to Mr. W. Holtze for photographs of an-
other group of rock-drawings, secured from the Katherine
River. These are all drawn in pipeclay.
* Journals of Two Expeditions of Discovery in North-West
and Western Australia, London, 1841, vol. i.


A creditable design of a lizard is the best preserved of
the group (pi. xiii.). It is well proportioned, and from the
long, slender head and neck of the figure, one might safely
refer it to the monitor (Varcinus sp.), which is there plentiful
and forms an object of their hunts. A decided differentia-
tion between head, body, and tail has been attempted, the
last-named tapering to a long, fine end. A long, bifurcated
tongue is extruded, which is in conformity with a frequent
habit of these animals. The left forelimb, only, possesses the
correct number of claws.
On pi. xiv. are shown tw*o drawings, which may
probably be meant for representations of the archer
fish (Toxotes sp.) that inhabits the waters of this
region. This fish is noted for its habit of cap-
turing insects resting on the leaves of water-plants
by shooting a stream of water upon them from below.
The general shape, position of the fins, straight antero-dorsal
contour, and strong dorsal spines support the above inference.
The lateral line in both drawings seems indicative of the row
of dark circles usually ornamenting the local species; if that
be so, the band is too central in the figure, and should be
nearer the dorsal border.
The next, and different, variety of fish shown on plate xv.
may be referred to a species of Therapon, on grounds of
general similarity of shape. The species inhabiting the local
waters is characterized by the short, square-cut tail, and the
long, low, spiny, postero-dorsal fin that, it is clear, the figure
means to represent. The sketch, at first sight, gives the im-
pression that spines are distributed over the greater part
of the body. The effect is very likely due to streaking of
the pigment by the weather, rather than to design.
Drawings on Bark and Implements. —Reference has al-
ready been made to the emblems painted on the chests of
messengers and visitors to another tribe, or of those who are
returning after a long absence.
Somewhat allied to these are the pictorial representations
of familiar objects upon implements and pieces of bark.
A very instructive series of pipeclay drawings on bark
was obtained from the Katherine River, for the photographs
of which I have again to thank Mr. W. Holtze.
The most true to nature, and perhaps the best-executed
figure of the series is that of a kangaroo in profile (pi. xvi.).
The sense of proportionate size of the various parts is not
bad, as are also their details. From the attitude of the kan-
garoo it is probably intended to be dead; this is suggested
mainly by the drawn-up tail and clutched fore-claws.


The figure on plate xvii. represent-s an emu. Its pecu-
liar feature is the upturned position of the head, which is
not very clearly delineated. The strong, muscular, upper
portions of the" legs have been rather exaggerated by the
artist. The plump body of the bird is true to nature, and
the correct number of toes has been assigned to each leg.
The following design (pi. xviii.), which is less favourably
preserved, depicts either a bustard (Eupodotis austral is)
or a crane, in a rather unnatural attitude, which also may
be that of a dead bird. The long, thin neck is more sugges-
tive of a crane than a bustard. A portion of another bird
is also indistinctly visible.
Fig. 72.
A group of drawings on a single piece of bark was found
bv Mr. P. Foelsche at Port Essington, and is represented in
fig. 72.
One of the figures repeats the salient features of the
kangaroo already described.
The figure on the right-hand side illustrates the method
of hunting the turtle by harpooning it from the bow of a
canoe, the rope that is attached to the harpoon being plainly
visible and connected with the canoe.
The figure of a human being adjacent to this group may
or may not belong to the former. It is of a character simi-
lar to* the drawing described from Blunder Bay; while the
long breasts suggest a woman, the opposite sex is also
clearly indicated in the sketch. The hands and feet are
crudely represented, the latter being abnormally large.
The largest figure, on the left hand, is that of a boat
with a mast and tackle, and three men aboard. These
are not nude, but clothed, and consequently not in-
tended to be aborigines. The boat, which is quite different
from the native canoes, may be intended for one of the


Malay proas that have been in the habit of visiting the
north coast of Australia for many years past.*
A photograph of similar bark drawings said to come from
east of Port Darwin (possibly the Roper River), is in the
local museum at Palmerston. By kind permission of the
Curator, Mr. N. Holtze, I have made the tracings reproduced
on pi. xix. Practically the same objects as those figured in
the preceding plates are represented.
The kangaroos of figs. 1 and 2 are not unshapely, and
the attempt to reproduce a bird of prey perched upon the
one in the former figure is unusual. Wickham, in his ‘ Notes
on Depuch Island, f figures a group in which a similar occur-
rence is depicted. In the explanation he writes that it
“appears to be a bird of prey having seized upon a kan-
garoo-rat.”
The remaining drawings of fig. 2 are, no doubt, intend-
ed to represent turtles.
Figs. 3,4, and 5 are well-finished designs of fish of seve-
ral species.
Fig. 6 clearly represents a saw-fish (Pristis sp.); fig. 7,
a group of dugongs (Halicore australis): fig. 8. two turtles;
and fig. 9, a crocodile. Judging from the position of the
eyes, the last-named figure is intended to represent the dor-
sal surface of the animal, but it will be seen that the artist
also clearly drew the anus.
Fig. 10 is an unusually bold design of a snake.
In conclusion. I have to acknowledge my indebtedness
to Messrs. P. Foelsche and N. and W. Holtze for the instruc-
tive series of photographs, and to Professor E. C. Stirling,
C.M.G., F.R.S., for kind assistance with my manuscript.
Cf. Flinders: Voyage to Terra Australis, 1814, vol. ii., p. 228.
* t Jo ™; Roy \ Ge °S r - Soc., Lond., vol. xii., 1842, p. 79,
a * i• subsequently published it in his ‘Discoveries in
Australia, 184 b, vol. n.; and more recently Worsnop : Pres. Ad
Sec \ Et hnolo F and Anthropology, Austr. Assoc. Adv.
bcience, vol. v., 1895, 1, et op. cit.


APPENDIX.]
COMPARATIVE VOCABULARIES* OF THE LARREKIYA, WOGAIT, SHERAIT, AND BERRINGIN TRIBES.
English.
Larrekiya.
Wogait.
Sherait.
Berringin.
boy
ngim
bambad
maunmin
yerra
girl
banngelo
midalong
darawurru
tchi par re
old man
lorropa
ngamuyuk
ponduburruk
borlo
old woman
gumul
ngabali
mangut
dalyuk
head
malumma
biija
bondu
biva
nose
gwiingwa
wija
inun
yin
ear
banarre
biborre
monijaul
jongi
tongue
kwiamello
ngadal
dang
onngaba
teeth
dunnburragi
dido
dirr
ngal
breasts
gwimingoppa
wing
wiing
yingi
back
gumilangwa
babbera
dan
deddi
hand
gauuarrewa
ngallo
ngenyulk
nungur
shoulder
darramindil
delma
men dum
minma
testes
gwiungwa
bor
pinguin
morro
foot
gwielgwa
jut
mal
gumbo
anus
gumolwa
moung
bop
mono
water
karawa
wjuk
wak
ou da
fire
gwingwa
win
junge
dumor
smoke
gwaiyingwia
wingal
wendo
wind
gororua
marrouk
oruk
mar rouk
star
mamilemma
murre
ngarwa
bnndenyil)H
night
damungwa
moradja
bau yadu
mauperl
emu
dangorra
ngaurun
ngiiurin
allungannva
crocodile
ngangalabba
wilarre
i yingu
warambenn
one
galluwuk
nganjit
yawonyukka
nganji
two
gallitchillik
barkardomma-
lang
warrenukka
meidya
three
gallitchillik
galluwuk
barkarda ngan-
jit
woritdawan
meida nganji
come here
ngallak
gau-a
wai ya
gau
* Compare further :— J. L. Stokes: “ Discoveries in Australia,” 184(>, vol. ii., p. 23 ; T. A. Parkhouse: Trans. Roy. Soc. S.A.,
1895, vol. xix., pt. I. ; E. M. Curr: “The Australian Race,” 188 G, vol. i., p. 258 (No. 1, Port Darwin, by 1 aul loelsche).


EXPLANATION OF PLATES I. TO XIX.
Plate I.
Larrekiya man, about 28 years of age, with body scars ex-
ceptionally well defined, wearing forehead band of kangaroo teeth.
Plate IT.
Larrekiya man, about 35 years of age, wearing plume of
cockatoo feathers, forehead band, nose-stick, necklace made of
threaded segments of grassHstems, armlets, and broad coiled belt
of stringybark; the circular soars produced by the firestick along
the upper arm and diagonally across the chest are also visible.
Plate ITT.
Larrekiya woman, about 30 years of age, showing scars made
on her back during the mourning ceremony at the death of
her husband.
Plate TV.
Kuvandra woman, about 23 years of age.
Plate V.
Tree burial Lifting the corpse to the platform of boughs
constructed in the forks of trees.
Plate VI.
Tree grave, near Knuckey’s Lagoon.
Plate VII.
w °nian in mourning, showing gashed scalp with ashes rub-
bed in. She is m the act of collecting wood for the camp fire,
and is wearing a white forehead band.
Plate VIII.
Natives driving fish, to be trapped in shallow water, Kather-
ine River.
Plate IX.
Native hut.
Plate X.
Pig- 1. Implements for making fire by the “sawing process.”
Fig. 2.—Native making fire by “sawing process.”
Plate XI.
Rock drawings, Blunder Bay, Victoria River.
Plate XII.
Rock drawings. Blunder Bay, Victoria River.
Plate XIII.
Rock drawing, monitor, Katherine River.
Plate XIV.
Rock drawing, fish (Toxotes sp.), Katherine River.


Plate XV.
Rock drawing, fish (Therctpon sp.), Katherine River.
Plate XVI.
Bark drawing, kangaroo. Katherine River.
Plate XVII.
Bark drawing, emu, Katherine River.
Plate XVIII.
Bark drawing, bustard, Katherine River.
Plate XIX.
Bark drawings, east of Port Darwin.
A9696—Hussey >v Gillingham, Printers, Adelaide .






Vol. XXXI., Plate I.
LARREKIYA YOUTH
Hussey & Gillingham, Printers, Adelaide.




Vol. XXXI., Plate 11.
LARREKIYA MAN.




Vol. XXXI., Plate TII.
LARREKIYA WIDOW.




Vol. XXXI., Plate IV.
KUNANDRA WOMAN.




Vol. XXXI., Plate V.
TREE-BURIAL.




Vol. XXXI., Plate VI.
BURIAL-PLATFORM, NEAR KNUCKY’S LAGOON.




Vol. XXXI., Plate VII.
WOMAN IN MOURNING.




Vol. XXXI., Plate VIII.
DRIVING FISH TO TRAP, KATHERINE RIVER.




Vol. XXXI., Plate IX.
NATIVE HUT.




Vol. XXXI., Plate X.
FIG. 1.
IMPLEMENTS FOR MAKING FIRE BY “SAWING PROCESS.”
Fig. 2.
FIRE-MAKING BY “SAWING PROCESS.”




Vol. XXXI , Plate XI .
SURVEYOR GENERALS OFFICE. ADELAIDE. A Vaughan, Photo-lithographer
ROCK DRAWINGS, BLUNDER BAY, VICTORIA RIVER.




Vol. XXXI , Plate XII.
SURVEYOR GENERALS OFFICE. ADELAIDE. A Vaughan, Photo-lithographer




Vol. XXXI., Plate XIII.
ROCK-DRAWING, KATHERINE RIVER (MONITOR).




Vol. XXXI., Plate XIV.
ROCK-DRAWING, KATHERINE RIVER (TOXOTES Sp.).




Vol. XXXI., Plate XV.
ROCK-DRAWING, KATHERINE RIVER (THERAPON Sp.).




BARK-DRAWING, KATHERINE RIVER (KANGAROO).




Vol. XXXI., Plate XVII.
BARK-DRAWING, KATHERINE RIVER (EMU).




Vol. XXXI., Plate XVI IT.
BARK-DRAWING, KATHERINE RIVER (BUSTARD).


Vol. XXXI , Plate XIX.
DRAWINGS ON BARK FROM EAST OF PORT DARWIN.


