

■
r
I
1 »
1
Melbourne:
McCARRON, BIRD & CO., Printers, 479 Collins Street.
1899.
ANTHRAX
AND
INOCULATION.
Reprinted from “The Australasian Pastoralists' Review."


(St 1241/ S
n. • 85
ANTHRAX AND INOCULATION.
["The Australasian Pastoralists’ Review,” 15th September, 1898,]
Attention having been much directed of late to this fatal dis-
ease by instances pointing to its rapid spread, we submit a
general view of the actual grounds for the opinion now so preva-
lent as to the spread of anthrax over previously healthy coun-
try ; and also as to what has been done in these colonies to
combat it and nullify its dangers. In doing this, it will be
well in the first place to give a short account of the disease
itself.
Anthrax, or Cumberland disease, while prevalent from time im-
memorial in the older countries of the globe, is by no means new
in Australia, the first recorded outbreak being in 1847, in the
County of Cumberland, from which it takes its local name.
Since then it apparently has gradually spread, until a very
large portion of New South Wales and Victoria are affected.
For long both the causes and treatment of anthrax were
obscure, it being attributed to poisonous weeds, over-feeding,
and other causes, and it was not till 1861, when Pasteur
published his work on “Germ Ferments,” that Davaine, who
ten years before had noticed rod-like forms in the blood of
animals dead of anthrax, came to the conclusion that they were
living organisms. Fifteen years later, Koch worked out the
life history of the anthrax bacillus by cultivation under the
microscope, and in 1877 Pasteur showed that they were in every
case present, and could be cultivated from the blood of animals
dead of the disease, and foreshadowed the method of inoculation
that he afterwards worked out to such a successful result.
Anthrax, then, is in every case directly caused by the growth
in the blood of a living organism, the bacillus anthracis,


totally invisible without the aid of a powerful microscope, being
not more than the six-thousandth of an inch in length, and the
twenty-thousandth- in breadth, so that it would take not less
than 120,000,000 of them placed side by side to cover a square
inch of this paper.
In sheep the progress of the disease is very rapid, and it is
seldom possible to distinguish those affected till immediately
before death. In those to whom the disease is communicated
experimentally the great majority die in twenty-four to forty-
eight hours, and it is probable that about three days is the
average length of time that elapses between infection and death
in the ordinary way.
The post-mortem symptoms of an animal dead of anthrax
generally are—“ The blood fluid, and of a thick tarry nature,
seldom congealing ; the flesh livid and discoloured; the organs
generally full of blood which sometimes before, and almost
always shortly after death, exudes from the openings of the
body. Small spots of purple or reddish colour often appear on
the lungs, while between the skin and flesh are often patches of
gelatinous matter.
The spleen which in healthy animals is small and firm, is in
anthrax the most characteristic symptom of the disease,
becoming large, dark, and rotten, and swelling to twice or
thrice its natural size.
The greatest care should always be taken in opening ox-
handling any animal suspected of having died of anthrax, as
though man is fortunately not so susceptible as many animals,
still should the diseased blood find access to any sore, infec-
tion and death may readily follow.
So far no remedy is known of much, or, indeed, any value in
treating the disease in stock, and, indeed, were such known,
its rapid course and the obscurity of its symptoms would
effectually prevent its being of service in the treatment of lax-ge
flocks. Year by year the known area of country affected has
been steadily spreading until at the present time very few por-
tions of the Central Division of New South Wales are wholly
clear, and it is known in a good many places in both the Eastern
and Western Divisions, while considerable portions of Victoria
are also affected.
Contrasting this with the limited area to which it was
supposed to be confined only a few years ago, it might well be
thought that it is spreading with almost lightning-like rapidity,
and that the severest measures would be justified to try and
keep it within the present known limits.
While, however, there is no doubt that the practice of shift-
ing sheep affected by the disease in order to stop its ravages—a
practice much more prevalent before the success of vaccination
was fully demonstrated than now—is responsible for the spx-ead-


ing of the disease to a good many fresh spots, it would bo
a great mistake to think that anything like the area now
recognised as infected has become so in recent years, as a great
deal of it has been really so for a very long time indeed, though
owners have either not recognised the true cause of their losses,
or else in the absence of a remedy have concealed them for fear
of prejudicing the sale of their stock. Two causes have con-
tributed to the more general acknowledgment of the disease
over large areas in recent years, the first being the ready means
of recognising it with certainty now open to pastoralists by
the submitting fresh samples of blood from suspected cases to
the vaccination experts for laboratory examination, by means of
which numbers of flocks previously supposed to be suffering
heavy loss from poison weed, &c., have had the true cause
demonstrated, and the deaths stopped by vaccination.
The second, and by far the most important in this connection,
has been the gradual establishment of a firm belief in the suc-
cess of vaccination as conducted by Messrs. M‘Garvie Smith and
Gunn, in reducing the losses to a minimum or even totally pre-
venting them. This belief, justified by and based on the expe-
rience of hundreds of graziers after several years, is responsible
for the vaccination of flocks over a rapidly increasing radius,
and the consequent recognition of so much additional country
as anthrax-infected.
So much is this the case, and for such a long period has the
disease been known to exist over much of the country recently
recognised as infected, that it is a moot point whether it has
not been there from the first stocking of the country, and it
is even arguable whether it may not have been indigenous to
many localities previous to their occupation by Europeans, a
supposition not at all improbable, considering the world-wide
spread of the disease, and the fact that the known limits of
infected country in Australia are to large extent entirely
supposititious, and that anthrax almost certainly exists in scores
of widely separated localities where it is not at present recognised
or acknowledged.
The cure of the disease being out of the question the only
other course open is prevention, and formerly, and even to
some extent at the present time, this was attempted by
immediately moving infected lots of sheep to healthy country.
This often had the desired effect, but when we remember that
the bacillus of anthrax has the power of growing and multiply-
ing in the earth itself, and in its seed or spore form of remaining
unaltered there for years, it is plain that no bettor course for
the spread of the disease could be adopted.
For at least three days after removal from the infected
pasture sheep continue to die, and every one that dies, unless
the carcase is immediately burnt where it lies, forms a possible


plague spot and centre for the future spread of the disease.
Burning in the summer when anthrax is most prevalent is often
out of the question, and as the juices of the dead animal soak
into the soil they form a rich bed in which the germs escaping
from the body grow and flourish for an indefinite period, and,
given favourable circumstances, will soon give rise to another
infected locality.
Fortunately another preventive method is available that is
both safe, speedy, and certain, viz., inoculation with the
attenuated germs of the disease.
It is now a considerable period since Pasteur first demon-
strated the efficiency of vaccination, and in 1888 it was intro-
duced into Australia by his agents, and a demonstration by
them at Junee proved, if proof was necessary, that sheep pro-
perly vaccinated were safe against the disease.
In the following year a large number of pastoralists availed
themselves of this treatment, but unfortunately from various
causes, chief amongst which was the impossibility of preserving
the vaccine in an unaltered condition for any length of time,
the success obtained in the experimental results was very far
from uniformly borne out in practice, and the cause of vac-
cination in the colonies received a serious set back; and inde-
pendent investigators who had suffered from the losses caused
by anthrax, and had with little success tried inoculation as
above, devoted both time and labour to overcoming the
apparently insuperable difficulties.
In the summer of 1893-94 Mr. Gunn first vaccinated sheep for
a few owners with a vaccine he had been for several years
perfecting, and so uniformly successful were the results that in
the following year over half-a-million sheep were treated in
New South Wales and Victoria with this vaccine for the most
part with complete success, but a few cases of comparative
failure to give complete protection occurred, where, owing to
distance, the delay in using the vaccine was considerable.
This was owing to the fact that the new method, while giving
a perfect vaccine, did not give a material capable of being kept
for any length of time in perfect condition when exposed to
the conditions inseparable from its conveyance over the wide
distances and under the extremes of climate met with in
Australia. Matters were at this stage when Mr. Gunn merged
his business in the present firm of M‘Garvie Smith and Gunn,
and so secured Mr. M'Garvie Smith’s invaluable discovery of the
method of preserving the vaccine unaltered for months, which
not only rendered it possible to send it to any part of Australia
in the same condition as when it loft the laboratory, but by
this very power enabled the strength used to be so nicely
chosen that it became possible to protect the largest flocks by
one inoculation only, an advance that previously was only


possible on the smallest scale, and within immediate reach of
the laboratory. This great advance after long and careful
testing was put in general operation last season, and over
1,000,000 sheep were protected by a single inoculation.
How great an advantage this is to stockowners can only
be justly appreciated by those who have had all the trouble and
labour of two successive musterings at a fortnight’s interval,
under the old system, to get the protection now available at
one-half the work, and in a fraction of the time. Year by year
as the vaccine has been perfected the cost has been reduced,
until now there is no excuse for the owner, who sees his flock
decimated by anthrax, while within his reach is a certain
preventive at a cost that a loss of little more than 2 per cent,
of his flock from disease would outweigh; and when it is
remembered that in New South Wales, at all events under
ordinary conditions, 30 per cent, is a moderate average loss in
infected flocks, and that it often ranges to 50 or even 70 per
cent., and that after vaccination the average loss is less than
| per cent., the enormous gain to individual owners and to the
State is easily seen, whilst an indirect but substantial gain is,
that with the reduction and practical stoppage of deaths the
danger of further spread of the disease is almost eliminated, and
even the worst infected pastures tend to become gradually
clean and healthy. Wo would impress on all owners who
may have stock dying of anthrax or of unknown disease,
the necessity of at once ascertaining definitely if the cause
of death is anthrax, which as before indicated, can be
now done with certainty and at no expense, and then
of taking every measure possible to limit and overcome the
disease—first, by at once vaccinating all affected flocks ; and,
secondly, by, wherever possible, burning all carcases of animals
dead of the disease, and where this is impracticable at the time,
of covering them with wood and burning where they lie as soon
as the season will permit. On no account should sheep while
dying be moved on to healthy country.
A word of caution, in conclusion, to those who have in any
way to handle animals dead of authrax to impress the necessity
of the utmost care. Rubber gloves should be worn wherever
possible, and where this is not practicable, the hands should be
washed both before and after the work in a strong solution of
carbolic acid or bichloride of mercury and water. Were these
precautions strictly adhered to, many lives annually sacrificed
would be preserved.


["The Australasian Pastoralists' Review," 15th December, 1808.]
Anthrax and Inoculation.
To the Editor.
Sir,— My attention has been drawn to an article in yonr
“Review” for September, upon “Anthrax and Inoculation,”
which calls for some comment. As the manager of a company
which has purchased the exclusive right of a direct supply of
anthrax vaccine from the Pasteur Institute, Paris, and its sale
and use throughout the Australasian colonies, I trust my remarks
will be taken as being made with a full sense of responsibility, and
as being worthy the attention of all those who desire, as every
colonist must, to grapple successfully with the very serious and
steady increase of the disease in this country.
With a portion of the article referred to I may say at once I am
entirely in accord. As all the world knows, the remedy for anthrax
was discovered and made practicable by Pasteur. That has for
years past been a matter of common knowledge. As the article
correctly states, the efficacy of the Pasteur vaccine was formally
demonstrated for the first time in these colonies at the Junee
experiment, which was carried out under the supervision of the
members of the Anthrax Board, in September and October, 1888.
This board consisted of five of the leading authorities and experts
in the colony, appointed by the New South Wales Government,
including the Government Analyst, the Chief Inspector of Stock,
and the Government Veterinarian, Mr. Stanley. The thorough-
ness of the board’s investigations and the rigid and searching
nature of the test then applied are a matter of history. The
result, as your article correctly states, was that the demonstration
proved, “ if proof was necessary,” that sheep properly vaccinated
with the Pasteur vaccine were safe against the disease. To Pas-
teur, then, and his representatives, the writer of your article
admits the colonies are indebted for the discovery and introduction
of the only known safe and certain vaccine protecting against
anthrax. So far I have nothing to complain of. The article in
question, however, goes on to say (in substance) that unfortunately
later experiments have proved that the vaccine is valueless, be-
cause it will not keep. That statement, Mr. Editor, is absolutely
untrue, and a gross injustice, not only to the great name of Pasteur,
but also to the Pasteur Institute, with its staff of distinguished
scientific men throughout the world. It is also, I submit,
with great deference, unfair to my company; and had it
appeared in any other than yonr columns I should be strongly
inclined to suggest that it was prompted by a trade riva 1


In the present case I cannot assume this; the writer has
obviously been misinformed, and has not made the inquiry
which in a few minutes would have satisfied him how gross an
error he was falling into. Surely, Sir, it would have been only
fair play, before publishing a leading article with such a mis-
statement in it, and giving currency to the same in perhaps the
most important pastoral publication in the Australasian colonies,
for my company and Dr. Kougier, the well-known expert from the
Pasteur Institute, to have been asked what truth there is in the
matter. The answer to any inquiry would have been ready and
clear. The Pasteur vaccine stands alone. It is the only vaccine
which the scientific world at present knows and recognises as an
efficacious prophylactic in cases of anthrax. Its preparation is
conducted under the most special precautions, and the original
lymph comes only from the hands of the experts working at the
Pasteur Institute at Paris, upon the lines and methods prescribed
by the great discoverer himself, Louis Pasteur. It is idle to pre-
tend that there can be any mistake in these methods. They have
received the sanction and approval of the most eminent living
scientists in every country in the world. They have indeed never
been questioned. The lymph so prepared is sent with the utmost
care to Australia. It is absolutely untrue that when it reaches
these shores it is of no value. The burden of proving this lies
upon those who allege it. The lymph when it arrives is, with the
exception of those rare occasions when almost every precaution
known to science fails, invariably in good and sound condition.
Its value and efficacy on arrival are tested in our own laboratory
at Double Bay by producing cultivations from it. If the anthrax
bacillus can be duly developed, well and good, if cot, then of course
the vaccine is not issued. The matter proves itself. I have so far
explained what precautions we take, and I pause here for a moment
to ask the writer of the article in question whether it can be
seriously denied that the vaccine is perfectly sound and good on
its arrival. But I will now go a step further. We are told in the
article (in effect) that, even assuming the vaccine to be good when
imported, it is of practically little value, because, with the heat it
is exposed to in this country, and the distance it has to travel to
reach back blocks, by the time it reaches the stockowner it has
lost its virtue. Now, here again, I say that such a statement ought
not to have been made without careful and independent inquiry.
Again I say also that such a statement is wholly untrue and mis-
leading. It is not a fact that the Pasteur vaccine is in the ordinary
course of things so affected. There being only one vaccine known
to the world as efficacious, viz , an attenuated culture of the
bacillus, we know at once the ground we are on. We know that
the bacillus requires air, and cannot bs bottled up for an indefinite
length of time whilst retaining its prophylactic energy. That
apparently the writer of your article did not know. We know,
too, precisely how long the bacillus, can live during trans-
port. Pasteur determined this point years ago, and his
observations have been confirmed over and over again. The
bacillus anthracis has a vitality of many months under the


ordinary conditions of transport and use in the colonies. It
the tabes are subjected to abnormal temperatures, either of heat
or cold, it dies, and thus becomes worthless for the purpose of
vaccination. So, too, an exposure to sunlight for five or six days
would damage the vaccine. But if the usual precautions are
followed there is no reason why the vaccine should not remain
perfectly good for any time reasonably necessary to inoculate the
flock under treatment. As to temperature, the vaccine remains
good at anything between 55 and 120 deg. Fahrenheit, and merely
casual temperatures reaching these figures will not seriously
impair its value. Indeed, they may be passed, either as minimum
or maximum, without damage being done. In regard to the time
occupied in transport or prior to use, if I am correct in stating the
life of the bacillus as above, it must be obvious to all that there is
no conceivable reason why any stockowner should have ground for
complaint, even if he lives at Perth or Cooktown. We could
undertake, indeed, to send a tube of our vaccine round the
world with perfect confidence as to its being thoroughly sound
on the termination of its lengthy journey, and the suggestion
that we are dependent upon the researches of an ingenious
Australian for a means of keeping the vaccine good can only
serve to raise a smile amongst scientific men of any standing.
If I might be allowed to do so, I would propose a journey
round the world for our vaccine, and any competitor under
precisely similar conditions, and under adequate supervision.
I do not pretend to say what the result would be in the
case of the other vaccine, but I do know that it is simply a
foregone conclusion in our favour as to the absolutely sound
condition of ours when it returns home. There is, however, no
reason why the stockowner should depend upon stale supplies of
vaccine, since fresh tubes can be procured from the laboratory at
a moment’s notice. Upon this point I say, therefore, the writer of
your article is called upon to justify and defend his statement that
the Pasteur vaccine is not equal to the demand made on it by the
usual conditions of transport and use in these colonies, and that
until he does so I most characterise his statement as a gross and
almost reckless error, and one directly contrary to known scientific
facts. The last point to which I wish to draw attention is an
alleged discovery that a single inoculation is an adequate protec-
tion ; and that by inference the usual Pasteur method of two
vaccinations has been superseded as out of date. Now, all scientists
are glad to learn new methods; and I, for one, should be only too
glad to know that the expense of the second inoculation can be
avoided. Here again, however, we know our ground. Pasteur
and other European savants have travelled over it before.
Their experience is uniform, and I know at present no local
facts to contradict it. One inoculation doet not adequately
protect the animal from anthrax. Pasteur proved it, and
prior to your article there has to the best of my belief, never
been a suggestion by a leading journal, deriving its information
from a sure scientific source, that Pasteur and his colleagues were
wrong. It would indeed be somewhat amusing to think that a


popular article in even so excellent a journal as yours, which does
not, however, devote itself to higher science, shonld lead the
Fastenr Institute and the rest of the scientific world on the right
road after so many years of careful study on their part. Apart
from this, however, let me say that I await with interest further
detailed proof that Pasteur was wrong again when he decided on
two inoculations instead of one; and that from my own personal
experience I can confidently hazard the opinion that the single
inoculation, whilst protecting for a limited period, or under specially
favourable circumstances, cannot be proved to be sufficiently safe
for general use.
In conclusion, Mr. Editor, I would suggest that if we are really
face to face with a series of scientific discoveries which practically
put Pasteur on the shelf, and make his work obsolete (as the tone
of your article indicates), then the sooner these facts are brought
home to the world the better. Fastenr was not taken on trust in
1881, when he made his great announcement, nor again in 1888,
when he introduced it to Australia. The Junee experiment proved
np to the hilt all that he had said. So too, now, is it unreasonable
to ask, before we crown the heroes of your article with laurel, and
award them the blue ribbon of fame, that they shall give the
humble followers of science a practical opportunity of testing
whether Fastenr is right or wrong, and whether in science two and
two continue to make four.—Yours, &0.,
E. ZIMMERMANN,
Manager of the Fastenr Anthrax
Vaccine Laboratory Limited.
“ Hermitage,” Double Day, 7th December, 1898.
[“The Australasian Pastoralists’ Review," 13th January, ISO!).]
Anthrax and Inoculation,
To the Editor.
Sib, —In your issue of the 15th December M. Zimmerman, in
the course of some comments on the above subject, takes occasion
to state that one vaccination does not give protection, and also
goes out of his road to make other statements practically concern-
ing our firm that compel me to ask a short space in your columns
to put a few questions to him. So far, while advertising our
vaccine and the great improvements effected therein, we have
studiously refrained from publishing any of the large amount of


material at onr disposal calculated to throw discredit upon our
competitors.
Now, Sir, with reference to M. Zimmerman’s assertion, that the
single vaccination does not adequately protect the animal from
anthrax, 1 have only to point to the fact that last season we
inoculated over a million sheep with one inoculation, and though
that was the first season of its use, and work on the large scale
revealed slight defects that small tests could not do, still it was so
successful that, out of the enormous number of sheep treated less
than 10 per cent, had to receive the second inoculation to render
them absolutely immune; and this season, as we are more and
more perfecting the material, out of another million not 2 per
cent, required a second vaccination. These are facts susceptible
of ready proof, worth far more than the sarcasms of any interested
opponent of the process, and accentuate the important fact that
we are carrying out with the magnificent results quoted above a
process that M. Zimmerman’s science has not yet had time to be-
lieve possible.
I can state, confidently, that before long the single vaccine will
be so perfect that not a single sheep will require a second vacci-
nation.
M. Zimmerman’s argument that because Pasteur and other
European scientists have travelled over the ground before, there-
fore there can be no further advance, is simply the hidebound one
of conservatism all the world over, which if generally followed,
would have left ns where our forefathers were. True scientists
know nothing more certain now than that every science marches
on to fresh discoveries.
Now, Sir, another important assertion of M. Zimmerman, in
which he states that the Pasteur vaccine is equal to all demands
made upon it by the conditions of travel, &0., in Australia, and
characterises any statement to the contrary as a gross and reckless
error. As I am responsible for all facts given in the article in
in question, I wish to ask M. Zimmerman the following questions;—
First, how does he account for the steady decline in the use of
the vaccine that has behind it the great Pasteur’s name, with all
its prestige, with five years’ start without competition, and the
steady rise in favour of that supplied by two “ ingenious” Austra-
lians?
Second, will M. Zimmerman give particulars as to the cause,
other than that given already in the article he traverses, of the
unsuccessful work of the Pasteur vaccine on, we will take as
examples, three large stations widely separated, say, Quat Quatta,
Yalgogtin, and Polygamy? For reasons which you will well
understand, we do not wish to name more places than necessary,
but if M. Zimmerman wishes I will supplement this list
indefinitely for him. In these cases the Pasteur vaccine was
supplied by well-known scientists—Drs. Loir and Moment, repre-
sentatives of the Pasteur Institute, and relatives of its principals.
Thirdly, as M, Zimmerman asks for practical proof of the success
of our methods, will he kindly tell ns what better practical proof
he asks than that furnished by the fact that whereas in 1888 the


Pasteur vaccine stood alone in Australia, and large numbers were
treated by it soon after, that in 1897 the official record of sheep
vaccinated by it had fallen to something over 20,000, while that
of the firm he affects to despise was over 600,000 for the
same period, though the actual discrepancy was much larger
than the official figures show, our actual number vaccinated
for that season being over a million, and for nine months of the
present season we have passed that figure. In connection with
this it may interest your readers if I give you the comparative
figures of sheep vaccinated in France by the Pasteur process
during the eleven years 1882-93, as against those vaccinated by
us in Australia from 1894 to 1898, or less than half the period,
nearly five years.
In the eleven years 1882-93 Messrs. Friedberger and Frohner, in
their standard work on ‘‘Veterinary Pathology,” give the total
sheep vaccinated by the Pasteur process in France as 3,296,815.
In the five years 1894-98 the numbers vaccinated by us were
3,815,638, or a total in five years of over half a million more sheep
than were treated in France in eleven years. Of this number
594,465 were treated by myself in 1894, and the remainder since
then by my partner and myself. These figures are open to
verification by inspection of our books at any time.
M. Zimmerman asks us to believe that science is Chinese, that
it attains a point and cannot pass it, and that beyond Pasteur
there can be no improvement. With all respect to the great names
of Davaine, Koch, and Pasteur, can M. Zimmerman explain, be-
sides the Quat Quatta, Yalgogrin, and Polygamy failures, the
great Russian failures we now quote from Messrs. Friedberger and
Frohner, page 359 of their excellent article on anthrax “In the
Crimea 4564 sheep were inoculated in 1888 with vaccine obtained
from Odessa, Bardaoh, the result being that 3478 (80 per cent.)
died owing to a mistake having been made between the premier
and second vaccine. Inoculations made with Pasteur’s vaccine
produced similar unfavourable results in the district of Odessa,
Gamaleia,” while again on page 360 they say; “ The inoculation
experiments which M‘Fadyean has made in England have
convinced him that it would be inadvisable to introduce Pasteur’s
method into that country.” In all these cases I quote from
Captain Hayes’ translation of the work referred to, and can M.
Zimmerman, besides these failures, explain my firm’s undoubted
success ?
In speaking recently on this subject Dr. Ashburton Thompson,
President of the New South Wales Board of Health, stated that
vaccine under the most favourable circumstances killed 5 per cent,
of the sheep treated; he undoubtedly referred to the published
results of Pasteur’s process, as under no circumstances whatever
will M‘Garvie Smith and Gunn’s vaccine kill a sheep, and we
have not only corrected Dr. Thompson’s statement in the public
press as far as our vaccine is concerned, but have offered to give
£lOOO to the charities of Sydney if be can produce proof of any
deaths having been caused by it out of the 3,750,000 sheep treated
by us.


Now, Sir, when yon recollect the conditions under which sheep
are depastured in Australia, and the enormous difficulty, or, I
might say, the practical impossibility in many cases of securing a
clean muster, it is easy to see the advantage possessed by an
absolutely safe vaccine over one in which any sheep unvaccinated
at the first inoculation or in which the first vaccine from any
cause is inoperative is liable to be killed by the second vaccine.
This is leaving altogether out of the question the enormous ad-
vantage of our keeping process and single inoculation.
With regard to the keeping qualities of the Pasteur vaccine, M.
Zimmerman states that be would undertake to send his vaccine
round the world with perfect confidence in its condition on its
return, &o. If so, again I ask him how it failed on Quat Quatta,
Yalgogrin, and Polygamy, &c., not only once but on several occa-
sions? Now, Sir, we challenge him to the following trial, viz.,
that he and ourselves shall deposit in responsible bands within
one month from the publication of this letter vaccine for at least
50,000 sheep, and also the sum of £5OO, such vaccine to be placed
under lock and seal for at least three months, under ordinary
climatic conditions, and then tested under all usual test conditions
on, say, fifty sheep each, the stake of the party whose vaccine
shall prove the inferior of the two to be handed by the stake-
holder to the charities of Sydney.
In conclusion, Sir, as I do not wish to take up too much of your
valuable space, I enclose for your perusal and the perusal of any-
one interested a few letters from gentlemen who have tried both
methods, and if after their study M. Zimmerman wishes their
publication we will be happy to oblige him. I will also, if be
wishes, furnish him with a full and detailed record of the Pasteur
vaccination on Yalgogrin in 1890, 1891, and 1892, with the failures
and losses there that compelled me much against my will to seek
for a vaccine that could be relied on to protect the sheep under my
charge, and will also at his request publish this inextenso. In fact,
Sir, I am beginning to think that this record, which was carefully
kept at the time, has such a scientific and practical interest that it
is my duty to publish it in any case for public information.
This letter is already far too long and I must stop, though I have
barely opened ground on the points mentioned, but I will just state
in conclusion that I am inclined to think that by the time M.
Zimmerman answers my questions and studies the records I am
prepared to submit to him he may perhaps arrive at the same
opinion as the pastoralists of Australia have long since done as to
the value of the “ unbroken record of the Pasteur vaccine” here,
but in a very different sense to that suggested by his advertisement.
—I am, <ko,,
J. A. GUNN, op M'Garvie Smith and Gunn.
McCarton, Bird & Co., 479 Collina-street, Melbourne.
copy
