

Anzac Day
25th April
MARSHAL FOCH’S message
“I am happy to express to Australia the undying
memory which we shall cherish of her incom-
parable soldiers.”
The Landing at Anzac.
(From a painting hy Cyrus Cuneo.)


ANZAC DAY
the 25th April, 1915, men of the First Australian Division, followed and supported by the mixed
Australian and New Zealand Division, landed on Gallipoli and made their kangaroo-like leap up
the cliffs at Anzac. Their achievement was paralleled by the famous 29th Division at Cape Helles.
The name that has since become so celebrated has an interesting origin. Writing in the Anzac Book,
Sir W. R. Birdwood, General Officer Commanding the Anzac Army Corps, explains—“ When I took over
the command of the A. and N.Z. Army Corps in Egypt a year ago, I was asked to select a telegraphic
code address for my Army Corps, and then adopted the word “ Anzac.” Later on, when we had effected
our landing here in April last, I was asked by General Headquarters to suggest a name for the beach
where we had made good our first precarious footing, and then asked that this might be recorded as
“ Anzac Cove v> —a name which the bravery of our men has now made historical, while it will remain
a geographical landmark for all time.”
Anzac Day has been celebrated by Australians each year since the great exploit on Gallipoli, and bids
fair to be celebrated annually for ever by the Australian people. This is the last Anzac Day in London
before the return of the present Australian overseas army called the A.I.F.
Anzac Day last year was celebrated in grim earnest in France, for in the dark and early morning of
April 25, 1918, the 13th and 15th Australian Infantry Brigades were launched into the great night attack
which retook Villers-Bretonneux in the height of the German offensive and thus saved the Allied line
before Amiens.
THE LANDING ON GALLIPOLI.
How Australian Troops First Made Their Name.
“ A rugged and difficult part of the coast,” says
General Sir lan Hamilton, “ had been selected
for landing . . . . -a theatre strongly garrisoned
throughout, and prepared for any such attempt,”
involving “ difficulties for which no precedent was
forthcoming in military history, except possibly in
the sinister legends of Xerxes.” The first landing
and assault was made by the 3rd Australian
Brigade (9th, 10th, 11th and 12th Battalions).
This brigade was followed by the Ist and 2nd
Australian Brigades, comprising the remainder of
the First Australian Division, and later in the
same day by two brigades of the Australian and
New Zealand Division —the 4th Australian Brigade
and the New Zealand Infantry Brigade.
There have been many descriptions of this great
exploit. General lan Hamilton’s graphic despatch
will live with all those of the journalists. He tells
how, as the first boats approached the rugged
shore in the dark, the enemy began to stir —about
one battalion of Turks was seen running along
the beach to intercept the lines of boats—and how,
in spite of a hot and devastating fire, which caused
many casualties, the Australians in the boats
remained perfectly quiet and orderly as the boats
grounded. “ The moment the boats touched land
the Australians’ turn had come. Like lightning
they leapt ashore, and each man as he did so went
straight as his bayonet at the enemy.” As
straight as his bayonet! And these were not then
seasoned infantry, but raw citizen soldiers!


Mr. C. E. W. Bean, Official War Correspondent
with the Australian Imperial Force, who wit-
nessed the landing, wrote :
“ The Australians and New Zealanders were
landed in two bodies, the first covering a force
to seize the ridges around the landing place,
and the second or main body to begin landing
about an hour later. The moon that night set
about an hour and a half before daylight. This
just gave time for the warships and transports
of the covering force to steam in and land before
•dawn.
“ The covering force was taken partly in four
of our own transports and partly in three battle-
ships. The night was perfect. About three
o’clock the moon set, and the ships carrying
troops, together with three warships, which were
charged with protecting their flanks, stole in
towards the high coastline. It was known that
the coast was fortified, and that there was a
battery on the promontory two miles to the south-
wards, and that several other guns amongst hills
inland covered the landing place. The battleships
and transports took up a position in two lines,
and the troops were transferred partly to war-
ships’ boats and partly to the destroyers, which
were hurried in-shore and re-transferred the men
to other boats. They then made by the shortest
route for the beach.
“ It was eighteen minutes past four on the
morning of Sunday, April 25th, when the first
boat grounded. So far not a shot had been fired
by the enemy. Colonel Maclagan’s orders to the
brigade were that shots, if possible, were not to
be fired till daybreak but the business carried
through with the bayonet. The men leapt into
the water, and the first of them had just reached
the beach when fire was opened on them from the
trenches on the foothills, which rise immediately
from the beach.
“ It was from them that the fire first opened
on the troops as they landed. The bullets struck
fireworks out of the stone along the beach. The
men did not wait to be sent, but wherever they
landed they simply rushed straight up the steep
slopes. Other small boats, which had been cast
off the warships’ steam launches which towed
them, were digging for the beach with oars.
These occupied the attention of the Turks in the
trenches, and almost before the Turks had time
to collect their senses, the first boat-load was well
up towards the trenches.
“ The Turks in the trenches facing the landing
had run, but those on the other flank and on the
ridges and gullies still kept firing upon the boats
coming in-shore, and a portion of the covering
force, which landed last, came under a heavy fire
before they reached the beach. The Turks had
a machine-gun in the valley on our left, and this
seems to have been turned on to the boats con-
taining a part of the 12th Battalion. Three of
these boats were left lying on the beach some way
to the north, and wounded men lay in them for
two days before they could be rescued.” Officers
and men died fighting like tigers. “ The 3rd
Brigade went over the hills with such dash that
within an hour of landing some had charged over
three successive ridges. Each ridge was higher
than the last, and each party that reached the top
went over it with a wild cheer. Since that day
the Turks never attempted to face our bayonets.”
Then came the Turkish counter-attack, which
lasted most of the day and night, and a long
strain on the thin Australian line, sore-pressed,
bewildered, and swayed by rumours started by
English-speaking Turks lurking behind the lines.
Mr. Bean describes the relief of all when the
first little Indian Mountain Battery, having
landed, began to fire on the enemy—for no
artillery had landed hitherto, and the infantry had
had to fight their own battle, helped only by the
Navy guns, belabouring distant targets. The line
was dug in by morning (April 26th), and the
position was well established.
‘‘Crossing the top of Maclagan’s Ridge,”
writes Mr. H, W. Nevinson, the scattered
groups of the 3rd Brigade suddenly looked down
into a deep valley running right across their
advance. . . . Down into this valley the 3rd
Brigade plunged. The thick bushes and devious
watercourses split them up. Battalions and
companies lost touch in haphazard advance.
Shrapnel from the opposite height and both flanks
swept the valley in bursting storms. From the
rear and every side, hidden snipers picked the
isolated men off as they struggled forward.
Officers fell. Orders ceased. In separate knots,
without leading or control, the men ran, and leapt,
and stumbled on. Right across the valley they
struggled, shouting their battle-song, ‘ Australia
will be there,’ bayoneting all Turks they caught,
and cursing as they fell. Up the opposing heights
they climbed —heights so steep on the face that,
later in the campaign, steps had' to be cut for
paths, and supplies were hauled up by pullies.
Over the top of that steep ridge the groups
charged on. Many got farther than Anzacs were
ever to go again. Some Jooked down into the
valleys where the nearest Turkish camps of Koja


Dere and Boghali stood. Many disappeared for Mr. John Masefield wrote: “There was no
ever into the unknown wdlderness. ‘ They refused thought of surrender in those marvellous young
to surrender,’ the Turks said at the Armistice of men; they were the flower of this world’s man-
a month later— ‘ they refused to surrender, so we hood, and died as they had lived, owning no
had to kill them all.’ ’’ master on earth.”
THE NIGHT ATTACK ON
VILLERS-BRETONNEUX.
On April 24th, 1918, with their double offensive
on the British lines—along the Somme and in
Flanders—at (he height of its force, the Germans
suddenly flung three divisions at the exhausted
British line around Villers-Bretonneux, on the
right flank of the Australian Corps position, and
stormed the place. Villers-Bretonneux and the
bald hill north of it were the key to the whole
position in which the Allies were holding on
desperately to Amiens, and the German capture of
the place compromised vitally the defence of this
part of the Western Front.
in the general plan of attack. There is no praise
too high for the 13th Brigade that night. The>
began fighting before the men of the 15th Brigade,
on the other side of the wood, who were delayed
in the dark owing to the difficulty of keeping
direction, and did not come into contact with the
enemy until after 11 p.m., more than an hour
later. The 13th Brigade men, for the first hour
or two, were driving into the unknown, believed
to be a forlorn hope, fighting against every con-
ceivable difficulty which can discourage attacking
troops. Besides the galling flank fire they had to
cross some of our own uncut wire running
obliquely across their front and tending to lead
them astray in the dark.
An immediate counter-attack was planned, and
that night the 13th Australian Brigade (49th,
50th, * 51st and 52nd Battalions) and the 15th
Australian Brigade (57th, 58th, 59th and 60th
Battalions) were ordered to assault and retake the
town and the hill. It was a desperate adventure,
against an exultant enemy, greatly superior in
numbers, entrenched in a strong position. The
troops of each brigade had no time to reconnoitre
the ground. But the morrow’s dawn would be
the dawn of Anzac Day, and the Australians went
for their task in the full enthusiasm of that know-
ledge, and accepted all the odds against them.
•
But they fulfilled their 'orders almost to the
letter, and by dawn (April 25th) had won the posi-
tion appointed them to take. Before dawn the
Huns sent in emissaries under a white flag to
inform the Australians that they were surrounded
by the 4th Prussian Guards Division (as indeed
they practically, though only temporarily, were)
and to offer them surrender. The Australians
sent these emissaries back as prisoners and went
on digging in.
A big wood —the Bois I’Abbe —filled with
German poison gas, protected the Huns from the
immediate west, and the attack was made from
each side of the wood—the 13(h Brigade attacking
over flat country at the south-west, and the 15th
Brigade up the rising ground to the north-west.
Meanwhile the 15th Brigade had also about
dawn captured the hill-top north of the town, after
an exciting fight, and shortly after daybreak the
town of Villers-Bretonneux was attacked from
that flank, the Huns were driven out of it, and
the two brigades effected junction with each other
to the east of the town in the former British front-
line trenches.
The assault was driven past the town on each
side with splendid dash, and the troops behaved
magnificently under the heaviest machine-gun fire,
not only in front of them but from the town and
the edge of the wood on their flank as well. This
flanking fire was not overlooked; it was coldly
calculated, and, as far as possible, provided for
The Huns never afterwards attacked here. The
brilliant recapture of Villers-Bretonneux marked
definitely the failure of the Germans to reach
Amiens, and the failure of their plans to separate
the British and French armies. C.
Printed by the Rosebery Press, Ltd., 19 Rosebery Avenue, B.C. 1, and issued by the Intelligence
Department of the High Commissioner for Australia, Australia House, Strand, W.C.
