

ARCHITECTURAL
MISSION
TO THE AMERICAS.
REPORT BY
C.V. HOWARD.


ARCHITECTURAL MISSION
TO NORTH AND SOUTH AMERICA
AUTHORITY.
Under date of March 2nd 1945, the Prime Minister and
Treasurer, the Right Hon. J. B. Ghlfley, advised the Hon, H.P.
LazzasAnl, Minister for Works, of his concurrence with the
proposal to send two Architects of his Department to America on
a Mission of Investigation into Architectural Development.
An important aspect of the investigation was the
design of Banking Premises and the Commonwealth Bank Authorities
therefore decided that an officer of the Bank should join the
Mission for the purpose of observing the effect which the modern
development of Banking Practice would have on Planning,
PERSONNEL OF THE MISSION.
Mr, 0. V. Howard, Chief Designing Architects
Mr, H. W. Reilly, Architect in Charge of Commonwealth
Bank Works,
Mr, G. McGrouther, Supervisor, Commonwealth Bank of
Australia,
Extract from open letter of introduction from the
Director-General of Works, Mr, L. P« Loder, explaining the
object of the Mission -
"These gentlemen are visiting America and Brazil on
behalf of the Commonwealth Government to view and investi-
gate architectural and planning developments so that they
may obtain and assimilate first-hand knowledge of the very
valuable contributions America and Brazil have made in
the architectural field,”
The Mission left Australia on May 21st, 1945 and returned on
November sth, 1945,


DOTTED LINE INDICATES THE ROUTE
TAKEN BY THE MISSION.


FOREWORD
Before proceeding with this report it might be
useful to Indicate the. basis upon which it has been written.
Our charter was a wide one, but, generally speaking, it could
bo regarded as an investigation into the trend of Architec-
tural planning and design* At times we try to convey a
distinction between Planning and Designing. The term des-
igning has a somewhat dimensional flavour and I think it should
be used in preference to planning, because in designing,
whether it is a town or a building, we should think of it as a
three dimensional job*
Everywhere in America, when talking to Designers,
we heard the same earnest expression of opinion regarding the
necessity of thinking in overall terms, instead of the indivi-
dual treatment of small units* In the small town streets of
America, as in ou' 1 own Australian towns, the small unit treat-
ment of individual shops is generally an eye-sore. The
pleasant appearance of a group of buildings designed to a
uniform height, or a street where the buildings are of a
uniform colour, is a contract to the individual unit treatment.
Throughout this report the theme of uniformity,
and to a measure standardisation, will come to the surface.
The trend of our way of life is following mechanical aids and
we are passing away from traditional and conventional designs,
although traditional designs will linger for some time to come,
especially in the United States of America, where the Colonial
Georgian influence is deeply rooted and on the west coast of
America whore the Spanish Influence will remain for many years
to come.
My reference to overall designing and its
associated uniformity will probably produce a mental picture
of rows of tenements, thousands of which were built during
last century. This must bo regarded as only standardisation
of dwelling units, and housing in its cheapest and worst form;
thousands of these units were built without consideration to
light and air, and without any landscape treatment o
The principle of standardisation during last
century was regarded as an economic factor, when builders
produced th~se tenements in almost every European City.
Today in the United States of America, and particularly on
the ’West Coast, standardised tenements are again being built
and designed by some of America-s best Architects with full
consideration to light and air and landscaping * I have
included Illustrations to indicate typical examples of this form
of housing.
I saw during my tour many of these Estates
planned with such housing in park-like surroundings; those
housing schemes may be regarded as among the best efforts of
American Architects e
We have standardised our telephone boxes and if
wo were to standardise our Commonwealth Banks and Post Offices
to the same degree the public would not object. It would
save Technical effort and Public money.
/2.


Factors relating to the design of Individual,
civic or commercial buildings are not being stressed in this
report, except the work of the Brazilian Architects. In the
United States and Canada very little new work has been
carried out since 1930. With that year came the depression
and then the war years. Nevertheless, great strides were
made in developing engineering services and proving the use
of new materials and fittings and it is in this sphere that
Australia has much to learn from the United States,
Before leaving Melbourne I was asked to investi-
gate developments which were taking place in air-port design.
I have endeavoured to cover as much of this field as time
allowed.
In reference to my investigation anto Tropical
Building design I have reported generally upon the broader
aspects of factors affecting comfort conditions in the
tropics, but as this is one of the most important items of
my visit to Brazil I propose to enlarge upon it in a separate
report.
In the appendices, I have included a list of
names of people who wore helpful, either by advice or by
facilitating our investigations and to those people I am
very grateful, and before concluding this foreword to my
report I would like to record my appreciation for the
courtesy and hospitality extended to myself and other members
of the Mission by the People of the United States, Canada and
Brazil, whose assistance we sought 0


IMPRESSIONS
FAMILY LIVING & CITY PLANNING;
In this report an effort is made to cover general
Impressions and trends of Architectural Design and Planning
and the observations may be considered as a yardstick to
measure our values in comparing our work in Australia.
We arrived in San Diego, California, on the after-
noon of the 23rd May, 1945, after a fast but tiring trip in
a Liberator from Sydney - a journey which took only 42
flying hours•
San Diego was our first impression of the way of
life of the people of U.S.A., the layout of the city, the
hurrying people, the streams of cars feeling their way along
the. roads. Tbe crowded trams and the glaring sun and
dust differed very little from some of our Australian
cities.
We had coffee at a corner drug store, this being
our first introduction to this amazing combination of
science, food and cheap nicknacks. Later in our visit we
realized the important part that the drug store played in
the life of the City middle income group. It is at the
drug store that the whole family partakes of its break-
fast; the father on his way into the office, drops in
for his cup of coffee and his doughnut or egg breakfast.
Later in the morning when his wife is on her way shopping
she has a drug store breakfast. So too the children call
in at thoir favourite Drug Store.
Eating out is becoming part of the dally life
of the American family. The number of drug stores and
road houses indicate this trend of living. This mode
of life is not confined to the high density areas but
also to the middle class suburban dwellers. With those
people it is not a case of preference but a question of
labour saving; the shortage and difficulty they have in
obtaining domestic help has forced them to this exped-
ient.
During our brief stay in the city of San Diego,
which before the war had a population of 200,000 which
under the stress of war conditions has increased to
500,000 - we realized the value of Satellite Towns and
Decentralization.
On the outskirts of the city, "Duration 11 housing
schemes were built, some of them are towns in themselves
accommodating as many as 15,000 people, planned on the
neighbourhood-unit principle, with their own shopping and
recreation facilities, etc. which obviated the necessity
of these people frequently visiting the city.
In the permanent residential areas we saw some
delightful housing developments and after seeing others
which were considered the best in America, some of the
Individual houses in San Diego with their general land-
scaping can rightly hold their own B The majority of
these houses were timber framed, cement rendered on wire
netting backed by building paper. Generally they wore
/8.


Charming ex-
amples of
houses for
the middle
income
group.
This two storey type with Spanish influence is still very
popular
The absence of front fences and clear lawn enhances the
Architectural value of these Georgian type houses.
A large percentage of houses in this group are white painted
weatherboard and rightly hold their own in the more expensive
housing areas.


coloured croam with no front fences* Woll kept lawns
and shrubs gave a delightful impression of houses
situated in park lands, to assist in this effect, roads
appeared to be slightly sunk and shade trees planted in
small colonies, rather than spaced along the road
evenly.
I have mentioned the Town Area and the Suburb.
The link between these two components appeared to bo
America’s greatest problem in planning.
In Now York and Chicago, and also in Detroit,
when I talked with the Town Planners and members of the
Town Planning Commissions, they were more concerned with
Express Highway, arterial roads, general traffic problems
and garage space a Later in my report, I will deal
specifically with certain aspects of these problems, but
I wish to include in the general impressions that our
changing way of transport calls for drastic action in our
Town Planning and Architectural Design to endeavour to keep
abreast of new conditions, and all this seems to indicate
the necessity of establishing an optimum standard for our
cities and decentralization of our towns.
Living in high density areas, eating at road
houses, the crazo for the open country during week-ends,
affects road transport. Both America and Australia have
permitted their cities to become congested. Wo have not
recognised the space required for cars© Every man work-
ing in the city is at liberty to bring a car into the
inner area of the city, and leave it there, if so desired.
It is obvious that in our planning and Architecture we
must provide for this contingency©
San Francisco is perhaps one of the most car-
jammed cities in America o Being in a hurry one afternoon
I took a taxi which travelled only one block in half an
hour - I left the taxi and walked o
Union Square garage, in the heart of San Fran-
cisco, is perhaps America’s best effort to solve the prob-
lem of car parking. This Square was a City Park, and as
a preliminary to the construction, the beautiful shrubs
and trees wore removed. A garage four storeys be lev/ the
surface was constructed. It has a capacity for 1,700
automobiles but actually during the day it has catered for
as many as 4,000 cars. All floors are connected by four
one way ramps. No single ramp rises more than half a
storey, 4 ft. 9 inches high. The city is proud of its
job, which has accomplished a task of removing from the
streets the equivalent number of cars that would ordin-
arily be parked on 125 city blocks. Today with the park
restored in its original splendour and with a garage
below, it is certainly an achievement.
Nevertheless, an undertaking of this magnitude
would bo unnecessary were parking decentralised and each
city building obliged to provide its own parking space.
The problem of car traffic in and out of the
city is one that is becoming Increasingly groat. In many
cities this problem is being tackled piecemeal by straight-
ening out bottlenecks vtfhore the greatest volume of traffic
/3«


NSW YORK
CITY
PLANKING
This perspective indicates the extraordinary measures
contemplated to relieve the city traffic congestion.
The proposal is for "grade separation" at Washington
Bridge on Cross-Bronx Expressway.
Another example of a proposal to increase traffic
capacity by construction of a four level expressway
at Brooklyn,


This illustration is a reprint from the Architectural
Review indicating the possible future use of roof space
for parking on a translucent roof surface. Although
this is intended to be futuristic there is an actual
example of this method of providing car parking space
for shoppers in a suburban emporium in Los Angeles.
The roof of the building is served by escalators for all
floors.


occurs, but this treatment is not altogether satisfactory,
because traffic studies clearly show that a largo per-
centage of traffic proceeds between its origin and dest-
ination along illogical routes and, at points beyond the
sections dealt with, becomes a future problem#
In viewing some of the proposed schemes to
overcome these traffic problems one cannot help being
impressed with their magnitude and the ruthlossnoss that
is necessary to improve the present condition#
We in Australia are to a degree heading towards
this city congestion and it is obvious to everyone inter-
ested in planning and the future of our cities, that no
stone should be left unturned to obviate what has happened
in many large American cities e
In the early planning of the Industrial cities
of America, the European Cities wore used as prototypes,
but they do not measure up to the European standard - the
garden square and tree-lined avenues are often missing#
In both countries the cities wore planned for
walking human beings and horse drawn vehicles. The
planners never visualised anything more than throe or four
storey buildings, but the industrial revolution took place
and with it came elevators and structural steely Property
owners in the hearts of cities began to realise that there
was almost no limit to the height which they could erect
their buildings and thus the density of people in the
inner core of the city increased beyond anything that had
been imagined#
The greater the density the more expensive the
land, and this congestion has been responsible for building
up unearned increments for property owners in contiguous
areas #
Transport facilities became the responsibility
of the City Council and with the congestion caused by
motor traffic, necessitated the purchase of land by the
Council at an enormous cost to provide such facilities.
The vertical development of the city, plus the narrow lanes
planned on the grid-iron system, has really boon one of the
world’s worst contributions to the welfare of the City
Workers #
To find a solution to this ever increasing
problem and to restrain the influence of the magnet like
attraction for people to the inner core of the city is not
one that can bo achieved in a generation#
The Detroit Transport Board, appointed by Major
Edward J# Jeffries, Jnr., has produced a scheme for
Expressway and Transit System for the city. The illus-
tration indicates the magnitude of this proposal, and con-
currently with the implementation of this proposal they
have prepared a scheme for replanning and slum clearances#
/4.


DETROIT EXPRESS WAY SYSTEM
This perspective is illustrative of the huge problem
confronting the planning authorities of the city of
Detroit. This proposal is one of many such projects
that are contemplated to alleviate the traffic problem
of that city. It will be seen from the sketch that
a slum clearance and a new housing development is
proposed either side of this new "Expressway" system.


Tho amount that would bo nocossary to cover tho
cost of tho resumption of property to carry out this scheme
is sufficient in itself to mako one wonder if it will ever
bo carried out and this would not bo tho most serious
obstacle which would have to be overcome® The inter-
ference with private rights, however groat tho public
wrong may bo, would be beyond tho legislative possibility
of any democratic- country, but there is an interesting
example, on a lesser scale, being implemented in Rio-Do
tho creation of the Avenida Prosidento Vargas®
Tho creation of new cities adjacent to tho old
cities, and building on land that would only bo the
fraction of tho cost of resuming existing city areas,
would appear to bo the logical thing to do* We could
then leave our existing cities to develop their obsoles-
once to a degree at which their useful life could be
regarded as spent. Then sections of tho old city could
be replanned; as residential areas for tho bright new
off-spring.
N An interesting side light on the question of
replanning of tho cities, is the way in which the Now
York City Planning Commission is tackling their problem.
During an interview with Mr® Edwin Salmon, Chairman of the
Commission, he outlined their policy and approach to tho
problem© They have prepared a tentative Master Plan,
mainly Indicating tho routing on their arterial highways
and the general principle of zoning. They are then
tackling their " ast problem area by area as separate
projects and they will endeavour to cordate tho future
improvements to agree with their master frame work©
Tho largest specific project that they had at
the time of the discussion was a study for Brooklyn ! s Civic
Centro and Down Town Improvements c
Their plan revealed that in this area thero were
opportunities for discontinuing a number of streets.
Many of these streets wore narrow and were laid out in the
early days to provide access to small lots. On tho other
hand, it would be nocossary to take over largo sections of
the area for the arterial highways. This in itself
constituted a slum clearance project as the land was lar-
gely covered with obsolete and unsightly buildings c . In
this project, after sotting aside areas to provide for
arterial roads, parks, playgrounds, civic and community
centres, tho remaining sections were allocated for housing
development schemes© It was the intention that these
areas wore to bo developed by private enterprise, usually
insurance companies or money lending institutions,,
However practical this scheme might bo it definitely has
its disadvantages! tho transformation by replanning and
with better transport facilities has the unfortunate aspect
of tho further concentration of people into the area©
Because housing developments by private enterprise must bo
economic and as the land values are high, they must in-
crease tho dwelling unit density, which under the existing
conditions is about 40 to tho acre, to a new density of
anything up to 100 or more dwelling units per acre©
/5 0


During my stay in New York I had an opportunity
of visiting a number of slum clearance schemes where the
substandard housing was replaced by blocks of multi-
storey dwelling units o Those wore high density schemes
and the amount of light and air provided for the indiv-
idual dwelling unit loft much to be desired, and was not
in the best interest of housing the people in accordance
with the modern principle, that light and air should be
the dominating factor in the design of a living unit©
Before leaving this subject of Family Living and
City Planning I would like to draw attention to the
difficulty of gauging living standards - values are a
matter of relativity©
We in Australia have seen people living under
sub-standard conditions and we have road articles of our
appalling slums, but when those conditions are related to
those which civilised people in the other parts of the
world have to contend with, the same terms cannot be
applied© To quote Francis Violich, in his book on Cities
of Latin America, he states ,J that the housing surveys in
the U.S©A© brought forth the startling news, that one-
third of the nation was ill-housed, ill-clothed, ill-fed, 11
yet comparing these conditions with those of Latin
America, it has been said that two-thirds are ill-housed
and it also follows with emphasis that this two-thirds is
equally ill-clothed and ill-fed© The naked truth is that
out of 126,000,000 Latin Americans there are no fewer than
85,000,000 actually starving - they have no houses, no
beds, no shoes©
Rio De Janeiro has its share of ill-housed people.
The city has an acute physical problem, the features to
which it owes its spectacular beauty has confined it to
the comparatively flat land which lies between the fan-
tastic granite peaks and sea« The city has now a popu-
lation of 2,000,000© To adequately house the people the
development will have to be in skyscraper form.
Most of the Latin cities have grown from a plan
laid out by the early Jesuit Priests according to the
planning principles of the !! Laws of* the Indies”. An
extraordinary example of this early planning is the town
of Santa Cruz. It was established by the Jesuits who
travelled up the La Plata River to Garumba and from there
made their way hundreds of miles through almost impene-
trable jungle to this spot at the foot-hills of the Andes
and hero established a town.
The first hundred years of the life of this town
must have been the most prosperous it has known© The
plan of the town followed the early pattern of the Spanish
Cities, which consisted of a largo square surrounded by a
grid-iron of streets which are so narrow that there is
scarcely room for two vehicles to pass c The houses lin-
ing those streets must have been quite pretentious when
built more than 200 years ago* They are definitely
Spanish in character built of mud brick, lime plastered,
and coloured a near white.
/6.


Tho houses aro mostly attached and have a
continuous colonnade with circular or square columns.
All roofs aro covered with half round Spanish tiles, almost
black with ago and on many of tho roofs weeds and small
shrubs aro grov/lng.
Tho streets are unmade, being actually dirt
tracks. Tho houses have high ceilings and plenty of
openings and havo been planned to form a court-yard at
the roar. Solid shutters are used instead of glass and
these aro usually open, giving a clear viow of tho
interior.
Tho early Spaniards were single men and,
unlike the early Northern American development, they loft
their womenfolk behind and mated with the women of the
country. The mixture of the Spanish and Indian is quite
apparent.
The houses and tho habits of tho people
havo changed little during tho past 200 years. They live
under tho most primitive conditions | they havo little
or no furniture, and the houses appear to be swarming
with children, babies, and women squatting about.
The menfolk are rural workers and walk
from the town to their work. This city has now a popu-
lation of 35,000 people, it was planned for probably only
5,000 people and there havo been only a few modern houses
built during tho past hundred years. This gives some
idea of congested conditions under which those people live
in this town of Santa Cruz, which is one of tho largest
towns in Bolivia, a country which has spent so many years
at war.
DESIGNING FOR CONVENIENT LIVING:
With the Industrial Revolution came mech-
anical ways of ¥\rorklng, but the domestic side of life is
slow to take advantage of mechanical aids.
When we think of tho Now Guinea native in
furnituroloss rooms, usually built abovo tho water to
facilitate his drainage problems, his one-piece suit, his
simple food, and compare it with tho bother to which we
havo to go in order to achieve the purpose of living, we
realise that we require all tho assistance wo can got from
mechanical labour-saving devices and all the help wo can
get from scientific planning, to bring about a convenient
way of living.
In planning our project, whether it bo a
largo neighbourhood unit, or small sub-division, tho area
must bo planned so that it will appeal to tho home owners
as a desirable place to llvo| it must bo convenient to
shopping and recreation facilities and it must bo economic.
It appears to havo only to become evident
during tho past few years that tho cause of blighted
suburbs and unprofitable sub-divisions lies in the failure
to apply certain fundamental principles in the planning of
land use.
/Vo


An interesting feature of this housing scheme is the absence of roads through the development. It
will be noted that garage courts are located at frequent intervals. The housing is of the attached
dwelling unit type and the majority of houses have an individual patio which is a completely walled
garden.


A FINE EXAMPLE OP GARDEN ACCESS TO AN ATTACHED DWELLING UNIT HOUSING
SCHEME AT PITTSBURGH, U. S. A.
ANOTHER EXAMPLE OF THE SAME HOUSING DEVELOPMENT BUT IN THIS CASE THE UNDU-
LATING CHARACTER OF THE SITE HAS BEEN TREATED WITH A PARK LIKE EFFECT
MAKING AN IDEAL PLAY AREA FOR CHILDREN.


The success of any neighbourhood should depend
upon the character that the creator has given to the
planning, but the planning must not stop at ground level*
Planning is throe dimensional and the third is that
dimension which deals with form, that is to say, buildings.
Tho real architectural neods of the people are
in the building, their surroundings aro often governed by
landscaping and convenience to facilities.
No attempt is being made in this report to
cover Town Planning principles, but an endeavour is being
made to convoy what has boon observed, and to suggest what
might bo done in Australia to avoid tho mistakes that
have boon made in other countries and, whore possible, to
point out what has been successful o By doing this wo
may achieve something that will bo of benefit in tho
planning of our towns and housing schemes o
During tho investigation of housing tho Common-
wealth Housing Commission used tho following slogan as
a basis for their approach to their enquiries
11 WE CONSIDERED THAT A DWELLING OP GOOD STANDARD AND
EQUIPMENT IS NOT ONLY THE NEED BUT THE RIGHT OP
EVERY CITIZEN. 11
As a member of tho Commission, I had that slogan firmly
fixed in my mind, when I viewed housing conditions of tho
countries we visited® I have stated earlier in this
report that living standards in different countries aro
not comparable«. Nevertheless, everywhere in North and
South America tho shortage of houses appeared to over-
shadow all other problems, and wo, in Australia, are not
really behind tho other countries in our efforts to over-
come tho housing shortage®
THE DWELLING UNIT ;
To produce a low cost house is tho problem of
tho moment® Wo cannot reduce areas or standards; these
aro already too low. It is my firm belief that this
problem has only one answer - mass production® I hesi-
tate to use tho word profabrication® Efforts both in
America and Australia to establish precedent for pro-
fabrication of permanent homos havo not boon successful;
although houses havo boon mass produced for specific pur-
poses, both in quantity and cost, quicker and choapor than
co"uQ.d havo been done by ordinary methods, it has generally
boon for Emergency, or War-Timo, housing,
I do not intend hero to fully cover what I
havo observed in tho field of profabrioation, but whilst
I am on the subject of ways and moans of overcoming the
housing shortage, I must refer to mass production of
houses or their components, because I havo formed a belief
from what I havo seen that wo aro starting at tho wrong end
in trying to prefabricate low cost homos®
/8,


IN THE CHICAGO EXHIBITION 1943 THIS MACHINE MADE HOUSE WAS FEATURED AS THE
"HOUSE OF TO-MORROW.” IT WAS DESIGNED BY ARCHITECT GEORGE FRED. KECK.
DESIGNED BY ARCHITECT CARL KOCH IS A HOUSE THAT GIVES THE IMPRESSION THAT
IT WOULD BE MORE SUITABLE FOR FABRICATING IN A WORKSHOP AND ASSEMBLING ON
THE SITE ALTHOUGH I DO NOT THINK IT WAS INTENDED THAT IT SHOULD BE REGARD-
ED AS A MACHINE MADE HOUSE.


It is tho upper and middle income groups who buy tho
mechanically perfect oar* Tho lower income group buys
tho woll used old model. Therefore, should wo not be
building the mechanically perfect prefabricated house for
those who can afford to buy it.
The illustration of tho house of tomorrow,
designed by Architect George Prod Keck, has tho appear-
anco of a mechanically perfect job but it does not appear
to bo a low cost house o If wo could begin production of
a modern machine --'made house, they could afford to buy
them, and wc would bo cutting our teeth on ways and moans
of production. If a thousand houses, each costing
£2500 complete with all labour-saving devices and designed
on a demountable basis with all engineering services
centrally placed, so that they would bo capable of being
reconnected to a still new model, I have no hesitation in
saying they would sell, and sell easily.
Permanent prefabricated homos of a durable
non-corrosive material will not meet the same opposition
if they are bought by individuals at a high cost. They
would be modern machine-made houses, and would have a
certain imprimatur of being worthwhile 9 On the other
hand, if low cost prefabricated houses wore foisted on the
public by a Government Instrumentality there would bo
strong opposition against thorn, Tho building of pre-
fabricated houses for tho upper income group is not sugg-
ested as a method of alleviating tho housing shortage but
is a suggestion which might bo regarded as an angle to
bo considered to further tho idea of machino-made houses.
Prom what I havo soon in America, I feel that
tho solution of the housing of tho people is by way of
mass production* Any scheme that can overcome tho hous-
ing shortage in five years instead of twenty should be
welcomed,
Tho individual, who for a number of years has
boon thinking of a homo, has visualised a house built of
bricks and mortar but, if tho masses havo to wait for
houses to bo built of such material, wo will still bo talk-
ing of a housing shortage twenty years to come.
I am firmly convinced that every section of the
building Industry will havo to play a part to solve the
housing problem*
I was very much impressed with the work of tho
UIS.A, Federal Housing Administration and, having in mind
tho necessity of every section of tho community playing
their part, I will include a brief summary of this organ-
isation.
Under tho Federal Housing Agency, tho Federal
Housing Administration insures mortgage loans made by
qualified lending institutions. This protection enables
lending institutions to make loans on desirable terms and
the scheme makes it possible for tho family of moderate
income to own their own home.
/9 a


Day to day shopping centre
Covered way linking Community Centre with shops.
Typical example of attached dwelling units.


This scheme is not regarded as a public housing
scheme or government controlled housing* It is essentially
to assist the individual through private enterprise#
After viewing the work done under this scheme,
it would appear that a scheme such as this, could bo spon-
sored by the Commonwealth Government, to assist the housing
of the people, without infringing the rights of the States.
The Federal Housing Administration is not a
constructing authority nor is it a collector of repayments
made by the homo purchaser# Its function is, broadly, to
lay down financing charges, conditions and a standard of
design and construction#
Most of the schemes submitted to F.H.A. are
largo housing projects and the dovolopor is asked to submit
a detailed layou 4 - of the scheme indicating the landscape
treatment# They encourage Neighbourhood Planning and the
provision of schools, shopping and recreation facilities.
When the scheme has boon approved as a project,
each building or dwelling unit is treated as a separate
entity for the purpose of administration#
Tho F.H.A, inspection system determines that
the property is a good security from both tho lending and
borrowing point of view. When tho construction starts,
both on tho site and tho actual construction of tho home,
periodic inspections are made to ascertain that tho con-
ditions are being adhered to#
A homo must bo built to standard requirements
before it can bo financed through tho F#H.A, Insured
Mortgage Plan#
Tho F.H.A. Insured Loans are made by private
financial institutions, approved by tho Federal Housing
Administration# Tho scheme caters for a person with a
steady income, good credit and a reasonable ability to
repay the Loan.
Tho application is made to any financial
institution approved by tho F.H.A#
Tho largest loan insured is $16,000#
Tho interest rate is 4-g$ 0
Tho down payment is 10%.
Tho lender uses tho F.H.A* insurance scheme
(which is against loss to tho lender) and can advance up
to 90 % of tho valuation of tho homo.
Tho above is an outline of the functions of
the F.H.A. and tho part it plays in the housing field.
/io.


I had a long discussion on the work of tho
Now York office with Mr, Ely, Chief Underwriter, and
later with Mr. Hamann, Chief Construction Manager, and
later I had tho privilege of making a tour of inspection
of their Housing on Long Island® Wo covered a distance
of 80 miles and saw many thousand of homes. When the
houses had boon built in small groups, they could not bo
regarded as anything approaching an ideal and many of tho
Individual houses wore of poor design,
Tho development at HILLSIDE PARK OAKS at
Nassau, also at NSW HYDE PARK and a number of other lessor
subdivisions, indicates what is possible by community
planning and control. It affords tho only basis which
future values and tho general development of beautific-
ation can bo assured,
I saw a number of subdivisions which had
been cut out of the natural forests® The beautiful trees
wore loft, in groups and singly; tho roads appeared to be
slightly sunk; there wore no fences; well kept green
lawns; the houses were white and cream; the designs wore
changed sufficiently and there was no appearance of
standardization, Tho roofs were of asphalt roofing
shingles in brown, dull rod and prune; tho floors about
2 ! 6 !! up from ground lino to allow for small windows in
cellars; small evergreen shrubs, some cut and some
natural, were clustered up against tho walls® The roads
were curved, but only slightly, a complete absence of
flower beds,
Tho general effect of tho above factors was
parklike and very beautiful. In this setting, low-wage
earners woro bringing up their families.
To soo this sotting ono had to pass thous-
ands of low-standard housing but it does indicate what is
possible. All tho officers of tho P.H.A, are most
enthusiastic, but they realise that if their Administration
insists on tho idoal, it will retard bettor general housing
of tho people and, therefore, they are not too idealistic.
It seems a pity, but it is necessary to have
an ideal objective,
Tho P.H.A. state in ono of their booklets, ,T No
gain is made in improving housing standards and conditions
through setting a standard which results in placing decent,
well built structures beyond the reach of tho average man.
No dwelling can make a satisfactory homo which provides
merely the mechanics of living. In any house, no matter
how small, thoro must exist a senso of comfort in its
appointments, and a fooling of charm in its appearance and
sotting ~, while it may bo nocossary to reduce a basic
house to a box, it must nevertheless bo a well proportioned
box, with its materials and openings treated with skill
and imagination, oven at some moderate increase in cost,"
/ll.


PREPABRICATION AND MECHANICAL AIDS
TO BUILDING HOUSES.
Definition
A prefabricated homo is ono having floors, walls,
ceilings, or roof,composed of sections, or panels of vary-
ing sizes which have boon fabricated prior to erection on
tho building foundation*,
This is a contrast to tho conventionally built
homo, which is constructed piece by piece on tho site.
(This is tho definition givon in tho "Commercial
Standards, C.S. 125-45 Prefabricated Homes 11 , issued by
National Bureau of Standards, Washington, U.S.A. 1945).
Generally
The greatest factor in U.S*A. against the dev-
elopment of profabrication is tho Unions. They are
opposed to anything that will interfere with their trade
practice•
Bettor living conditions is a principle that
tho Unions are fighting for P and getting the cost of
housing down would help tho low-wage earner to enjoy
better living conditions.
A groat deal of research has boon carried out in
tho field of low-cost housing and although I visited a
groat number of housing schemes, in various stages of
construction, I saw very little in tho way of mechanical
aids to building© Tho problem of getting houses down in
cost appeared to be tackled from the design angle and not
fr om the method of construction.
I am making these comments from what I have seen
in tho Eastern States and it may not give a true picture
of what is happen Inge., In citios like Chicago, Detroit,
Cleveland, otc C j provision has to bo made to insulate
against tho intense cold, and this makes it a little more
difficult to develop profabrication©
Tho problem of building houses on an assembly line
cannot altogether be compared with tho automobile industry
because houses are not a compact unit, but thoro is no
reason why houses could not bo designed and built on a
unit basis*,
Under existing conditions architects draw tho
plans and specify tho materials to bo used, and they arc
not a part of tho organisation producing the product, as
aro tho dosignors of tho automobile industry© Another
factor is that every house is a separate project, except
thoy aro built under some Housing Authority, and experi-
ments in costs cannot bo carried out to tho same extent
as when a factory concentrates on turning out many thous-
ands of tho same modelj this model could bo a unit or
component of a house which could bo produced on a mass
production scale c
/12 c


A prefabricated steel house designed and erected by
Mr. W. Lea of LOS Angeles. This photograph was taken
shortly after its erection. When inspected it had
been standing for ten years, its appearance was very
pleasing, structurally sound and the passing years had
had very little effect on the material. No evidence
of rust was seen although it was long past its time
for repainting.


The problem of reducing costs is ono of co-
operation with the building industry* so that knowledge
of technical improvements may bo applied. Through tho
medium of our Experimental Building Station wo are
a position to disseminate this knowledge. Tho Canadian
Government has given approval for tho establishment of a
Building Research Centro to investigate now methods of
constructing houses.
In the United States, tho Prefabricated
Homos manufacturers formed an institute known as tho
"Prefabricated Homo Manufacturors * Institute”.
At their 2nd Annual Meeting* Chicago, March
27th, 1945, it was stated that there was a marked change
of attitude towards prefabrication.,
Tho following is an extract from the report
of that meeting s
”We have not tried for the public limelight
because the time was not ripe - wo have not boon critical
of tho Government housing agencies ""wo have not condemned
conventional housing methods nor have wo taken a
swaggering altitude to~the futuro~position"of profab-
rication* Wo have endeavoured the things that
are basic and fundamental - Wo have striven to put a
soliTToundation undor'TKis promising now industry of
facto ry-built homos - and I think it is important for you
to know what has boon accomplished in this brief period.
l! Wo have increased our membership from 12
charter members to 30, an increase of 150$" this, at a
time when few, if any, are actually making houses.
"Wo have accomplished tho remarkable objective
of establishing standards for this new industry - stand-
ards that will show the world that prefabricated homos are
superior homos and not temporary shacks. Those standards
are receiving favourable attention from hundreds of
sources including material manufacturers, financial organ-
isations, government agencies and consumer groups -
publicity which through any other moans would have cost
tho industry a hundred thousand dollars or more.
!! Wo havo. through personal cont. acts, brought
about a complete reversal of attitude on tho part of most
of tho important Government agencies having to do with
housing* Instoad '*of being kicked around as a few
individual operators, we are beginning to gain recognition
as an industry 0 Wo are being consulted and are receiving
enquiries that arise regarding all matters connected with
profabrioation*
!, Wo have developed a marked improvement in tho
field of public relations* Numerous other associations and
organi sat ion's™ are Being acquainted with our existence and
are dove-tailing their program into our own - notably among
those groups are tho U.S. Savings and Loan League, the
National Savings and Loan League and tho National Assoc-
iation of Real Estate Boards 3
/is.


“Wo havo worked with the Association of Collog-
iato Schools of Architecture toward formulating
curriculum in profahrication for students of architocturo.
Tho Post-War Industrial Commission of tho State of
B£ichigan has boon interested in profabrication for tho
utilization of tho Stato ! s timber resources. We have
generated interest in prefabrication from tho Small Homes
Council of tho University of Illinois looking toward tho
possibility of their publishing a pamphlet on this subject.
“Wo have boon invited to present tho merits of
profabrication in a number of exhibits of intorost to
homo owners and, in addition to those, there are each
week hundreds of inquiries by mail and personal calls in
which wo aro building up a better understanding of and a
healthier public acceptance for profabrication.
“Publicity regarding prefabricated homes has
developed a sounder tone. Thore has boon a noticoablo
reduction in tho “spectacular” articles for a more con-
servative and more accurate evaluation of factory-built
homos in tho post-war period® This has come about large-
ly because writers have sought tho Institute as a source
of information. In addition to several articles of our
own, wo have co-operated with writers for a number of
tho more important business and consumer magazines.
“In all tho important ¥\rork of building codes wo
have made some progress - prefabrioation has boon definitely
recognised by tho Uniform Building Code now in use by more
than 350 cities. Under tho National Electrical Codo we
wore successful in having a now sub-committee sot up for
consideration of tho wiring of shop fabricated panels and
from it there aro good prospects for tho development of
now and more efficient methods of wiring that will come
up for approval under tho codo.
“In this brief period tho exponents of “modern
homos by modern methods” from every corner of this country
and Canada, as well, have been consolidated into a lusty
new industry and we have every reason to bo proud of the
excellent progress that has boon made but our future lies
ahead and wo must plan for the future ••••••••••••••
“On tho basis of these standards wo can show tho
world that we aro constantly striving toward bettor homes
that meet high standards of qtiality - homes that are de-
finitely out of tho class of demountable “war” shelters
with which they are too frequently associated, “
/14/


Although I have stated that I did not see much in
the way of mechanical aids to building, there is much
evidence of the prefabrication industry developing*
The following is an extract from an advertisement in an
American Daily paper
•’These Scientifically planned Defoe home-units
will offer not only beauty and individuality of
design, but also the financial advantage made
possible by modern mass production methods*”
In reading such an advertisement there is no
Indication whether it is designed in accordance with the
Prefabricated Homes ’’Commercial C.S*I2S - 45
of the National Bureau of Standards, wherein are laid
down standards of workmanship, materials, protection of
panels during transport, erection requirements, strength
of components, etc* An interesting feature of these
requirements is the attention paid to Insulation, which
refers to it as necessary to promote health and comfort
and to reduce heating oost c It is understood that the
Commonwealth Experimental Building Station is preparing
standards for prefabricated houses o The acceptance of
such standards by State Housing Authorities would give
some uniform control for commercial organisations prod-
ucing prefabricated houses 0 At present it would be
almost impossible to design a prefabricated house which
would comply with the multiplicity of building regu-
lations throughout Australia*
The manufacturers would benefit by the com-
pliance with such standards, as it would give their
product the imprimatur of a neutral technical authority
and would indicate to the purchasers that they were
purchasing a sound structure o
During the War years,organisations produced
thousands of temporary houses for war workers* One of
the largest of these was at San Diego, California, which
in this State alone had 4 ;) 000 emergency houses. This
Estate v/as planned on the neighbourhood unit principle
complete with community shopping and child activity
centres* The shopping centre was particularly well
designed and could be regarded as a model for the type
of day to day shopping centres wo are contemplating
in the suburbs of Canberra*
Perhaps the United Statens greatest effort at
prefabrication was the building of a town in twelve
months to house 70,000 people at Oak Ridge, in the
Tennessee Valley*
Whilst in Chicago, we mot Mr* M*A* Owings, of
the firm of Architects, Messrs* Skidmore, Owings and
Merrily This firm was responsible for the planning of
the town adjacent to the factory that was built for the
experimentation and manufacture of the atomic bomb*
During our tour of inspection of the Tennessee
Valley we had the privilege of visiting the prefabric-
ated town of Oak Ridge, whore 10 S COO houses and assoc-
iated buildings were erected in twelve months* The
/X 5.


whole of the components of these buildings wore pre-
fabricated in areas, some of them as far distant as
150 miles, and conveyed to the site by trailers* The
following features were embodied in the planning of
the town ;-
(1) There was a cross section of the population in
each neighbourhood,
(2) A high-speed road skirted the perimeter of the
town and there were no buildings of any kind
t fronting on to it, also there were only a
limited number of roads branching of#it into
the residential areas,
(3) All shopping was decentralised. In the design-
, ing of these shops it was realised that a
mistake had been made. The shops were too
large and did not provide competition. They
realised that it was essential from a shopper*s
point of view to have a number of small shops
dealing with the same commodity, A condition
had developed whereby shoppers from one resi-
dential area would walk more than a mile to
another shopping centre in an adjoining resi-
dential area because of some slight which they
had received from their own butcher or grocer,
(4) In the planning there appeared to bo a mixture
of various systems of subdivisions - the Turned
Road System appeared to bo most popular,
(5) The Commercial Section of the Town was designed
as a permanent project,
(6) A large number of halls wore provided to provide
for religious service; they wore not allocated
to any particular religion,
houses were built almost exclusively of
plywood in various thicknesses, and glued, or nailed, to
light-weight wood framing. The house sections wore
transported from the factories to the site by truck and
trailer, Upon arrival at the site the house sections
rom conveyance to the foundation stumps
which were already in Each section of the
house was about 24 ft, long, 8 ft, wide and 8 ft. high and
each section was complete Including finished painting,
plumbing and electric work fixtures, and specified furn-
ishings o It is claimed that 90% of the completed build-
ing was prefabricated at a point removed from the area.
/16.


DESIGN OF AIRPORTS.
GENERALLY ;
Aviation Is rapidly developing into the most
important transport unit. The transport of human freight,
mails and certain types of merchandise requires the differ-
entiation of tho functions of an airport. They are now
not unlike the functions of a railway station and require
sections to deal with goods similar to a railway siding,
but airports are separated and have no connecting links,
therefore every consideration should bo given to designing
them on a regional basis. As far as possible facilities
at each airport should be designed structurally and
administratively on some form of standardised basis. It
simplifies matters for passengers, officials and general
public, especially in regard to sending and receiving
goods. Having regard to the foregoing, these comments
are based on the desirability of' the implementation of a
national pattern for our airways.
In planning our airports, the site should
be large enough to permit expansion. This factor applies
particularly to towns who ! s population may Increase by
many thousands in future years - it is quite possible that
small towns may develop because of aviation. Tons of
domestic freight, especially foodstuffs, may be carried
from distant towns to cities, especially from areas which
could supply fresh fruits and vegetables to city areas.
The Federal subsidy for mail service is a
vhry Important factor in tho progress of aviation in tho
U.S.A, It enables both passengers and express to be
carried as a pay load. This factor has been responsible
for a number of Municipal Airports.
PLANNING AROUND AIRPORTS ;
The location and planning of an airport is
interwoven with Town Planning. Tho area adjacent to the
airport, both in respect to transport facilities to and
from the city, and the utilisation of adjoining land,
must be considered., Close collaboration is necessary
between the Department responsible for tho airport and
the Town Planning Authority.
In making air travel as safe as possible,
very rigid regulations and specifications should be laid
dov/n to govern location, design and construction of
airports. Not only should the area be free from obstruct-
ions in the immediate vicinity, but the v/hole neighbour-
hood, as determined according to local requirements, should
be kept free from such obstruction. The erection of high
buildings can be controlled, but the growth of high trees
adjacent to the boundary is often neglected, principally
because they grow unnoticed.
The following is an extract from tho Civil
Aeronautics Authority
/IV,


Whore standards are imposed they are far from
being commensurate with the real problem
presented* In one Instance the right imposition
of Zoning regulations is limited to a band of
500 ft* around an airport * whereas a high
structure may actually have a serious effect
on the safety of opera-cion out to a radial
distance of from one to two miles."
REGIONAL PLANNING OF CITY AIRFORTS :
. . In New York and its environs there are
G-9 airports. This number will give some idea of the
development of aviation and the necessity to control
such development on a regional basis.
It may be necessary to do some long
range planning in our Capital Cities so that provision
can be made foi a comparable expansion.
In and around large cities many kinds of
7 4 will bo necessary, such as those required for
aviation schools, fields for testing planes, private
clubs, etc, AH these different organisations and
requirements should bo considered in a city regions 1
system, J &
WASHINGTON NATIONAL AIRPORT:
, The creation of the National Airport at
Washington, D.C., is comparable with the development
of our airport at Mascot. A total amount of J 16.000 000
was made available for the project. It has been built
on the shores of the Potomac River, miles from the
city. ihe total area is 729 acres, of this 173 acres
are covered by buildings - both terminal and hangar-
leaving a balance of 556 acres for a landing ground!
, . „__ . :t is interesting to note that after a
choice of 17 sites this location was decided upon because
0 _ 1 . 0 c aseness to the city, the time element being an
all important factor.
The area was low and swampy and the filling
was done by dredging. A surcharge of 6 to 8 ft. of S
grav'd was placed on the runways to accelerate settle-
ment. The' gravel was dredged direct from the river at a
01 9 P or cubic Y a nd whereas dry excavation of
other sites would have cost 30c. There are four runways
provided, two of them being 200 yds. wide whilst the
n^ r 7?f°f haV L eaC h m . a w . idth of 1 5° Yds. Taxi strips are
only 75 ft. wide. The longest runway Is 6,855 ft.
The pavement is designed to support a load of 80 pounds
per square inch without undue displacement and is^composed
of asphaltic concrete laid in two Aatprs, each jh" thick.
f^nrri d in« n^Se^nn P ? S {? rmin S. th e storm-water service are
a in dia. and are made of reinforced concrete.
1n Mq? inlin The work on the terminal building was started
in May, I9d-0, so thap this airport can be regarded as one
of the latest.
/18.


ADMINISTRATION BUILDING, WASHINGTON NATIONAL AIRPORT, WASHINGTON, D. C.
AIRLINES TICKET COUNTERS, WASHINGTON NATIONAL AIRPORT. WASHINGTON, D. C


There are 6 hangars, J which have doors
175 ft. wide and 10 ft high. The main doorway is JO ft.
high. The other hangar has electrically operated sliding
doors 225 ft. wide and JO ft. high and each of these
hangars is paved with reinforced concrete 6" thick on a
clay base.
LA GUAHDIA FIELD :
This is one of Now York’s Municipal
Airports, and is situated on the shore of East River,
adjacent to an arterial road.
It is equipped with a land plane adminis-’
trativo building, 7 large hangars with adjoining offices,
a seaplane hangar and a seaplane Terminal Building.
This is the air terminal for four of the
leading Air Transport companies of the United States,
In the early days of the planning of La
Guardia, there was a great deal of criticism from a
section of the people in New York, It was contended
that the proposed air-field was too large and that it
represented a waste of public money.
To off-set this criticism, the Mayor,
Fiorello H, La Guardia, suggested that it should be
commercialised and that the public should pay for
admission to see the planes taking off and arriving.
There was also a feeling that this would assist in
educating the public in Aviation,
With this object in view, an Observation
Deck was designed and erected. It is 1,500 ft, long
and the amount of ten cents charged for admission, the
total of' the admission charges for the first year being
$125,000.
Shortly after La Guardia was completed it
was realised that it was too small and in the future it is
to be regarded as a field for short flights or for a
shuttle service.
I was informed that there are 10,200
employees, exclusive of army personnel, engaged on this
field and the number of operations, leaving and arriving,
is 500.
All flights are controlled through the main
terminal but all administrative work of the individual
companies is done through their own offices adjoining
their respective hangars.
It was the general opinion that the days
of the seaplane are past, no requests now being received
from the Air Companies for the development of seaplane
activities, the reasons for the discontinuance of their
use being as follows
Ac.


(a) Difficulty in handling passengers. It is
necessary for a launch to meet the plane,
(b) In the winter, danger is expqrienced from
ice-drift.
\ 4
\
(c) Ground swells frequently delay the take-off.
As against the above, ground pianos land and
run right up to the terminal' and handling passengers and
servicing is a simple matter.
IDLEWILD AIRFIELD ;
The particulars relating to this huge project
v/ere supplied by Mr. Alexander McGregor, an engineer on the
staff of the Department of Marine and Aviation, who was
acting in the capacity of Co-Ordinating Officer and who, it
was understood, will be the Operation Manager when the field
begins to function.
Mr McGregor was employed on the La Guardia
Eleld during the whole of it r s construction and he said that
in designing the new field every effort has been made to
avoid the short-comings of La Guardia which was found, when
completed, to be much too small and cramped.
In the planning of Idlewild, the approach
to the problem was entirely different, the designers were
dominated by one thought, it must be big enough for the
future development in Aviation.
The area, which is a dredged sand base, is
14.527 acres, as against the 550 acres of La Guardia', The
runways have a total length of 9 miles, are 200 ft, wldo
and 12 inches thick.
The designers have planned to unload 90
planes at the one time, to have 500 planes in the air
at the one time and to have runways capable of taking
planes weighing up to 150 tons. They have planned for 14.0
hangars, have made provision' for 50*000 cars and have
allowed for Jj.0,000 personnel.
Mr.' McGregor introduced me to the firm of
architects, Messrs. Delano and Aldrich, responsible for the
designing of La Guardia, who are now working on Idlewild.
I spent an afternoon in their office perusing the early
studies for this new Field. Mr. George Llcht, Senior
Architect, explained the difficulties with which they were
confronted, and many interesting s idellghts were discussed.
In the planning of Idlewild there are a
number of unusual features, such as the separation of the
hangars from the main administration buildings, the placing
of the administration building in the centre of the field
and the irregular-shaped dock surrounding the administration
building. The distorted dock line was the result of an
endeavour to get additional length, so that 90 planes, both
passenger and cargo, could be docked at once.
/20.


Plan of a proposed airport at Detroit
Plan of proposed airport at Idlewild, New York.


This dock is an uncovered platform and in somo eases
passengers would have to walk nearly 100 yards to and
from their’plane, This does not appear to be a happy
arrangement, especially in wet weather, or when passen-
gers arrive suffering from air sickness. However, two
suggestions are being made, one is to cover the dock
and the other is to convey passengers by a motor coach,
designed like a moving ramp, from the building along the
dock to the * plane. The alternative is covering the
dock, which would cost a considerable sum of money.
My feeling in the matter is that it would bo
bettor to separate freight-carrying ’planes from passen-
ger f pianos. As designed, the proposal appears to be
too unwieldy.
Another point which came up for discussion
was the design of the hangars, the size of which is
constantly changing, owing to the { plane designers
increasing the size of the ’planes. The dimensions of
the ’planes for which they are designing hangars are as
follows s-
Wing Span 189 ft.
Overall length of fuselage 156’ 1”
Width of tail ’planes 69’ 6 U
Width of wings 29’ 2 I!
Prom loading edge of Wing
to nose of fuselage 56’ 3 11
They now have particulars of another ’plane
which they will probably have to accommodate. This
will carry 204 passengers, with a wing span of 225 ft.
It will have 6 pusher engines and be 57 ft. 4 U high.
It will probably bo five years before these ’planes will
be operating.
It would appear that consideration will have
to bo given to workshops on wheels, and designed to fit
over the airscrews and engine.
AIRLINES CITY OFFICE;
One of the most modern buildings in Nov/ York is
the Airlines Building In 42nd Street 9 It is known as the
Airlines Terminal.
In this building nearly all the airline com-
panies are located, but, like La Guardia airfield, this
building was too small when completed and a number of the
companies could not be located in the building. The
illustrations indicate the exterior and interior of the
building.
The largo Transit Hall is on the first floor, the
ground floor being devoted to shops 0 The main entrance
is from 42nd Street and then by escalator to the first
floor. The main hall is a clear span with an elliptical
coiling supported on piers standing out some 15 ft. from
the external walls,, Around the sides of this hall the
various airline companies are located - American Airlines,
Eastern United, Pan-American, National Airlines, etc.
At the opposite end to the entrance is the way out to the
parlour coaches o This principle of traffic circulation
appears to be an excellent feature of the planning.
/21»


The idea of a central city office for air lines
would appear to bo an excellent set-up for our large
Australian Towns, when one considers the congestion that
occurs in Martin Place, Sydney, both in the street and in
the office• It would be well for some thought to be
given for a central city office, planned on a functional
basis, when the planning of our airports is under
consideration.
DORVAL AIRPORT t MONTREAL;
At Montreal I visited the Dorval Airport and made
a general inspection of the field and buildings. This
Airport is comparable with our city airports in Australia.
Montreal has a population of !■§■ millions and the airport
is about 7 miles from the city, with existing facilities
similar to those at Mascot and Essondon. Dorval is
considered the most important airport in Canada and
easily the bosb equipped and developed.
In discussing their postwar proposals with
Mr. Gr.H. Briggs, the Station Manager for the Trans-Canada
Air Linos, I realised that they are still uncertain how
to plan for the future development of aviation. However,
after a general discussion with thoir technical men, the
general opinion was that on long range planning the
passenger service should be separated from the freight
and that the hangars should be well away from both the
passenger and freight service®
In the existing layout the hangars are about
300 yds. to the roar of the administration building, and
this space is taken up with a concrete apron, lawns and
road approach to the administration building. The
present administration building is far too small, and
one suggestion is to turn it into a freight depot and
build a new administration building. Amongst other
things that they were considering in their postwar scheme
was the possibility of piping fuel from a central depot
and the running of a spur lino from the adjacent railway
in to the airfield. Another item that is under consid-
eration is building of a City Terminal Office to house
all the Air Line Companies, with proper provision for the
departure and arrival of the coaches to and from the
airfield.
Whilst in Ottawa I called on the Department of
Transport, Air Service Branch, and discussed various
aspects of design with Mr c H.A. Mclntyre and Mr. J.T.
Hornsby. Mr. Mclntyre had recently made a tour of the
U.S.A. for the purpose of getting some idea of the trend
of design in airport planning- This information was
particularly required for the postwar development of
Dorval. He had had discussions with many people whom I
had met, and in general, the opinions wo had formed about
various aspects of planning were the same. The one
feature for which there does not appear to be an answer
is the size of hangars. In discussing this subject with,
the architects for Idlowlld they gave me what they con-
sidered the size of the largest ’plane under construction.
Later I heard of a ’plane much bigger - the ’’HERCUIES 11 -
just completed in the Hughes Aircraft Plant in Culver City,
California. It is 320 ft® from tip to tip, built entirely
/22.


AIRLINES TERMINAL AT 42ND STREET, NEW YORK CITY
Note ground floor space used for shops and main office
floor served by escalators from main entrance at street
level.
AIRLINES TERMINAL ROTUNDA. NEW YORK CITY
Offices for the various airline companies are located
round the sides with exits for passengers to parlour
cars at opposite end to entrance from escalators.


of wood, with eight engines® It will have a gross weight
of more than 200 tons. At this stage the question is,
will it bo the landing and servicing facilities that will
determine the si z o of aircraft?
I have since heard that it has been laid
down at an International Conference that runways shall
not exceed 10,000 f , so this might be a determining factor
in the design of aircraft.
DESIGN OP ADMINISTRATIVE BUILDINGS;
Owing to the groat variations which exist, in
sky length, height and wingspread of aircraft, it is
very difficult to suggest standards for loading and fuel-
ling facilities, and it would appear that the only
reasonable thing to do is to design for the largest
anticipated aircraft, and the operational waste must be
faced in the immediate future the airport is dealing
with a smaller type of craft„
For the present, it might be worthwhile to
consider d short-term programme to covor the immediate
postwar years, until there is a more definite vista
of the future developmental requirements. However,
our immediate planning should be flexible enough to
provide for present requirements and allow for future
expansion®
/23.


BANKS AND OTHER COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS.
As a special report on banking promises is
being submitted by another member of the Mission, I
therefore do not intend to go into much detail on this
subject* However, I have certain comments to make,
which are of such a nature, that I hesitate before
committing thorn to writing* Hero in Australia our
Architectural Drawing Offices believe that the United
States of America is the homo of good design*
Broadly speaking there is a sound basis for this belief,
but the buildings wo see illustrated are widely sep-
arated,, One could drive for half a day in a city like
Chicago without seeing a modern well designed building.
We use American Architectural Journals as
Bibles, from which wo cull what wo consider the best,
but much of the stuff illustrated we pass over, as not
so good* Whilst in New York, I met the editor of one
of the foremost Architectural Journals and also some of
the principals connected with other well known Journals.
My reason for making those contacts was to got the
address of Architectural Photographers of unpublished
material which I thought might bo useful to the Depart-
ment.-, My enquiries for those addresses revealed that
all cities and towns of the Americas constitute a field
which they explored for subject matter* I realised
then, why the well designed buildings, wo see illus-
trated in Journals, were so hard to find.
In every city and town wo v:sited we searched
for Banks which would be useful for reference, wo looked
for new ideas in planning, tollers ? screens, counters,
strong rooms, etc. We photographed many Banks, and we
recorded ideas for reference, but generally speaking our
suburban Commonwealth Banks are Architecturally better
than anything wo saw during our tour of the Americas.
Our standardised counters, tellers 5 screens and other
fittings are much ahead of anything they have dono o
This observation must in itself give us confidence in what
wo are doing- Our Department has specialised in the
designing of banks in collaboration with the represen-
tative of the Commonwealth Bank over a long period, and
wo have achieved a high standard of design by the elim-
ination of undesirable features and by constantly
improving standard details*
In our investigations into typical largo city
banks wo learned much about traffic circulation and mech-
anical aids to administration and the resultant effect on
planning*
The most modern bank in tho United States of
America is tho Saving Fund Society Building, Philadelphia.
Wo made a thorough inspection of this building and many
features have been rocordod c ,
/24o


This photograph of the model is typical of the
trend of the more conservative types of design
used for such buildings as High Schools, Civic
Administrative Offices, etc.
A perspective sketch of the new Queens General
Hospital Nurses' Residence. This drawing was
prepared in the Office of Works for the City
Planning Commission of New York. It is felt
that this design is comparable with the work in
hand in our Department.


Earlier in this report I statqd that very few city
buildings had been erected after 1930, but a lot of
planning has boon done and much now thought has been
Incorporated in that planning. Wo are now undergoing a
period of change* Wo know more about materials, wo are
not so koon on spectacular buildings and wo have very
definite ideas about hygiene, comfort conditions, and
ventilation. We are gradually becoming loss individ-
ualistic, and all those factors are boing reflected in
our buildings o Wo now find beauty in clean-cut simple
designs* Our modern commercial buildings are equal to
world standards and it doponds upon our architects and
engineers whether tho equipment in those buildings is the
best that America and England has to offer.
Our Technical men must keep themselves informed
of now developments* An illustration of now develop-
ments that are taking place is the use of a small diameter
wrought iron pipe for air conditioning, instead of foot
square ducts which add enormously to the cost by tho
space they require in a building*
Tho illustration on tho next page depicts tho
first largo building in America to use tho pipe method*
Tho most important item of our investigation in
Bank Design is the use of a two-floor banking chamber*
A proposal to use this principle had been incorporated in
sketch plans for tho now Gollins Street Hoad Office,
Commonwealth Bank* Our investigations confirm that tho
principle is satisfactory* Tho best example of tho use
of this principle is the National City Bank, 51st Street;
it is one of tho latest banks built in Now York. It
has an upper and lower banking chamber and enquiries we
made indicated that it is entirely satisfactory. Many
of tho largo banks in America have their banking chamber
on tho first floor and in some oases escalators are boing
used to convoy tho public to and from tho banking faci-
lities *
As a result of tho abovo investigations wo are
planning a new Brisbane General Post Office on tho upper
and lower Posting Hall principle* Using this method of
obtaining a greater floor area for public use will save
many thousands of pounds in a job of this magnitude*
Tho information and confidence gained in this item alone
is an example of tho benefit derived from a mission of
investigation into the technical developments that are
taking place in other countries*
/25.


STATLER HOTEL, WASHINGTON
In this hotel the Statler hotel organisation became
the pioneer of the "Conduit Weathermaster System.”
The illustration indicates the pipe system and from
it, it is not difficult to visualise the amount of
space that would be required if the ordinary duct
method were used to air condition this building.


BRAZIL AND TROPICAL BUILDING DESIGN.
Generally,
In many respects Brazil is similar to Australia#
Geographically, it includes sub-tropical and temperate
zones and, as in Australia, each zone varies considerably
according to its nearness to the coast or its altitude#
Australia cannot boast of a rivor of the magnitude of
tho Amazon. In the Amazon basin the rivor rises and
falls as much as 40 foot in a few hours, whon tho melt-
ing snows of tho Andos begin to movo downstream. This
mighty rivor rises in tho Peruvian Andos, is fod by 200
tributaries, comprising 30,000 miles of viator-course,
draining 2,600,000 square miles, tho world 1 s greatest
river basin. It flows north-oast through northern
Brazil, its banks presenting, in many places, an almost
solid wall of jungle growth, tooming with alligators,
turtles and over 2,000 varieties of fish; it empties into
tho Atlantic Ocean near Para, and is navigable by ocean-
going vessels for 2,500 miles, serving several large
cities including Manaos which has a population of 75,000,
Further south on the Tropic of Capricorn is the city of
Rio do Janeiro, capital of Brazil, with a population of
2,103,000, and 260 milos south is tho industrial city of
Sao Paulo, lying on a plateau of tho Tleto Rivor, whilst
westward is 8010 Horizonte, tho capital of tho State of
Minas Gerais.
The Pooplo.
In Brazil is to bo found a cross-section of people
of many nationalities• Tho latest statistics indicate
60% whites, 20% mulattoes, 10% u caboclos !r (Indian and
Negro half-breods), negroes 8%, and puro Indians 2%#
Tho early Portugese settlors intermarried with tho
negro slaves brought in great numbers from Africa. This
began tho intermingling of blood strains. Today in
Brazil thoro is a wido separation between tho wealthy
and tho poor. Thoro is also the very poor, but the term
"poor" in this case refers particularly to tho low wago
oarnor. Housing and living conditions of this section
of the community cannot be regarded as a basis fo»
comparison with any similar soction in Australia. It is
not intended horo to infer that these low-wago earners
aro a depressed raco, because thoro is probably no other
country in the world where there is such a broad sense of
justice for all colours and creeds as in Brazil, His
standard of living however, is very low.
Tho planners of Brazil aro taking a long range
view of tho development of their cities and towns. The
Architects and Engineers with whom I discussed planning
problems realised that one of tho difficulties with which
they are confronted is tho fact that the raising of the
standard of living and housing of those people will result
in the elimination of an important factor in Brazilian life,
namoly choap labour, more particularly domestic labour.
/se.


An illustration of the early houses for low wage earners
in Brazil, many of these still exist is the suburbs of
the towns and are typical of rural workers houses.
part of a housing scheme for low wage earners built by the
Government at Le-Blon, Rio de Janeiro.
Numerous large scale housing schemes exist in suburbs of
LOS Angeles consisting of groups of attached dwellings.
Many such schemes as these are planned in the U. S. A. for
low wage earners.


To tho middle income group this is very important because
it reduces tho work of tho housewife and gives greater
comfort to families*
Whatever development takes place, there will
be no half measures about it, At present there is a
strong feeling for the ultra-modern development, because
this is a country of contrasts *
TROPIC DESIGN FACTORS.
In tho Northern States of Brazil an attempt
was made in tho early days of Portuguese colonial devel-
opment to employ certain design factors to mitigate the
intense heat*
Belem, which is situated on the estuary of
tho Amazon River and only a little south of the equator,
surrounded by tropical forests, is probably one of the
hottest spots in tho World* In the early development
of this city a very noticeably Moorish influence pre-
vailed. Tho houses were planned with a high floor
level, tile floors, wide doors and windows, and a general
feeling of openness in the planning with high ceilings*
Many of tho windows were screened with mashrobia wood-
work, although in the middle East this form of screening
was for privacy rather than for ventilation*
During the past 50 years the characteristics
of this Moorish influence disappeared and tho buildings
followed the planning and design of the European Archi-
tects* The streets are very narrow and the houses
packed closely together, window and door openings wore
reduced and ceilings lowered; fortunately, the main
thoroughfares wore broadly planned and planted with
shady trees* In Belem several of tho main streets are
lined with huge mango trees, their spreading branches
meeting in the centre of the road* The shade value of
those trees can well be imagined* In some instances it
is possible to walk the entire length of tho street under
tho shade of these beautiful trees o
Rio De Janeiro is so situated that tho City ! s
topographical features have forced it to be tucked away
in between mountain peaks and the ocean* Luxurious
tropical growth covers the adjacent mountains, which rise
almost perpendicularly over the city*
Tho Copacabana area, which is a parallel strip
between the ocean and the mountains of approximately i of
a mile wide, and about 8 miles long, is packed with
apartment houses eleven and twelve storeys high, with a
nett density of over 1,000 persons per acre*
Wo have boon told that tho living conditions
during tho summer in tho lower apartments is appalling.
Elevationally, these buildings are well designed and of
pleasing appearance* They are cement rendered and
finished a near ¥/hito o This, together with the uniform
height, makes oven a poorly designed building pleasing.
/27.


In 90% of those huge apartment buildings no attempt
has been made in design to mitigate the intense heat of
the Rio do Janeiro summer, except for window shade* The
universal treatment to obtain shade to the windows is the
use of an external wood roller-shutter with steel exten-
sion arms# These blinds are finished flush, but are
pierced to allow for light and ventilation. The local
name for them is "Persian Blinds". They are often
placed on all sides of the building - on the south as
well as the north and the only reason I can find for this
is for privacy, which is necessary in these closely built-
up areas# I was much impressed by this form of shade#
Those blinds were originally imported from Stuttgart,
Germany, but are now manufactured locally in Rio.
Another form of window shado is the projecting
slab or balcony, but usually the projection has boon gov-
erned by architectural treatment of the building rather
than by its functional value# This criticism is mainly
in connection with the buildings erected during the past
15 y) ars, but this does not apply to new work in progress
or on the drawing boards# The modern architectural move-
ment in Brazil is fully alive to the necessity of planning
to improve living conditions in a climate such as this#
Nevertheless, whatever moans are employed in the design of
the buildings, it can be of little value if consideration
is not also given to the siting of these buildings so as
to enable a free circulation of air between them#
Therefore, Tropical Buildings* Design must bo preceded by
Town Planning suitable for such conditions#
SINGLE DWELLING UNITS.
In Sao Paulo we wore agreeably surprised at the
tropical design factors incorporated into the single-
dwelling units to make them more liveable# Strangely the
conditions are not nearly so severe as in Rio do Janeiro#
Sao Paulo is 3,000 feet above sea level and the climatic
variation is very noticeable#
The Jardim America is a residential suburb of Sao
Paulo and comprises the section of the middle income group#
The general layout of this area is divided by a main
arterial highway with the residential streets branched off
from it# The streets of this area are planted with
"jacaranda" trees; the effect of those trees when covered
with their blue flowers against a background of white
buildings with dark red tiles and well kept gardens is
very beautiful#
Approximately of the houses are two-storey, the
old houses having a distinctive Spanish character, but all
the modern and reconditioned houses indicate a very def-
inite modern influence and there is distinct evidence of
consideration given to factors such as shadow value on
walls and windows, large openings with moveable glass
louvres and the planting of vinos and shrubs to create
shado which would bo valuable to protect either the walls
or "patoos"«
/28.


It is used on the
windows of nearly all
apartment buildings
and also in many city
buildings. in Brazil.
The photograph below
of apartment buildings
in Rio de Janeiro indi-
cates its extensive use.
This type of shade is
known in Brazil as the
Persian blind and is
probably the most
effective window screen
for sun protection with-
out interfering with
free circulation of air.


Tho cement rendering is generally finished with a
wood float, using a coarse sand, and unlike tho cement
rendering in Australia, we found no evidence of crazing,
tho general effect being very pleasant.
Most of the roofs are tiled with half round
Roman tiles; these are much lighter in character than
those used in Australia. They appear to have a thick-
ness of about 3/8” and have not the clumsy appearance of
those in North America or Australia.
Another interesting feature is tho effect of tho
large overhanging eaves; many of them project 410",
and in the early designs shaped joists are carried through
to tho edge of the tiles. In the modern work they have
either a flush soffit or joists carried through with
raftor carried down, making a joint at the intersection.
Gutters are not used, and thus tho necessity of
having downpipes carried from the gutter and down tho
wall is obviated. It might be mentioned that tho absence
of gutters can bo attributed to tho regulations not
permitting them on account of the necessity of prevention
of mosquito breeding. This factor might be noted for
future design of buildings in our northern towns.
In our design of houses for the Tropics, wo
have paid careful attention to through circulation of
air and the planning of the siting of the buildings to
enable full advantage to bo taken of this factor. Wo
also paid groat attention to ventilation below window
sill level, because wo have found that this is just as
important as ventilation at the head level of a person in
sitting position, and in our discussions with designers
working on the problems of ventilation it appeared to be
something that they had failed to see tho necessity of
considering. However, further reference will be made
to this subject in tho next section.
/29.


AIR MOVEMENT LOUVRES CONSTRUCTION.
Tho control of boat and light by moans of
louvros and blinds has boon developed to a remarkable
Brazil, Thoro are a nurnbor of methods of
suoh l^- 3 ™ Bhades Gombined with ventilating factors,
(a) A largo horizontal adjustable louvro as illus-
trated in tho building for tho Ministry of Edu-
C Each louvre is an approximately 6 ft,
x 20 ins a panel of fibro oomont in a metal frame,
(b) Tho fixed vortical louvros which produce a sun
baffle system as Illustrated in tho A. 8.1.
(Tho Brazilian Pross Association Building),
hoso aro constructed of reinforced concrete
blades approximately 2f n in thickness fixed
vorticaHy at an angle to the front line of tho
IL JL Clll*l •
(c) Largo shaped adjustable vertical louvros as
Janoiro atGd in Nursory building, Rio de
(d) Projecting sides, hoads and cills forming a box
around the windows as soon in tho Old Pgodlos
Homo, Rio do Janeiro,
(o) Tho Persian blind - this is a form of wood
roller blind fixed externally in front of the
win ow, an illustration is Included showing its
construction. This form of window shade is
??° °? thG most P o P u lar In Brazil.
Almost all modern offices and apartment buildings
have theso blinds on every window. It is an
Sha ?2 aad it does not intG nfero with the
ventilation, it also has a privacy value,
j / . 1 find it difficult to justify the uso of (n)
is rlaiisfd°?hit f arg j ol r y b ?i ldia S s ’ especially when it
paused that framing for this louvre construction fnm«
corhM° P ? ndGn h Wall - SUpported by means of brackets or
louvre- £?° a h? 0 raal ? wall abruotioro. Behind those
of onen t sl ?? od wall with often loss than 30%
of openings, which seldom opon bolow window cill level
thoroforo much of tho ventilating factor Is lost. ’
fa) onrl Chf?^ t ?£ I V ll ? t£ y? stins comment concerning typos
(a; and (b) is that (a) is a much more pleasant tyno thnn
( ) whon viewed from tho inside, because tho individual
louvro can bo adjusted to givo full outside vision. It
tho oT'ohr° tl ?? d a 0n dUII days lato aftornoons, that
tho olcotric lights were burning on all floors of tho
bu-ldl'n? 3 !!hu ™ rt _ loax louvros and in tho Education
not bolSg usod, arS ° horlzontal louvros, lights woro
/30.


MINISTRY OF EDUCATION AND HEALTH BUILDING.
This is the most startling and elaborate building
in Rio De Janeiro. The sun shade system used in
this building is the adjustable horizontal louvre
type. These louvres, three to a floor, are regu-
lated by a crank. The louvres are invariably at
odd angles which gives a textured effect to the
whole elevation. fainted blue they can be turned
according to the movement of the sun, admitting
plenty of air, yet excluding direct sunlight.


THE BRAZILIAN PRESS ASSOCIATION BUILDING RIO DE JANEIRO
This building has an extremely pleasant appearance quite
apart from the interesting Architectural motifs incorpor-
ated for functional reasons. On the two sides of the
building exposed to the hot sun, fixed concrete louvres
each 32" deep and 2⅔" thick form a part of the facade.
Their functional value however is not as great as their
Architectural effect.


AIRPORT ADMINISTRATIVE BUILDINGS RIO DE JANEIRO
This illustration shows a rear view of the building
indicating the use of vertical louvre construction.
OLD PEOPLES HOMS
RIO DE JANEIRO
This is another design factor to
form a sun break, to windows.
The shadow value of this box like
treatment is very effective but
the cost of this form of construc-
tion and its architectural value
are hard to justify.


In Brazil air conditioning is almost unknown in
Commercial buildings, wall and window shading by louvros
can only be regarded as a poor substitute in a sub-tropical
town such as Rio de Janeiro.
This louvre treatment is only carried out on
the northern and western elevations. The designers usually
endeavour to got the maximum amount of glass on the
southern elevation. In the buildings investigated, I did
not see any serious attempt to plan for through circulation
of air. In the buildings illustrated most of the floors
have a central corridor which prevents a through current
of air. When I discussed with designers the importance
of encouraging the prevailing breeze through the build-
ings I realised that they did not regard it as an
important factor. On the other hand, we regard it as
the most Important factor for creating comfort conditions
in living spaci in buildings in the tropics. At first
I thought this was duo to a racial difference ; the
Latin races do not appear to require the same amount of
air circulation that wo do, but this is not the answer.
I formed the opinion that the following is probably the
reason
The prevailing breeze in Rio do Janeiro is so
gentle, that it could bo regarded as little more than a
zephyr and therefore it is not worth considering as a
factor in planning for comfort conditions. As an example
of its mildness the following is a comparison
Along the Copacabana beach front there are
fifty or more open air cafes only about 100 yards from
the surf pounding on the beach. Many of those cafes have
canvas awnings on extension arms, some of them 20 1 wide,
and the cafe tables aro set with cloth etc. If we had a
similar set-up along our Pacific Beach Front our dally
north-easterly would cause a lot of trouble and the first
strong southerly would wreck everything.
Wo hoar a lot of talk about open-air cafes and
people quote other countries, but when they are being
planned for our cities, consideration will have to bo
given to protect them from our winds.
/31.


THE WORK OF THE BRAZILIAN ARCHITECTS.
In Rio Do Janeiro thoro is a group of young
Architects and Engineers who are responsible for design-
ing and building some of tho most modern structures in
the world* Most of this work has boon carried out by
Architects working in association. Probably one of
tho most brilliant of this group is Oscar Nlcmoyor. I
have included illustrations of a number of his works but
they do not convey a true value of tho spirit and gaiety
which ho has invested in his buildings.
Much has been written about these Architects
and their work and the buildings designed by then have
boon frequently illustrated, I need not therefore go
into detail regarding their achievements but I must
express my appreciation of their kindness during our stay
in Rio. Associated with this group of Architects are a
number of ultra-modorn painters and sculptors who do not
appear to have any logical reasoning for tho decorative
art they apply to some of these buildings.
Some of tho schemes which they are planning
in Brazil are beyond anything yet attempted in tho
United States of America. One example of largo scale
designing is the hotel known as “Quintandinha", at tho
mountain pleasure resort of Petropolis, forty miles from
Rio Do Janeiro a There they have erected a marvellous
structure which at tho time of my visit had cost in the
vicinity of £3,000,000, this building forms tho nucleus
of a project which will probably be one of the world*s
finest play grounds. Tho hotel as it stands provides
accommodation for only 700 guests but with a staff of
1,200. About 80% of its area is allocated to salons,
dining rooms, grill rooms, cabarets, theatres, swimming
pool, boauty salon and a huge gaming rotunda with
thirteen roulette tables and also many other typos of
gaming tables e Tho clear span of tho dome is approxi-
mately 160 foot, said to bo tho largest of its typo in
tho world. The kitchen is designed to cook for 10,000,
There are many other features too numerous to
mention, including an endeavour which is being made to
design a theatre to “outsmart” Radio City, Nov/ York.
They have provided apartments above tho wings of the
theatre to accommodate 600 artists. Adjacent to tho
hotel they have started tho construction of apartment
buildings and also another hotel v/hich together will
provide accommodation for about 10,000 people. Tho
surrounding mountains, for a radius of about a mile, have
boon planned on modern housing linos and, when tho scheme
is completed, tho area will have a population of about
25,000 people of the upper income group, They have also
a proposal for a mono-rail, linking up Rio, it is estim-
ated that this journey v/ill take only fourteen minutes.
Tho features which they have incorporated in this vast
project are extraordinary but logical, oven if they
appear to bo fifty years ahead of their timo o They
hope to mako “Qulntandinha” tho Mecca of tho rich from
tho United States of America and adjacent South American
Countries a
/32.


DESIGNED BY ARCHITECT OSCAR
NIEMYER IN BRAZIL
The Architect ' s own home in
Rio de Janeiro.
This house fronts a main
street in the city of
Belo Horizonte and is
probably the most charm-
ing of his work. Note
the ramp, which this de-
signer uses wherever
possible in place of
stairs
An example of the ex-
traordinary measures
adopted to gain an
architectural effect.
In this case the work-
manship is crude and
the result is unsatis-
factory.


AVENIDA PRESIDENTS
VARGAS RIO DE JANEIRO
This photograph of the model for this huge project indi-
cates an interesting method of obtaining a much greater
shopping and office front alignment by the use of hollow
squares abutting the main thoroughfare.
S. PAULO BRAZIL
A proposed housing scheme using multi storey dwelling units.
This scheme was designed by A. De Mello Flores and Atilio
Correa Lima.


An interior view showing the effect of ad justable louvres
used in conjunction with a glazed wall.
Another example of the Architectural effect gained by the
use of tropical design factors.


With fast air travel of tho future this playground
may bo only a matter of a few hours from Now York. One
may find fault with detail but, as a scheme, it is
well thought out, and the interior decorations of tho
hotel, which wore designed by Dorothy Draper of New York,
are exceptionally fine.
I left 11 Quintandlnha” amazed, but with tho
thought that I would like to see it again when the design-
ers’ dream has become fact.
INSULATION.
In our single dwelling unit of one floor, thin
oeilings are responsible for much of our indoor heat.
Overhead insulation would be beneficial and the typo of
roof would dictate tho amount of insulation necessary.
It is interesting to note that in U.S.A., where consid-
eration is given to thermal resistance against summer
heat by ventilation in tho roof space, provision is also
made for closing this roof ventilation in tho winter, but
this is only possible with a sealed typo of roof such as
they have in the U.S.A. and Canada. It would be fairly
safe to say that QO% to 90% of domestic work in those
two countries is roofed with bituminous tiles tacked to
close boarded sarking. During tho hot summer days tho
heat glues those tiles together and therefore tho wind
does not penetrate tho roof space.
Insulation is tho general practice in the
Northern and Eastern States of U.S.A. and in Canada, on
the inside face of external walls a separate frame is
built to take a blanket form of insulating material*
Tho coiling is also insulated and in all these houses
an efficient form of central or hot air heating unit is
Installed, designed to give a temperature of 70° through-
out all rooms in tho house. These features are also
included in low cost workers* homos.
In places like Canberra, and parts of Victoria,
also Tasmania, consideration should be given to some
form of central heating to increase comfort conditions
during tho winter months.
/33,


MATERIALS;
Muoh experimental work is being carried out in
U.S.A* to produce now materials but there is usually
a long delay between the discovery and commercialised
production,,
I hoard of some interesting experiments boing
carried out in the treatment of timber such as
(a) A treatment to prevent warping and cracking;
(b) Timber that will be sap free and from which all
fats and resinous acids have been removed*
(c) Furniture and fittings made from soft woods
chemically treated to make them as hard as oak e
Of all the new materials I saw during my tour,
probably the most useful to us in Australia would bo the
coloured bituminous floor tiles* These tiles have
proved a practical hard wearing floor covering* They
are extensively used in modern buildings for corridors
and general office floors, they take a high polish and
yet remain non-slip© Literature describing this
material has been handed in to the library*
During my stay in Now York I visited the Archi-
tects Sample Corporation# The showrooms of this organ-
isation cover a large area and displayed in these rooms
are the newest materials and the latest development in
equipment o I obtained a large number of catalogues and
descriptive matter dealing with materials and equipment
displayed., which will be very useful for reference*
In the New York Public Works Department there is
an interesting sot up which is called the "Building
Materials Exhibit Section"# In this section all the
well known building materials, including a large range of
woods, stones, marbles, etc# are exhibited. They also
have a number of full scale units of different forms of
construction based on standard specification and these
are used as a guide to both designers and supervisors.
Such an Exhibit Section would bo a very useful adjunct
to this Departments Library*
/34.


RE C OMM3 HD AT 10 NS ;
Among tho opinions expressed throughout this
report thoro aro a number which have a direct bearing upon
our work in Australia and those aro separately listed
hereunder as recommendations for consideration •-
1* That tho Commonwealth Government should earnestly
encourage the Decentralization of our towns, tho
planning of which should be in accordance with
modern Town-Planning principles;
2• that, in the designing of our new city buildings
car parking areas be provided;
3. that, in our Housing Schemes wo urge the elimin-
ation of all fences to enable overall landscaping
to bo developed, so that people may live in park-
liko surroundings;
4. that, in any proposed Slum-Clearance scheme, when
an endeavour is boing made to design an economic
scheme on high-cost land. Municipal Councils
should prevent tho increase of tho housing density
beyond, say, twenty dwelling units per gross acre;
5. that, in our endeavour to reduce tho cost of tho
dwelling unit, the standard of the dwelling should
not bo lowered;
6# that, tho benefit derived from increased density in
housing schemes by tho use of groups of two storey
attached dwelling units of not more than six units
in each block, bo more widely publicised;
V# that, a further invostigation be made into tho
functions of tho Federal Housing Administration of
tho United States of America, particularly regarding
the part it plays in insuring loans to financial
institutions for tho purpose of building largo hous-
ing projects. The Commonwealth Government could
administer such a scheme without infringement of tho
rights of tho States;
8. that, a u Prefabricated House Commercial Standard 11 bo
framed in a manner that would bo acceptable to all
State Housing Authorities, Until such a standard
is framed the market for a machine-made, or package
type house will bo very limited;
9. that, in tho planning of our Airports, Town Planning
factors bo considered, especially those relating to
arterial roads linking tho City and tho Airport,
/35.


10. that, a Contra! Air-linos City Offico, designed to
house all air-lines companies, be considered in
conjunction with the planning of the airports and
road system;
11. that, in the planning of our immediate Airport
Administrative Buildings, flexibility should be
the keynote, in order to allow for unknown devel-
opments ;
12. that, the construction hangars bo delayed for, say,
five years and consideration be given to the build-
ing of elevated mobile workshops for engine repair
work;
13. that, the degree of standardisation of our small
suburban, or country town, banks and post offices
be increased;
14. that, a manufacturers 1 sample room be established
in conjunction with the library. Samples of
fittings could bo displayed, together with natural
and commercial materials;
15. that, the manufacture of the ”Persian Blind”, as
illustrated in this report, bo sponsored for use
in our tropical buildings,
(C. V. HOWARD)
Chief Designing Architect.


PERSONS WHO ASSISTED THE MISSION
IN ITS INVESTIGATION
Mr*, Howell, Australian War Supplies San Diego Cal. USA
Pro cur orient,
Mr, Mclntyre, Australian Legation Washington D.G. n
Mr* Bray Hammond, Federal Reserve 11 11 ”
Building,
Mr* C,V, Kollway, D/Diroctor-Gonoral Aust, New York N.Y. w
War Supplies Procure-
ment,
Mr* H* Hart on, (Inspector), Aide to 11 *' ”
the Mayor of New York
Mr, Edwin A, Chairman, Town Planning 11 11 11
Salmon, Commission,
Mr* Sproul, President, Federal 11 11 11
Reserve Bank,
Mr, Tonyock, Federal Reserve Bank, 11 *’ ”
Mr, Howard General Manager, 11 11 11
Gillespie, Otis Elevator Go,,
Mr, Regan, Vico President, National 11 11 11
City Bank of N.Y.,
Mr, Simpson, Architect, National 11 11 fI
City Bank of N.Y,,
Mr, Greenwood, Director, Carrier Coy., 11 11 11
Mr, Harris, Carrier Coy,, 11 " 11
Mr, Reid, Publisher, Pencil Points, 51 ” M
etc.,
Mr, Irving V,A, Commissioner, Public 11 11 !t
Huio, Works Department,
Mr, Gordon Chief Architect, 11 11 11
Lorimor, Public Works Department,
Mr, Duncan, Manager, Chemical Bank, 11 ” n
Capt. Kenneth P. Operation Manager, ” ” 11
Bohr, La Guardia Airfield,
Mr, Alexander Engineer, Dopt 0 of Marino 11 11 11
MacGregor, & Aviation,
Mr, G, Axt, A,1.A,, Architect, 11 11
Mr, John Hamann, Chief Construction Manager, M 11
Federal Housing Admini-
stration,
/2.


Mr* J*H, Bly, Chief of tho Construction Now York
Dept., Pcdoral Housing N.Y. USA
Administration,
Mr* E.H* Shoppell, Pedoral Housing ,! 11 11
Administration,
Mr* 0. Sullivan, Director, Otis Elevator Phlla- Penn. 11
Co o delphia
Mr. W. Styx Director, Dymaxion 11 11 ”
Wasserraan, Dv/olling Machine Inc.
Messrs. Delano & Architects, La Guardia Now York
Aldrich, & Idlewild Airfield, N.Y. USA
Mr* G. Licht, do* 11 11 n
Mr* Monson, Wesco Paint Co o , Boston Mass* ”
Mr. Meagher, Asst. Secretary, New 11 ” M
England Mutual Life
Insurance Co*,
Mr. Chapman, Property Manager, do, S! u 11
Mr* Spencer, President, First u 11 M
National Bank,
Mr. G.H* Briggs, Station Manager, Dorval Montreal Canada
Airport, Trans-Canada
Air Linos,
Mr. Sterling, Australian High Gommiss- Ottawa 11
loner,
Mr* R, Harry, Aust. High Commiss-
Office, 11 tf
Mr. T. Dunbarton, Press Attache, Aust, ,f 11
High Commissioner f s Office,
Mr, C. Sutherland, Chief Architect, Dept. ” 11
of Public Works,
Mr* H.A, Mclntyre, Dept, of Transport, 11 11
Air Services Branch,
Mr* J.T. Hornsby, do o 11 11
Mr. W, Anderson, Director-General of 11 11
National Housing,
Mr, Dudley, Chief Technical Officer, M 11
National Housing, Admin,,
Mr. L.G. Richardson, Manager, Hallidays, Pro- Toronto 11
fabrication & Building
Materials Specialists of
Burlington, Ontario,
Mr. H, Lior, Profabrication Specialist, 11 ”
Mr* Darloy, Nolla Park Institute Cleveland Ohio USA
/3.


Mr. Mclnornoy, Run Detroit Mich. USA
J/tr# D.S. Kiskaddon, Vico—Prosident, •• »i it
Buhl Land Co.,
Mr. McLoohlan, Manager, Chicago, in. "
Otis Elevator Go.,
Mr. R. Plindt, Structural & Cost 11 « n
Engineer, Federal Public
Housing Authority,
Mrs. M. Bush, Ryerson Library, 11 it it
Mr. G. Trogh, Principal Archltoct, " n tt
Podoral Public Housing.
Authority
Mr. N. Owlngs, Architect, it » „
to. Oarston E. President, Contin- " n n
Ronning, cntal Illinois Nat-
ional Bank & Trust Co.,
Mr. E.R. Jacobson, United Stool Export Now York NY "
Co.,
Mr. Honlo, Director of Inform- Knoxvlllo Tonn. "
ation, Tonnossee
Valloy Authority,
Augur, Asst. Dlroctor, Rog~ w it tt
ional Studios DoptT
Tonnossoo Valloy
Authority (T.V.A.),
Mr. G.L. Richardson, Senior Archltoct, » « n
(T.V.A.),
Llout. Hobson, T.V.A. it n „
G.L. Kidd, T.V.A. n u „
Mr. J.P. Porrls, Englnoor, T.V.A., » it u
Nolan Mitcholl, Rosearch Officer, 11 it n
T.V.A.,
Ifro R. Brook Taylor, Chief of Industrial *» it u
Division, T.V.A.,
Mr. M. Grroono, Australian Legation, Rio Do Brazil South
Janeiro, America
Di*. Lulz Simoos Prosldont, Dopartmonto 11 n it
Lopes, Administrates
Sorvlcqs Publicos,
B scar Mollo G.E., Director, Divis- 11 it it
Ploros, ao Do Edificlos
Publicos, Dopartmonto
Admlnis trativo
Sorvlcqs Publicos,
A.


Sonor Raymundo C.E., Dlvisao Do Rio Do Brazil South
Camara, Ediflcios Publicos, Janeiro, America
Dopartmonto Admini-
strative Sorvicqs
Publicos,
Senor Marcolo Architect, Dopartmonto n 11 11
Roborto, Administrative Sorvicqs
Publicos,
Mr. Alberto Ploroa, Director, Aeronaut- n n 11
leal Division, Admini-
strative Sorvicqs
Publicos,
Mr• Harby, Manager, Bank of London 11 H 11
and South America Ltd.,
Mr. Rodrigo Mollo Director, Service Do 11 M w
Franco do Andrade, Patrimonia Historico
e. Artistico Nacional,
Dr, Angelo A. Chief of Architectural 11 11 u
Nurgel, Division, Dept, of
Agriculture,
Mr. Oscar Neimoyer, Architect, 11 11 11
Mr. Alexander Australian Minister, n 11 11
McGregor,
Mr. Waller, First Secretary, ,T 11 11
Australian Legation,
Mr. Arthur Rabolo, Agent, Bolo n 11
Horizonte,
Mr. G.J. Davies, Australian Ytfar Supplies Los Calif. U.S.A.
Procurement, Angelos
Mr. Shcahan, do. San ,f w
Francisco,
Mr. Findlay, Manager, Canadian Bank 11 11 11
of Commerce,
Mr. Jo Higloy, Manager, Otis Elevator l? ” 11
Co.,
Mr 0 James E. Lash, A/Exocutivo Director, 11 n n
San Francisco Housing
Authority,
Mr. D.M. Bufkin, California Redwood Assoc. 11 11 11
Mr. T.S. Mittoll, District Manager, « " »
Otis Elevator Co.,
Mrs. A. Newberry, Manageress, Mctrop- ” 11 ,!
olitan Life Insurance
Company Housing Scheme,
/5.


Mr. W. Lea, Stool House Prefab- Los Calif. USA
ricator, Angelos,
Mr, N.G. Rohn, Pacific Coast Manager, 11 w n
Ohmer Rogistor Co,,
Mr, Donochad, American Broadcasting Hollywood, ,! 11
Corporation,
Mr e Soarlo, Vico Prosidont, n !t ”
American Broadcasting
Corporation,
Mr, S, Lundon, Vice President, Los 11 11
Institute of Arch- Angelos,
itocts,
Mr, Wo Gordon, Executive Chief, 11 11 •*
R.K.O, Studios,
Capt 0 Cook, Director of Research, n 11 11
R.K.O, Studios,
Mr* Flannery, Research Officer, 11 » ”
R.K.O. Studios,






