

Archbishop Ullathorne.
LONDON
CATHOLIC TYVTH
SOCIETY
18 WEST SQVARE SE
Price One Penny .








Archbishop Ullathorne*
(1806-1889.)
There are some lives which serve to mark an epoch,—
.lives which by virtue of their striking power or unique
position or both, stand apart by themselves, and form
landmarks in the history of their time. Of such was the
life of Archbishop Ullathorne—one who was the link
between the old order and the new, —the last of that
long line of Vicars Apostolic, stretching back even to
the times of the “Reformation,” the first Bishop of
Birmingham, and consolidater of Catholic life in mid-
England, and the Patriarch of the present English Epis-
copate; the promoter of the restored hierarchy in England,
the chief founder of the Church in Australia, the zealous
missioner among the outcast and degraded, the prudent
adviser at the Councils of the Church, and the learned
expounder and unwearied defender of her doctrine and
practice in a period of doubt and difficulty and transition.
It is a life which, by reason of its originality ofcharacter and
grandeur of spirit, quite as much as its extent of work
and eminence of position, is well worthy of being handed
down to posterity.
And handed down it will be in some form at least. For
there exists an autobiography, written during the last
months of his life, which will doubtless give a peculiar
insight into Dr. Ullathorne’s character, as well as a
* Abridged, by permission, from the Oscotian, with alterations
and additions.


graphic picture of his relations to the times in which he
lived, —though even there, rom the nature of the case,
many a wonderful touch in word and act will be wanting,
which we would fain see preserved, but which seem
destined to pass away unrecorded.
This memoir does not aim dt being in any sense a
complete account of such a life. It is mainly a short
summary of its chief facts and events; yet it is hoped
that it will be of interest to many, especially with regard
to those parts which concern his last years and days
upon earth.
I. Early Life.
William Ullathorne was born on the 7th of May, 1806,
at Pocklington, some ten or twelve miles from York. His
father belonged to a good old Catholic family, which
reckoned among its ancestors a lineal descendant of
Blessed Thomas More, Chancellor and Martyr. His
mother was a convert, distantly related to Sir John
Franklin, the Arctic navigator; and William was the
eldest of their ten children. He learnt his letters from
the daughter of a Protestant clergyman in the town, and
when he was eight years old became a weekly boarder
in a neighbouring village, that he might receive some
further schooling. He returned home every Saturday
night, that he might hear Mass on Sundays, and listen
to the instructions of the venerable Abbd Fidhle, who
had at that time the charge of the Pocklington mission.
The teaching the boy received at Burnby was, of course,
quite of an elementary kind; but his own insatiable
taste for reading enlarged his stores of knowledge, far
beyond what is usual in boys of his age. His imagina-
tion was remarkably lively, and led him to take special
delight in any tales of voyages and travels he could lay
his hand on.
After two years of this village schooling, the family
removed to Scarborough, where, for the first time, he
saw the sea. This had been a great object of his aspira


tion from the time he had read Robinson Crusoe; and he
never forgot the keen sense of wonder and delight with
which he gazed on that enchanting sight.* Here he was
sent to a school of higher pretensions, kept, like the form-
er one, by a Protestant master. He suffered, however,
great disadvantages by his change from Pocklington, in
the loss of weekly Mass. Although there was'a Catholic
Chapel at Scarborough, there was no resident priest; the
mission was served alternately by two priests of the
neighbourhood, each coming once in six weeks. As
they were both Douay priests, and generally dined at
Mr. Ullathorne’s house, the boy’s interest was much
awakened by their college stories; but his real attraction
was to the sea. His father attempted to bring him up to
. his own business, but after a year’s trial it was thought
best to yield to the strong wishes of the son.
A new brig was about to be launched, whose owners
were among Mr. Ullathorne’s personal friends, and it
was to be commanded by a captain very superior to the
ordinary run of mercantile captains. The officers and
crew were also picked men, and so the future Bishop
sailed as cabin boy from Newcastle to Leghorn, thence
to Barcelona, and then returned from Tarragona to Hull.
His next voyage was to St. Petersburgh. He was
charmed by the wildness of the Baltic Sea, and much
struck by the religious habits of the people; but a change
of captains, and a change of destination for the vessel,
led before long to the cancelling of his indentures. His
parents hoped that this would sicken their son of sea life
altogether; but though he had not much taste for ship
work, and greatly disliked the coarse society into which
he was necessarily thrown, he still retained his desire
to see more of the world; so he spent the winter in
studying the science of navigation, and in the following
* To the last he was never tired of talking, and hearing, and
reading, about the sea. In fact, so strong was the impression made
upon him by his early sea-faring days, that he ever after regarded
himself as a sailor, and had always a humorous pity for “poor
land-lubbers. ” He used always to declare that it was aboard ship
that he learnt the meaning of discipline and obedience.


spring set sail again. This time he was under a Catholic
captain, whose nephew, the mate of the vessel, had been
educated for a while at Stonyhurst, and was full of faith.
They made a voyage to Cronstadt, and another to
Memel, and there the young sailor met the turning-point
of his life.
One Sunday morning the mate proposed that they
should go to Mass; so the “Garden of the Soul” was
fished up from the bottom of the sea-chest, and the two
youths set off together through the flat town, with its
numerous wind-mills for sawing timber, and its many
churches, which were in the hands of the Lutherans.
Beyond the town they reached a considerable wooden
structure, exteriorly not unlike a barn, with a large grass-
plot in front, in the middle of which stood a bare wooden
cross. Mass had already begun ; the men knelt on one
side of the church, the women on the other; and their
devout and recollected faces made the deepest impression
on the cabin boy. Their hands were joined in prayer,
and they were singing the Litany of the Blessed Virgin
to two or three simple notes, accompanied by an instru-
ment somewhat resembling in effect the tinkling of small
bells. The sight and sound affected him in a wonderful
way; his heart and soul were turned inwardly upon
himself; he saw the claims of God upon his service, and
felt a deep reproach for leading an aimless life. On the
homeward voyage, he spent all his leisure time in reading
the two or three Catholic books which the mate happened
to have on board, and as soon as his ship entered the
Thames he wrote to his parents, saying that he now
wished to give up the sea, and to return home.
Not long afterwards a friend, who had a son studying
for the Church at Downside, pressed a younger son of
Mr. Ullathorne’s to embrace the same vocation. The
invitation, however, met with no response; whereupon
the elder brother made known to his parents the change
that had been wrought in him, and to his great delight
it was soon arranged with Dr. Barber, the Prior of
Downside, that William should go to that school. He
went in the beginning of February, 1823.


II. Religious Training.
There were only twenty boys in the school; probably
there were none of these whose education —in its more
common sense —was more backward than William Ulla-
thorne’s, certainly none whose mind on the other hand
was more fully developed. He now set him'self to work
to supply the deficiency, and his natural abilities enabled
him to push his way with wonderful rapidity to the top
of his class, and indeed of the school; for at each suc-
cessive examination, he was transferred to a higher class.
If the intellectual and classical part of his education
was too hurried, as he himself on more than one occa-
sion publicly acknowledged, the same cannot be said of
his religious and spiritual training. This was deep and
solid, as became the nature which was to receive it. Fr.
Folding, afterwards Archbishop of Sydney, was Prefect
of the school, and also spiritual director. He at once
began to prepare the new pupil for his first Commu-
nion, which in consequence of the absence of a resident
priest at Scarborough, and his own sailor life, he had
not yet made. The preparation was long and thorough,
and the first communion was delayed until Christmas
night, 1823. Twelve days later, William Ullathorne
was admitted as a postulant to the Benedictine Order.
On the r2th of March, 1824, he received the habit,
together with four other students.
Besides the usual course of religious training and
exercises, the young novice devoted himself with the
utmost ardour to the study of all the books that came
within his reach. He made his solemn profession on the
sth of April, 1825, taking the name of Bernard.
Early in the year 1828, he commenced his course of
theology under a man of singular ability, Dr. Brown,
afterwards well-known as Bishop of Newport and Menevia.
In October he received Confirmation from Bishop (after-
wards Cardinal) Weld; on the 12th of the same month he
was promoted to the Sub-diaconate, and in the Ember-
week of September, 1830, to the Diaconate.
He was soon afterwards sent with another of his order


to the Benedictine College at Ampleforth. where he was
appointed Prefect of discipline, and where his firmness of
ruling was soon made manifest. On Ember Saturday,
September 24th, 1831, he was ordained priest at Ushaw
by Bishop Penswick, Vicar-Apostolic of the Northern
District.
The account of his religious training must needs be
scanty and inadequate; for, besides the time itself being
a period of retirement from the world, it was also one to
which Dr. Ullathorne rarely alluded at any length, and
then only to more intimate friends, so great was his reticence
in all that concerned his own spiritual life. His private
devotion was ever hidden and unobtrusive; so much so,
that it was only in his last illness, when retirement was
no longer possible, that those around him realised how
tenderly and ardently he had loved his God.
III. Life as Priest.
For some little time after his ordination, Father Ulla-
thorne was doing the ordinary Sunday duties of a priest
at Craik and Easingwold; and after that was recalled to
his own monastery to teach in the school. But, about
this time, events happened which had a most important
bearing on his career.
Fr. Polding received a brief appointing him Visitor-
Apostolic of the Mauritius, where his uncle, Dr. Slater,
was Bishop. He, however, declined the appointment,
and Dr. Morris was put in his place. The Vicariate of
the Mauritius at that time extended far beyond the limits
of the island. It embraced all Southern Africa, Australia,
and the islands of the Pacific, including New Zealand,
and even a considerable part of British India. Dr.
Morris was an old member of the Downside community,
and naturally wished for co-operators from the house of
his profession. In reply to his application, he was told
by the Superiors that if Fr. Bernard were asked, he
would probably be not unwilling to go. The young priest,


who had already, years before, expressed his sympathy
with the sufferings of the convicts in Australia, now
declared his wish to go there. After consultation with
his superiors, he wrote to the President-General of the
Order for leave to offer himself for that mission; which
leave was at once granted.
Ecclesiastical affairs in Australia were then in a very
uncomfortable position, and Sir Richard Bourke, the
Governor, had asked the Home Government to make
some arrangements whereby a Catholic ecclesiastic
might be sent out, invested with competent authority, to
settle the matters in dispute. Dr. Morris, therefore, pro-
posed to make Fr. Ullathorne his Vicar-General for that
part of his diocese. Fr. Ullathorne, alarmed at the pro-
posal, had recourse to his usual mentor; and acting on
Fr. Polding’s advice, did not refuse the offer.
He set out from London in September, 1832, reaching
Sydney about Shrovetide in February, 1833, at which
time there were only three priests in the colony to minister
to the wants of a scattered flock of some 20,000 souls.
The new Vicar-General, by his prudence, tact, and firm-
ness at once made his influence felt, reforming abuses,
deciding disputes, destroying party spirit, conciliating
the Government officials, and establishing unity and
peace throughout the whole community.
The Vicar at once entered upon the missionary life,
which his companions were already familiar with. Their
usual mode of travelling was on horse-back, accompanied
by a servant man on another horse, carrying the vest-
ments, altar stone, &c. The priest himself always
carried the Blessed Sacrament in the breast pocket of his
coat, not knowing when he might come upon the sick
and dying—a practice lately prohibited by the Holy
See. On one occasion, the Vicar lost the holy oil-stocks
through their wearing a hole in his pocket. This happened
on the desolate Blue Mountains, many miles from any
habitation; but strange to say, a French woman, happen-
ing to pass that way, picked them up, and at once con-
cluding that they belonged to a priest, found means of
restoring them.


In most places, the police courts served for chapels,
but at times a public room over the stables of some hotel
had to serve the purpose; and it happened more than
once that the Vicar had to preach against drunkenness in
places devoted to drinking. Wherever the missionaries
went, the Catholic innkeepers never failed to entertain
both them and their horses, free of expense. When they
reached a township, they used to ride round, visiting all
the farms in the neighbourhood, calling also at Protestant
houses, to ask leave for the Catholic convict-servants to
come to Mass and the Sacraments; also looking after any
sick who might require attention. Then came the day
for Mass, which was occupied from morning till night
with people coming and going. Sometimes a second
day was required for communions, and all this amid
intense heat and many other grave inconveniences.
Even at Sydney itself there was work enough for more
clergy than the colony contained. Besides the usual
flock, there was a large gaol in which convicts were put
on first landing, and to which others were sent from all
parts of the colony for extra punishment. There was the
felons’ gaol, where about forty executions took place in
the year; a large chain-gang to be looked after on an
island in Sydney Cove; a great convict hospital in
Sydney, another at Paramatta, and another at Liverpool,
twenty miles off.
These things, and many other duties connected with
the convict population made more priests necessary; and
the difficulty of communicating with Bishop Morris at the
Mauritius made it clear that New South Wales needed a
Bishop of its own. Feeling the weight of his responsi-
bility, Fr. Ullathorne wrote to his old novice master at
Downside a letter which set astir the English Benedictines,
led to communications with Rome, and finally to Fr
Polding’s appointment as the first Bishop of Sydney.
Meanwhile, events occurred which brought the Vicar
into yet closer relations with the convicts. The duty of
attending at executions usually fell to the lot of another
priest, Fr. McEncroe. But when a judicial commission
was sent to Norfolk Island for the purpose of trying a


number of criminals who had been engaged in rebellion
against the troops and in an attempt to get possession of
the island, the Governor begged Fr. Ullathorne to
accompany the commission, as many of the guilty men
were Catholics.
Describing the place in a pamphlet on the Catholic
Mission in Australasia, he says: “Norfolk Island is
about 1000 miles from Sydney. It is small, only about
twenty-one miles in circumference, of volcanic origin, and
one of the most beautiful spots in the universe.” The
detailed account he then gives, which is too long to
reprint here, shows that the place, from the magnificence
of its scenery, the luxuriance of its growth, and the
purity of its climate, must be indeed an earthly Paradise,
but he then goes on to show what a moral hell had
been created by the depravity of man, amid such beauti-
ful surroundings.
This island had been selected as the place of punish-
ment for men who had committed fresh crimes, after
having been already transported to New South Wales
for crimes committed in England or Ireland. Probably
the majority of them had received, at one time or other,
sentence of death. They were a desperate body of men,
made more desperate through their isolation from the
outer world, the hardships of their lot, and the utter
exclusion of religion from their midst. In fact, so deep
was their depravity that in their language evil was liter-
ally called good, and good, evil. Their life was one of
intense misery: they worked in heavy irons and fed on
salt meat and maize bread; so indifferent had life become
to them that murders were committed in cold blood, the
murderer afterwards declaring he had no ill feeling
against his victim, but that his sole object was to obtain
release from his surroundings.
To such men as these was Fr. Ullathorne sent in 1835,
to prepare such Catholics amongst them as were con-
demned to death, to meet their end. This work he did
most successfully, and much more as well; for, besides
collecting much information which he used to good
purpose afterwards, twenty conversions were made and


one hundred and fifty general confessions heard,
during the week still allowed before the departure of the
ship.
He left prayer books behind him; arranged a form of
prayer for their use on Sundays, and obtained the
appointment of one as reader, whose duty also it should
be to teach those to read who were unable, in the inter-
vals between labour and food.
At the close of the next year, the Vicar re-visited
Norfolk Island, and our readers will appreciate his delight
at finding that his poor penitents had remained remark-
ably attentive to their duties of religion, in spite of all
sorts of ridicule and persecution; and, as a consequence,
had vastly improved in their lives and conduct. They
now had their reward in being admitted to Holy Com-
munion. Besides hearing three hundred confessions
during the fortnight of this second visit, the Vicar’s
labours were also rewarded by twelve conversions from
among the Protestant criminals.
In the midst of these distracting duties, he yet found
time to write a short work on the “ Use and Abuse of
the Sacred Scriptures, as exhibited in the Discipline and
Practice of the Protestant and Catholic Communions.”
This was published when there was a danger of anti-
Christian Education gaining a footing in the colony. He
also published a sermon on Drunkenness, and another
on Cursing and Swearing, thousands of copies of which
were circulated throughout the settlement at the expense
either of the Government or the Governor. Indeed, the
former sermon has often been used, and still continues
to be used largely throughout the British Isles, by Pro-
testants, as well as Catholics, in their fight with that
terrible evil.
After Bishop Polding’s arrival, Catholic affairs soon
began to assume larger proportions. And as the Church
expanded, its wants increased; so much so, that it was
soon determined to send Fr. Ullathorne to England to
do what he could to provide for them.
He landed in England towards the end of 1836, and
then entered upon what must be called, in some respects,


the most eventful years of his life, when he was brough into
contact with so many men of note in various parts of the
country. He was perpetually on the move, not only
through England, but also in Ireland. He wrote and
published the book already mentioned on the Catholic
Mission in Australasia; gave lectures up and down the
country on his distant mission and its wants; and his
appeals met with a very large measure of success. He
also met the Vicars-Apostolic of England, assembled at
York, and the Irish Bishops at Maynooth; and arranged
to take out with him or send fifteen priests (four of whom
became bishops), five church-students to study Philo-
sophy, five Sisters of Charity from Dublin, and two or
three schoolmasters. Finally, he was called upon,
through the suggestion of Dr. Lingard, to give evidence
before Sir William Molesworth’s Committee on the sub-
ject of transportation and its attendant evils. His evi-
dence will be found in the report of that Committee laid
before Parliament in 1838.
In the midst of these various duties, he was summoned
to Rome, at the instance of Cardinal Weld, to give an
account of his mission. Pope Gregory XVI. gave him
his approbation and encouragement, and conferred on
him the title of Doctor of Divinity.
On his return to England, he assisted at the opening
of St. Mary’s College, Oscott, May 29th, 1838. Soon
after he set sail for Sydney, and on his arrival found
himself the object of almost universal indignation in the
colony, and, indeed, throughout the other penal settle-
ments. His evidence before the House of Commons,
and his little book on the subject, had preceded him; and
garbled extracts had been published from them, dressed
up in the usual newspaper fashion, with all sorts of ex-
aggerations. He had deeply wounded both freemen
and emancipists in two ways: he had touched them in
two most sensitive points, their pride and their pockets.
He had made known throughout England, and, indeed,
all Europe, the state of moral degradation which prevailed
in the colony; and had exposed the evils and vicious
results of the assignment system. But on the continu


ance of that system depended the wealth both of emi-
grants and emancipated convicts. The land derived its
value from the number of convicts that its owners could
get assigned to them. Hence, the more criminals, the
more wealth. Moreover, trade and manufactures rested
on the same basis; and even the domestic servants of
both sexes were usually assigned criminals. But after
the evidence which had been given against it, this sys-
tem was vigorously attacked in Parliament and by the
English press; and its reformation was already looming
in the distance, though many years had yet to roll over
their heads before the colonists realised the truth and
justice of what had been said. But he lived to see the
fruit of his labour, and hear the reviling changed to
blessing; for in a monster meeting held at Sydney, in
1850, almost on the very spot where he had dwelt,
100,000 men registered a memorable oath, that no convict
should ever again be allowed to set foot on Australian
shores.
About this time he wrote his “ Reply to Judge Bur-
ton,” the most important of his colonial productions. It
was to protest against decisions in applying certain Eng-
lish laws to the Colony, which, had they stood, would
have invalidated all the Catholic marriages there up to
quite a recent period, the children of those
marriages, and upset the tenure of much property.
He had also a conflict with an anti-Catholic Tract
Society, to which government officials were giving their
support, and by his efforts the abuse was abolished.
These and other encounters caused him to be called in
Protestant circles the Very Rev. Agitator-General of New
South Wales.
After a while, Bishop Polding determined to return to
Europe for a time, as a still further increase in the number
both of priests and bishops became necessary; and Dr.
Ullathorne, who took alarm at seeing his name on the
Bishop’s list for the bishopric of Hobart-Town, insisted on
accompanying him to Rome. It was the Vicar’s taking
leave of New South Wales altogether, though he did not
know it at the time. Yet, before he went, he published


three letters addressed respectively to the Governor, the
city of Sydney, and the colony in general, predicting
great financial troubles and consequent distress. These
letters were signed by his usual political notti de plume ,
“Sydney;” and though the colonists did not believe him
at the time, they had good reason to do so afterwards,
when the crash came.
On their way to Europe the Bishop and his Vicar paid
a visit to New Zealand; and Dr. Ullathorne was so im-
pressed by what he saw and heard that he has charmed
many an audience, young and old, by narrating his
adventures there, and describing the character of the
country and the native inhabitants—their splendid
physique, their simplicity and their peculiar customs.
He and his party were astonished to find themselves
repeatedly pointed out as “Picopo.” On asking the
Catholic missionaries what it meant, they were told that
from certain peculiarities belonging to their language,
the words “ Bishop” or “Eveque” were unpronounceable
to the natives, so that Bishop Pompallier, who was
stationed there, had taken the Latin word “Episcopus,”
and turned it into “Picopo” for his own title; and in
process of time his religion had also become designated
by the same word. The English Catholic was called
“Picopo-Poryaxono” (from Port Jackson, the harbour
of Sydney), and the French Catholic “Picopo—Weewee”
(“oui, oui”) from his frequent use of the affirmative in
his own language.
The travellers also paid visits to some of the native
chiefs in their own homes, one of whom greatly amused
the Vicar by rubbing his cold blue nose with great energy
against the nose of his visitor.* Another amusing in-
cident relates to their difficulties in crossing a morass.
Dr. Ullathorne was taken over first, on the head and
shoulders of a half-naked New Zealander, and then
enjoyed the sight of a huge human pyramid advancing
* It was the coldness, quite as much as the custom, that amused
him. Even in his last illness, when some one spoke about his
feeling cold, he remarked: “ The coldest object in nature that I
know of is the nose of a New Zealand chief.”


at solemn pace, apparently supported on two copper-
coloured legs. The pyramid consisted of good Bishop
Polding, with his purple-stockinged legs conspicuously
prominent, and on his shoulders, rising above the broad
ecclesiastical hat, a young English lad, who was travel-
ling with them, from whose hands hung a couple of wild
ducks.
Our travellers reached England in June, 1841. Bishop
Polding started for Rome. Dr. Ullathorne, released from
his position as Vicar, returned to Downside, where he
received from the Fathers assembled at the General
Chapter of the English Benedictines the title of “ Predi-
cator Generalis ” ob merita, which gave him a seat for
life in the General Council of the Congregation. Soon
after he was appointed to the mission of Coventry. Here
he was a wonderfully effective preacher, an indefatigable
missioner, devoted to his flock who in turn were devoted
to him. Through his exertions the Church of the Most
Holy Sacrament and St. Osburg was built.
About 1845, Dr. Ullathorne received word from Rome
of his nomination to the See of Adelaide: he had to
make his second journey to Rome where he succeeded
in declining it. After his return, he was offered the See
of Perth, New South Wales, which he also declined.
But it was evident that he was destined to be a bishop
sooner or later. After the death of Bishop Baggs,
Vicar-Apostolic of the Western District of England, he
was nominated to that bishopric, and pressed by Cardinal
Acton not to refuse it, on account of the difficulties of
the situation. Yielding to this pressure, and acting in
obedience to the President-General of the Order, Dr.
Barber, he consented to accept the appointment, and
was consecrated Bishop of Hetalona, at Coventry, on
June 21st, 1846, the day on which Pius IX. was crowned
as Sovereign Pontiff. All the Bishops of England
attended, Bishop Briggs being the consecrating Bishop,
with Bishops Griffiths and Wareing as assistants, and
Bishop Wiseman, preacher. Dr. Newman and his com-
panions, then recent converts to the Church, were
present at the ceremony. His devoted flock presented


him with a beautiful chalice and an address, to which
he wrote a most touching and appropriate reply.
IV. Life as Bishop.
The new Bishop lost no time in proceeding to his new
sphere of action. He went to the College of Prior Park
the next morning for the public reception according to
the prescriptions of the Ritual. Here he took up his
residence for a while: for, although it had always been
his opinion that a Bishop ought to reside in one of the
most populous and important towns of his district for the
sake of his clergy and the thoroughness of the ecclesiastical
ceremonial, he yet felt anxious for the College on account
of its financial difficulties and the general condition of
the studies and discipline. His conditions of reform
were not accepted by the President, Dr. Brindle, nor was
his offer to take the College with all its difficulties off his
hands, on condition of exercising full control over it in all
respects. Dr. Brindle being in possession, and having
a large personal stake in the place, remained firm in his
position; whereupon his Lordship renounced all further
responsibility in the affairs of the College, and went to
Bristol, where he lived in a hired house for some time.
A saying began to spread about to the effect that Prior
Park had killed two Bishops already, and seemed not unlike-
ly to kill a third; to which the Bishop replied, that hitherto
he had been in the habit of killing the difficulties that
attempted to kill him. Finally, after holding a formal
visitation on the matter without avail, he laid it before
the Holy See; and we need only add that a Commission
of Bishops fully justified his action. As to Prior Park
College itself, it passed into lay hands, and was then
recovered by the present Bishop of Clifton (Dr. Clifford).
The Bishop at Bristol began to map out and organize
his diocesan plans and raise new institutions; but he was
sadly hampered by lack of funds for all ecclesiastical
purposes; and this, with the amount of work to be done


at Bristol itself and Clifton, made him limit his chief
energies to those places.
Early in 1848 he was sent, at the unanimous request
of all the Vicars-Apostolic, to be their representative
and agent in Rome for the prosecution of the restoration
of the Catholic Hierarchy in England. He arrived in
the Eternal City on May 25th, stayed about ten weeks,
and returned to England to meet the assembled Bishops
at Manchester.
It is a matter of history how Dr. Wiseman, coadjutor
to Dr. Walsh, was removed to London; how Dr. Walsh
himself died not long afterwards, and Bishop Ullathorne
was appointed to succeed him as Vicar-Apostolic of the
Midland District, in spite of his remonstrances and his at-
tachment to his first episcopal home, where his unfinished
plans were just getting into shape, and where dwelt
his Dominican children who had followed him from
Coventry to Clifton, and had been the object of his special
care. The new Bishop was received in St. Chad’s
Cathedral, Birmingham, on 30th August, 1848, by the
main body of the clergy of the district. Dr. Newman
and his companions, who had but recently taken posses-
sion of Old Oscott, were also present. The clergy dined
with the Bishop, and Dr. Weedall, speaking in their name:
addressed his Lordship in a beautiful oration, expressing
very cordially their unanimous loyalty to the ruler set over
them by the Holy See.
The name of Edgar Edmund Estcourt may be mentioned
here, as he accompanied the Bishop to Birmingham and
occupied so prominent a position in the diocese till his
death in 1884. He was one of those converts from
the Established Church who had found a temporary
home at Prior Park; but had left that College at the
same time as Dr. Ullathorne, and had lived with him as
his secretary. With untiring perseverance he effectively
helped the Bishop to rescue the temporal affairs of the
diocese from the verge of bankruptcy to their present
flourishing condition. This was the first work that
the Bishop was called upon to undertake; and to do
it effectually he resolved to take the clergy into his


confidence, and to gain their consent to a general reduc-
tion of income, at least for a while. To raise funds for
Church Education, he determined to ask for contributions
from the faithful, and to organize a system of weekly
collections; but from them also it was impossible to obtain
the sympathy and aid he required without making them
in some degree acquainted with the real difficulties of the
case. This he did in a series of financial Pastorals, at
the same time justifying the memory of his predecessor,
Bishop Walsh, with regard to the unforeseen failure of in-
vestments, etc., and by reason of the great works he had
undertaken and completed. This appeal must have been
very distasteful to Dr. Ullathorne; for one of his marked
characteristics was the unwillingness with which he ever
made appeals to the faithful of his flock for pecuniary
aid.
Mention has already been made in this narrative of
the negotiations, in which Bishop Ullathorne had been
the chief agent, for the restoration of the English Hier-
archy. These belonged to the year 1848; but, owing to
the revolution in Rome, and the consequent dispersal of
Pope and Cardinals, the Brief was not issued until Sept.
29th, 1850. We need not describe the turmoil that
succeeded its publication in this country. Cardinal
Wiseman’s appeal to the people, and a public meeting in
the Town Hall of Birmingham, presided over by Bishop
Ullathorne, on Nov. 18th, had much to do with recalling
the English mind to a healthier and more sensible tone.
On Sunday, Oct. 27th, his Lordship took possession of
his Cathedral in presence of an immense congregation,
and after the gospel, Dr. Newman delivered his remark-
able sermon, “Christ on the Waters.”
There is no need to dilate at length on his life as
Bishop of Birmingham, for its main events are known to
all. He never really took part in “public life.” His
power lay in another direction. He used to say that he
had missed his vocation and ought to have been a her-
mit. He seldom came forward except in defence of
Catholic truth and interests that were attacked, and then
far more often in writing than in public meetings; though


when he did take part in these things, it was always to
some purpose. But his main work lay hidden from
public gaze: it was to organize, consolidate, and expand
his diocese; to nourish the ecclesiastical spirit in his
clergy; to foster and direct religious communities; to be
the wise counsellor of his brother bishops and of a host
of people of all sorts and conditions. And it was owing
to these things, we think, far more than to his public
appearances and writings that he was so well known and
so widely esteemed at the time of his death.
However, it may be of interest just to give some sort
of list of the events of his episcopate. In 1850, he
fought for Religious Education against Mr. Fox’s Bill,
and against State interference with convents, between
1851-4. He was one of the promoters of the Catholic
Defence Association to maintain the rights of Catholics
and secure perfect religious liberty throughout the Empire.
In 1852, he helped Bishop Grant to prepare the statute
for the first Provincial Synod, and began his own Dio-
cesan Synods in 1853. But before this (1852), he was
imprisoned in Warwick Gaol for debt—no real debt of
his own but because he happened to be one of the ex
officio trustees in a charitable bequest, in which he had
no beneficial interest whatever. This created some
amusement, because his Lordship had always warned
his clergy against getting involved in debt. Plenty of
sympathy was shown him, of course, and many visitors
went to see him; and he seems to have rather liked the
retirement for the short time it lasted. In 1856, he went
on a pilgrimage to Subiaco; in 1858, he held his second
Diocesan Synod; in iB6O, at a crowded meeting in the
Town Hall, he protested against the violation of the
rights of the Holy See by the House of Savoy; in 1862,
he assisted at the canonization of the Japanese Martyrs,
at Rome, and subscribed to the Address of 265 Bishops,
then in Rome, protesting against the spoliation of the
Papal States; and in 1863, he assisted at the Centenary
of Sedgley Park School. At his third Diocesan Synod,
1864, together with his clergy, he thanked Dr. Newman
for his “Reply to Mr. Kingsley,” and on the following day


wrote the letter which forms the postscript to the “Apolo-
gia,” and is described by the great Oratorian as “a very
precious document, completing and recompensing, in a
way most grateful to my feelings, the anxious work
which has occupied me for nearly ten weeks.” In 1865,
he assisted at the funeral of Cardinal Wiseman; in the
same year he consecrated Mgr. Manning, Archbishop of
Westminster. In 1866, he read a paper before the Aca-
demia of the Catholic Religion on the “ Management of
Criminals,” and the following year gave evidence before
a Parliamentary Committee on “Ecclesiastical Titles and
the Roman Catholic Relief Acts.” In 1867, his clergy
presented him with an address and towards
building a Diocesan Seminary—an object that had long
occupied his thoughts. In 1869, at a public meeting in
the Town Hall, he condemned the “unchristian and god-
less policy” of the National Education League of which
Birmingham was the centre. At his fourth Diocesan
Synod, in the same year, he was asked to accept
“towards defraying the expenses of his assisting at the
General Council” of the Vatican; and he took a
notable part in that Council. On June 21st, 1871, his
Lordship reached the half-jubilee of his Episcopate.
After Pontifical Mass in the Cathedral, the clergy present-
ed him with a costly pectoral cross and chain, accom-
panied by an address written by Dr. Newman.
He preached, on July 23rd, 1873, at the fourth Pro-
vincial Synod; and on September 13th of the same year
admitted students to the new seminary of St. Bernard’s
at Olton, opening it solemnly on October 2nd, when Dr.
Newman preached the inaugural sermon.
In 1874, on the Feast of St. Gregory the Great, he
kept the 50th year of his religious habit, and joined with
three others who had been professed with him, in pre-
senting a “memorial of gratitude” to their old novice-
master, Archbishop Polding of Sydney. In September,
1878, he went to stay at Oscott College after a serious
illness, and practically took up his residence there till
the end of his life. His increasing infirmities obliged
him to ask fora Bishop Auxiliary; and the Very Rev.


Canon Usley, first Rector of the Seminary (now Bishop
of Birmingham), was selected by the Holy See, and con-
secrated by him in St. Chad’s Cathedral, Birmingham,
December 4th, 1879.
A complete list of works written by Dr. Ulla-
thorne will be found in the volume of “Characteristics,”
lately selected from his writings and published. They
were extremely varied in scope; among them may
be mentioned: “The Proposal to submit Convents
to Government Inspection,” “The Association for the
Promotion of the Unity of Christendom” (1864);
“Mr. Gladstone’s Expostulation Unravelled” (1874);
“Pilgrimage to the Proto-Monastery of Subiaco” (1856);
“Remarks on the proposed Education Bill” (1850);
“ Lectures on the Conventual Life” (1868); a “History
of the Restoration of the Catholic Hierarchy in Eng-
land” (1869); “Church Music” (1880), &c., &c.
But perhaps the greatest and most important works
that came from his pen were the fruit of his ripe old
age. “The Endowments of Man” (1880); “The Ground-
work of the Christian Virtues” (1882); and “Patience”
(1886); which contain the accumulated wisdom of his
whole life, and will ever be a lasting monument of his
powers of observation and analysis, his keen insight into
human nature and his practical as well as theoretical
knowledge of the spiritual life. The last work he ever
published was the “Memoir of Bishop Willson,” first
Bishop of Hobart Town, and his personal friend, who
succeeded to his labours among the convicts. This was
written in 1887.
As to the results of his diocesan labours, his own
statistics up to 1884 show us that 44 new missions had
been founded, and 67 new churches built; and the number
of priests increased from 86 to 198 since he began to rule
the diocese. Also the religious communities for men had
grown from two to five, and of women from seven to 36.
In the beginning, orphanages and charitable institutions
were represented by one House of Mercy; now there are
two Houses of Mercy, seven Orphanages, two Asylums
for Aged Poor, two Hospitals for Incurables, and three


Hemes for Children under the Poor Law Board. In
nearly every case these are managed by nuns. We may
add that whereas in 1848 there were about 12 Mission
Schools, there are now 193; that the present number of
Churches and Chapels is 150.
There are two persons whose names stand forth
conspicuous in the history of the diocese 5f Birmingham
during the last forty years, of whose relations with its
Bishop it would seem necessary we should say a few
words. The one is Cardinal Newman, the other Mother
Margaret Mary Hallahan, foundress of the English
Congregation of Nuns, of the Third Order of St. Dominic.
Of the relations between Mother Margaret Hallahan
and Bishop Ullathorne, he has himself given some record
in his preface to the interesting life of that wonderful
woman. He gives thanks to God that in His goodness
He had deigned to make him an instrument to co-operate
in the work of that great soul, and that he had had the
privilege of her friendship and prayers for six-and-twenty
years. As to the character of that friendship, he re-
echoes her own words, uttered on her deathbed—“lt has
always been in God and for God.” He sums up her
character in the few words, wherein Montalembert
describes certain heroic women of our country of the old
Saxon days, namely, that “she had the vigour of the man,
the tenderness of the woman, and the simplicity and
humility of the child.” It was he who first brought
her to England, and he was her guide in external works,
as well as in her interior soul, till her death on May nth,
1868.
The relations between Cardinal Newman and Bishop
Ullathorne were uniformly characterized by mutual
respect and regard. The Bishop, in a letter dated June 2,
1864, says to the Cardinal (then Dr. Newman): “We
have now been personally acquainted, and much more
than acquainted, for nineteen years, during more than
sixteen of which we have stood in special relation of duty
towards each other. This has been one of the singular
blessings which God has given me among the cares of
the episc'mal office. What my feelings of respect, of


confidence, and of affection have been towards you, you
know well. Nor should I think of expressing them in
words. . . . During our long intercourse there is only one
subject on which after the first experience I have measured
my words with some caution, and that has been where
questions bearing on ecclesiastical duty have risen. I
found some little caution necessary because you were
always so prompt and ready to go even beyond the
slightest intimation of my wish or desires.”
On his part, the Cardinal on many occasions expressed
his appreciation of the Bishop,—in dedicating to him his
lectures on Anglican Difficulties, in his letters, in the
composing of, or sharing in the, addresses presented by
the clergy; and again in the History of his Religious
Opinions, where he says: “When I first became a
Catholic, nothing struck me more at once than the
English out-spoken manner of the priests. It was the
same at Oscott, at Old Hall Green, at Ushaw; there
was nothing of that smoothness or mannerism which is
commonly imputed to them, and they were more natural
and unaffected than many an Anglican clergyman.
The many years which have passed since, have only
confirmed my first impression. I have ever found it in
the priests of this diocese; did I wish to point out a
straightforward Englishman, I should instance the
Bishop, who has to our great benefit for so many years
presided over it.”
V. Last Days.
He went to live at Oscott in 1878, as we have said,
after a serious illness—a course which had become im-
peratively necessary. He then practically gave up
active work, leaving it to the charge of his Bishop-Aux-
iliary and Vicar General; still, however, reserving to
himself the real ruling and superintendence of the
diocese. His time was now mainly employed in read-
ing, the writing of his greater works, the duties of a


large correspondence, and the helping materially his
episcopal brethren by his wise and learned counsel in all
their important deliberations. Occasionally he paid a
visit to his Cathedral, and in the summer generally made
a round of visits to his convents, staying at each a short
time, and returning to Oscott for the autumn and winter.
He kept the Golden Jubilee of his priesthood on Sep-
tember 24th, 1881, on which occasion he sang Mass in
the College Chapel. Preparations had been afloat to
make him a grand presentation, but he had interposed,
and expressed his desire that the offering should be
prayers and Masses. The loyal and universal response
to this desire touched him deeply, as is evident from a
beautiful letter which he sent to the clergy of the diocese.
But in 1886, on the occasion of his eightieth birthday, he
was not allowed to escape a presentation, though it was
of a private character. At the meeting of all the Eng-
lish Bishops in London, in Low Week, he was made to
sit down in their midst. The Cardinal Archbishop of
Westminster then offered him hearty congratulations in the
name of all, and made him a present of a selection of
books connected with his special line of studies, as a
token of their “admiration, confidence and love.”
The same year was also the 40th anniversary of his
Episcopate; and Oscott commemorated it by publishing
the “Ullathorne number” of the Oscotia?i, from which
this short memoir is mainly taken.
For the rest, his life passed on quietly and peacefully
in his last home, undisturbed save by occasional serious
outbreaks of illness, arising chiefly from a chronic malady
which was a real martyrdom to him for the last twenty
years of his life. If he had seemed somewhat distant in
his official relations of bygone days, he was not so now.
He dined with the College clergy every day till his
failing health kept him a prisoner to his rooms; and they
and every visitor that went to see him received always a
kindly welcome, and came away from his presence the
richer for his wide experience and varied knowledge, his
fund of anecdote and genial humour, and his depth,
originality and grandeur of thought.


It was in July, 1887, that his increasing infirmities
compelled him to resign his episcopal see. As is well
known, his Auxiliary, Bishop Ilsley, was appointed his
successor, while he himself on April 27th, 1888, was
nominated by the Holy Father titular Archbishop of
Cabasa, in Egypt, as a mark of honour for his long and
valued services to the Church.
At Oscott, a little celebration was arranged in honour
of this event; and in responding to the congratulations
and the recognition of the honour and privilege the Col-
lege possessed in his residing there, he said: “ I have
been studying my new diocese geographically and histo-
rically. I began life as a Yorkshireman, then I was turned
into an Australian, after that into a New Zealander, and
now at last I find myself an Egyptian; though, strange
to say, I don't feel very different from what I was before.
I find Cabasa was famous of old for many things—
amongst others for having had an heretical Bishop.
The Canons of the Church do not oblige me to go there
personally, though I can send a Vicar-General there, if I
choose. However, let me tell you a secret: I don’t
think I shall go at all, for I am very happy and comfort-
able where I am.”
The greater part of a year elapsed, and then early in
the March of the present year (1889), his last illness
began. He had been accustomed for some time to say
Mass in his room; he said it for the last time on St.
Chad’s day, March 2nd. A week afterwards he was in seri-
ous danger; on Sunday, March 10th, he was anointed by the
President of the College, Mgr. Souter, and after re-
newing his profession of faith with intense earnestness,
received the Holy Viaticum from the hands of the Bishop
of the diocese, Dr. Ilsley, who had come over to visit
him. Another week and more of pain and suffering
borne without a murmur or sign of impatience; and then
on the 20th of March, when he could no longer take
nourishment, it was evident the end was near. About
an hour after noon the next day, the feast of his patron,
St. Benedict, he passed away to God. The bodily
struggle was severe; for in spite of age and infirmities


his constitution was still a powerful one. But in his
soul there was no struggle, —only perfect peace. He
had had no fear of death. When it had become evident
that he could not recover, he said with a smile to his
doctor, with whom he had had many a philosophical chat:
“Well, doctor, now that the old limbs are falling to
pieces, I feel that I am beginning to live iu the land of
metaphysics.” And afterwards more seriously: “You may
think it presumptuous of me to say so, but my mind is
completely tranquil.” And again: “It is nearly time for
the man to go.” And, whether it was that, in the course
of a long and difficult career he had acted ever on prin-
ciple never from impulse or passion,—or that his last
years were themselves a preparation for death, —or
because his last days were blessed by the countless
prayers of his devoted children, —or for all these reasons
combined: —certain it is, there was no disturbance what-
ever: his soul was “completely tranquil” to the last.
One could not but see in the “Pax” on his coffin a double
fitness, when the thought came how perfectly it had been
realised.
His funeral obsequies were conducted with all the
solemnity of the Church’s Ritual, and according to those
traditions which he himself had inspired. There were
three Requiems with the body present —first of all at
Oscott, his last home on earth; then at his own Cathe-
dral ; where he had governed for over forty years, and
where in the presence of twelve bishops and a vast
representative concourse of clergy, religious and laity,
fitting honour was paid to him as a bishop;—and lastly
at St. Dominic’s, Stone, which had been chosen as his
last resting-place. And there, on Wednesday, March 27th,
1889, his body was laid beside that of his mother, —his
“dear mother,” as he always called her; to whom he
considered that he owed so much; of whom, in spite of
the striking uneffusiveness of his character, he never
spoke but in terms of the utmost tenderness and respect.
The main outlines of his character will have been
traced by the reader. It is not for us to criticise or
discuss it. Who cannot see, by his writings and words


and deeds, that it was well summed up in the sermon
preached at his funeral, when he was called “a spiritual
man,” and therefore one with a great soul, to whom
littleness and meanness were unknown?
The rights and dignity of God’s Church, the power of
the Holy Spirit, the true wisdom, the real dignity of man,
self-discipline, humility, the union of the soul with God—
these were his themes. He lived and died in that nobler
atmosphere which had become natural and habitual to
him, but which is unknown to the world. “The sensual
man perceiveth not these things that are of the Spirit of
God; for it is foolishness to him and he cannot under-
stand .... But the spiritual man judgeth all things ....
For the Spirit searcheth all things, yea the deep things
of God.” (i Cor. ii. io, 14, 15.)




Penny Biographical Series.
St. George. By the Rev. J. W. Reeks.
St. Patrick. By the Rev. Arthur Ryan.
St. Bede, Monk and Mass-Priest. By the late
Bishop of Hexham and Newcastle.
St. Alphonsus Liguori. By a Redemptorist Father.
Queen Mary. By G. Ambrose Lee.
Don Bosco. By Mrs. Raymond Barker.
Ven. John Ogilvie, S.J. By Mrs. Francis Kerr.
B. John Fisher. By the Rev. W. H. Cologan.
St. Thomas of Canterbury. By Rev. F. Goldie, S.J.
B. Edmund Campion. By the same.
St. John Berchmans. By the same.
Ven. Edmund Arrowsmith. By the same.
St. Ignatius Loyola. By Rev. W. H. Anderdon, S.J.
B. Thomas More. By the Hon. Justice O’Hagan.
St. Columba. By the Rev. J. Golden.
Miss Catherine Boys. By Rev. Ambrose St. John.
Ven. Philip Howard. By G. A. Lee.
The English Martyrs under Henry VIII.
and Elizabeth. In five parts.
A Lecture on the English Martyrs: with six
illustrations. By the Rev. J. Morris, S.J.
Leo XIII. By the Rev. Joseph Rickaby, S.J.
St. Teresa. By David Lewis, M.A.
St. Peter Glaver. By the Rev. Fr. Sola, S.J.
St. Benedict. By the Rev. T. B. Snow, 0.5.8.
St. Francis of Sales. By Rev. H. B. Mackey,O.S.B.
St. Augustine. By the Rev. A. J. Saxton.
St. Philip Neri. By G. Ambrose Lee.
The Little Sisters of the Poor. By the Rev.
James Connelly. [sail, C.SS.R.
B. Clement Hofbauer. By the Rev. O. R. Vas-
St. Francis of Assisi. By the Rev. F. Jarlath
Prendergast, O.S.F.
Ven. Margaret Clitheroe. By Rev. A. B. Gurdon.
The Saints and Beati of 1888; with an introduc-
tion on Beatification and Canonization. By the Rev.
John Morris, S.J.
Mary Stuart. By the Hon. Mrs. Maxwell Scott.
Cathoi.ic Truth Society, 18 West Square, London, S.E.
Printed at the Catholic Reformatory School, Market Weighton.
