

Extract from the Journal R.1.8.A. Third Series, Yol. VI. No. 17




FIG. 1. —THE FIRST CHURCH IX AUSTRALIA. DEMOLISHED IX 1856.
ARCHITECTURAL WORK IN SYDNEY, NEW SOUTH WALES,
. 1788 - 1899.
By James Baenet \_F.\ of Sydney, KS.W.
IN far New Holland, when George the Third was King, 111 years ago, Captain Arthur
Phillip, R.N., with his fleet of eight ships, on the 18th January 1788, anchored in
Botany Bay. Its shores, however, were soon found to be unsuitable as a site for
settlement; so search was made along the coast for a more favourable position, and the fine
harbour of Port Jackson was presently explored. On the 24th of the same month the first
colonists landed on the then lovely sandy beach at the mouth of a fresh-water stream, in
what is now known as Sydney Cove. Then they began building their huts and store-houses
in the heat of summer, to shelter the thousand odd pioneers of the infant commonwealth
of Australia. The artificers and ships’ carpenters went to work under the direction of
Lieutenant Dawes, an engineer officer, and on the 15th May 1788 the first stone of a
temporary Government House was laid. This was followed by the erection of a wooden
church, built at the expense of the Chaplain, the Rev. Richard Johnson, which unfortunately
was afterwards destroyed by fire.
In July 1793 (five years after the foundation of the Colony) the first stone of a church
dedicated to St. Phillip was laid by the Lieutenant-Governor, Major Francis Grose. This
very interesting structure might be regarded as the dawn of architecture in Australia.
Its architect is unknown, but little doubt exists that the Chaplain was the prime mover,
and perhaps Lieutenant Dawes assisted, although he left the Colony before the building was
commenced. It was erected on the brow of what is now known as Church Hill, and the
chancel was a semicircular structure, standing towards the north-west, and at the south-east
entrance a battlemented round tower was erected; also a porch on the north-east side.
This church was not consecrated till 25th December 1810 (the first Christmas in Governor
Third Series, Vol, VI. No. 17.—29 July 1899. 8 U


Macquarie’s time), but it had been used as a place for public worship since 1797. In 1808
King George the Third presented a silver communion service, which is still in use. The
accompanying photograph [fig. I], which is from a sketch by the late Mr. Joseph Fowles,
teacher of drawing in the National schools, shows the architecture of this the first church in
Australia. The structure was pulled down in 1856, having been in use more than sixty
years. The site on which it stood is now enclosed and planted, and is used as a place of
recreation.
FIG. 2.—ST. JAMES’S CHURCH, SYDNEY
The Church of St, James, in King Street, was the second church built in Sydney. It
was completed in 1820, in the tenth year of that mighty builder, Governor Macquarie. The
architect of this church, and also of the churches at Windsor, Richmond, Parramatta, and
Port Macquarie, was Francis Howard Greenway, civil architect, who also was architect
of schools, courthouses, hospitals, barracks, and the first lighthouse in Australia at Sydney
Heads, Port Jackson. St. James’s Church is a fine structure of brick, with stone dressings,
having porticoes with Doric columns, and pediments of Roman character, campanile of brick,
with spire of wood covered with copper —a very conspicuous object and a landmark. It has
recently been restored, and one of the porticoes opened out, but unfortunately broaches have
been added to the base of the spire, thus changing the original appearance and the archi-
tectural character. The photograph [fig. 2] was taken before these alterations.


In 1820, on the 19th October, Governor Macquarie laid the foundation-stone of St.
Mary’s Roman Catholic Cathedral. The architect is unknown ; the style of architecture was,
as then known, the Gothic of Batty Langley. This building was destroyed by fire, and a
temporary pro-cathedral took its place pending the completion of the fine decorated Gothic
structure now being built, which will be the permanent cathedral.
A Presbyterian church was built on Church Hill in 1824, also St. Patrick’s Roman
Catholic Church in 1844, the latter a decided advance in architecture; and in 1849 was
begun St. Phillip’s new church at the top of the hill, a little higher up than where the first
church stood, from designs by the late Edmund Thomas Blacket, architect. It is in the
FID. 3.—ST. ANDREW’S CATHEDRAL, SYDNEY.
perpendicular Gothic of the fifteenth century, and was finished in 1855, at a cost of £16,000.
It is built of sandstone outside and inside, with nave, aisles, and chancel, having a fine western
tower with lofty pinnacles, telling well in the picturesque outline of the city. In 1857 St.
Benedict’s Roman Catholic Church in George Street West was built, the late William Munro
being architect; in 1859 St. George’s Presbyterian Church in Castlereagh Street, by Mr.
Field, the successful competitor; and in 1863 St. John’s Church of England at Barlinghurst,
by the late Mr. Gould, architect, the spire being by Mr. E. T. Blacket.
St. Andrew’s Church of England Cathedral in George Street [fig. 3]. —The first stone of
this Cathedral was laid on the Ist September 1819 by Governor Macquarie. Francis Howard
Greenway was the architect; but his design w 7 as abandoned, and a new one based on St.
Mary’s, Oxford, was adopted in 1887. The first stone of the newly modelled building was laid


by Governor Bourke after the appointment of the first bishop, Broughton, and the late James
Hume was the superintending architect. Little progress, however, was made till 1846, when
Mr, E. T. Blacket was employed to re-model the design, which is perpendicular Gothic of
good character. The nave is 157 feet by 26 feet; aisles, 17 feet; and narrow transepts,
14 feet 7 inches wide, with two fine western towers and squat central tower, recalling some-
what to memory features of both Canterbury and York Cathedrals. The cathedral will
accommodate 1,500, the seating is of oak in good design, the reredos of alabaster by the late
J. E. Pearson, R.A., and the building of sandstone throughout. A chapter-house in keeping
with the cathedral was added in 1886, Mr. Blacket, jun., being the architect. Altogether the
entire structure, with enclosed garth, from an architectural view is both pleasing and
appropriate. It was consecrated on St. Andrew’s Bay, 80th November 1868, the Duke of
Edinburgh being present on the occasion.
FIG. 4.—THE UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY.
In 1889, a Wesleyan chapel of good classical design was built in York Street; Mr. Josiah
Atwool, architect. The late Thomas Bowe also designed Wesleyan chapels in Eedfern and
Woolloomooloo and elsewhere, as well as Presbyterian and Roman Catholic churches, of Gothic
character, and much merit, in a style individual to himself. He was also very happy in a
synagogue design. There are several Congregational churches by the late John Bibb,
architect, all possessing good classical features.
St. Mary’s Roman Catholic Cathedral, now in course of erection, is in fourteenth-century
Gothic, reminding one somewhat both of Lincoln and York Cathedrals. The northern or
sanctuary half of the nave has been in use for some years; the central tower and southern
nave and transepts are now in progress. The building, when complete, with its towers and
spires, will be an ornament to the city, an honour to the Roman Catholic community, and
a lasting credit to its architect, Mr. W. Wardell.
The discovery of gold in 1851 brought a great increase in population and wealth to the
Colony, when far-seeing patriots, including the late W. C. Wentworth, the present Sir Charles *
Nicholson, F. L. S. Merewether and others, founded the Sydney University [fig. 4], and, in 1854,
engaged Mr. E. T. Blacket as architect to prepare designs suitable for the fine commanding


site granted on Grose Farm. The style chosen was his favourite fifteenth-century or
Tudor perpendicular Gothic, built in sandstone, with central gate tower, great hall and
many lecture rooms, historical museum, &c. The great hall of convocation is 185 feet by
45 feet, with fine open roof of ironbark and cedar timber ; the floor is of native marble ; it
has fine stained-glass windows showing the kings and queens of England, founders of colleges
at Oxford and Cambridge, and portraits of men of letters and science, from Chaucer to
FILL S.—MEDICAL SCHOOL, SYDNEY UNIVERSITY.
Captain Cook, all of which are gifts from enterprising colonists. The building was opened
with a musical festival of a week’s duration in 185 V. Thirty years later (in 1887) the Medical
School adjoining [fig. 5] was built in the same style of architecture, with many fine lecture
theatres for anatomy, physiology, and other subjects, and a museum and laboratory fitted
with all the latest appliances. There are also separate buildings for chemistry, physics,
engineering, biology, and a large Natural History Museum.
Surrounding the University are the affiliated Colleges of St. Paul, C.E. —Mr. E. T.
Blacket, architect, built in 1857 ; St. John’s R.C. College, built in 1862; St. Andrew’s
Presbyterian College—the late William Munro, architect, built in 1872; and the Women’s
College, erected in 1890. The first three are of Gothic architecture, built in sandstone.
The latter is built of reddish bricks and tiles, and is Italian in character. Adjoining is the
Prince Alfred Hospital, a building of thoughtful design, constructed of buff-coloured brick with
stone dressings, and provided with the latest and best appliances. The building was erected
to commemorate the escape of the Duke of Edinburgh from an attempt upon his life.
The Sydney Hospital in Macquarie Street [fig. 6] is a fine structure of Italian archi-
tecture, and is built of sandstone. It was the result of a competition in which the late
509
ARCHITECTURAL WORK IN SYDNEY, NEW SOUTH WALES, 1788-1899


Thomas Eowe was successful. This edifice takes the place of the original Sydney Infirmary,
the work of the civil architect, F. H. Greenway, in Governor Macquarie’s time.
There are many public schools of recent erection in various styles. The earliest,
erected in 1815, is in Fore Street [fig. 7], designed by Greenway for a hospital; but perhaps
the greatest effort in building by the Department of Public Instruction is the Technical
College and Museum in Harris Street, Ultimo. It is Romanesque in style, built in reddish
brick with stone dressings, and is the work of the late W. E. Kemp, for many years
architect of the Department.
The Town Hall [fig. 8]. —Designs for this important building were called for by public
competition, and the late Mr. Wilson was the successful competitor. In 1868 the founda-
FIG. 6.—SYDNEY HOSPITAL.
tion-stone was laid by the Duke of Edinburgh. On Mr. Wilson’s death, and before the
completion of his design, the late Mr. David Mcßeath, and the late Mr. Sapsford, architects,
were-, engaged in this work ; three other architects also were employed before its final
completion in 1889 ; so that twenty years were occupied in building. Since then a carriage
porch has been added. The main feature is the Centennial Hall, 166 feet by 85 feet, with a
seating capacity of 4,000. There are besides a large vestibule or subsidiary hall, spacious
corridors and stairs, council chambers, library, Mayor’s reception rooms, offices for the Town
Clerk and his subordinate officers, &c. The style of architecture is florid Italian Renaissance,
built in sandstone.
Adjacent to the Town Hall is the new Queen Victoria Market building, recently erected.
It occupies a space of some 600 feet by 100 feet, having a spacious basement intended as a
market hall for the sale of fruit and vegetables. On the ground floor, on the level of the four


surrounding streets, are many shops having frontage to these streets, and also to an inner
arcade. On the floors overhead are halls for music, meetings, public lending library and
offices, also an hotel. The whole is surmounted by many domelets, and one central dome
about 60 feet in diameter. The style of architecture is florid Romanesque ; it is built of
sandstone on iron girders, supported on trachyte piers. There are several other halls for
public concourse, such as the Freemasons’, Oddfellows’, and the Wesleyan Centenary Hall.
FIG. 7.—FORE STREET PUBLIC SCHOOL, SYDNEY.
The latter, the work of the late Thomas Rowe, is built on the site of a chapel of good classic
architecture erected in 1889, one of the first of its kind erected, but pulled down to make
room for the present hall.
The historical Parliamentary buildings of Sydney [fig. 9], the Immigration Barracks, now
used as law offices, and the Supreme Court House, since greatly altered and added to, were
designed by Civil Architect F. H. Green way, in the days of Governor Macquarie, who held
office eleven years, from 1810 to 1821 inclusive. During this period he erected or con-
structed 250 public works and buildings. The Imperial Commissioner, Mr. Bigge, in his
report to the House of Commons, said that this was Governor Macquarie’s misfortune;
but these buildings have been and still are very useful to New South Wales.
The Criminal Court House, adjoining the Gaol at Darlinghurst, was built in 1886 from
designs by the then Colonial Architect, the late Mortimer William Lewis. It is the only


specimen of Grecian Doric in Sydney. Mr. Lewis designed Court Houses for Parramatta,
Newcastle, and Berrima, also classic in style. He superintended the erection of Govern-
ment House from designs and drawings by the late Mr. Edward Blore, architect, of London.
This building, which occupies a fine site overlooking the harbour and the naval anchorage in
Farm Cove, and next to the beautiful Botanical Gardens, is Tudor in style. The foundation-
stone was laid by Lieutenant-Governor Colonel Snodgrass on the 26th January 1888, that
being the fiftieth anniversary of the foundation of the Colony. This building is now sixty-one
FIG. B.—TOWN HALL, SYDNEY.
years old, and, with the exception of the addition in sandstone of a carriage porch and an
arcaded verandah on the eastern front, remains as built in the time of Governor Gipps.
The Observatory, built of sandstone in Governor Denison’s time, stands on the site of
the first windmill erected in Sydney, close to Fort Phillip. It commands fine views of the
city and harbour from the tower. The architecture is Italian. This, together with the
Registry Office in Elizabeth Street (a work in a style adapted from the Tudor period), is by
the late Alexander Dawson, Colonial Architect. Both buildings have had later additions.
Australian Museum.—The first portion of this structure was designed by the late M. W.
Lewis, Colonial Architect, in 1846, but has been so added to and enlarged that the original
Greek work has disappeared and given place to its bold Roman architecture. Internally, the
portion facing Hyde Park is divided by screens of Corinthian columns into five halls on each
floor, and the original portion is one fine hall, with two tiers of galleries, lighted from the roof.
512
[29 July 1899
JOURNAL OF THE ROYAL INSTITUTE OF BRITISH ARCHITECTS


The Public Library in Macquarie and Bent Streets was originally designed by Mr. Henry
Ginn, architect, in 1848 ; the foundation-stone was laid by the late Mr. A. McLeay, and
the library was opened to the subscribers in 1846, costing £5,000. Since it has been pur-
chased by the Government it has been rebuilt and added to in the same style of Palladian
architecture by the Colonial Architect, and is now double its original size.
The Chief Secretary’s Office in Macquarie and Bridge Streets, opposite to Government
House gates.—This building, which is of sandstone, was completed in 1880. It is here that
the Executive Council meetings are held. The Secretary for Public Works has offices at the
The Secretary for Public Works has offices at the
western end in Phillip Street, where extensive additions have lately been made. The style of
architecture is Italian Renaissance, but its simple outline has recently been destroyed by the
addition of a pavilion and roof-storey of French character not in keeping with the original
design. In the niches are statues representing Wisdom, Justice, Mercy, Labour, Science, and
PIG. 9. —THE OHIO INAL PARLIAMENT HOUSE, SYDNEY.
Art. Opposite, in Bridge Street, is the Treasury, Florentine in style, from designs by the
late M. W. Lewis, Colonial Architect.
The Lands Office, in Bridge Street, like the Chief Secretary’s Office, is also after the
Italian Renaissance, of Roman type in its architecture. This building stands alone ; it has
a frontage to four streets, and was erected in two sections. The first stone was laid on
7th October 1876 by the late Hon. Thomas Garrett, Minister for Lands, on a site in front of
the then existing Lands Office. This portion was first completed and occupied, and the
second section was built on the site of the old office, and was completed in 1891. The
northern elevation to Bridge Street is surmounted by a pavilion, in the centre of which is a
revolving dome for astronomical purposes, resting on masonry rising through the roof from
the rock foundation. The southern front is dominated by a clock tower, 257 feet in height.
Native red granite from Gabo Island, in columns and pedestals, polished in part, is used at
three of the entrance doorways. Internally there are two courts, with a large strong-room
between. On the four elevations there are 48 niches, 17 of which have statues of explorers,
among them being Phillip, Banks, Flinders, Bass, Sturt, Leichhardt, Burke, Wills, &c. The
whole edifice is built of sandstone externally and brick internally.


The General Post Office [fig. 10], in George Street, Martin Place, and Pitt Street, was built
in two portions. The first, or western, half was begun in 1866. In April 1869 the Duke
of Edinburgh set the keystone of the George Street entrance, and in 1874 this portion was
occupied for public business. second,® or eastern half, including the campanile, was
FIG. 10. —THE GENERAL POST OFFICE, SYDNEY.
completed in 1886. The architectural style is Italian Renaissance, of Venetian and Florentine
character, in which native grey granite from Moruya was first introduced in the base course,
the carved capitals, and in a great many polished columns; the remainder is built of sand-
stone, all through stone, clean chiselled inside, and rubbed externally. In a niche, over the
central entrance in the northern front, is a statue of Her Majesty the Queen, seated; and
immediately beneath are reclining figures of Britannia and New South Wales, all in marble,


by the late Giovanni Fontana, sculptor, of London. Surmounting this entrance is a clock
tower 280 feet in height. Unfortunately the stately dignity of the building is being marred
by the addition of an attic of French design, whose varied line and want of repose is out of
harmony with the rest of the structure, and its extra weight is a source of danger.
The Custom House at the Circular Quay is a plain building, of simple Italian architecture,
erected in 1887. Of similar character is the Central Police Court recently built. The
Police Stations in North George Street and in Woolloomooloo are in prominent positions, the
former Italian, and the latter Greek architecture. The new entrance to Darlinghurst Gaol is
of appropriate character.
The Mortuary Railway Stations at Sydney and the Cemetery at Rookwood show the
application of Gothic architecture to a novel purpose. The former has on a wide platform a
ticket office opening into two vestibules, with retiring rooms, and a carriage porch surmounted
by a bellcote. The latter, in the cemetery, where the coffins are removed from the train
hearse, has platforms on either side, with porches, retiring rooms, and bellcote. Both
buildings are of sandstone, and appropriately decorated with sculpture representing angels,
cherubs, &c., by the late Thomas Ducket and Henry Apperly, sculptors.
Commercial Buildings.—The Bank of New South Wales, built in 1851, and the Commer-
cial Bank adjoining, built in 1854 —the former Florentine astylar, and the latter Roman
Palladian —also the London Chartered Bank, Italian, are all the work of the late John Hilly,
architect. The Bank of Australasia and the English and Scottish Bank are both astylar, the
works of the late E. T. Blacket. The Joint Stock Bank is Italian of a German type. All
these buildings are in George Street, the principal street of the city. In Pitt Street are the
Union, City, and New Zealand Banks, all Italian Renaissance ; the Oriental Bank, with
Greek lonic engaged columns and pediment, by the late William Weaver and W. E. Kemp,
architects. The Savings Bank in Barrack Street is Roman in character, with lower and
upper colonnade of marble and granite. The banking room and vestibules in all these
buildings are spacious, and decorated with marble and colour.
Insurance offices are numerous. The Australian Mutual Provident Society’s Office in
Pitt Street, the Mutual Life of New York in Martin Place, opposite the Post Office, the
Citizens’ Life Office in Moore Street, the Mutual Life Office in Wynyard Street, are all in
Italian Renaissance, built of sandstone. The Equitable Life of U.S.A. in George Street is
Romanesque, and built of trachyte. Like the banks, the business rooms of these institutions
are spacious, and richly decorated in marble, colour, gold, and mosaics.
Wool warehouses of imposing and appropriate architecture and of great magnitude are
situated in various positions near the quays. Warehouses for general merchandise are
numerous, and generally fine imposing structures, picturesquely situated in O’Connell Street,
Bridge Street, Clarence Street, and York Street. Shops and offices in the main streets are,
with the exception of a few Gothic examples, of Italian or English, or French or German
types of Renaissance, many of them good examples. As a whole they give a rich picturesque
effect to the narrow, irregular street lines, with their ever-varying undulations and contour,
the warm grey stone being enlivened with colour of brick, marble, granite, tile, and terra-cotta.
Clubs and Hotels. —The Australian Club is a red brick structure of Jacobean character,
in Macquarie Street, on a commanding site overlooking the harbour and Gardens. The Union
Club, in Bligh Street, is of Italian character, and near to it, built of stone of similar style, is
the New South Wales Club. The Athenaeum, in Castlereagh Street, is a brick cemented
edifice. The Hotels Australia and Metropole are fine structures, equipped with modern
appliances ; and coffee palaces and places of entertainment are numerous and of appropriate
design. There is a Royal Naval Home for H.M. sailors, giving every convenience and comfort.


Theatres. —There are six principal theatres, besides music halls. The oldest, the Theatre
Royal, is the work of the late John Hilly, architect. It is especially well designed both lor
seeing and hearing; the box and upper tiers follow the slope of the pit, and the means of
exit admit of the rapid escape of the audience in case of need. The other theatres are
comparatively new, and are fitted with every modern convenience and well arranged for the
safety of the audience and players. All are Italian Renaissance in style, except the latest,
The Palace, which is novel, but appropriate in its architecture.
Sydney has no fewer than seven arcades of shops, affording shelter from the sun and
heat, and giving convenient ways of access from one crowded street to another. Three of
them are the work of the late Thomas Rowe. They are all of Italian architecture, except the
latest in Queen Victoria Market Building, which is of Romanesque design and 600 feet long.
Fire Brigade Stations, with all the latest modern ideas and improvements, and of appro-
priate design, have been built in recent years. Spacious Grand Stands of convenient design have
been erected at the Cricket Ground, Agricultural Show Ground, and at Randwick Racecourse.
Generally the architecture of Sydney, after passing through the Georgian period and a
short classic Greek era, and the rebuilding which followed the gold discovery in 1851, is mainly
Italian Renaissance of various types. Of course churches and educational buildings are
Gothic, as a rule. Recently from the United States has come Romanesque in an Insurance
Office building; and the same style has been applied to Branch Banks, Technical College, Queen
Victoria Market Building, and no doubt will run its crudities to seed in warehouses, stores,
and shops. In rebuilding a city fine lofty structures are to be seen alongside old and mean
buildings. This is unavoidable.
Sydney has a few tall edifices like those common in the United States, and the tendency
in crowded business centres is towards increased height, owing to the high price of land, and
doubtless the introduction of lifts and the general use of telephones encourage the erection of
lofty buildings. There being no municipal law to regulate the height, owing to a defective
Building Act, high houses in the narrow streets of Sydney are a source of danger in case of
fire, and they interfere with light and air.
There are very many private villas in the suburbs and along the margin of the harbour,
and there is invariably one feature, which is considered indispensable for shade and shelter
from the heat and sun in this bright and just now almost rainless land, namely, the veran-
dah. The wave of the demon of fashion has reached Australia from Bedford Park. There
are many fine specimens of this fascinating, but on the whole mean-looking make-believe
picturesque-cottage mode of building, with its bits of rough masonry, red Brick hollow wallery,
rough-cast, half-timber, and dangerous wall shingles, useless gables and dormers, belvideres,
loggias, bow windows, bay windows, half-moon windows, round and horse-shoe windows and
great arches, all surmounted with blazing red tiles from France. This craze is now being
affected by the speculating builder, and the landscape is marred by staring red crudities ;
even the quiet beauty of our lovely Botanical Gardens, and the classic precincts of the
University, are alike invaded by this vanity, which we may in time get used to, and shall
have to tolerate until the inevitable reaction sets in.
Building material in Sydney is mainly sandstone, on which the city stands, and after
forty-five years’ experience I can say that, when carefully selected and protected by a damp-
proof course at the ground level, it is very durable. When first quarried the stone is usually
of a bluish grey tint, which on exposure to the atmosphere colours a warm brown; this in
time tones into a pleasing grey, and gives a refining effect to mouldings and enrichments. It
is easily wrought, and can be got in unlimited quantity and of any size ; its composition
is insoluble silica, oxides of iron, and alumina. There are excellent bricks of various tints of


red, also grey and buff, and terra-cotta of various shades ; also fire-resisting lumber. There
is marble in abundance, very hard and of every variety of colour, but far from Sydney;
granite red and grey, trachyte in various tints, but distant from the city. There are timbers
for carpentry, such as ironbark, tallow-wood, black-butt—all very hard and durable, but
liable to the ravages of the white ant. For joinery, cedar like mahogany, also pine.
Slate for steps and other purposes, but too costly for roof covering; roofing slates are
imported. Tiles are also made, and cement equal to the best Portland is manufactured here.
Limestone is in abundance, but 100 miles inland.
Decoration. —Carving in stone is freely applied to many of the Sydney buildings, the
sandstone being very suitable and easily cut. The artists are generally of European training,
some of the early work being carved by those who were employed at the Parliament buildings
in London. Internal decoration in colour painting is done by artists from the best European
ateliers, and also wall decoration and floors in marble and mosaic from Europe. Native
marble, granite, and trachyte are also coming into use in decoration.
The names of the early pioneer architects, whose works are referred to, are those of
worthy men who have passed over to the great majority. At the present time Sydney has
over one hundred architects in practice, amongst whom are many native young men of
promise who have been educated and trained to their art and profession in the studios and
offices of eminent masters, and in the Technical College, where the various branches of the
arts and crafts are taught.
Sculpture, the sister art to Architecture, is fairly well represented in Sydney considering
its age and size, and distance from the great art centres of Europe. The city is adorned with
eight public monumental statues in bronze. The first example of the plastic art in Australia was
the statue of Governor Bourke on a pedestal of Aberdeen granite erected in 1840, and placed
in the Outer Domain overlooking the harbour. This work is by the late eminent sculptor
E. H. Baily, R.A. Next in order of time is the statue of Prince Albert, by Theed, at the
north entrance of Hyde Park on Queen Square, executed in 1866. This fine work was selected
by Her Majesty, whose noble representation by Boehm stands opposite in the same square.
Then there is Woolner’s great work of Captain Cook in Hyde Park. Recently, in the
Palace Garden, there has been put up a statue to Governor Phillip on a pedestal of white
marble adorned with reclining figures representing allegorically the advent of Civilisation in
Australia; it is surrounded by four fountains, the work of Simonetti, a resident sculptor.
In Macquarie Place and near the Exchange is a statue of the late Thomas S. Mort, an enter-
prising and patriotic colonist, by P. E. Connoly, sculptor. In Wynyard Square there is a fine
work, by Signor Giovanni Fontana, of the late John Dunmore Lang, D.D., patriot and
statesman; and in Hyde Park a statue of the late R. H. William Bede Dally, the originator
of the Soudan Contingent (Mr. White, sculptor). This work was cast in Sydney.
Sydney has several fountains, one of which in the Botanic Gardens has a fine figure of
a water nymph in bronze by Birch. In these fine gardens are many statues in marble, copies
from Italy of such as the Apollo Belvedere, Venus de Medicis, Mercury, Discobolus, Meleager,
Canova’s Boxers, and many others. The Centennial Park, laid out in 1888, which covers
640 acres, and contains a three-mile drive and asphalted footpaths between trees, has many
marble and terra-cotta statues. Of the former are those of Gladstone, Disraeli, Lincoln,
Garfield, Parkes, and Dickens, &c. In the Chief Secretary’s office are marble statues of the
Queen and Prince of Wales, and New South Wales, by Fontana. Sydney is indebted to the
late Sir Henry Parkes for its fine display of the sculptor’s art. The Art Gallery, which is
now being enlarged, and is in a classic style of French type, contains some good works in
sculpture and a fine collection of pictures in oil and water-colour.


'?yc*&cf l/a*r&. f jb /I ff y/*' /<* /^vc**'**-*-^
/£ e 44JOLS . <T t '^t*^Cf<&is£ r ~ rff '^&t**&^p
r/ lef ffi£c k^' /&(//C t / /S*
,%£, *y,jxz~ £'te/*~*/ /fff yy*£r£rt~.e*scy?£
<cf *s£><y£y!eey* /’&***/■ ecc^f//0
' /^p t .. y^/te***&S aw <■>»•#<« ncy
CL***y £-**■ ~/i£i //£_ ybri^/j(£L<}
c*4a-*- y^n




'fC


, ~ ■ /;■, . .**■ - ■ ■
' ';'■ ■ *■; ' V,
' ; !, .'■ • ; ' ; .■■■■:■> . - ! S’-^j
. ■
■
'• ' \ , - ■*.? • a fef '; 1 ■. ' ■ . ;■ • *
' • - - • -' V‘ v ' • ■ ■ •> V • >. r . .
.£ ; O- •; , /* . v .'A < 'tK:.*- •' ..
• . v, - r ■ ’ "
y\' ■ ;
■ '
? -1 ' - ■ ’ ; ; - ' '
, : _


',4 .4
1 • - -■ . • ,.;J V-V.V;
. ■ 4
•
>
! kii} sff v j >#'■ MStS®?.i
■
:■■■„■ . ' ■ ■ ■ ■
... r v //V .••=''•■> V4 ;>>S : * .>«>.■„ ,,,; ■ ',; v /v-.v4 4 ■ J /;• ' ,v ■• ••. ,V ••♦••. ■ ‘i.
■-•■v -v\ .. vj^••'i- - , t,W'\. v :
® ' 4^ r ’4VM 4 Wi M-it }r
■
-
'4' ‘.< ■■•'.4' ;,.. , ,. 4 44-44 4. " i ■ 4 4v:.f444 Vi ■ - ,.<,*•. 4'., 44 4 4'*4 ■ 4 ; ,4.4 '• :444 44414 ' v : • -
'
•
1 - : < 1 ,
. • / ■■ ‘ -.4-
■ .... • ' • ;■ . ■: ' '■•‘•.4 ; 4 . .4 ■ .-■ ‘ , . 4 , , ' < :/■ ■ V- . 4 -
, .:■ Ik 4 v.u# 4 *. f - • $ • ■ 4 *, 4 4 4' - ;,•- ■'.•.• / -. v-; . ■> V-
;
