

ARE YOU CONVERTED?
AN ADDRESS,
DELIVERED AT A
PRAYER-MEETING,
HELD IN
THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND SCHOOL-ROOM,
WINDSOR,
ON DECEMBER 15TH, 1875,
BY JOHN TEBBUTT, F.R.A.S.
PRINTED BY BENJAMIN ISAACS, GEORGE STREET.
1876.




ADDRESS
TO THE
PRATER MEETING,
AT THE
Church of England School-Room,
WINDSOR,
ON WEDNESDAY MORNING, DEC. 15, 1875.
After Prayer and the reading of the 71st
Psalm, the Meeting was addressed as
follows:
Poor David’s life was preeminently one of ups and
downs. It was chequered by many joys and many
sorrows. The Book of Psalms presents his mind under
all the phases of trial peculiar to the Christian pilgrim.
It breathes real experience, and on this account its
expressions of tribulation, sorrow, faith, comfort joy
and triumph are regarded as an inestimable treasure by
every humble and devoted follower of the Lord Jesus
Christ. David’s temporal troubles were great, but per-
haps the greatest of all was that which he was called
Upon to suffer at a time when his heart and his flesh
•were failing, at the time, indeed, when old age was
bringing its infirmities upon him. I allude to the in-
gratitude and rebellion of his favorite son Absalom,
This sad event was to him the source of great mental


affliction and bodily suffering. The poor old king had
been driven from his throne by ingratitude, the basest
of all foes and was now a wanderer. To his exile we
owe the beautiful and pathetic Psalm we have just
read. It is expressive of his great affliction, of his
utter helplessness without God, of his firm dependence
upon Him, and of his hope of final restoration to his
former state of prosperity and happiness. To the
spiritually-minded Christian the Psalm is remarkably
full of the Gospel plan of salvation.
The words which I have selected for brief consider-
ation this morning are those contained in the twentieth
and twenty-first verses of the Psalm. “ Thou, which
hast showed me great and sore troubles, shalt quicken
me again, and shalt bring me up again from the depths
of the earth. Thou shalt increase my greatness, and
comfort me on every side.”
They may, I think, be regarded in a threefold aspect—
■firstly, as expressing the individual sufferings of David
and his hope of deliverance from them— secondly, as
pointing to the humiliation, sufferings and death of the
Redeemer, his glorious resurrection and final exaltation
to his throne in heaven—and, thirdly, as illustrating
the tribulations and sorrows of those whom the Holy
Spirit has convinced of sin, their consequent repent-
ance, conversion and sanctification, and final reception
into eternal glory. It is not desirable that we should
dwell now on the first aspect of our text. Our time
is too limited. It will be sufficient for us to know
that David’s trials were peculiar. Had his persecu-
tions been from surrounding enemies he could have
borne them better. But his foes were his own sub-
jects, and they were instigated by his own favorite
son. Truly, no enemies are so formidable as those in
one’s own household. In the second aspect of our
text we are called upon to contemplate the Redeemer.
He whose glory is from everlasting descended also
from his throne in consequence of a rebellion of infi-
nitely greater magnitude than that of Absalom. It


was no less than the rebellion of mankind. David
was compelled by the force of physical circumstances,
to descend from his throne, but the force which brought
the Redeemer from his, was that of free boundless love.
Sin had made such a chasm between God and the
sinner—there was such a gulph fixed between the two,
that the idea of poor frail sinful man bridging it over was
for ever hopeless. The infinite and perfect holiness of
God could not allow Him to look upon sin otherwise
than with the greatest abhorrence. The transgression of
His law must, of necessity, he punished. There would,
indeed, be very little majesty about a law which could
be vindicated without a penalty. God as a conse-
quence of his perfect justice must punish sin. But
the great and sore troubles which the sinner inherits,
both by original sin and his actual transgressions, are
awfully great. Sin involves eternal separation from
God and all that is pure, lovely, holy and good, and
everlasting association with the Evil One and all that
is impure, hateful and unholy. But what a glorious
and comforting truth it is, that God possesses the
attribute of infinite love as well as of infinite justice.
Infinite love, provided a way by which at the same
time the majesty of divine law could be upheld and
the sinner could, if he were willing, escape eternal
perdition. God gave His only begotten Son to bear
the iniquities of us all, in order that we might be
again restored to divine favour. The Only Begotten
Son voluntarily presented Himself as the Way, the
Truth, and the Life, for the salvation of despairing
sinners. O, what great and sore troubles did Jesus
experience for our sakes. He who is God of God,
Light of Light, Very God of Very God, by whom all
things were made and do consist, left the throne of His
glory, and to use the words of St. Paul, made Himself
of no reputation, took upon Himself the form of a
servant, was made in the likeness of men, and became
obedient unto death, even the death of the cross.
The Apostle’s words might be regarded as a commen-


tary on those of David. Now, although the Redeemer
experienced great and sore troubles, even to the drink-
ing of that hitter cup, which extorted from Him the
cry “My God, my God, why hast Thou forsaken me?”
and although He gave up the ghost and was laid in the
grave, yet He was afterwards quickened, raised from
the dead, and restored to His former glory, at God’s
right hand. And in a sense his greatness shall be in-
creased, and he shall be comforted on every side. Yes,
my friends, the Church which He condescends to regard
as His body shall go on increasing from age to age, by
the addition of believing Christians, from every nation
and every tongue. The Redeemer shall see of the
travail of his soul and be satisfied. St. Paul, in the
passage we have already quoted, speaks not only of
Christ’s humiliation, but also of his glorification. He
says, “ Wherefore God also hath highly exalted Him
and given Him a name which is above every name,
that & the every knee should bow; of
things in heaven, things in earth, and things under the
earth ; and that every tongue should confess that Jesus
Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.”
We see, then, that the words of our text are pro-
phetic of the sufferings, death, resurrection and glorious
ascension of the Messiah. As a prophecy, the utter-
ance of David may seem obscure to carnal vision, but
when viewed through the Gospel lens of the Apostle,
it comes out vividly in all its details. We come now
to the third aspect in which our text is to be regarded.
It represents, in a condensed form, the past experience
and the future expectations of the converted. The
unconverted man lives on in perfect ignorance of his
real state and condition before God. He may be living
the life of open and notorious sin before men, such as
idolatry, blasphemy, sabbath-breaking, drunkenness,
impurity or theft or he may be living a life of outward
respectability, decency and morality. In the former
condition we are assured he is living with no other
expectation than that of God’s present and eternal


■wrath, hut in the latter gondition too, he may be very
far from the kingdom. tVe may belong to the class
represented by the despised publican before his con-
version, or to that represented by the self-righteous
pharisee. No matter to what class of the unconverted
we may belong, let us rest assured that, before we can
take our place among the converted, we must reach a
great crisis in our life. That crisis is represented by
the words at the beginning of my text, namely, “ Thou
hast showed me great and sore troubles.” I believe
there is no one humble devoted follower of the Lord
Jesus Christ who can say that he has not felt, in a
greater or less degree, the force of these words. Every
true Christian can sympathize with the heartfelt utter-
ance of David. For what other than great and sore
troubles can possess the soul of a sinner when he is
for the first time convinced of sin. When the Holy
Spirit has so far enlightened his mind and conscience
as to show him the holiness and purity of the divine
nature and the utter sinfulness and desperate wicked-
ness of his own heart, the sinner shrinks with horror
and amazement from the contemplation. In his spi-
ritual trouble he feels that the arrows of God’s justice
stick fast in his soul and that the hand of divine retri-
bution presses him sore. We have often heard, my
dear friends, of godly sorrow for sin, but we must
remember that this godly sorrow is not a thing to be
simply heard of or talked about in ordinary conversa-
tion or intercourse. It is no myth—it is no mere
sentimental thing. It is a solemn reality—a thing which
it is necessary to feel before we can know the value of
a crucified Saviour. It is every thing that can be
comprehended under the phrase “ broken and contrite
heart.” We must feel that we are dead before God in
trespasses and sins. Nothing can exceed the intensity
of David’s spiritual sorrows, as expressed in some of
the penitential Psalms. Peter, too, had a keen sense
of his own sinfulness, as viewed in the light of God’s
purity and holiness. He trembled, saying, “ Depart


from me, for lam a sinful man, 0 Lord.” He bad,
too, the experience of a broken heart, when he saw
the mild but reproachful glance of the Saviour’s eye
after the denial in the High Priest’s house. So much
broken was his heart, that the fact was revealed in
bitter weeping. And have not we, my dear friends,
when we have harboured some unholy thought, uttered
some impatient w r ord, or committed some unchristian
act, felt that the mild reproachful eye of Jesus has been
looking into the inmost recesses of our heart? Have we
not experienced bitter regrets at this fresh wound in
the bosom of the loving Saviour? The man who has
grown up from his childhood under Christian training,
who has led what is termed a strict moral life, has never
committed what are called the grosser sins, has ever
attended all the external acts of public worship, and has
even been publicly noted for his outward religious con-
duct is not safe if he has not felt the broken heart.
Let me illustrate what I say by the case of St. Paul.
As regards outward compliance with the law, he is
shown to have been blameless, but as regards his inner
life, he was totally ignorant of his utter sinfulness and
unworthiness before God. He might have lived on in
utter self-complacency, had it not pleased God to bring
him to a true understanding of himself. To employ a
homely, but expressive phrase, the self-righteousness
was taken out of him. The light of God s perfect
holiness was too overpowering for Paul’s carnal vision
to bear. It was hard for him to kick against the pricks
of conscience. The arrows of conviction had pierced
his carnal breast. He trembled and was astonished:
he was completely overcome by the infinite holiness, of
Jesus. St. Paul’s conviction, however, was not like
that of Judas. St. Paul’s was godly sorrow, which
worked repentance unto salvation; the sorrow of Judas
was that of the world and worked only death. Doubt-
less, his own great and sore troubles, which he experi-
enced at the time af his conversion, were present to the
Apostle’s mind, when he wrote those remarkable words


in the 9th and 10th verses of the 7th chapter of his
Second Epistle to the Corinthians :—“ Now I rejoice,
not that ye were made sorry, but that ye sorrowed to
repentance : for ye were made sorry after a godly man-
ner, that ye might receive damage by us in nothing.
For godly sorrow worketh repentance to salvation not
to be repented of : but the sorrow of the world worketh
death.”
Let us rejoice therefore with the Apostle, when we
see the evidences of a broken heart in any poor fellow
sinner, because we know the preciousness of the results
which flow from it.
The examples of godly sorrow contained in the word
of God are recorded for our instruction and guidance.
During the history of the Church, even down to our
own days, there are not wanting remarkable instances
of the same godly sorrow which works repentance unto
salvation. The conversion of Martin Luther and John
Bunyan are among these instances : the life and writ-
ings of these worthy men might be studied with profit
by every inquiring Christian.
We shall now proceed to consider the text still fur-
ther, as it represents the progressive state of the con-
verted Christian. The poor despairing sinner being at
length brought to experience great and sore troubles
on account of his sinfulness, being at last brought 1o
the depths of the earth, is in a fit state for the exercise
of faith. When a poor sinner is thus plunged into the
sea of penitential sorrow, what a glorious privilege,
nay, what an unspeakable joy it is for us to be per-
mitted to direct his outstretched arms to the Only
Rock of safety amid the rolling waves of spiritual
trouble. That only Rock is the Lord Jesus Christ,
the once Crucified, but now Glorified One, the
same tender Saviour yesterday, to-day, and for ever.
My dear converted friends, you can sympathize with
me when I say that there is not a more noble act to be
performed than to direct the sin-tossed soul to Jesus.
It is the great and blessed prerogative of Him who is


the Resurrection and the Life to quicken dying sinners,
to raise them from the depths of sorrow, and to say to
the troubled heart —“ Peace, be still.”
May it be our unspeakable privilege not only to point
the sorrowing to Jesus, but also to pray that many sin-
ners may be the subjects of godly sorrow which worketh
repentance unto salvation, not to be repented of.
The sinner being now quickened begins to live. I
say begins to live, for the career of the newly converted
is one of progress. Being now penitent and forgiven,
he is great —great indeed, in comparison with what he
was in his carnal state. He is richly blessed. But
mark what our text says—his greatness shall be in-
creased. The seed of eternal life is planted in his
soul, but that seed must be watered by the rain from
heaven. It must spring up into the blade, then into
the ear, then the full corn in the ear, and at last be
gathered into the heavenly garner. Here we have the
operation of sanctification. The newly converted is
not to stand still in his Christian course. He is not
always to be a babe in Christianity. He is daily to
grow in grace and in the knowledge of his Lord and
Saviour. But mark again the words of our text —
he cannot increase his own greatness. Although
converted he does not rest on his own strength, for
becoming greater in the kingdom of heaven. No !
God is his strength and his portion for ever. He finds
that he will yet have many battles to fight. His
threefold foe —the devil, the world and the flesh will
yet have many a quarrel with him, but then he has his
threefold ally. He has the guiding and protecting
hand of his Heavenly Father in his conflicts. When
bespattered by sin, he has the cleansing blood of Jesus
to fly to for purification; when wounded by the assaults
of his foes, he has the balm of Gilead for his healing;
when rendered faint by the greatness of his exertions,
he has the Bread of Heaven for his sustenance; and
when well-nigh overwhelmed by the apparent hopeless-
ness of the conflict, he sees the beckoning hand of


Jesus, and hears those encouraging words—“ Be of
good cheer, I have overcome.” His faith and courage
are increased by the Holy Spirit, and he finds himself
comforted on every side. The close of a converted
life may be summed up in the eloquent thanksgiving
of the Apostle—“ The sting of death is sin, and the
strength of sin is the law, but thanks be to God who
giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.”
But the close of his earthly career will not be the close
of his greatness. By the power of Jesus, the first
fruits from the dead, he will be raised again from the
grave, and made like unto Him. With a glorified spirit
and body he will see Jesus face to face and dwell w r ith
him for ever. Even in heaven it is not improbable
that his greatness will be increasing from age to age
by translation from glory to glory. W hat a prospect
for a converted soul! in this there will, assuredly, be
sufficient to satisfy all its hopes and aspirations.
We have thus briefly wmrked out the details of our
text, as they are illustrative of the work of conversion
and sanctification. There is a very solemn saying of
the Saviour’s. It runs thus —“ Except ye be con-
verted and become as little children, ye shall not enter
into the kingdom of heaven.” So you perceive, the
question “ Are you Converted ?” brings us face to face
with the realities of eternal life and eternal death.
Each one in this room is, at the present moment,
livn g for Heaven or living for Hell. Each of us
will, hereafter, be with God, the holy angels, and the
redeemed for ever; or we shall be outcasts for ever.
This is a very very solemn thought. Do not say I
put the alternative in language too strong to be en-
dured. It is language warranted by God’s word. It
is language not near so strong as that which came from
the lips of the loving Jesus Himself.
Finally, my friends, let us turn to practical account
what has been said. Let each one here present put
the question seriously to himself or herself. Do the
words of our text as they have just been spiritually


expounded, apply to my individual case? Have I
ever been in great and sore trouble on account of my
sinfulness before God ? If not, let me reflect that I
am in extreme peril, and that I have still the wrath of
God abiding on me. If there be here present any
poor soul who has not yet tasted of the great and sore
trouble, may he, when he returns from this prayer-
meeting to his home, enter his closet, shut to the door,
fall on his knees, and beseech God that he would, of
his infinite mercy, show him his true position. May
he thank God that he is yet spared to be converted
before the door of mercy is shut and it is too late to
cry for forgiveness. But if, my dear friends, there be
any of you labouring at this moment under the sense
of unforgiven sin, let me beseech you to turn your
weeping eyes to the Lamb of God, who alone can dry
up the penitential tear, who alone can heal the broken
heart, and whose Blessed Spirit alone can pour into
your wounded conscience the oil and wine of heavenly
consolation. Let me entreat you to look with all the
power you can summon to the cross and passion ot
the Redeemer, and you will not fail to find forgiveness
there. Take Jesus at his word—“ Him that cometh
to me I will in no wise cast out.” “ Whosoever be
lieveth in me shall not perish, but have everlasting
life.” May He, dear sorrowing fellow-sinner, quicken
you. May He bring you from the depths of penitence
and sorrow, and finally, to use the closing words of
our text —may He increase your greatness and com-
fort you on every side.
And now one word in conclusion, to those of you
who have not only tasted of the great and sore trouble
on account of sin, but have already been quickened,
born again from above, and raised at length from
the death of sin to the life of righteousness. Still, my
dear friends, keep your eye fixed on Jesus. Pray
earnestly for those fruits of the Spirit, the graces of
patience, meekness, and self-distrust; for remember,
you cafcnot increase your own greatness. It is God


that works in you to will and to do of His good plea-
sure. Repress the first risings of spiritual pride and
self-confidence. Submit, implicitly, to the will of God,
be directed and controlled by His Blessed Spirit in
your lives, and you shall, to employ again the words
of our text —have your greatness increased and you
shall be comforted on every side.
May the peace and joy which Jesus imparts to all
those who believe in Him, be the precious inheritance
of all who now hear me, and may we all be partakers
of a joyful resurrection and a glorious immortality,
for His name and mercy’s sake.


