

ANGLICAN ORDERS
VALID ?
•5* ►l' >!< ►!< ►!< >!•< >l< •?<
RgS*"' S
Adelaide, S.A.
Printed at “The Southern Cross” Office,
28, Waymouth Street,
-in
i i




AEE AMLICAI OEDEES VALID ?
Letter I.
My dear Friend—You say that you
believe Anglican orders to be valid, and
that, therefore, you are justified in
remaining in the Church of England. I
maintain, however, that even were the
orders of undoubted validity you would
endanger your salvation by remaining
outside of the One Fold of the One
Shepherd. Valid orders are not a note
of the church, nor does their possession
ensure those who have them being in the
Catholic Church. The question of orders
is quite a secondary one, added by acci-
dent to the main question about the
heresy and schism of the Anglican Church.
Just as an individual may be stamped
with that character of the priesthood
which eternity itself is powerless to efface,
and yet may fall away, and have no more
right to be considered formally a child of
the Church of God than the veriest
Pagan, so may bodies of men. It is
worth noting that hardly one of the early
heresies and schisms lacked valid orders,
and when you realise how terrible it.is
for those in wilful schism to approach the
sacraments, and thus trample under foot
the blood of Our Lord, 1 think you will
agree that they would have been better
without them. The Nestorians, Arians,
and Donatists had valid orders, and yet
what orthodox man would have com-
forted them with the fact. Alas, not
only have valid orders been found in
heretical sects, but consecrated priests
are to be found in the everlasting prison
house of hell. Even if an Anglican had
real priests and real sacraments, he is no
more fit to approach these sacraments
while he persists knowingly in heresy and
schism than he would, be were he living
in adultery ; indeed, adultery is a less sin
than heresy. Remember that if the
modern Ritualist has valid orders, and
really consecrates the body and blood of
Christ, so did the careless and faithless
parson of the eighteenth century, and so
does every Anglican clergyman, be he
high, or low, or broad ; so, too, did those
who lived at the end of the sixteenth
century, when we are told that “ for near
upon a hundred years the communion
service of the Church of England was cele-
brated at a common table in the middle of
the church or chancel, while those who
received stood or sat at their pleasure,
and ministers with no pretence to
episcopal ordination were not excluded
from its administration, who preferred
to use a common plate and cup, instead
of the chalice and paten of Catholic
times ; and who cut up the vestments
of the old religion into gowns and
bodices for their wives, (a) 1 have said
that Arians, Nestorians, Donatists, and
nearly all the ancient heretical bodies
possessed valid orders, and yet St.
Augustine, writing to the Donatists,
whose only sin consisted in refusing to
listen to the voice of Peter, says —“ All
the Sacraments of Christ are received
not to salvation but to condemnation,
when without the charity of the unity of
Christ,” ( h) and again—“ Outside the
Catholic Church the schismatical bishop
(a) See Froude’s “ History of England,”
vol. viii., p. 93, and Green’s “ History of
the English People,” p. 371.
(t>) S. Aug. “ Contra Letteras Petiliana,’’
lib. iii., c. i.


can have everything except salvation ;
he can have honor, he can have the
sacrament, he can believe the gospel, he
can both have and preach the faith, but
nowhere except in the Catholic Church
can he have salvation ; ” (c) and speaking
of the Donatists, he says —“ When any
such join the Catholic Church, they
receive the root of charity in the society
of unity, in order that the sacraments of
truth which they possess before may be
held unto their deliverance and not to
their damnation,” (d) and St. Cyprian
teaches that ‘ ‘ not even martyrdom will
avail to win salvation for those who are,
through their own fault, outside the
Church.” 1 have said this much to show
you that the question of the validity of
Anglican orders is not the fundamental
question on which your salvation depends ;
it is but a side issue. True, valid orders
are found in the true Church, but a
Catholic priest has no more need to prove
the validity of his orders than has a man
in good health to assure himself that he
is alive by testing the circulation of his
blood. Let me beg you, therefore, to
keep your mind fixed on the all-important
question, whether you are or are not in
the Church established on earth by our
Lord and indwelt by the Holy Ghost ? It
is a visible Church having a visible
Head. It is one, holy, Catholic, and
apostolic, the pillar and ground of the
truth, and against it the gates of hell will
never prevail. If you are in the ark of
salvation you are safe, but if out of it
neither valid orders nor any other raft
you may devise will avail to sail you
against the deluge of sin, the assaults of
Satan, and eternal perdition.
Had you lived in the days of Noah you
would not have been saved from the flood
outside the ark, even had you constructed
a raft of gopher wood, and been able to
plead that it formed part of the material
originally intended for the structure of
the ark, nor would it have availed you
to say that Noah had done wrong in
cutting it off from the ark. Neither are
you safe outside the bark of Peter, even
if you have valid orders (which you have
not), and even though you complain that
(c) “ Gaume” lx., p. 947.
(d) “ Epistola Ixi. ad Theodorium Epis-
copum.
your forefathers were wrong in severing
the Church of England from the unity of
the Catholic Church. I have said this to
show you that the question of the validity
of orders is but a side issue, not a funda-
mental question ; indeed, for those who
believe in the deity of Christ there seems
to be but one fundamental question, and
that is, where is the Church established
by Him and indwelt by the Holy Ghost,
that Church which was to be the teacher
of nations, the mouth-piece of God,
against which the gates of hell should
never prevail ? To find that Church, and,
having found her, to believe what she
teaches, seems to me the logical outcome
of belief in Him who founded her.
Having told you that I do not consider
the question of orders as one of primary
importance, I will proceed to state the
reasons which convince me that Anglican
orders are not valid. There is one fact
which has great weight in convincing me
that Anglican orders are more than doubt-
ful, and that is that though the Church
teaches that to reiterate the sacrament of
orders is sacrilege, she yet ordains all
Anglican clergymen who wish to become
priests ; still, to you who do not yet be-
lieve in the Divine mission of the Church,
I will adduce proofs of a different order.
Anglican orders are considered null and
void, both on account of the sacramental
form in that sect having been vitiated,
and on account of the interruption of the
episcopal succession ; and when to this is
added the views and opinions of the
reformers, and the uncertainty of baptism
in the Church of England, you will, I am
sure, admit that it is, to say the least of
it, extremely unlikely that valid orders
should have survived.
It will, I think, be easy to prove to
you that the leaders of the English
Reformation hated and despised the Holy
Sacrifice, trampled under foot the Blessed
Eucharist, and utterly rejected the
Sacrament of Order. They ripped up
and put to death and disembowelled all
‘•massing priests,” and determined to
purge the country of all “ superstition ”
and supernaturalism, and establish in its
place a “ rational religion ” watched over
by State officials, who should “ minister
to the people the Word of God.” Cranmer
was both clever and crafty, and he knew
that the best and surest way to effect his


purpose was to vitiate the ordinal. That
he did this, and thus rendered Anglican
orders null and void, and that Barlow,
the father of the present episcopate, was
himself unconsecrated, will, I hope, be
made clear in the following letters.
I remain, yours truly,
A. B. E.
Letter 11.
My dear Friend—l have promised in
this letter to point out the character and
opinions of those who formed the ordinal,
the object for which they formed it, and
the circumstances under which it was
formed. lam afraid I must touch briefly
on the character of the reformers, as the
subject is not a pleasant one. A Pro-
testant historian, who has examined the
morality of their lives, writes : —“ The
Reformation was engendered in beastly
lust, brought forth in hypocrisy and
perfidy, and cherished and fed by
plunder. It devastated the country, and
laid the sure foundation of that pauperism
and disgraceful morality which afterwards
prevailed.’’(e) “ It was not,” he adds,
“ the work of virtue, of fanaticism, of
error, of ambition; but of a love of
plunder.” Lord Macaulay thus describes
its author : —“ A king, whose character
may be best described by saying that he
was despotism itself personified, unprin-
cipled Ministers, a rapacious aristocracy,
a servile Parliament—such were the
instruments by which England was
delivered from the yoke of Rome. The
work which had been begun by Henry,
the murderer of his wives, was continued
by Somerset, the murderer of his brother,
and completed by Elizabeth, the mur-
derer of her guest. ... Of those
who had any important share in bringing
the Reformation about, Ridley was
perhaps the only person who did not
consider it as a mere political joh.” (/)
I will now draw your attention to some
facts affecting the character of Cranmer,
whose influence on the Reformation, and
whose share in the formation of the
(e) Cobbett’s “ History of the Reforma-
tion,” p. 50.
(/) Cobbett.
ordinal, entitle him to the first place.
Cranmer having taken the oath of celi-
bacy, married a second “ wife,” his first
being yet alive. This ‘‘ wife” he brought
to England in a chest having holes bored
in it to give her air. A Protestant
historian, from whom I have already
quoted, thus sums up his character :
“ Thomas Craumer’s name deserves to be
held in everlasting execration. It is a
name which we could not pronounce
without almost doubting of the justice of
God, were it not for our knowledge of the
fact that this most cold-blooded, most
perfidious, most injurious, most blas-
phemous caitiff expired at last amidst
those flames which he himself had been
the chief cause of kindling.” (g) Dr. Little-
dale, a Protestant divine, says of
Cranmer, that he was “ the most in-
famous personage in English history,
compared with whom John Plantagenet
and Henry Tudor have light shades in
their characters.” ( h )
Barlow, when Bishop of St. David’s,
openly cohabited with the person whom,
in Edward Vl.’s time, he took as his
wife, and Burnet says he made himself
odious by his evil life, which was
notorious.
The following account of Richard
Barnes, Bishop of Durham (A.D. 1577),
is thus given by a contemporary :
“ Richard Barnes, an apostate priest,
twice married, a common drunkard,
Bishop of Durham, accustomed to drink
seven times every meal and as many
between meals, every draught containing
a pint ; and in his public consistory to
offenders accustomed to use most obscene
and filthy words, fell at length with
intemperance into a fever, and so into a
frenzy. . . . Soon after his disease
brought him to his last exigent, when, as
past speech, Toby Matthew, willing him
in sign of his faith to hold up his hands,
he always held his fingers, to his mouth,
which one Ralph Hilton, his base [born]
son, marking [it], swore, and said Mr.
Dean did mistake his father, for that his
finger to his mouth did desire nothing but
drink. And so desperately he died.” {i)
(g) Innovations, p. 36.
(A) “ An Ancient Editor’s Note-book.”
(i) “ The Church under Elizabeth,” by Dr.
Lee, p. 127, vol. ii.


If such were the men promoted to
bishoprics, well may a Protestant writer
say that “ illiterate, ignorant, and unin-
structed, the more violent and vulgar
they were in frantically denouncing the
religion of their grandparents the greater
was the favor shown them by those
Ministers of the Queen who superintended
the ancient dioceses, and were officially
pledged to root out the old faith and
he adds—“ In the utter moral corruption
then existing the nation was only reaping
what had been so recently sown by these
* reforming ’ prelates and their party.” (j)
“ After a time marriage was disparaged,
adultery condoned, and concubinage
advocated ; while the grossest abomina-
tions were extenuated by wandering
preachers. The murder of the ‘ man of
sin,’ as they called the Chief Bishop of
Christendom, was esteemed a virtue.”
Dr. Bale, one of the chief bishops of the
Reformation era, whose name occurs in
the commission for Parker’s consecration,
is said by an Anglican divine to be a
“fair and faithful specimen of an out-
spoken and consistent Reformation-Pre-
late. ” ( k) His language is too coarse and
revolting to be quoted, and the Rev. H.
Christuas, D.C.L., who has re-edited his
works for the Parker Society, states that
“ they cannot with propriety be presented
to the public.” This man was a perjured
monk, and the High Church clergyman
already quoted tells us that he deals with
the most sacred subjects in a spirit of
virulence and buffoonery, and writes of
the Catholic sacraments and sacred rites
of the Universal Church in language so
frightful that many will find it difficult to
believe that the profane author of such
sentiments was in his right mind. His
contemporaries, however, were well pleased
with him, and his writings do not appear
to be out of harmony with the official
‘ Homilies ’ which had recently been
issued. ” This man was made Prebendary
of Canterbury.
Poynet, Bishop of Winchester, not only
took a wife, but took the wife of a butcher
who was still living, and who by process
of law recovered her.
(j) “ The Church under Elizabeth,” vol. i.,
p. 225.
( k ) “ History of the Protestant Reforma-
tion,” by W. Cobbett, p. 189.
A. Protestant historian thus gives their
disbelief in “ Good Works ” as the reason
for the immorality of their lives “ The
Reformers differed from each other as
widely as the colors of the rainbow in
most other things, but they all agreed in
this, that good works were unnecessary to
salvation, and that the saints, as they had
the modesty to call themselves, could not
forfeit their rights to heaven by any sins
however numerous and enormous. By
those, amongst whom plunder, sacrilege,
adultery, incest, and perjury were almost
as habitual as sleeping and waking ; by
those who taught that the way to ever-
lasting bliss could not be obstructed by
any of these, nor by all together, by
such persons. Charity, besides that it was
so well-known a Catholic commodity,
would be, as a matter of course, set
wholly at nought.” (i)
I will quote two more Anglican authori-
ties, and then I will quit this unpleasant
subject. “ Documents,” says Dr. Little-
dale, “ hidden from the public eye for
centuries in the archives of London,
Venice, and Somancas are now rapidly
being printed, and every fresh find
establishes more clearly the utter
scoundrelism of the reformers.” He
passes in review and examines the charac-
ter of all the leading reformers. “ Dan ton,
Marat, and Robespierre,” he says,
“ stood on a higher moral level than
these villains,” and merit greater respect
than Cranmer, Ridley, or Latimer.
This, remember, is the verdict, not of a
Catholic, but of a brother clergyman.
“ I gravely assert,” he continues, “ that it
is absolutely impossible for any just,
educated, or religious man to have read
the history of the times in genuine
sources, and hold two opinions of the
reformers ; these are no hasty sentiments.
They have been built up slowly by years
of careful reading.”
Nicolas Pocock, a Protestant writer of
great weight and ability, declares the
bishops of the Reformation period to have
been the very scum of the earth.” (m)
These were the men who, with the help
of foreign troops, stamped out the ancient
(?) Letter to the Guardian, by Dr. Little-
dale, May 20, 1868.
(ni) “ The Reformation of the Prayer
Book,” by Nicholas Pocock.


faith in England. Theae were the men
who, under their royal master, devised a
new religion in its place ; a true know-
ledge of their characters and opinions
will therefore help us to form a just
estimate of their work. Having seen
what manner of men they were, let us
now see what views they held on the
sacrament of the altar, and on holy orders.
This subject I will reserve for my next
letter.
I remain, yours sincerely,
A. B. E.
Letter 111.
My dear Friend—As the chief office of
a priest is to offer the Holy Sacrifice and
to dispense to the faithful the body and
blood of Christ, it will, I think, throw
light on our subject if we examine the
views held by the reformers concerning
the blessed sacrament. If one thing is
more clear than another, it is their
intense hatred of the sacrifice of the
Mass. Wicliffe had taught that the
consecrated host is not the body and
blood of Christ, but merely an effectual
sign thereof. Ho objected to and
denounced the elevation and adoration of
the host, and maintained that “ this is
my body ” was merely a figurative
expression. “All the sacraments that
Christ left on earth,” said Wicliffe, “be
but minds (memorials) of the body of
Christ, for a sacrament is no more to say,
but a sign or mind (memorial) of a thing
past or to come. ”{n) It was such teaching
as this that caused Elizabeth, even before
her coronation, to order a bishop not to
elevate the host when saying Mass in her
presence, and to leave the chapel when he
refused to obey. It was such teaching as
this that paved the way for Luther’s
assertion that there was no external priest-
hood ordained in the gospel, and that
the Catholic priesthood had been “ erected
by Satan through lies of men.”
Bucer, whose influence on the liturgy
of the Anglican Church can hardly be
over-estimated, and to whom the pro-
posed prayer book was, before publication,
submitted for approval, objects to all
(») “ Wieliffe’s Wicket,” p. 15.
that may tend to favor the doctrine of
the real presence. In the “ Order of
Communion,” in 1548, a direction was
given that in case the wine was in-
sufficient the priest might consecate more.
In the first book of King Edward care
was taken to prevent this sacrilege by a
proviso that the number of communicants
should be ascertained over night. In
Bucer’s “Censure” he remarked upon
this, that “hence some conceive the
superstition that they think it wrong if
any of the bread and wine of the com-
munion remains over to suffer it to come
into common use ; as if there were any-
thing divine or sacred inherent in this
bread and wine, even out of use of them
in communion. Wherefore some think
that, however much remains from com-
munion, they are to consume the whole.
Men are therefore to be taught that
Christ the Lord is offered to the mind of
pious receivers by the Lord’s words and
these symbols, and not to the bread and
wine. And thus, beyond the use of the
communion, which the Lord instituted,
the bread and wine, even if they have
been placed on the Lord’s table, have in
themselves no more sanctity than other
bread and wine Whatever
appears to favor the bread worship, or to
be used by anti-Christ to retain the same
in the hearts of simple men, we ought to
abolish as far and as purely as possible
from the churches. ”(o)
Hooper, in a letter to Bucer dated
June 19, 1548, denies the Beal .Presence
in the following terms:—‘And the
minister gives what is in his power,
namely, the bread and wine, and not the
body of Christ; nor is it exhibited by
the minister, eaten by the communicant,
otherwise than in the word preached,
read, or meditated upon. And to eat the
body of Christ is nothing else than to
believe.”(p) But there was one of the
reformers whose hatred of the sacrifice of
the Mass and of the Real Presence
exceeded all the others, and that was
Oranmer. So great was this diabolical
hatred that a well-known writer says—
“ Every measure Cranmer carried out for
promoting the Keformatien seemed
(o) “ Scripta Anglicana,” p. 464. (Canon
Escoit.)
(p) “ Original Letters,” p. 47.


directed against the holy altar and the
sacred priesthood.” Crafty, politic, and
cunning as Cranmer was, he could
neither conceal nor control his impatience
to blot out the holy sacrifice and the Real
Presence on the altar. He openly says—
“ The words of Our Saviour be effectuous
to the faithful receiver, and not to the
dumb creatures of bread and wine, under
whose form faith teaches not that the body
and blood of Christ be invisibly hidden. ”(q)
Becon, the friend and adviser of Cranmer,
echoed his sentiments by saying “ the
sacrifice of the Mass came from hell.”
Grindal, Parker’s successor in the See of
Canterbury, called the Mass “ an accursed
abomination and a diabolical profanation
of the Lord’s Supper.” Dr. Falke said
that “ in denying the blasphemous
sacrifice of the Popish Mass, with the altar
and the priesthood that thereto belongeth,
we use no wily policy, but with open
mouth at all times and in all places cry
out upon it ”(r) It was this spirit which
dictated the 39 Articles, in which it is
declared that the sacrifice of the Mass is
a “ blasphemous fable and dangerous
deceit,” and which formed the oath
administered to the sovereign in the office
of coronation, and which every bishop
(until recent times) was required to take
on entering Parliament, and which oath
declares the sacrifice of the Mass to be
“ superstitious and idolatrous.” If such
was the temper of the times who can
wonder at the result which ensued.
Rastel, writing to Jewel, complains of the
state of affairs, and utters many indict-
ments which Beylin, in his Church History,
is obliged to record as “ sad tricks.” He
states that “ the residue of the Sacrament
unreceived was taken of the priest or
parish clerk to spread their young
children’s butter thereupon, or to serve
their own took with it at their homely
table. ”(s)
As a natural consequence of these views
Mass was abolished by Act of Parliament,
and for hearing or offering the Holy
Sacrifice men were imprisoned, tortured,
hung, and disemboweled. Altars were
taken down and destroyed, and the sacred
(q) Dublin Review , vol. x.
(r ) “ Defence of the English Translations.”
( s) Hevlin’s “ Affairs of Church and State
in England under Queen Elizabeth,” p. 174.
altar-stones, consecrated with Holy
Chrism, were purposely and deliberately
profaned. The Archbishop of Canterbury
(Grindal) issued an especial injunction
that “ the churchwardens shall see that
the altar-stones be broken, defaced, and
bestowed to some common use."(t) This was
done “ by placing them at the church
porch so that all that entered must tread
on them, by placing them as steps leading
to the nearest pigsties, and by putting
them to uses too profane to particularize.”
No means were left untried to root out
the faith of the English people in the
Blessed Sacrament. But though “re-
formers ” and courtiers, eager for the
spoils and rich furniture of the sanctury,
urged forward the work of demolition the
hearts of the English people clung to
their ancient faith, and from time to time
the leaders of the reformation were
obliged to pause and temporize lest they
should be unable even with the help of
their German mercenaries to enforce their
decree. Ridicule and profanity were
resorted to to undermine the faith of the
people. Travelling conjurors undertook
to prove by ocular demonstration to the
shallow, or those who thought themselves
wise, the impossibility of the reality of the
Blessed Sacrament. These, clothed in
disused or imitation sacerdotal vestments
and by the aid of tin cups and thin pellets
of bone on which were engraved repre-
sentations of the enemy of souls, most
profanely caricatured the Mass and its
manual actions, with utterances of
“ Munipsimus ” and “ Sumpsimus ” and
the still used phrase of harmless modern
conjurors, hocus-pocus (Hoc est Corpus).(u )
The same Protestant historian tells us
that the new ministers caricatured the
ancient priesthood as “ worshippers of
Jack-in-the-Box,” as they profanely
termed the Blessed Sacrament reserved
in the tabernacles of the Catholic Church.
Profane rhymes were circulated, of which
the following is a specimen :
0 presumptions undertaker
Never cake could make a baker
Yet a priest could make his Maker.
And Bishops spoke of the Blessed
(t) “ Injunctions of Edmund Grindal,
1571.” Lord William Serres. Dr. Lee, p. 115.
(u) “ The Church under Elizabeth.” Dr.
Lee, p. 115.


Sacrament in language which, says an
Anglican clergyman, has never been
outstript in blasphemous coarseness.
“ Who,” says one of them, “ ever heard
of so great a wonder that a dry cake
should become a god to be worshipped ?
. . . . They will take upon them to
create (Him) every day afresh, and when
their old God stinketh in the box remove
Him out of the way and put a new one in
His room.”(r)
An Anglican, writing in the Church
Times , owns that the reformers made the
Eucharist contemptible in the eyes of
the people, and adds that the complaint
of the people under Edward LI., that the
altars had been turned into oyster
boards, was literally true. “ Communion
tressels and boards ” (just like those on
which even now vendors of shell-fish
exhibit their wares), carried in and out of
church with exactly the same quietness
as they are now used for a schoolroom
tea, were what the astonished people
saw ; and the Sacrament dispensed with
as much studious irreverence as if the
minister had intended nothing save to
make it contemptible. ”(iv)
Later on the disorder that prevailed at
the administration of “The Supper”
became intolerable, and, true to their
determination that in the State religion
should be done decently and in order,
Elizabeth had inserted a rubric directing
people to kneel when receiving the Com-
munion ; lest, however, old feelings and
ideas should be revived through this
return to the ancient custom, an ex-
planatory rubric is added, which you
will still find in your prayer-book, at the
end of the Communion Service This
was inserted through the influence of
Bucer, and runs as follows :—“ Thereby
no adoration is intended, or ought to be
done, either unto the sacramental bread
or wine there bodily received, or unto
any corporeal presence of Christ's natural
flesh and blood ; for the sacramental
bread and wine remain still in their very
natural substance, and therefore may
not be adored (for that were idolatry to
be abhorred of all faithful Christians),
and the natural body and blood of our
Saviour Christ are in heaven, and not
(v) “ Bales’ Works,” p. 259.
(to) Church Times , September 26, 1879
here, it being against the truth of
Christ s natural body to be at one time
in more places than one.”
We are told that Laud insisted on the
rule of receiving the sacrament kneeling,
though it was stillcomraonly handed rouifd
the Church to the people in their p aces, a
distinctively Protestant system which in
rare cases lasted till our own day,
and was the practice at Christ Church,
Oxford, until a few years ago. Until
very recent years it was a common prac-
tice to pour out of the vestry window
what remained in the chalice, and to
feed the parson’s chickens with the super-
fluous bread.’’(as)
We have seen the hatred the reformers
felt for the blessed sacrament ; we have
seen how those who ventured to offer the
holy s were ripped up alive, had
their bowels taken out before their eyes
(as the official sentences expressly ordered)
and thrown into cauldrons of burning
pitch ; and I ask you whether common
sense allows you to believe that these
reformers endeavored to perpetuate
what they so much hated by perpetuating
the orders through which it was derived,
or whether they blotted it out by doing
away with them 1 The vicar of All
Saints’, Lambeth, tells us that “ the
Protestant literature of the period (too
profane and offensive to quote) is all based
on the gross assumption that ‘ eucharistic
adoration,’ as it is now termed by cer-
tain English churchmen, is flagrant
idolatry, and that idolaters ought not to
be suffered to live.”(i/) ‘ ‘ Elizabeth’s
prelates,” he says, “ had long ago proved
from scripture, as they maintained, that
Massmongers, being idolaters, should be
killed.” (z) Archdeacon Harpsfeld, of
Canterbury, Edward Vl.’a councillor, tried
to make the world believe that to
worship Christ’s body in the blessed
sacrament was nothing but idolatry.(a)
It may be worth while to see by what
the fathers of the Anglican establishment
replaced the Mass which they had
( x ) “ The Anglican Ministry.” A. Hutton,
p. 72.
(y) Dr. Lee, p. 143.
(z) Dr. Lee, p. 181.
(a) “ The Pretended Divorce between Henry
YIII. and Queen Catherine.” N. Harpsfeld.
Book 111., p. 110.


abolished. Instead of a sacrifice they
instituted a supper; sacerdotal and
supernatural rules were to be abolished,
but in their stead was to be established a
fraternal meal taken in memory of the
death of Christ.
The “Lord’s board,” as it was called,
was brought down with its trestles from
the east end of the chancel, and placed, as
for a domestic meal with benches round,
in the middle of the choir. It was
covered with an ample table napkin, a
large leathern bottle of wine, a loaf of
bread and a knife, sometimes a pewter
plate and flagon, or occasionally a
wooden platter and a tin cup, were by the
sexton then placed on it, together with a
cushion and prayer-book. “ The minister
sat in an armchair, where he preached
and prayed. When the service was ended
what remained of this bread and wine was
handed round again to the congregation, (b)
and the table lifted back again to its
place. Even this did not please some of
the extreme party. Robert Cooke, one
of the gentlemen of the Queen’s Chapel,
complained that a substantial meal
should be provided, “My remarks,” he
wrote, “relate to the Last Supper of
Christ, in the administration of which a
mistake is made now-a-days, and ever had
been, almost from tne time of St. Paul,
since he placed before the Corinthians a
supper to be eaten. We use only a
morsel of bread, in mockery of a supper.
They used a variety and abundance of
meat and drink, so as to depart satisfied ;
we return hungry.’(c) Later on this wish
was partially carried into effect. “I he
supper took place in the evening. Loaves
and wine were supplied in abundance ;
platters were placed round the table ; a
sop of bread and wine was made and
partaken of with spoons. v (d) Another
writer tells us that “ the service for this
ceremony was borrowed from the nearest
house, and that the communicants took
their seats at tables which the Catholics
termed ‘ oyster boards.’ ”(e) The men
who brought about this state of affairs
(J) Dr. Lee, vol. i., 91.
(c) “ Robert Cooke to Eodolph Gualter.”
Zurich Letters. 2nd Series. Letter 95.
(d) Dr. Lee, p. 203, vol. ii.
(<?) “ Documents from Simaneas,” p. 17.
were the men who maintained that for
any one to assume priestly powers was
derogatory to Christ, the only true priest,
who asserted that the sacrifice of the
Mass was “a blasphemous fable and a
dangerous deceit,”and maintained that the
blessed sacrament of the altar was “ a
god made in co-operation by the bakers
and Queen Mary's shaven conjurors,”
and other blasphemies too awful to
repeat. Once more, I ask you, were such
men likely to wish to have in their new
church orders like in kind to those of the
“ idolatrous massing priests ” they so
hated ? Would they, in forming an
ordinal, form one which reverently
hedged round the sacred rite, or would
they not rather form one which did away
with all semblance to the “ stinking
orders ” (as they called them) of the
Catholic Church ? That they chose, and
chose intentionally, this latter course,
seems to me clear. Their one idea was to
do away with supernaturalism, to have
no sacerdos, but to put presbyters in
their place. The intense love of the
English people for their ancient faith
forced the crafty Cranmer and his
colleagues to use diplomacy as well as
force in attaining this end, but they
attained it.
It has been pointed out that “the
reformation, commenced under Henry
VI iI. and completed under Elizabeth,
was justifiable in truth on one principle,
and on one principle only, that which for
half a century was enunciated and pro-
claimed by supreme authority, read four
times a year by the ministers and their
allies, and which still forms part of the
doctrine of the homilies of the Church of
England, viz., that ‘laity and clergy,
learned and unlearned, all ages, sects, and
degrees of men, women, and children of
whole Christendom (a horrible and most
dreadful thing to think) have been at once
drowned in abominable idolatry, of all
other vices most detested of God and
most damnable to man, and that by the
space of 800 years and more.’ ”(/)
I remain, yours sincerely,
A. B, B.
(_/) “ Homily on Idolatry.”


Letter IV.
My dear Friend —In considering the
opinions of the reformers of the sixteenth
century, we must not lose sight of the fact
that they were greatly influenced by those
of their predecessors, the Lollards, Now,
we know that one of the leading tenets of
the Lollard heresy was “ that no power is
given of God to priests of ministering
sacraments, saying Mass, or other divine
service, more than to layman. ”(</) We
know, too, that Luther maintained that
“ it is a matter of propriety, though not
of necessity, that certain persons should
be appointed to teach the Word of God
and administer the sacraments ; but that,
though not ordinarily lawful, there is
nothing to prevent any one of the faithful
discharging those functions in case of
necessity. That ordination is not a
sacrament, nor is any sacramental grace
conferred in it, but is merely the public
approval of persons as truly called, and
admitting them to the lawful exercise of
their functions.” (fo) I have quoted
Luther’s views because the English
Reformation has always seemed to me a
joint product of the heresies of Wicliffe
and of the German reformers, and
because Cranmer, Barlow, and others,
were in constant communication with
and greatly influenced by their German
masters. Let us now see what opinions
the English reformers themselves held.
Cranmer distinctly taught that order was
not a sacrament, and that “ceremonies
used in the admission of ministers are not
of necessity, but only for good order ;(i)
thac Christian princes have the whole
care of their subjects as well in things
spiritual as temporal ; and that ministers
of God’s Word are only officers appointed
by them.” His deliberate judgment given
in writing in answer to a grave and
important question is as follows : —“ The
civil magistrates under the king be Lord
Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Admirals,
Sheriffs; the ministers of God’s Word
under His Majesty be bishops, parsons,
vicars, and such other priests as be
( g) “ Foxe,” vol. v., p. 648 ; and “ Mait-
land’s Letters on Foxe,” p. 57.
(A) “ The question of Anglican Orders,”
Escourt, p. 16.
(i) “ History Reformation,” Burnet, vol. i.
App., p. 214-236.
appointed by His Highness to that
ministration, as, for example, the Bishop
of Canterbury, the Bishop of Durham,
the Parson of Warwick, etc. All the
said officers be appointed, assigned, and
elected in every place by the laws and
orders of kings and princes. In the
admission of many of these offices be
divers comely ceremonies and solemnities,
and which be not of necessity, but only
for a good order and seemly fashion ; for
if such offices and ministrations were
committed without such solemnity, they
were nevertheless duly committed, and
there is no more promise of God that
grace is given in the committing of the
ecclesiastical office than in the committing
of the civil office. ”{j)
What a light do these opinions throw on
the Canons of the Church of England, which
declare that the king’s majesty under God
is the only supreme governor of this
realm .... as well in all spiritual
or ecclesiastical things or causes as tem-
poral, and moreover decree “ that none
who have spoken against and depraved
His Majesty’s sovereign authority in
causes ecclesiastical shall be admitted to
communion, except he acknowledge to the
minister before the churchwardens his
repentance for the same.”(/c) Jewel says :
—“ Now are we to speak of the ministry
of the church, which some have called
holy orders, shall we account it a sacra-
ment? There is no reason to do so.”
What light, too, do these opinions of
the reformers throw on the fact that
Edward YI. granted a dispensation to
Archbishop Cranmer to eat flesh meat
during Lent, and gave similar license to
Coverdale, Bishop of Exeter, and his
wife to eat meat on fast days with six
guests at table. Becon’s doctrine is the
doctrine of the Articles :—“ There are
two sacraments ordained by Christ our
Lord in the Gospel, that is to say,
baptism and the Supper of the Lord.
Those five commonly called sacraments,
that is to say, confirmation, penance,
orders, matrimony, and extreme unction,
are not to be counted sacraments of the
Gospel, being such as have partly grown
(j) “ A Treatise of the Sacraments,”
Work’s, vol. ii., p. 1129.
(k) Canon xxyii,


from the corrupt following of the
Apostles, partly are states of life allowed
in the Scripture, but yet have not like
nature of sacraments with baptism or the
Lord’s Supper, for that they have not any
visible sign or ceremony ordained by
God.”( 0
In the ‘ ‘ Resolutions of several Bishops
and Divines upon some questions con-
cerning the sacraments,” the ninth
question was “ Whether the Apostles,
lacking a higher power, as in not having
a Christian king among them, made
bishops by that necessity, or by authority
given them by God ? ”(m) Barlow answered
—“ Because they lacked a Christian
prince, by that necessity they ordained
other Bishops.” Eleventh question—
“ Whether a Bishop hath authority to
make a priest by the Scripture or not ?
Whether any other may make a priest ?”
Barlow answered—“ Bishops have no
authority to make priests without they be
authorised of the Christian princes,” and
he adds, “ that laymen have other whiles
made priests.” Cranmer answered—“A
bishop may make a priest by the Scrip-
ture, and so, too, may the people by
election. In the New Testament he that
is appointed to be a bishop or priest
needeth no consecration by the Scripture,
for election or appointing thereto is
sufficient.” To the twelfth question,
“ Whether in the New Testament be
required any consecration of a bishop or
priest, or only appointing to the office be
sufficient ? ” Cranmer answers—“ In the
New Testament he that is appointed to
be a bishop or a priest needeth no con-
secration by the Scriptures, for election
or appointing thereto is sufficient.”
Barlow answered “That only re-
appointing is sufficient. ”(m)
Barlow further asserts that—“lf the
king’s grace, being supreme head of the
Church of England, did cease, denominate
and elect any layman (being learned) to
be a bishop, that he so chosen (without
mention being made of orders) should be
as good a bishop as he is, or the best in
(l) Art. xxx.
( m ) Record xlix., and “ Collier,” vol. ii.
Appendix 49.
(n) See Stillingfleet’s “ Trenicum,” and
“ Collier,” vol. ii. Appendix No. 49.
England.”(o) Tyndale says—“We choose
temporal officers and read their duty to
them, and they promise to be faithful,
and then are admitted ; neither is there
any other manner of ceremony at all
required in making our spiritual officers
than to choose an able person and then
rehearse to him his duty.”(p) Bishop
Cooper says (1589) —“ No form of Church
government is divinely ordained. Pro-
testant communities in establishing
different forms have but made use of
their legitimate liberty. Episcopacy is
suitable in England, because the English
constitution is Well
might Jewel, writing to Peter Martyr on
the 7th of February, 1562, say—“ Now
that the full light of the Gospel has shone
forth, the very vestiges of error must, as
far as possible, be removed with the
rubbish, and, as the saying is, with the
very dust; and I wish we could effect
that as to the linen surplice, for as to
matters of doctrine we have pared every-
thing away to the very quick, and do not
differ from your doctrine by a nail's
breadth.” (r)
Comment on these views would be
superfluous. Men who thus felt and
taught would care little about ordination,
and less about the validity of the form
used.
1 remain, yours sincerely,
A. B. E.
Letter V.
My dear Friend—ln glancing at the
history of the ordinal of Edward VI., we
must not ignore the German influence
exercised on its compilation. During the
reign of Mary many of the “ reformers ”
had fled to Germany, and had there
formed friendships with, and imbued the
ideas of their German “ colleagues.” On
the accession of Elizabeth they returned
to England, but continued intercourse
was maintained with Germany. “It was
(o) “ Strype’s Memorials,” vol. i., p. 184.
“ Collier,” vol. ii., p. 135.
(p) “ Obedience of a Christian Man,” vol.
i., p. 259. Ed. Parker Society,
(q) Macaulay’s “ History of England,”
vol. i., p. 77.
(r) “ Zurick Letters,” p. 100,


the design of Cranmer to carry on the
Reformation by slow and safe methods,
not hazarding too much at once.”(«) His
German friends were greatly displeased,
and continually urged him to advance
boldly and quickly ; but a more crafty
policy best suited Oranmer’s character,
and was, moreover, rendered necessary
by the deep love of the English people
for the faith of their forefathers, for he
feared by sudden action to cause an out-
break. He therefore endeavored gradually
to break down the barriers which existed
between him and his cherished desire.
He obtained the appointment of his own
creatures to positions of influence,
encouraged the Press, the gospellers, and
the stage, to ridicule the holiest mysteries
of the Catholic faith, and restricted the
preaching of its clergy. After a while he
became bolder, and denounced the bless-
ing of candles, ashes, and palms, as
superstitious, and forbade by law all
ceremonies in connection with them.
Later on, he and his fellow “ reformers ”
ventured to remove and desecrate all
holy images. Here he paused, for he
feared to proceed further until the
influence of such action had sunk into
the hearts of the people and borne fruits
of laxity and indifference. In March,
1547, a body of bishops and divines,
appointed by the State, drew up an
English communion service for administer-
ing the holy eucharist under both kinds.
Cranmer wished this body to effect
further reforms, and to test their fitness
for the work several questions were put
to them, one of which was —“ What is
the oblation and sacrifice of Christ in the
Mass ? ” Cranmer openly denied that
the Mass was a sacrifice, and maintained
it was only a memorial rite. Holbeach,
Ridley, and Ferrars, and the Bishops of
Salisbury and Bristol, gave the same
answer; two divines deemed it a mere
prayer in memory of the Passion ; eleven
bishops professed a true belief in the
sacrifice. These eleven formed too
powerful an opposition for the wily
Cranmer to encounter, and so once more
he paused in his work. His next action
was to vest the power of episcopal
elections in the Crown, and thus secure
tools willing to help him in the abolition
(s) Burnet, vol. ii., p. 25.
of the holy sacrifice and of the sacrament
of the altar, which was the object of his
peculiar hatred. Step by step he crept
slowly on with his diabolical work, but
his German friends waxed impatient. At
length the arrival in England of several
foreign reformers strengthened his hand,
and urged by them he resolved to push on
his long cherished scheme of completely
altering ‘the liturgy and vitiating the
ordinal, for he saw clearly that if he
wished finally to abolish the sacrifice he
so much hated he must first vitiate the
orders which gave power to consecrate
the body and blood of Christ. That this
crafty conduct was not inconsistent with
his character is shown by the fact that he
was publicly charged in the House of
Lords with a vile attempt to vitiate the
form of the holy eucharist, and that none
of those who knew or had worked with
him raised any protest against the
accusation.
In September, 1548, a commission was,
by royai injunction, appointed to draw
up a book of common prayer and for the
celebration of all public offices. Great
was the resistance shown to several parts
of this new prayer book, but on none was
such a determined fight made as on the
ordinal. The Catholic divines would
consent to no ordinal which vitiated the
sacrament of orders, whereas Cranmer
was determined to introduce one that
did. A deadlock occurred, and at last
the book was presented to Parliament
without any ordinal. Cranmer’s next
step was to issue an order for the des-
truction of all missals, antiphonals, and
other books containing the ancient
liturgy (September, 1549). This order
met with great opposition, for by this
time the whole country was in a state of
ferment, owing to the changes in religion
and the deprivation of their rights.
Fifteen counties were in arms on the day
the fatal liturgy was introduced ; but
soon German mercenaries, kept ready,
stamped out “the rebellion.” Dearly
did the English people love the ancient
faith, and bravely did the masses of the
people struggle to retain it; but they
were without leaders, their bishops
imprisoned, their altars made desolate,
themselves cut down by foreign mer-
cenaries, fined, imprisoned, put to death.
In the following January Cranmer


pressed for the appointment of a new
commission for the compilation of an
ordinal, to devise a form for the con-
secrating of bishops, priests, and deacons.
This proposal was strongly resisted by all
the Catholic members of the former
commission. Their resistance was, how-
ever, of no avail, and their solemn protests
were unheeded. Many now saw that he
plotted the destruction of the hierarchy,
and determined to make a brave resist-
ance. Some who had weakly yielded in
all else to save life and limb, and in the
hope of better days, at length fully
realised that the question was vital, and
they refused to yield. The number of
the bishops on the new commission was
reduced from eighteen to six, of whom
Heath, Bishop of Worcester and
Chichester, was among the number.
There was little for them to do, as the
forms had been prepared beforehand, and
even used at an ordination by Cranmer
and Bidley. Heath, Archbishop of
Canterbury, refused to give his assent to
the new form, and was “ covented before
the Lords ” for refusing. Persisting in
his refusal, he was cast into prison. Here
he was visited by Cranmer and Ridley,
who by bribes and threats tried to induce
him to yield, but in vain. After a time
he was again brought before the Council,
and again refused to “ set his hand to the
book.” He returned to prison, and was
soon afterwards deprived of his bishopric.
Bribes, threats, and imprisonment were
powerless to induce Heath to sign away
the apostolic succession.
The commission finished its work and
the ordinal received the great seal, was
confirmed by Act of Parliament, and was
the only one in use in the Church of
England for 100 years. This is the
ordinal I will try and examine in my next
letter. That its meaning was well under-
stood by those who had framed it is
shown by the fact that directly it was
introduced the altars were overthrown
and replaced by wooden tables.
Thoroughly as Cranmer had done his
work, he was not quite satisfied. Policy
had obliged him to leave in the prayer
book of 1548 some “remnants of Popery.”
Burnet tells us that “several things had
been continued, either to draw in some
of the bishops who by such yielding
might be prevailed on to concur in it, or
in compliance with the people who wer e
fond of their old superstition ”(i) He
was content, however, when in 1552 a
second edition, revised by Martin Bucer,
was enforced by Act of Parliament.
Nothing now remained save to enforce
what had been by law established. How
thoroughly he did his work ; how
powerless was the ordinal to confer valid
orders ; I will try and show you in my
next letter.
Yours sincerely,
A. B. E.
Lbttee VI.
My dear Friend—ln your last letter
you say that you admit that Cranmer
desired to do away with the sacrament of
orders, but that you believe that his
wicked design was thwarted, and that
the ordinal compiled was competent to
confer valid orders. Before examining
the ordinal of Edward VI. I will try and
define the sacrament of orders. All
sacraments must, you admit, have an
outward and visible sign and an inward
and spiritual grace, and this outward sign
must have been instituted by Christ
Himself. The outward and visible sign
consists of “ matter ” and “ form.” For
instance, in the sacrament of baptism
water is the matter, and the words, ‘ ‘ I
baptise thee,” is the form. The matter
is the thing done or used ; the form is
that which sanctifies the matter so as to
bestow on it the power of imparting
grace, and determines its nature as a
sacrament. It follows that the expres-
sion of the distinctive character conferred
is essential to the validity of the form,
as otherwise the matter would not be de-
termined to a special act. Moreover,
this matter and form must have been in-
stituted by Christ Himself, since none
but the author of grace can attach the
gift of grace to any external act. If,
then, we find in the ordinal of Edward
VI. matter and form instituted by Christ,
and used for the purpose for which He
instituted them, then the orders it con-
fers are valid, but not else. You say
(t) Burnet, vol. ii., p. 155.


that it is clear from Scripture that the
imposition of hands is the matter ©f the
sacrament of orders, and this you have
retained. Let us, therefore, examine the
form and see how far it determines the
matter to the required end I have said
that the expression of the distinctive
character conferred is essential to the
validity of the form. This may be ex-
pressed either by an allusion to the type
found in the Old Testament of the order
conferred, or by the mention of some
spiritual power which is the distinctive
privilege of the order to which the can-
didate is raised, or by the actual mention
made of the office conferred.
The way in which our Lord rendered
the form efficiently determinative of the
matter can only be learned from eccle-
siastical tradition. In the Roman, Greek,
Maronite, Neatorian, Coptic, and all other
valid rites, the distinctive character is
thus determined ; but such was not the
case in the Anglican Church for more
than a hundred years. True, at the end
of that time, when taunted by Catholics
and Presbyterians with having no orders,
the rite was, in 1662, altered to supply
the defect ; but the alteration came too
late One hundred years had elapsed
since the introduction of the Calvinistic
forms of Cranmer, and their work was so
efficaciously done that orders had died
out in the Church, which had first severed
itself from the centre of unity, and then
apostatized from the Faith. .Nought was
left but an English establishment.”^)
I will now give you the rite as used
until 1662, and also as altered at that
date, and I am sure you will admit that
the ordinal of 1552 was not, and was
never meant to be, a sacramental means
of imparting spiritual and sacerdotal
power ex opere operate, but was meant to
be, and was no more than, a solemn in-
vocation of the divine blessing on a mere
grant of external authority ; to which, no
doubt, may be appended, according to the
state and dispositions of the recipient,
an increase of sanctifying grace ex opere
oper antis, (v)
(u) “ Ordinal Edward V 1.,” by Dom De
Raynal, 0.5.8., p. 171.
(y) Hutton on “Anglican Orders.”
Bdwardine Episcopal Edw. Bpis. Form,
Form, a.d. 1552. Altered, 1662.
Take the Holy G-host,and Receive the Holy Ghost
remember that thou stir for the office and work of a
up the grace of God, which Bishop in the Church of
is in thee, by imposition of God, now committed unto
hands, for God hath not thee by the imposition of
given us the spirit of fear, our hands ; In the name
but of power and love and of the Father, and of the
of soberness. Son. and of the Holy
Ghost. Amen. And re-
member that thou stir up
up the Grace of God
which is given thee by
this imposition of our
hands; for God hath not
given us the spirit of fear,
but of power and love and
soberness.
Bdwardine Form for Same Form, Altered
the Priesthood, a.d. 1662.
1552. Receive the Holy Ghost
Recaive the Holy Ghost, for the office and work of
Whose sins thou dost for- a Priest in the Church of
give, they are forgiven ; God, now committed unto
and whose sins thou dost thee by the imposition of
retain, they are retained, our hands. Whose sins
And be thou a faithful dis- thou dost forgive, etc. [as
penser of the Word of God. in that of 1552].
and of His Holy Sacra-
ments : In the name of the
Father and the Son and
the Holy Ghost. Amen.
You will easily see that the Episcopal
Form of 1552 does not fulfil the require-
ments laid down in the definition of a
sacrament. It in no way determines the
matter to the predestined end, and might
as fitly be used to appoint a lay-reader or
to administer confirmation. The words
“ Receive ye the Holy Ghost,” etc., are
Scriptural, but nowhere in the Bible are
they given as the form of orders, and
they to whom they were addressed were
already priests.
Moreover, these words are to be found
in no ordinal in the West earlier than
the 14th century,(if) and cannot therefore
be the form of orders. The latter part of
the Edwardine form is the compilation
of Cranmer and his crew, who thus swept
away the whole of that part of the service
by which, for the first fourteen centuries,
orders had been conferred, and substi-
tuted in its place an addition claiming no
higher authority than the 14th century.
This change they effected with a view to
putting an end for ever to “ sacerdotal
pretensions,” and because they believed
that orders were one of those things “ not
to be counted for sacraments of the
gospel, being such as have grown partly
(to) Martine De Antiquis’ “ Ecclesia
Bilibus,” 461, art. x.


of the corrupt following of the apostles,
partly are states of life allowed in the
Scripture, but yet have not the nature
of the sacraments with baptism and the
Lord’s Supper, for that they have not any
visible sign or ceremony ordained bv
God.” (Articles of ihe Church, No. 25.)
We will next examine the Edwardine
form for the priesthood, though, of
course, it matters little what that was,
if they who used it were no true bishops;
still its examination will, I am sure,
clearly show you how thoroughly the
reformers did their work and how radical
was the change effected. That you may
see this the more clearly, I will briefly
point out the course followed in the
Roman pontifical:—“ In this the Bishop,
in ordaining a priest, first imposes both
hands on the head of each of the
ordinandi successively, without saying
anything, and all the priests present do
the same. This is the first imposition of
hands. He then says three prayers,
during the first of which he and all the
priests present hold their right hand
extended over the ordinandi. After this
he puts on each the sacred vestments and
says the prayer, ‘ Deus sanctificationum.’
Having then anointed the hands of each
with the holy oil, he delivers to each the
chalice containing wine and water, and
the paten upon it, with a host thereon,
saying the words, ‘ Receive power to offer
sacrifice to God, and to celebrate Masses
as well for the living as the dead, in the
name of the Lord.’ ”(*) From this point
Mass is continued, the newly ordained
concelebrates with the Bishop, and thus
exercises the sacrifical office he has
received. After this, towards the close
of the ceremony, he kneels once more
before the bishop, who lays both hands
on his head, saying, “ Receive ye the
Holy Ghost. Whosoever sins ye remit,”
etc. In the prayer “Deus Sanctifica-
tionum,” mentioned above, occur the
words, “ That they may, by immaculate
benediction, transform bread and wine
into the body and blood of Thy Son.” In
this, and in the delivery of the instru-
ments (chalice and paten), with the
accompanying words, “ Receive power to
offer sacrifice to God,” you have what I
(x) Canon Escourt on “ Anglican Orders,”
may call the keynote of the ordinal.
Valid orders impart a new and inefface-
able character, and give power to offer
Christ in sacrifice for the living and the
dead, and sacramentally to absolve the
members of His mystical body, the
Church. It was this power the reformers
wished to efface, and therefore they
changed the whole nature of the rite.
They deliberately intended to do away
with the orders of the Catholic Church,
of which they said, “ Keep to yourselves
your stinking, greasy, anti-Christiail
orders. We abhor, defy, detest, and
spit at them.”
To effect this they swept away the
tradition of the instruments, which, with
the accompanying words, was considered
by many theologians to be the matter and
form of the sacrament. They did away
with all mention of sacrifice, and they
devised a form containing no allusion
to any distinctive office of the
order to be conferred—an omission
which vitiates the form and renders
the sacrament null and void. In-
stead of the delivery of chalice and
paten with the words “ Receive power to
offer sacrifice to (rod and say masses for
the living and the dead,” they delibe-
rately substituted the handing of a Bible
with the words, “Take thou authority to
preach the word of God and to minister
the sacraments to this congregation.” No
longer did they wish for “ massing
priests ” having power to offer the
holy sacrifice, but they desired and ob-
tained in their place a number of officials
who should decently and in order be ad-
mitted to the ecclesiastical department of
the civil service, and should, under State
supervision, preach, teach, and minister
to the people.
Henry VIII. caused those who main-
tained the spiritual supremacy of Christ’s
Vicar to be ripped up in each other’s
presence, their arms torn off, and their
hearts cut out and rubbed upon their
mouths and faces. Cranmer and Eliza-
beth used “arguments” equally con-
vincing to stamp out faith in holy orders
and the sacrifice of the Mass. Can we
wonder that many yielded to the force of
such arguments ?
I have in this letter tried to show you
that those who formed the Anglican


ordinal of 1552 not only did away with
the delivery of the instruments, not only
suppressed all those parts of the ordinal
which refer to the sacrificial character of
the priesthood, not only omitted the
unction, but did all this with the de-
liberate intention of doing away with
“ the greasy stinking orders ” of the
Catholic Church, and that they devised
an ordinal, the form of which in no way
determines the matter to the prescribed
end, and which is invalid.
Yours sincerely,
A. B. E.
Letter Vil.
My dear Friend—lt now behoves us to
see whether Parker was ever consecrated,
and if so, whether Barlow, who was the
consecrator, was himself a bishop, as, if
not, the ceremony was null and void.
First as to Parker’s consecration. It
was at the time supposed by many to
have taken place at a profane ceremony
performed at a public-house called the
Nag’s Head, but I will merely quote this
supposition as proof of the current
disbelief in Anglican orders. It is certain
that, for some reason or other, Protestants
were unable to answer the taunts of
Catholics as to the want of orders in
their communion, and as to the absence of
any proof of Parker’s consecration during
the whole of Elizabeth’s reign. They
evaded the question. Catholics naturally
thought that Parker had not been conse-
crated ; but the fact that his consecrator
was himself unconsecrated was, I think,
the reason of their silence.
When at the time Catholics urged
that Archbishop Parker had not been
duly consecrated, he did not reply by
producing the register of his consecration
which would have put the fact beyond
dispute, but applied for, and obtained, an
Act of Parliament to remedy any defects
there might have been therein —and the
register itself was not produced or
specifically alluded to for more than 50
years afterwards, not indeed until every
one named in it was dead.
It is also significant that there are
many facts connected with the entry of
Parker’s consecration in the Lambeth
Register that render it probable that it
was not entered contemporaneously with
the supposed event, such, for instance,
as that one Nicholas Ballinghara is
mentioned as Archdeacon of Lincoln,
which he was not until long after the date
mentioned. Moreover, the entry is made
with much detail, and bears marks of
having been carefully worded with a view
to anticipated objections. In this it is
unlike any other entry in the register ;
and the volume in which it occurs is
evidently a new volume and a clean copy
of a former one.
Canon Estcourt, in his work on
“Anglican Orders,” proves conclusively
that the Lambeth Register is not the
original record of what took place, but a
glossed version thereof, in which certain
awkward facts are suppressed, and that it
is, in short, a cooked copy,(y)
A copy of the original record has been
preserved in the Fox MSS. in the
British Museum. It differs considerably
from the entry in the Lambeth Register.
We shall find that three important
alterations have been made. In this copy
it states :—l. That the ordinal of Edward
YI. was used. 2. That Barlow was the
consecrator, and the other three his
assistants 3. It gives the dates of the
respective consecrations of those who
assisted in the ceremony and the names
of their consecrators, though unable to
do more for Barlow than vaguely saying,
“It was in the reign of Henry VIII.,”
name and date both being wanting.
The cooked entry in the Lambeth
Register ; —l. Makes no reference to the
ordinal of Edward VI., but says the
prayers used were juxta forman libri
audoritate parliament editi (at that date
no such book had any legal existence).
2. It attempts to evade the weight of the
flaw of Barlow’s non-consecration by
making all four appear to have been
consecrators, although at all consecrations
one only is consecrator, and the others
merely assistants; and although the
ordinal of Edward VI. expressly calls
them “ the other bishops present.” 3. It
makes no mention of the consecration or
consecrators of any of the four, thus con-
cealing the omission in Barlow’s case.
(y) Estcourt on “ Anglican Orders,” chap.
iii.


The Lambeth Register was not produced
till the reign of James I. He was a
strong advocate for episcopacy, and early
in his reign he became dissatisfied with
the evidence of valid orders in the
Anglican communion, and it is said that
he entered into secret negotiations with
Henry YI. of France to import real
bishops from that country. This fell
through. It was probably to convince
him that the revised edition of the
Lambeth Register was produced for the
first time by Mason.
There was an outcry of incredulity and
astonishment among Catholics when
Mason’s register appeared, and in order
to quell this four Catholic priests were
brought out of prison by Archbishop
Abbot and ordered to inspect it in his
presence and that of the Bishops of Ely,
Lincoln, London, and Rochester, and to
bear testimony as to its genuineness.
They, not being experts, failed to detect
any forgery ; but begged to be allowed to
examine it more at leisure before
deciding. This request was refused,
and they were sent back to prison.
Qui s'excuse s'accuse , and I think that
this action speaks volumes.
For fifty years Catholics had taunted
Anglican bishops with having no orders,
and had challenged them to show their
credentials ; said they were not conse-
crated, but were merely bishops by royal
authority, and that Parker was himself
no bishop. Surely if the Lambeth
ceremony had really occurred, and that
Barlow, the consecrator, had been him-
self a bishop, the advocates of Anglican
orders would have answered by referring
to the Lambeth Register ; whereas it was
not till after fifty years, and when every-
body who had taken part in it was dead,
that Mason announced its existence.
Harding specially taunted Jewell with
this want of consecration, and defied him
to prove that he was validly ordained.
Jewell answered boldly enough until
Harding said — 4 ‘ But who laid hands on
your archbishop (Barlow) 1 ” Then
answered he never a word.(2) On Sep-
tember 9, 1559, the Queen issued a royal
mandate to four Catholic and two Pro-
testant bishops, directing them to con-
(z) Harding’s “ Detection,” fol. 234.
secrato and confirm one Parker, a
notorious Protestant and chaplain to the
Queen, to the Archiepiscopal See of
Canterbury. Tunstal, who was to have
been the consecrator, together with two of
the other Catholic bishops, refused to act,
and were subsequently deprived of their
Sees with the rest of the Catholic
episcopate.
On the failure of the commission there
was, of course, an embarrassment, and a
correspondence ensued between Cecil (the
Secretary of State) and Parker. In the
State Paper Office there is a letter from
Parker, on which Cecil has appended two
marginal notes. One is about Edward's
ordinal, of which he writes—“ This is
not established by Parliament.” The
other is about the possibility of a conse-
cration under the circumstances, and he
says —“ There is no archbishop nor any
four bishops now to be had, wherefore
quasrendum.” They were clearly in a fix ;
but though baffled by Tunstal’s refusal to
consecrate, Elizabeth, furious that her
royal will should be thwarted, determined
to overcome the difficulty by exercising
her royal prerogative as supreme head
and fountain of ecclesiastical jurisdiction.
She therefore dispensed with the rites
and ceremonies of consecration, and pro-
claimed Parker in a solemn act Arch-
bishop of Canterbury. Later on she
issued a mandate to Kitchen, of Landalff
(a Catholic bishop who refused to take
part) ; Barlow, elect of Chichester;
Scory, elect of Hereford ; Miles Cover-
dale, Bishop Suffragan of Bedford ; John,
Suffragan of Hetford ; and Bale, Bishop
of Ossory, to consecrate Parker. This
mandate contained an additional clause by
which the Queen of her supreme authority
supplied all deficiency in the acts done by
them, or in the person, or state, or faculty
of any of them, such being the necessity of
the case and the urgency of the time, (a)
This was the mandate, and Barlow,
assisted by Scory, Coverdale, and
Hodgkins, confirmed the election of
Parker in their own words—“ By the
(a) “ State Papers,” Domestic, Elizabeth,
vol. ii., October-December, kept in Public
Record Office. A facsimile of this document
will be found in “ Anglican Orders,” by
Canon Estcourt, p. 88.


supreme authority of the said most
serene lady our Queen, supplying by the
supreme royal authority
delegated to us, all defects in the elec-
tion, as well as in those things done by
us, or that are, or shall be in ourselves,
or in the condition, state, or capacity of
any of us for this performance.” It
seems to me clear that the “ defects ”
referred to in the state (statu) of any of
them was the want of orders on the part
of Barlow.
Later on authorisation was sought and
obtained from Parliament (Ist Elizabeth)
for the omission of the ceremonies, and
on March 21 a Bill was read a second
time—“ That the Queen shall collate
or appoint bishops, the bishoprics being
vacant, and that without rites or cere-
monies.” And the point worth noticing
is that the mandates of Henry for the
restitution of the temporalities to a new
bishop were to this effect, —“Whereas such
a chapter and such a See has, by our
permission first obtained, elected such a
person, and whereas the Archbishop of
Canterbury has, by his letters to us, signified
that he has consecrated that person, and
invested him with episcopal authority ; we,
by these present, charge you, the escheator,
to surrender the temporalities.” In the
case of Parker the words, “ And whereas
we have given our royal assent and have
received his fealty due to us for the said
bishopric,” were substituted for those
printed in italics. What was the reason
for the change ? The reason was that
Parker had received no valid consecration,
and that, therefore, the ordinary words
were inapplicable to him. lam not here
contending whether a service did or did not
take place “ between 5 and 6 one morning
by torchlight in Lambeth Chapel ” ; but
that, even if it did, there was no conse-
cration, insomuch as Barlow, who is said
to have officiated, was himself no bishop.
Those who are said to have taken part in
the ceremony thought little, and cared
less, about consecration.
The royal authority made bishops and,
as Elizabeth informed one of them,
“ could unmake them.” They were state
officials, and the crown, the “ source and
fountain” of all ecclesiastical power, could,
it saw fit, dispense with the ceremony
of their consecration ; from it they derived
heir orders as well as their mission and
jurisdiction. The source of their mission
is clearly pointed out by a well-known
High Church writer (now a Catholic) who,
before leaving them, asked his brother
clergymen the following questions:—
“ Whence did the Legal Primate Parker
get his mission as a Christian bishop ? By
whom was he sent?” And he adds,
“ Certainly not from the apostolic source
from which all his predecessors had
received it, not from the Catholic
Episcopate of England.” They were
deprived, banished, imprisoned, or
“ interned” in private houses ; not from
the four See-less and letters-patented
creatures of the crown, who confirmed his
election and were supposed to give him a
sham consecration ; but he did get it from
Elizabeth, and acknowledges in his act of
homage that “ He holds his bishopric as
well in spirituals as in temporals from her
alone of the crown royal. ”
1 will end this letter by giving you an
account of Parker’s consecration, written
by one who lived in the time of Elizabeth.
“ When Elizabeth,” says Sanders,
“ restored the law for making bishops,
according to which the Queen’s prelates
were to be ordained, it was required
that besides the metropolitan, or with his
consent, two or three bishops should assist
and impose hands on them. But it fell
out ridicuously that when these super-
intendents were to be created, they could
not prevail with the Catholic bishops to
impose hand on them; and among
their own party they had not three, or
even two, bishops by whose hands or
consent they might be ordained.
They were very pressing with an Irish
archbishop, whom they at the time were
keeping in prison in London, to help
them in this necessity, and offered him
his liberty and other rewards if he would
be the principal in their ordination ; but
the good man could not for any con-
sideration be induced to impose con-
secrated hands on heretics, or to be a
partaker in other men’s sins And thus,
as they were without any legitimate
ordination, and were commonly said and
proved, even by English law, to be no
bishops, they were obliged to call in the
aid of the secular arm and to obtain the
confirmation of the lay government in a
subsequent Parliament, so that by tha
authority, whatever in the previous


might and would serve their turn. . . .
I say, therefore, that by the verdict of
Holy Scripture, and the practice of
the primitive Church, these men are
no bishops Your pre-
consecration had been improperly done
or omitted, or otherwise than the
Statute prescribed, might be condoned
them, although after they had filled the
episcopal chair and discharged the office
of bishops for some years without epis-
copal consecration. Hence the name was
given them of Parliamentary bishops.”( 6)
Surely the above facts will convince
you that, viewed historically, Anglican
orders are, at best, doubtful ; whereas,
viewed theologically, they are certainly
invalid. Even were their validity merely
doubtful, would you not be running a
terrible risk by trusting to them when
sacraments of undoubted validity are to
be had ?
Yours sincerely,
A. B. E.
Letter VIII.
My dear Friend—ln your last letter
you express an opinion that Anglican
orders were not always repudiated by the
Catholic Church; but so far is this from
being the case that immediately after the
alleged consecration of Parker, Catholics
taunted their opponents with the in-
validity of their orders. Dr. Stapleton
thus writes:—“ JNow the pretended
bishops of Protestantism—whereas the
whole number of our learned and
reverend pastors for confession of the
truth were displaced, none being left in
the realm having authority to consecrate
bishops or make priests, that being the
office of only bishops—by what authority
do they govern the fold of Christ’s flock ?
Who laid hands upon them ? Whither
went they to be consecrated into
France, Spain, or Germany—seeing that
at home there were no number of such as
tended bishops have no such ordi-
nation (as the ancient bishops had),
no such laying on of hands of other
bishops, no authority to make true priests
or ministers, and therefore neither are
( h ) Sanders De Schism Angl. 1 cl., colon.
1585, fol. 165-7.
ye true ministers, neither are they any
bishops at all.”(c) And he adds in
another place that these men had
“rushed into the ministry without any
imposition of hands and without any
ecclesiastical authority.”
Harding challenges Jewel in these
terms —“Ye have abandoned the external
sacrifice and priesthood of the New
Testament, and have not in your sect
consecrated bishops, and therefore being
without priests made with lawful laying
on of hands, as Scripture requireth, all
orders being given to bishops only, how
can you say that any among you can
lawfully minister, or that you have any
lawful ministers at all? You, Jewel,
bear yourself as if you were Bishop of
Salisbury. But how can you prove your
vocation ? By what authority usurp you
the administration of doctrine and the
sacraments ? What can you allege for
the right and proof of your ministry?
Who hath called you? Who hath laid
hands on you ? By what example hath
he done it ? How and by whom were
you consecrated ? Who hath sent you ?
Who hath committed you to the office
you take upon you ? Be you a priest or
be you not ? If you be not, how dare
you usurp the name and office of a
bishop ? If you be, tell us who gave you
orders ? The institution of a priest was
never yet but in the power of a bishop.
. Show us the letter of your
orders. At least show us that you have
received powers to the office you presume
to exercise, by due order of laying on of
hands and consecration. But order and
consecration you have not
Though the Prince has thus promoted
you, yet ye be presumers and trusters in
of yourselves. Well, lands and manors
the Prince may give you ; priesthood
and bishopric the Prince cannot give
you.”(d)
Bristow, who wrote about ten years
later than Harding or Stapleton, calls the
new ministers “ laymen, unsent, uncalled,
uncousecrated.”(e) “ The King of Eng-
land,” he says, “and the Queen, too,
( c ) Fortress of the Faith, Antwerp, 1565,
pp. 36, 141, 144.
( d ) Harding’s “ Conferenceof Jewel,”
( e ) “ Motives,” p. 9.


give their diplomas to whom they choose.
Then these carry themselves as bishops
and begin to ordain ministers We have
in England,” he adds, “to wit in the
case of Parker, Grindal, Saunders, Borne,
and others, many examples who, having
been ordained priests according to the
Catholic rite, were judged fit to be with-
out any ordination not only priests, but
also bishops, archbishops, and primates,
either by virtue of royal letters or by a
ridiculous consecration of those who had
received the power of consecrating only
from the Queen. ”(/) This Bristow waa
a trained theologian, and had carefully
examined the question.
Attacks such as these were for the
most part met with retorts to the effect
that Catholics might keep their orders to
themselves ; that they would have none
of them, for they loathed and spat upon
the stinking, greasy orders of the Catholic
Church, Nor did their practice in this
respect differ from their opinions;
indeed, so far is the necessity of epis-
copal ordination as a divine institution
from being part of the Anglican creed,
that it was not till the passing of the Act
of Uniformity in the reign of Charles 11,
that clergymen who officiated in the
Established Church were required to
have received it at all. Keble himself
owns that those who defended episcopacy
against the first Puritans nowhere venture
to urge the exclusive claim of an epis-
copal ministry or to connect the succession
with the validity of the holy sacraments.
They were quite content if they could
prove it to be an allowable and un-
objectionable form of government. He
admits that “ nearly up to the time when
Hooker wrote, numbers had been
admitted into the ministry of the Church
of England with no better than Presby-
terian ordination.”(gf) This statement of
Keble’s is fully borne out by the
following facts :
John Knox was offered a bishopric by
Edward VI., and when the offer was made
there waa no hint that re-ordination should
be required. John Morison, a minister
of the Scotch Church, crossed the border
and offered his services to the Archbishop
{/) “Motives,” p. 264-266.
(y) Keble’s “ Preface to Hooker,” p. 76.
of Canterbury in 1582. The brat point was
to receive a licence from hia Grace, which
waa given by hia Y.G. in the following
terrna :—“ Since you were admitted and
ordained to aacred ordera in the holy
miniatry by the impoaition of hands,
according to the laudable form and rite
of the Reformed Church of Scotland, we,
therefore, approving and ratifying the
form of your ordination and preferment,
grant to you by the express command of
the Rev. Father in God, Lord Edmund,
Archbishop of Canterbury, to celebrate
offices and to minister the sacraments,
etc., eto.(h)
Indeed, it is conceded on all hands
that, up to the Restoration, Presbyterian
clergymen were admitted without re-
ordination to the cure of souls and the
administration of the sacraments in the
Church of England. Bishop Fleetwood
says—“ We had many ministers from
Scotland and France and the Low
Countries who were ordained by presbyters
only, and not by bishops, and they were
instituted into benefices with cure of
souls, were not re-ordained, but only
subscribed the “ Articles.” Bishop Cosin
in 1650 affirms that the H nglish bishops
did not re-ordain French Protestant
ministers who wished to enter the English
establishment and qualify for the cure of
souls. This he states to have been his
own custom, and also that generally
followed. After all, who are the advocates
of Anglican orders I —only a few high
churchmen. The Catholic Church rejects
them, and so, too, does the Greek. Only
lately at the Bonn Conference the Greek
representative, when called upon fo accept
such orders as valid, utterly refused, and
Dr. Overbeck, speaking for the Greek
Church, in his book, “ Intercommunion
between the English and orthodox
Churches,” quotes a large number of
English divines to show that the
Established Church never recognized the
necessity of episcopal ordination. “ The
Roman Church,” he says, “ is rigorously
orthodox in re-ordaining ab initio con-
verted Anglicans, and the Eastern Church
can but imitate her proceedings.” He
adds, that “All further controversy is
broken off and disputably settled,” and
(A) “ Life of Grindal,” B. 2, c. 13.


that “the Greek Church does not
recognise the English Church to be a
church at all.”
Such, then, is the verdict of East and
West as to the validity of your orders,
and were I you, I should rejoice that it
is so. Remember that if valid orders
have been possessed by High Churchmen,
so, too, must they have been by Low and
Broad. Can you, then, think of the way
in which the sacraments have been
administered, without shuddering at the
awful sacrilege which would have been
entailed had Anglican orders been valid 1 ?
Yours sincerely,
A. B. E.
Letter IX.
My dear Friend —It is clear that if
Barlow was unconsecrated, then Parker’s
consecration was null and void. No man
can consecrate who is not himself a
bishop, and the fact of his having
episcopal assistants in no wise affects the
nullity of the act. It is admitted by all
that there is no documentary proof on
record of Barlow’s consecration. For the
last 25 years Anglicans have ransacked
every library and every register in the
hope of finding evidence of the fact, but
in vain. His confirmation in the See of
S. David’s is entered in Cranmer’s
Register, and a blank space is left, as
though to fill in the consecration when
that event took place. It was never
filled in. The grant of temporalities
generally mentions the fact of conse-
cration. Barlow’s does not, though it
does speak of his nomination by the
King, his election by the Chapter, and
his confirmation by Cranmer. In an
official document dated June 12 he is
styled “ elect of S. David’s.” At this
date he had already taken his seat in
Parliament, and was in possession of the
temporalities of the See. This document
was a warrant to the Garter King-at-Arms
from Thomas Cromwell, who was intimate
with Barlow, and would have known had
he been consecrated. No bishop after
his consecration was ever termed “bishop
elect yet no one maintains that Barlow
was consecrated after June 12, nor is it
likely that one who considered the
ceremony unnecessary and useless would
then trouble to undergo it. The fact that
a man was styled bishop proved nothing
in those days. This we see in the case of
Parker. If he were “ consecrated,” the
ceremony took place on December 17.
Now we have a document signed “ Per
iptam Reginam ,” addressed on the 20th
of the previous October “ To the Most
Rev. Father in Christ, Matthew, Arch-
bishop of Canterbury.” In addition to
this, it is clearly proved that he had
possession of his See in virtue of the
Queen’s election some two months before
his alleged consecration.
In examining this question you must
not forget the views and opinions of
Henry, whose obsequious tool Barlow
was. Henry had transferred the powers
of the keys to his own royal person, and
maintained that the ordering of bishops,
as well as their appointment, belonged of
right to him, i.e., that it was practically
included in his royal acts of nomination
and election. Archbishop Cranmer shared
his views. Is it, then, unlikely that
Barlow should have sought to please his
royal master by dispensing with a cere-
mony he himself believed to be useless ?
Remember that Barlow publicly main-
tained that —“ If the Kind’s grace, being
supreme head of the Church of England,
did choose, denominate, and elect any
layman (being learned) to be a bishop,
that he so chosen (without mention being
made of any orders) should be as good a
bishop as he is, or the best in England
that he also maintained that “ because
the Apostles lacked a higher power as not
having a Christian prince among them,
by that necessity they ordained other
bishops and that he asserted that
“ laymen have other while made priests,
and that in the New Testament no
consecration of bishops and priests is
required, but appointing to the office is
sufficient. ”
It was the policy of Barlow and of
Cranmer to exalt in every way the
authority and supremacy of their royal
head. Nor can we wonder if no limit
was placed to the power of him (or her)
who was by Cranmer styled “The Vice-
regent of God on earth.” This title was
given by Cranmer to Edward VI. in his
coronation speech.
Yours sincerely,
A. B. E.


Letter X
My dear Friend—There is one fact to
which I have not yet alluded, and yet it
is a fact which renders unnecessary any
examination of the validity of Anglican
orders. I refer to the uncertainty of
baptism in the Church of England. Even
had Barlow been consecrated, and had
the rite used been a valid one, Anglican
orders would still be doubtful. You
know that unless a man be baptised he is
not a Christian, and therefore can receive
no other sacrament. You know, too,
that every Protestant minister who is
received into the Catholic Church is con-
ditionally baptised —in other words,
doubts are entertained as to the validity
of his former baptism. Nor are these
doubts groundless. Of course, now-a-days,
invalid baptisms are rare ; but before
the High Church movement such was not
the case. For a very long time baptisms
in England and Scotland were adminis-
tered in so careless a manner that it is
certain that many of those brought to the
font (or basin) were never baptised at all.
Cardinal Newman says —“ When I was
in the Anglican Church I saw enough of
the lax administration of baptism, even
among High Churchmen, though they
did not, of course, intend it, to fill me
with great uneasiness. Of course there
are definite persons whom one might
point out whose baptisms were sure to be
valid ; but my argument has nothing to
do with present baptisms. Bishops were
baptised not lately, but as children. The
present bishops were consecrated by
other bishops; they again by others.
What I have seen in the Anglican Church
makes it very difficult for me to deny that
every now and then a bishop was a con-
secrator who had never been baptised.
Some bishops have been brought up in
their youth as Presbyterians, others as
Dissenters, others as Low Churchmen,
others have been baptised in the careless
perfunctory way once so common ; there
is therefore too much reason to believe
that some consecrators were not bishops,
for the simple reason that, formally
speaking, they were not Christians. ”(i)
(i) Essays Critical and Historical, vol. ii.,
P. iii.
Many High Churchmen have admitted
the substantial justice of the doubts
which Catholics have expressed about
baptisms administered by Anglicans
before the modern High Church revival.
The Reunion Review, the official organ of
the S.P.C. R., publishes an article on
“ Baptism in the Church of England,” in
which are letters that show that Bishop
Alford openly baptised fourteen adults by
once flicking his finger in the air over all
of them.(j) This Bishop Alford is the
same who “ warned people to be on their
guard against accepting the fashionable
doctrine of baptismal regeneration.” The
same magazine publishes some carefully
arranged statistics, which show that in
some parishes just 4 per cent, of the
children never are baptised, and in others
on an average about 9 per cent. Dr. Lee,
Vicar of All Saints’, Lambeth, states
that * ‘ since the infamous Gorham judg-
ment not more than 15 per cent, of the
people in our cities and large towns are
baptised at all.”(&)
Mr. Bennett, Vicar of Frome, writes as
follows in the 6rst volume of the Church
and the World:—“ Baptism as a sacra-
ment was well-nigh lost among the
English people. Common basins were
brought into the churches, while the
fonts were made into flowerpots for the
garden of the parsonage. It is very
questionable whether water, when used,
really did touch the person meant to be
baptised.” With such testimony before
his eyes, it is not surprising that a well-
known Anglican writer exclaims—“ The
staggering thought is forced upon us that
baptism as it has been universally
admitted in past days, and is frequently
administered in the present, is possibly
no baptism at all, either in the sight of
God or of the Church of God.” The
same author goes on to state that there
is good reason to fear that the consecra-
tion of a dozen living Anglican prelates
were invalid, because the bishop so-called
who consecrated them was not himself
baptised, and that consequently the
(j) Reunion Magazine, vol. i., pp. 77, 94,
(It) The Church under Elizabeth, vol. i.,


ordination of about two thousand living
Anglicans ordained by these bishops are
on this score invalid. ( I ) This, remember,
is the testimony of an Anglican High,
Churchman.
This neglect of baptism in the Church
of England was an outcome of the dis-
belief in supernaturalism. For fully a
hundred years baptism was regarded as a
mere ceremony for naming, nothing more ;
one of the laws governing the religious
department of the Civil Service ; a wise
provision for admission into the State
Church, so that all might be done
decently and in order. Baptismal re-
generation, which since the Gorham
controversy is an open question in the
Church of England, was then generally
ignored, and thus baptism came to be
considered as a mere form, and was often
neglected. This neglect is, in itself,
sufficient to render the validity of
Anglican orders extremely doubtful.
Hooker thus bears testimony to the
views held by the reforming party of
1588. He says—“ Baptising of infants,
although confessed by themselves to have
been continued ever since the very
Apostles’ own times, yet they altogether
condemned ... the eucharist they
received after supper. ”(w) Baring Gould,
a celebrated High Church divine, is
responsible for the following, which
testifies to the disregard of baptism in
recent times—“ln a parish on the Cornish
side of the Tamar, some little while ago,
the newly appointed rector, turning over
the register of baptisms in the vestry,
was much astonished at seeing entries of
the christening of boys only. ‘ Why,
Richard,’said he to the clerk, ‘however
comes this about ? Are there only boys
born in this place 1' ‘ Please, your
reverence, ’taint that ; but as they won’t
take the girls into the dockyard at
Devenport, ’taint no good baptising
them. ’ The boys were christened only for
the sake of the register requisite to pre-
sent on admission to the Government
dockyard. ”( n )
(l) The Reunion Magazine , Oct., 1877.
p. 54. See also “ Pastoral of the 0.C.R.”
( m) Hooker’s Preface, 1186, vol. i., Hooker’s
Works. Ed. Keble, Oxford, 1845.
(n) “ Old Country Life,” by Baring Gould,
London.
There is but one other subject to
which I will allude. I have said so much
of the designs and opinions of the
Reformers that it is superfluous to state
that they had no intention of conferring
sacerdotal orders —indeed, their fixed
determination was to do away with what
they termed “ the greasy, stinking orders
of the Catholic Church.” This want of
“ intention” is in itself enough to render
the validity of the action more than
doubtful. Our Lord instituted the
sacraments as human actions —actus
humanus the actions of reasonable
beings, not mere charms or magic. All
theologians agree that if there be an
absence of “ intention ” the act does not
come under this head. Think you that
a priest in a lunatic asylum who remem-
bers the words of consecration used in the
Mass, and imagines they were those used
for grace ; think you, I say, that he
would consecrate the bread and wine on
the table should he use the words before
his meals ? Do you suppose that a bishop
who, in explaining to a class of boys the
rite of confirmation, places his hands on
one of their heads and recites the form of
the sacrament ? Do you suppose that he
unintentionally administers confirmation ?
Or, again ; in some Masses the words of
consecration occur in the gospel while the
bread and wine are on the altar, will any
one maintain that the consecration takes
place then and there 1 Surely, to believe
thus would make the words act as a mere
charm, and degrade the dignity of a
sacrament. If, then, this absence of
intention invalidates the act, how much
more would the intentional using of a
rite framed for the express purpose of
blotting out sacerdotalism be powerless to
confer valid orders ?
We have seen that the ordinal of
Edward VI., which was in use for 100
years, is wanting in the essential of a
sacramental rite, inasmuch as it possesses
no form which determines the matter to
the prescribed end, and that it is there-
fore powerless to confer valid orders.
You have admitted that it is doubtful
if Barlow, the supposed consecrator of
Parker, was ever himself consecrated;
and I have, 1 think, proved to you both
the absence of intention on the part of
the Reformers and the uncertainty of
baptism in the Church of England.


Once more let me remind you that the
validity of Anglican orders is not the
vital question. Hold what opinion you
like on the subject, but examine well
whether you are, or are not, in the true
Church ; whether you are united to the
Head, as must be all living members of a
body ? It is useless for you to say that
Christ is the Head of the Church, for He,
too, is, par excellence, the prophet, priest,
and king. He has built up a living body,
and has delegated His prerogative to men
for the “edification of that body.”
Remember that if Christ be God, and if
He established a visible Church, founded
on Peter as on a rock, then you endanger
your salvation by remaining outside this
ark of salvation. The marks by which
you are to know the true Church are
simple. She is one, holy Catholic and
Apostolic. Let me, therefore, beg of you
to leave side issues alone, and to seek
that Church that has unity, sanctity,
Catholicity, and apostolicity for its
“ notes.” He who through his own fault
is outside the pale of the visible Church
cannot be saved, and the possession of
valid orders by such a one will but
increase his guilt and responsibility.
That God may give you grace to be
received into the one True Fold, where
alone there is “ peace and joy in
believing,” is the sincere prayer of,
Yours faithfully,
Printed at The Southern Cross Office, 28, Waymouth Street, Adelaide.






