

Third Series
PAPERS FOR WAR TIME. No. 32
Are We to Punish
Germany, if We Can?
By
A. CLUTTON-BROCK
Price Twopence
HUMPHREY MILFORD
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
LONDON EDINBURGH GLASGOW NEW YORK
TORONTO MELBOURNE BOMBAY


PAPERS FOR WAR TIME
First Series. Already published .
1. CHRISTIANITY AND WAR. By the Rev. W.
Temple, M.A.
2. ARE WE WORTH FIGHTING FOR? By the
Rev. Richard Roberts.
8. THE WOMAN S PART. By Mrs. Luke Paget.
4. BROTHERS ALL: THE WAR AND THE
RACE QUESTION. By Edwyn Bevan, M.A.
5. THE DECISIVE HOUR: IS IT LOST ? By J. H.
Oldham, M.A.
6. ACTIVE SERVICE; THE SHARE OF THE
NON-COMBATANT. By the Rev. W. R. Maltby.
7. THE WAR SPIRIT IN OUR NATIONAL LIFE.
By the Rev. A. Herbert Gray, M.A.
8. CHRISTIAN CONDUCT IN WAR TIME. By
W. H. Moberly, M.A.
9. THE WITNESS OF THE CHURCH IN THE
PRESENT CRISIS. By X.
10. THE REAL WAR. By the Rev. W. E. Orchard.
D.D.
11. LOVE CAME DOWN AT CHRISTMAS. By
Professor G. Hare Leonard, M.A.
12. AN ANSWER TO BERNHARDI. By the Rev.
Professor D. S. Cairns, D.D.




Third Series
PAPERS FOR WAR TIME No. 32
ARE WE TO PUNISH
GERMANY, IF WE CAN?
By
A. CLUTTON-BROCK
HUMPHREY MILFORD
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
LONDON EDINBURGH GLASGOW NEW YORK
TORONTO MELBOURNE BOMBAY
1915




BASIS OF PUBLICATION
This series of Papers is issued under the auspices of a Com-
mittee drawn from various Christian bodies and political
parties, and is based on the following convictions :
1. That Great Britain was in August morally bound to
declare war and is no less bound to carry the war
to a decisive issue ;
2. That the war is none the less an outcome and a revela-
tion of the un-Christian principles which have dominated
the life of Western Christendom and of which both the
Church and the nations have need to repent;
3 That followers of Christ, as members of the Church, are
linked to one another in a fellowship which transcends
all divisions of nationality or race ,
4. That the Christian duties of love and forgiveness are as
binding in time of war as in time of peace ;
5. That Christians are bound to recognize the insufficiency
of mere compulsion for overcoming evil, and to place
supreme reliance upon spiritual forces and in particular
upon the power and method of the Cross ;
6. That only in proportion as Christian principles dictate
the terms of settlement will a real and lasting peace
be secured ;
7. That it is the duty of the Church to make an altogether
new effort to realize and apply to all the relations
of life its own positive ideal of brotherhood and
fellowship ;
8. That with God all things are possible.


ARE WE TO PUNISH GERMANY,
IF WE CAN?
It is a doctrine of civilization that a nation at war must
consider two things, namely, its own victory and survival,
and the future relations of all civilized peoples. It is the
second consideration that has produced international
law, according to which nations still have duties to each
other when they are at war, because they have duties
to the future of mankind, which includes their own
future. There is no judge or policeman to enforce inter-
national law ; yet it exists because of a common faith of
the nations in each other. They lay down rules in the
quiet of peace to restrain themselves in the heat of war;
and these are like good resolutions that we make when
we are not tempted, so that we may remember them
when we are tempted, and so that we may not break
them and be treacherous to ourselves.
International law assumes that war is an abnormal
state, an evil, and a threat to all civilization. Its aim is
to make the threat as little dangerous as possible ; to
prevent the exasperation of war from lasting into the
peace that is sure to follow ; and to confine the war to
the original cause of quarrel, so that, when that is decided


by the event, the war may not be continued merely
because of the manner in which it has been conducted.
Quarrels in some barbarous nations become blood-feuds
lasting from one generation to another, and it is one of
the chief duties of a family to carry on its blood-feud.
International law tries to prevent wars from becoming
blood-feuds and from wrecking all civilization by their
persistence.
When nations at war keep agreements which they
have made in peace, they still have some civilized relation
with each other, so that, after the war is over, they can
fall back easily into their normal state of friendliness,
feeling that the quarrel was about some particular point
and not a quarrel for ever or to the death. But if agree-
ments are made in peace and broken in war, there will
be a greater exasperation than if there had been no
agreement at all; the war, whatever its result, will not
end the quarrel ; the peace will be one of exhaustion
rather than of reconciliation, poisoned by memories of
the manner in which the war was conducted.
So it is important that agreements made in peace
should be kept in war, merely because they are agreements,
and because the breaking of them produces a lasting re-
sentment and a general insecurity. A nation that refuses
to enter into any international agreements threatens
ARE WE TO PUNISH GERMANY—


civilization and its own future less than one which breaks
agreements it has made. If it does that, it will seem to
have made the agreements only so that it might have the
advantage of unexpectedly breaking them ; and this is an
advantage for which it will not soon be forgiven. That
seems now to be the case of the Germans. They undertook
not to use poisonous gases in war, as they undertook not
to violate Belgium neutrality; and in both cases they have
gained an advantage by breaking their agreement. We
cannot tell how far this bad faith was meant from
the first. Probably they always meant to violate
Belgian neutrality but not to use poisonous gases.
They may have entered into most of their agreements
meaning to keep them. Unfortunately they could 'not
conceive of a war in which Germany would not soon make
her victory certain. They were ready to keep their
agreements, or some of them, so long as her victory
seemed certain ; but when the certainty vanished, then,
they felt, the agreements must vanish too ; and they
must get what advantage they could by breaking them.
This is a war, they say, of life and death ; and what do
agreements matter compared with the survival of Ger-
many ? Hence their growing disregard for all inter-
national law, both in its main principles and in its details,
a disregard which has culminated so far in the use of
poisonous gases and in the sinking of the Lusitania.
IF WE CAN ?


The war is a life-and-death struggle, they say ; and
they will make it as desperate as possible. They do not
look beyond it to the future peace, because that will be
made by the crushing of one side or the other ; and there
will not be enough left of the losers to feel exasperation
or, at any rate, to vent it. That, of course, is nonsense,
as the war of 1870 proves. The Germans will not cease to
be a nation, if they lose ; nor shall we, if they win.
There will always be enough of us left to desire revenge
and to make that desire a danger to Germany. But the
Germans will not believe that now. We cannot, at present,
make any appeal to their reason. We must, therefore,
consider only the question of our own conduct.
In discussing this it is worse than useless to express
amiable sentiments vaguely or to lament the general
wickedness of war. These particular crimes are not part
of the general wickedness of war ; and it only exasperates
people now to tell them that every nation at war is
equally guilty, because it is not true. We have to dea
with a situation in which one nation thinks nothing of the
future of Europe and wages war with no thought except
of victory. She does not care whether she wrecks civiliza-
tion in the process. If she wins, by whatever means,
civilization is secured ; if she loses, it will be destroyed.
That is her belief ; and so victory is her only aim, beyond
ARE WE TO PUNISH GERMANY—


which she does not look. The question is, therefore,
whether this recklessness of hers is to impose the same
recklessness upon us. Whether we too are to forget the
future of civilization in our effort to punish Germany and
defend ourselves. There is, of course, a real danger that
we shall catch her recklessness, if she is strong enough
to win further victories of moment. Our exasperation
will grow with her success, especially if she succeeds
through her breaking of international law. Then this
may become a war as religious, or as irreligious, as the
Thirty Years’ War and may end in a general and lasting
demoralization.
But we can separate in our minds the effort to defend
ourselves from the effort to punish Germany ; and this
separation is important as concerning our motive.
There are people—and it is very natural —who wish
not only to defeat the Germans, but to punish them for
the manner in which they are conducting the war. But
at once the question arises, If we are going to try to
punish the Germans, what Germans shall we succeed in
punishing, and will the German nation regard it as
punishment ? Let us take the case of gases. The gas
used by the Germans not only puts those who are over-
come by it out of action ; it also causes them to suffer
great pain for a long time afterwards. Now, it may be
IF WE CAN ?


that we could discover a gas which would put our enemies
out of action, but would not afterwards cause them pain.
Suppose, then, that we used, not this gas, but the painful
gas, with the object of punishing the Germans : those
Germans whomfwe should punish would be poor soldiers
who had used the German gas only because they were
told to do so, and most of whom were fighting for their
country from a sense of duty. The Germans themselves,
perhaps, have used a painful gas because they thought
that we deserved punishment for our misdeeds ; and we
can see in a moment the cruelty and injustice of making
our soldiers suffer for the supposed wickedness of Sir
Edward Grey. Now Ido not believe for a moment that we
or our allies would use a painful gas, where a painless one
would serve, with the object of punishing the Germans.
I only give it as an obvious instance of the cruelty and
injustice of reprisals in war, or indeed of any attempt to
punish a nation. To those who make the attempt it is a
nation that they punish, but to the nation punished it is
individual men, or women and children, who suffer ; and
they are only enraged at the injustice and cruelty of it,
as we are at this moment, when we think of our soldiers
choking with the gas or our defenceless countrymen and
women drowning in the sea. When one nation tries to
punish another, it is never the nation that suffers or is
conscious of punishment. The nation is conscious only
ARE WE TO PUNISH GERMANY—


of the wrong done to individual members of it and of
a desire to avenge that wrong.
Thus reprisals, if they are meant to punish, punish
the wrong people ; and, if they are meant to deter, they
have the opposite effect. We have seen that already in
our ‘ special treatment 5 of the. prisoners from German
submarines and in the eagerness with which the Germans
took revenge for it. If they were at all afraid of us or
our threats, they would never have bombarded Scar-
borough. They are not considering the question how they
shall pay the bill if they lose. They are not going to
lose, they think, but to win through their desperation;
and the more we punish them the more they will punish
us, or rather those innocent and unfortunate Englishmen
whom they are able to punish. Are we, therefore, going
to make our soldiers and sailors suffer, because we want to
punish the Germans ? That is the first question we have
to ask ourselves, when we talk of punishment; and to
that there can be only one answer.
But there is a further question that we have to ask
ourselves, and one that is more important still and perhaps
more unpleasant. When we wish to punish the Germans,
why do we wish to punish them ? Our immediate answer,
if we do not stop to think, will be that we wish to punish
them so that they may never do the like again. But is
that the real reason ? That is a question which every one
IF WE CAN ?


must answer for himself ; only it is his duty to find the
true answer. There is nothing very wicked in desiring
vengeance upon the Germans at this moment; at least
most human beings would desire it; but to deceive yourself
about your own motives is dangerous to yourself and to
others. Therefore we must not tell ourselves that we
wish to punish the Germans for the good of civilization,
if our real desire is to take revenge on them ; for in that
case we shall assume the most important point at issue,
namely that our revenge will be for the good of civilization.
Now it is through assuming points of this kind, and
through supposing that their instinctive purposes are
moral purposes, that the Germans have reached their
present state of mind. Their crimes are great, but not
such as no other nation could commit, and they have not
committed them because they wished to be wicked. On
the contrary they, like us, pride themselves on their
moral sense, only unfortunately they have made it flatter
their instincts. They wish to win, and they have told
themselves that it is for the good of the world that they
should win. Hence they do not care how they win, since
their victory will be good in itself. We must not fall into
the same error, lest we commit crimes like theirs. We must
not tell ourselves that our revenge is for the good of the
world ; for, if we do, we shall not care how we take it.
Let us therefore assume that we have a very natural
ARE WE TO PUNISH GERMANY—


desire for revenge, and, having assumed that, let us ask
whether it is for the good of the world that we should take
it. All experience of revenge in the past will tell us that
it is not. Revenge always breeds revenge, and no nation
was ever convinced of its misdeeds because vengeance
was taken for them. If we want to know what is the
best way of dealing with our enemy, we must concern
ourselves with his state of mind as well as our own.
We are filled with moral indignation against the Germans ;
but they are no less filled with moral indignation against
us. Nothing is easier for any mass of human beings than
to feel moral indignation, especially when they are in
the wrong. It is in fact the means by which they protect
themselves against their consciousness of their own wrong.
And if revenge is taken upon them for that wrong, it
merely acts as fuel for their moral indignation. They
do not see it as revenge at all; for to do that would be to
admit that there was reason for revenge. They see it
only as gratuitous wickedness, for which they proceed to
take revenge, if they can. Therefore revenge, on one side
or on the other, never has any effect except to gratify the
instincts of those who take it.
Now we are not fighting this war to gratify our instincts.
We have said, a hundred times, that we are fighting it for
our own safety and the future of Europe; and we must
IF WE CAN ?


continue to fight it for those objects and for no others.
Revenge will not bring us safety ; it will do harm, not
good, to those of our countrymen who are in the enemy’s
power ; and it will prolong the war instead of shortening
it. For if the Germans see that we are fighting for revenge,
they will fight to escape the shame of it long after they
are hopeless of victory. If they saw this war only as
a trial of strength, they might confess defeat when they
were defeated. But if they see it as a war of vengeance,
they will fight on with growing recklessness and exaspera-
tion, as the Carthaginians fought the Romans in the
third Punic War. We may crush them, perhaps, but we
shall convince them, not of their wickedness but of ours.
And at the end we shall have to deal with a sullen and
ruined remnant, still a part of Europe, and still dreaming
of future vengeance and past heroism. We want to
teach them a lesson, as the saying is ; but it must be
one that they will learn. Napoleon tried to teach Prussia
a lesson ; but what Prussia learnt from him was the very
opposite of what he tried to teach ; and so it will be now
if we try to teach through vengeance.
We must make up our minds to it that, if the Germans
are to learn any useful lesson at all from the war, they
will learn it slowly through defeat and the inevitable
consequences of defeat, not through our anger against
them ; and further, that, while the war lasts, they will
ARE WE TO PUNISH GERMANY—


think it treachery to Germany to learn any useful lessons
whatever. The consequences of their policy and conduct
will become clear to them, not during the war, however
much they may suffer from it, but afterwards, when
they can consider calmly why they forced it and what they
have suffered from it. We have, probably, a wild desire
in our hearts to force them to see and confess their mis-
deeds. We dream of a broken and contrite nation abasing
itself before its triumphant enemies. We may be sure
that, whatever happens, that will not happen. We may
force the Germans on to their knees, but they will not
kneel and do penance from their own conviction of sin;
and our desire to see them kneel, however natural, is
not to be encouraged. Since we are men and not gods,
our business in this war is to conduct it with the aim not
of punishing our enemies but of securing a lasting peace
after it. And we must, therefore, make the securing of
peace our one problem and not confuse it with any other
problems suggested to us by our own sense of German
wickedness. We must see ourselves, in fact, not as
avenging angels but as policemen. The policeman is
a figure less glorious and beautiful than the avenging
angel ; but remember that Germany at this moment
thinks of herself as an avenging angel, and that is why
she seems a devil to the rest of the world. If we are
avenging angels to ourselves, we shall be devils to the
IF WE CAN ?


Germans and shall continue to be devils even when we
have taken vengeance. That is the way in which the
human mind works ; and our moral duty in this war
is to be aware of the way in which it works, both in our-
selves and in our enemies, and to act so that our actions
may have the best possible effect both on our own minds
and on theirs.
We may take it for granted that we all feel the German
wickedness and should all like to punish them for it.
There is no need to prove by strong language our sense
of their guilt, or our sorrow for the loss and suffering
which it has caused. We do not, in this matter, need to
think of ourselves and our own attitudes and emotions
at all; but only of what is best to be done, so that the
German crimes may not breed crimes between our children
and theirs, many of them orphan children already. If
we have a lust for vengeance, let us ask ourselves whether
we wish to take it on those children, whatever nation
they belong to. That question will make us forget our
own emotional luxuries in the desire to save all those
children from the calamities which their parents are
suffering. The cure for all sentimental savagery, for
all hysteria disguising itself as moral indignation,
for all egotism that calls itself patriotic, indeed for
self-deception of every kind, is in the thought of children
ARE WE TO PUNISH GERMANY—


and what is to be done for them. And that is not
only because of the strong tie of blood which binds
the father’s present to the future of his child, but also
because we see that children are children, and their
childishness is not disguised or staled to us by the
marks of age that ought to be experience.
But these German leaders, who think themselves gods
of war and set their faces fiercely so that they may
frighten the world, are only children, too, who have lost
all the charm of childhood with their own pretension of
wisdom and strength. They can do immeasurable harm
because there is no one to whip them and put them to
bed. We could laugh at their antics and at all this
childish hysteria of the German people, if it were not so
mischievous. But, though it has filled the world with
mourning and rage, it is still childish and pitiful and
blind. Their wickedness is naughtiness, defiant, hysteri-
cal, glutting itself upon its own violence. It has to be
restrained, if we can restrain it. German y must be m astered
and held down like a child that has lost all control of
itself, but not hated or shattered with a blind violence
like her own. For if we all give way to the childishness
that is in us, the world will become a hideous nursery
of murderous children, with no grown-up wisdom or
kindness to prevent them from shedding each other’s
blood ; until nothing is left but death and ruin. We have
IF WE CAN ?


the chance now to exercise that wisdom and also that
kindness which, if we cannot feel it for our enemies, we
must feel for our own children. And, if we feel it for
them and let it guide our hearts, it will not rob us of
courage and endurance, but it will make us desire what
we ought to desire in the conduct of the war ; and it will
show us how that desire may best be accomplished.
ARE WE TO PUNISH GERMANY—IF WE CAN?


PAPERS FOR WAR TIME
Second Series. Already published .
13. PATRIOTISM. By the Rev. Percy Dearmer, D.D.
14. SPENDING IN WAR TIME. By Professor E. J.
Urwick, M.A,
15. CHRISTIANITY AND FORCE. By Professor A. G.
Hogg, M.A.
16. GERMANY AND GERMANS. By Eleanor
McDougall, M.A.
17. PHARISAISM AND WAR. By F. Lenwood, M.A.
18. THE CURE FOR WAR. By A. Clutton-Brock.
19. OUR NEED OF A CATHOLIC CHURCH. By
the Rev. W. Temple, M.A.
20. WAR, THIS WAR AND THE SERMON ON
THE MOUNT. By Canon B. H. Streeter, M.A.
21. THE REMOVING OF MOUNTAINS. By the
Author of Pro Christo et Ecclesia.
22. INTERNATIONAL CONTROL. By Professor
W. G. S. Adams, M.A.
23. THE PRICE OF BLOOD. By Kenneth Maclennan.
24. BIOLOGY AND WAR. By Professor J. Arthur
Thomson, LL.D.


PAPERS FOR WAR TIME
Published at the rate of two papers each fortnight under the
auspices of a Committee drawn from various Christian bodies
and political parties, the editor beingtheßev. W.Temple,M. A.
Price 2d. each; Is. Cd. per dozen; 2s. post free, each series.
Thirl Series. Already Published.
25. THE VISIONS OF YOUTH. By the Bishop oi
Winchester.
26. BERNHARDISM IN ENGLAND. By A. Clutton-
Brock.
27. THE ONLY ALTERNATIVE TO WAR. By
the Rev. A. Herbert Gray, M.A.
28. CHARIOTS OF FIRE. By Frank Lenwood.
29. THE ETHICS OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE.
By Henri Lambert.
30. INDIA AND THE WAR. By John Matthai.
31. BRITISH AND GERMAN SCHOLARSHIP. By
Professor J. Hope Moulton, D.Litt., D.D., D.C.L.,
D.Theol. (Berlin).
82. ARE WE TO PUNISH GERMANY, IF WE CAN ?
By A. Clutton-Brock.
In Preparation.
PEACE WITH EMPIRE: THE PROBLEM. By
Edwyn Bevan, M.A.
THE REASONABLE DIRECTION OF FORCE: A
Plea for Investigation before War. By Louise E.
Matthaei.
THE PLACE OF THE CHURCH IN THE NEW
WORLD. By J. H. Oldham, M.A.
OXFORD; FREDERICK BALL, PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY
