

ARE THE STATEMENTS OF SCIENCE AND GENESIS
CONTRADICTORY?
PUBLIC DEBATE
IN' THE
SYDNEY PROTESTANT HALL
Mr. CHARLES BRlGHT—Affirming
Rev. E. C. SPlCER—Denying
KConsr. C-. REID 11ST TEC DC CHAIR
(REPORTED BY L. E. HARCUS)
GEORGE IROBIEIRTSOISr
Melbourne, Syuney, Adelaide, and Brisbane




ARE THE STATEMENTS OF SCIENCE AND GENESIS
CONTRADICTORY?
PUBLIC DEBATE
IN THE
SYDNEY PROTESTANT HALL
Mr. CHARLES BRlGHT—Affirming
Rev. E. 0. SPlCER—Denying
HON. Gt. lE3I- REID 11ST T ZEE IE CHAIR
(REPORTED BV L. E. HARCUS)
GEORGE ROBEETSO UST
Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide, and Brisbane




f; SCIENCE AND GENESIS.
♦
Report of the Debate upon the Proposition
“ ARE THE STATEMENTS OF SGIENGE AND GENESIS
CONTRADICTORY?”
Affirmative MR. CHARLES BRIGHT.
Negative REV. E. C. SPICER, M. A.
CHAIRMAN :
HON. G. H. REID, M.L.A., Minister for Education.
ASSOCIATE-CHAIRMEN :
For MR. BRIGHT. For MR. SPICER,
MR. W. MAC DONNELL. | SIR J. G. L. INNES
First Day—Tuesday, 22nd May, 1883.
The Chairman —Ladies and Gentlemen, I will begin by
stating that I have been requested by the Rev. Mr. Spicer and
Mr. Charles Bright to take the chair upon this occasion, and I
will now read to you the rules which are to be observed in
connection with the debate which is about to begin. These rules
have been agreed upon by Mr, Spicer and Mr. Bright.


Question for Debate
“Are the statements of Science and Genesis contradictory 1 ”
Mr. Charles Bright
Affirmative.
Rev. E. C. Spicer, M.A. ... Negative.
Conditions of Debate —
To take place on the evenings of Tuesday, May 22, and
Wednesday, May 23, 1883.
Chair to be taken each evening at 8 o’clock.
Mr. Bright to commence, and be allowed half an hour,
interruptions (if any) not to be reckoned. Rev. Mr. Spicer then
to be accorded half an hour under same conditions.
Mr. Bright to follow for a quarter of an hour.
Rev. Mr. Spicer, a quarter of an hour.
Mr. Bright, a closing address of a quarter of an hour.
Rev. Mr. Spicer, a closing address of a quarter of an hour
The Chairman to keep the time, assisted by two Associate-
Chairmen, one representing Mr. Bright, and the other Mr. Spicer
The same order of speaking and conditions to be observed
each evening.
A full report of the Debate to be taken, and published in
pamphlet form as soon as convenient.
Before this debate begins I wish to say about half a dozen
sentences, and I would begin by stating that from what I know
of the character of Mr. Spicer and Mr. Bright, and from what I
judge to be the character of this audience, I feel sure that my
task will be a pleasant one. It will be my duty to see that the
rules of debate and the principles of fair play are maintained •
and I feel, ladies and gentlemen,—though I need not address
myself to the ladies, for the generous and restraining influence
always felt when they are present will, I am sure, be experienced
here to you, gentlemen, I would say that from my observation
I find that any little disorder which occurs at such meetings as
this, is occasioned more by those who try to keep order than by
the offenders themselves, so that the best way in which you can
assist me to keep order is for each of you to keep order himself.
I admit that I cannot expect the audience to maintain a perfectly


impassive attitude; but I hope that the more impulsive will
remember that the tremendous issues at stake will not stand or
fall either with Mr. Bright or Mr. Spicer. Nothing that will
occur on Tuesday, the 22nd of May, 1883, or on Wednesday, the
23rd of May, in the same year, will exercise any very tremendous
influence in settling these questions. Indeed it seems to me
almost impossible to hope that any human being can perceive
truth in all her full and unclouded majesty, until he passes the
portals of mortality ; and, in the meantime, while faults and
fallibilities are arising quickly and darkly among us, he will best
deserve to be right who finds in the honest errors of his fellow-
men, in matters affecting their immortal welfare, not openings for
dislike or persecution, but rather for the profoundest compassion.
I now call upon Mr. Bright to open in the affirmative on this
question.
Mr. Bright —Mr. Chairman, ladies, and gentlemen, I appear
here this evening in order to maintain the affirmative of the
question which has been stated to you by the chairman : “ Are
the statements of Science and Genesis contradictory T’ And
before I proceed with my argument I would desire right at the
outset to express my respect for the gentleman who has come
forward to meet me this evening in debate. I feel sure that all
lovers of free discussion must honour the Rev. Mr. Spicer for
appearing as advocate of the orthodox cause this evening. On
one point I believe we are cordially agreed, and that is that no
theology which is afraid of free discussion can hope to stand its
ground at the present day. Moreover, I would at the beginning
appeal to my own friends, if such there be—and there must be
plenty—in the audience, that they shall keep as impartial an
attitude as possible, and shall above everything in this discussion,
give just as fair a hearing to my honourable opponent as I myself
hope to receive from his friends. And now to the question itself.
Fortunately, we cannot, I think, go far wrong upon definitions in
this discussion. A large amount of debate frequently occurs
because there is a misunderstanding of mere words, but in this
debate Ido not see how such a misunderstanding can occur. The
word Genesis speaks for itself. It covers the first book of the
Pentateuch, and that book is here in its accredited shape. We take
different, strikingly different views of it, but I believe that we
shall carry on the discussion in such a way that most persons dis-
posed to be just will have to hold that both are fighting, not merely
for victory, but for what we honestly believe to be truth. With re-
gard to the other prominent word in the question, Science, I would
state that what I mean by that word is systematised knowledge.
Science, etymologically means knowledge, but its significance in a


debate of this nature is knowledge reduced to system. In all
the various branches of information which the universe presents
to us, mankind has been busily endeavouring to discover that
which is true, to find out the modes in which nature operates ;
and in such respect as these modes are determined, that consti-
tutes science, and that is what I understand by the term. Now
it is my desire to show you that the statements of science—which
is systematised knowledge—and those of Genesis, are, in many
details, contradictory ; and here I wish to guard against any
misunderstanding of this nature. No truly scientific man would
for a moment hold that anything that could be reported to him as
a natural phenomenon was impossible. Arago, the distinguished
French philosopher, said that he was rash, who outside of the
domain of pure mathematics made use of the word impossible.
Professor Huxley says virtually the same, and most scientific
men will endorse the affirmation, that outside of that sphere we
cannot consistently make use of the term impossible. But wbat
we are enabled to say is that certain things presented to our
notice do not agree with the facts which we have come to know
in science ; and hence, though not impossible, they require a vast
mass of evidence before they are admitted to be not contradictory
to science. Professor Huxley, in his essay on Hume, lays this
down very clearly. He says : —“ The more a statement of fact
conflicts with previous experience, the more complete must be the
evidence which is to justify us in believing it.” Hence while
on a simple assertion which does not conflict with what we know,
we should receive a statement on slight testimony, yet if there
be anything altogether foreign to what is now recognized under
the name of science, we should require overwhelming evidence
before it is admitted as not contradictory to science. We see this
when we come to survey any of the other ancient traditions of
the race. Take the writings attributed to Homer as an instance.
If we wish to discern whether the story of Narcissus being-
turned into a flower is true or fabulous, we compare it with the
teachings of science, and see it is contradictory thereto. Science
knows nothing of such a description of transformation. So, also,
if we wish to decide whether the weeping Niobe was really turned
into a stone image, we contrast the story with the facts which we
know as science, and say it is contradictory to those facts, and
hence put the story down as fabulous, or as a poetic conception of
the past. Now I contend that with the writing I hold in my
hand, the book of Genesis, "scientific men, and men, who like
myself rely on science, have simply to act in a similar manner.
That which would be discerned by us to be fabulous, if presented
in some other theology, must be so regarded in respect to this
writing, provided that science returns a similar verdict. Take
the Mohammedan theological assertions as an example. It is
related that Mohammed was taken to heaven by the angel Gabriel,
and that the angel Gabriel had six hundred wings. If we wish


to learn whether that be contradictory to science or not, we have
to present it for scientific consideration, and if science knows
nothing of six-hundred-winged angels, we must come to the con-
clusion that it and science are .contradictory. Now the tradition,
as I term it, of ancient times which I hold in my hand, I find
presents contradictions when brought to the crucial test of
scientific investigation. I find in the first line: “In the beginning
God created the heaven and the earth.” I shall simply put
before you what I believe to be the statements of modern science,,
and, if contradicted by Mr. Spicer, I shall endeavour to suppor t
them by extracts from the works of scientific men; but I simply
now put it forward as among the axioms of science, that there is
no such thing known in the universe as dissipation of energy, no
such thing as non-persistence of force ; hence that the eternity of
what we term matter is one of the canons of modern science
and hence there can be no such thing as a beginning in the sense
of a positive creation of something out of nothing. “Nothing,”
Ingersoll well says, “ as a raw material is a failure ; ” and it seems
to me to be a contradiction to the statements of science to assert
that at any period of the history of this universe something was
created out of nothing. Then, going on still further, I find that
on the first day of creation, “ God said, “ Let there be light; and
there was light. And God saw the light that it was good ;
and God divided the light from the darkness. And God
called the light Day, and the darkness he called Night, And the
evening and the morning were the first day.” That was univer-
sally accepted as a commencement of creation at a period when
the nature of light was thoroughly misunderstood, when it was
conceived that light was an absolute thing, while darkness was
another thing. It was not known that light was a movement
simply of ethereal atoms, caused by a heated body, that it was
not, in short, in itself a substance ; much less was the darkness
caused by its absence, a substance. It was conceived that light and
darkness, as well as cold and heat, were positive things, but
it is one of our familiar statements that cold is simply the
absence of heat, and darkness simply the absence of light.
When it was believed that darkness was a thing of itself,
it was also believed throughout Christendom that a bottle
of the darkness of Egypt was kept by the Papal Church
as one of its curiosities—it was supposed to be an absolute
substance, and that it could be retained and kept. Science has
taught us that darkness is merely the absence of light, and
the only light known to us in this portion of the universe, is
that derived from the central, luminary, the sun.* In other
portions of the universe there may be, and there are almost
sure to be, other sources of light, but that is the only source
known to us. Yet here I find that there was light and darkness
* I meant, of course, the only light known to us the absence of which
causes our night, or period of darkness.—o. B.


before there was any sun created, and that the evening and the
morning were the first day. These, evening and morning, are
as we know produced by the action of the earth itself, and in
accordance with what we know could not be produced on earth in
any other natural method than by the earth turning towards the
sun for light or morning, while darkness or evening is produced
when the earth turns away. This is another contradiction to
which I invite the attention of my friend. It is then
stated that “ God said, Let there be a firmament in the midst
of the waters, and let it divide the waters from the waters.
And God made the firmament, and divided the waters which
were under the firmament from the waters which were above the
firmament; and it was so.” Here again we have statements
which are utterly unintelligible to modern science ; it is not
known what is meant by them. When it was believed that the
firmament was a solid canopy to the earth itself, we can conceive
of statements of this kind gaining credence, but at the present
day we have learned to know more of the truth about the uni-
verse ; and these statements are therefore contradictory with
those of science, inasmuch as science knows nothing of a body of
waters above divided from waters below it; it only knows of
vapours from the waters below being taken up by the action of
the sun’s heat, and falling down again in the refreshing form of
showers. This, then, is another contradiction. Then, in closing the
third day, we are informed that the earth w T as to “ bring forth
grass, the herb yielding seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit
after his kind whose seed is in itself, upon the earth; and it was
so.” Here again we have what science calls completely unintel-
ligible statements, namely, that there were fruit trees upon the
earth before the manufacture of the sun, which we are aware is
required in order to bring these fruits to perfection, or before any
trees can grow. Science teaches us by explorations in the earth
itself that in the earlier periods of the earth’s formation there
were slimy products of both vegetable and animal formation
•developing beneath the waters, but that there were no fruit trees
until the sun’s light assisted in bringing them forth. Yet it is
the fourth day, according to Genesis, before the sun is made and
its rays shine upon the earth. The sun is to rule the day, and the
moon to rule the night; and then the writer, almost ignoring that
glorious galaxy of worlds around us, adds, “ And he made the
stars alsothrows them in as a mere passing incident of the
fourth day. There is a contradiction to science, which knows of
no such manufacture of sun, moon, and stars after the fruit trees
were created. Then we go on to the fifth day, when “ God said,
Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creature that
hath life, and fowl that may fly above the earth in the open
firmament of heaven. And God created great whales and every
living creature that moveth, and the waters brought forth abun-
dantly after their kind, and every winged fowl after his kind ;


and God saw that it was good.” The fruits of the earth were
created on the third day, and on the fifth day the waters bring
forth “ the moving thing that hath life.” Here is a contradiction
of modern science, which says exactly the contrary. I must now
rapidly pass on to some other portions of Genesis. I find that
this account of creation, a part of what is known as the
Elohistic portion of Genesis, from the use of the word Elohim
as descriptive of the Creator, terminates with the third verse of
the second chapter: “And God blessed the seventh day, and sancti-
fied it: because that in it he had rested from all his work which
God created and made.” Nothing could by any possibility be
made clearer as a statement of alleged fact that the universe was
created in six ordinary days and that God rested on the seventh day.
These are the statements of Genesis, and I declare —and there are
very few who would affirm anything different—that they are con-
tradicted point blank by science. Nay I believe that even my
friend Mr. Spicer will not venture to say that these statements
in their ordinary sense are not thus contradictory, but he will en-
deavour to show you, possibly, that they are capable of some other
interpretation than that which the words seem plainly to bear,
Passing to the second, known as the Jehovistic account of creation,
discerned to be the work of a different hand from the Elohistic
account, we find a totally different arrangement of creation. We
are informed that the Lord made every plant of the field before
it was in the earth, and every plant before it grew, and
that the first thing that is made on the earth is a man to till the
ground He is put into a garden to keep the garden, and these
plants which were previously made are planted in the ground :
And out of the ground made the Lord God to grow every tree
that is pleasant to the sight and good for food; the tree of life,
also in the midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledge of good
and evil.” And so on with the second legend of creation which
proceeds in a diametrically different way from the first one which
ended with the creation of man, “ male and female created he
them.” The second account of creation begins with the creation
of man, proceeds with the planting of the garden, and goes on to
explain that the various animals are made and brought before the
man in order to see if there is anyone there who will do for a help-
meet for him. Not finding the needful helpmeet, he is put into a
comatose state, and a rib is taken from his side, out of which a
woman is made whom God brought to the man. Now these alleged
facts are all contradictory to the statements of science. I need not
bring these statements before you in detail. Modern science holds
that there has been no breach of continuity, that there has been a
perpetual evolution of the world from what we should term in-
ferior forms to the forms now found in existence, and that
this evolution is still going on; that if this be creation, creation
is still proceeding. I will read you the words of that distinguished
scientist to whom I have already referred—Professor Huxley—


upon what is meant by this scientific hypothesis of evolution. He
says ; —“ The hypothesis of evolution supposes that in all this vast
progression there would be no breach of continuity, no point at
which we could say ‘ this is a natural process ’ and 1 this is not a
natural process/ but that the whole might be strictly compared
to that wonderful series of changes which may be seen going on
every day under our eye, in virtue of which there arises out of
that semi-fluid, homogeneous substance which we call an egg, the
complicated organisation of one of the higher animals. That, in
a few words, is what is meant by the hypothesis of evolution.”
That is what was stated by Professor Huxley in a lecture
delivered in New York, and that is what is meant by the processes
of nature going on under evolution. We have a very different
account in Genesis, and so I am justified in declaring it to be con-
tradictory to science. Next we have a story of a serpent coming
and talking to the woman who had been in this wise created. It
is one of the statements of science that serpents do not talk. It
may not be impossible but it is contradictory to the facts classified
as science, and comes under the same aspect as the weeping Niobe
or the transformed Narcissus. We require overwhelming evi-
dence before we can believe it, and that evidence is not forth-
coming. Proceeding onwards in Genesis we discover that these
first created beings lived to an enormous age, that Adam lived to
the age of 930 years; that another named Methuselah, lived to the
age of 969 years, and died in fact about fhe time of the flood, —
probably was drowned in the flood. Indeed it is fortunate that
the flood occurred or Methuselah, having got into the habit of
living, might have gone on living until now. Longevity of this
character is unknown to science, and is therefore contradictory to
its allegations regarding the duration of human existence on this
planet. Furthermore, we are told that a vast flood came upon
the earth, we are informed that this flood was universal; and here
again is one of the points where science contradicts the assertions
of Genesis, declaring that no such flood as that, with a mass of
water five miles high or more, as it must have been according to
the record, was ever upon the earth, and that there is no way in
which such a mass of water could have been got rid of by evap-
oration. Hence this again is a contradiction between Genesis
and Science.
The Rev. E. 0. Spicer— Ladies and Gentlemen, before I
begin, I wish to thank Mr Bright for the uniform courtesy which
he has displayed in all the meetings which we have been obliged
to have preliminary to this evening’s meeting, and for the trouble
he has taken in advertising and making all the arrangements for
the debate. I now take up a position of the most distinct antag-
onism to Mr. Bright, but before doing so, I wish to explain my
position here this evening. When that pretentious scientific
sham, William Denton (Disorder.)


The Chairman—l hope, whatever may be the opinion of
some of those here present in reference to Mr. Denton, they da
not think they will either vindicate his character, or heighten his
reputation, by hissing on this occasion, and must at once protest
against this interference with the freedom of Mr. Spicer during
this debate.
The Rev. E. 0. Spicer —When Mr, Denton—to suit myself
to the audience—when Mr. Denton stated things that I con-
sidered to be contrary to fact, I went upon the platform and said
so ; I was asked to say these things again, and I did so; Mr.
Bright advertised a lecture in reply to me. Ido not know
whether any of you heard that lecture, or whether any of you
hissed Mr. Bright for attacking an absent man. I was not absent,
as it happened, but you may have thought I was. The first
thing I have to say with respect to Mr. Bright’s arguments, is
that they are exceedingly old. About the year 650, somebody
said something like this: —Celsus gives instances of very great
alleged antiquity put forward by other nations, and asserts that
the Jews wove together some most incredible and stupid stories
about the Creation, the formation of man and woman, and about
God, who it is said was so weak at the beginning of things that
he was quite unable to make even a single mortal obey him, Celsus
next ridicules the account of the Deluge, and of the Ark, and sa
on. These things were said about the year 650, that is over 1200
years ago. Mr. Bright, however, has not got so far as the Deluge
yet. So you see all these objections are very old. Some may say
that the objections may not be the less true because they are old,
but lam of opinion that the reason they have been lying so long
in the dust is that they were connected with a system that was
false, while the statements of Genesis remain untouched.
Genesis begins a revelation to mankind, and it is associated with
a true system which still exists. You need not ask where is the
Christian Church to-day, but I will ask where now is the system
built on the fallacies of Celsus 1 Perhaps not one of you present
this evening ever knew that Celsus existed until you came into
this hall. I can tell you this, that Origen answered Celsus in
most of his points very completely; but Ido not want to give
you the answers of Origen, I will endeavor to give you my own
answers. lam surprised, utterly surprised, that Mr. Bright
should have put himself, as I think he has done, so completely
into my hands. I will preface my remarks by bringing before
your notice a scientific impossibility. You often hear the remark,
“ That boy is a goose.” Now let us examine that statement
scientifically. Is the statement in accordance with scientific
facts 1 A goose has a beak, and feathers, and a gizzard, and
webbed feet, and wings ; the boy has no beak, no feathers, no
webbed feet, no wings, and so far as my knowledge of anatomy
goes, he has not even a gizzard. So the boy is not a goose. I
have proved to you that the statement is contradicted by science.


I want you all to remember that argument, because many of Mr.
Bright’s arguments appear to me to come under that definition,
which I will call the goose argument. Then, again, suppose that
a number of savages are living in a country where the atmosphere
is continually filled with a dense dark smoke, they would never
see the sun except as a red, dull, round body, which they would not
think of worshipping. Then suppose a person came to them with
a bull’s eye lantern, having a colored glass over it. That is red,
the sun’s light is red, and therefore there is not, and cannot be,
any light that is not red. I shall call that the smoke argument.
The statement of Mr. Bright, that we are to compare the state-
ments of Homer in reference to Narcissus being turned into a
flower, and the weeping Niobe into a stone, with that of Genesis
in reference to the serpent speaking, and say the serpent never
spoke—that is the goose argument. And there is another part of
his argument that I shall call the smoke argument. We are all,
to a certain extent, savages living in a smoky atmosphere ; we
have put into our hands a book, this book of Genesis, in the
English translation. Mr. Bright has said that there is no diffi-
culty in finding out what Genesis is ; one thing is certain, and
that is, that what Mr. Bright has read is not Genesis—-it is
perhaps an English translation of Genesis, but where he got his
interpretation from Ido not know. It is certain that he has nob
consulted any critical translation of Genesis, for he has read,
“And the evening and the morning were the first day.” The
real translation of that I will read to you presently.
A voice—Read the Bible.
The Rev. E. 0. Spicer —l will not accept the English
Bible at all. (Dissent). Let me explain what I mean. I mean
that I will not accept the English translation of the Bible as it
is given. I will give you the true translation by an eminent
Hebrew scholar, which, I hope, will be in the hands of all of you
to-night, as it has been printed by Mr. Ardill. The various
difficulties Mr. Bright has raised, I think, will be best answered
by going carefully through the first chapter, as he has done. In
the first place, I may say that I accept the definition of science
given by Mr. Bright, that is, “ Systematised Knowledge.” He
afterwards said that science is what we know, but that I do not
accept, and will keep him to his first definition. Mr. Bright
begins by saying that science knows of no such thing as a
beginning, that is a creation of something out of nothing. If
Mr. Bright had said that science knows nothing about a beginning
he would have been perfectly right. Let me read to you the
statements of some of the most distinguished scientific men of
the day. “If ” says Tyndall “ you ask me if science has solved,
or is likely to solve the problem of the universe, I must shake
my head in doubt. We have been talking about matter and
force, but whence came matter, and whence came force 1 The
phenomena of matter and force lie within our intellectual range,


but behind, and above, and around all, the real mystery of the
universe remains unsolved, and here the true philosopher will
bow his head in humility, and admit that all he can do in this
direction is no more than that which lies within the compass of
an ordinary child.” And Herbert Spencer says, “In all directions
the investigations of the man of science bring him face to face
with an insoluble enigma.” Science knows nothing about a
beginning ; some scientific men say that in the beginning were
atoms. What are atoms 1 Herschel says they have all the
properties of a manufactured article; another says no, “In the
beginning were forces.” But what are forces 1 Carpenter says
that force is but the expression of will. Of whose will 1 Who
manufactured these atoms 1 The book says, “In the beginning
God created the heavens and the earth.” Now, where in Genesis
does Mr. Bright find that God created the universe out of
nothing *? It is not there. So to put something there that is not
there, and then to say that science contradicts it, when science
knows nothing whatever about it, is not an argument with which
I can deal. Genesis says merely, “In the beginning God created
the heavens and the earth,” so it is still, left an open question.
With regard to the words “ light” and “firmament,” Mr. Bright,
in the name of science, makes the astounding assertion that the
only light we know of is derived from the sun. I will give him
the stars and the comets ; I will give him the red dull glowing-
mass of Jupiter ; but I will ask you did you ever see an Aurora ?
If so, where did that light come from ? From the sun 1 Anyone
who says so convicts himself of knowing nothing whatever of
science. A great philosopher said in reference to it, that it
seemed to him that this was the remains of the great primitive
light which dawned in the infancy of the world. Light is closely
akin to heat and electricity, and it would be quite correct to say
that they are the sources of every force that exists. I will say
that I think Mr. Bright—and here I wish to tell you that what I
am saying is only my own opinion, I am not here to represent
any body but myself—l think Mr. Bright overlooks the fact that
the description of the first chapter of Genesis refers only to the
Creation looked at from the point of view of the earth, and that
between “ the beginning ” and “ the first day ” there existed an
enormous period of time. In case anybody should say that I
am putting that into the record that is not there, I could
read you something that was said hundreds of years ago, befox-e
science knew anything about the earth’s formation, to the effect
that between the words “ In the beginning” and “ the first day ”
there might be placed an enorpious number of ages. And here I
should like to notice one thing; Mr. Bright said that it was
universally believed throughout Christendom that the darkness of
Egypt was kept corked in a bottle. That is new to me. I never
came across such a statement in all the Church history I ever read,
and I deny that it was ever universally believed that darkness.


■existed in a bottle. Butinanycase Mr. Bright, I think, has no right
to bring that in when talking about Genesis-; it certainly is not in
Genesis. Then with regardto the firmament, lam utterly surprised
that Mr. Bright should make such a strange assertion as that the
firmament was believed to be a solid sphere. The Hebrew word
does not mean a solid firmament, it is Hakiah, which moans an
expanse. Further on Genesis says that the birds fly in the open
firmament of heaven ; how could they fly in anything that was
solid 1 Such an assertion is ridiculous. Without going far into
the philological aspect of the question, let me tell you that the
heavens, as the Hebrews considered them, were called by a large
number of names, one of whichrefers to a cloud of fine vapour, and
the notion of solid celestial crystal spheres did not exist in the
Hebrew cosmogony, but was put in afterwards by those who read
the cosmogonies of the Grecian schools of philosophy which did
believe it. Dr. Dawson says that the attempt to put a solid
firmament into the first chapter of Genesis, in the face of such
facts as these, needs only to be denounced as a bare-faced impos-
ture. Then Mr. Bright referred to grass and fruit trees existing
before the sun. He did not say this half so well or half so funnily
as Mr. Denton did. I listened to Mr. Denton’s lecture on this
subject with some amount of enjoyment. Then about the waters
bringing forth abundantly, and so on. Here is a scientific record
which I hold in my hand, it bears the imprimatur of one of the
greatest geologists living, Professor McCoy, now of Melbourne—
a gentlemen who has enough letters after his name to reach across
the table if they were printed in very small type, who has had honours
conferred upon him from all Europe, who is quoted in Sir 0. Lyell’s
works and many others as an authority. “ The earth was once a
globe of fiery matter,” but let me begin at the beginning. Genesis
says, “ In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth.”
Science says nothing about the first cause. 2nd—“ And the earth
was empty and desolate,” not “ without form and void ” as in our
translation, “and darkness was upon the face of the deep.” Science
says : “ The earth was once a globe of fiery matter, covered first
with a thin hard crust subject to various undulatory movements.
Above the crust was an universal ocean, and surrounding this
ocean a dense mass of vapours, totally excluding all light.” 3rd—
“ And God said, Let there be light,” Science says nothing about
that. 4th—“ And there was light.” Science says : “ These vapours
thinned, and allowed a diffused light to pass through them.” The
light was there before, above the clouds. sth—“And God divided
the light from the darkness, and God called the light day, and the
darkness He called night. And there was evening and there was
morning ; one day.” It is not “ and the evening and the morning
were the first day.” Science says: “ This light being due to
the sun, light and darkness would alternate as the earth revolved,
causing day and night, and evening and morning.” 6th—“ And
God made the expanse and divided the waters which were below


the expanse from the waters which were above the expanse.”
Science says : “ These vapours now thinned still more, part des-
cending in rain and part rising in the form of one vast unbroken
cloud all round the globe, hanging above the air which rested upon
the universal sea.” Why to-night you have had an example of
the waters above the firmament tumbling down upon you. There
was a firmament, an expanse surrounding the earth, and the
waters above were the clouds that pour down their rain.
7th—Genesis says : “ And God said, Let the waters below
the heavens be gathered into one place, and let the dry
ground appear.” Science says nothing. Bth—Genesis ; “And it
was so.” Science says: “The liquid nucleus shrank away from
the solid crust, which cracked and fell into ridges and hollows
into which the sea flowed, leaving part of the hot crust dry.”
9th—Moses says : “ And the land brought forth sprouts ; ” not
“grass.” Deshe does not mean grass; it is not grass at all.
Science says : “In the Laurentian rocks abundance of carbon is
found (Dawson), showing evidence of plant life, but of too soft a
nature to be preserved.” 10th—“ Herbs seeding seed after their
kind.” Science tells us that in the Lower Devonian—you see I
give you the rocks—gymnosperms make their first appearance.
11th—Genesis says: “And trees producing fruit, wherein is
their seed, after their kind.” Science : “In the Upper Devonian,
Trigonocarpum and fleshy fruits first appear. These all grew as
in an universal hothouse under the unbroken cloud, forced
upwards by the heat of the earth. So far there have been no
seasons.” 12 th—Moses says: “And God? said, Let there be
luminaries in the expanse of the heavens, to divide the day from
the night, and let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for days
and years ; and let them be for luminaries in the expanse of the
heavens to give light upon the earth. And God made the two
great luminaries, the greater luminary to rule by day, and the
lesser luminary to rule by night; and the stars. And God
appointed them in the expanse of the heavens to give light upon
the earth, and to rule over the day and over the night, and to
divide the light from the darkness.” Science tells us that “ The
clouds at length broke, allowing the sun’s light and heat to
influence the seasons, while the colder earth could not maintain
an universal spring. Trees are then first found with woody
rings. When the clouds became thinner the moon appeared, and
when they broke , the stars.” There is an account of the creation
of the sun, moon, and stars ; the clouds got thinner, and the sun
appeared ; thinner, and the moon appeared ; still thinner, and
the light of the stars was seen. It must be remembered that
Moses was describing this scene from the standpoint of the earth,
and hence described it as it would have appeared to an observer
upon the earth. 13th—Genesis: “And let the waters swarm
forth swarming things, living souls.” Science : “In the Silurian
seas, Trilobites and Lingula are found, and throughout the


Permian, Oolitic, Tirassic, and Liassic periods there was abundance
of marine life. Ammonites, Belemnites in millions, and many
others, with ganoid and placoid fishes in great numbers.” 14th—
“ And let birds fly upon the land, upon the face of the expanse
of the heavens.” Science says : “In the New Red Sandstone
the footprints* of birds appear for the first time,” accoi’ding to
Hitchcock, Deane, Dana, and Lyell. 15th—Genesis says r
“ And God created the great monsters, and all the living souls
that creep, which the waters swarmed forth after their kind ;
and all birds of wing after their kind. And God blessed them,
saying, Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the waters in the seas,
and let birds multiply in the land.” Science says that “there
also appeared giant sea lizards ; the Ichthyosaurs, Plesiosaurs,
Mososaurs, Elasmosaurs, and feathered birds.” 16th—Genesis :
“ And God made land animals after their kind.” Science tells us
that “ then upon the land are found the Iguanodon, Dinotherium,
Megatherium, Palaeotherium, Machaerodus, Mammoth, and other
gigantic beasts of the vertebrate type.” 17th—Moses says :
“ And the cattle after their kind.” Science says : “ Next appeared
various kinds of cattle, the horse, the ox, the sheep, in order.”
An attempt has been made to prove that verses 24 and 25 of the
Ist chapter of Genesis contradict each other as to the order of
the appearance of “ beasts and cattle,” but a simple glance will
show that the former refers merely to God’s intention of creating
them, while the latter shows the order in which the intention has
been carried out. 18th—Moses says: “ And all creeping things
of the ground after their kind.” Science says that “ during this
period numberless creeping things, insects, beetles, butterflies,
<fec., appeared.” 19th—Then Genesis says : “And God said, Let
us make man in Our own image, after Our likeness, and let them
have dominion over the flesh of the sea, and over the birds of the
heavens, and over the cattle, and over all the land, and over all
the creeping things that creep upon the land. And God created
man in His image, in the image of God He created him; male
and female He created them.” “ And last of all,” says Science,
“ appeared man, since whose appearance no new species have
appeared, and the condition of the various plants and animals of
the earth remain as they were when he appeared.” As I have
only half a minute more I shall be compelled to leave the rest of
the answers till I have another opportunity.
Mr. Bright— The argument which I have piesented in my
first address lam told is a very old argument. I do not doubt
it; it is probably as old as criticism itself, and the fact that this
old argument is still perpetually coming up against ancient forms
of superstition, and growing stronger as time rolls on, shows
that it has never yet been satisfactorily answered. My friend,
Mr. Spicer, terms it a “goose argument,” and answers it with what
he calls a “smoke argument” of his own. Well, I must be prepared
* Professor McCoy is not certain about these footprints.


to leave my “goose argument” and his “smoke argument” tobe con-
trasted, the one with the other; but no amount of learned terms
-—even though Mr. Spicer be able to tell you all about Gymno-
sperms—no amount of learned terms will convince you, I think,
that the statements of Genesis are not contradicted by those of
Science. My friend admits that no human being was ever suddenly
tranformed into a stone or into a flower, and even that a serpent
never spoke; but how does he know that 1 Only because the
alleged facts are contradicted by Science ! Genesis however
explicitly says that the serpent did talk, and the contradictions 1
have to bring before you arise not out of what Mr. Spicer says,
but out of what Genesis affirms. Genesis distinctly states :
“Now the serpent was more subtle than any beast of the field
which the Lord God had made. And he said unto the woman,
Yea, hath God said, ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden !
And the woman said unto the serpent, We may eat of the fruit
of the trees of the garden : But of the fruit of the tree which
is in the midst of the garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eat of
it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die. And the serpent said
unto the woman, Ye shall not surely die : For God doth know
that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened,
and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil.” In fact
they carry on a conversation together according to Genesis ; and
Genesis is contradicted not alone by Science, but by the Bev.
Mr. Spicer. It is asserted that the argument of Celsus, based on
the obvious intrepretation of the words of Genesis was answered
and overthrown 1200 years ago ; yet we find that the Christian
Church, which must be supposed to have known something about
its own theology, maintained these very interpretations as the
•only legitimate ones more than a thousand years after the time of
Celsus. How shall I discover what was assumed to be the meaning
of these passages in Genesis but by listening to the voice of the
churches 1 Passing by the greatest and oldest Christian authority,
let us glance at the interpretations maintained by a leading Pro-
testant Church of Christendom in the 17th century, as publicly
avowed by a hundred specially selected divines, after long protracted
discussion at Westminster. My friend taunts me with professing
to say that the creation occurred by the construction of some
thing out of nothing. Well, if I err I err in the company
of these hundred divines who put forward the Westminster
Confession. Chapter IY., section I. says “It pleased God in
the beginning to create, or make of nothing, the world and all things
therein in the space of six days.” Moreover, I find in the same
confession, information as to how we are to act if there is any
doubt about the meaning of Genesis, or any other portion of
the Scriptures : “The infallible rule of interpretation of Scripture
is the Scripture itself, and it must be searched and known by
other places which speak more clearly.” Now when Igo to other
portions of Scripture do I find that that word “ day,” which my


friend would give such a tremendous and elastic interpretation to r
means enormous periods of time; will it bear such an interpreta-
tion ? lam aware that we may make use of the word “ day ”in
such a sense as this ; we may talk of the day of the domination of
the Roman Catholic Church, of the day when Spain was in the
ascendant; but the context invariably discloses what is meant.
In this case do we find that the context would lead anyone ta
suppose that more was meant than commonplace days, that vast
periods of time were signified by the word “ day ?” If we are in
doubt we must, according to the Westminster Confession, have
recourse to other portions of Scripture to see what is meant by
this same word. In the eighth chapter of Genesis and third verse
we read “ And the waters returned from off the earth continually :
and after the end of the hundred and fifty days the waters were
abated.” Is the meaning of that a hundred and fifty periods of
time of millions of years in duration? In the 25th verse of the
9th chapter of Deuteronomy, Moses is said to have remained in
the mount for forty days. Does that mean he was there
forty of these immense periods of time ? It is further related that
Jonah was in the belly of the whale for three days. Does that
mean three hundred million years ? I hope not, for Jonah’s sake, as
well as that of the whale. In the I6th chapter of Exodus and the
26th verse we read “ Six days shall ye gather it;” (the manna)
“ but on the seventh day which is the Sabbath, in it there shall be
none.” Here again these expressions mean simple days. I find
moreover in this book of Exodus itself a repetition of this very de-
scription of the creation ; “ Six days shalt thou labor and do all thy
work, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in
it thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter,,
thy man-servant, nor thy maid-servant, nor thy cattle, nor the
stranger which is within thy gates ; for in six days the Lord made
heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the
seventh day, wherefore the Lord blessed the seventh day, and
hallowed it.” How can expressions be made clearer than
that ? If anything were intended by the writer but the
absolute days of the week, could such forms of expression be
adopted. lam told by Mr. Spicer relative to my comments on the
words “ in the beginning ” that science has nothing whatever to
say touching the question of who created these things at the
beginning, and he quoted from Tyndall, as he might have done
from many another leading savant , to show that science recognises
the mystery. Just so, it recognises the mystery, and leaves it a
mystery, as do all those who repose confidence in scientific teachings.
The rationalist, unlike the theologian, admits the mystery, stands
in awe and wonder before it, terms it, perhaps, by the mystical
name, God, but he does not dogmatise regarding it, him, or her
for he feels he cannot ascribe to it anything so human as gender
and never dreams of asserting that this God walked in a garden,
carried on a talk with human beings, and made coats of skins for
the first man and woman. When it is said that this Almighty Soul


of the universe did the tailoring work for the first pair, science
says—just as it does with regard to the stories of Niobe, Narcissus,
and the talking serpent —we only know that this is contradictory
of the facts which have been observed and classified in the field of
nature’s workings. lam asked to say who or what created the
atoms. Here again, not knowing who created the atoms, nay,
not having even the slightest information as to whether they ever
were created, or whether the idea of creation be not merely an
ephemeral conception of the finite mind, I say nothing about it,
and science, in the person of scientific men, says nothing also.
Science contradicts only assertions which are in opposition to its
classified facts. It is in a position to contradict the hypothesis of
Genesis, but it is not in a position to assert what the mystery is
with which Genesis affects to deal. It does declare that the facts
of the universe which we know are in opposition to these stories,
as to other early traditions and legends of our race, and that being
the case it has no hesitation in labelling them fabulous. Moreover
I am informed that it is perfectly childish of me to talk about the
creation as set forth in Genesis in the way in which I am doing.
Well, if Mr. Spicer had declared himself in that fashion three or
four hundred years ago, it would have gone hard with him as he
would have stood a good chance of being burned for heresy.
What is the belief put before us in these writings—not in the
ancient Hebrew merely, but in the accredited translation? We
know what the belief of Protestant Christendom has been by the way
these stories are represented in Milton’s “ Paradise Lost.” Milton
describes the actual method of creation just as any one would judge
from the words in Genesis, the animals coming out of the earth full
grown, and with all their instincts and faculties developed.*
*“ The sixth, and of creation last, arose
With evening harps and matin ; when God said,
‘ Let the earth bring forth soul living in her kind,
Cattle, and creeping things, and beast of the earth,
Each in their kind.’ The Earth obeyed, and straight
Opening her fertile womb, teemed at a birth,
Innumerous living creatures, perfect forms,
Limbed and full grown. Out of the ground up rose,
As from his lair, the wild beast, where he wons
In forest wild, in thicket, brake, or den ;
Among the trees in pairs they ran, they walked :
The cattle in the fields and meadows green ;
Those rare and solitary, these in flocks
Pasturing at once, and in broad herds up sprung.
The grassy clods now calved ; now half appeared
The tawny lion, pawing to get free
His hinder parts ; then springs, as broke from bonds
And rampant shakes his brindled mane ; the ounce,
The libbard, and the tiger, as the mole
Rising, the crumbled earth above them threw
In hillocks : the swift stag from underground
Bore up his branching head : scarce from his mould
Behemoth, biggest born of Earth, upheaved
His vastness : fleeced the flocks and bleating rose,
As plants.” Paradise Lost , Book VII


But, I may be told, Milton was merely a poet, not a theologian.
Dean Stanley, a distinguished member of Mr. Spicer’s own
church, says of him ;—“ Of all our brilliant English divines of the
seventeenth century, there is not one who can be fairly said to
have exercised so much influence over the popular theology of
this nation as has been undoubtedly exercised by a half heretic,
half puritan layman, the author of Paradise Lost.” It follows
then, from what I have shown, that it is not my interpretation
which is before you, but the interpretation of nearly the whole
Christian Church. And let me ask, in conclusion, what is it that
is compelling another form of interpretation to be proffered at the
present day ? It is the pressure of science. The people are
beginning to discern that Genesis and Science are contradictory,
and hence theologians discover that in some way or other, the
statements in the Bible must be wrested from their plain meaning
to force them into agreement with the statements of science.
The Rev. E. C. Spicer —l do not think it will conduce very
much to the conclusion of this debate if I go on gyrating round
the arguments of Mr. Bright, and he goes on revolving round those
I may use; but I want to point out that he has now completely
shifted his ground. He has been filling your ears with the West-
minster Confession and the opinions of Dean Stanley and Milton.
I do not care what they say, that has nothing to do with me. My
position is that I know, from having studied the matter, what
science says, and science has also caused me to examine and see
the truth of the Mosaic account; I therefore protest against Mr.
Bright or anyone else trying to set up science against the Bible.
Science has done wonders for the Bible, in teaching us the truth
where the English translation is found to be imperfect. To show
you how much these poor, degraded, miserable theologians knew
about it, I might read a few words that were put into my hands
this afternoon—and here I should like to say that it does not
seem fair to ph the science of to-day against the theology of
hundreds of years ago. How would it be if I put the theology of
to-day by the side of the science of hundreds of years ago llf there
is to be a comparison it should be of the science of to-day and the
theology of to-day. St. Basil, St. Casarins and Origen, who lived
1200 years ago, answered these arguments. They are “much more
explicit, for they account for the creation of light, prior to that of
the sun, by supposing this luminary to have indeed before existed,
yet so that its rays were prevented by the dense chaotic atmos-
phere from penetrating to the earth, and that this was on the first
day so far rarified as to allow the transmission of the sun’s rays,
though not the discernment of its disk, which was fully displayed
on the third day.” How I never knew that had been written until
this afternoon, and it is curious that I should have arrived at the
same explanation of these apparent discrepancies. I will now go
on to consider some of Mr. Bright’s objections in his first half hour’s
speech. As far as the two accounts of the creation contained in


Genesis are concerned, all critics admit that if the second account
is by a different writer from the first, which I do not admit except
for the sake of this argument, the person who did write it had the
first one in view. Now, do you think, this being the case, that he
would be such a fool as to write an account in the second chapter
which would contradict the first account? But I maintain that
these two accounts do not contradict each other. The first is an
account of the creation of the world by “ Elohim,” the God of
Nature ; the second is an account of that God being brought into
covenant relation with man under the title of Jehovah, which
name is added and kept all the way through when God is spoken
of in regard to this covenant relation with man. Then I come to
the arguments about the flowers, fruits, mist, and rain, and so on,
of which lam surprised Mr Bright did not make more. I could
have put arguments into his hands infinitely better than those he
has used. But that translation by the Hebrew scholar, which
I have already given you—and do not run away with the idea
that you know anything about Genesis because you have a trans-
lation of it in English, for any classical scholar will tell you how
impossible it is to get a true idea of the original from any-trans-
lation—this Hebrew scholar says : translating ‘terem,’ already, a
sense it evidently has in Joshua ii. 8., ‘and they were already laid
down,’ and in 1. Sam. iii. 3., ‘ the lamp was already out;’ and
rendering ‘ ki,’ though, a meaning it often has, the translation of
this obscure passage would run thus: ‘ and every plant of the
field was already in the earth, and every herb of the field had
already sprouted, though the Lord God had not caused it to rain
on the earth ; and Adam was not to till the ground ” —in that
region of the earth where, as his readers knew, rain was almost
unknown —a mist which went up from the abundantly watered
plains of the Euphrates and Tigris supplying the place of rain.
Now Mr. Bright goes on to talk about the serpent. He says that
I said the serpent did not talk, but I said nothing of the kind. I
said that Mr. Bright said the serpent did not talk, and that that
statement was like the goose argument. I shall have to ask you
what the serpent was. I believe the serpent did speak. (Hisses
and cheers.) I believe the serpent also hisses. (Loud laughter.)
I have been informed so. Now Mr. Bright tells you that I should
go to Scripture to interpret Scripture. Very well, I will do so,
and I find there the words “ that old serpent, the devil.” I
believe that it was the devil that tempted Eve; I believe it
because the devil is called the serpent, and because the serpent
is universally in Holy Scriptures the symbol for the devil. lam
not now going to discuss what the devil is, or who he is, that is
altogether beside the question now at issue. I will go on to
of the creation of Eve, which I am perfectly surprised that
Mr. Bright did not make more of. He quoted Colonel Ingersoll
just now, and if you want to know how much can be made of
Adam’s rib you need only go to Ingersoll to find it. If you want


to know how all these matters stand, “ work them out,” as Joseph
Cook says. “There stood God,” says Ingersoll, “ with a rib in his
hand, meditating whether he should make it into a blonde or
brunette.” You have only to put the thing in that coarse way
to see how ridiculous those who talk in that fashion can make
themselves. There can be no doubt that the true explanation is
found in the “ deep sleep ” which fell upon Adam. He fell into
a deep sleep, and saw a vision, as did Abraham, (Genesis xv. 12).
That vision covered a truth, viz., the covenant of God with
Abraham ; and so this “ vision ”of woman being taken out of a
man’s side—not formed from a rib—conveys a truth now. Ido
not believe that Adam was the first man in the world, though
Mr. Bright has not said anything about that. If, however, Mr.
Bright likes, I will show you that Genesis does not say anything
of the sort; in fact, from what is said, we may rather draw a
contrary inference. We read that when Cain was going out,
God put a mark on him, lest any should kill him, (see ix. 6). —
“ Whoso sheddeth man’s blood, by man shall his blood be shed.”
Now who was going to kill him, if there were only Adam and
Eve, and Abel was slain ? Then, again, whom did Cain marry,
and who helped him to build his city in the land of Nod? For
we learn that he went out and built a city, and his descendants
taught the arts and sciences. I believe Adam was the beginning
of the Adamite race, and as such, that he was taken specially
under the care of Jehovah. Now my explanation of the matter
is, that Adam, feeling his unutterable solitude, longed for some-
body to whom he could communicate his inmost feelings. He
saw the animals placidly grazing on the plains around him, the
birds circling in the air, the beasts crouching in the bushes, and
himself utterly alone with no one to sympathise with him. On
the top of some high mountains, perhaps, he fell asleep, and in a
vision saw God coming to him—perhaps in human form, Ido not
know how—and taking from his side a part of himself, instinct
with that spirit which the same God had breathed into him.
Waking and going down the mountain’s side, away from his
solitary resting place, he may have found his “ ideal love and
recognised the fact that he had met his fate, and so may they have
gone together to live in the Garden prepared for them. I contend
that this is a perfectly justifiable explanation of the affair. Then
Mr. Bright talks about the age of the patriarchs as being a
contradiction to science, but if you take the record you will find
that there are two ages given ; the first of these I contend is the
age of the man himself, and the second the age of the “ clan ”or
family founded by that man. The record is that “ Adam lived
an hundred and thirty years, and begat a son in his own likeness,
and called his name Seth : And the days of Adam after he had
begotten Seth were eight hundred years, and all the days of
Adam were 930 years.” So I contend the man Adam lived 130
years, while the clan Adam existed for 930 years. In the second


verse you read, “ God called their name Adam,” and so of the
others. I can support this contention by other explanations of
Hebrew authorities, and until Mr. Bright has explained these and
all former points, he has not answered my arguments. He has
left them alone. All these numerals, however, are the most
uncertain portions of any ancient documents, but I think they
may be explained by taking them in this way : the first number
giving the age of the man, and the second the time that his clan*
existed on the face of the earth. With regard to the universality
of the flood, I can only say this
The Chairman —Your time is up.
Mr. Bright —Our friend, Mr. Spicer, strangely enters a
protest against science being pitted against the Bible. “ Science,”
he says, “ has helped people to discern mistranslations in the
Bible, and has thus brought it into harmony with science.” But
I am here precisely to pit science against the Bible, if I can per-
form the task. With regard to what Mr. Spicer avers, that he
has to thank science for enabling him to discern mistranslations,
so that the Bible and modern science can be brought into com-
plete harmony, I would quote in opposition thereto the opinion of
another eminent member of Mr. Spicer’s own Church given on a
recent day. This quotation from Bishop Moorhouse is taken
from the Melbourne Age , though I saw it transferred to the
columns of the Sydney Echo : —“ When prophetic men introduced
scientific conceptions into their utterances, they were the
scientific conceptions of their own days, and were introduced,
not to give scientific information, but to illustrate some trans-
cendental truth. The Bible was given to teach religion, but not
scientific truth. It only referred to natural facts in order to
illustrate spiritual facts, and, therefore, it described natural facts
as they were conceived by those to whom the revelation was
addressed.” Now, I agree with Bishop Moorhouse in this
exactly. That is precisely what I say with regard to Genesis.
It gives its statements regarding natural phenomena according to
the science of the times when it was written. Biblical critics of
the later schools say that the Elohiatic account of Creation was
written about the time of Samuel ; but, however that may be,
there is no doubt that it reflects the science of its time, just the
same as the works of Homer and the sacred books of eastern
nations reflect the science of their times. Mr. Spicer tells
us that we are not to set the science of our day
against the theology of hundreds of years ago, as he alleges that
I am doing ; but is it the theology of hundred of years ago that I
am pitting against the science of our own time ? If so, then in our
Public Schools in New South Wales they are teaching the theo-
logy of hundreds of years ago. I hold in my hand the “ Second
*Notb. —ln the Vulgate the passage referring to Noah stands thus —
“ Octavum Noe justitias prseconem,” the eighth Noah a preacher of right-
eousness. Doubtless the eighth of his clan. Compare Henry VIII,


Reading Book,” used in all of our Public Schools. One of the
lessons is headed, “ How the world was made.” The young people
are told nothing about these discrepancies and mistranslations
that the reverend gentleman has been speaking of, but on the
contrary it is stated —“ We read in the Bible that God made all
things in six days. The earth was at first dark, and without
form. Then God said, ‘ let there be lightand there was light.
This was the work of the first day. On the second day, He made
the sky, or heavens.” Making a “ great expanse,” could not be
a very formidable undertaking. But how does Mr. Spicer account
for the expression in reference to the deluge, that the windows of
heaven were opened? Opening windows in a ‘‘great expanse” would
be a curious performance. However, that is by the way. This
book goes on—“ On the third day He made the dry land or earth;
and He brought the waters into one place apart from the land,
and called them seas. On that day also He made the earth to
bring forth grass.” Now I never said anything about grass.
Mr. Spicer says it was not grass, but here are the children being
taught that it was grass. “ And seed, and trees of all kinds. On
the fourth day He made the sun, and moon, and stars, and He set
them in the sky to give light upon the earth. On the fifth day
He made all sorts of fishes that swim in the waters, and all sorts
of fowls that fly above the earth. On the sixth day God made all
kinds of beasts and cattle, and of things that creep upon the
ground. On this day He also made man, to whom He gave
power over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and
over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over all things that
creep upon the earth. On the seventh day God ended the work
which He had made ; and he rested from it, and called the seventh
day holy.” This is what the children are being taught at this
day in the schools, for the support of which we are all taxed;
and yet we hear a reverend gentleman declaring that this is the
theology of hundreds of years ago. Then Mr, Spicer speaks
about the original of the Scriptures, and says that we are to go to
it if wc wish to get at their real meaning. That is very good
advice, but where does he get the original of the Scriptures ? Let
him produce the original of these Scriptures, and his name will be
memorable throughout all Christendom. I regret that I misun-
derstood what Mr. Spicer said when I declared that he affirmed
that the serpent never spoke. He now explains that he thinks
that the serpent did speak, but he goes on to say that it was not
the serpent who spoke, but that it was the devil. All I can say
is that so far as my secular reading goes, the devil is not a
scientific fact. Then we are told that if we want to know what
these things are, we are to work them out; but the moment we
begin to do so, and work them out differently from the popular
theology, we are informed that we do not know Hebrew, and that
we cannot work them out properly unless we understand that
inviting language. Yet even of those who do understand it well.


there are numbers who will not bear out the Rev. Mr. Spicer in
his construction of that word “ yom,” day, as it is translated.
They will not admit that it means a large period of time, or that
in the context it can signify anything but what has been popu-
larly ascribed to it. Again, lam told that Adam was not the
first man. We are gradually getting quite a new light cast upon
this old tradition. I remember a quaint conundrum propounded
to this effect—“ Who is the first man mentioned in the Bible 1”
The answer given of course was generally “ Adam,” until it was
explained that the answer ought to have been “ Chap I.” All I
can say is that, with the exception of “Chap I,” Genesis says
nothing of any man preceding Adam. As to the questions put
by Mr, Spicer, why the Lord put a mark upon Cain lest anyone
should kill him and whom did Cain marry, when there were no
others around but his own family, those are precisely the ration-
alistic queries that have been put for years past. Cain’s wife
has been one of the mysteries of theology for a long period
of time. We have had an entirely new light likewise thrown
on the creation of Eve. We are told now by Mr. Spicer
that it was a vision. All I can say is, that if it were a vision
then Scripture should have said so; but what does Genesis
aver? “And the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall
upon Adam and he slept; and he took one of his ribs, and closed
up the flesh instead thereof ; and the rib which the Lord God had
taken from man, made he a woman, and brought her to the
man.” Those are the words in Genesis, and it is the words of
Genesis that I have to show you are contradictory to the teachings
of science. Even if the whole side of Adam were taken instead
of merely a rib, science—which is systematised knowledge—knows
nothing about occurrences of that sort; and it is because of this
that science ventures to assert that they are fabulous, and to those
who vehemently proclaim that they are not fabulous, but truth,
science simply says—“ produce your evidence.” Rationalistic
minds deal with you as they deal with all the other traditions of
the past, and you must not ask to be treated in a different fashion.
Then 1 have another explanation given to me, —Mr. Spicer appa-
rently forgetting that it is not his fanciful theories but the state-
ments of Genesis which I have to combat. This is an explanation
of the age of these ancient patriarchs. It is the Clan Adam and
the Clan Methuselah, it appears, which lived to these enormous
ages. Well, if Genesis meant a clan, Genesis should have said
so, and I then should have seen nothing in it, so far, contradictory
to modern science. But I will go on and give Mr. Spicer another
fact to bring into harmony with science, and it is this; a little
further on in Genesis I find that because a certain woman looked
back when escaping from a burning city she was turned into a
pillar of salt. Now science, or systematised knowledge, dmows
nothing of such occurrences as women being suddenly turned into
pillars of salt. Hence there will be need for another explanation^


as the words are plain enough in the original. This I claim as
another contradiction between Genesis and Science. There are
several others yet unnamed by me, so that to harmonise these con-
flicting statements the reverend gentleman will have to produce a
perfect volume of new interpretations before he can hope to satisfy
the inquisitive rationalist.
The Rev. E. C. Spicer —McCausland, in his “ Builders
of Babel,” says: When the sons of Noah entered on their
career they were surrounded on all sides by other races of man-
kind, some higher, some lower than the others in the scale of
humanity, but all inferior to the new race, who were commissioned
to increase and multiply, and to replenish and subdue the earth.
The Scripture record does not pronounce that Adam was the first
created of human beings on the earth. It only says that about six
thousand years ago God said “ Let us make a man, or Adam, in
our own image, after our likeness,” and that thereupon God
created the man, in his own image, who, by transgression, fell
from his high estate and became subject to the penalty of death.
His descendants were subsequently destroyed by an extensive
inundation, with the exception of one family, consisting of eight
individuals, who were saved in an ark, and from whom have
descended the great Caucasian or Adamite race. While inherit-
ing the patrimony of degradations that were consequent on the
fall of their progenitor, they also inherited some of the physical
and intellectual qualities that belonged to the man created in the
image of God, and with that inheritance they went forth to
leaven the world with a civilization unknown before. The
history of the Adamite is the theme of the Bible.* There
are certain expressions in the narrative that favour the clan
theory. “He called their name Adam in the days of their being
created.” Here, evidently, the word “ Adam ”is used in a
generic sense, to designate not only the individual but the family
or race which God created in him. Adam was the name of the
clan or dynasty. “The race of “red earth” was the first to bear
rule in the world. The successive chiefs, or heads, or fathers of
the tribe had doubtless distinctive appellations of their own,
marking the order of their descent from Adam, the first of his
race as well as the patronymic ; but in the lapse of ages all this
has been lost. There are many parallel cases in Scripture;
Abimelech, Amalek, Og, Caesar, &c. The most striking instance
is that of Pharaoh. This official title from P-RA, “ the sun,”
was borne by the kings of Egypt for 1500 years. Ten Pharaohs
are mentioned in scripture. The sacred writers speak of these
all simply as Pharaoh, giving merely the official title, and adding
nothing but the death of Menptah at the Exodus to forbid the
belief that Pharaoh had lived for 1500 years.” There you see is
* On special creations compare—
“ Nature and natures law’s lay hid in night,
Gon said, ‘ Let Newton be,’ and all was light.”


an analogy. I want to point out to you this fact that Mr. Bright
is continually saying that science does not know anything about
certain facts, and yet he comes here for the purpose of showing
that science contradicts these very facts. How can science
contradict anything when it says nothing whatever about it 1
Now, once more, Mr. Bright has not told us what science has to
say about the origin of woman. The truth being that science
knows nothing about it, except that all the lower animals —from
which some scientific men say that man has been developed—
were at first of one sex, reproduction taking place in various
ways, until the two sexes were differentiated from one original
type. The two sexes, it is well known, of any animal are merely
modifications of one another, and it is only by the differentiation
of the same type that the two sexes are produced. But as to the
way in which man and woman came into being science says
nothing, because, it may be presumed, she knows nothing. Then
Mr. Bright accuses me of making days of “ gum elastic,” stretch-
ing them out to enormous ages. Now, Mr. Bright heard me say
in this hall, and from this platform—for he was in the hall when
I delivered my lecture—that I accepted the twenty-four hour
theory ; and if you want to know my explanation of it, you can
read it in this pamphlet which you can buy as you go out of the
hall. Those who were present will remember that I quoted a
long passage from Shakespeare commencing “ All the world’s a
stage,” and taking each age as a day, I put in the words evening
and morning, and went on “ suppose some one were to say, ‘ Why,
that is ridiculous ; you have made the man only seven days old,
for you have spoken of an evening and a morning, and, therefore,
you cannot say your days are not twenty-four hours long ; and
how absurd it is to suppose a man could be a baby onSunday, and a
schoolboy on Monday, and a lover on Tuesday, and a soldier on
Wednesday, and a judge on Thursday, and a superannuated
pensioner on Friday, and an old decrepit man on Saturday.’
Why, you would tell your critic to go to a lunatic asylum ; or if
he looked hopeful, you might pause to say that although the
word ‘ day ’ in this as in the Mosaic record means —only as
far as the word itself goes—twenty-four hours, just as ‘ death,’
and ‘day,’ and ‘life,’ and ‘ bath,’ mean what they usually do in
those lines where Shakespeare speaks of sleep as “ The death
of each day’s life, sore labour’s bath.” We take them in
their proper relative sense, and so of the rest. Now, going back to
these times when there was no writing, Moses wanted to give an
account of the creation which could be remembered, and so I think
he put it into a mnemonic form for this purpose. I have explained
the rest of the Sabbath in that same lecture, showing how the same
relative sense of the words must be adopted, they must not be
pressed into an exact conformity with the literal sense. But I
never said that the days were to be lengthened out, and I
was surprised to hear Mr. Bright say that I had done so. A


critic present on that occasion bears out my statement. Then
Mr. Bright brings up another matter which he says requires
bringing into harmony with science, and that is that because a
woman looked back she was turned into a pillar of salt. Now it
must be remembered that this was at the destruction of the cities
of the plain, the site now occupied by the Dead Sea. Science tells
us that this has been the scene of earthquakes from time imme-
morial. It is not stretching the imagination to suppose that Lot’s
wife in fleeing from the destruction thus caused, looked back, cast
a longing lingering look behind her, and was stifled by the
exhalations arising from the doomed cities. Mr. Bright says that
science knows nothing about women being encrusted with salt,
but if he chooses to go to the Salt Lake in South Australia he can
buy ram’s heads which have been totally encrusted with salt, and
I do not see why the body of a woman might not be also so
encrusted and turned into a pillar of salt. There is nothing in
Genesis to say that the pillar of salt was standing upright—have
you never seen a pillar lying on the ground? I have seen these
ram’s horns, and see nothing in the statement of Genesis to con-
tradict science. So I make Mr. Bright a present of that expla-
nation, for science knows nothing about Lot’s wife. Certainly if
a person lingered behind it might happen that he or she might
have been suffocated and then turned into a pillar of salt. Then
Mr. Bright has quoted Bishop Moorhouse of Melbourne as if he
were in opposition to me. With regal’d to that I need only say
that the Bishop thoroughly approved of my lecture. Then
Mr. Bright referred to certain Biblical critics and their con-
clusions as to the date of certain portions of Genesis. In reference
to that I will merely say that the only place I have seen such a
criticism was in the pages of Oolenso. With regard to the quo-
tation from the school book which he gave, I do not think that is
taught in our public schools now. I am under the impression
that religion has been banished from our public schools altogether
(No). Well lam glad to hear it, but I will say that Mr. Bright
has now given the best possible reason why that book at all events
should be kicked out of the schools, and I thank him for calling
attention to the fact that the book is used. Then with regard to
the opening the windows of Heaven, is there no such thing as
metaphor in the world ? Did you never talk of rain coming down
in bucketfuls? Where were the buckets? That is just as fair a
question as Mr. Bright’s. Why, we even talk of it raining cats
and dogs, but we do not mean it literally. I contend that that is
a perfectly legitimate answer to .Mr. Bright. lam not aware,
ladies and gentlemen, whether there are any other questions that
Mr. Bright has asked me that I have not answered, but I should
like to read yon an account that is given in a spiritualistic journal
of the creation of the world. Mr. Denton told us in one of his
lectures that Psychometry would tell people more about the facts
of the universe than mathematics could teach them, and since


reading this I believe it. Here is the extract; —“ In the beginning
God, the holy procedure, inhabited the dome, which burning in
magnificence primeval, and revolving in prismatic and undulatory
spiral, appeared and was the pavilion of the spirit, in glory inex-
haustible and inconceivable in movement spherical unfolded in
harmonious procedure disclosive And God made two
great lights to rule the Zodiac, and to be for creative disclosure,
disclosive manifestation, manifest glory, glorious radiation, inter-
penetrative aggregation, and thence vortices, vorticle suns, suns of
vortices, solariums, vertical planetariums, floral universes, and
final consociative universal intelligence in unity of innumerable
individuality,” and so on for a lot more of the same stuff. If you
will compare that with the majestic account in the first chapter of
Genesis, and with the account from the book of science, I think
you will see that there is a marvellous agreement between the
story of Moses and that of modern science, which no other account
has approached. The attempt to pit science and the Bible,
one against the other, must end with intelligent people in failure.
-g aL.
™ ’ t * t ’* * } ’ cr


Second Day —Wednesday, 23rd May.
The Chairman —Ladies and Gentlemen—Mr. Bright.
Mr. Bright —Mr. Chairman, Ladies, and Gentlemen, I may-
say at the outset this evening that it is an evidence of the
interest taken in this debate that, so far as I am concerned, I have
received a small volume of letters and suggestions ; and all I can
hope is that the reverend gentleman who takes the opposite side
in the discussion may, for his peace of mind’s sake, have received as
many. It is hardly necessary to state to those who have favored
me with such suggestions that in a limited debate such as this—
limited as regards time, I mean —all that the disputants can do is to
take up the broader issues presented to their view by a considera-
tion of the subject. I endeavored to do this last evening, and I
propose this evening to take a similar course. I shall now refer
as briefly as possible to two or three of the points presented by
Mr. Spicer in his closing address last evening, and then proceed
to add further instances in which I conceive that these writings of
Genesis conflict with science. The reverend gentleman said last
night in order to meet a difficulty which, as we know, it is needful
for those who take his position to meet —in order to meet the
evidences that science has adduced—he expressed his conviction
that Adam was not the first man, that there might have been a
race of beings before Adam. In the first place in regard to that,
I would say that the account in Genesis, popularly accepted,
states the order of creation : that on the third day the vegeta-
tion appeared; on the fifth day, the birds; and on the sixth
day, the animals, and that on the same sixth day Adam was
created. Well of course the question presents itself—lf there
were a pre-Adamite race, on what did they feed before there was
anything on the earth for them to partake of. Of course this is
not one of the real difficulties I have to encounter in this debate,
because it is not an issue raised in Genesis, but is an issue raised
by the reverend gentleman himself on this platform, although
previously, doubtless frequently advanced by writers who have
endeavoured to undertake this task of harmonising Genesis with
science. In a volume which the reverend gentleman follows
tolerably closely in his argument, —“Moses and Geology,” by Dr.
Kinns—in that volume this same idea is broached in order to get
over the difficulty that science presents of these remains of men
found in so many different portions of the earth’s strata along
with the remains of animals, long since extinct. Remains of the
latter and of human beings, evidently cave-dwellers, are found in
the same deposits of the earth. In the book to which I refer, and
which the reverend gentleman so closely follows, Dr. Kinns
presents this conception of a previous creation of men—two crea-
tions of men, in short. Now in a somewhat amusing review of
Dr. Kinn’s book, which appeared in the London Times of August
23, of last year, I find this very assumption ridiculed. The Times


characterises this endeavor of the author to overcome the
difficulty as, “an expedient which proves the alacrity and sim-
plicity of his own faith, whatever scholars and linguists may say
to itevidently implying that Dr. Kinns could not make good
his position against the scholars and linguists of Europe. But
these are side issues, and have little to do with this debate. It
was further stated by my reverend antagonist, as another method
of getting over one of the difficulties I presented as a contradic-
tion between Genesis and Science, that in regard to the length o
the patriarchal lives, the centuries recorded in Genesis represented
the duration not of single lives, but of clans, and that it was to
the clans dying out that the extreme length of time referred. In
this way we have the clan Adam and the clan Methusaleh. Now
I want to know how a clan does die out. Only, as far as I know,
by the failure of issue. Now if Adam’s issue failed, and the clan
Adam died out, whose children are we 1 I have certainly been
under the supposition that, according to the account contained in
Genesis, we were all assumed to be the children of Adam, that
we constituted the great clan Adam ourselves. But now we are
told that the clan Adam died out in 930 years, so that we are left
poor orphans in this universe. Moreover, there is yet another
difficulty to be encountered in regard to that previous suggestion
of Mr. Spicer’s as to Adam not being the first man, when we
adopt the course which I pointed out last night we are directed
to take in the celebrated Westminster Confession, and seek to
interpret Scripture by Scripture itself. Now going to other parts
of Scripture for information in regard to this question, I find that
Paul in dealing with the resurrection of the dead in the 15th
chapter of Ist Corinthians, and the 45th verse, says, “ And so it
is written, the first man Adam was made a living soul; the last
Adam was made a quickening spirit The first man
is of the earth, earthy ; the second man is the Lord from Heaven.”
Hence it appears that Paul laboured under the same misconception
as myself, that taking the Genesis account as presented to us,
Adam was in reality the first man. I must leave Paul to be
dealt with by my reverend antagonist in his next address. lam
told further that I misconceive my reverend friend’s meaning
relative to the “ days ” being more than 24 hours long. He says
now that he accepts the days of creation as days of 24 hours, and
wonders that I should have failed in discerning it. I confess I
am still somewhat in the dark upon the question, for I cannot
understand what is the meaning of that poetical presentation of
his under the form of Shakespeare’s “ Seven Ages of Man.”
Why does he interpolate the words “ evening and morning ” in
that address, but to show how the “ days” may be stretched out ?
If he does not want them stretched, why show how the
elastic process is to be accomplished ? There is yet another of
the reverend gentleman’s arguments to which I have to make brief
reference, namely, that Mr. Spicer last night closed his address


with an account of the creation, which he said was taken from a
spiritualistic publication. I feel under no concern to reconcile
that account with the statements of science; it can go for what
it is worth ; if science contradicts it, I am prepared to pay no
heed to it whatever ; I am not here to defend that account of
which I know nothing, hut the reverend gentlemen is here to
defend Genesis. One of his modes of making that defence is to
declare that the arguments I use against him are old ones, as old
as the time of Oelsus. Ido not deny it; but regarding Celsus, I
would say that considering that the Rev. Mr. Spicer introduced
that ancient opponent of Christianity to you with such a flourish
of trumpets as somebody unknown to the whole of the audience,
I think he might have given you his true date. I thought at
the time that he was bringing him too near to our own age, but
was really afraid to contradict so confident an authority. Now,
however, I would say that in bringing him down to the middle
of the seventh century, he was altering Celsus’ epoch by more
than 400 years. Again, Mr. Spicer appeared to think that he
was making a strong case in pointing out that I said science did
not know certain things, such as of women being turned into
pillars of salt and so on, and argued that as science knows
nothing of these things, therefore it cannot contradict them.
Now let us apply that argument to some other writings than
those of Genesis. Take Shakespeare’s “ Midsummer Night’s
Dream ” for instance. Suppose the fairy personages described in
that exquisite romance, were declared to be realities, science
could and would only say we do not know anything of these
fairies, and not knowing them we say that they are contradictory
to known facts. To contradict in any other way would be
dogmatic, and true science is not dogmatic. It simply says we
do not know anything about these things, they are opposed to
what we do know, and if you conceive them to be true you must
produce your evidence. With regard to the power working in
the universe, which people have called God, and dogmatised in
such various ways about it, science does know. Science is
meeting continually with that power, the mystery underlying
phenomena, but seeing that the finite intellect cannot possibly
comprehend it, science terms it the Unknowable. It is in-
comprehensible ; just as Mr. Spicer’s own creeds say, though
they, after so declaring, proceed to profess to comprehend, and
to state exactly how many persons it consists of, and the nature
of its attributes. Science on the other hand, finding it, him, or
her—for as I said before, nothing so human and finite as gender
can be applicable to it—finding this mysterious power incompre-
hensible, leaves it so, and passes on to study that which can be
comprehended. Now I will rapidly proceed to show some
further points in which this tradition, as I deem it, of Genesis,
differs from the statements of science, and contradicts them.
Last night I very cursorily referred to a portion of Genesis


which I will now proceed to speak of more in detail. If the-
re verend gentleman could altogether succeed in proving—which
I fear he never will do—that the two varying accounts of the
creation are not contradictory to the statements of science, his.
task would then only be just commenced, for there is in reality
a third creation set forth in the hook of Genesis a little further
on. The world you must never forget is according to Genesis
destroyed. After it has been created, all the living things it
contains are caused to die, and there has to be what in reality
means a fresh creation, so far as large parts of the earth are
concerned. Animals and plants have to be scattered once
more abroad over the face of the globe. Here then is a
tremendous difficulty to face in reconciling Genesis with science,,
for science declares that no such vast body of water as would be
required to satisfy the tradition, could be formed within the
limits of our atmosphere. Five miles high, for it covered the
highest mountains, this body of water must have been. Science
also declares that it would have been impossible as a mathe-
matical fact for a specimen of each of the respective species to
have been kept alive in that majestic ship which Noah was
commissioned to construct. I find in Sir John Lubbock’s ac-
count of “Fifty Years of Science,” which constituted his address as
president of the British Association in 1881, that he states that of
animals there are now known something like 320,000 different
species. Here is a pretty considerable menagerie to preserve
alive. It is known that there are at the least 6000 different species
of birds, 650 species of reptiles, and some 750,000 species of
insects. Now the ark would be tolerably well filled with pairs
of all of these species, and when we come to remember also that
not only had all these animals, birds, reptiles, and insects to be
kept for a year and seventeen days, but that the food requisite
for them had also to be kept, and that eight people only had to
do all the attendance upon them, I say we have a statement in
Genesis which appears to be a flat contradiction of what we-
know as science. Moreover, we are told that when the flood
was abated, Noah, who was in charge of this remarkable ship
and cargo, sent out a dove, which returned with an olive leaf in
its beak. It does not appear to have been known to the writer,
that such plants require to breathe the air at certain periods, just
as much as animals, and that an olive tree after it had been sub-
merged for a year or more, would not have many leaves for a
dove to pluck. Any one who has seen a country after even a
very moderate flood, will know the state the land is left in
when the waters subside. Yet another difficulty in this
astounding story, and that is—that there are certain animals
which not only at the present day are peculiar to certain portions
of the world, but from the deposits in the earth’s strata we
are taught by paloeontology that these animals have always
lived in these particular parts of the earth, and never any-


where else. Some of these would have required thousands of
years to get to the ark, and thousands of them must have
died by the way. Surely in such a journey as that they
would have left some traces of themselves, especially as they
would have to return by the same route after coming out of
the ark. Yet, no traces are seen, and it is on this account
that science denies the positive statement in Genesis that there
was a universal deluge. To accept the account as true we must
admit that there was a scattering abroad of all animals from one
particular centre of the earth’s surface. Now science, I hold,
denies that. Where shall we look for the scientific dictum upon
such point as this if not in that quite conservative reservoir of
knowledge, the Encyclopaedia Britannica. The articles there are
carefully prepared by the greatest authorities upon the subjects
treated of ; the editors do not rush into speculation, they do not
put things forward that are not matured ; and, 1 find in that
book under the head of “Evolution,” the article being from the
pen of Professor Huxley, these lines:—“No truths brought to
light by biological investigation were better calculated to inspire
distrust of the dogmas intruded on science in the name of
theology, than those which relate to the distribution of animals
and plants on the surface of the earth. Yery skilful accommo-
dation was needful if the limitation of sloths to South America,
and of the ornithorynchus to Australia, was to be reconciled with
the literal interpretation of the history of the deluge; and with
the establishment of the existence of distinct provinces of distri-
bution, any serious belief in the peopling of the world by
migration from Mount Ararat came to an end. Under these
circumstances only one alternative was left for those who denied
the occurrence of evolution, namely, the supposition that the
characteristic animals and plants of each great province were
created, as such, within the limits in which we find them. And
as the hypothesis of ‘ specific centres ’ thus formulated was
heterodox from the theological point of view, and unintelligible
under its scientific aspect, it may be passed over without further
notice as a phase of transition from the creational to the
evolutional hypothesis.” Such are the words found in that article
in the Encyclopaedia Britannica , that all serious belief in the
statement of Genesis is at an end, thus showing very clearly and
distinctly that the statements of Genesis and science are in
direct contradiction. I would, moreover, ask my reverend
opponent if there be no conflict between the statements of
Genesis and those of science, how does it happen that some of
the foremost scientists of our day are disbelievers in a revelation
of this kind 1 Ido not think, if we went over the whole
scientific range we could find more eminent names than those of
Darwin, Huxley, Herbert Spenser, and Tyndall, but of these
four, countrymen of our own, to say nothing of the great
scientists of Germany led on by Ernst Haeckel, not one of them


is a believer in this alleged revelation. Surely here is some proof
that science finds itself in conflict with revelation. Before
concluding, I wish to call attention to another portion of Genesis,
and point out that in another science, and that the most exact
of all, the science of mathematics, Genesis once more finds itself
in conflict. We are given an account in the 46th chapter of
Genesis of the migration of Jacob and his followers into Egypt,
and I have made some calculations from the facts presented.
Jacob is said to have been 130 years old when he went into
Egypt. Now Joseph was thirty years of age when he obtained
authority over the granaries of Egypt. After this there were
.seven years of plenty and seven years of famine. It is fair to
conclude that Jacob and his followers went into Egypt about the
middle of the seven years of famine, thus bringing Joseph to the
age of about forty, so that he must have been born when Jacob
was about 90. Judah was born about nine years before Joseph,
when Jacob, therefore, was 81. Now, from 81 to 130 are 49
years. In that time Judah, according to Genesis, had to grow
up and become a man, and have three children of his own.
Allow for that the very moderate term of 20 years, which is, at
least, nine years less than the account given in Genesis would
indicate. Two of his sons grow up, marry, and die. Allow for
that another twenty years. Their widow then undertakes to
wait until the third son is old enough to marry. She waits, and
afterwards has twins by Judah himself, their names being Pharez
and Zarah. Allowing five years for this, we have 45 out of the
49 years consumed. Yet we are told that this Pharez was among
the seed of Jacob, who with their wives, sixty-six souls in all,
accompanied Jacob into Egypt, and with Pharez, then about
three or four years of age, were his two sons Hezron and Hamul.
Here, then, is another difficulty which I present to the reverend
gentleman. There are only 49 years for him into which to pack
all these four generations. As corroborative of my assertion
regarding Jacob’s age when Judah was born we have assurance
that he must have been at least 70 years old when he first visited
Laban,for we are told that his father, Isaac, at the time when Jacob
played the celebrated trick upon him of the false hairy face and
hands, thus getting his blessing instead of poor Esau, was old
and blind, and, as he lived to the age of 180, he could, at this
time, have been hardly under 110 or 120, and he could not have
been so unless Jacob had been about 70. You have, therefore,
to cram into those 49 years the generations I have named,
furnishing us with another statement of Genesis which is contra-
dicted by science.
The Bey. E. 0. Spicer —Ladies and Gentlemen, I do not
wish to begin this evening by prejudicing many of you against
me as I did last night, but whether I do so or not, I hope you
will allow me to say just a few words without interrupting me,
and if you then disagree with what I say, I must sit down and


wait. I think that it is only due to myself to state the reasons
why I spoke disparagingly of Mr. Denton yesterday, and I hope
you will listen to me while Ido so. There are, as far as I know,
only two gentlemen who have come forward to pit science
against Genesis, one of whom is Mr. Denton—for he is no
professor —and the other is Mr. Bright. Now I asked the
foremost geologist in Sydney for his opinion of Mr. Denton as a
scientific man, and he said, “He is a charlatan.” I wrote to
Professor M‘Coy, of Melbourne, to whom I referred yesterday,
asking if he recognised Mr. Denton as a scientific man, and his
answer was an underlined No. Now, until an eminent man
comes forward to pit science against Genesis, 1 contend that the
opinions of those who have come forward must be taken to have
really less weight than I think you are prepared to give them, for
Mr. Bright himself admits that he is not a scientific man. I
thank you very much for kindly listening to my explanation ;
now as Mr. Bright, though not a scientific man himself, takes in
this debate the position of a man of science, I want to make this
statement concerning those who take that position : As men of
science you profess to verify your facts for yourselves ; you, of all
men, have the least right to ground an argument on popular and
unverified impressions, such as Mr. Bright has been doing this
evening. (Disorder.)
The Chairman —It is simply disgraceful for any man in this
assembly to hiss. If he has any opinions on this question, he
only disgraces himself and them by such conduct.
The Rev. E. 0. Spicer —You, of all men, have the least
right to ground an argument on popular and unverified impres-
sions, and the main charge to which many, who are most forward
in disputing the facts and truths recorded in the Bible, expose
themselves is precisely this, that, while they are very careful to
ascertain all the facts and laws of science, they do not study the
Bible for themselves, and seek with the same care to discover
what its facts and truths really are. If Mr. Bright wants to
know what science is, he goes to Huxley or Tyndall; now, if
people would do this with the Bible, verify the facts for them-
selves, instead of negligently taking the popular assertions—
which everywhere else they distrust—and so much they are bound
to do if they will speak not only of Scripture and science, but of
the most difficult portions of Holy Scripture, it is very certain
that they would arrive at conclusions very different from those
which they now too commonly reach. Mr. Bright has told you of
four scientific men who have said something against Holy
Scripture ; now, because a man is an eminent scientist in one
direction, it does not make him eminent in another. Theology is
a science of itself, Biblical criticism is another, and there is.
another—the science of God. Now Huxley may be an agnostic ;
he is one. He “ does not know ” anything about these matters,
and hence his opinion is not of great value. A theologian is the


test interpreter of theology. Suppose that a man falls off one of
■our trains, and some one says : “ Hun for a doctor ; ” what would
you think of the man who said, “ No, run for Sir Henry Parkes;
the doctor has a lot of preconceived notions about the way to set
a limb, from which Sir Henry Parkes is free” 1 Now, I will give
you the statement of no less than 617 scientific men—you will
find it in my pamphlet as follows :
“We, the undersigned students of the Natural Sciences,
desire to express our sincere regret that researches into scientific
truth are perverted by some in our own times into occasions for
casting doubt upon the truth and authencity of the Holy
Scriptures.
“We conceive that it is impossible for the Word of God as
written in the book of Nature, and God’s Word written in Holy
Scripture, to contradict one another, however much they may
appear to differ.
“We are not forgetful that physical science is not complete,
but is only in a condition of progress, and that at present our
finite reason enables us only to see as through a glass darkly, and
we confidently believe that a time will come when the two records
will be seen to agree in every particular.
“We cannot but deplore that Natural Science should be
looked upon with suspicion by many who do not make a study of
it, merely on account of the unadvised manner in which some are
placing it in opposition to the Holy Writ.
“We believe that it is the duty of every scientific student
to investigate Nature simply for the purpose of elucidating truth,
and that if he finds that some of his results appear to be in contra-
diction to the written Word, or rather to his own interpretations
of it, which may be erroneous, he should not presumptuously
affirm that his own conclusions must be right, and the statements
of Scripture wrong. Rather leave the two side by side till it
shall please God to allow us to see the manner in which they may
be reconciled; and instead of insisting upon the seeming differences
between science and the Scriptures, it would be as well to rest in
faith upon the points in which they agree.”
I believe it is true that in one of the first lectures Mr.
Bright gave when he came to Sydney, he stated it as a fact that
in America the lion and the lamb were lying down together, as it
was beginning to be seen that religion and science could be
reconciled the one with the other. If lam wrong, I must blame
the reporter for a misrepresentation of Mr. Bright’s meaning.
Now, ladies and gentlemen, before replying to Mr. Bright’s argu-
ments, I should like to bring before you a few points in which
science and Scripture agree, but before doing so let me correct
an existing impression, that I admit that science has taught
theologians a more liberal interpretation of Scripture. lam
going to show you that science has done nothing of the sort, that
these views were held by theologians before science knew


anything of the matter. With regard to “ the beginning,” and
the lapse of time between it and the first day, see Clemens of
Alexandria, Origen, Augustine, Chrysostom, Gregory Nazianzen,
and Justin Martyr. As for the light existing outside the earth,
but not coming through the cloudy envelope, St. Basil, St.
Csesarius, and Origen bear testimony. With regard to the-
firmament, they said nothing, because the idea of a solid firma-
ment was put in by later writers, it does not belong there at all.
It was put in by those who were not scientific men. Ruskin, if
you read him, says something about people looking at the
level edge of a cloud, which might readily suggest the division
between the waters above and the waters below. Then as to the
length of the days, showing that the word “ day ” does not
represent an actual period of 24 hours, we have Augustine and
Bede, who speak as follows, Augustine says : “ Illorum autem
'priores tres sine sole peracti sunt qui quarto factus refertur ,” “ the
first three of these (days) was finished without the sun, which is
mentioned as created on the fourth ;” while Bede says, “ Fortassis
nomen (diei) omnia volumina saeculorum hoc vo-
cabulo includit,” “ perchance this name (of day) includes all the
roll of ages in one word.” So you see it is not true that science
has taught a more liberal interpretation of Scripture in this
matter. Now in regard to pre-Adamite man, Peyreyrius wrote
in 1655 to prove that Genesis I. referred to a pre-Adamite race,
and Genesis 11. to the Adamite, the direct ancestor of the Jewish
and allied races. The words are not “ let us make the Adam,”
but “ let us make an Adam,” that is to say, a man. It is simply
the name for the race. It is the second chapter that refers to the
Adam, the direct ancestor of the Jews, Now with regard to the
clan Adam not being extinguished, it appears to me that Mr.
Bright’s objection is a very frivolous one ; for it is well known
that families do die out, and the history of Scottish clans
furnishes an example. Then with regard to Celsus, I must give
Mr. Bright the advantage of having found me out in an error, I
gave the date of Origen’s referring to Celsus, instead of that of
Celsus himself.* But with regard to the symbolic interpretation
Origen says, that “ Breathed into his nostrils the breath of life,
does not mean that God blew the man up like one would inflate
skins, but that God breathed into man of His incorruptible
spirit,” And again “ Plato spoke in a befitting manner to
those who knew how to ascertain his true meaning,” and
Origen says “Are Greeks alone at liberty to convey a philosophic
meaning in a secret manner T Indeed this reminds me of an old
Latin saying “ Aut inveniam discrepantiam, aid faciam,” “If 1
cannot find a discrepancy, I will make one.” This seems to be
the motto of many modern critics. I now come to certain harmonies
which exist between Genesis and science, taking the definition
of science, which we have agreed upon, viz., systematised knowledge.
*An old note confused the second century for the seventh.


I have searched in vain through Mr. Bright’s addresses for this sys-
tematised knowledge until he quoted Huxley on evolution. These
I accept as the statements of a seif ntific man. I will divide these
harmonies into geological, chronological, ethnological, philological,
topographical and historical. Now, so far as the geological argu-
ment goes I will refer you to my argument last night. With re-
gard to the chronological harmony, the date of the beginning of
Nimrod’s Chaldean dynasty, in the Bible, is put at between 2200
and 2300 b.c. Rawlinson in his “ Ancient Monarchies ” says
Simplicius gave the date 2234 8.c., and Goldschmidt has
just found out that Berosus and others who wrote about
336 Bc. also give about 2234 b.c. Philo Biblius and Artidemas
• O # #
declared the same thing, while Greek and Hindoo historians also
agree with Genesis as to time. Now, with regard to ethnology,
as I have said, the first chapter gives an account of the history of
men generally, and the second the history of the Adamite race.
Now Moses states that thex-e was a flood, and that all the Adamite
race save eight were destroyed. And here let me answer Mr.
Bright’s statements, by saying that I do not believe the flood was
universal, and that there is nothing in Genesis or in the Bible
to say it was. But we can see how easy it would be for a
people living amongst themselves, as the Adamite race did, and
believing in a flat earth of limited extent, and the heavens to be
the part “heaved up” over it, to come to the conclusion that a
universal flood had taken place, if we imagine that by some great
geological convulsion a large extent of country was reduced below
the sea level, so that the waters of the Caspian Sea, the Aral and
the Black Sea came pouring over it. Then Mr, Bright made a
point of the dove bringing back an olive leaf and apparently does
not know that the olive is one of those trees which will live under
water, but that is a scientific fact. Now Moses says that all the
Adamite race were destroyed save eight who were confined to
one spot, but he mentions other people besides them; there are
the Nephilim, Rephaim, Zuzim, Anakim, and Avim, remnants
of a riotous turbulent and violent race, the aboriginal inhabitants
of the earth. The battle of the Kings of the plain where Lot was
captured, the story of Melchisedek and so on are histories of some of
the same people. But the Adamite race were all confined to one
spot, they built a tower, striving to keep together, and impiously
resisting God, for which their language was confounded, and three
divisions took place, led by the three sons of Noah. In this
connection let us notice the prophecies of Noah respecting his
sons, of whom, says Genesis, the whole earth was overspread.
These were “ Cursed be Canaan“ Blessed be the Lord God of
Shem and “ God shall enlarge Japhet.” Now history tells us
of incursions of a people into Egypt, the Hyksos or Shepherd
Kings. They were a violent and rapacious people who captured
the land, built Nineveh and Babylon, and were driven out to
Greece and Carthage—where their reputation passed into a
proverb descriptive of their double dealing, “Punica mens, Punica


fides”—and to Syria. Being driven from here they went to
America, where they built great cities and perished. Of them it
might he said, “ I went by and lo ! he was gone ; I looked, and
his place was nowhere to be found.” So the prophecy was fulfilled
as regarded the Karaites, Ham being the father of Canaan. And
now with regard to Shem. The Hebrews and the Arabs are the
Semitic races. They are distinct yet, but are closely allied ; they
are the religious people of the world, all we know of religion
comes from the Semites, and so that prophecy. “ Blessed be the
Lord God of Shem,” has been fulfilled. Then we come down to
Japhet the third son of Noah. All the European and Hindoo
races are Japhetic. They are not religious in their nature, and
that is the reason why infidelity finds such a ready soil in the
Japhetic races. It is a fulfilment of prophecy ; they are enlarged
indeed ; all the arts and sciences, all the progress and discovery
of the world are Japhetic in their origin, and here again science
and Genesis are in accord. The Negroes, Mongolians, and
Aboriginal races are all different from them. This brings me to
the philological harmony between science and Moses. There are
three distinct classes of language, ( a ) the Mongolian, or mono-
syllabic, ( h ) the Turanian, or agglutinative language. These two
are the barbarous languages of the pre-adamites, whose decendants
you see in the Chinese, and negroes and aboriginals generally.
Then there is (c) the Caucasian, or inflectional language. This is
divided into three parts. The Hamite language is extinct, with
the exception, perhaps, of the Berberic tongue ; the Semitic how-
ever still exists, and bears a certain resemblance to the Japhetic,
although they are widely different in many respects. The Japhetic
language is the Indo-European, or, Aryan, and is seen in all the
European and Hindoo tongues, including the Sanscrit of the Yedas,
Latin, Greek, and so on. These three groups of the Caucasian lan-
guage form a marvel to comparative philologists; which they cannot
understand. They say, that it is a wonderful and peculiar fact,
that while all other languages seem to have a gradual growth, these
are found suddenly fully formed and capable of expressing high
ideas. You, who study philology, know what an advance it is to
get from a “pooh-pooh ” or a “bow-wow” language, which makes a
child talk of a moo-cow or a baa-lamb, or the Fijian jumble for a
bullock—a “ nambullamacow,” or such as that of the negroes or
our Australian aboriginals, to an inflectional language, which is
capable of expressing these high connotative ideas. This, then, is
the language, I think, that God spoke to Adam in Paradise. The
difference between my God and Mr. Bright’s God is that I believe
in a God who can communicate with His children if He wants
to; and I believe that, if we are His children, He would want to
communicate with us, and that He has done so, and here I find
the record of His having done so. Now, about the topography
of the Scriptures. Nothing can be more certain than that the
Scripture records of places are true ; the bricks and marbles of


Babylon tell us this, and all research points with separate fingers
towards the plains of Bhinar as the scene of Biblical history.
Nineveh, and Babylon, and Warka, and Accad have all been
identified ; and I contend that Mr. Bright has not proved his
case, until he has answered every single word about every single
town and place that I have brought before you. I can sweep
away all that he said about the Deluge, by saying at once that
there was no such thing as a universal Deluge; but, when I find
history and Genesis speaking of Nineveh, and Babylon, &c., I do
not think my statements can be swept away by mere assertions.
Now, this brings me down to the historical argument. The
universal tradition of all Caucasian people authenticates the
Flood ; it is only the other day that an Assyrian tablet was dug
up, absolutely confirming every statement made in Genesis about
the Flood. Abraham is by the Arabs called “the friend of
God ; ” the Hebrews are represented in Egyptian sculptures ; and
as to Cain, there is a curious fact about him, or, at any rate, his
descendants, in Chinese history. A people once came to China,
who taught the Chinese various arts, which they have always
retained, but have never improved upon. Now, that often
puzzles people ; but, when it is remembered that Tubal Cain, who
was a descendant of Cain, was an artificer in metals—in brass
and iron—l think we may presume that he went into Mongolia,
and taught the Chinese these things, which they have never
improved upon. Now, I will read you some extracts from
Rawlinson upon this subject of the harmony between Genesis and
history:—
“ The events related from the fourteenth to the thirty-ninth
chapter of Genesis, are altogether of so private a nature, that
profane history could scarcely be expected to notice them. Our
information, moreover, with respect to the time is scanty, and
scarcely extends to Palestine, the scene of the events narrated.
When, however, we come to the history of Joseph we are once
more brought into contact with the important kingdom of Egypt,
a kingdom of which, even at this remote date, we have consider-
able knowledge, derived in part from ancient authors ; in part
from the native monuments, which occasionally it is believed
reach back to this remote period. Here then profane history may
once more be applied to test the veracity of the narrative; and it
may be inquired whether the Egypt of Joseph agrees or disagrees
with the Ancient Egypt of the monuments of the old classical
writers. Now the chief features of the Egypt depicted in the
later chapters of Genesis, seem to be the following The mon-
archy, noted in Genesis xii., continues. The king still bears the
title of “ Pharaoh." He is absolute, or nearly so, committing
men to prison (xl. 3), and releasing them (ib. 21), or, if he
please, ordering their execution (ib. 22) ; appointing officers over
the whole land, and taxing it apparently at his pleasure (ib. 34) ;
raising a foreigner suddenly to the second position in the king-


dom, and requiring all, without exception, to render him
obedience (ib. 41-44), At the same time the king has counsellors
or ministers “elders of his house” (1. 7), and others, whose
advice he asks, and without whose sanction he does not seem to
act in important matters (xli. 37-38). His Court is organized
after the fashion of later Oriental monarchies. He has a body-
guard under a commander or “ captain,” one of whose chief duties
is to execute the sentences which he pronounces upon offenders
(xxxvii. 36). He has a train of confectioners, at the head of
whom is a “ chief confectioner ” (xl. 2), and a train of cup-bearers,
at the head of whom is a “ chief cup-bearer” (ib.) He rides in a
chariot, and all men bow the knee before him (xli. 43). The
state of Egypt is one of somewhat advanced civilization. There
are distinct classes of soldiers (xxxvii. 36), priests (xlvii. 22),
physicians (1. 2), and herdsmen (xlvi. 34, xlvii. 6). There is also
a class of “ magicians ” (xli. 8) or “ sacred scribes,” who may be
either a subdivision of the priests or form a distinct profession.
The name given to this last class implies that writing is practised.
Among other indications of advance in civilization are the men-
tion of “ fine linen,” as worn by some (ib. 42), of a golden neck-
chain (ib.), a silver drinking cup (xliv. 2), wagons (xlv. 21),
chariots (1. 9), a coffin, or mummy case (ib. 26), and the practice
of embalming (ib. 2-26). Among special peculiarities of the
nation are (1) the position of the priests, which is evidently very
exalted (xli. 45), and more particularly their privilege with
respect to their lands, which they hold by a different tenure from
the rest of the people (xlvii. 22) ; (2) the existence of customs
implying strong feelings with respect to purity and impurity, and
a great dread of material defilement (xliii. 32) ; (3) a special
dislike or contempt for the occupation of herdsmen ; and (4) a
greater liberty with respect to the intermixture of the sexes than
is common in the East, with a consequent licentiousness in the
conduct of the women (xxxix 7-12). Other noticeable points are,
the great fertility of the soil, the existence of numerous granaries
(xli. 56), the practice of carrying burdens upon the head (xl. 16);
the use, by the monarch, of a signet ring (xli. 42); the employ-
ment of bought slaves (xxxix. 1) ; the importation of spices from
Arabia (xxvii. 25) ; the use of stewards (xxxix. 41, xliv. 1); the
washing of guests’ feet (xliii. 24) ; the practice of sitting at meals
(ib. 38) ; the use of wine (xl. 11, xliii. 34), and meat (xliii. 16) ;
and the employment of some mode, which is not explained, of
divination by cups (xliv. 5). It may be broadly stated that in
this entire description there is not a single feature which is out
of harmony with what we know of the Egypt of this remote
period from other sources. Hay more, almost every point in it is
confirmed either by the classical writers, by the monuments, or
by both.” But as I have only another minute left, and it will
take me fully ten minutes to read the statement, without making
any comments upon it at all, I will wait to conclude it until my
turn comes again.


Mr. Bright —There is a lot to be done yet, so we had better
get to busipess at once.* I will, in the first place, allude to two or
three of the minor points taken by my reverend opponent. First
Mr. Spicer corrects himself with regard to Celsus. In speaking
of the middle of the 7th century he states that it was not Celsus
to whom he was alluding, but Origen replying to Celsus. I have,
however, to inform the reverend gentlemen that Origen’s date also
is early in the third century. Then lam told by my friend that
the flood was not universal. Well I appeal to the language of
Genesis itself, and I find that it says : —“And the waters prevailed
exceedingly upon the earth, and all the high hillsthat were under the
whole heaven were covered. Fifteen cubits upward did the waters
prevail, and the mountains were covered. And all flesh died that
moved upon the earth, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of beast,
and of every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth, and
every man.” That seems to me to be plain enough, but I would
further ask if the flood were not universal, but only partial, why
should Noah take the birds into the ark 1 Surely they could
easily get away from a partial flood. Again the ark, we are told,
rested on Mount Ararat. Now Mount Ararat is 17,000 feet high,
or more than three miles, and it must have been a tolerable pile
of water that would cover it. Assuredly science knows of no
way in which that mountain could have been submerged less than
5000 years ago. Now I know, as Mr. Spicer said, that the olive
will grow under water, but will it grow under water for over a
year, especially if that water has been mixed with the salt water
of the ocean ? Then another observation made was, that my
objections are not scientific. If they be not, Mr. Spicer has a
strange mode of answering them. Why does he alter his inter-
pretation of Scripture to suit them ? He does it because the
absolute statements of science have shown the literal meaning of
the Bible to be no longer tenable. Then he has said that a child can
put questions on these subjects which learned men cannot answer,
but we are dealing with questions of the most serious importance
to all mankind. Even “ ignorant and conceited ” people are to be
damned to all eternity if wrong. They are not to be saved by
saying they did not know, they have to know. Hence the
necessity of complete clearness in statements of this kind. My
friend says he believes in a God that will and can communicate
with man, and has done so. So do I, but I believe the modes of
communication are different from those approved by Mr. Spicer.
I believe He is communicating to us through the work of those
noble men of genius who are devoting their lives to the study of
the great volume of nature, but not through these conflicting
revelations ascribed to him by differing sections of humanity.
There is some truth in all these traditions doubtless, but that does
not prove any of them, whether the Bible of the Jews, that of the
Christians, the Vedas of the Hindoos, or the Koran of the
*This remark was made in deprecation of prolonged applause.


Mahomedans to be infallible revelations. The true religion, the
religion of humanity, is undoubtedly reconcilable with science.
Tyndal well says, “It is against the mythologic scenery rather
than the life and substance of religion, that science enters her
protest,”* meaning by the term “ mythologic scenery ” as it
would appear precisely such stories as we find in this tradition of
Genesis. My reverend friend spoke of Mr. Denton in a disparaging
manner. lam not going to spend time in his behalf, because he
does not need it. If there be men whom we term scientific who
declare him to be a “ charlatan,” well, he is not the first brave man
who has been called names by those who plume themselves on their
diplomas. For myself Ido not claim to be a scientific man, but I
do claim to be one of those who should understand Genesis if it be
explicable in anyway whatever. I read Genesis and scientific works
for myself, compare them for myself, and it is through this read-
ing and comparison that I discern that they conflict with each
other, and when I find myself sustained in this belief by such eminent
men as I have mentioned, I feel justified in the conclusions which
I have reached. The reverend gentleman says he has 617 men of
science who declare Science and Scripture to be in harmony. Now
Galton could only find 300 scientific men in England to whom to
send questions, and of these he picked out 180 as being of suffi-
cient reputation for his purpose, of whom there were very few
indeed who would admit that they believed in these revelations.
But even if there were far more than these 617 of inferior note in
the scientific world, what would that weigh against the name of
Charles Darwin, for instance ? I find that the eminent German
scientist, Haeckel —a man who stands in the front rank of scientific
research throughout the world —says in the preface to his admirable
“ History of Creation “Proud as England may be to be called
the fatherland of Newton, who, with his law of gravitation,
brought inorganic nature under the dominion of natural laws of
cause and effect, yet may she, with even greater pride, reckon
Charles Darwin among her sons, he who solved the yet harder
problem of bringing the complicated phenomena of organic nature
under the sway of the same natural laws.” And what do I
find to be Charles Darwin’s conviction on this question?
in a letter he penned in reply to a German student—a letter
which was refused admission into nearly all the English news-
papers, there being only the Spectator and Pall Mall Gazette,
with the exception of the avowedly Freethought papers, which
would allow this letter to appear, showing thus what a conspiracy
of silence is set up when any truly great man speaks out against
the popular theology—Charles Darwin writes :
“ Sir, —I am very busy, and am an old man, in delicate
health, and have not time to answer your questions fully, even
assuming that they are capable of being answered at all. Science
-and Christ have nothing to do with each other, except in as far as
Article entitled “ Virchow and Evolution,” in Nineteenth Century.


the habit of scientific investigation makes a man cautious about
accepting any proofs. As far as lam concerned, Ido not believe
that any revelation has ever been made. With regard to a future
life, every one must draw his own conclusions from vague and
contradictory probabilities. Wishing you well,
I remain,
Your obedient servant,
Down, June sth, 1879. Charles Darwin.”
That letter appeared in the Spectator of the 30th September, and
in the Pall Mall Gazette of the 23rd September last. But I would
say further that not merely these great scientists—and it is only
a few scientists who are really worthy of the name of great—
have been charged with a disbelief in orthodoxy. These charges
have been made against every one in his day who has been seen
to be in advance of the opinion of his time. Bacon had charges
of atheism brought against him. So with Newton, who would
now be introduced as a shining light on behalf of orthodoxy;
but in his own day Leibnitz affirmed that Newton had “robbed
the Deity of some of his most excellent attributes, and had sapped
the foundations of natural religion.” As for the gentleman in
Melbourne, so eulogised by Mr. Spicer—Professor McCoy—he is,
doubtless, a good classifier and collector, and a persistent seeker
after learned titles ; but to attempt to put him abreast of men
like Darwin, and Huxley, and Tyndall, and Haeckel, is a most
monstrous assumption on the part of any one. My reverend
friend, I find, modestly says he is not infallible, like Genesis. I
think he is just as infallible as Genesis. Genesis, if we look to
it, as we must do, for its own presentations of alleged scientific
fact, is found to be completely fallible. Moreover, it is useless to
assert that we are not to go to the Bible for facts of this nature,
for they are presented there to us, and, being there, it is necessary
to contrast them with the facts of science, and, when so con-
trasted their fallibility and absurdity are evidenced. My friend
says that Biblical criticism is a science; I admit it, and what do
we find it saying in reference to Genesis 1 Does it believe that it
is an infallible communication from the Deity 1 Not in the least.
My friend said that he only knew of Colenso supporting one
proposition I furnished; but Colenso only corroborates and upholds
the results of the labours of the modern critics of Germany.
What is known as the Tubingen school of critics has ransacked
the Scriptures, and has fixed from internal evidence the epochs in
which most of the books of the Bible were produced. The con-
clusions have been reached after most severe research in all direc-
tions. Now let us have recourse once more to that conservative
publication, the Encyclopcedia Britannica, for the result of this
research, so far as a portion of Genesis is concerned. I find
Professor Robertson Smith—a reverend authority himself—
writing about the Elohistic aud Jehovistic portions of Genesis,
says ;—“ That the way in which the two names are used can


•only be due to difference of authorship is now generally admitted
for the alteration corresponds with such important duplicates as
the two accounts of Creation, and is regularly accompanied
through a great part of the book by unmistakable peculiarities
of language and thought, so that it is still possible to re-construct
at least the Elohim document with a completeness which makes
its original independence and homogeneity a matter of direct
observation.”* In that publication, then, which purports to
give not speculation, but the absolute results of scientific
criticism, this hook of Genesis is shown to be of varying author-
ship, and comparatively late dates are given as those at which
some of the fragments were written.
The Rev. E. 0. Spicer —l came here to argue about the
statements of science and Genesis, not to go over a lot of ground
about Tyndall, and Huxley, and Darwin, and the rest of it. I
leave that to Mr. Bright, begging you all to observe that he has
not attempted to answer a single argument I used in the half-
hour that I was speaking to you, and for proof of this I will
appeal to the printed report which is about to be published, and
ask you to compare my speech with his and see if he has done so.
Now with regard to Hezron and Hamul, the stress of Mr. Bright’s
argument rests upon the preposition “ with,” but that preposition
does not exist in the Hebrew, but another which signifies “to,” “of,”
“ belonging to.” The accurate translation is, “ All the souls of or
belonging to Jacob, who came down into Egypt, were sixty-six.”
It is nowhere stated that Hamul and Hezron accompanied Jacob,
and the expressions “ came ” or “ went down into Egypt ” have a
wide signification, including those who did not emigrate into
Egypt, but were born there ; and that is the answer to Mr. Bright’s
somewhat vulgar objection. With regard to the “ first Adam”
and the “ last Adam,” I do not see how that bears on the
question, but the “ first Adam ” was the first of the Adamite race,
with whom God came into covenant, the “ last Adam ” was the
Lord Jesus Christ. Now with regard to the people in Germany who
said there were only some 330 scientific men in England, I answer
that by saying that the Germans allege that there is only one
Greek scholar among the English race, and you will be perhaps
gratified and surprised when I tell you that that one is Dr. Badham
of the Sydney IJniversity, but because the Germans say that, do
you actually believe that there are no other English speaking
‘Greek scholars? I will now proceed with the historical com-
parison I commenced in my last address. Rawlinson goes on to
say : —“ The King’s absolute authority appears abundantly from
Herodotus, Diodorus, and others. He enacted laws, imposed
taxes, administered justice, executed and pardoned offenders at
his pleasure. He had a body guard, which is constantly seen on
the sculptures, in close attendance upon his person. He was
assisted in the management of State affairs by the advice of a
* Article on ‘ ‘ The Bible ” : Encyclopaedia Britannica, Current Edition


council, consisting of the most able and distinguished members
of the priestly order. His court was magnificent, and comprised
various grand functionaries, whose tombs are among the most
splendid of the early remains of Egyptian art. When he left his
palace for any purpose he invariably rode in a chariot. His sub-
jects, whenever he appeared, bowed down or prostrated themselves.
With respect to the early civilisation of Egypt, it is especially
noted by those conversant with the subject that the earliest sculp-
tures extant, even those anterior to the pyramid period, which can
scarcely be later than b.c 2400 or 2300, contain traces of a pro-
gress and advance which are most striking and indeed surprising.
‘We see no primitive mode of life ’ says Sir G. Wilkinson ‘ no
barbarous customs, not even the habit so slowly abandoned by
all people, of wearing arms when not on military service, nor any
archaic art ’ In the tombs of the pyramid period are
represented the same fishing and fowling scenes, the rearing of
cattle, and wild animals of the desert, the scribes using the
same kind of reed for writing on the papyrus, the same boats,
the same mode of preparing for the entertainment of guests, the
same trades as glass-blowers, cabinet-makers, and others, as well as
similar agricidtural scenes, implements, and granaries.’ ‘ Les
representations de cette tombe ’ says M. Lenormant, speaking of one
more ancient than the Great Pyramids ‘nous montrent la civilisa-
tion Egyptienne aussi completement organises qu’elle Vetait an moment
de la conquete des Perses ou de celle des Macedoniens, avec une phg-
sionomie completement individuelle et les marques d’une longue exis-
tence anterieicre.’ This civilisation comprises the practice of writing,
the distinction into classes or castes, the peculiar dignity of the
priests, the practice of embalming and of burying in wooden coffins
or mummy cases, the manufacture and use of linen garments, the
wearing of gold chains, and almost all the other points which have
been noted in the Mosaic description. The priests’ privilege with
respect” (disorder).
The Chairman —I must comment upon the hearing which
Mr. Bright receives and that which Mr. Spicer receives ; there is
a distinct difference, and it is not creditable to the supporters of
Mr. Bright.
A voice—We have had enough reading.
The Rev. E. C. Spicer— What does it matter whether I read
it or speak it? “The priests’ privilege with respect to lands
which cannot be proved from the monuments is mentioned by
Herodotus and Diodorus; and the former distinctly states that
the general proprietorship of the lands was vested in the king.
The same writer witnesses to the strong feeling of the Egyptians
with respect to “ uncleanness,” and to their fear of contracting
defilement by contact with foreigners. The Egyptian contempt
for herdsmen appears abundantly on the monuments, where they
.are commonly represented as dirty or unshaven, and sometimes
even caricatured as a deformed and unseemly race. The liberty


allowed to women is likewise seen on the monuments, where, in
the representation of entertainments, we find men and women
frequently sitting together, both strangers and also members of the
same family, and that this liberty was liable to degenerate into
license, appears both from what Herodotus says of the character
of Egyptian women, and from the story told in the Papyrus
d’Orbiney, entitled “ The Two Brothers,” where the wife of the
elder brother acts towards the younger almost exactly as the wife
of Potiphar towards Joseph. The practice of men carrying-
burthens on the head both appears on the monuments, and is also
noticed by Herodotus; that of sitting at meals, which was
unlike the patriarchal and the common oriental custom, is also
completely in accordance with the numerous representations of
banquets found in the tombs ; the washing of guests’ feet, which
does not appear to be represented, is illustrated by a tale in
Herodotus, as well as by the ancient custom of the Greeks ;
divination by cups is noted as an Egyptian superstition by
larablicus; the monuments abound with representations of
stewards and granaries, of the purchase and sale of slaves, and
of the emplyoment of wagons and chariots. The use of a signet
ring by the monarch has recently received a remarkable illustra-
tion by the discovery of an impression of such a signet on fine
clay at Kozunjik, the site of the ancient Nineveh. This seal
appears to have been impressed from the bezel of a metallic finger
ring ; it is an oval, two inches in length by one inch wide, and
bears the image, name, and titles of the Egyptian king Sabaco.
It would weary the reader were we to proceed further with
this confirmation of the Mosaic narrative in all its details.”
Now all these statements I have made are from different
writers, and in every one of these cases the statements of
science and of Genesis corroborate each other. There is something
else with regard to the sons of Joseph, Ephraim and Manasseh.
When Joseph brought them to Jacob to be blessed and admitted
among the Israelitic tribes, Jacob put his right hand on the head of
the younger son instead of on the older, as was expected. Now it is
a wonderful thing that the result in the history of the two tribes,
of Ephraim and Manasseh showed that Jacob was in some way
under divine inspiration in so doing. At the time of Moses,
Manasseh was still 20,000 more in number than Ephraim, but it
was the reverse in the days of the Judges; and even after
Ephraim was next to Judah, the most powerful tribe in Israel. I
cannot find that I have any more arguments of Mr. Bright’s to
answer, and I will therefore give that gentleman the rest of my
time.
Mr. Bright —l must say at the outset that I deeply regret
that any of those who call themselves friends of mine should in
any way curtail the right of hearing of my reverend antagonist.
One point that requires answering in the remarks made last is
where Mr. Spicer, through a misunderstanding, quotes what I said


about the number of scientific men in England as having been ad-
vanced by the Germans. The remark I made came from Francis
Gal ton, F.R.S., a noted scientific man of the present day, cousin
to Charles Darwin, the author of a book on “ Hereditary Genius
a man who has devoted himself with the utmost success to a study
of that abstruse subject—heredity. It was not the Germans at
all. I wish further to say that I cannot quite follow my friend
in his readings from books, as I do not see their bearing on the
present argument. No one assumes that these writings come by
magic into the world, or are simply imaginatve. All traditions
are partly historical, and they may be very largely historical. It
is only when they state something that conflicts with what we
know, that we ask for stronger evidence on behalf of such occur-
rences, and term them contradictory to science until such evidence
is forthcoming. How does Mr. Spicer account for the fact that
in this book of Genesis we read that “ there were giants in those
days,” even assuming that by the term translated “ giants ” is
merely meant people of excessive strength. All old books tell
us of giants. In Homeric, as in Hindoo, Buddhist and Parsee
tradition, we are told about gigantic or strong races. In Homer,
where he speaks of Hector being about to throw a massive stone,
he says, according to Pope’s popular rendering—
“Not ten strong men the enormous weight could raise,
Such men as live in these degenerate days. ”
Old writers were constantly assuming that the past had contained
the grander time they dreamed of, whereas science tends to show
that there never was a people on the earth with a greater average
of height, weight, and strength than those who are living now.
In this particular, as in others, Genesis resembles all old traditions.
Is it surprising then that it should be regarded by scientific ob-
servers in a similar way 1 The story of conflicting science and
religion has been told by Professor Draper of America, who was
spoken of by Tyndall in his memorable Belfast address as the
producer of one of the greatest works of our time, the “ History
of the Intellectual Development of Europe.” In Dr. Draper’s
“ History of the Conflict between Religion and Science ” he says—
“ From the time of Newton to our own time, the divergence
of science from the dogmas of the Church has continually increased.
The Church declared that the earth is the central and most im-
portant body in the universe; that the sun and moon and stars are
tributary to it. On these points she was worsted by astronomy.
She affirmed that a universal deluge had covered the earth ; that
the only surviving animals were such as had been saved in an ark.
In this her error was established by geology. She taught that
there was a first man, who, some six or eight thousand years ago,
was suddenly created or called into existence in a condition of
physical and moral perfection, and from that condition he fell.
But anthropology has shown that human beings existed far back
in geological time, and in a savage state but little better than that


of the brute. Many good and well-meaning.men have attempted to
reconcile the statements of Genesis with the discoveries of science,
but it is in vain. The divergence has increased so much, that it
has become an absolute opposition. One of the antagonists must
give way.”
That is what the historian of this conflict declares, and I would
ask any rational man, if for the first time a traditional account
such as is contained in Genesis were placed before him, what his
opinion would be ? Suppose an account such as this—containing
part history, doubtless, and part fable—suppose such an account
were put before him from any other source, say, for instance, he dis-
covered it in the Book of Mormon—if he found an account of that
character regarding the creation of a woman out of the rib of a
man—or even out of his whole side, stating that the clothes of
certain human beings were made by God, recording reptiles talking,
sons of God coming down and marrying the daughters of men,
a flood covering the whole earth, with animals of all kinds,
including birds, and insects, and creeping things, taken into an
ark ; of a dove being sent out after the lapse of more than a
year and plucking an olive branch, or of the God of the universe
walking in a garden in the cool of the evening, and talking to
his own creatures therein ! If such an account came under his
notice for the first time, what would be his verdict upon it?
I venture to say that the verdict of any rational man, if such an
account were presented to him for the first time, his mind not
impelled to term it sacred by previous training, would be:—
“ This is a narrative of mingled truth and fiction, of fable and
fact, in which the writers probably believed that they were giving
nothing but the truth, the entire truth ; which, however, we are
compelled to see is a tradition which we should study as we
would any other tradition of our race, but which is not to be
taken as an infallible scripture.” If it were not for the fact that
we have been taught in our youth to consider this book of
Genesis as the infallible word of God, such would be the verdict,
I believe, of all rational men with regard to it. And now, as
this is the last occasion upon which I shall have an opportunity
of speaking in this debate, I would set myself right with those
who are strongly opposed to the view I take, by explaining why
I desire to upset their faith in what they term the “ Word of
God.” Why do I do this ? Because upon that book is based
the whole statement of there having been a fall of man, because
this statement of a fall is opposed to the teachings of science,
and is a terrible teaching for the race, because it leads into the
bondage of a belief in a magical scheme of salvation, engendering
a distrust in nature and the study of nature. It is because of
that belief being, in my mind, mischievous and terrible, that I
have desired to show that there are these conflicting statements
between science and Genesis. We are told in Genesis that men
and women were created perfect, and that they have fallen into a


sinful condition. It has ever been thus in all the older traditions
of our race that the writers have conceived of a golden age of
humanity, as being behind us. It is the province of science to
inform us that this golden age is before us, that it is something
towards which we are to work, and to which we are to attain by
natural means, that nature herself and the Power behind nature
have given us the necessary capacity for discerning that which
is good, and avoiding that which is evil. By using this capacity
to the best of our ability we shall help to bring about the golden
age which the poets of the past have conceived of as the root of
things instead of their fruition. It is for the reason that lam
anxious to show that there is a better way and a better system
than the one it is Mr, Spicer’s province to advocate; it is because
I believe most earnestly that science indicates a better way and
system that I have placed it and Genesis in opposition. And,
whatever my reverend antagonist may assert, it does appear to
me that he has not answered the contradictions that I have put
before him, that wherever he has attempted an answer it has
been by twisting the meanings of words, and forging interpreta-
tions, which the words cannot possibly have commonly borne,
and that he has not shown that these contradictions can be
encountered in any other fashion. I thank you all for the most
kind and courteous hearing you have given me, and sit down
now hoping that I have not, by my outspoken advocacy of a
cause I love, made one single enemy in this vast audience.
The Rev. E. C. Spicer —Mr. Bright talks about twisting
the words of Scripture, and in almost the same breath he has
twisted the Hebrew word Nephilim into meaning giants,
whereas it means “ violent men.” If Mr. Bright does not
understand these Hebrew words, he is one of the very few
of his race who do not. And then he has talked of the
“ Sons of God ” coming down and marrying the daughters of men,
and that he should have known ought to be the “ Sons of Elohim,”
or “the gods.” How do not be led away by what Mr. Bright
says because he says it very well, but work this thing out for
yourseves here, and ask yourselves is this belief a creed for the
death bed 1 Here are the words of one of the greatest infidels
who ever lived, Voltaire; they are given by his own physician
who attended him on his death bed: —“ It was my lot that this
man should die under my hands. Often did I tell him the truth,
but unhappily for him, I was the only person who did so. ‘ Yes,
my friend,’ he would often say to me, ‘ you are the only one who
has given me good advice. Had I but followed it, I should not be
in the horrible condition lam now. I have swallowed nothing
hut smoke ; I have intoxicated myself with the incense that turned
my head. You can do nothing more for me; send me a mad-doctor.
Have compassion on me; lam mad ! I cannot think of it without
shuddering.’ ” I want you to be careful that in listening to
Mr. Bright you are not swallowing smoke. The words of Ingersoll,


road by Mr. Bright in a former lecture, “ What were the last words
of Christ? ‘My God, my God, why hast Thou forsaken me!”
are on the part of Ingersoll a distinct falsehood. If Mr. Bright
read them to his audience (on that Sunday night when I heard
him) knowing them to be false, I dare not say to this audience
what I should have to think of him. As you well know, the last
words were “ Father, into Thy hands I commend my spirita
very different thing. In his last speech Mr. Bright has at last
shown the reason of his real opposition ; it is the opposition to
Christianity by some system which he holds, but what is its
result ? Christianity began with Genesis and ended with Christ—
a life so perfect, that, says Renan, “ the world is still living upon
its weakened perfume.” Last Sunday, in all the Churches of the
Catholic faith, we were listening to words about the Holy
Trinity; but what was Mr. Bright talking about ? Mr. Bradlaugh!
And who is Mr. Bradlaugh? He is a man who wrote a filthy
pamphlet (disorder) who went about with another man’s
wife—(great uproar.)*
The Chairman —l feel now that we are coming to the con-
clusion of this debate, that Mr. Spicer ought to have the fullest
indulgence, and, I think those who ought to be the last to interfere
with him are those whose banner is Freethought.
The Rev. E. C. Spicer —The religion of humanity ! Well,
what is going to become of humanity ? Science tells you that
the human race is going to perish ! Are you going to tell me
that you are going to work for something that is going to perish ?
“ This is the religion of humanity,” says one, “ Do to your neigh-
bour as you would have him do to you.” A grand rule; but
there will come a time when you will say, “My feelings are as
important to me as my neighbour’s ; I will do what I like; I
will commit any crime I like.” A book, that I have on this
subject, speaks of vice being as good as virtue, drunkenness as
good as sobriety ; this is a spiritualistic work (Disorder.)
The Chairman —Really I must interfere—this quarter of
an hour belongs to the speaker, and to no one else.
A voice—What book is that ?
The Rev. E. 0. Spicer — l will give the name to any one
who wants it. lam sorry to have to experience these inter-
ruptions, and as I cannot get on with any connected arguments,
I will conclude by saying it seems to me that you must judge of a
system by its results, and Christianity seems to me to be a living-
influence, bringing men towards the golden age of the future to
which Mr. Bright has referred. I will close now by asking you
* On examination, I desire to substitute these words. He is a man,
who in company with Mrs. Besant lent his name to the publication of a
pamphlet which was suppressed by law as having a low and immoral
tendency. The immorality referred to I intended only to apply to the
pamphlet of their joint production.— E. C.S.


to compare carefully the different statements of science and
Genesis, which will be put forward in the account to be published.
Compare my answers with the statements Mr. Bright has brought
forward, and the statements I have brought forward with
Mr. Bright’s answers. I am sorry that some of you seem to
have a spirit of animosity towards me, (loud “Noes” from all parts
of the room), then I apologise for my error, for I have none
towards you. Copernicus once replied in memorable words to a
great difficulty. “ If,” said a contemporary astronomer to
Copernicus, “if the world was constituted as you say, Venus
would have phases like the moon; she has none 1 What do you
say to that 1 ” The answer of Copernicus was a fine example of
quiet confidence and patient faith. He said, “ I have no reply
to make, but God will be so good as to permit an answer to this
difficulty.” (Laughter). Soon after Galileo invented the
telescope, and the phases of Venus were discovered. I have
just two more things to say. If you saw a diamond and
a piece of coal, not knowing anything of their constituent parts,
and anyone were to tell you that they were the same things, you
might say: “ Here is a contradiction ; ” and yet it would be
quite true, for, notwithstanding the different appearance between
the sparkling gem and the black coal, they are both carbon.
Now, I do not believe that the system Mr. Bright speaks of
makes you happy; you may think it does, but I doubt it will
for long. Now, if there is any one of you that is troubled by
difficulties in understanding the ways of God towards man, let
me bring before you the story of St. Augustine, who was troubled
by doubts about the Holy Trinity. Going along the sea shore, he
saw a child with a shell pouring into a hole in the sand the water
from the ocean. He asked the child what he wanted to do, and
the reply was, “ I am going to empty the ocean into this hole.”
“ But you cannot do that,” was the saint’s natural reply.
“Then how can you expect to contain in your finite mind all
about the Infinite.” I would say to you all, Wait—judge the
two systems for yourselves ; read history. Do not be led away.
Find out what infidelity has done in the past, and what it is
doing now. Where are its hospitals and asylums 1 Its works of
mercy 1 Then find out what Christianity has done, and is doing
for the regeneration of the world. If this came to be a question
between the two systems, and only six men stood up for
Christianity, I would make the seventh, and die in its defence.
Mr. Bright—l should have been pleased to move a vote of
thanks to the Chairman but for the fact that he has expressed an
objection to it. I must, however, express my personal thanks to
him for having presided as he has done. And now that this
debate is over, let me say that I have no fault to find with my
reverend antagonist, except that I wish he had avoided traducing
absent people.


The Rev. E. C. Spicer-— I have also to express my thanks to
the Chairman, and also to the audience for the kind manner in
which, after all, they have listened to everything that I have had
to say.*
The Chairman —On the eve of Her Majesty’s birthday, I
ask you to join in giving three hearty cheers for the Queen.
These cheers were heartily given, and the audience separated.
* Note. —I wish also to express my thanks to Mr. Bright for the
courteous way in which he conducted his part of the Debate.—i?. (7.6.






PEAPES AND SHAW
Have recently opened large shipments of their now celebrated
brand of
STANDARD READY-MADE CLOTHING.
These Goods are All Wool, and the cut, tit, and workmanship is
not to be excelled anywhere.
“ STANDARD ” TWEED SUITS, THIRTY-TWO SHILLINGS AND
SIXPENCE.
PEAPES and SHAW’S, GEORGE STREET.
“STANDARD” TWEED SUITS, THIRTY-FIVE SHILLINGS.
PEAPES and SHAW’S, GEORGE STREET.
“STANDARD” TWEED SUITS, TWO GUINEAS.
PEAPES and SHAW’S, GEORGE STREET.
“STANDARD” TWEED SUITS, FORTY-FIVE SHILLINGS.
PEAPES and SHAW’S, GEORGE STREET.
“STANDARD” TWEED SUITS, FIFTY SHILLINGS.
PEAPES and SHAW’S, GEORGE STREET.
NOTE-
PATTERNS of the Tweeds in each price quoted forwarded on application,
together with instructions for self-measurement, post free.
OVERCOATS FOR WINTER, in light, medium, and heavy
fo V’f lIPPCJ 9 vf)o
OVERCOATS, CUT SPECIALLY, EXTRA LENGTHS, and
exceptionally well finished, 425., 455., 50s.
SCOTCH TWEED ULSTERS, LINED WOOL, 305., 355.,
425., 455., 50s.
GENT.’S DRESSING GOWNS, in Scotch Knickerbocker Felt
Wool and Paisley, in great variety.
NEW RUGS, in Wool, Plain and Fancy Seal,
extra si *4, from 15s. 6d. upwards.
A MAGNIFICENT SHIPMENT OF BAGS.
GLADSTONES IN BUFF AND ENAMELLED HIDE.
THE EXCELSIOR BRIEF BAG.
THE BEACONSFIELD, and a variety of other shapes.
PORTMANTEAUS and OVERLAND TRUNKS, in all sizes
CHRISTY’S HATS, CHRISTY’S HATS, CHRISTY’S HATS.
ALL THE NEWEST AND LATEST LONDON SHAPES,
In Black Silk, Drab Shell, Hard Felts.
TRAVELLING HATS and CAPS, in great variety.
THE TURKISH FEZ. THE TURKISH FEZ.
PEAPES & SHAW, George Street


T. F. WIESENER
WATCH & CLOCKHAKER
MANUFACTURING JEWELLER
OPTICIAN AND SCIENTIFIC INSTRUMENT MAKER
334 GEORGE ST., SYDNEY
(Midway from Post Office to Hunter St.)
The STOCK is worthy of inspection, and every article
marked in PLAIN FIGURES; it consists of
WATCHES-— Every quality, make, and price.
CLOCKS. —From the modest Cottage to the costly Turret.
JEWELLERY. —The latest novelties from Europe, or our
own make. Loose Gems for special orders. Designs
furnished.
OPTICAL GOODS. —Spectacles for every sight, any shade,
shape, and price. Opera and Field Glasses, Telescopes,
Microscopes, Levels, Theodolites, &c., &c.
SUNDRIES for Surveyors, Microscopists, and Scientists.
Any and Every Kind of Work executed on the
Premises.
The best constructed and appointed WORKSHOPS in the City.
YOU ARE INVITED TO INSPECT AND TEST THE CAPABILITIES OF THIS
ESTABLISHMENT. y
Why chance the disapointments inseparable from spading orders
home when you can see them executed exactly as you wish?
THINK OF THIS, AND CUT OUT THE ADDRESS
T. F. WIESENER
334 GEORGE STREET
SYDNEY
Motto: SATISFACTION OR NO CHARGE
«r TRY OUR IMPROVED THEODOLITE STAND
