

ARGUMENTS
EDUCATION.
MADAME
C. COOK.
THREE IN NUMBER.
“Private Teachers and Teachings.— Yesterday evening at the Odd-
fellows’ Hall, in Elizabcth-street, Madame Charles Cook delivered the first
of a series of lectures on Teaching, dividing her subject into three heads—
Manners, Accomplishments, and Literature. There was a numerous and
attentive audience —one that appealed cordially to appreciate both the
matter of the lecture and the mode of its delivery. In the course of her
address (much of which was viva voce), Madame Cook gave many shrewd
and amusing hints on the subject of education, and especially in its more
practical aspect as regards family life. Several of the suggestions to parents
were decidedly good, and calculated to remedy the present numerous defects
of “private teachings.” The entertainment concluded with a clever render-
ing of one of Mrs. Caudle’s lectures, which gave* great amusement.”—
Sydney Morning Herald, September 1, 1876.
Sglmcg:
LEE & LOSS, “EXCELSIOR” STEAM PRINTING WORKS,
231 & 233 CASTLEREAGH STREET.




ARGUMENTS
EDUCATION.
MADAME C COOK.
THREE IN NUMBER.
“Private Teachers and Teachings, —Yesterday evening at the Odd-
fellows’ Hall, in Elizabeth-street, Madame Charles Cook delivered the first
of a series of lectures on Teaching, dividing her subject into three heads—
Manners, Accomplishments, and Literature. There was a numerous and
attentive audience —one that appeared cordially to appreciate both the
matter of the lecture and the mode of its delivery. In the course of her
address (much of which was viva voce), Madame Cook gave many shrewd
and amusing hints on the subject of education, and especially in its more
practical aspect as regards family life. Several of the suggestions to parents
were decidedly good, and calculated to remedy the present numerous defects
of “private teachings.” The entertainment concluded with a clever render-
ing of one of Mrs. Caudle’s lectures, which gave great amusement.”—
Sydney Morning Herald, September 1, 1876.
LEE & ROSS, “EXCELSIOR” STEAM PRINTING WORKS,
231 & 233 CASTLEREAGH STREET.




f Sbo
PREFACE.
These lectures read ; “ Doctors differ, patients die.” I shall quote
an Italian proverb particularly calculated to the present time,
“ Chi non sa niente, non dubita di niente” which means—almost all
of you being men of learning and possessed of knowledge—you
did not doubt what some called “my nothing.” However, I hope
that the dangerous saying of (if literally taken be rightly under-
stood), a most excellent maxim, “el sabio muda consejo, el nescio
no” That many a wise man (who refused me) may alter his
mind—the fool, never. I beg to say that lam enabled to fulfil
my promise, and the third number of this work will be produced
on the 15th of next month when will be published the
names of kind respondents, accompanied with the refusals from
great men without manners.—Yours,
R. F. COOK.
39 Cumberland Street.




ARGUMENTS ON EDUCATION.
All the sages of ancient Greece and Rome bodied forth optical
science, therefore, if I argue on the topics from personal sight,
knowledge, and circumstances, I tread in the steps of great
masters and teachers. The boon which must accrue to the races of
the present generation, partaking universally of the national
system of education, would be nonsense for any one to cavil about.
Though it remains for me, you, anyone, to set forth and see if there
be not a great wrong, at the very commencement Manners.
Firstly, that it is inate in us to be mannerly—like the tares
amongst the wheat; when we attempt to pitch numbers indiscrimi-
nately together, to attain a certain knowledge, we leave that
particular aside, and there can be no doubt we first sow the seed of
much evil. Can no other plan be devised by teachers
under any system, than that of scrambling—with dumb motions
and extending muscles, which act upon the brain (we have a proof
of this in our ordinary motions), till at last it becomes habit when
interrogated to extend the arms, dilate the pupil of the eye, con-
tract the muscles of the neck, in the excitement of the moment—
for what ] To answer the question put forth by the interrogator.
There is no politeness, no modulation of voice, no kind feeling.
All is forgotten in the scramble for premiership. The children of
public schools have no time to be mannerly. The pupils of private
schools have a better chance. They learn not in masses, they
have more time to think, and the system permits nature to hold its
sway. In my peregrinations this last month, I met with gentlemen-
born Australians, proud of their country—natives with nature’s
great boon stamped on an intelligent forehead. The very way
they received the news that a colonial production was on the tapis,
they (I allude to over forty young gentlemen to whom this work
can scarce be palatable), whose only observation made when I pre-
sented the resume of this work with the list was, “ take a seat
few questions, a compliment on the undertaking, wishes of success,


and happy to forward any movement towards bringing forth
young Australia. Indeed, these are the race of very young men
(all in one locality) I should say whose future will be carved on
marble,
so forcibly impressed me with the following idea Here
are the rising generation, here is Australia’s first-born,
they are the fruit of a mannerly beginning, these are the fore-
runners of a young race of a new world, who will in a short time
crush out the tadpole, the bloated frog, the monied jackass, the
crown ally. They seemed to me to be running from the age of
twenty-five to thirty at the very most—a rising cloud of shining
meteors in succession. All could not become subscribers to this
work that were asked, but the refusal was so polished that the
intention could not be misconstrued. Times and calls are not con-
fined to the old. Why, some will say, do you make so much and
dilate upon meeting a succession of gentlemen with manners 1 I
will tell you. Because in these last four weeks I have met with
such a succession of rudeness ! A wholesale grocer who drives a
carriage, has a lot of children, when he was asked to put his name
down, “No, I shan’t; the State educates my children for 2s. 6d.
per week !! ” That the Public School sets a grand example by
placing the rich on the same floor as the poor, there cannot be any
two ways of thinking, but for the State to charge the rich man no
more than the poor there must be a variety of opinion. Another
leading merchant, whose name resembles the capital of Italy, said,
“ Why should I put my name down to this 1 Really I do not
care a n.” Then he lifted his hat, and said, “ Excuse me ;
really, madame, I take no interest in this matter,” What else he
would have said is a myth, for I walked away. Another whole-
sale merchant asked my opinion of the Public School. I merely
said, “ My special mission was devoted to private teachers and
teaching.” “Oh ! you are French. I should decline, under any
circumstances, putting my name to any of your productions, as no
doubt you would like to rear a race of Communists.” I bowed
mockingly, saying, “ Where ignorance was bliss, ’twere folly to
be wise.” A great shoe manufacturer took the list. “ Oh, I see
you will make a lot of money by your lectures.” “ That is im-
possible ; I only seek fifty members, and it will cost about £40.”
“ Well, I don’t believe in a lot of womenfolk preaching.” I only
called upon two ladies. They really catechised me so that I
told the last, whose husband is a great financier, “ Madame, I
called on you as a lady whose name is down pour *la creche ’ (the
Foundling), and I really thought for the propagation of manners
you would have become a subscriber.” Elle rri'a repondue tout
honnement. “ Madame, Ido not see that your lectures are war-
ranted, for I see people at Government House just come from home,
and they have not half the manners we have. I shrugged my
shoulders, replying, “ Chacun d son gout” 1 called on a fashion-


able dentist; he handed me over to the tender care of his mother
and sister—she had mj subscription list in her hand. This lady-
spoke French—and very good French ; kept me talking for two
hours at least, and, all at once, when I rose and extended my
hand for the begging paper, she energetically said, “ How old are
you 1” “ Sixty, Madame.” “9h my, lam only fifty-tour;
I look older than you. What do you do to your complexion ;
it is still good 1 ” Well, as I wanted to get away, I said,
“A French lady who wishes to preserve herself never uses
anything but soap and water; you English ladies, with your
wigs and your cosmetics, seldom can indulge in that luxury.
You say you are fifty-four I took you for seventy-four.”
C’etait le coup d'etat. I got my paper, but she did not subscribe.
In fact I am more impressed and emphatic than ever, that with
all this talk of education amongst all classes, for want of
manners, respectable people become ignorantly unfeeling. It
behoves all parties superintending education, whether private or
public, to lay down rules for manners. To private families—as
you cherish your progeny, be careful that the teacher of either sex
be mannerly : that is the staple foundation of your future hopes.
Money has its advantages ; all cannot attain it. Many who have
attained money could not retain it, therefore, laissez le; but
coarseness in a man is cowardly, and grossness can always be
traced to faute d'education. Be persuaded, all my readers, that
the generations and old countries are passing away, and this in
years to come, is the New World ; as the sun travels from East to
West, so have, and will, nations. His ruling hand, His watchful
eye, say : Now is the appointed time. I have given you all, and
your own hands shall fashion your children for a future great
nation.
Before proceeding on Home Influence of Accomplishments, it may
not be amiss to tell those who never heard of an institution called
La Cr6che, what it is, and how fortunate is that upper ten even in
Australia pour leur amusemens, that they introduce these little
fantasies. For surely, every one of you who responded to that
spasmodic call; who could not resist lady “this” and lady “that.”
What must they have felt when it expired one day leaving
a deposit which formed the nucleus of a foundling p>is-en-pis (worse
and worse). England has its Manchester, Liverpool, and many
great mercantile towns, numbering three times the population of
Sydney, and they cannot boast of a foundling. ’Tis merely Pains,
London, Berlin, Dublin, Edinburgh, that a merciful God has so
manifested Himself in the hearts of the denizens of those cities,
that they are merciful to their fellow creatures. The dense masses
of miserable objects have this one means to keep them from the
great crime. But to come back to this little city, and here we find
charity in institutions—great, charity in private —greater, charity
by unknown hands —greater still; and is it possible that one and


all of this community do not feel a blush creep over their features
when they subscribed to such a superfluous institution. The sooner
it gets the “ measles ” and dies out the more creditable it will be
to those gushing spontaneous charitable ladies— qui S’ameuse
I allude to the foundling. Now to the Creche. French people
are really very nice, and so polite ! But oh ! dreadful to relate,
shame on me that has to say it, they, the male part, are a very
matter of fact people, and not always so very polite in their domestic
arrangements, par exemple : Would you believe it of such bowing
and scraping individuals 1 The women put all the hay and straw
and load the waggon, when ’tis done the husbands “ light their
cigar,” throw themselves on the top of the said load, and their wives
really drive that waggon into the market town, wearing sabots as
a rule, bien souvent sans. Well, what will you say when I tell you
the women go out to help the fishermen. These women are called
Poissarde. No doubt many of you in these days of travelling
have been to Boulogne, Calais, Dieppe, Havre, and may have had
the misfortune to arrive off these jetties at low tide, and can
recollect the women with their pretty costume assisting the men to
bring the passengers to the jetty on their backs ! ! The surf being
so great that boats are useless. They have babies, they will take
it to the Creche. First they sit down and give their child a good
feed, cleanse it and take it up to one of those long ungainly halls.
There stands at the door the speculator La femme du creche, a middle-
aged hard visaged woman, who has rented this place, and has put
all down the sides of the hall small wooden fixtures made not un-
like the manger in a stable. These little troughs are filled with
clean straw. The mother takes and places her child in one of them
and gives a gros sou to Madame who, in return gives her a tin ticket
with the number corresponding on the cradle. It cries or it does
not. The fisherwoman, sometimes termed Matelotte or Poissarde
having taken the fish to market, and disposed of it, returns at six
p.m. and retakes her child. Here in the antipodes it was just the
reverse. A nice house was taken on Church Hill, a lady was en-
gaged as matron, donations of all kinds rolled in, as the mothers
rolled home. G'est une des drolles choses qui se presente dans
Vhistoire d’Australie.
We now come to Home Influence ! Does it never strike
any of us that were a little more attention paid to those two
words, and the rendering of accomplishments as a medium to pri-
vate amusements, both parents and children would not so easily
part with each other, as they seemingly do, each looking out for a
good parti. Small concerts, Dutch fairs, tableaux vivants, read-
ings, all make a home on the continent so entirely independent
of out-door amusements. It may not be amiss for me to show
here how they conduct in all classes their charitable propensities,
without the constant begging which seems in this country the rule
—not the exception—and when we think of it in a proper light,


the tax we impose upon tradesmen of all grades, and they thro’ a
commercial view not being able to refuse what they really cannot
afford. As I once before said, the money spent on education here
is on a liberal scale, and seldom used to entertain those, whose
solicitude for years has furnished the means—’tis all for strangers.
Every family here can afford to get up an evening of amusement
de temps en temps, acting charades, a little music, a good recitation,
a pretty song, a reading, and wind up with a concerted piece of
music, here is a programme. Suppose there are from thirty upwards
of invites. In the middle of the room on a small table is a box,
everybody is supposed to put something in that box, for in the in-
vites you say this particular evening is for such a charitable affair.
You see this. The right persons are taxed. As regards home in-
fluence, these charitable evenings are precious. Of course the
parties “ reading up ” take a little time. Each night of the re-
union for practice is an evening’s gratification to the parents.
Simply they see what education has and is doing for their children,
and then they have the further gratification that others see as well
as they the education they have had. Human nature is the same
all over the world, and parents are always proud to see their fami-
lies on a good footing. To add to this evening’s entertainment
you have the pleasure of knowing you are assisting a charity, and
it does not curtail your enjoyment, for there must be more godli-
ness and happiness with contentment |accompanying this gift, than
the gift given with a grudging hand. Dutch fairs are generally
for a charitable children’s party. For weeks before they are dres-
sing small dolls, making pen wipers, sponge monkeys, priests out
of the bone which connects the neck to the head of a beast, pro-
curable in any slaughter house, sea-weed bouquets, pincushions,
all simple inexpensive affairs. The long room is converted into
little stalls, each selling their own collections, winding up with a
little dance. Sums raised for charities thus must be acceptable to
God and man, and make the little folks industrious as well as
charitable. The Americans are great, but very funny people.
The same can be said of Australians. The Americans hate
aristocracy, but will move every obstacle to enter the circle which
takes the name of Cordon, and then to the “ White House.” Here,
if they can only get to Government House, assez fagile Dieu salt,
par exemple. There is a class of people who really never care to
go to that big house only once per year. And there is another
class who really never think at all about it. Again, there is another
class who would not like their daughters and sons to rush up
against some of the habitues. That’s the Longs and the Shorts of it.
The next point to be argued in these lectures will not make any
less of the Public Education. It is to show certain points with-
out arrogating to myself superiority —une chose certain. The
question of Education in the present day is very similar to the
Temperate Societies. They argue, they put forth, they lay down


laws, they dress themselves up like the Darwinian sect— et
pourquoi ? They argue amongst their friends who, by oath, must
think as they do, forgetting the main point of discussion. An
argument is like a marriage— il faut deux personnes —to persuade
and bring to the same way of thinking : unless 'tis so, the
ceremony cannot take place. Who are the Larrikins 1 not the
low, the uneducated. No. They are street arabs from the
beginning. lamin a position to prove they belong frequently to
another class ; for, be it understood, larrikins have their degrees
of comparison, and, according to the sphere they move in, they
launch out in various ways as pests to society at large. My view
is very clear on this point. The £2O (more or less) that is given
as a douceur to young girls and boys in the training school, as a
stimulant to further advances, is a great mistake. Firstly—l
have known some of both sexes not to exceed in years more than
fifteen when they first received their money. Now, if the parents
require their children to be teachers, they ought to be in a position
to keep them during their term of probation ; and by their being
in that said position for three years, the sequence of nine cases out
of ten would be very different. I know, for I have given great
attention, as well as time, to ferret out facts. I know of two,
three, and four in a family, recipients of salaries ; well, of course,
many evils arise, naturally— abuses de meme. The first money
that a lad of sixteen or seventeen gets he gives to his parents,
perhaps the second sum, perhaps the third. Then this young
fellow finds he would like a stroll; he has no time but night.
The next money due, he deducts a pound, perhaps more. The
mother, in this case, is not the friend, for she does not tell the
father of the abstraction, and she, mother like, says, “ Well, he
works very hard ; he no doubt wants pocket money.” The boy or
girl with their first pound ! Why, they are millionaires ! Then
conies treats of ginger beer ! ginger wine ! shandy-gaff ! Tom is
such a good fellow ; he has treated four, and they, knowing he
has more money, propose a walk in this style. They
sing; they surround some poor girl in a cross-street; and from
that first derelection of stopping out for an hour the mischief is,
as a rule irretrievably done : car c’est le premier pas qui cdute. At
last he gets a rise, and with it, his ideas question the propriety
why is he to give up anything at all 1 And, though he goes to his
daily duty, who is there appointed by the Board to question this
young man how he employs his recreation 1 Ido not say he or
she are not to have relaxations ; but I distinctly say, the money
of probation should be put away by the rules of the Board to meet
any emergency that might be required for improvements; for, be
it borne in mind, whilst these scholars are being trained, their
parents could in no way complain of having to keep them. Simply
the Board of Education is giving them a living without Jee or
reward, and such a living as will fit them for any society, any


country, and anywhere; but, for the want of surveillance there are
too many at present veritable larrikins ; and as the song says :
“ Out all night in the bright moonlight,
And come home with the cows in the morning.”
Now, if their parents had to find them in pocket money, &c.,
they would look after their morals. The Board could not appoint
or pay people to do what the parents ought.
The next thing I wish to point out—foreign languages—are
they, or are they not, necessary 1 If they are, let them be taught
so that they become of utility ; if not, why have them taught at
all 1 In the Public School ’tis a farce ; many a young lad and
girl, belonging to acquaintances, have I prepared exercises for.
They had it to do; they had never learned their alphabet; they did
not understand their accents ; but Levisac’s Exercises had to be
done. Certainly the price was only 10s. per quarter, and, as I
remarked to a lady friend who was complaining, “ What can you
expect for 10s;” and really the party who teaches a foreign
language in such a large establishment must have in his or her
composition an electric battery to be able to impart to such num-
bers, Nature in its simplicity would scarce venture
such a portentous task. I know of classes, and very
large classes; but they have as a rule to be divided
and subdivided. In private teaching I certainly feel very sur-
prised that we have not a more talkative education. To write a
letter and translate Telemaque is a poor return to a parent who is
under the delusion that the tutor is competent to impart what he
professes—languages —mais in this case, as in all I have before
said, the fault is not with the pupil or the teacher. The parents
if they require quid pro quo should insist that at table or in the sit-
ting-room their children should try in their childish way to utilise
what they are devoting so much time to, and by making a rule in
the household that French, German, or Italian should be spoken
by all parties at, say dinner time —Men au mal. Eventually they
are compelled to study or be laughed at. Young or old scarce like
that punishment. Thus, imperceptibly, we rear linguists. To
speak well, we have to read carefully, commits to memory—diffi-
culties, and by degrees store our intellect so effectually that we
become elocutionists, authors, &c., &c., without perceiving the
growth of knowledge. Theoretical teaching can never go out of
fashion, and old masters are always worth looking up, for ’tis by
putting the past with the present that we admire them, and make
others admire us. Books, as references, are necessities; but
those whose avocation it is to impart would do well to use them
seldom, leaving it to the pupil to search out your ideas. How few
can read a French book after they leave school. How few mercan-
tile men can put their sons in their counting-houses as foreign
correspondents ; I could go on writing a book upon the subject.
We are having, at this moment, German imparted with English


caligraphy. As for the singing community who indulge largely in
Italian songs, and never learned Italian, seems almost too funny to
dilate on; still such things are, and I can assert from an experience
extending over many years, have existed here, in a country which
vies with any part of the world for liberality. The money expended
in these colonies for education is immense—seldom grudged. The
employers, as a rule, are munificent in salaries to incompetent as
well as competent persons; and when I hear persons complaining,
I always say—the people of Australia are grand in their schemes
for educating their families, but are seldom judicious or discrimi-
native in their selection of talent.
The next point of the lecture open to argument—Music, the way
it is taught, how few musicians we have natives of the colony, and
the query, how is it ?
Music requires a natural talent combined with taste ; to such,
theory is the grand point ; music is merely taught for play. I,
who have been very successful, made it a study; divided it into
many parts. I will try to abridge all unnecessary detail, but I
think persons should take it from two points of view—single
music or solos—and there are as many styles of solos as there are
instruments. The popular idea is a very common error, that is,
believing music very easy and simple, and no trouble to learn.
There is a great simplicity, I acknowledge, in the pieces of the
present day, to what there must have been in olden time. In the
British Museum, London, there is a virginal book belonging to
Queen Elizabeth, published in 1578, the book, much less the
difficulties would puzzle the most able of our modern performers.
The second view is concerted music, whether as a duet, trio,
quartet, quintet, and these have only a date of 1768. Boccherini
was the first in that year to introduce a trio, and also a quintet,
and he never had a rival but Mozart. Music dates very far back;
Euclid (277 b.c.) treated of it; and strange to say, that with the
decline of liberty, music sank to a very low ebb. The Romans ele-
vated it, and though so warlike in disposition, they cultivated it
particularly for martial purposes. They used their capital letters
for notes. Music would require a volume to itself, so as to intro-
duce the great variety of phases it is capable of. In the tomb of
Bymandyas, near Thebes, a musical instrument was found with
supposed music, and we know that the Egyptians were acquainted
with it 2000 years 8.c., therefore, if you want to be a musician
you must not grudge time to learn it historically, and follow it
through centuries ; study the old old masters, and eschew all new
vagaries that have nothing traceable in them but their laying
claim to the word music. What is more pretty and beautiful
for a family to cultivate than madrigals 1 They require no instru-
mental accompaniment, and although they date as far back as the
16th century, are still cultivated in musical families. The beauty
of music shows it is a heart sentiment; it is seen in children and


savages as well as in the most refined. Every musical production
must express feeling, though it should be impressed on one and all,
that every good piece of music and every author cannot please the
million. We must, to become musicians, cultivate the heart, mind,
sentiment, so as to appreciate it fully; for instance, there are
several times of Mozart that are repeated on all occasions, always
fresh and pleasant. I always think a person who does not like
music must have some defect in their ears. We ought to be careful
to teach composition, never excluding execution ; but I think we
should so impart music like every other part of education—consult
the pupil’s taste. Some have no ear, or rather the fineness in the
aural section which would preclude them playing well sacred or
sentimental pieces, they can never play well without their copies
on the instrument; to such, give difficulties which require great
manipulation and execution to the superlative degree. I find
generally stupid people play difficulties very much better than a
born artist. I think it is they have no soul for music, and are
determined to overcome all obstacles. Sonatas, though old
fashioned, form a nice study, improve the touch, and produce good
timeists.
I have endeavoured, I think, to touch more or less on all the
topics with the exception of one, which will require such delicacy
of treatment, that I put it off for number three. To treat of the
present great men and their manners, ma conscience, is a great
undertaking; personally, I could make a very prompt reply, for I
have only one member of parliament, and only the names of two
firms of the leading merchants of this great city, and par parenthese
(that was by proxy, principals being in England). Strange to say,
the greater part of subscribers are solicitors ; they were all cour-
teous even when they said nay. The young firms—the aristocratic
ones—l shall have to get a book called “ blue book,” and get at their
genealogical tree. It will cause sundry difficulties, for the most
part of those I called on were more or less rude, not barbarian
rude, but naturally savages. They had the power to say no. How
did they say it ? Suffice to say—l had the mortification, anyhow,
of having asked to be humiliated. But the tongue, St. James
pointed out as being a very inconvenient foe, I say with the first
Napoleon —La plume, la ‘plume perfide Albion est men epee.






