

Aristodemus
by
G .W.L
Marshall
Hall.




Aristodemus
A Tragedy
by
G.W.L. Marshall-Hall
“All* Schuld racht slch auf 6rden.”—Goethe.


Aristodemus.
Characters.
Hrtemis.
Hrtsto&emus, King of Messenia.
Did dtneen.
tlalra, his Daughter.
©pbioneus, a soothsayer, blind.
flbessenger.
Damts, a youth, bethrothed to Taira.
corppbceus.
a sop.
Chorus of Messenian women and old men.
Spartans.
Solbiers, BttenOants, etc.
Xttsis, Bearer of the Oracle.
The Scene is laid before the Palace of the King
in Ithbme.


The
ATLAS
PRESS
Block Place
Little
Collins
Street,
Melb.


THE TEMPEST.
DRAMATIS PEBSONJE.
Alonso, King of Naples.
Sebastian, his Brother.
Prospero, the right Duke of
Milan.
Antonio, his Brother , the
usurping Duke of Milan.
Ferdinand, Son to the King
of Naples.
Gonzalo, an honest old Coun-
sellor.
Adrian, ) T d
Francisco, ] J ' or(U -
Caliban, a savage and de-
formed Slave.
Trinculo, a Jester.
Stephano, a drunken Butler
Master of a Ship , Boatswain
Mariners.
Miranda, Daughter to Pros-
pero.
Ariel, an airy Spirit.
Iris,
Ceres,
Juno, i- Spirits.
Nymphs ,
Reapers , j
Other Spirits attending on
Prospero.
SCENE. —A Ship near Shore ; afterwards an Island.
ACT I.
SCENE I.—On a Ship at Sea. A tempestuous
noise of Thunder and Lightning heard.
1-r— . r. T • . . -r, , .
Scene ll.—The Island : before the Cell of
Peospebo.
Enter Peospebo and Miranda.
Mira. If by your art, my dearest father, you
have
Put the wild waters in this roar, allay them.
I‘ro. Ee collected:
No more amazement. Tell your piteous heart,
There’s no harm done.
Mira. O, woe the day !
With those that I saw suffer: a brave vessel,
Who had no doubt some noble creatures in her,
( Dashed all to pieces. 0, the cry did knock
1 Against ray very heart. Poor souls, they perished.


r Pro. No harm. H,
4 I have done nothing hut in care of thee, |
Pro. ’Tie time I
1 should inform thee further. Lend thy hand, |
And pluck my magic garment from me—So; i
[ Lays down hix mantle. |
Thtcdjrrful upixUlulir'Pf' ffirUTWilt', WUIUII UlBffid ,
TWT«liir;» 'rii'tw of cumpmiUmi 111 BKSe, ’
No, not bo much perdition as an hair,
Betid to any creature in the vessel i ,
.•«« - } , jmaueii iujr aim I
Tl rtnfttftfc- bounded off,
_ Sit*****-; ak.flo
nw, hr Canst thou remember
A time before we came unto this cell 1’
t grimy cruet
Mira. ’Tis far off; w
had I not
Pour or five women once, that tended me ?
Pro. Thou had’st, and more, Miranda: Mip fO,
7¥o. Twelve ’year since, twelve year
since,
Thy father was the Duke of Milan, and
A prince of power.
Pro. ’ Hand his, v
By foul play, as heaved
thence;
But blessedly holp hither.
Mira. O, my heart bleeds
Fro. My brother,7~^ e whom,'iText thyself,
Of all the world I confederates
„—« ooueaM me tlie Ki n g 0 f Naples
R.ro T fern*, ih
To give him annual tribute, do him homage, j(
Subject liis-cgronct to his crownj^hastenesfTwe.
This King of Naples, being ah enemy aance
To me inveterate, hearkens my brother s suit,
whereon.
A treacherous army levied, one midnight
Fated to the purpose, did Antonio open '
The gates of Milan ; and, i’ the dead of darkness,
The ministers for the purpose hurried thence
Me, and thy crying self.
Mira. Alack, for pity !




Pro. they hurried us aboard a bark,
Bore us some leagues to sea; where they prepared
A rotten carcass of a boat, \an herrrimi
- ■ ” '* • - ■ ™, ! there they hoist us, J
To cry to the sea that roar’d to us; taangh wwwp,,lt;
To’the winds, whose pity, signing back again,
Dife— dwrtrhwtwg wwug,
Mira. Alack! what trouble
Was I then to you !
Pro. O ! a cherubim
Thou wast, that did preserve me! letll
. Mira. How came we ashore ? of a
„ „ Pro :. B 7 Providence divine. le
tym Mm r-gniYfin brrnr An-mi by tint murnilerr arm ■~f-lhr
man,
And .wfae,«3*S e |S*afiil > ‘
TVfo« ~1 i -l-i- n
Mira. Heavens thank you for’t! And now I
pray you, sir,
For-still-t is beating in my naiad, your reason
For raising this sea-storm 1
Pro. KBMBiihiHss4»»4CT'th. —
strange, bountiful Fortune,
Kow -my dear My, hath mine enemies
Brought to this shore ; and -by>"Biy
fefitO my zenith doth depend upon
A most auspicious star, whose influence
If now I court hot, but omit, my fortunes
Will ever after droop. .
Thou art inclined to sleep; ’t is a good dulness,
And give it way :—I know thou canst not choose.—
[Miranda sleeps.
Gome away, servant, come ; I am ready now;
Approach, my Ariel. Gome !
Enter Ariel.
■s.
Ari, All hail, great master; grave sir, hail!
I come
To answer thy best pleasure; be’t to fly,
To swim, to dive into the fire, to ride
On the curled clouds : to thy strong bidding, task
Ariel, and all his quality.
Pro. Hast thou, spirit,


Performed to point the Tempest that I bade thee 1
Ari. To every article.
I boarded the king’s ship : now on the beak,
Now ia the waist, the deck, in every cabin,
I flamed amazement: sometime I’d divide,
And burn in many places; on the topmast
The yards and bowsprit would I flame distinctly,
narrow yei is uißiuosoine
Then meet and join. . . , ...
or in r, TTon/Mio nr am no*
Pro. My brave spirit 1
Ari. , Not a soul
But felt a fever of the mad, and played
Some tricks of desperation. Ail, but mariners,
Plunged in the foaming brine, and quit the vessel,
Then all a-fire with me : the king’s son, Ferdinand,
With hair up-staring (then like reeds, not hair),
Was the first man that leapt; cried, ‘Hell is
empty,
And all the devils are here.’
Pro. But are they, Ariel, safe ?
Ari. Not a hair perish’d ;
On their sustaining garments not a blemish,
But fresher than before: and, as thou bad’st me, , pyyyiß
In troops 1 have dispers’d them ’bout the isle: *
The king’s son have I landed by himself; ur.
Whom I left cooling of the air with sighs, %
In an odd angle of the isle, and sitting,
His arms in this sad knot.
Pro, Of the king’s ship, . , ,
The mariners, say, how thou hast dispos’d, irOUB Blgxlt
And all the rest o’the fleet ?
Art, Safely in harbour
Is the king’s ship; in the deep nook, where once ZUBGIIt,
Thou call’dst me up at midnight to fetch dew jji_
From the still-vex’d Bermoothes, there she’s hid: *
The mariners ail under hatches stowed; fieS
Whom, with a charm join’d to their suffer’d labour,
I have left asleep: and for the rest o’the fleet,
Which I dispers’d, they all have met again; 0
And are upon the Mediterranean flote.
Bound sadly home for Naples;
Supposing that they saw the king’s ship wreck’d,
And his great person perish. 9
Pro. Ariel, thy charge
Exactly is perform’d; but there’s more work: . •
What is the time o’the day? * CUVlufl*
Ari, Past the mid season. Uld,
Pro, At least two glasses: the time ’twixt six ,
and now it.
Must by us both be spent most preciously, [pains,,
Ari, Is there more toil? Since thou dost give me
Let me remember thee what thou hast promis’d,
Which is not yet perform’d me.
Pro, How now? moody?
What is’t thou can’st demand^
Art . My liberty.
Pro. Before the time be out ? no more.
Scene 2.] THE TEMPEST. 41




Pro. Dost thou forget Cisis
From what a torment I did free thee?
Art. No.
Pro. Thou dost; and think’st
It much, to tread the ooze of the salt deep;
To run upon the sharp wind of the north ;
To do me business in the veins o’the earth,
When it is bak’d with frost. j
Art, I do not, sir. neziuiy 'jfnrrd-i
Pro. If thou more murmur’st, I will rend an
And peg thee in his knotty entrails, till [oak,
Thou hast howl’d away twelve winters.
Ari. Pardon, master;
I will be correspondent to command,
And do my spiriting gently.
Pro Do s°; an d after t wo day' mad with laurel,
I will discharge thee. 1
Ari. That’s my noble master!
What shall Ido ? say what: what shall Ido 9
Pro. Go make thyself like to a nymph o’the sea;
Be subject to no sight but mine; invisible
To every eye-ball else. Go, take this shape,
And hither come in’t; hence, with diligence.
[ex. Ariel.
Awake, dear heart, awake ! thou hast slept well ■ CITIZENS.)
Awake!
Mira. The strangeness of your story put
Heaviness on me.
Pro. Shake it off: come on ;
We’ll visit Caliban, my slave, who never
Yields us kind answer.
Mira. ’Tis a villain, sir,
I do not love to look on.
Pro. But, as ’tis,
We cannot miss him ; he does make our fire, 10U •
Fetch in our wood; and serves in offices
That profit us. What, ho! slave! Caliban !
Thou earth, thou ! speak.
Cal. [within.] There’s wood enough within.
Pro. Come forth, I say; there’s other business J (Jo.
Come forth, thou tortoise! when ? [for thee;
Re-enter Ariel , like a water-nymph.
Fine apparition! My quaint Ariel,
Hark in thine ear.
Ari. My lord, it shall be done. [exit
rough the foe,
Flashings of swords I saw, and heard a voice :
Let go the Bearer of the Oracle!
Whereat amazed the foeraen fell away
Hpw here I found myself I cannot tell.
/
Aristodemus.
0 brave and worthy man!


Tisis.
Alaa ! . . . ai! . . . ai!
What was it I would say ? . . . support me ! . . . . so ! . . .
0 Sire ! . . .
Aristodemus.
Say on !
Tisis.
May I then freely speak ?
Aristodemus.
Be thy news good or ill, pronounce them boldly,
Nor we are not of so infirm a nature
As pitifully to shrink back from fate,
For in our veins the blood of heroes flows
And what the gods lay on us we shall bear.
Tisis.
The Oracle hath spoken.
Aristodemus.
Zeus be praised !
What god, and by what deed of ours incensed,
Thus blights us with so bitter-biting breath ?
Tisis.
With reverence I name her, goddess-maiden,
Virgin-Protector, glorious Artemis!
Aristodemus.
0 mighty Huntress ! Night’s majestic Queen !
That terrible art, in thy chastity,
On whom to gaze with mortal eyes is death !
Wherein, 0 say wherein we have offended ?
Tisis.
Still rests inexpiate the sacrilege
Unto the Laphnian goddess wrought aforetime,
Of virgins violated at her altar,
Of blood-pollution, and her image scorned ;
And thus beneath her wrath ye waste away.


Scene lll.—Another Part of the Island.
Enter Alonso, Sebastian, Antonio, G-onzalo,
Adman, Francisco, and others.
Gon. By ’r lakin, I can go no farther, Sir;
My old bones ache : hereis-amaze trod, indeed;
Through fnrth-rjghts- aad"-nieatul«ir»! By your
patience,
I needs must rest me.
A lon. Old lord, I cannot blame thee,
WbQ.mmJAfcyßetPatt^cfieffwTttrvteariness,
Tp tb.fr dulling of ;tny spirits. Sit down, and rest.
Even here-I put pff ,my
No 1 loDgaAvi©rwy"fifttt««er ; he is drowned
Whom thus we stray to find, and the sea mocks
Our frustrate search on land, 0 thou, mine heir
V Of Naples and of Milan !
\ Hrtb*i»ade~hi»4Jipab>fr*Hi»ee ?
'' Fran. Sir, he may live.
I saw him beat the surges under him,
'&hi .
He came alive to land.
Alon. No, no; he’s gone.^
j | Enter Ariel, invisible ; solemn music playing.
Alon. 1 I wish mine
eyes
Would, with themselves, shut up my thoughts :
' I find,
They are inclined to do so.
Seb. Please you, sir,
Do not omit the heavy offer of it:
It seldom visits sorrow ; when it doth.
It is a comforter.
Ant. We two, my lord,
Will guard your person while you take your rest,
And watch your safety.
Alon. Thank you. Wondrous heavy.—
[Alonso sleeps. Exit Ariel.
Seb. What a strange drowsiness possesses them 1
Ant. It is the quality o’ the climate.
, Seb. Why
Doth it not then our eyelids sink ? I find not
Myself disposed to sleep.


Ant. Is or I :
They fell together all, as by consent;
They dropped, as by a thunder-stroke. What
might,
Worthy Sebastian—o ! what might—no more; •
And yet, methinks, I see it in thy face,
What thou shouldst be. The occasion speaks thee,
and
My strong imagination sees a crown
Dropping upon thy head.
Seb- What ? art thou waking?
Ant. Do you not hear me speak %
Scb- Ido ; and, surely, fits, etc.)
It is a sleepy language, and thou speak’st
Out of thy sleep. What is it thou didst say 1
This is a strange repose, to be asleep
With eyes wide open ; standing, speaking, moving,
And yet so fast asleep.
Ant. Noble Sebastian,
( Thou let’st thy fortune sleep—die rather; wink’st
Whiles thou art waking.
Seh. Thou dost snore distinctly;
There’s meaning in thy snores.
Ant. lam more serious than my custom: you
Must he so too, if heed me; which to do,
Trebles thee o’er.
Seh. Well; T . ~ . . , , , ,
Jtnt. ; yyiii y OU grant, with
That Ferdinand is drown’d ? L me »
Seh. He’s gone.
Ant. Then, tell me,
Who’s the next heir of Naples?
Seh. Ghw*fc«l. \
Ant. JgJggJJjal,tif Tunis; she el 1 s
Ten om
And let Sebastian wake ! ”—^y r .feliis.were death
That now. hath seized them y .why, they wese no
worse.;
Than now they (Ire. There be that can rule Naples
As well as he that sleeps ; Q, that you bore
The mind that I do : what a sleep were this
For your advancement! Do you understand me %
Seh. Methinks, I do.
Ant. And how does your content
And a god’s ambrosial breath !


Yea! and the flashing of
Deathless limbs
Saw, and the terrible strength thereof:
Heard through the heaven his
Thunderous passing,
And his voice like a stormy sea;—
“ Lo ! this day,—of my
Generation, —is
Born a king to the Argive race:
Even he that
First among earth-born
Openeth eye to the light of day !”
Then he nodded, and
All the heaven
Shook with thunder, and flashed with flame.
While about his vast shoulders flung
Trembled th’ ambrosial
Curls of the god.
Aye! and the wondering
Daughter of earth
Heard, and was dumb.
Ah ! but she heard not the
Bitter laughter,
Saw not the terrible goddess glide
Over the starry
Ocean of night,—
Knewfiot Here, Mistress of heaven,
Standing beside her.
Yea, but the day-break !
Yea, but the shining of
Light that shone not on eyes unborn !
Shone not upon the
Son of Alcmene
Closed and sealed in the womb’s blind bud.


Do not, for one repulse, forego the purpose
That you resolv’d to effect.
Seb. The next advantage
Will we take thoroughly.
Ant. Let it be to-night;
p For, now they are oppress’d with travel, they
Will not, nor cannot, use such vigilance.
As when they are fresh.
Seb. I say, to-night: no more.
Solemn and strange music; and Prospero above,
; invisible. Enter several strange shapes , bringing
f in a banquet; they dance about it with gentle
actions of salutation; and, inviting the King, fyc.
to eat, they depart . [hark!
, Alon , What harmony is this ?my good friends,
1 Gon. Marvellous sweet music! [were these ? >
Alon. Give us kind keepers, heavens! What
Seb. A living drollery; now I will believe,
That there are unicorns ; that in Arabia
There is one tree, the phoenix throne ; one phoenix
' At this hour reigning there.
Ant. I’ll believe both ;
c And what does else want credit, come to me,
And I’ll be sworn ’tis true : travellers ne’er did lie,
1 Though fools at home condemn them.
Gon. If in Naples
• I should report this now, would they believe me ?
If I should say, I saw such islanders
(For, certes, these are people of the island,)
Who, though they are of monstrous shape, yet, note,
Their manners are more gentle-kind, than of
r Our human generation you shall find X)IU !
Many, nay, almost any.
> Pro. Honest lord,
Thou hast said well; for some of you there present.
Are worse than devils. [aside.
\ Alon. I cannot too much muse, [pressing
Such shapes, such gesture, and such sound, ex-
( Although they want the use of tongue) a kind
Of excellent dumb discourse, Kllacti)
Pro. Praise in departing. [aside.
Fran. They vanish’d strangely,
Seb. No matter, since [stomachs. —
They have left their viands behind ; for we have
Will’t please you taste of what is here?
Alon. Not I. [were boys,
Gon. Faith, sir, you need not fear: when we
Who would believe that there were mountaineers,
Dew-lapp’d like bulls, whose throats had hanging
at them
Wallets of flesh ? or that there were such men.
Whose heads stood in their breasts? which now we
• i Each putter-out on five for one, will bring us [find,
u ancient Good waiTant of .
That nevt Alon. I will stand to, and feed,
- Although my last: no matter, since I feel,
Jl6lu Oil, ■, The best is past. Brother, my lord the duke,
To sordid Stand to and do as we.
Thunder and lightning. Enter Ariel, like a harpy,
Wert doul daps his wings upon the table, and with a quaint
TViooi V»o vc device, the banquet vanishes.
Ari. You are three men of sin, whom destiny
May any f (That hath to instrument this lower world,
And what is in’t,) the never surfeited sea
Hath caused to belch up; and on this island
Where man doth not inhabit; you ’mongst men
Being most unfit to live. I have made you mad ;
[seeing Alon. Seb. frc. draw their swords.
And even with such like valour men hang and
drown
Their proper selves. You fools! laud my fellowo


Are ministers of fate ; the elements,
Of whom your swords are temper’d, may as well
Wound the loud winds, or with bemock’d-at stabs
Kill the still-closing waters, as diminish
i One dowle that’s in my plume; my-follow mutefa?
Aac [ters
] Yo.ur swords %
. And remember,
* (JmsnrcS^tfry’ou,) that you three
( From Milan did supplant good Prospero;
Kipps’/! «mt<v ihn. I«M> nrhiiffh h»j4r¥Wpitf. it,
(• lii^ancLMaTimTOeni-eJrild; for which foul deed
The powers, delaying? have r g
Incens’d the seas and shores, year&&£}»e>ei’ei&aves>
G Against your peace. Thee of thy son, Alonso, I Conclave
, They have bereft; and do pronounce by me,
1 IdngTing perdition ("irnnfl * lin “ nn y
] Can shall rtap byiWgp 1 attend [from
your ways; whose wraths to guard you '
J (Which ls
Upoa yotrr head^) is nothing, but heart’s sorrow, 1
And a clear life ensuing.
] He vanishes, in thunder: then, to soft music, enter
t the shapes again, and dance with mops and
k rnowes, and carry out the table.
I Pro. [aside.] Bravely the figure of this harpy ot.
hast thou
Perform’d, my Ariel; a yir Q l * hmlj :
Ot'my iH&tcuctkm-kast then
strange, my meaner ministers
\V don> Aip hi^hinlminrn
And these, mine enemies, alltik*Ht-wp [work,
, In ihf iT itlntrni iiruxi i ll*ny wir are in my power;
i And in these fits I leave them, whilst I visit
Young Ferdinand, (rfhiiin „ lin y, JiUpptihfl' ii
And his and my lov’d darling. tymwnfy)
[exit Pros, from above,
AJ | Gon, I’the name of something holy, sir, why
! In this strange stare ? [stand you
Alon. O, it is monstrous !* monstrous!
Methought, the billows spoke, and told me of it;
j The winds did sing it to me; and the thunder,
A That deep and dreadful organ-pipe, pronounc’d
The name of Prosper ; it did bass my trespass.
Therefore, my son i’the ooze is bedded; and
I’ll seek him deeper than e’er plummet sounded,
And with him there lie mudded. [exit,
Seb. But one fiend at a time,
I’ll fight their legions o’er.
Ant. I’ll be thy second. [exeunt Seb, Sf Ant .
Gon. All three of them are desperate; Aair
l Ph»t c ftM«4lC«Wt >ll * ll >**"*"■ follow tho™ swiftly,
And hinder them from what this ecstacy
May now provoke them to.
Adr. Follow, I pray you. [exeunt.
Coryphoeus.
A deed of unimaginable horror,
Past thought or utterance, the god lays on us.


ACT IV.
SCENE I.—Before Prospero’s Cell.
Enter Prospeeo, Ferdinand, and Miranda.
Pro. If I have too austerely punished you,
Your compensation makes amends, for I
Have given you here a thread of mine own life,
Or that for which I live ; whom once again
I tender to thy hand. All thy vexations
Were but my trials of thy love, and thou
Hast strangely stood the test: here, afore Heaven,
I ratify this my rich gift. O Ferdinand,
Do not smile at me that I boast her off,
For thou shalt find she will outstrip all praise
And make it halt behind her.
Per. I do believe it
Against an oracle.
Pro. Then, as my gift, and thine own acquisition
Worthily purchased, take my daughter; '
What, Ariel, my industrious sefvanV'lSriei I
Enter Ariel.
Ari. What would my potent master 1 here 1 am.
Pro. Thou and thy meaner fellows your last
service
Did worthily perform, and I must use you
In such another trick. Go, bring the rabble,
' a A u — + ~ ♦!"«
Song.
Jun. Honour , riches, marriage-blessing.
Long continuance, and increasing.
Hourly joys he still upon you !
Juno sings her blessings on you.
Cer. Earth’s increase, and foison plenty,
Barns and garners never empty ;
Vines with clustering bunches growing ;
Plants with goodly burden bowing.
Spring come to you, at the farthest,
In the very end of harvest !
Scarcity and want shall shun you ;
Geres’ blessing so is on you.
102 THE TEMPEST. [Act IV.




a graceful dance; towards
the end whereof Prospero starts suddenly, and
speaks; after which, to a strange, hollow, and
confused noise , they heavily vanish.
Pro. [Aside .] I had forgot that foul conspiracy
Of the beast Caliban, and his confederates
Against my life ; the minute of their plot
Is almost come.— [To the Spirits .] Well done.—
Avoid :—no more.
h Fer. This is most strange; your father’s in some
_ That works him strongly. [passion
Mira, Never till this day, *
Saw I him touch’d with anger so distemper’d.
Pro. You do look, my son, in a mov’d sort,
T As if you were dismay’d ; be cheerful, sir :
£ Our revels now are ended; these our actors,
As I foretold you, were all spirits, and
& Are melted into air, into thin air:
_ And, like the baseless fabric of this vision,
The cloud-capp’d towers, the gorgeous palaces,
£ The solemn temples, the great globe itself,
Yea, all which it inherit, shall dissolve;
I. And, like this unsubstantial pageant faded,
Leave not a rack behind; we are such stuff
As dreams are made of, and our little life .
I Is rounded with a sleep.—Sir, lam vex’d ;
*> Bear with my weakness; my old brain is troubled.
Be not disturb’d with my infirmity;
\ If you be pleas’d, retire into my cell,
And there repose; a turn or two I’ll walk
To still my beating mind.
Fer. and Mira. We wish your peace, [exeunt.
Pro. Come with a thought:—l thank you :
I Ariel, come.
Y Enter Ariel. 3:
Art. Thy thoughts I cleave to: what’s thy n •
E Pro. S*it, [pleasure*? Say, my spirit,
1 How fares the King and’s followers 1
i Ari. OgiMucid* togetißbr
q lir,ii&-Baißa.fo»hionas,yQu^v«-inehm^ , ’^eTing,
His hl' f >[ linl ~i iUttf l yonrs, abide-ali-three dyrtraotetl,
a n| ] mourning wer them,
j Your charm so strongly
\ works them,
\ That if you now beheld them, your affections
Would become tender.
Pro. Dost thou think so, spirit 1 f
Ari. Mine would, sir, were I human.
Pro. And mine shall.
M Hast thou, which art but air, a touch, a feeling
E: Of their afflictions, and shall not myself,
T One of their kind, that relish all as sharply,
E Passion as they, be kindlier moved than thou art 1
Though with their high wrongs I am struck to the
quick,
Yet, with my nobler reason, ’gainst my fury
Do I take part. The rarer action is


In virtue than in vengeance : they being penitent,
The sole drift of my purpose doth extend
Not a frown further. Go, release them, Ariel.
My charms I 'll break, their senses I ’ll restore,
And they shall be themselves.
An. \ I’ll fetch them, sir. [Exit.
Pro. Ye elves of hills, brooks, standing lakes :
and groves;
And ye, that on the sands with printless foot
Do chase the ebbing Neptune, and do fly him,
When he comes back; you demy-puppets, that
By moonshine do the green-sour ringlets make,
Whereof the ewe not bites; and you, whose pastime
Is to make midnight mushrooms; that rejoice
To hear the solemn curfew; by whose aid
(Weak masters though ye be) I have be-dimm’d
The noon-tide sun, call’d forth the mutinous winds,
And ’twixt the green sea and the azur’d vault
Set roaring war: to the dread rattling thunder
Have I given fire, and rifted Jove’s stout oak
With his own bolt; the strong-bas’d promontory
Have I made shake; and by the spurs pluck’d up
The pine and cedar : graves, at my command,
Have wak’d their sleepers; oped, and let 1 hem forth
By my so potent art. But this rough magic
I here abjure; and, when I have requir’d
Some heavenly music, (which even now I do,)
To work mine end upon their senses, that
This airy charm is for, I’ll break my staff,
Bury it certain fathoms in the earth,
And, deeper than did ever plummet sound,
I’ll drown my book. [solemn music.
Re-enter Ariel: after him Alonso, with a frantic
gesture , attended hy Gonzalo; Sebastian and
Antonio in like manner , attended hy Adrian and
Francisco . They all enter the circle which Pros-
pero had made , and there stand charmed; which
Prospero observing , speaks,
, ._ A . '
* The charm dissolves apace;
And as the morning steals upon the night,
Melting the darkness, so their rising senses
| Begin to chase the ignorant fumes that mantle
Thdr clearer reason.—O my good Gonzalo,
' My true preserver, and a loyal sir
To him thou follow’st; I will pay thy graces
I Home, both in word and deed.—Most cruelly
Didst thou, Alonso, use me and my daughter:
Thy brother was a furtherer in the act; [blood,
Thou’rt pinch’d for’t now, Sebastian.—Flesh and
You brother mine, that entertain’d ambition,
[He moVBi Expell’d remorse and nature; who, with Sebastian, lfs
. ( Whose inward pinches therefore are most strong)
in Up W(, u i(l here have kill’d your king; Ido forgive
thee [*ng
Unnatural though thou art!—Tlwii* undemtimd-
Xhat trow , Not one of them,
That yet looks on me, or would know me. Ariel,
Fetch me the hat and rapier in my cell;
[exit Ariel,
I will dis-case me, and myself present,
As I was sometime Milan :—quickly, spirit;
Thou sbalt ere long be free.


Ariel re-enters, singing, and helps to attire Prospero,
Ari. Where the bee sucks, there suck I j
In a cowslip’s bell I lie :
’ There I couch when owls do cry.
On the bat’s back 1 do fly.
After summer, merrily:
Merrily, merrily, shall I live now.
Under the blossom that hangs on the bough.
Pro, Why, that’s my dainty Ariel: I shall miss .
t h ee . . Attendants.
But yet thou shalt have freedom: so, so, so.—
To the king’s ship, invisible as thou art:
There shalt thou find the mariners asleep
Under the hat-hes ; the master and the boatswain,
’ Being awake, enforce them to this place; 1 gOO
And presently, I pr’ythee.
T . Ari. I drink the air before me, and return Boy,
r Or e'er your pulse twice beat. [exit,
Gon. All torment, trouble, wonder, and amaze-
] Inhabit here: some heavenlypower guideus[ment,
Out of this fearful country !
* Pro, Behold, sir king, *
The wronged Duke of Milan, Prospero ;
F<MM»e¥4Mts6urance that »divi«g p«nce
U (My ww*'iy»!Hih ocfy;
Aim to thee, and thy company, I bid Old 1113.11 !
j A hearty welcome,
Alon. Whe’r thou beest he, or no,
Or some enchanted trifie to abuse me,
: As late I have been, I not know: tkgMpiaiw
( Att4l thi» W a .
Thy dukedom I resign; and do entreat
G Thou pardon me my wrongs. But how should tIIDG.
Be living, and be here? [Prospero
Pro. First, noble friend,
Let me embrace thine age; whose honour cannot
( Be measur’d, or confin’d.
J Gon, Whether this be,
-| Or be not, I’ll not swear,
rj Pro, You do yet taste
Some subtilties o’the isle, tbat will not let you
C Believe things certain: welcome, my friends all:-*
I But you, ray brace of lords, were 1 so minded,
[to S. tjf A.
I here could pluck his highness’ frown upon you,
And justify you traitors ; at this time
£ I’ll tell no tales. .
rp Seb. The devil speaks in him. [nswe.
1 Pro. No;—
Ai For you, most wicked sir, whom to call brother
Would even infect my mouth, I do forgive
* Thy rankest fault; alt trf+fc* Welcome, sir;
J] This cell’s my court; here have I few attendants,
And subjects none abroad ; pray you, look in,
My dukedom since you have given me again,
I will requite you with as good a thing;
p, At least, bring forth a wonder, to content ye, 1311 !
As much as me my dukedom.
F' The entrance of the cell opens, and discovers Per - U
dinand \nd Miranda playing at chess.
Mira. Sweet Mord, you play me false.
~ Per. No, my dearest love,
I would not for the world.
r J I Mira. Yes, for a score of kingdoms, you should e.
And I would call it fair play. [wrangle,
Alon. If this prove,
A vision of the dear son
Shall I twice lose. \
Seh. A most high miracle 1
Per, Though the seas threaten, they are merciful;


Ophioneus.
Man,
Forbear!
flristodemus.
Better hadst thou forborne, even when
In our extremity and sheer despair
I sped the messenger to Delphi’s shrine,
Daring our fate, and thee, —that durst forbid it,
Foretelling monstrous horror on my head
If this thing were accomplished. But thou seest
The god derides thee, gracious unto us.
But now get thee from hence, and elsewhere ply
Thy tricks o' the trade, for we will none of them.
Ophioneus.
Alas !—What wilt thou do ? Unhappy one !
That handiest the indignant shears of fate
Unknowing whom thou slayest.
Aristodemus.
Thou alone
In this art ignorant. Little, it seems,
Avails thee now thy vaunted prescience,
Or trembling thou wouldst hear what makes us tremble
The splashing of infernal Charon’s pole
Curdling the brackish slime of turgid Styx ;
And his hoarse voice hailing by name his fare,
The wretched offspring of more wretched sire,
Lyciscus child, whose tender thread of life
rphis shears, fulfilling the Oracle.
Ophioneus.
Ah me!
When blind men see, and those that see are blind !
Ye are deceived : Lyciscus hath no daughter ;
Childless his wife, and this a fosterling
Whose veins are unsanguineous to thine.


Aristodemus.
Thou dreamest! —Unless this be some cunning double
Such as your devious priestcraft loves to use,
Shunning a plain straight issue : For 1 think
Since gold is very food and drink to ye,
This miserable father hath procured you,
And stuffs your belly full to stay your mouth.
Ophioneus.
Bear witness, 0 ye gods, what recompense
I have from this injurious king, for all
My nights of vigil, toil, and foodless days
Of prayer, endured for his sake and these.
Yet if the strong and strenuous stream of fate
May be dammed up, or curtailed of its course ;
If the huge bulk of all-engendering time
Upon its iron hinge may back-revolve,
Confounding the vast firmament with noise ;
If that which is to be may lurk abortive
Within fate’s monstrous womb, and come not forth ;
If universal nature’s ordered fixture,
Becoming lawless, mutable, and ruptive,
May suffer dissolution and reverse :
I pray ye that it be so, nor there fall
Upon these here nothing of that I utter.
{He is seized with a frenzy, during which his sight is
restored to him)
Ai! Ai!
What lightnings these
That search my brain ?
What throes convulsive
Paining me through ?
Woe ! Ah woe ! Apollo!
Woe’s me, thou god !
I burn,
My vitals burn :
Ai! Ai!
I waste, I perish, I consume !


The shadow of terrible Presences wraps me about,
And weighs down my visioning soul with disastrous
eclipse;
The night of mine eyes is fulfilled with impalpable
flame,
And the depths of my being vibrate as a passion-
swept lyre ;
Lo ! the darkness is rolled from mine eyes, and the
morning breaks,
Breaks on me sudden and terrible, like to the passing
of gods:—
0 wonderful light of day ! —lmperial domes
Cloud-built; —high towers, and immensurate arches
of heaven!
Thou firm and solid fundament of earth !
I have seen ye,—yea, with mine eyes I have seen ye again
ere I die I
{Falls on his knees in an ecstasy)
Chorus.
Meet it is we praise the gods
With bowed knee and trembling breath,
Seeing wondrous things and strange
Things unheard of brought to pass :
Tombs of darkness ne’er unsealed
Filled with sudden fire of sight,
Filled with shapes and signs and portents
And the unvisioned future’s light.
Ophioneus.
A wondrous and a fearful thing is this, •
My children, that the gods vouchsafe to me,
To fill my barren orbs with these, and ye,
And yonder, that tower proudly over all,
In stature like to the immortal gods,
And full of gracious royalty.—l think




vV v \
l< n .
_ iwr-n,. .._ _ ... II I II MM [--I, »IV-J^ |, * , ‘^I'‘‘ 1 '‘‘ ; '** < '** J * >~', *I‘'* 1 ‘'* -»*—-
&Wi ,Kr . • A
K ObJub ______
IkU JU _
StS
$$ (Axs^'
u
v , . t OsuJh •


This is none other than the King himself,
Such majesty is blazoned on his front.
(He is seized with trembling)
But who are these approaching ?—Dreadful shapes !
Their eyes all dripping blood ; about their hair •
Foul writhing snakes encoiled.—o fearful sight!
And horribly they gnash their teeth at us.
Ah! Ah! Ah! Ah!
Behold the dread Erinys—the Avengers !
What would ye here ? —avaunt ! —0 horror ;
See ! one behind this maiden holds aloft
A bloody knife that steams most horribly ;
The other, o’er the Queen, a halter twists ;
And near the King a third one wipes a sword
Whereon the oozy gore is half-congealed.
Ah ! Ah ! They roll their bloody eyeballs on me,
And freeze me into stone. —No more ! no more !
0 let me see no more ! Lead, lead me forth,
Blind, —blind as I was born, —and never, never, never
more
Let these accursed eyes behold aught ’neath the sun !
Woe! Woe! Woe! Woe !
(He staggers forth, led by a boy.)
Scene j.
(King. Queen Taiba. Chokus and others.)
Chorus.
Words of madness hear I, trembling,
Shuddering, see looks of frenzy,
Evil-omened, fraught with horror
And disastrous fate’s oncoming ;
Withered is the soul within me,
And the flesh of me all wasted,
With unfathomable anguish
Of premeditated doom.


Aristodemus.
Time, the great artificer, whose adept
All-fashioning hands indifferently shape
The commonest and the most strangest things,
Brings also this to pass. Then be ye not dismayed,
But turn we from such wild and windy madness,
To that which sane and eonstruable is,
And tributive to our considered purpose.
Queen.
Far be it from me, 0 my lord the King,
To contravert this utterance of thine
Most unavailingly,—for well I know
The soul in thee is constant as a star
Embedded in the crystal sphere of night,
Mid storm and change and wrack of underworlds
Invariable, steadfast, unappalled.
But yet,—my heart misgives me—and the shade
Of monstrous things to be falls chilly on it, —
And what they are I see not, but I know
They shall be full of fruitless suffering,
And we, a mock for the satiric gods.
Aristodemus. •
Peace, Queen ! Our fears are worst interpreters,
And wrest all opposites to their fantasy.
Enter Guard.
Scene ji.
(As Befoeb, and Guard.)
Guard.
Here am I come, outspeeding my companions,
To tell thee, sire, that she whom thou badst seek
Is fled; with her, her father, old Lyciscus.
Aristodemus.
Would the gods mock at us ? —Whence hast thou tihs ?


• .
I <Wm) *
K . -tV f \ •
»' 'l »v ..
, v ‘ ' '
/b j, |
UU^^'


Guard.
I am of them to whom command was given
T" go fetch these both. But when we came t’ hia house
We nothing found but one old white-haired slave,
That wagged his beard at us, and bade us search,
With this word of hia master : That he flies,
Averting from this land bloodguiltiness,
Lest in your overhasty mood ye slay
A child, but none of his, a fosterling
Reared in his house, the fruit of other loins.
Thus spake he, and I, hearing, hastened hither
With utmost of my speed to make report.
Aristodemus.
Tis good ! And by his excellent dissembling
This priest has scouted all of you, and me.—
Accursed be he and all his kind for ever !
These traffickers in piety, to whom
Truth, honour, liberty, kinship and country,
All that is sacred to a patriot’s heart,
Are nought but tools to use or cast away
According as their selfish ends be served.
So are they nurtured in dissimulation
That they no more remember their once selves,
But their unnature becomes naturalized ;
Deceit, instinct; falsehood a sort of truth ;
And thus pervert they wholesome nature’s functions,
And of their weakness strive to build a strength :
Greedy for power, and powerless but in semblance,
Weak 'gainst the strong, and strong against the weak,
And false to all, —to God, to man, themselves.
Coryphoeus.
A bitter speech, 0 King, is this of thine,
But whether just or not let others say :
The harp of fate is variously strung,
And manifold the sounding chords thereof:—
To this one hearken too, harsh though it be,
Lest by some chance a god now pluck the string.


Queen.
Nor my prayer, nor this good old man’s, despise—
The echo of what stirs in every heart.
An awful thing it is to incur the guilt
Of innocent blood, —there is a curse thereon.
What profit have we of it ?—or the gods ?
Will they that look unmoved from their high seats
Upon the misery of unending millions, —
Madness of heart’s despair, death’s bitterness,
And life prolonged beyond despair and death,
Will they, perchance, for one sad maiden’s tears,
Relax one whit of all their iron will ?
It cannot be!—o lay aside the thought!
The sanguine sea whereon thou wouldst put forth
Hath never but one harbour, that is—death I
Aristodemus.
What froth of words is this thy heart throws up
Against me, 0 my Queen ?—Of what avail
Against the fury of immortal breath,
That sweeps us o’er the sounding surge of life
Toward the shore of death, —where quiet is ?
Yea, or what sort of counterpoise to set
Against the holy covenant of a god ?
What if we spurn it, —shall we not be spurned ?
Or breaking it, —why ! —shall not we be broken ?
How will ye plead,—whom one sole doom offends,
Being too pitilessly pitiful,
When, by this same your pity slain, there fall
A myriad-many innocents, and hold
To you their piteous arms outstretched—in vain ?
0 in that day ye who now shun to look
Upon the gaunt and hungry face of Death,
Shall call on him by many a tender name
To take you in his loverlike embrace,
So ye no more may hear their hollow groans,
Nor witness their long drawn-out agonies.
Nay! there be some of us to whom these things
Are nothing new or inexperienced :


r '
X


Who mid the burning city’s blaze have seen
The flash of arms and threatening of plumes,
And terrible through the night, colossal forms
Tower sudden from the rampart down upon us :
And heard, through all the din of hurtling war,
Through savage shouts of triumph, sullen groans,
Oaths, pantings, curses, thundercrash of ruins,—
The wail of children, terror-struck ; quick shrieks
Of frenzied virgins ; horrid gibberings
And idiot laughter of demented mothers ;
And over all hoarse brazen-throated Murder
Urging his smoking blood-hounds on to slaughter.
0 such things have we seen, such things o’er-lived.
Yea ! would that I with this sad useless remnant
Of out-worn life might purchase you reprieve
From man’s oppression, and from God’s despite.
Alas ! —but, woe is me ! this may not he, —
And that which must, I know not how to speak. ....
Taira.
And therefore from the flower of thy lips
1 beelike will sip forth the hidden secret,
And store it in these ears as in a hive:—
0 royal father ! I, a simple maid,
From thee pluck courage most unmaidenlike.
For am I not thy daughter, having part
In that triumphant golden lineage
Of Zeus-horn Herakles, —whose prerogative
It is, above all other meaner souls
To dare, and to endure ? Is it not ours,
By right of that divine same strain in us,
To seek the danger weaker spirits shun,
In all emprize of hazard still the first ?
To suffer all things feared and nothing blench ?
To match our strength with fortune’s; yoke with Death ;
And with a swimmer’s joy plunge foremost in
The strong remorseless swirl of rising fate ?
Be 1 our privileges, our recreations,
v For godlike is the tireless force in us :


0 must we not despise the flat and smug
S Mechanic, mouselike, hole to hole contentment
1 Of ignominious humanity ?
\ The slaves of one all dominating fear :
\ To suffer ! all whose dwindled joys and pains
\ Suffice not to fulfil one splendid hour
Of our exhaustless superfluity.
Yea, by the gods ! who would not rather be
The most unpitied toilsome drudge of fate,
Than linger out such languid debile days,
The laughing-stock and scorn of noble spirits ?
is that royalty within my veins
As brooks no rival in the straight of honour :
Father ! my father ! from remote dim heaven
The godlike star of our great ancestor
Looks confidently down on us, —and waits . . .
Thou gazest ? . . . and thou utterest no word ? . . .
0 ! that which silently thy heart broods o’er
A god hath given me to feel and speak !
Tis I, even I, the daughter of the King,
That now must dare this great immortal deed :
Yea I, and I alone of all, am she,
Whose innocent and all-infolding love
Must cover up with blossoms of my blood
The horrid soar of cankered guilt in us.
Blood calls for blood, as hate engenders hate,
And each debt cancelled lays its counter-claim,
In endless horrible concatenation.
Me, only me, hate doth not kill, but love, —
Fruitful exuberant love, that laughs at death,
And winningly transforms his surly glances
To looks of gentle amiability,—
And turns to painless air in his caress.
Queen.
0 all presaging mother’s heart of me!
What did I fear ? What shuddering conceal ?
What mounting sorrow swallow trembling down ?


— — —■—
~\r


Alas ! my daughter ! on a fearful venture,
Forsaking me, art thou about to embark.
And I, that stand upon this desolate shore
Gazing afar into the moaning night
Where voiceless thou art swept away and lost, —
For ever lost to me!—what shall I do?—
What pray ?—0 whither turn for comfort ? Lo !
The unmerciful heavens, wrapt in their righteousness
As in a coat of mail, with stony eyes
Of calm indifference look down upon
The sweat of agony on mortal brows.
Alas! Alas!
In thy undoing all we are undone !
Chorus.
Soundless are the feet of Fate,
And her ways invisible :
In the courts of kings she sits,
And they wither on their thronesj
Or by hearth of humble thrall,
And the fire thereof is quenched :
Death lives in her empty eyes,
And her mouth is fed with death.
None may know her, none reveal her,
None avoid, or brush aside ;
Whom she marketh for destruction
Silently she steals upon ;
On the noontide sleeper creeps she,
Like swift night is her approach,
Suddenly he wakes, and sees her
Standing by him, —abwobe, —and dies.
[Enter Messenger ).
Scene xii.
(The Aforegoing. Messenger.)
Messenger.
Thus —in rude haste—unmannerly I come
Before thee, King, forth from the battle’s midst,
Despatched by him who holds the eastern gate,


Warlike Cleonnis. Like a wounded lion
He bellows on his comrades to the fray,
And in the foemen’s sides his iron claws
Tear bloody gaps, and everywhere at once
He rages, like a god infuriate.
But as a vast and hoarsely roaring sea
That hurls upon some frowning opposite
Its waves innumerable, and then aback,
Broken and trembling, shivered into spray,
In th’ swirling backwash sucks them, but more fiercely
To vomit them upon the stubborn foe, —■
So ceaselessly their closely serried ranks
Burst o’er us—and we crumble—piece by piece—
Nor now much longer may our strength hold out,
Nor any hope is more, unless some god
Afford us succour, taking pity on us.
Aristodemus-
A little yet hope on !—To Artemis
I first will sacrifice, and then once more
This heart, this fate-unconquered heart shall try
Yea ; for the last, the very last of all times,
What weight of God’s oppression it can bear.
(Exit Messenger.)
Scene xiii.
Aristodemus.
(With passion).
0 light of my old eyes, fair child of mine !
There is that in my heart which may not cut—
Let weep who may, and pour his sorrow forth
In unavailing words, —I will not. .. . Yet
In this distracted kingdom of my soul
Rebellion half unfolds its daring standard,
And like two equally matched combatants
The father and the king stand both at bay.
0 child, —this deed of thine shines forth in thee
More lustrous than athwart the wintry sky


To desperate-eyed shipmen, Hesperus.
And in the years to be thy name shall sound
On lips of children and of men born free,
Their saviour, and their symbol of liberty,
Deathless and glorious as the name of God.
Taira.
0 palpitant, all renovating Air,
That cincturest the whole vast breathing world
With thy inviolate, purifying essence!
Ye happy plains, ye lordly mounting heights,
And limitless deep gulfs of footless heaven !
And thou, dear Earth ! sweet mother of us all,
Whose joys and woes are relevant to ours ;
That knowest thirst, and hunger, sweat and travail,
And flinchest not, nor sparest, but for ever
Toilst patiently on thy allotted circuit:—
Now in a flash of beauty ye pass from me.
Friends! . . . I have loved ye. . . yea! and more
than ye
The sacred spirit that within ye burns—
Liberty:—Not the license of the weak,
But lordship, subject unto which man learns
To master and to use the gift within him :
Aye, Liberty! priest-hated liberty,
That mobs pervert, and tyrants seek to strangle.
0 through all might of tyrants, priests, and mobs,
Let your love cling to her, as mine to you.
Beloved ... 0 my parents ! . . . Woe is me !
My heart seeks vainly some less bitter word
Than this which I must say: Farewell! . . . .
Farewell!
(yp the turns towards the-
AFme !. . . Who is’t upon the thresljdW there ?.. . .
1 So soon? .... 0 yet a little /tvhile I .... Have
i'i mercy! . . . /
ij lam so young to die Alas ! Alas !.. . .


Thy looks are chili I fear thee . . . . . Woe is
me !.....
0 friends!./.... He beckons me . . . look ....
see you hot ? . . . .
Farewell, /my father! . . Mother / . . Ah! . . .
Farewell!
Point riot thy skinless finger at me/threatening,
Thoj/stern and terrible shape, that seemst like Death ! . ...
1 falter not .... lead onward ! .... see! ... . I
corns !
enters the Palace.)
Scene xiv.
KING. QUEEN. ATTENDANTS, ETC. CHORUS.
Chorus.
Gently, gently, 0 Beloved !
Gently fall around thee night,
Close thine eyes around with shadows,
And thine heart;
As around the hearts of flowers
Petals close,
Gently, gently close.
(Enter Da mis).
Scene £\>,
Aristodemus. Queen. Attendants etc. Chorus.
Damis.
Damis.
(Rushes in beside himself. Gazes wildly around and perceives
that Taira is absent.)
She is not here! . . . too late ! . . . too late! . . .
too late!
And I may never look upon her more !
If thy poor murdered voice hath any where
An echo, speak, 0 speak to me most wretched !
And I will search the lonely gulfs of hell


And pluck thee from Death’s horrid ravishment.
Ah I—give me back my bride, —cruel old man !
Behold me, clinging to thy knees, a suppliant!
Turn not away!
Aristodemus.
0 torture beyond torture!
Damis.
Thou answerest not ?—Answer thou shalt, child-slayer!
Blood-guilty tyrant!
Aristodemus. ( with majesty).
Silence ! foolish boy !
What is thy paltry dram of grief beside
A father’s anguish ?
Damis. {more wildly.)
Mockery of words!
Her father ?—murderer, rather say !—But ere
Thou consummate this butchery, I’ll kill thee.
{Drawing his sword he rushes upon the King, who remains
motionless with indignation. The bystanders hold Damis back,
and after a tussle, wrench the sword from him. Until the end
of the scene he continually struggles to free himself with the
utmost desperation, and becomes more and more frenzied.)
What crime is this ?—Demented youth!—Hold back !
Damis. (fiercely.)
True was it that he spake, that blind old man
Whom thou didst scorn, —to thyself only wise,
To all else stubborn, godless, infamous, —
Aristodemus. {trembling with anger.)
Bear him away ! —Quick! —Let him speak no more 1
My soul is over-wrought, and turns to frenzy.


Damis. ( struggling .)
Hear me thou shalt!—Ye think to slay a virgin,—
But this ye slay is none : —We were betrothed: —
To me in secret granted she her love.
Aristodemus. ( beyond himself.)
Ah ! Vile one !
Damis. ( shrieking , as he is forced off.)
Even now within her womb
Waxeth a witness of our vows
Aristodemus. [frenzied with passion.)
Ah! ah!
Liar ! Damned art thou for this perjury !
{He seizes and brandishes the sacrificial knife)
Come thou, cruel steel! but cruel less by far
Than is the venomed brutish fang of slander:
Come thou, and unto all proclaim her innocence !
0 liar! liar ! liar ! liar !
[He rushes furiously into the palace.)
Queen, (swoons.)
Ah! ... .
(She is born* out. Exeunt all but chorus .)
Scene xvi.
Chorus.
Behold! behold!—the Slayer and the Slain,
In one doom mingled,
In one net snared!
Behold! behold!—Father and daughter,
With self-same blood
Besprent and bespattered!


I bewail in Aulis the fearful deed
Wrought of old by the Argive King,
When an evil word in an evil hour
He uttered, slighting the bow-loving Goddess.—
And Artemis heard ;
And a "prayer she sped to the mighty Poseidon,
To him that presides o’er the monstrous sea,
And the hair of'the Ocean-god bristled with wrath,
As he smote with his trident the sleeping main,
Till it leapt in its fury:
He loosed on the ships a blast of doom,
A portent dread on the souls of the heroes,
That vainly they yearned to Simois strand,
And vengeance for beautiful ravished Helen,
And Ilium’s undoing.
Then blindness fell on the heart of the King,
And he set the knife to his child’s fair throat,
That Ocean might drink of her maiden blood, —
Drink, and be stilled.—But fierce Erinys
Saw, and remembered :
They whetted the axe for a wifely hand ;
For the hand of a son they whetted it; —
They set on its edge a triple seal,
And a blood-curse on the House of blood, —
Agamemnon’s House!
Behold! behold!—the Slain and the Slayer,
In one doom mingled,
In one net snared I
Behold! behold !—the links of the past
That bind and trammel
The future’s feet 1
But may no such chance e’er cross this threshold,
Nor no such evil,
Nor dread Erinys.
(Enter messenger.)


Scene xvii.
CHORUS. MESSENGER,
Coryphœus.
Why com’st thou, moistening with thy tears the stones,
So that they almost seem with thee to weep ?
Messenger.
And stones, could they but see what I have seen,
Would lose their hardness, thaw, and turn to water.
For 10, I saw the daughter of the King,
Standing before the altar, motionless,
As queenly as a sculptor’s marble dream,
With arms out-stretched, and radiant face upraised
Toward the awful Image of great Artemis.
Then, suddenly, unawares, in burst the King,
As though some god had goaded him to madness,
His face distorted with a frenzy of passion :
And straight,—with no libation poured, nor prayer
To the immortal gods, nor any word
But this, which forth from his clenched teeth he hissed :
“ Liar ! Liar! Liar ! ” he seized her by
The long robe of her hair, which hung adown
E’en to her feet, a fount of splendid gold,
And plunged in her bare throat the shining steel:
Then ripping ope her white and tender flesh
E’en to the navel, he commands us look,
Still crying “ Liar! Liar! ” And he bends
Upon her, weeping,—the which never yet
He hath been seen to do, —And then at last,
Mastering his passion, he performs the rites,
And offers supplications to the gods.
But in my soul there lurks a deadly fear
Of woful happenings about to be.
And hither 1 am come to bid you join
Yours to the general voice of lamentation.
And now, even now, the palace doors are opened.
{The doors open)


Scene xviii.
(The interior of the palace. At the hack on a pedestal the
Image of Artemis, beating an immense brazen shield, before
which an altar ; across it the slain body of Taira. The King
stands on the steps, his arms uplifted imploringly towards the
goddess. Soldiers and citizens fill the apartment. The
Queen , half-supported, half-kneeling, with outstretched arms,
also supplicates the Image. Enter Ophioneus, led.)
Ophioneus.
0 Rulers of this city, and all ye
That press with sandalled feet itspaven ways,
Give ear to me, by whom Apollo speaks:—
For that in ire, without due rites performed,
Libation poured, or prayer to the high gods,
The blood of this maid hath been shed by you,
The offended majesty of God is wroth ;
And your tears, groans, beseechings, leaden-winged
Ascend not the superlative of heaven,
But weighed to earth stifle within your throats :
Bloodguilty are ye, and contaminate,
Abominable in the sight of God,
And he who wrought this evil thing—accursed !
Accursed he and his kin for evermore !
(Exit)
Aristodemus. (horror-struck.)
Oh I Oh!
Queen. (Rushes out, frantic.)
The doom ! the doom ! Woe ! Woe ! Woe ! Woe !
Scene xix.
KING. PEORĹE. CHORUS, ETC.
Chorus.
Woe! Woe!
On what sanguine flood
Are we hurried away ?
Hurried, and lost ?


Aristodemus. (Bushing from, the Altar.)
What have I done ? . . . Insensate ! ... Woe is me !
The most accursed, damned, god-stricken wretch !
Stab me !—0 kill me !—Tear this heart out! . . . .
. . . See! . . .
And cast it for the dogs to vomit at!
Chorus.
Woe! Woe!
By what wind of madness
Driven along ?
Driven, and broken ?
Aristodemus. (To the image of Artemis.)
Invulnerable goddess !—Maiden-Queen !
Protectress of this land ! upon whose arm
Invincible is hung the sacred Shield,
Symbol to us of safety,—Signature
Of thy inveterate graciousnesa and favour !
Beseech thee now, if ever thou didst hear
The cry of suffering mortality.
Look down on us !—befriend us !—give some token
Whereby we may confute this truthless prophet,
And know our offering not all m vain :
0 stoop—o condescend to us, —0 hear us !
Chorus.
Thou that dwellest in
Splendour immortal,
Changeless, unsubject to
Sorrow and pain :
Maiden! Protectress !
By these our tears we beseech thee,
Hear, 0 hear us !
Aristodemus.
Turn, turn thy calm imperishable eyes
Upon a wretched father’s stricken heart.!
If ever thou didst bate a father’s groans,
If ever thou didst staunch a father’s tears,
If ever thou didst ease a father’s woe,
Then by these groans, these tears, this woe ; 0 hear me!






Chorus.
Thou Unbeholden, yea !
Even of God:
Thou that art awful and
Perfect in chastity :
Maiden! Protectress 1
By travail of mother made fruitless,
Hear, 0 hear us !
Aristodemus.
0 if our griefs, that storm the rampart air
And clamour at the gates of very heaven,
Have yet no power to force an entrance there,
Look, look upon this corpse,—this maiden-life, —
This Innocent,—this gentle soul of woman :
And let the high triumphant festival
Of virtue that shews glorious forth in her,
Blot out a moment’s mad infatuation
Of one most desperate man : 0 hear us ! hear !
Chorus.
O by thy deathless, im-
-Mutable Being;
By the pure essence and
Godhead of thee :
By fate, and change, and mortality,
Hear, 0 hear us !
Aristodemus.
0 thou all-comprehending-one ! thou all-
incomprehensible ! We derogate
From thy great office and high dignity,
Urging unworthily our foolish claims, f 6
When rather we should nothing further plead
That thy wise graciousness : —0 hear me ! —Yea !
By thy invulnerable maidenhood !


Chorus.
By thy eternal, in-
violate maidenhood,
Hear, 0 hear us !
Aristodemus.
And by the insupportable pure light
Of thy pervading Presence !
Chorus.
By the unbearable
Light of thy Presence,
0 hear us >
Aristodemus.
By thy bow,
All-conquering, resistless 1 And thy shield’s
Impassable, impenetrable ward !
Chorus.
By the all-conquering
Might of thine archery,
Hear us !
Aristodemus.
Lo ! by the splendour of thy perfect godhood !
By the immortal Thought that shaped thee ! 0 !
If aught there be within this whole wide world of woe
May pity move in an immortal breast, —
By that I do conjure,—command thee, —Speak !
A sign ! .... A sign ! .... 0 by a sign resolve us !
Chorus.
By fate and doom,
By woe and death,
By dread Erinys,-.
And Lethe’s str|am,»—
0 by thy immachl|te godhead,
Hear, 0 hear us !






Stoop, and descend to us,
Merciful one!
Set the seal of thee
On our hearts,
And before our eyes
The sign!
A sign—a sign—
Vouchsafe a sign! . . . .
{A moment's silence is followed by a thundercrash, as Artemis’
great shield falls shattered to the ground.)
Woe! Woe!
{All rush away, terrorstruck, shrieking. Aristodemus,
appalled stands for a moment paralysed. He staggers
convulsively towards the goddess, with clenched fist upraised as
in defiance, —he totters, and falls prostrate at her feet. Thunder
and lightning. The Palace doors crash to of themselves.)
Scene xx.
Chorus.
Lift unto Zeus the solemn dirge!
Wail, 0 ye children ! Wail!
Hi hath set in our garden a stately tree,
And we. sate us down in the shade thereof,
us down and ate of its fruit:
But poison was in its shade,
The fruit of it, sorrow.
Tiffi, unto Zeus the solemn dirge!
Wail, 0 ye children ! Wail!
He hath sped to our mansion a
And we spread before him a feast well-dight,
We slaughtered the ewe-lamb of pur flock,
And set it before him :
And bis name waa—Death !
0 towers and high-places of Ilium !
0 voice of Cassandra, crying unheard !
0 godlike invincible strengths of heroes!
0 doom of Ilium !


They girded thee round with a wall of brass,
With a three-foid wall they girded thee ;
They took their stand thereon, and vaunted !
Ilium unhappy!
WaafriMHi,, !
' 3 ■
0 night of destruction ! Night of horror!
0 thunder of feet, and a multitude shouting,
Mid wrack, and ruin, and utter woe
Of Ilium burning!
IgpAkniMAi i itJmm-e !
’ y ''
0 strident triumphant shoutings of gods !
0 shapes of terror stalking colossal
Through smoke and flames of the roaring city !
Vengeance on Ilium !
Jthomi !
0 din and tumult of hurtling warriors !
0 sights, and sounds, and shapes, of ruin !
0 white haired Priam, ruthlessly slaughtered !
Ilium’s woe!
Hfca 5 * mrnf -itkame !
’ 3
0 sons and daughters, dead on the threshold!
0 royal Hecuba discrowned!
0 city dethroned, despoiled, and demolished!
0 Ilium vanquished!
Wob’b nre, Ith&me !
{Enter Messenger.)
Scene jJt.
Chorus. Messenger.
Messenger.
0 most unhappy House of Herakles,
Bound to a birthright of unending woe !
Coryphceus.
Is anywhere a woe yet to be found
Unsuffered by our grief-inured King ?


Messenger.
The Queen is dead.
Coryphoßus,
Alas !—By whose hand slain ?
Messenger.
By none but fate’s, I think. For in her chamber
We found her, round her neck the fatal cord.
Coryphoeus.
And knows the King of this ?
Messenger.
He knows, —For when
A lapse of time had something cooled our fears,
We ventured to approach the palace-halls',
Where stretched along the marble floor he lay,
In senseless swoon, and whether live or dead
We hardly knew, but with quick, trembling hands,
Strove hard to raise him, so that he awaked,
And turned his face to us, —and in his look
Was something terrible, unutterable,
That made us fear. A long, long time he stood,
Gazing upon us there with grave sad eyes,
Silent. And no one of us dared to stir.
And then at last in deep slow tones he spake,
Kindly, and measuredly, with great composure,
As if of all he only were unmoved :
“ Already, Friends, I know why ye are come,
And all that other woe ye fear to speak of,
For many things, once dark, are clear to me.
But hasten now, and with sweet-perfumed wood
Three litters build; and set a purple cloth
Thereon. And after lustral rites performed,
And all dues else pertaining to dread Hades.
Lay on the one this maiden, in her robes
Of virginal white, and poppies in her hand,


And round her brows a wreath of laurel twine.
But on the other, clad in regal mantle,
A crown of shining gold upon her head,
Place that imperial form that was my wife,
The royal mistress of this House, —your Queen.
And as ye bear these honourably forth,
Bid all our youths and maidens gather round,
All bearing white and purple blooms, and singing
Some soul-confirming beautiful old hymn,
Some Doric strain, that weeps, as warriors weep.
And thus, against the altar, set them down.
Here, to the right, my Queen ; my daughter there ;
And one between them, —vacant. And I pray you,
See ye to this forthwith. But Igo hence
To arm me, and once more confront the foe,
Ere that my destiny fulfil itself.”
So spake he to us. And we, that were awed
By that strange wondrous majesty in him,
Durst speak nor stir not, while he moved away,
As moves one that sees nothing, but is wrapt
In awe of some far passing-wondrous thing.
Coryphceas.
The fountains of mine eyes are long run dry,
Or I could weep to hear thee tell this tale.
(Enter Guard)
Scene xitt.
Messenger. Guard. Chorus.
Guard.
0 luckless bearer of worst news, I come.
For like a foundering ship, our city dips
Her quivering beak into th’ inrushing flood.
But go ye, and seek out a place of safety.


Coryphoau*.
0 where can age and weakness find a refuge
Gainst the rude mastery of lawless rage ?
Let us remain together, here, my friends !
Clasping the sacred altar of the goddess.—
But say, brave man, how fares our lord the King ?
Guard.
Clad all in armour of bright gleaming brass,
He flares upon the forefront of the battle.
Like forked lightning, that some thunder-cloud
Forth-belches. And three times a hurricane
Of massed foemen bellowing drave upon him;
Three times fell backward, smitten, all aghast
At that huge strength and fiery motion of him.
But at the fourth time, all alone he stood,
Mid heaped up corpses both of foe and friend.
Then step by step he back recoils, hung round
With foemen, like some monstrous unicorn,
In whose tough hide sharp-toothed boar-hounds fasten,
While spears of huntsmen vainly on him break. __
If ever man might with the gods encounter, '
Unterrified, and hurtless, this one would !
But who, Ah who ! may cope with destiny ?
Scene xxiii.
(Enter soldiers, etc., in flight, finally Aristodemus.)
Ariatodemus.
Brave countrymen ! —what man may do, we did.
And who may more ?—But now some bitter god
Destroys us utterly, as one that drives
His harrow through a field of standing corn,
And nothing more is left to us save honour,
Which no man neither any god may minish.
Then hearken unto me that am grown wise
With clear foreknowledge of the things to be.
Nor, having spoken, let none of you question


Of anything I bid you, but obey.
And firstly, having gathered all your people,
Your household gods, and what of goods ye can,
Bring them to where aslant the ocean shore
Your well-built ships lie. Straightway put ye forth
And fearless follow where the god shall lead.
For now it is decreed, leaving your birth place,
In other lands ye other homes shall find.
Till that strong eagle, sprung of dragon’s-brood.
Whom Thebes shall rear, a scion of liberty,
A glory and a fame to Grecian land, —
Shall build anew your eyrie in the heights,
Baising once more these ancient city-walls,
And to your children’s children render up
our high soul of liberty undimmed.
Foreknowledge of such things the goddess grants,
And pitying, slays me.—And myself, alone,
Must now search out the dim last way of all;
The way which leads to that untravelled land
Where all that I have loved is gone before.
For kinglike lived I, like a King will die,
Not querulous, dispraising this my fortune,
But rather, manfully embracing it,
As one that wrestled bravely and was worsted, —•
Well knowing ye, 0 my beloved people,
Shall live and prosper by this death of mo.
Farewell! . . . Obey! (exeunt soldiers)
(to chorus) But ye, with bowed hearts, lift
Your solemn voices in glad praise to Zeus,
Who does, and undoes, as it pleaseth him.
Farewell! Farewell! {exit.)
Scene xxiv.
Chorus.
Behold! behold!
The horseman Terror
Astride of the furious steeds of Thought.


Naked rides he,
And shouts aloud,
And his roadway is over the hearts of men.
Behold ! behold!
He rides to the future
With head ever turned to the phantom past.
Woe is his guide ;
His companion, Ruin;
And dogging his heels is the shadow of Death.
Scene xxv.
( Spartan soldiers rush in with drawn swords ; they Jill the stage.)
Spartans.
Vengeance ! Vengeance ! (
The king ! ~ . . Where .is the king ? . . . Burst in the
i si ' sr-
doors!
(ilk* they struggle to burst open the doors t three mighty
thundJtbkrps resound. The doors roll bad; of themselves;
black darkness falls; inside the palace the figure of Artemis
alone is lit with a blaze of light, which is reflected on the three
corpses of the King, the Queen, and Taira, which lie in the
position described by the messenger.
stands-. a Ju4-rp,. uue hsMing.
third xl bloody*sward f as.dsL.the visum -af Tdphims«m~iJ)i«m*-Txf: ~ T
The Spartans, beholding this dread spectacle start back
aghast. The chorus fall on their knees.)
Chorus.
Woe! Woe!
The End.
