

Armageddon
or Calvary
The Conscientious Objectors
of New Zealand and “The
Process of their Conversion”
BY H. E. HOLLAND, M.P.
Mrs. Ballantyne asked for an assurance
that the lads would not be subjected to
persecution during the voyage to England.
Sir James Allen replied that they would
be subjected to no persecution whatever.




ARMAGEDDON
OR CALVARY
THE CONSCIENTIOUS OBJECTORS
of New Zealand and “The Process
of their Conversion ”
BY H. E. HOLLAND, M.P.
WELLINGTON. N.Z.
Printed By The Maoriland Worker Printing and Publishing Co. |Ltd.
and Published by H E. Holland,. 207 Happy Valley Road, Brooklyn
1919


THE C.O’s.
Their names are writ in every Clink —
This small but steadfast band
Who for themselves have dared to think
And firmly take their stand.
The tyrants’ boast to crush and kill
And this proud spirit bend
Does only strengthen each man’s will
To conquer in the end.
Although to-night in prison cell
’Neath Mammon’s lock and key,
It only holds the earthly shell —
The mind and soul arc free.
The Brotherhood of Man’s their aim ;
So come whate’er betide
They’ll bear it all in Freedom’s name,
Their conscience is their guide.
Though each should fill a Martyr’s grave,
What grander end could be ?
Their death will only help to pave
The road to Liberty.
D. BAXTER.
In Detention,
July 26, 1917.


FOREWORD.
The publication of this book may be said to have a three-fold
purpose. It is written to turn the searchlight of publicity on a policy
which had we been wise should never have been written into the
Statutes of this country; secondly, to make known some of the shock-
ing experiences the men of conscience were called upon to undergo
and the terrible price they were required to pay for their crime of
holding conscientious objections to military service; and, finally, to
make it impossible for such a stupendous wrong to ever again sully
the annals of this country with the record of its atrociousness.
To this end I have sought to place the book before the public in
advance of the General Election, It is imperative that the electors
should kfiow the lengths to which a Government, having clothed itself
with military despotism, in arrogant disregard of the wishes of the
people, found it possible to go in its determination to t anslate into
practice the theories of the military extremists. This being so, and
because the General Election cannot be much longer delayed, the work
of compilation has had to be done in great haste and often during in-
tervals snatched from the crowded hours which belong to strenuous
campaigning.
I wish to thank Messrs. Brown and Briggs (Palmerston North the
Sotial Democratic Party (Wellington), the National Peace Council of
New Zealand (Christchurch), the Labour Representation Committee,
(Gisborne), the Auckland Waterside Workers’ Union, Mr. and
Mrs. R. W. S. Ballantyne, Messrs. Ronald S. Badger, Burns,
Smith, Begg, and Moffit, and other friends for placing sufficient funds
at my disposal to cover the cost of publication. I also wish to thank
Mr. J. Glover, manager of “ The Maoriland Worker ” for having turned
the work out at little more than the cost of production; the conductor
of the Country Worker’s Page for advance notices in successive issues;
“The Worker” mechanical staff for the manner in which they have
cheerfully co-operated in hastening the production of the book, as well
as for the excellence of their work; and Mrs. Beck, of the Women’s
International League, for assistance in compiling lists of imprisoned
C.O.’s.
Whatever profits accrue from the sale of this book will be devoted
to the fund for providing for the maintenance of the wives and child-
ren of imprisoned and victimised Conscientious Objectors.
H.E.H.


TO THE WOMEN
WHO SUFFERED


ARMAGEDDON
OR CALVARY
I.—INTRODUCTORY.
The war period revealed that there were four types of Con-
scientious Objectors to Military Service in New Zealand.
On the one hand we had the Religious Objectors, who took much
the same view of Military Service as was held by the early Christians.
They obstinately persisted in bestowing a literal interpretation on
the command of the Galilean Carpenter: “Thou shalt not kill”; and,
even as the early Christians were hurled among dreadful serpents,
flung into the lions’ den, or nailed to the Roman cross, so these latter-
day Christians were ready to pay the penalty for their life principles,
whether through pitiless years H the gloom of the prison cell or
grimly before the guns of the firing party. Stella Benson, in her novel,
“This is the End,” says: “You must take either Christianity or War
seriously—hardly both.” The extreme Christians of New Zealand
chose to take Christianity seriously, and it was unfortunate for them
that our War Legislation forbade literal interpretations of the fupda-
mentals of Christian teaching. Prior to the war there were few in-
deed who would not have conceded that the anti-war .slogan of the
Carpenter was a profound morality. The War Regulations, however,
made it an offence punishable with a year’s jail to propagate the
command: “Thou shalt not kill,” and it became a matter for the
practical Christian of choosing between Christ and the War Regula-
tions.
Different in many ways from the Christian Objectors were the
Socialist Objectors; of these there were some thousands. The Christian
Objector is always a Pacifist. Sometimes the Socialist is a Pacifist;
often he isn’t. There are many Socialists who wouldn’t fight under
any circumstances whatever. Again, the Socialists are legion who —
while they would avoid war as long as it could be avoided —would
fight to the death in a struggle to liberate mankind from Capitalism.
Generally speaking,, the Socialist Objector bases his objection on the
fact that wars are never made by the workers nor yet in their in


terests, but have their foundations in the quarrels of the national
capitalists over markets and for economic supremacy. “The interests
of the workers of all countries are identical,” said the Socialist
Objector; “there is no reason whatever why they should kill one
another in their masters’ quarrels.” And, of course, he immediately
found himself up against the Military Service Act and the War Regu-
lations. ■ / \ ' '
Of a different type, again, were the Irish Objectors. Often, of
course, the Irishman is a Christian; often he is a Socialist; some-
times he is neither. It is seldom that he is a Pacifist; once in a
hundred years you will find a Sheehy Skeffington—and Skeffington
was of English descent, anyhow. When, during the recent war, many
Irishmen in New Zealand objected to military service, their objection
was not based on either a Christian or a Socialist reason; its founda-
tion was historical. They protested that the Irish had never been
voluntary, but always compulsory, subjects of England, and that, ■
therefore, they ought not to be required to fight in England’s wars.
In support of this objection, they called in evidence seven hundred
long and terrible years of history—years of oppression and repres-
sion, of recurring artificial famine, of overflowing prisons, of cruel
evictions numbered by the million, of a country depopulated by mis-
rule. Their history was sound; their case was strong. But the War
Regulations reached them notwithstanding.
The Maori Objectors were again of a different type. In some re-
spects the Maori Objector resembled the Irish—with the difference,
of course, that the Maori belongs to a different historical period from
his white brother. The Maori Objectors came mostly from the Waikato
Tribe. They are not Pacifists; from time immemorial, they have been
a warlike people. The reasons on which ther objection was founda-
tioned are to be found in the history books —particularly Rusden’s
History.
Of course, every Conscientious Objector did not go to prison—nor
yet to the hills. Men with families had bitter reason to know that, if
they placed high principle first and chose the prison, those most dear
to them in life would suffer hardship and hunger, want and misery.
And so, out of their great love for the little children whose bread-
winners they were, out of the love they bore the good women whose
life-mates they were, they made the supreme sacrifice of principle
and went “marching down to Armageddon,” heavy-hearted, it is true,
out still with the pitiful assurance that whether they lived or whether
they died their loved ones would be saved, however miserably, from
the ravages of hunger. The others resolutely shouldered the Cross,
and, “with the moral courage of a God” (as the Dismissed Dominie
has written it), unfalteringly directed their steps towards the gloomy
summit of the modern Calvary.
For there was no other alternative. It was either Armageddon or
Calvary.
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


II. —THE COMING OF CONSCRIPTION.
Immediately following the "outbreak of war in 1914, Sir James
Allen, without consulting either Parliament or the people, hastened to
promise to the British military authorities an Expeditionary Force of
8000 men, and to maintain this at full strength for the period of the
war. No sooner was this promise made than the people were being
sternly reminded that they must “honour their obligations,” etc. The
first Expeditionary Force numbered 7761, necessitating a monthly
reinforcement of 1100 men; and, notwithstanding the almost un-
thinkable terms offered the volunteers, so great was the response to
the call for men that the Main Body was speedily increased by addi-
tions from the Reinforcements. As a matter of fact, by the time of
the Gallipoli retreat we were supplying reinforcements on a Main
Body strength of 14,000 men—nearly double the number originally
promised by Sir James Allen. Later this strength rose to 20,000,
and still later to considerably more; until we were sending away drafts
of from 220 D to 2600 men every four weeks—more than double the
original reinforcements. The more thoughtful men now began to
recognise that New Zealand was being bled white in the matter of the
physically best of its manhood.
The 1914 General Election was fought out in December, when the
war fever was at its height, and only here and there the voice of
Reason found itself capable of rising above the frenzied din. The
election was remarkable for the sham fight staged by the Reform and
Liberal Parties; but neither Tory nor Liberal “Patriot” dared to lift
a serious voice in advocacy of the imposition of Conscription. The
election was no sooner over, however, than the two anti-Labour Parties
began to make overtures to each other,, and in due time an alliance
was entered into, and the National Government was formed.
Following hard on the heels of this event, a section of the press
commenced an insidious propaganda in support of Conscription for
New Zealand. The best-informed men in the Labour movement had no
illusons concerning the idea that was in the minds of the military
propagandists. It was fairly clear that the papers wanted Conscrip-
tion, not so much to defeat the Germans as to defeat the people of
New Zealand.
The papers became more and more insistent in their demands, and
at last certain minor politicians began to say—somewhat timorously
at first, and then more brazenly—that they “would support Conscrip-
tion if it should be found that we could not otherwise keep our obli-
gations to the Empire.”
It was now the task of the capitalist press to “prove” that only by
the adoption of Conscription could we honour “our obligations to the
Empire”; and this it proceeded to do.
When Labour began to raise its protests against the danger of


Prussian Militarism being fastened on this country (I had the honour,
by the way, of sounding the first warning note in the leading columns
of “The Maoriland Worker,” of which paper I was then editor), the
Tory-Liberal leaders at first denied that they contemplated such a
move. A little later we found them saying that they would only resort
to Conscription if it was necessary to do so to enable us to “keep
our obligations to the Empire.” Sir Joseph Ward was indiscreetly
frank. He told a Dunedin audience that he knew that Conscription
was Prussian Militarism; still, he said, in effect, he “would vote for
it if it was necessary to enable us to keep our obligations to the
Empire.” From this more or less camouflaged attitude to the open
declaration that Conscription was necessary to enable us to “honour
our promises to the Empire” was but a short step. But both press
and anti-Labour politicians smothered up the fact that Sir James
Allen’s original and unauthorised promise had been kept under Volun-
taryism with interest at from 100 to 200 per cent.
Swift in the wake pf the campaigning for Conscription came the
intimation that a “National Register” of the country’s manhood was
to be taken. In “The Maoriland Worker” I voiced the protest that
this was the first real step towards Cbhscription. Other men raised
similar protests on the public platform. The Labour movement began
to awaken—all too late, unfortunately. As the protests poured in, the
Government deemed it advisable solemnly to pledge its word to the
•people that the Register was to be a purely civil census, and would
not be used in any way in connection with Conscription. How
flagrantly that pledge was dishonoured was demonstrated when the
first Conscription ballot was drawn and it was found that the very
cards signed by the men for the purposes of the National Register
were the cards that were drawn by the girls from the boxes in the
Statistician’s office when the marble numbers were called. At all
subsequent ballots the National Register cards were similarly used.
All men over 19 years of age were required to register; but only
from those between 19 and 45 were replies demanded as to their
willingness or otherwise to undertake military service. The men of
this age who registered numbered 195,341. Of these 33,785 declared
that they would not undertake service at home or abroad, while 44.338
w ! ere unwilling to undertake service abroad, but stated their willing-
ness to do home service. So that 78,123 men declared against being
sent abroad for war service.
The men who expressed themselves willing to undertake military
service abroad numbered 119,778. Of these a very substantial majority
(61,704) were married men, while 16,876 were single men with depend-
ents. Only 34,103 single men without dependents intimated their will-
ingness to go abroad.
" The Register was thus a clear indication that a huge majority of
eligible men were against Conscription; for—side by side with the
emphatic answer of the single men—there was the hard fact of the
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


Government’s pledge that the Register was not to be used for
military purposes, and the further fact that very many married men
for obvious reasons replied “Yes,” believing that the married men
would never be called upon. It was at this time the general opinion
that the single men would fill all the gaps.
Presuming on the “Yes” majority—an altogether misleading quan-
tity—the Conscriptionists became more aggressive in their demands;
and the Labour movement replied with the great Anti-Conscription
Conference of January, 1916, at which 200 organisations were repre-
sented, and which, with one dissentient only, denounced Conscription.
From this Conference was issued the memorable Anti-Conscription
Manifesto, which extracted a wild scream from every profiteering
interest, agent, and political lackey in the land. The Manifesto de-
manded the highest trade union wages for the soldiers and the com-
mandeering of all incomes over a soldier’s wage. This to ensure a
semblance of “equality of sacrifice” on the part of the wealthy. A.
S. Neill, the gifted author of “A Dominie Dismissed,” once met a titled
lady and discussed war matters with her. After she had gone he was
asked what he thought of the English aristocracy, and gave his opinion
in these words: “To the English aristocracy property alone is sacred.
That woman has given the lives of her two sons willingly for her
country, but if she were asked to give half-an-acre of her estate to
help pay for the war she would go mad with rage and disgust.” Cap-
tain Donald Simpson said something similar about certain pro-
fiteers in New Zealand. The thunderburst of rage and disgust which
greeted the proposal of the Labour Conference to take the money of
the wealthy (for whose property interests the soldiers were fighting)
for war purposes left the marks of its forked lightning flame scorched
black in the columns of the yellow press and burnt deep in the
memories of the audiences who listened while certain anti-Christian
religionists among the politicians raved on select and secluded plat-
forms.
While the Labour Conference was discussing ways and means of
saving New Zealand from the iron grip of Prussian .Militarism, Mr.
,W. M. Hughes and Mr. W. F. Massey were meeting secretly at Auck-
land—undoubtedly for the purpose of discussing the application of
Conscription to the Commonwealth and the Dominion. Mr. Hughes
had adopted a not very courageous method of getting away from Aus-
tralia. He had caused it to be known that he purposed sailing for
London by a boat due to leave Melbourne, He had organised a send-off
for himself at Sydney station, and had steamed outward and south-
ward to the stage-managed cheers of his official admirers. He had
gone a few miles out of Sydney, and had then left the train, and, re-
turning to the metropolis, had been taken in a launcl) to the Auckland
boat lying in the stream, leaving the Germans to believe he was sailing
from Melbourne, and consequently leaving the Melbourne boat to be
regarded as lawful prey by the submarines if they really wished to
THE COMING OF CONSCRIPTION.


get Mr. Hughes—a matter about which I have my own doubts. At
Auckland, as I have indicated, Mr. Hughes was secretly met by Mr.
Massey. The Censorship was employed to prevent the people of this
country from knowing that Mr. Hughes was here or that he and Mr.
Massey were conferring. The following telegram, dated January 22,
1916, was sent to the editors of the various papers:—
“The Hon. Mr. W. M. Hughes. Prime Minister of the Common-
wealth, is arriving in New Zealand shortly. You are strictly pro-
hibited from making any mention, reference, or allusion to this fact
or to his movements whilst in the Dominion or to his departure there-
from.—C. H. GIBBON, Colonel, Chief of the General Staff, and Military
Authority under the War Regulations Act.”
After his meeting with Mr. Massey—a conference which, no doubt,
had to do with the subsequent military history of this country—-the
Australian Prime Minister sailed for London, where to the British
Militarists he duly pledged the country he nominally represented to
adopt Conscription. On the strength of his military policy he was
lionised in certain quarters and actually taken seriously. But his
stock fell when he failed on his return to Australia to make good in
the matter of his rash promises. Happily for the cause of human
freedom, however unhappily for Mr. Hughes, his own party promptly
dealt with him for his apostasy, repudiated his pledge for the Prus-
sianising of Australia, compelled him to submit the matter of Con-
scription to a Vote of the people (by whom it was twice decisively re-
jected), and eventually hurled him in disgrace and political dishonour
from their ranks, and left him hissing and spitting vituperatively from
the outer darkness at the working men he had successfully duped for
over twenty years.
III.—THE DIVISION LISTS.
Mr. Massey and Sir Joseph Ward, for their part, were taking no
chances in the matter of trusting the people to decide the question
of Conscription or No Conscription. They led a supine majority in
Parliament, a majority that moved obediently at every crack
of the two-thonged whip. And so, on May 31, 1916, the Con-
scription Bill (labelled the Military Service Bill) was introduced, and
sledge-hammered through Parliament, carrying in its final stage with
only five dissentients.
Consistently the Parliamentary Labour Party, consisting of only
four men, fought the measure through all its stages. In this fight
alone the Labour Party justified its political existence. On every
division the four Labour men voted the right way.
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


The vote on the second reading of the Bill was reached on June
1, and 47 members voted with the Ayes, and five with the Noes, while
four members paired.
The members voting for Conscription were: —Allen, Anderson, An-
stey, Buddo, Buick, Craigie, J. M. Dickson, J. S. Dickson, Ell, T. A. H.
Field, W. H. Field, Forbes, Fraser, Guthrie, Harris, Herries, Hornsby,
Hudson, Isitt, Jennings, MacDonald, McNab, Mander, Massey, Myers,
A. K. Newman, E, Newman, Ngata, Nosworthy, Okey, Pearce, Pomare,
Poole, R. H. Rhodes, T. W. Rhodes, Russell, Scott, Smith, Statham,
W. Stewart, Sykes, Talbot, Veitch, Witty, Wright, Wilford, Young.
The members who voted against Conscription were:—HIND-
MARSH, McCOMBS, WALKER, WEBB, Payne.
McCallum and Sidey paired with the Ayes, and Thacker and
Fletcher with the Noes.
The House went into Committee, and on June 6 a division was
taken on the question of forcing boys of 20 to the trenches, and re
suited:—AYES: Allen, Anderson, Anstey, Craigie, J. M. Dickson, J. S.
Dickson, Fraser, Guthrie, Hanan, Harris, Henare, Herdman, Herries,
Hornsby, Hudson, Hunter, Jennings, MacDonald, McNab, Malcolm,
Mander, Massey, Myers, A. K. Newman, E. Newman, Ngata, Nosworthy,
Okey, Pomare, Poole, Russell, Scott, Sidey, Statham, W. Stewart,
Sykes, Talbot, Veitch, Wilkinson, Wright, Young. NOES; Colvin, Ell,
T. A. H. Field, W. H. Field, Fletcher, McCallum, McCOMBS, Payne,
Poland, T. W. Rhodes, Smith, WALKER, WEBB, Wilford, Witty.
Ward paired with the Ayes, and HINDMARSH with the Noes. The
Ayes numbered 41 —or just one more than half the strength of the
House.
On June 6 a motion was tabled in favour of raising the military
age to 55. Against this the Government made a resolute stand. The
voting resulted: —AYES: Anderson, Colvin, Ell, T. A. H. Field, Mc-
Callum, McCOMBS, McNab, Payne, Poland, Smith, WALKER, WEBB,
Wilford. NOES: Allen, Anstey, Craigie, J. M. Dickson, J. S. Dickson,
W. H. Field, Fletcher, Fraser, Guthrie, Hanan, Harris, Henare, Herd-
man, Herries, Hornsby, Hudson, Hunter, Isitt, MacDonald, Mander,
Massey, Myers, A. K. Newman, E. Newman, Ngata, Nosworthy, Okey,
Pomare, Poole, T. W, Rhodes, Russell, Scott, Sidey, Statham, W.
Stewart, Sykes, Veitch, Wilkinson, Witty, Wright, Young. HIND-
MARSH paired with the Ayes, and Ward with the Noes.
On the same date it was resolved, by 43 votes to 9, to place un-
married men with dependents in the First Division, the four Labour
men voting with the minority, and Veitch, the Wanganui “indepen-
dent,” with the majority.
On June 7 the House divided on the question of exempting Relig-
ious Objectors. The division list stands: —AYES: Allen, J. M- Dickson,
Ell, T. A. H. Field, Guthrie, Hanan, HINDMARSH, Isitt, Jennings,
McCOMBS, Massey, Okey, Payne, Poland, Poole, Talbot, WALKER,
WEBB, Wilkinson, Witty, Wright. NOES: Anderson, Anstey, Craigie,
THE DIVISION LISTS.


W. H. Field, Fletcher, Fraser, Harris, Herdman, Herries, Hornsby,
Hudson, Hunter, MacDonald, Mander, McNab, Myers, A. K. Newman, E.
Newman, Nos worthy, Pomare, R. H. Rhodes, T. W. Rhodes, Russell,
Scott, Smith, W. Stewart, Sykes, Veitch, Young. On this occasion, only
50 members, out of a House of 80, voted; and it stands on record that
the refusal to recognise the Religious Objector was carried by only
29 members—a fraction more than a third of the House. Many mem-
bers appear to have deliberately absented themselves.
On the same date the clause in the Bill which provided up to five
years’ jail with hard labour (in addition to liability under the Army
Act) for Conscientious Objectors and military defaulters was voted
upon. The list; —AYES: Allen, Anderson, Anstey, Brown, Buick,
Craigie, J. M. Dickson, J. S. Dickson, Ell, T. A. H. Field, W. H. Field,
Fraser, Guthrie, Hanan, Harris, Henare, Herdman, Herries, Hornsby.
Hudson, Hunter, Isitt, Jennings, MacDonald, McNab, Mander, Massey,
Myers, A. K. Newman, E. Newman, Nosworthy, Okey, Pomare, Poole,
R. H. Rhodes, T. W. Rhodes, Russell, Scott, Sidey, Smith, Statham,
W. Stewart, Talbot, Veitch, Wilford, Wilkinson, Witty, Wright, Young.
NOES; Fletcher, HINDMARSH, McCOMBS, Payne, Poland,'WEßß.
Ward paired with the Ayes, and WALKER with the Noes.
On June 8 the House divided on the clause providing for fine and
imprisonment for employers retaining in their employ Conscientious
Objectois. The list; AYES; Allen, Anstey, Bollard, Brown, Buick,
Craigie, Dickie, J. M. Dickson, W. H. Field, Fraser, Forbes, Guthrie,'
Hanan, Harris, Henare, Herdman, Herries, Hornsby, Hudson, Hunter,
McCallum, MacDonald, McNab, Mander, Massey, Myers, A. K. Newman.
E. Newman, Nosworthy, Okey, Pearce, Pomare, R. H. Rhodes, T. W.
Rhodes, Russell, Scott, Sidey, Smith, Statham, W. Stewart, Sykes,
Talbot, Thacker, Veitch, Ward, Wilford, Wilkinson, Witty, Wright!
Young. NOES:- Colvin, Ell, Fletcher, HINDMARSH, Isitt, Jennings,
McCOMBS, Payne, Poland, Poole, WALKER, WEBB.
On the same date the House again divided on the clause which
gave the police power to question and arrest without .warrant men of
military age. The list:—AYES: Allen, Anstey, Bollard, Buick, Craigie,
J. M. Dickson, Ell, T. A. H. Field, W. H. Field, Forbes,' Fraser!
Guthrie, Hanan, Harris, Henare, Herdman, Herries, Hornsby, Hunter,
Isitt, Jennings, MacDonald, McNab, Mander, Massey, Myers, E. New-
man, Nosworthy, Okey, Pearce, Pomare, R. H. Rhodes, T. W. Rhodes,
Russell, Scott, Sidey, Smith, Statham, W. Stewart, Sykes, Talbot!
Thacker, Veitch, Wilkinson, Witty, Wright, Young. NOES: Fletcher,'
HINDMARSH, McCOMBS, A. K. Newman, Payne, Poland, Poole,
WALKER. Ward paired with the Ayes, and WEBB with the Noes.
On the same date yet another division was taken on a clause which
provided a fine of £SO for persons knowing the whereabouts of
Conscientious Objectors and military defaulters and failing to in-
form. The four Labour men, one independent, and one Liberal voted
or paired against the proposal, and 45 members (including Veitch)
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


On the same date the House was divided on the clause giving
Cabinet power to end the voluntary system of enlistment by procla-
mation. Forty-five members (including Veitch) voted and two paired
with the Ayes. The four Labour members, one independent, amd one
Liberal either voted or paired with the Noes.
The third reading of the Bill was taken on June 9—the Government
was determined to lose no time in militarising the country—and the
list showed: —AYES: Allen, Bollard, Buick, Colvin, Dickie, Ell, T. A. H.
Field, W. H. Field, Forbes, Fraser, Guthrie, Hanan, Herdman, Merries,
Hornsby, Hudson, Jennings, MoCallum, MacDonald, McNab, Malcolm,
Mander, Massey, Myers, A. K. Newman, Nosworthy, Pomare, Poole,
R. H. Rhodes, T. W. Rhodes, Russell, Scott, Sidey, Smith, W. Stewart,
Sykes, Talbot, Thacker, Veitch, Wilford, Wilkinson, Witty, Wright,
Young. NOES: Fletcher, McCOMBS, Payne, WEBB. E. Newman and
Ward paired with the Ayes, and HINDMARSH and WALKER with the
Noes.
It should be noted that Thacker, who had voted against the second
reading, changed his mind and voted for the third reading.
By the end of July, the unpopularity of the Government’s action,
supported by Parliament, was abundantly manifest; and on August
4 the House was divided on the question of extending its own life-
in other words, the proposal was to disfranchise the whole of the
electors of New Zealand until December, 1918. It appeared to the
Labour Movement that this step was deliberately taken to ensure
that the people should have no opportunity of dealing with the men
who had so grossly betrayed them. For this amazing proposal, 41
fnembers (one more than half the strength of the House) voted.
Nineteen members who were not out of New Zealand absented them-
selves. The division list;—AYES: Anderson, Allen, Bollard, Buddo,
Buick, J. M. Dickson, J. S. Dickson, Ell, W, H. Field, Fraser, Glover
Guthrie, Hanan, Harris, Henare, Herdman, Merries, Hudson, Hunter,
Isitt, Jennings, MacDonald, McNab, Malcolm, Mander, Massey, Myers,
E. Newman, Nosworthy, Okey, Poland, Pomare, R. H. Rhodes, Russell,
Scott, Statham, Stewart, Sykes, Thomson, Ward, Young. NOES: An-
stey, Craigie, T. A. H. Field, Fletcher, HINDMARSH, McCOMBS, A. K.
Newman, Payne, T. W. Rhodes, Talbot, Veitch, WALKER, WEBB,
Wilford, Witty, Wright.
In the April session of 1918, the House again extended its own life
—i.e., disfranchised the whole of the electors—for a further period of
a year: until the end of 1919. So the Parliamentarians who imposed
Prussian Militarism on the people took good care that the outraged
people should be deprived of all means of co»stitutional redress. It
is for the people to pronounce on this line of conduct at the forth-
coming general election.
THE DIVISION LISTS.


IV.— THE FLOOD-TIDE OP REPRESSION.
No sooner was the campaign for Conscription seriously entered
upon than the large halls, principally in the metropolis, were closed
against the Labour Movement. Even the Wellington Town Hall was
refused for the purpose of holding a public meeting under the
auspices of the Labour Party to discuss the proposal. The proprietors
of a local theatre tore up their agreement with the Social Demo-
cratic Party; and when the people filled the Alexandria Hall to over-
flowing and hundreds clamoured outside for Anti-Conscrip-
tionist speakers to address them, the speakers—Mr. P. C. Webb, M.P.,
Miss Adela Pankhurst, and the author—were prosecuted and penalised
on a charge of “obstructing the traffic,” notwithstanding that Abel-
Smith Street on Sunday evening is positively devoid of traffic. On
the same day, Mr. W. F. Massey addressed a crowd in Cuba Street—
one of the city’s busiest thoroughfares; but the class line was drawn
far too rigidly to permit of any prosecution in his case.
The repressive War Regulations multiplied with the enactment of
Conscription. Detectives were told off to follow up Labour meetings,
and in due time Hansard reporters were sent to take verbatim reports
of Labour speeches. When in December, 1916, the second great
Anti-Conscription Conference, representing 50,000 workers, was
sitting, detectives appeared with orders to demand admittance—a de-
mand which was, however, not complied with. Mr. Peter Fraser
(now M.P. for Wellington Central), secretary of the Conference, was
arrested while Conference was sitting; and the arrests of Messrs.
Brindle, Armstrong, and a number of others followed in rapid suc-
cession. Messrs. Semple and Cooke had been arrested a few
days earlier. Almost half the effective platform propagandists
of the Labour Movement were placed behind prison bars. Then the
pursuit of the men who voiced Labour sentiments became still more
determined. For months, at every meeting I addressed—it did not
matter what the subject was—a “Hansard” stenographer took a ver-
batim report at the press table, while a detective took notes in the
body of the hall (apparently for the purpose of checking the short-
hand reporter’s notes), while two or three other detectives were also
in the body of the hall.
A system of far-reaching espionage became part of the official
programme. The letters of the Government’s principal anti-mili-
tarist opponents were subjected to a censorship intended to be secret,
but so clumsily carried out that it told its own tale. For consider-
ably more than a year every letter which came to myself, whether
addressed to my home or office, was opened and read and then re-
closed neither neatly nor with regard for method or cleanliness. My
letters were held up for periods which ranged from three days to a
month. Letters to my wife from our sons in Australia were sub


jected to the same scrutiny. Even the Christmas cards which came
addressed to our children did not escape. This was not my exper-
ience alone. It was the experience of every person prominent in the
Labour movement, the Peace Council, the Freedom League, the
Women’s League, and other organisations whose work menaced the
interests of the Prussianists and the Profiteers. Of course, it was
inevitable that in due time intelligence methods would be developed
within the Labour movement which would render the system of
espionage largely ineffective.
About this time two determined attempts were made from within
to induce Cabinet, by War Regulation, to make it an act of
sedition to advocate the Parliamentary repeal of Conscription. For-
tunately for New Zealand —perhaps, also, for the Prussian-minded
men responsible for the proposal—the infamous attempt against
Constitutionalism was not agreed to by Cabinet.
Early in 1917 there came the first miners’ go-slow strike, consti-
tuting an effort to secure a 17i per cent, wages increase to enable the
miners to meet, to some small extent, the enormous increase in the
cost of living, which increase was largely the direct outcome of war
profiteering. The Miners’ Executive members were dragged away
to jail, and a new Executive came into office; whereupon the rank
and file, going over the heads of the Executive, declared a strike
against Conscription. The strike was eventually called off as the
result of a bargain between the Acting-Prime Minister and the Min-
ister of Mines on the one hand and the Miners’ Federation on the
other hand, practically guaranteeing that the miners would not be
conscripted for the army, and that the men concerned in the strike
would not be prosecuted. Needless to say, the terms of the bargain
were not honoured in their entirety, for the ink was scarcely dry on
the signatures when Messrs. O’Brien and O’Rourke were arrested
and sent to jail.
As a result of the strike, Mr, P. C. Webb, M.P. for Grey, was
arrested on May Day of 1917, held without bail, and at last sentenced
to three months’ jail. On his release he was accorded a reception
by thousands of citizens of Grey, Westland, and Buller, which lives
as the greatest event in the history of the West Coast.
V.— SIDE-STEPPING THE LAW.
Parliament first of all emphatically refused to exempt the Con-
scientious Objector, as the Division List of June 7, 1916, shows. Then,
for a reason yet to be explained, Parliament changed its extraordinary
mind, and proceeded to make provision for the exemption from com-
batant service of men who could prove that, prior to August 4, 1914,
they belonged to a religious organisation opposed to military service.
THE FLOOD-TIDE OF REPRESSION.


When the Bill was sent to the Legislative Council on June 9it con-
tained the following condition on which a balloted man might secure
exemption:—
“That he was on the fourth day of August, 1914, and has since
continuously been a member of a religious body the tenets and doc-
trines of which declare the bearing of arms and the performance of
any combatant service to be contrary to divine revelation, and that,
according to his own conscientious religious belief, the bearing of
arms and the performance of any combatant service is unlawful by
reason of being contrary to divine revelation.”
It will be noted that this severely excluded recognition of the in-
dividual religious conscience except as the auxiliary of the collective
conscience of an organisation. It denied to the Anglican, Catholic,
Presbyterian, Methodist, Salvationist Objector the right of individual
conscience. To the Socialist, Irish and Maori Objector it denied the
right of either a collective or an individual conscience. It only left
the way of exemption on conscientious grounds open to the members
of the Society of Friends, Christadelphians, and one or two other small
bodies. Even in their cases it was insisted that they must appear
for medical examination, attestation, etc. And again, even to these
objectors it only gave exemption from “combatant” service; it offered
the alternative of “non-combatant” service; and, of course, in a mul-
titude of cases, the extreme religious conscience revolted against any
kind of war work.
The printed document to be signed by the Objector set forth that:
“I, (Blank), having appealed to a Military Board on the ground of my
religious objections to military service, hereby undertake, if my
appeal is allowed on that ground, faithfully and willingly to perform
such non-combatant work or services as may be required of me in
accordance with regulations made under the Military Service Act,
1916, and at such rate of payment as may be prescribed by such re-
gulations.”
On June 7 the House divided on a proposal to deprive the Con-
scientious Objectors of their citizen rights for a period of ten years,
and the proposal was defeated by 33 to 23. The division list:—AYES:
Allen, Bollard, Buick, J. M. Dickson, Harris, Henare, Herdman, Her*
ries, Hornsby, Hudson, Mander, Myers, E. Newman, Nosworthy, Okey,
Pearce, R. H. Rhodes, T. W. Rhodes, Statham, W. Stewart, Wright
Wilkinson, Young. NOES: Anstey, Craigie, Dickie, Ell, T. A. H. Field,
W. H, Field, Fletcher, Forbes, Sir W. Fraser, HINDMARSH, Hunter,
Isitt, Jennings, McCallum, McCOMBS, MacDonald, McNab, A. K. New-
man, Poland, Pomare, Poole, Russell, Scott, Sidey, Smith, Talbot,
Thacker, Veitch, WALKER, Ward, WEBB, Wilford, Witty,
By the following session the vast majority of the Tory and Liberal
members had somersaulted, and a Bill was carried and sent to the
Legislative Council providing for deprivation of citizen rights for
the Conscientious Objectors. The Bill, however, also contained a
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


clause providing for the exemption of all clergymen and teachers (in-
cluding, of course, the Marist Brothers). This clause was rejected
by the Council, whereupon the Government dropped the whole
measure. The Council’s desire to see the Marists conscripted saved
the other Objectors in this respect for the time being. By the second
session of 1918, as we shall see, the whole of the House, with the ex-
ception of the Labour members, had fallen under the influence of the
interests antagonistic to the men of consciencie.
Now, the rejection by the Council of the clause referred to left
the law so that it required that the name of every clergyman and
theological student should be placed in the ballot in the order of his
Division. The Catholic clergy and teachers, by reason of their
celibacy vows, came at once into the First Division; consequently
the Catholic Church was the first religious organisation seriously
menaced by the Act. It was alleged, however, that the Government
had previously pledged itself to the Church that the clergy and the
Marist Brothers would not be called up. The “New Zealand Times,”
when the fact became known, explained that the Government had
made this bargain because it was anxious to get Conscription through
without being tripped up by the problem of the Conscientious Ob-
jector. This pledge was understood to mean that the clergy would
not be balloted. When the “system” began to work, however, and
Bishop Brodie and quite a number of the clergy and Marist Brothers
were duly drawn and required to take their chances before the Appeal
Boards, the suspicion arose that another scrap of paper was about
tg be torn up, and a determined spirit of resistance began to make it-
self felt.
Plain speaking on the part of influential Catholics was not without
its undercurrent of threat., Archbishop O’Shea laid it down that while
a priest would cheerfully expose his life at the call of duty, “to put
a rifle in his hand and require him to take the life of another would
be an outrage on the sanctity of his profession and an outrage on
the Catholic conscience.” When he was reminded that in France the
priests were Compelled to the trenches, he retorted: “‘Well, the law
that compelled the priests to fight in France was passed by an infidel
Government for the purpose of destroying the Church.” He warned
the Government; “Catholics are resenting deeply the attempt to con-
script their clergy, and will resent it still more if it is persisted in.”
He sternly declared: “We will use every means in our power to prevent
it.” He appealed to the Government “not to persist in a policy that we
look upon as a useless persecution and will resent to the end.” Father
Taylor wrote in the leading daily papers protesting that it was “mon-
strous” that a layman should declare the clergy “under compulsion to
carry arms and dip their hands in the blood of their fellowmen.”
The chairman of a Catholic public meeting at Wellington denounced
the proposal to conscript priests and theological students as “a gross
outrage,” A prominent Wellington lawyer at the same meeting asked:
SIDE-STEPPING THE LAW.


“Are we going to stand by and see our priests sent to the firing line?
I say no. Is there a single male Catholic in the Dominion who will
not make any sacrifice to prevent a single priest being sent to the
firing line?’’ The Wellington correspondent of a Christchurch paper
intimated that the Catholic clergy had a promise from the Govern-
ment that the clergy would not be conscripted, and that the Bishops
had been lulled by this promise, and so had allowed the legislation
to proceed without protest. This correspondent, pointing out that
Archbishop O’Shea’s words had been addressed to “men and women
of Irish blood, who knew something of suffering and had not for-
gotten,’’ declared that “to them and their offspring there would be no
bravado about making a stand to protect the priest,”
The Government had sown the wind, and it began to look as if the
Church would lay upon it the obligation of reaping the whirlwind.
But for a harvesting of this sort the Government had no stomach;
and accordingly it planned for a way by which it might escape from
an ugly situation. The method it adopted to save itself from the
consequences of its own unwise and unjust law was explained by Sir
James Allen to a deputation (of "a private character”) of represen-
tative Methodists and Presbyterians which waited upon him at
Christchurch on February 23, 1917. Parliament having refused to
exempt the clergy, this end was to be achieved by the Minister of
Munitions sending to the Appeal Board in each clerical case a certi-
ficate pf exemption. All that was necessary was that the heads of
the respective churches should make application on behalf of the
clergy for whom exemption was desired.
The Cabinet could not have been the happiest family round about
this period, for two days later the Hon. G. W. Russell, also deputa-
tionised at Christchurch (by the Ministers’ Association), said: "He
could not give a specific reply to the Association that a secret under-
taking existed between the Government and the Church”—meaning the
Catholic Church. But the honourable gentleman made it quite clear
that he had considerably swerved from his former attitude. On the
previous June 6 he had voted against exempting Religious Objectors.
On June 7 he had votdd in favour of jail with five years’ hard labour
for Conscientious Objectors. On June Bhe had voted to punish with
fine and imprisonment an employer who retained in his employ a
Conscientious Objector refusing military service. On June 8 also he
had voted in favour of a £SO fine for persons who failed to inform
against Conscientious Objectors refusing military service. Now he
told the Protestant ministers he was in favour of exempting all
clergymen—“he could conceive of nothing more incongruous than that
a minister of religion should be compelled to bear arms.” It was
surely not alone because he once represented Riccarton that his
dearest friends nicknamed the present member for Avon,
It may be explained here that the Labour Movement never at
any time desired that the clergy of any church or the Marist Bro-
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


thers should be conscripted. Labour stood against Conscription in
the first place, and in the second place for the exemption of every
man, whether clergyman or layman, with conscientious objections to
military service. If a clergyman was an ardent militarist, there
could be no logical reason for his desiring exemption. But, of
course, all Christians who interpreted Christian principle from the
viewpoint of the early Christians were of necessity anti-militarists,
and the Labour movement desired that none of these should be re-
quired to do violence to their conscience. There was an open way
by which the principles of such men might have been respected.
But the Government did not take that open way. On the contrary,
it sledge-hammered its tyrannical clauses through Parliament, deny-
ing the right of a conscience to the individual, and then when it
became alarmed at the storm it had raised, it set out to evade its
own bad law. And although it saved itself from coming into conflict
with the Church over the matter of the clergy, it went on sending
scores of good Catholics to jail for the crime of possessing con-
sciences, just as it sent scores of good Socialists, good Protestants,
good Quakers, good Irishmen, and others to jail for the same reason.
From the manner in which the Government backed down before
the determination of the Catholic Church, the Labour movement has
one great lesson to learn: IT IS ORGANISATION THAT COUNTS.
The Church had made up its mind that neither its preachers nor its
teachers should be sent to the trenches —and they were not sent. But
while the Government stood beaten and afraid before the organised
strength of the Church, the jail doors were swinging inward day by
day for the representatives of Labour. It is organisation that counts.
VI.—BY PATHWAYS OP SORROW.
The law —made by a handful of men in disregard of the will of the
people—duly came into operation, bringing a succession of disasters
in its trail. The rule of despotism never fails to lower the moral
standards and depreciate the essential values. Deception now be-
came a part of the national life; the spy and the informer functioned
secretly. Even the Minister of Defence came to the conclusion that
it was part of the duty of a Member of Parliament to act the part
of informer. From time to time the Government published lists of
the "wanted” men, and every list was sent to each Member of Par-
liament with an accompanying circular signed by the Minister of
Defence, which left no doubt in the mind of the M.P. as to what was
expected of him. One of these circulars reads:—
“Please find enclosed herewith a pamphlet containing the lists and
full particulars of soldiers who have been declared to be deserters
SIDE-STEPPING THE LAW.


from the various training camps, and also lists of the names of miss-
ing reservists who have been drawn in the various ballots, for whose
arrests warrants are still outstanding and in the hands of the police,
I have arranged for these pamphlets and lists to be sent to you each
month, as there is every probability that some information might
come to your knowledge which would be of assistance to the military
authority in tracing these men. Should any information reach you
at any time, it would be appreciated if you would communicate the
same to the local police or to the military authorities.”
Month by month hundreds of unwilling men were forced into camp;
month by month hundreds were gazetted as deserters. Month by
month numbers were seized or gave themselves up—some of them
going into camp and some into prison, when their places in the
“Gazette” were filled by other names. It did not matter that a man
had never taken the oath, that he had never passed a medical test,
that he had positively refused to be a soldier. He was held to have
taken the oath; he was categoried as a soldier; he was labelled “de-
serter,” and treated accordingly. Employers were forbidden to give him
work; his own mother was liable to jail with three years’ hard labour
if she gave him shelter; his own friends were liable to fine and im-
prisonment if, knowing his whereabouts, they failed to inform the
authorities.
The boats carried away hundreds of New Zealand’s best men —
openly, immediately prior to Conscription; secretly after its enact-
ment—to become exiles in distant lands. Thousands became fugi-
tives in their own land. They moved from city to city, from town to
town, from district to district.
Hundreds went to the hills, and in the wildness of the mountain
forest found a measure of that freedom which had been so ruthlessly
destroyed elsewhere. These mountain dwellers, for conscience sake
and with a fortitude akin to heroism that will never be understood
by their detractors, faced hardships that cannot be chronicled. In
the heart of the winter the rigours of the season tested to the limit
their almost superhuman powers of endurance. Betimes they lived
in dug-outs; and when the torrential rains of July and August came
they were literally flooded out. In the summer months the bush
fires swept through the mountains and drove them from refuge to
refuge. While their fellows were being hunted down in the towns
by the detectives, they were being tracked through the hills by the
uniformed police and menaced by the would-be informer.
Of necessity, sorrow and suffering—the ripe fruit of this national
wrong-doing—came into the lives of a multitude of people, desolation
and despair into a multitude of homes. The wives and mothers
suffered most. In war-time it is ever the mother heart that breaks.
Nor did the children escape; they were made to pay the bitter price
of want and destitution.
The story will never be adequately written of the brave women
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


who cheerfully faced penury, who, with a love that was divine, left
little homes that had been won through long years of sacrifice
and went to work—as teachers, as nurses, as factory workers, as
waitresses, as domestic servants, as charwomen —to provide for their
children when the men were deprived of the opportunity of working
for them; of how they struggled through the weary months and des-
perate years while the men they honoured were wandering in’ exile
or languishing in prison. Wide and varied, tragic and terrible, were
some of their experiences.
For more than two years my correspondence file contained, in the
form of a multitude of letters, different phases of the story of the
nation’s heartbreak, particularly the record of the agony of the
mothers and wives. For it is one of the wide glories of the Labour
movement that all who are weary and heavy laden come to us with
their burden of sorrow. During the intolerable sloth of what ap-
peared to be interminable months, there was seldom a week that
some wife or mother, some sister or sweetheart, did not come to
me with breaking heart and streaming eyes to tell the story of the
broken hope of her life.
.hl wife whose husband wiis a C.O. in refuge, awoke on different oc-
casions round about midnight to a find a plain-clothes police officer
on her verandah, moving stealthily, and evidently intent on discovering
whether the husband was home.
The mother of a C.O. was taken ill and died. The C.O. (who was
sheltering in the bush) arranged that a friend should visit his home
and perform certain rites in his behalf. As the friend entered the
gate of the residence where the dead woman lay, he was suddenly
seized by the police, who had planned an ambush anticipating that
the son would come back to take a last sad farewell of all that was
mortal of the mother who bore him.
VII.—DEPORTED BY NIGHT.
From the first application of the Conscript law to the middle of
1917 a steady stream of victims poured first into the detention bar-
racks and thence to the prisons. The first sentence was generally 28
days’ detention, followed by 84 days in the civil prison. Later this
was extended to 111 days, and still later to 11 months or one year.
When it was found that deportation would not break the C. 0., an
almost uniform sentence of two years’ hard labour was inflicted. One
C.O. tried by Court-martial in the early part of 1918, when asked to
plead, retorted: “What is the use of my pleading when my sentence
has already been determined?” “How do you know that?” demanded
the President of the Court. “I know it, anyhow,” replied the prisoner.
BY PATHWAYS OF SORROW.


“If you know it, then, what is the sentence?” asked the President.
“Why, two years,” said the prisoner. “How do you know?” again
asked the President. “We have power to award either a heavier
senlenee or a lighter sentence than that.” “I know you have the
power,” said the prisoner; “but in your own mind you know that
my sentence is two years.” The C.O. was found guilty and remanded
for sentence. When the sentence was promulgated it was found that
he had been correct —his term was two years’ hard labour. Then,
suddenly, New Zealand was shocked into vigorous protest by the de-
portation of fourteen Conscientious Objectors.
On July 15, Mrs, Ballantyne received a hurriedly-scribbled note
from her son, Garth (who had been sentenced some time previously*
and was serving his sentence in the civil prison at Mt. Cook). He
had pencilled this note on board ship, and it had been got ashore
surreptitiously . The message read:—-
“The undermentioned Conscientious and Religious Objectors
were forcibly put on board the transport Waitemata on July 13
and 14: —
“JOHN BAXTER, ARCHIBALD McCOLL LBARMONT BAX-
TER, ALEXANDER BAXTER, Brighton, Otago.
“WILLIAM LITTLE, Hikurangi, Whangarei, via Auckland.
“MARK BRIGGS, Box 285, Palmerston-North.
“FRED ADIN, Patrick Street, Foxton.
“L. PENWRIGHT, Geeverton, Tasmania.
“HARRY PATTON,, North Beach, Cobden, Greymouth.
“ALBERT ERNEST SANDERSON, Babylon, North Wairoa,
Auckland.
“GARTH CARSLEY BALLANTYNE, 53 Bidwell Street, Wel-
lington.
“DAVID ROBERT GREY, Lowcliffe, Hinds, Canterbury.
“DANIEL MAGUIRE, c/o P. Higgins, Foxton.
“L. J. KIRWAN, Sewell Street, Hokitika.
“THOMAS PERCY HARLAND, 15 Lawson Street, Roslyn,
Dunedin.
“All well, in good spirits, and determined to stick out to the end.”
Up to this time the public of New Zealand had had no inkling of
the Government’s intention violently to take from these shores the
men who were conscientiously opposed to military service. The
parents and other relatives of the fourteen men so taken were not
notified that their sons were to be taken away, and, consequently, the
mothers particularly were shocked and almost prostrated with grief
when they learned that their sons had been dragged away by night
and forcibly placed on the transport. Those of us whose task it
was to break the news to some of the mothers would never wish to
undergo another similar experience.
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


On the Wednesday following the deportations the mother of one
C.O. came -to me at “The Worker” office. She had three sons, all
of whom were Conscientious Objectors. The whole three had been
called up under Section 35, and two of them had gone to prison—
one for 28 days and one for 84 days, while the third had just given
himself up to the military authorities. On the Tuesday evening the
mother had come to Wellington for the purpose of visiting her sons
on the following day. On the Wednesday morning, however, she
heard that some Conscientious Objectors had been forcibly deported;
and, hastening to “The Worker” office with fear in her heart, she
learned that one of her boys was among them. She had
received no intimation that her son was to be taken away, and she
was given no opportunity whatever of seeing him before he left. Her
tears fell like rain, and the sobs that welled from the depths of her
broken mother’s heart proclaimed the magnitude of her hurt. Search
all the long history of the ages, and you will find nothing more tragic
than the spectacle of that bereaved mother —the light gone out of the
years of her life—bowed down beneath the burden of sorrow endured
by the mothers of the world through all the centuries of sin and
suffering that Stretch from the foot of Calvary’s Cross to the gangway
of a Twentieth Century Transport. To me it was as if the Mother of
God stood there uplifting a protest to Heaven against the crucifixion
of Humanity, and 1 levelling an accusation against myself and all the
rest of New Zealand for the Wrong we had made possible.
A few days later the father of another of the men came from the
North, only to learn that his son had been forcibly taken away. He
was destined never to see his boy again.
Other fathers and mothers were left to discover for themselves
that their sons had been transported without even the sorry consola-
tion of bidding them farewell.
VIII.—HISTORIC PROTEST.
On the morning of July 15, Mr. Montgomerie Ballantyne (now de-
ceased) came to me in haste with the news that his brother and
thirteen other C.O’s. had been forcibly taken from New Zealand in the
Waitemata. After a hurried consultation, we decided that the most
effective method of letting the public know the evil thing which had
been done would be by deputation of protest to the Minister. Swiftly
the messages were sent, and as swiftly came the response. There
was no man or woman of responsible position in the Labour movement
who was not ready to voice the intense indignation of organised
Labour at the injustice which had been perpetrated. Indeed, to say
that the indignation was intense is to put it mildly. Mr. McCombs,
DEPORTED BY NIGHT.


M.P., happened to be in Wellington, and to him was entrusted the task
of arranging the deputation, which was received by Sir James Allen
(Minister of Defence) on Tuesday morning, July 17.
The report which follows was taken for and appeared in “The
Worker.”
The deputation included Mrs. R. W. S. Ballantyne (mother of one
of the lads deported), Mrs. S. Snow (secretary Housewives’ Union),
Mrs. S. Beck (president Wellington S.D.P.), Mrs. Aitken, and Mrs.
Wesley (Women’s International League), Messrs. J. McCombs, M.P.,
J. Read (president Wellington Trades and Labour Council), G. L.
Glover and J. Roberts (president and secretary respectively
Waterside Workers’ Federation), C. Grayndler (general secretary
A.P.U.), H. Tunnicliffe (Palmerston North. L.R.C.), H. E. Holland (ex-
ecutive member New Zealand Labour Party), R. W. S. Ballantyne, W.
Barr, and other representative men and women.
Mr. McCombs, in introducing the deputation, said that while it was
large and representative, the men and women comprising it had been
called together at urgent notice, and, had time permitted, many others
who were opposed to the forcible deportation of Conscientious Objec-
tors would have been there also. He knew the deputation would
have the sympathy of the Minister, for he remembered that when the
Conscription Bill was before Parliament, Sir James had endeavoured
to make the law better than it was for the conscientious objector.
Within the short period that had elapsed since the deportations were
known, a number of people had expressed their indignation to him
personally, and that feeling was widespread. He read two extracts
from the “Christian Commonwealth” showing that some time back the
British Government had sent 34 conscientious objectors over to
France, and when they still persisted in refusing military service, had
court-martialled them, and sentenced them to death; but the death
sentence was immediately commuted, and the men returned to Eng-
land and put in prison. The British Government did not now send
conscientious objectors to the trenches; and the deputation sought in-
formation concerning the objectors taken from New Zealand.
Mr. J. Read said he was firmly convinced that no military pur-
pose would come out of the act of the Government in shipping these
men away against their will. These men objected to fighting, and
surely the Government was not sending them away with the inten-
tion that they should be shot in the trenches without lifting an arm
in defence. If the Government were not contemplating this, then the
men would become a burden on the military authorities. He raised
his voice against the action.
Mrs. Ballantyne said she was the only mother present of the boys
who had been forced upon a transport, and she demanded from Sir
James Allen the information where her boy was being sent to. She
had seen him last Sunday week, and he had told her there was then
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


no fear that he would be forcibly put on a transport. She was given
no opportunity of seeing him again after he had been shipped. Her
son had repeatedly told her on no condition would he take part in
military service. She was sorry for the other mothers who had
been debarred from seeing their sons before they were hurried away.
Her boy was only 21 years of age, and was in delicate health. He
had had a college education, and was a good, steady boy, and yet he
had been put in jail alongside of men who were serving long sentences
for crime. It was shameful to think of, and it was an outrage that
the boys should be taken away by force without their mothers even
knowing that they were going. '
Mrs. Wesley spoke for those mothers who had not the opportunity
of seeing their sons before they were deported. She herself had three
sons at the front. They had gone voluntarily, but not with her con-
sent; but she felt sure they would never have gone had they known
that later men’s liberties would be taken from them because they had
religious and Socialist objections to military service. They left these
shores thinking they were going to fight for freedom, and what free-
dom had they left behind? Since her beys had gone freedom in New
Zealand had ceased to be. She was confident the lads carried away
from New Zealand would never surrender their principles.
Mr. J. Roberts said he spoke for the industrial workers, and he
asserted that from one end of the country to the other industrial
workers were opposed to men being taken 12,000 miles away against
their wills for military purposes. The Government was putting itself
up against a serious problem; it seemed to be forcing a crisis, for
when other industrialists saw their comrades put on board a transport
at the point of the bayonet it was likely to engender trouble.
A voice: “It’s Prussianism.’’
Mr. Roberts, continuing, said the Government would be well ad-
vised to bring these men back, for the pride of conscience was the
greatest gift man possessed. If he were one of the men he would
keep on objecting all the time. People might call them shirkers, but
he knew one or two of them who had told him they had decided they*
would not fight under any consideration, as they were opposed to
military service. It might mean death for them, and thus they could
not be called cowards. He thought the Government should act im-
mediately, and have these men returned to New Zealand.
Mr. Holland said he represented the political side of the Labour
movement. The first question he desired to ask the Minister on
behalf of both the movement and the relatives of these conscientious
objectors was: How many men were placed on board the transports,
and what were their names? He asked for definite information on
this matter. The deputation knew that some men had been forcibly
placed on two transports—one lot on a certain date (named), and they
had heard thgt another lot had been taken on a subsequent date; and
they also desired to know what was going to be done when these
HISTORIC PROTEST


men reached England. He was personally acquainted with most of
the men who had been subjected to compulsory transportation. These
men had repeatedly stated that they were opposed to military ser-
vice, and no matter what the consequences were, he was certain they
would never do violence to their consciences. It seemed to him that
men and women in New Zealand had no legal right to a conscience,
He asked were these men, who had conscientious objections, going to
be forced into the trenches. If so, it was certain they would be shot
rather than bear arms. What military purpose was to be served,
he asked, by dragging this handful of men away from New Zealand,
Already they had in England more conscientious objectors than they
knew what to do with. In Dartmoor there were 3000 objectors, \and
over 600 in Wormwood Scrubs, while in all there must be quite 5000
of them in Britain. As far as he knew, there were more soldiers
looking after these men than there were conscientious objectors, so
that the pursuit of the conscientious objectors was not to be com-
mended even from a military viewpoint. The men forcibly deported
were of irreproachable character, and it could not be charged against
them that they were cowards; for it required far more courage to take
the stand they were taking than to go into camp. Some of these men
and boys were Socialist objectors, some were religious objectors, and
some objected for other reasons. The Minister would know that dur-
ing the first three centuries of the Christian era no Christian would
be a soldier, and men—and women; too —endured appalling tortures
and were flung to the lions and heroically faced death rather than
surrender their principles. There was very little applied Christianity
to-day; if the Churches were all Christian churches they would all
stand for peace and against war. The spirit that actuated the con-
scientious objectors of to-day was the spirit that inspired the early
Christians, and it was not good that the spirit of Diocletian should
be let loose against them. Most of those forcibly placed on the trans-
ports were mere boys, and to drag them from prison was bad enough,
to forcibly carry them on board and make them a public spectacle
was bad enough, but it was the acme of inhumanity and cruelty to
take them secretly from these shores and not allow their mothers to
see them or even know they were going. After referring to the
Socialist conscientious objectors, Mr. Holland drew the Minister’s at-
tention to the case of the Cody brothers —of whom there were five,
and who had all been called up under section 35, and who were
apparently pursued by a number of persons, some of whom were
undoubtedly actuated by a desire ta. secure the land the Codys held
rather than by motives of genuine patriotism.
Sir James Allen: “That statement is not true. I utterly repu-
diate it.”
Mr. Holland said the march of events would show he was right.
He proceeded to refer to the fact that three of the Codys had been
ordered into camp, and when they refused the remaining two were
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


again called before the Board, and ordered into camp, leaving no one
to look after the farms, and their father lying on a dying bed. The
last two brothers had since been arrested, and were now in custody,
while the other three had disappeared.
Sir James: "Do you know where they are?”
Mr. Holland: “I do not; but if I did, I most certainly should not
tell you. lam not an informer.”
Sir James: “I did not think you would give the information.”
Mr. Holland went on to say that it was a fact that men of Irish
blood, with a knowledge of Irish history, were conscientiously opposed
to taking part in the war.
Sir James; “God bless my soul! Irishmen have been some of the
best soldiers of this war. They have enlisted in large numbers.”
Mr. Holland: “I concede all that, but —”
Sir James; "Give me an Irish battalion behind me, and I would go
anywhere!”
Mr. Holland: “Quite so. I admit the Irish can fight. They proved
it last year, when 3000 of them, badly armed, held Dublin against 30,000
trained and fully-equipped British soldiers.” There was, however,
an historical fact which neither Sir James nor any member of the
Cabinet could deny, and that was that the Irish were subjects bf
Britain by compulsion and not by consent, and when they objected to
military service it was for this historical reason. When Irishmen
volunteered for military service no injustice was done to anybody; but
he submitted the Government ought not to compel Irishmen (or any
others, for that matter) to go to the trenches from New Zealand. He
had seen it in print that there were now 150,000 British soldiers on
duty in Ireland, and even if they dragnetted New Zealand to the last
man —First Division and Second Division —they could not get that
nutnber of soldiers from here. He went on to say that even if he
were a militarist—which he was not, and had never been —he would
not dream of taking up the attitude taken up by those responsible for
sending the conscientious objectors away. They seemed to forget that
the soldiers now being sent away were conscripts and not voluntary
soldiers, and that there was widespread dissatisfaction with the Con-
script Law. He did not think Cabinet would dare to test the accuracy
of that statement by permitting both the soldiers and the people to
vote on the question of Conscription.
Sir James Allen said he utterly repudiated the suggestion that the
conscripts were not willing soldiers.
Mr. Holland asked Sir James if he would be willing to test his
opinion by taking a vote of the men in any of the camps on the ques-
tion of Conscription. He thought there was a tendency here to copy
some of the worst features of Prussian Militarism, and urged that
the boys just taken away ought not to be taken to the trenches, where
they would be certain to refuse to bear arms, and would consequently
be liable to be shot. He wanted to know whether the Government
HISTORIC PROTEST.


proposed carrying their policy of deportation to its logical conclu-
sion. Would the married men of the Second Division who were con-
scientious objectors be forcibly taken away also? He reminded Sir
James that the National Register cards showed that some 34,000 men
of military age said: “No military service whatever/’ and nearly
80,000 said: “No military service outside of New Zealand.”
Sir James Allen: “Some of the men who said that were over mili-
tary age.”
Mr. McCombs and Mr. Holland said that was not so; men over
military age did not have to reply as to military service.
Mr. Holland said since then a further change had taken place, and
many married men who had answered “Yes” because they believed
they would never be called upon, were now of quite a different
opinion.
Concluding, Mr. Holland said, on behalf of the mothers and relatives
af the men, he again asked the Minister for information as to the
number of men transported and where they were being He
made a plea that the Minister .would take such Steps as would prevent
such an outrage ever again being inflicted upon men and boys whose
crime was that their ideals were loftier than those of their fellow-
men. * ■
Sir James Allen, in reply, said he realised what a very difficult
problem the case of the conscientious objector to military service con-
stituted. As Mr. McCombs had said, when the Bill was before Par-
liament he had done his best to put in a clause giving some recogni-
tion to the conscientious objector, but Parliament was very decided
3,bout it; and it had been very difficult to secure what they had
gained*'and that was only secured after several conferences with the
Legislative Council. What was in the Act was there was the will of
the majority in Parliament, and in administering it he had to carry
out the.;will of Parliament. Now, as to religious objectors
Mrs. Ballantyne: “There are Socialist objectors as well as
religious.”
Sir James Allen said there was a clause in the Act which pro-
vided that if a man objected to all military service, he could be put,
by applying, to work on State farms.
Mr. Holland; “The present clause does not meet the case of either
the Catholic or the Church of England conscientious objector.”
Sir James Allen: “I admit it does not allow for all religious ob-
jectors.”
Mr. Read: “It applies only to certain sects.”
Sir James Allen said that if a man belonged to a religious denomi-
nation whose tenets were against military service he was permitted
under the Act to do non-combatant service.”
Mr. Holland: Which, as the conscientious objector interprets it,
means helping some one else to do the killing.”
Sir James Allen: “It means saving life, not taking it.” Continu-
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


ing. Sir James said he could not understand the man who would object
to non-combatant service. He had strained the military law as much
as possible. The authorities had to be careful that they were not
sheltering shirkers under the conscientious objectors’ clause —men
who had suddenly developed a conscience.
Mr. Holland; “You cannot lay that charge against these men.; they
have been conscientious objectors all along.”,
Sir James went on to deal with the case of the Cody brothers,
and said the country was at war and in danger. There were five bro-
thers in this family, well-to-do people. Other people in the district
had sent their sons to the firing line. The five brothers were called up
under section 35 of the Act. Their cases were heard; three of them
were ordered into camp, and the Board depended on them to report on
the date fixed. Instead of doing so, they had disappeared.
Mr. Holland: “They made it clear they would not go into camp.”
Sir James Allen said these men were- being searched for by the
police, and he could well understand the indignation of the people of
the district whose sons had enlisted. He denied that any of the per-
sons responsible for the agitation against the Codys were influenced
by motives suggested by Mr. Holland.
A lady member: “The Codys are not the only Irishmen who have
conscientious objections.”
1.1 Sir James Allen: “The three brothers I have referred to are de-
serters, and when they failed to report, the remaining two were .or-
dered into camp.”
Mr. Holland: “In other words, you punished the last two for the
sins of the three who failed to appear.” •■»•..
Sir James; “Nothing of the sort. We punished no one.”
■ Coming back to the case of the deported objectors, Sir James, said
that these men had been sent to England for the purpose of giving
them a further chance of doing their duty. It was hoped that dif-
ferent circumstances would induce them to change their minds.
Mr. Holland: “You want them to go back on,their life-long
principles.”
A member; “Trying the third degree on them?”
Sir James said the idea was to give them another chance to accept
non-combatant service.
Mr. Holland: “Have these boys been sent away under any arrange-
ment with the Imperial authorities?”
Sir James Allen; “No. We have hot communicated with the Im-
perial authorities at all about the matter.”
Mr. Holland; “Then I’m inclined to think you’ll hear about it from
the Home Government. The authorities there have quite enough con-
scientious objectors of their own, and they’re not likely to take kindly
to your attempt to unload your troubles on to them.”
Sir James said Mr. Holland had questioned the willingness of the
men who were being ballotted. That statement was quite incorrect.
HISTORIC PROTEST.


The men who were now being sent were quite as willing as those
who had volunteered. When they got into camp they were as keen on
their duty as the other men. It was true, as Mr. Holland had said,
that the men now going away were more subdued, but that was
because they recognised the responsibility that was on them.
Mrs, Snow: “They are getting less training.”
Sir James Allen denied that statement, and said that men sent
away before their time had their training finished in England. He
added that instructions had been given in the camp that genuine con-
scientious objectors would be given non-combatant work.
Mrs. Ballantyne asked for an assurance that the lads would not e
subjected to persecution during the voyage to England,
Sir James Allen replied that they would be subjected to no perse-
cution whatever.
Mr. Roberts said he had gone through the Military Service Act,
and he could see nothing that gave the Government power to deport
men who were not soldiers, men who had not taken the oath.
Sir James Allen said these men were New Zealand soldiers under
the Act, notwithstanding that they had not taken the oath.
Mr. Holland asked Sir James Allen for a definite statement of what
the Government intended to do with these lads. Would it compel
them to go into the trenches in France, and if they refused to bear
arms there would they be shot? Would Sir James give the deputation
an assurance that under no circumstances would these lads be shot for
their refusal to surrender their principles?
Sir James: “If I gave you that assurance, you would communicate
with them and urge them to hold out.”
Mr. Holland; “There is no danger of that. You know your Gov-
ernment opens every letter I receive or send. I want the information
for the sake-of the mothers of these lads. If the boys are to be shot
because of their principles, why not keep them in New Zealand and
shoot them here instead of taking them to Prance?”
Sir James said the Government had no desire to shoot anybody,
nor did they wish to deal unjustly with anyone. As he had said, the
idea of sending the men to England was to give them another oppor-
tunity to accept non-combatant service. If they still refused, he sup-
posed they would be dealt with in the same way as the other conscien-
tious objectors in England.
In reply to Mrs. Ballantyne, Sir James said facilities would be
provided for parents to communicate with their sons.
In reply to Mr. Holland, Sir James said he could not see his way
to furnish a list of the men sent away, but would see that the rela-
tives of every man sent away was communicated with. He had been
surprised to learn from the deputation that the parents had not been
notified that their sons were being sent away.
In reply to further questions, the Minister said they had less than
50 conscientious objectors in custody.
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


Mr. Holland; “But you have nearly 2000 of them already gazetted
as deserters, and I suppose there are 2000 or 3000 more who are not yet
gazetted?”
Mr. McCombs, on behalf of the deputation, thanked Sir James Allen,
and the deputation withdrew.
IX. —AFTER THE DEPORTATIONS.
For a long period after the Waitemata had sailed, only the merest
scraps of information concerning the “shanghaied” men Altered
through. It was a time of terrible anxiety and suspense for the
mothers and other relatives. Then letters began to come through,
most of them from soldiers, and many of them sent surreptitiously,
and from these we began to learn in shreds and patches of how the
deported men were faring. Garth Ballantyne wrote his mother when
nearing Capetown, and this letter brought the Arst deAnite news of
experiences of the C.O’s. up to that stage. Later still came messages
from Britain, telling of the almost unbelievable cruelties to which
they had been subjected while on the way from Capetown to Ply-
mouth and the equally abominable cruelties indicted on them while
in Sling Camp.
We learned that our Religious and Socialist friends in Britain (who
wished to advise the New Zealand C.O’s. as to their legal position and
rights under English law), had been refused permission to see them,
and had been told that “New Zealanders in England are under active
service conditions, and are subject to military law.” Which meant that
the New Zealand military authorities were adopting a different atti-
tude towards the C.O’s. from New Zealand than the British military
authorities were adopting towards British Objectors. Several depu-
tations waited upon the High Commissioner, at which Brigadier-
General Richardson was present; and the reports seem to indicate
that the High Commissioner was not permitted to have much voice
in the matter. “General Richardson refused point blank to allow any
communication with the Objectors by representatives of sympathetic
organisations in Great Britain.” The civil authority was made to
subserve the military authority, and all the time our New Zealand
militarists were gibing at the ultra-militarism of Germany. Of course,
it is fair to assume that General Richardson had his instructions.
In the meantime, the feeling of resentment against the action of
the Government in connection with the deportations was gathering
strength. Immediately following the deportations, huge meetings
were held in Wellington and other centres, and in nearly every case
practically unanimous protests were recorded and demands made for
the return of the deported men. The Trade Unions carried innumer-
HISTORIC PROTEST.


able resolutions, the Labour Party branches and Socialist organisa-
tions took a similar course, the Women’s Leagues, Councils, and
Institutes poured in their protests. The C.O. became a topical subject.
The Prime Minister threatened that every man not exempted by
the Boards would be sent away. But, in spite of this attitude on
the part of Mr. Massey, there was a general idea abroad that the
National Government had received a severe reprimand from the
Imperial Government for its trouble in deporting the fourteen. On
November 21, 1917, it was stated by the Wellington “Dominion”—the
principal Government organ—that “the Imperial authorities have no
wish to be troubled with men who will not fight,” and that the policy
of forcing objectors aboard transports had “now been abandoned in
favour of imprisonment.” This statement strengthened the belief
that the Government had been rapped over the knuckles. It must
have been felt, however, that the “Dominion” had been guilty of an
indiscretion, for a little later a Southern paper (in an evidently In-
spired report) announced that all the Conscientious Objectors in jail
would “have to go the same way as the preliminary draft.” In reply
to this announcement, I expressed the opinion in print that all that
was best in the industrial and political life of New Zealand would
indignantly repudiate even the suggestion that any such policy should
be pursued.
The February official statement of Sir James Allen contained the
following paragraph; “Statements have been made in the press that
it is not intended to despatch abroad any more of the soldiers who have
been punished for refusing to obey orders. These statements have
been made without foundation, and no such decision had been reached.”
The manner in which this paragraph is worded suggests a heavy
camouflage. It had never been stated by anybody that “soldiers who
had been punished for refusing to obey orders” would not be sent
abroad. The statement was that Conscientious Objectors who refused
to be soldiers would not be sent abroad; and this proved to be correct.
Sir James’s statement could be read in two ways. However, the
Government did not dare to send any more C.O’s. away. If any further
attempt had been made in that direction, it is certain that a very
serious situation would have arisen in New Zealand. Besides, it is
now clear that the Imperial authorities did not want C.O’s. from here;
they had quite enough of their own; and it is just possible that, when
some day the correspondence becomes available, it will reveal the
measure of the National Government’s humiliation.
ARMAGEDDON OK CALVARY.


X.—“THE BEST PANTOMIME.”
The political appointment of Mr. A. L. Herdman, Attorney-General
in the National Government, to a Supreme Court Judgeship necessi-
tated a by-election for Wellington North, to fill the vacancy thus
created. This election took place on February 28, 1918. It was my
privilege to carry the Labour standard in that memorable conflict,
and I determined to make the Government’s treatment of the Con-
scientious Objectors a leading issue in the campaign. Accordingly,
in the course of my opening speech in the Town Hall Concert Chamber,
Wellington, on February 7, I made this a part of my indictment of
the Government. I went fully into the circumstances connected with
the deportation of the fourteen men, and dealt also with the treatment
of men in detention and prison in New Zealand, challenging the Gov-
ernment to set up a Royal Commission, not a military tribunal, to
investigate my charges. The hall was crowded to overflowing, many
scores of people having been unable to gain admission; and it was
significant that there was no dissentient voice raised against my
denunciation of the Government’s policy. Among the matters I
placed before the electors was the following letter, written to me by
a soldier, and dated Featherston, February 3: —
“Sir, —I want to tell you what happened to four Conscientious Ob-
jectors who arrived here (Featherston Camp clink) on Thursday last
—three days ago. They were not allowed very long to get used to their
new surroundings before they were called out and marched off; first,
I presume, to the doctor for medical inspection, and then to the Q.M.
stores, where, I suppose, an attempt was made to get them to sign for
a uniform. This, they told us on returning, had been refused, each
of the four standing on his dignity as a Christian and civilian. One
of them had refused to submit to a medical examination, and force
was resorted to. Again they were not left long in peace before they
were ordered out and marched off and subjected to a preliminary trial
for refusing to obey a lawful command, etc., and remanded till the
following morning, when they were again duly marched off under
escort like criminals, and charged before the officer commanding. He
considerately gave them a further remand for 24 hours to enable
them to consider or reconsider their attitude. This was on Friday;
on Saturday they were again marched off and the four were tried
together. They were awarded 168 hours’ detention, and marched
back to the clink. It now seemed that the ‘heads’ had finished their
share towards administering the Military Service Act. Shortly after
they had been delivered to the sergeant of the guard, an underling in
the shape of a n.c.o. came bouncing right into the clink, had them
brought before him, and gave them what he called his mind in language
which must have been extremely edifying to Christian men. He then
told them he had finished with words, and would try what action


would do. He told them he was first going to have them medically
examined. Three of the men expressed their readiness, and one again
objected as a civilian. ‘All right,’ said the soldier; ‘we are going to
do it supposing we have to put the handcuffs on,’ and off they were
marched. They were examined —one by force —and marched back.
And now, bow your heads in shame everyone, and read what happened
in a military camp in New Zealand. The n.c.o. came in again, called
in the sergeant of the guard, who had with him four suits of military
denims or overalls. To each man in turn he offered a suit, and each
man in turn refused. The n.c.o. then took out his watch arid gave
them ten minutes to take off their civilian clothes and don the denims
or have it done by force. Needless to say, no notice was taken either
of the demins or the threat, but back the n.c.o. came. ‘The ten
minutes are up,’ he said; ‘now we’ll try action.’ He then ordered
each man into a close confined cell, bolted the door and locked the
bolt —the cells are approximately Bft. x 6ft., there is a bunk 2ft. wide
on one side running the Bft. way, leaving a floor space of Bft. x 4ft.
The n.c.o. then had three military police brought in, along with three
soldiers, men of the guard, and the order was given to open one door
at a time and ‘strip the b s.’ In the first two instances, the men
allowed their clothes to be torn off much as a dead sheep allows its
skin to be taken; the third man stood to attention for the first time,
and warned the attacking party that he would resist, although he
said he intended to hurt no one. The whole six men were employed
to strip him, and whilst the struggle was on the n.c.o. stood outside
the door and urged them on saying: ‘Give the b one up if he is
such a damned fool, right to the b jaw, that’ll stop him; frog-
march him, one of you sit on his back and another on his head.’
After they had stripped him, the gallant n.c.o. asked him how he liked
‘action,’ and the man’s answer was, T suppose you are proud of your
day’s work?’ ‘Yes,’ said the n.c.0.; ‘it was the best b pantomime
I ever saw. There is only one thing I’d enjoy better, and that is to
shoot you, you b , with your back to the wall. I’d do it and feel
proud.’ His door was then locked, and the inner door dividing the
clink proper from the cells was closed in our faces before the fourth
door was opened, and our view shut off. I called through the closed
wooden partition to the fourth man, who was a Religious
Objector: ‘Demand a witness, comrade,’ but he didn’t do so.
I heard him say he would not resist, ‘but,’ he said, ‘in the name of the
Lord Jesus Christ, Who is our Saviour, I forbid you to touch me.’ The
answer of the n.c.o. to this was: ‘We have taken vows as well as you,
and we are obeying orders.’ Thus ended this glorious day of militar-
ism. Each man had the suit of denims thrown into him as his
civilian clothes were taken away. The men, with one exception, are
still in their underpants and shirts;one of them —the one who won’t
sign anything—is left without a blanket at night; this man also refuses
to eat anything while he is close confined. The men are not at all
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


down-hearted; they continue to sing their hymns—all joining in. If
you can’t publish this, for God’s sake do something. , There were four
other witnesses.”
The statements contained in this letter are substantiated by an-
other letter from the “clink” of the same camp on the same date, the
writer (the Religious Objector mentioned by the soldier) being one of
the founders of the Richmond Mission. Extracts from this Religious
Objector’s letter were read before the Defence Expenditure Commis-
sion to prove the useless expense of such a system. On hearing the
extracts read, one of the Commissioners remarked: “You will never
make a soldier of that man.”
The soldier’s letter to myself is also borne out by the statement of
Mr. J. K. Worrall, the C.O. referred to as having been forcibly stripped
by six men.
The result of the contest for Wellington North —hitherto a Tory
stronghold—staggered the Government. In 1914 the votes cast for the
Tory and Liberal candidates represented in the aggregate a majority
of more than 4700 over the votes cast for myself as Labour candidate.
In 1918 the combined Tory-Liberal majority was only 412. In the
three other by-elections which followed in 1918 —Grey, Wellington
Central and Wellington South—the Government’s military policy and
its treatment of the Conscientious Objectors was made a fighting issue,
and in each case the Government was decisively beaten (with absolute
majorities), notwithstanding that the forces of Toryism and Liberalism
in each case combined.
Immediately following my opening meeting in the Wellington North
campaign, some of my statements were challenged by the Prime
Minister in the daily press, and the controversy recorded in the next
chapter followed.
XI.—A REMARKABLE CONTROVERSY.
Mr. Massey took from the daily press certain statements alleged
to have been made by me, and these, together with the Prime Minister’s
replies, were printed as under: —
1. “Fourteen lads had been sentenced three or four times for the
one offence —a gross injustice!”
Reply: “This statement is untrue. No man could be and no man
was sentenced more than once for the same offence.”
2. “Some of them were boys of twenty, deported without their
mothers knowing where they were going.”
“ THE BEST PANTOMIME.”


Reply: “This is also untrue. Seven were 30 years of age and over;
one was 27; three were 24; one was 23; two were 22.”
3. “They were taken Home in irons.”
Reply: “This statement is like the others, but it is a fact that on
the voyage some of them would not observe ordinary cleanliness, and
as a consequence their civilian outfits were condemned by the medical
officer, and they were compelled to dress in uniform.”
4. “Massey, Ward, and Allen had promised that they would not be
persecuted or forced to wear uniform.”
Reply: “No such promise was made.”
- 5. They were taken in irons to France.”
Reply: “There were five of these men who stated that they were
conscientious and religious objectors. These latter were not com-
pelled to wear uniform and were not sent to France. The report does
not show how many of the remainder were sent to France, nor does
it say anything about their being taken in irons, but if such was the
case then the obvious conclusion must be that it was necessary for
the authorities to take such precautions.
“It is quite clear that the statements referred to were grossly
exaggerated, and made for the purpose of prejudicing the administra-
tion of the Military Service Act in the eyes of the public. It is no
pleasure to the Government or the Defence Authorities to punish men
for non-compliance with a necessary law, but in a time of war the
Act must be strictly enforced and administered without fear or favour.”
My rejoinder was published as follows:
“In the first place, Mr. Massey makes quite erroneous quotations
of my statements. He could easily have ascertained, either from ray-
self or the comprehensive report of my speech published by * The
Maoriland Worker,’ the exact statements made by me. Instead of
doing this, he appears to have based his denial on the necessarily,
condensed reports published in the dailies or hearsay.
“I said: ‘Fourteen lads . . . had been flung into prison here,
jailed two and three times over for the one offence—a principle vile
in law,’ etc. Mr. Massey makes me say that they were jailed ‘three
or four times’ for the one offence. He says my statement is grossly
untrue. Let the facts decide. The three Baxter brothers were each
sentenced to 28 days in Alexandra Barracks, then to 84 days in the
common jail, and again to 28 days in Alexandra Barracks, from which
prison they were taken to the transport. Mr. W. Little received three
similar sentences. Mr. Mark Briggs served a first sentence of 30
days, and was serving a second sentence of 84 days when deported.
Mr. Garth C. Ballantyne had served one sentence of 28 days in Alex-
andra Barracks and was serving a second sentence of 84 days in the
common jail when deported. There are also Conscientious Objectors
serving second sentences in the jails of New Zealand at the present
time.
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


“I was in error to the extent of one year when I stated that ‘some
of them were boys of 20.’ I should have said ‘boys of 21.’ Mr. Bal-
lantyne, who was arrested on March 21, had attained his twenty-first
year on February 16. Mr. Fred Adin was a month older. How Mr.
Massey now makes them 22 when arrested is for him to explain.
“Mr. Massey is again in error when he credits me with having said:
‘They were taken Home in irons.’ I spoke from very complete notes,
of which ‘The Worker’ report is an exact copy. What I said was:
‘ . They were taken from the jail in the dark of night and
forcibly placed on a transport.- When they were taken out of jail
they were not told where they were going. They were carried on the
transport like bags of produce. And the transport had left New
Zealand before their mothers knew what had been done. Their
mothers were given no opportunity of saying good-bye to them, al-
though they were going to almost certain death. They were herded
together in a close prison cabin, and when they became seasick were
not given vessels to vomit in, with the result that the officer remarked
that the cabin ‘smelt like a hyena’s den.’ Three of them were left
at Capetown, being too ill to proceed further; and the remainder, along
with a number of troops, were transferred to another boat —which
also carried passengers. After they left Capetown they were brought
on deck, and their own clothes were stripped off them and thrown
overboard —he had seen a photo of the incident —and they were forcibly
dressed in khaki. They took the khaki off, and were at one time
naked on deck. Later they were left with only their singlets and
underpants on. On arrival in England they were taken to Sling Camp
in irons, and were going about there in singlets and underpants. They
were subjected to unthinkable treatment, and later some of them were
taken in irons to France and threatened with the death penalty.’
“Mr. Massey says that because ‘some of them would not observe
ordinary cleanliness, their civilian outfits were condemned by the
medical ofiicer, and they were compelled to dress in uniform.’ My
information is to the effect that all of them were forcibly dressed in
uniform. A soldier writing from Sling Camp on' October 12 to a
friend at Invercargill, says: ‘Before we left Wellington they put
about a dozen Conscientious Objectors on board. There was a great
go to get them to put on the uniform, but they refused. . . . After
we left the Cape it was forcibly put on them, and their own clothes
were thrown overboard. . . . After the uniform was put on them,
they were brought round in front of where the lady passengers were—
it was evidently thought they would not pull it off there, but off it
came.’ The ladies fled, according to the writer, and the Conscientious
Objectors were left naked on the deck. •
“Mr. Harry Patton, in a letter published in the Christchurch
‘Press’ (December 28) wrote: T was ordered to put on the uniform on
the boat, refused, and was forcibly stripped and forcibly dressed in
the uniform, pulled it off, had my clothing returned at night. Tran-
A REMARKABLE CONTROVERSY.


shipped to another boat at Capetown, kept at the stern of the boat
a few nights, clothing taken off and thrown overboard, turned the
hose-pipe on me, cold water, then dressed in the uniform, and num-
erous other little insults all the way.’
“One of the deported men, in a letter written at sea on October 14
(and printed in the ‘Green'Ray,’ Dunedin) described how they were
taken from jail after dark on July 12 last, and put on board the trans-
port. They refused to embark, and were forcibly put on board. T
myself was carried on the shoulder of a military policeman gs though
I was a bag of chaff,’ he wrote. He then describes how they were
placed in the clink almost in the corner of the boat, and for the first
few days the one porthole was not open, and the door was kept
locked, consequently there was little ventilation. They were nearly
all seasick, and, in the words of the writer, ‘we could not get any-
thing to be sick into, consequently the atmosphere became almost in-
describable: to use the officer’s own words, “the place smelt like a
hyena’s den.” ’ He then goes on to say that they were eventually
ordered to put on the uniform, and ‘on our refusing he (the officer)
brought in the military police and took us out one by one on to the
top of one of the hatches, and there, in front of the crowd of laughing,
jeering soldiers, forcibly stripped us and put the uniform on. .. .
I was greatly surprised to notice a number of the officers, who are
generally supposed to be gentlemen, apparently enjoying this degrad-
ing spectacle; that also cameras were very much in evidence. None
of us attempted to resist, but took it all with a quiet smile, and as soon
as we got back to the “clink” immediately took off the uniform in
spite of threats to tie us up unless we kept it on. We lay on our beds
all day in our underclothing, and in the evening they gave us back
our own clothes, which, of course, we lost no time in getting into.
Kirwan was so ill when carried out to have the uniform put on that
he had to be taken to the hospital, where he has been ever since.’
“Mr. Massey again misrepresents me when he states that I said:
‘Massey, Ward, and Allen promised that they would not be persecuted
or forced to wear uniform.’ In the first place, Mr. Massey knows quite
well —as all who have listened to my addresses know—that Ido not
descend to the discourtesy of dropping the prefixes of my opponents.
What I said, referring to the persecution of the Conscientious Objec-
tors, was: ‘This notwithstanding that Sir James Allen had promised a
deputation that they would be subjected to no persecution.’ Mr.
Massey says, ‘No such promise was made.’ I was a member of the
deputation that waited on Sir James Allen in July last, to protest
against the deportation, and I have a very clear recollection of Mrs.
Ballantyne (mother of Mr. Garth Ballantyne) asking Sir James for an
assurance that the lads would not be subjected to persecution during
the voyage to England. The Minister’s reply was that ‘they would be
subjected to no persecution whatever.’
“In addition to the way they were treated on the transports, letters
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


from soldiers and others in England show what other treatment the
objectors were called upon to endure. The London ‘Call’ of Thursday,
November 15, contained the following, under the heading ‘Brought from
New Zealand in Irons.’: ‘Further particulars are to hand respecting
the New Zealand Conscientious Objectors to whom reference was made
recently in these columns. Of the 14 that were embarked to England
with the 28th New Zealand Reinforcements, to which they were deemed
to be attached, three of them—Sanderson, of North Wairou, and two
Baxter brothers, of Otago—were put off the ship at Capetown, as they
were too ill to be taken further. The rest were taken to Sling Camp,
Salisbury, where they remained in irons in the guardroom for several
weeks. Eight of them have now been sent over to France. Most of
them went over handcuffed, and therefore still resisting. Their
names are: Ballantyne, Harland, Patton, Little, Baxter, Briggs,
Maguire, and Kirwan. Of the other three, one is in Codford Military
Hospital, suffering from dysentery (Adin, of Foxton), and two are
still in Sling Camp (Gray, of Canterbury, and Penwright, of Tas-
mania).’
“One soldier ‘mentioned seeing one of them forced to put on a pack
for France. He threw it off immediately. It was again put on and
he was handcuffed. He then sat down, and was kicked along at the
heels of the draft.’
“On October 27 Mr. Patton wrote to his relatives: T am being
taken over to France to-night under arrest. I don’t know what they
are going to do with me there, but you will perhaps hear some day.’
On October 26 Mr. L. Kirwan wrote to his relatives to the same effect.
“On November 30, the ‘Friend’ —a British religious paper—printed
a letter from Mr. Patton, in which he stated that three of them
reached Staples on October 28. They refused to parade, and were
taken before an officer, by whom he was sent to the guardroom for a
few days. His letter runs; ‘Then I was ordered out with a pack on. I
refused, and the pack was fastened on to me. I refused to walk with
the pack, and was dragged about two hundred yards and placed in a
tent. . . . There is another Conscientious Objector in the guard-
room, named Briggs, who has relatives in Yorkshire. Three other
Conscientious Objectors have been sent up to the firing-line—Little,
Baxter, and Ballantyne. I don’t know what had become of them. The
officer told me I would be sent on there, too, and would probably be
shot.’
“We now have Mr. Massey making the curious statement that ‘there
were five of these men who stated that they were Conscientious and
Religious Objectors. These latter were not compelled to wear uniform,
and were not sent to France.’ Mr. Massey’s statement does not
square with information in the possession of myself and others. The
whole 14 were Conscientious Objectors—some for religious reasons,
some for Socialist reasons, and some for Irish reasons. Three of
them were left at Capetown ill; eight were sent to France; and one
A REMARKABLE CONTROVERSY.


was ill in Codford Hospital; Adin and Gray were still in Sling Camp.
Where does Mr. Massey get the five who were ‘not sent to France’
because they professed to be Conscientious Objectors?
“I note with interest that, while Mr. Massey does not admit that
these Conscientious Objectors were taken to France in irons, he is
prepared to justify the outrage if it really happened.
“Mr. Massey has made no attempt to reply to my exposure of the
treatment of Conscientious Objectors at Featherston only the other
day. Neither has he deigned to explain why his Government dragged
the 14 away by night without giving their mothers any opportunity
whatever of bidding them good-bye.
“It is not at all true that my statements ‘were grossly exaggerated,
and made for the purpose of prejudicing the administration of the
Military Service Act in the eyes of the public.’ They were made by
way of an honest endeavour to save the young men and boys of this
country from becoming in a general sense the victims of such atroci-
ties as characterise the conscript service of Prussia and other mili-
taristic countries, and they were further made in the interests of the
broken-hearted mothers of New Zealand.
“I take this opportunity to challenge Mr. Massey to set up a Royal
Commission —not a military tribunal —to investigate this matter, and
to permit the return of the deported Conscientious Objectors for this
purpose. Nothing that has ever happened has wrought such evil to
our national life as this one incident; I venture to say that it has
shocked the finer feelings of every honest-minded militarist, to say
nothing of the many thousands who think otherwise.
“In conclusion, in view of the positive discrimination which has
characterised the administration of our military law, is not the Prime
Minister rather straining the possibilities when he tells us that ‘in a
time of war the Act must be strictly enforced, and administered with-
out fear or favour.’ That is a matter, however, that I shall deal with
at my election meetings.”
Mr. Massey made a further statement, over which the “Dominion”
placed the headlines; "A Tell-tale Letter.—About Conscientious Objec-
tors. —Plain Talk by Mr. Massey,” commenting: “Mr. Massey does not
follow Mr. Holland further in investigation of the statements as to
how the men were treated, but he quotes a letter to show that Con-
scientious Objectors may not always be deserving of sympathy.” Mr.
Massey’s statement follows; —
“There is just one point I wish the people of this Dominion to
thoroughly realise with respect to the men for whom Mr. Holland is
endeavouring to create a great deal of unnecessary sympathy as the
‘victims of atrocities characteristic of the conscript service of Prus-
sia,’ etc.
“I desire to make it clear that so far as the statute law of this
country is concerned these men are not Conscientious Objectors, but
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


soldiers of the Expeditionary Force who have been called up by ballot
to take their share in the defence of the country of whose privileges
and protection they have taken full advantage, and that so far as the
Defence Department, which has to administer the law, is concerned,
they must obey orders just the same as their fellow citizens do, and
be prepared to accept the consequences of such refusal. These men
cannot be allowed to place themselves superior to the will of Parlia-
ment and obey no law but their own inclination. If this is tolerated
we will soon see an end of all decent order and government and a
state of affairs such as is now wrecking unfortunate Russia.
“I want every father and mother who have sons fighting and dying
in defence of our liberties and civilisation, and ‘for the service of
freedom,’ not to be led away from the real issue, which is, that these
so-called 'religions, conscientious, and Socialistic’ objectors demand
the right to accept and enjoy all the benefits accruing from the sacri-
fices of the sons of New Zealand, but repudiate their obligations to
share in these sacrifices.
“Mr. Holland has made many statements and quoted many letters
in the interests, as he says, ‘of the broken-hearted mothers of New
Zealand.’ I think it is just as well that the parents of New Zealand
generally should be given an opportunity to gain a clear conception
of the lofty principles and ideals which animate some of these mar-
tyrs in the cause of conscience. The following extracts are from a
letter which was written by the parent of a ‘Conscientious Objector,’
whose conscience only developed after his appeal on all other grounds
had failed and his claim for exemption had been dismissed:
“ ‘l’m afraid all this villainy is having a bad effect on us. David
satisfies me. May he go down quick into hell, may his flesh be
torn by dogs, may his name be obliterated. Relax all the law,
“Thou shalt not kill,” and you’ll find ten thousand dead within one
week. . ... A father of a returned soldier told me this morning
that the French so hate the British and colonials that they refused
them the use of their wells, and at the Somme the French women
preferred to go behind the German lines to being left to our troops.
An American reporter has said that without a million American
troops we cannot break the German line. Good job, too. Well,
where are we to go after the war? I’m sick of the Union Jack,
For thirty years it has been blood-soaked without cessation. We
English are played out. There’s no good in us. We are a set of
brutal thieves. There’s a Socialist colony in California. . , ..
Our real enemy is alive, and none seem to move. . . . Curse
them, as Elijah did, and as all did, curse them. Will no one come
out? Will not one revolt? Curse them. Curse them hard. They
ought to die, for they are not only useless, but a stumbling-block,
and by God’s laws they should die a slave’s death. . . . Damn
them, they are rotten. By heaven, the,whole country is rotten —
A REMARKABLE CONTROVERSY.


absolutely rotten. ... I'm regretting all the time now that you
ever went near this people. It is my first close experience of
“soldier,” and I find the great mistake: they are scum, not fair,
straight people, but criminals worse than jailbirds. . , The idea of
fighting for such filth makes one sick. ... I’d love to change
places with you now. I’d take the oath, and, by God, I d kill ail
I could of these black-hearted scum. Curse them. No Australian
blacks are lower. . . . Wriggle out, if possible, and don’t be
particular. Once you can get away from them you can manage
till we can leave them to the Japs. May the Japs mutilate every
cursed man and rape every woman. War they want —let them go
there —we don’t want it. . . . Curse them. God curse and blight
them. .. . One thing you may be sure about —if we British get
a complete victory it will be our last; we shall be intoxicated with
our hell-got gains and pride and power, and, just as Rome gained
some tremendous battles at her downfall, so with us. ... .
I’m thinking that the war is steadily proving the superiority of the
Germans at every point.’ ”
At the foot of Mr. Massey’s statement was printed the following
Press Association message from Dunedin: —
“Commenting on the recent reference by Mr. Holland concerning
Conscientious Objectors, the Minister of Defence states that the 14
men to whom Mr. Holland referred could not all be classed as Con-
scientious Objectors. Five had alleged conscientious objections, which
the Boards rejected, five had appealed on the ground of hardship and
public interest, and did not allege conscientious objections, and four
did not appeal. No promise was ever made by Mr. Massey, Sir Joseph
Ward, or Sir James Allen that the men would not be forced to wear
uniforms. The real religious objector, when exempted by a board,
did not wear a uniform, and did service with the Agricultural Depai t-
ment. None of these men were entitled to this course, and most of
them had not attempted to prove themselves within the category. The
Defence Department knew as much about these men as it knew about
any other soldier that was embarked and reached the other end. It
was impossible to keep a record of every man’s movements.”
To the foregoing, I replied:
“I had hoped that the Prime Minister would make some endeavour
to offer an explanation of the facts furnished by me in my last state-
ment. But he has not done so. It is unfortunate that Mr. Massey Is
completely silent on the matter of Conscientious Objectors being sub-
jected to two and three sentences for the one offence, although he at
first denied that more than one sentence could be inflicted. He is also
ominously silent about the cruelties which were inflicted on the
Conscientious Objectors on the transport and in Sling Camp. He now
flies off at another tangent, and argues that ‘these men are not Con-
ARMAGEDDON OK CALVARY.


scientious Objectors, but soldiers of the Expeditionary Force,’ etc.
I have known some of the men—particularly Messrs. Ballantyne and
Briggs—for a number of years, and they are not only Conscientious
Objectors themselves, but both of them belong to families that have
for long years held pronounced views on militarism. Mr. Massey
seems to think that the possession of a conscientious principle is a
matter to be determined by Act of Parliament or War Regulations.
For the first three centuries of the Christian era the Christians gen-
erally held similar views to those held by the Christian Conscientious
Objectors of to-day; and the rulers of that period took the same view
that Mr. Massey and his Government take to-day. Then the conscience
men (and women) were flung to the lions or nailed to the cross. Mr.
Massey makes a law which refuses to the Catholic, the Anglican, the
Presbyterian, the Methodist, the Salvationist, or the Socialist, the right
to hold a conscientious objection to military service; and, having made
his law, he then pronounces its victims ‘conscienceless.’ I can ap-
preciate the difficulty which he must necessarily experience in get-
ting the more thoughtful of his own supporters to see it that way.
“But can Mr. Massey explain the apparent contradiction of two of
his statements. In the first denial he said: ‘There were five of these
men who stated they were Conscientious and Religious Objectors.
These latter were not compelled to wear uniform and were not sent
to France.’ I furnished facts in my last statement which completely
disposed of this assertion. In his second statement, Mr. Massey tells
us ‘these men are not Conscientious Objectors,’ and he terms them
■•these so-called religious, conscientious, and Socialist objectors.’ Will
he then tell us how it came that, as he first alleged, five of them were
treated as Conscientious Objectors if none of them were Conscientious
Objectors? Will he also explain the discrepancy between his first
statement, which was clearly to the effect that only some of them
were compelled to dress in uniform and for the sole reason that
their civilian outfits were condemned by the medical officer because
they ‘would not observe ordinary cleanliness,’ and Sir James Allen’s
statement, which is in effect that ‘no promise was' ever made . . .
that the men would not be forced to wear uniforms’ —the implication
being, of course, that it was all along intended to compel them to wear
uniform. In my speech no reference was made to any promise about a
uniform, but only about persecution. However, it is for the Ministers
to tell us whose statement is correct.
“I notice Sir James Allen says: ‘The Defence Department knew as
much about these men as it knew about any other soldier that was
embarked and reached the other end.’ He adds that it is impossible
to keep a record here of every man’s movements. If this is so, it
is weighty proof of the need for great departmental changes. Four-
teen men and boys with conscientious objections are forcibly carried
from New Zealand, they are subjected to treatment born of the spirit
of Diocletian, some of them are taken in irons to France—one a boy
A REMARKABLE CONTROVERSY.


of between 21 and 22 —are forced to the firing line, their mothers are
almost frantic with anxiety and grief, and for months the Department
tells them it can give them no information as to the fate of their boys.
“Why was it left to some of the mothers to learn from private
sources—as they have learnt this week —that their boys have been
courtmartialled and sentenced to five years’ hard labour? The three
sent to the firing line were Messrs. Ballantyne, Little, and Baxter —and
these are the men who have been sentenced. Mr. Ballantyne is in a
military prison in France, and the others are also in prison, either in
France or England. I submit that the Prime Minister’s sneer about
‘the broken-hearted mothers’ will not satisfy the men and women of
New Zealand, who, whatever their po.litical attitude or their views on
militarism, love justice. One of the things they will want to know is
why these men and boys are not brought back to New Zealand.
“It seems to me that there is no language in which could be ade-
quately expressed the regret and resentment which every fair-minded
person must have felt on reading the letter (alleged to have come from
the parent of an objector) put into print by the Prime Minister with
the only possible object of besmirching the parents of the 14 deported
objectors. I would urge that the people have a right to expect from
the Prime Minister a higher conception of what he owes to his office—
a higher regard for the dignity of his position—than to permit the
anger of an ill-advised moment to induce him to offer such a letter
without the name of the alleged author. The parents of such of the
Conscientious Objectors as I am personally acquainted with are as
highly respectable and as deeply respected by those who know them,
as any member of Mr. Massey’s Cabinet, and would neither be guilty
of penning such a letter as the one referred to, nor of putting it into
print if it happened to fall into their hands.”
XII.— DEPARTMENTAL INACCURACIES.
So wide was the interest aroused, so great the indignation awak-
ened, because of the treatment of the C.O.’s that towards the close
of February, 1918 —on the eve of the Wellington North by-election—
the Government deemed it advisable that Sir James Allen should
issue an official statement covering their cases. The document con-
sisted of eight pages of printed foolscap, and purported to be a
statement “as to Objectors generally and the fourteen Objectors who
were embarked for service abroad in July, 1917.”
On the front page of this somewhat involved and unfortunately
inaccurate and contradictory document, the question was asked;
“What has the Defence Department done which it should not have
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


done?” and, still more ludicrously, on the same page it was pro-
claimed, with apparent seriousness: “If responsible authority is to
knuckle under to insubordination the whole fabric of the British
Empire would crumble into chaos.”
Readers should take the trouble to secure copies of this very re-
markable document for themselves. It is not possible in the pages
of this book to devote any large amount of space to its discussion. I
purpose merely dealing with several of its most prominent inac-
curacies, inconsistencies, and contradictions.
One of the first of these has to do with the religious bodies. Sir
James declared that “the only religious bodies which have so far
satisfied the Boards as to their right to exemption are the Christa-
delphians, Seventh Day Adventists, and Quakers.” Still, as the
records will show, quite a number of Quakers, and, I think, also
Seventh Day Adventists and Christadelphians, found the prison gates
slammed behind them.
The Minister was at much pains to controvert the facts set forth
in Mr, Garth Ballantyne’s letter as to the position and ventilation of
the “clink” on the transport, which Sir James endeavoured to show
was all that could be desired. The obvious answer to Sir James on
this point is that Mr. Ballantyne and the other Objectors were in the
“clink” and Sir James was not. The men who spent three weeks
in the place are entitled to have their word taken in preference to
that of the politician who had frequently admitted that he had neither
facts nor information concerning the Objectors.
In his statement Sir James Allen declared that if the Objectors
were forcibly dressed in khaki it was because their own clothes were,
condemned by the medical officer. But the Minister neglected (per-
haps wisely so) to explain why, if their clothes were so condemned,
they were permitted to have them back after the first forcible dress-
ing, and why they were permitted to wear the condemned clothes
until Capetown was reached.
Sir James quoted a report from General Godley, in which the
General stated that two Generals (whose names are'for some reason
withheld) desired that the Objectors should be sent with drafts in
the usual way “and treated like any other soldier.” To this, however.
General Godley said he did not consent, and it is clear that his
reason for not agreeing was not because of any desire to respect the
conscientious objection of the men conserned, but because if they were
sent with drafts “the inevitable result of it would be that they would
either desert or else refuse to go up to the trenches when ordered,
and would then be shot for refusing to do duty in the face of the
enemy,” and General Godley thought that this would be the very worst
thing that could happen—it “would make martyrs of them.”
In a report of a week later, if Sir James Allen’s statement is
correct. General Godley intimated that “all the Conscientious Objec-
tors sent from New Zealand, except two, have agreed to do duty
DEPARTMENTAL INACCURACIES.


either in the infantry or as stretcher-bearers.” It will be seen that
the General makes no fine distinctions, such as Mr. Massey and Sir
James Allen sought to draw at this end. He recognises all the four-
teen as genuine Conscientious Objectors. He attributes “the conver-
sion to a reasonable attitude of the majority of these men to the fact
that they were separated and posted to different companies and
units.” It had been recognised that strength is born of association,
and that the men could never be broken down while they were to-
gether. But the General is silent on the dreadful experiences the Ob-
jectors were called upon to undergo—experiences in which Sir James
Allen may at this late hour be able to discern “the process of their
conversion,” which he told the Orphan Club he did not know.
In this same report of General Godley’s, after notifying that all
but two had given in, there is another notification to the effect that,
“in addition to the two Conscientious Objectors mentioned, there have
been three others who have been treated like any other soldier, and
have had to be tried by courtmartial in France on a charge of dis-
obedience to an order,” that the Court had found them guilty and
condemned them to five years’ penal servitude, and that he had com-
muted the sentence to two years’ hard labour, with a recommendation
that this be “suspended” to three months if their conduct in prison
was good. This was another phase of “the process of their conver-
sion.”
In this latter part of General Godley’s report there was one impor-
tant omission and two most extraordinary contradictions. The General
omitted to say that a New Zealander sentenced under the military law
to more than two years cbuld not have been held in a French military
prison, and would have had to be returned to New Zealand to serve
the sentence. The report that the three men sentenced were treated
“like any other soldier” furnishes a complete contradiction of the
General’s report of only a week earlier, in which he says he would
not agree to the suggestion of the two other Generals that the Objec-
tors should be treated “like any other soldier.” Yet another contra-
diction is apparent when he says first that all the Objectors brought
from New Zealand but two have given in and then reports that three
others have been sentenced by courtmartial because they would not
give in. In compiling his second report the General must surely have
forgotten all about the earlier one.
As further showing the extreme carelessness with which the official
statement must have been prepared, it may be mentioned that Sir
James Allen’s assertion that Mr. Garth Ballantyne was drawn in the
first ballot was altogether wrong. Mr. Ballantyne was drawn in the
second ballot. Sir James said: “He appealed on the grounds that his
calling up was contraary to public interest because of his occupation
and a hardship to his employers, a firm of surveyors. He was repre-
sented by a prominent Wellington solicitor, his case was carefully
fought out, and the question of religion or conscientious objection was
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


never raised.” This is almost a complete mass of inaccuracies. It
is true that Mr. Ballantyne lodged an appeal, but he did not think
it worth while to appear. He was not “represented by a prominent
Wellington solicitor,”nor by anyone else; neither was his case “care-
fully fought out.” His employer engaged the solicitor and appealed
to the Court on the ground that Ballantyne, who was a surveyor, was
engaged on work of national importance. When a telegram was sent
by the military authorities to Mr. Ballantyne asking why he did not
parade, he replied, briefly: “Conscientious Objector.”
In view of these and other facts, it is not a matter for wonder
that the time came when Defence Department statements concerning
the Conscientious Objectors were received with little or no credence.
Meanwhile, the deported men were undergoing tortures and ex-
periencing tyrannies that should make every freedom-loving man and
woman in New Zealand ashamed to remember.
XIII.—THE PROCESS OF CONVERSION.
Speaking at the Orphan’s Club on August 25, 1918, Sir James Allen
(designated Orphan Allen) is reported by the Wellington “Dominion”
to have said: “Some time ago fourteen Objectors went to the front,
and every one of them are now fighting with their units. The pro-
cess of their conversion he did not know.” The grammar of this sen-
tence may with fairness be debited to the “Dominion.” But for the
inaccuracy of it the Minister must carry the responsibility. My in-
formation is that only one of the fourteen men took a gun, that others,
also surrendering to that cruel “process of conversion” which Sir
James Allen told the Orphans he did not know (but which will be
made perfectly clear in these pages), accepted ambulance or other
non-combatant work, while some went to the brink of Hell and the
borderland of Death and still did not yield to the military “process of
conversion.” The letters which follow —as well as others quoted in
my controversy with Mr. Massey—will give some indication of what
that “process” amounted to. The statements of Messrs. Briggs, Bal-
lantyne, and Baxter in later chapters will make the “process” still
clearer.
A soldier who went home with the same draft as the C.O.’s,
writing from Sling Camp on October 12, 1917, to the secretary of his
Union in Southland, first of all explained that there was a strike on
the boat which carried the C.O.’s away. The quality of the stew
supplied to the soldiers formed the basis of this upheaval, and the men
“had a win.” Then he described the death at sea of one of the soldiers,
who had been parading sick every morning, but who nevertheless
DEPARTMENTAL INACCURACIES.


was ordered into a cold shower bath at six in the morning (as all the
men were). The sick man did not want to go into the shower, but
“orders are orders here.” He eventually took the shower, “went info
the hospital at 3 in the afternoon, died at 8, and was over the side at
11.” The soldier then furnishes an account of the treatment accorded
the C.O.’s, and particularly the incident of their being placed on the
passenger deck after being forcibly dressed. He bitterly complains
that the Norman Castle carried “eight hundred troops and over a
hundred passengers,” and says he assumes that this was the reason
why Germany took to sinking what were supposed to be passenger
boats.
L. J. Kirwan wrote to his brother from Sling Camp on Sep-
tember 26, 1917: —“I am being sent to France to-night. . . . Our
days are numbered. Man’s life is not worth much in France. I
cannot tell you how we have been treated. ... I am not allowed
to write what I would like to, for it would get torn up by the censor.
‘Life is real, life is earnest; and the grave is not its goal.’”
On October 26, 1917, T. P. Harland wrote from Sling Camp: “Since
last writing I have to inform you that Ballantyne and Briggs (C.O.’s)
have been sent to France with full pack up. I am not sure whether
Maguire has been sent yet. I aplied for leave to visit London, but
was refused because I would not drill, otherwise fuller information
would have been available. If you did not receive my previous letter,
please allow me to repeat that Little and Baxter were sent to France
with full pack up and handcuffed. As to the position with regard to
Penright and Adin, I have no information.”
On October 26, 1917, Harry Patton wrote to his brother from Sling
Camp: “I am being taken to Prance to-night under arrest. I don’t
know what they are going to do with me there, but you will perhaps
hear some day. I shall not up a rifle or anything like that.”
“The Friend,” 30th November, 1917, published the following:
Harry Patton, one of the New Zealand C.O.’s sent to France, writes:
“I received your letter yesterday; it gave me a great deal of comfort.
I am in an isolation camp at present at Etaples for 21 days. Three of
us reached Etaples on 28th October, refused to parade, and were taken
before an officer. The other two took on stretcher-bearing in the
R.A.M.C. Three were placed in a tent by ourselves for three days,
and then transferred to the R.A.M.C. I refused to parade, and was
taken before the officer. He told me I had been transferred to the
R.A.M.C. , and that I would be saving life. I told him anything I did
in the military was helping to take life, and that I would not do it,
so I was put into the guardroom for a few days. Then I was ordered
out with a pack on. I refused, and the pack was fastened to me. I
refused to walk with the pack, and was dragged about two hundred
yards and placed in a tent. For three days I was ordered to parade
every day; kept refusing; had officers to see me, trying to talk me
round; taken before a chaplain, gave him my views; was placed in
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


detention. They tried to get me to work in the garden; refused. Then
measles broke out. There is another C.O. in the guardroom named
Briggs, who has relations in Yorkshire. Three other C.O.’s have been
sent up to the firing-line—Little, Baxter, and Ballantyne. I don’t
know what has become of them. The officer told me I would be sent
up there, too, and would probably be shot. The two in the R.A.M.C.
have refused to take the oath or to take pay; so I don’t kpow how
they will get on.”
On December 12, 1917, Fred Adin wrote from Sling Camp to his
sister: “I hope you won’t think ill of me for doing what I have done,
but it was a matter of life or death. A few weeks more of imprison-
ment would have killed me. I was nothing but skin and bone when
I came out of the hospital, and I could not have stood it if I had
gone back to prison. Nobody knows what we put up with on the trip
across and after we arrived here. I could tell you something that
would startle you, but it is over now, so I will say nothing about it.’”
He then went on to say that he hoped his action would not make it
harder for his two brothers —both C.O.’s in New Zealand. Writing to
his mother he said: “Now I have given in I shall be able to write to
you”—showing that he was not allowed to write while refusing ser-
vice.
On March 5, 1918, from “Somewhere in France,” Archibald Baxter
wrote to his parents in Dunedin: —“My Dear Father and Mother, —I
have just time to send you this brief note. I am being sent up the
lines to-morrow. I have not heard where Jack and Sandy are. As
far as military service goes, I am of the same mind as ever. It is
impossible for me to serve in the army. I would a thousand times
rather be put to death, and I am sure that you all believe the stand
I take is right. I have never told you since I left N.Z. of the things
I have passed through, for I know how it would hurt you. I only tell
you now, so that, if anything happens to me, you will know. I have
suffered to the limit of my endurance, but I will never in my sane
senses surrender to the evil power that has fixed its roots like a
cancer on the world. I have been treated as a soldier who disobeys
(No. 1 Field Punishment). That is hard enough at this time of the
year, but what made it worse for me was that I was bound to refuse
to do military work, even as a prisoner, it is not possible for me to
tell in words what I have suffered. But you will be glad to know
that I have met with a great many men who have shown me the
greatest kindness. I know that your prayers for me are not in vain.
I will pray for you all to the last; it is all I can do for you now. If
you hear that I have served in the Army or that I have taken my
own life, do not believe that I did it in my sound mind. I never will.”
On May 14, 1918, the Base Records Office, Wellington, forwarded a
communication to Mr. Baxter's father as follows: “Dear Sir, —Re
47841 Pte. Archibald Baxter, I have to advise you that a cablegram
has been received from overseas, stating that the above-named soldier
THE PROCESS OF CONVERSION.


was admitted to hospital, United Kingdom, and that his mental condi-
tion was causing anxiety. I sincerely trust that with care, rest and
attention, Pte. Baxter will soon be restored to his natural condition. 1 ’ 1
On September 4, 1918, Garth Ballantyne wrote from France to his
mother: “Little and I joined up with the Division about five days ago.
We came at a bad time, as they were in the middle of a big stunt. I
am now stretcher-bearing in the Hawke’s Bay Co., Ist W. 1.8. We
both worked on the same stretcher most of the time, I myself com-
ing through so far untouched, but Little was wounded two days ago.
He was hit with a machine gun bullet while he and I and two others
were attempting to get another man out. ... I thoroughly hate
the whole business, although in this particular job there is the satis-
faction of knowing that you are helping other poor fellows who are
suffering.”
In October, 1918, Sir James Allen found it necessary to issue a
second printed document containing “official statements” as to the
case of Archie Baxter and the remainder of the fourteen deportees. This
new “statement” contained the allegation that Baxter “is apparently
of a surly, morose disposition, and does not say much.” Sir James
further declared that “the medical examiners found that he was not
insane, and that he did not require to be sent to a hospital, mental
or otherwise.” In view of this statement, it was surely cruel and
bordering on the brutal to notify Mr. Baxter’s parents (as was done
on May 14, 1918) to the effect that he had been “admitted to hospital,
as his mental condition was causing anxiety.”
Sir James Allen, in the official statement referred to, proceeded
to explain the nature of Field Punishment No. 1, and resented the term
of “crucifixion” applied to this form of punishment. He omitted to say
that the British soldiers in the first place and the British militarists of
the Blatchford type in the second place were responsible for this term.
Sir James Allen’s explanation went to show that an offender sentenced
to Field Punishment No. 1 “may be kept in irons,’’ and “when in irons
he may be attached for a period or periods not exceeding two hours
in any one day to a fixed object, but he must not be so attached
during more than three out of any four consecutive days, nor during
more than 21 days in all.” It was further explained that although
“irons should be used when available,” when irons are not available
“straps or ropes should be used.”
The soldiers called it crucifixion because the men punished were
often lashed to the wheels of gun carriages, with arms and legs ex-
tended, as though the victim were on a cross. But Sir James Allen
refrained from explaining this. A British soldier—a well-to-do busi-
ness man, who enlisted during the early part of the war—was sub-
jected to this atrocious treatment, and died under it. His “offence”
was that he had lost his gas helmet. The matter was ventilated in
the House of Commons, and fiercely denounced by Robert Blatchford
in the “Sunday Pictorial.” I had, on every occasion on which I made
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


reference to this matter, insisted that the N.Z. Government should
intimate to the Imperial authorities that it would not tolerate the
infliction of such a barbarism on any man from these shores, whether
soldier or C.O.
On September 16, 1918, there came from Little’s mother at Hiku-
rangi to Ballantyne’s mother at Wellington a brief note with a heart-
broken message: “Just a line to let you know we have just received
a wire saying that our dear boy died of wounds on September 4. The
cruel brutes! We may never know how he died.”
On November 22, 1918, Garth Ballantyne wrote from France to his
mother: “At last the long-looked-for time has arrived, and hostilities
have ceased. Peace should be finally settled before long. The cen-
sorship has been slightly lifted, and we can now say where we are and
where we have been. I have just received very bad news. Wm.
Little died from the wound I told you he received. I have written to
his mother, giving her as many details as I could. ... At least,
he died trying to save life and not trying to take it. . . . Sanderson
has been sent to a convalescent home. I have also heard that Gray
was for some reason returning. Perhaps you will hear from him.
He could tell you much that would interest you.”
XIV.—PERIODS OF SUSPENSE.
From time to time scraps of information filtered through con-
cerning the deported men, mostly in surreptitiously-sent letters from
soldiers on active service and sometimes at the hands of returning
soldiers. One of these latter brought me the ticket giving the “Re-
sult of N.Z. Medical Board, Staples, 9/10/1918,” in Mark Briggs’s case.
It is signed by Major Bowerbank, and bears out Mark Briggs’s state-
ment.
The parents and other relatives and friends of the deported men—
overwhelmed with anxiety—were making every effort to ascertain
their fate, for a considerable time without success. Relatives of
several of the men wrote to me repeatedly to the effect that they
could obtain no information. »
On May 31, 1918, Mr. Ballantyne’s parents were forwarded the fol-
lowing communication from the Base Records Office, Wellington: “The
latest entry on your son’s record here shows that he was transferred
to the Canterbury Regiment on the 11th October, 1917, and that on
the 14th November, 1917, he was tried by field general courtmartial
and sentenced to five years’ penal servitude, which sentence was com-
muted by Lt.-General Sir A. J. Godley to two years’ imprisonment
with hard labour.”
On August 13, 1918, Mrs. Ballantyne wrote to Sir James Allen:
THE PROCESS OP CONVERSION.


“ Can you give me some information about my son. Garth C. Ballantyne,
who was deported. It is now 13 months since you sent him away,
and in all that time I have received only two letters from him: one
written on the voyage and one from a military prison in France, dated
December 12, 1917. Since then I have had no letters from him, and
as I am absolutely certain he would write if allowed and if still alive,
you will understand lam terribly anxious. Last month I received a
notice from Base Records that he had been in hospital five months
previously. Such information was, of course, so old that it was
worse than none. I notice that you stated publicly that you were ar-
ranging for parents to get news of their sons every three months, and
should like to know when we may expect this news.”
Sir James replied on August 18, denying that any restriction was
placed on the correspondence of the Objectors, and, after giving one
or two very meagre items of information, concluded: “I have asked
that reports shall be forwarded to New Zealand from time to time
respecting soldiers who have refused to perform military duties, but
no report has yet reached me concerning your son.” A feature of
this letter is the studied references to “Private” Ballantyne, and the
persistent use of the term “soldier,” as though the object of the letter
was to impress upon the stricken mother the fact that the military
authorities were determined that she should be made to feel that her
son was a “soldier,” and not a Conscientious Objector.
On August 27, 1918, Mrs. Ballantyne wrote again to Sir James
Allen challenging his statement to the Orphans’ Club that everyone
of the fourteen "were now fighting with their units,” and mentioning
that since her last letter she had had a few lines from her son, who
wrote from prison and gave no indication that he intended “fighting
with his unit.” Mrs. Ballantyne added: “You expressed a hope that
‘some day the story of the Conscientious Objectors would be written.'
Your wish will be gratified, for it is being written even now, and when
the time comes for it to be published it will not be the C.O.’s who will
be shamed, but the Government that has so ill-treated them.” For Sir
James’s edification she quoted from the writing of a Religious Ob-
jector: “German atrocities! Are the people’s eyes in this country so
fixed on France that they cannot see what is going on in their own
land?”
Repeatedly I endeavored to secure definite information concerning
the deportees, but without avail. Towards the close of the 1918 second
session (see Hansard, vol. 183, page 1091), I asked the Minister of
Defence: “(1) Whether he will furnish a report as to the number
of members of the New Zealand Expeditionary Forces who have been
subjected to the punishment known as crucifixion or Field Punish-
ment No. 1? (2) Whether Mark Briggs, one of the fourteen Con-
scientious Objectors deported last year, is now in hospital and classed
C 2 and permanently unfit; and, if so, when will he be returned to
New Zealand? (3) Whether he will call for a full report in connec-
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


tion with the case of Mark Briggs, and also a return showing the
number of New Zealand Conscientious Objectors subjected to Field
Punishment No. 1?”
The Hon. Sir J. Allen (Minister of Defence) replied: "(1) Field
Punishment No. 1 is sparingly inflicted in the New Zealand Expedi-
tionary Force. If the honorable gentleman will move for a return of
the number of soldiers of the New Zealand Expeditionary Forties who
have been subjected to Field Punishment No. 1 the matter will be
considered. (2) The Military Service Act does not recognise the ‘Con-
scientious Objector’; it recognises only the ‘Religious Objector.’ It is
incorrect to term the fourteen men who were embarked on the 17th
July, 1917, ‘Conscientious Objectors’; there were five ‘Religious Objec-
tors’ who had failed to satisfy the Military Service Boards, and the
remainder were ‘Defiant Objectors,’ including four deserters. Mark
Briggs was one of the ‘Defiant Objectors’; no advice has been re-
ceived that Mark Briggs is now in hospital and classed C 2 and per-
manently unfit. (3) Mark Briggs was an auctioneer, of Palmerston
North, and was drawn in the third ballot. He appealed on the grounds
of public interest and hardship, but did not appear in support of his
appeal, which the Military Service Board dismissed. He was sent
into camp, and refused to obey orders, and was courtmartialled in New
Zealand for disobedience. He was embarked on the 17th July, 1917;
refused duty on the transport, and was awarded 28 days’ detention on
the 15th September, 1917; arrived in Sling on the 25th September;
proceeded overseas on the 20th October, 1917, and was posted to 3rd
Battalion, Auckland Regiment, on the 11th December, 1917; by orders
dated the 21st January, 1918, it appears that he was awarded 28 days'
Field Punishment No. 1. Unless the fourteen men embarked on the
17th July, 1917, are regarded as ‘Conscientious Objectors’ (which
would be incorrect), no New Zealand ‘Conscientious Objectors’ have
been subjected to Field Punishment No. 1.”
In the middle of 1918, several returned soldiers came to my resi-
dence at Brooklyn and recounted to me some of the tortures in-
flicted upon Mark Briggs. On the strength of their report, I made my
statement on the floor of the House on the night of December 6, 1918,
during the course of my speech in opposition to the third reading of
the Bill to deprive Conscientious Objectors of their franchise and civil
rights generally, when I said: “Take one particular case—that of Mr.
Mark Briggs, one of the fourteen men deported. ... On one
occasion he was dragged with ropes around him through shell
craters and left almost for dead —not by the soldiers, but by the
military police—and the soldiers were so exasperated that on that
particular night they went round with hand grenades looking for the
police; so great was the respect which Briggs had won from the sol-
diers themselves by the attitude he had taken up. Fortunately, the
police were out of the way, and nothing happened.”
In due time the deported men began to arrive back in New Zea-
PERIODS OF SUSPENSE.


land, and it was then that their friends found themselves listening to
calmly-told stories of atrocities perpetrated and brutalities endured—
stories woven out of a period of wretchedness in which the
wild spirit of the primitive actuated the torturers and the firm purpose
of a lofty principle inspired the tortured —stories to make the blood
run cold with horror or flame righteously into indignation and shame.
And it is here that I purpose letting three of the men who endured
write into this history their own terrible experiences in their own
honest language—three of the men who, out of the night that covered
them, “black as the pit from pole to pole,” had reason to thank
“whatever gods there be” for their unconquerable souls. The three
chapters which follow are from the pens of Messrs. Briggs, Baxter, and
Ballantyne. Others of the fourteen may have other narratives to
startle all that is best in New Zealand out of a lethargy that is
twin to Oppression. When these statements are read, there will be
no righteously-minded man or woman who, having read them, will
not register deep vows before the high altars of Humanity that never
again shall the dreadful atavism of such a system be permitted to
steal from the jungle and fasten its fangs in the fair white throat of
our civilisation.
XV.—MARK BRIGGS.
At the time the mis-called National Register was taken, Mr. Briggs
was employed as a flax-worker at Manga-iti, in the Waikato district.
In filling in the register form, he stated that he held conscientious
objections to military service, and that he was not prepared to serve
with the army either in or out of New Zealand; but he further stated
that he was prepared to do any work of national importance (other
than war work) either in or out of New Zealand, provided it was
work for which he was fitted.
The story which follows is Mark Briggs’s own narrative:
I was drawn in the Third Ballot, and duly notified by registered
letter to parade for medical examination. I ignored the order, and
seme time later a military officer with the rank of major appeared
at my place of business and handed me another notice, at the same
time saying: “You will parade at Duke Street, Palmerston North,
at half-past nine to-morrow morning.” I replied: “I will not.” The
Major then said: “Will later in the day suit you?” I said: “No.”
He then asked: You are the Mark Briggs who was drawn in the
ballot, are you not?” I replied; "I have had sufficient notifications
from the military authorities to lead me to believe I am.” The
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


Major then wanted to know when it would suit me to appear for
examination. I told him that it would never suit me. He then
said: “All right; I’ll send you a registered notice in the morning.”
The Major then walked out, and next morning the third notice
(registered) came to hand. I took no notice of this; and I next
received a card ordering me to parade at Palmerston North prepara-
tory to proceeding to camp. Of this I also took no notice.. Then,
after all these interviews and notices, I found my name gazetted as
“Missing and cannot be found.” When this Gazette notice appeared
in the Palmerston North papers it was the source of much amuse-
ment.
In the meantime, I lodged an appeal on formal grounds, solely for
the purpose of gaining time. I did not appear to support the appeal,
which was, of course, dismissed.
On or about the 23rd of March, 1917, at nine in the morning, a
police officer put in an appearance with a warrant for my arrest,
and I was taken to the Defence Office, where I was asked by the
officer if I was now prepared to be medically examined. I replied,
“No.” I was then put in a room where six or eight red-caps were
amusing themselves playing cards. At about two in the afternoon I
was taken to the military barracks by two red-caps. I was next
taken before the higher officers and was asked all the questions on
the attestation paper, answering “No” in practically every instance.
I was then taken to the police station by the red caps, where I
remained all night, and next day taken back to the barracks and
presented before the same officers, when the procedure of the pre-
ceding day was practically gone through again. The officer in charge
at last intimated that I would proceed to Trentham at 11.30 that
day. “How many police will it take to conduct you there?” he asked
me. I replied; “It took one of the civil police to arrest me, two
military police to bring me down here in the first place, two to take
me to the police station, and four to fetch me from there down here
this morning. I leave you to be the judge.” He then said he sup-
posed one would do, and immediately ordered ong of the military
police to take me to Wellington, at the same time handing him a pair
of handcuffs. I was brought to Wellington, and at Lambton Station
was met by Mr. H. E. Holland, then editor of “The Maoriland
Worker.”
I was taken out to Trentham, and placed in Details that night.
The next morning I was taken before Colonel Potter, Camp Com-
mandant, and was charged with disobeying the order to parade, and
the charge was dismissed on technical grounds. I was, however, not
permitted to return home; but was taken to the Records Office, where
an attestation paper was placed before me and I was requested to sign
it, which I refused to do. I was then placed in the “clink.” The
following morning I was again taken before Colonel Potter, and was
once more charged with having disobeyed a lawful command given by
MARK BRIGGS.


my superior officer. After evidence had been tendered, I was asked
what I had to say to the charge, and replied that I didn’t admit
that I had a superior officer. Colonel Potter asked if I would take a
sentence from him or be tried by courtmartial. I replied that I
would not take his sentence, and was, accordingly, remanded for
court-martial.
A day or two later I was taken, along with Mr. Levett, from the
"clink” to the medical hut by the military police. At the medical hut
I was subjected to an examination which resolved itself into a heart
test. This test was made by two doctors, and the papers were duly
filled in. We were then taken back to the “clink,” and on the way
there the military policeman said; “You have no need to trouble;
you’ll be out of camp in three days. Have a look at this.” He showed
both Levett and myself the medical report, which was to the effect
that I was not medically fit to undergo a courtmartial trial. A few
days later I was taken before another doctor, and by him was passed
fit to undergo hard labour, etc. That day I was courtmartialled,
the charge being the stereotyped one of disobeying a lawful command.
The President of the courtmartial asked me: “Are you a religious
objector?” I replied that I did not base my objections on religious
grounds. “What, then, do you stand for?” he asked. “For the liberty
and freedom of the masses of the people of New Zealand,” I replied.
“But, my dear fellow,” he said, “if you stood for the liberty and
freedom of the people of New Zealand, you’d be fighting the Germans.
What do you mean when you say you stand for the liberty and free-
dom of the people?” “I stand absolutely opposed to the Conscrip-
tion Act, which was placed on the Statute Book by a few irrespon-
sible individuals,” I said. He retorted: “You elected these men to
Parliament to make the laws, and you should obey them.” “If that
is your contention,” I said, “you must uphold every German in the
trenches, because they are only obeying laws made similarly by the
irresponsible individuals in their country.” He didn’t reply to this;
and I was sentenced to thirty days’ hard labour in the civil prison,
which sentence I served in Mount Cook Prison. At the end of the
thirty days I was taken from Mount Cook to the Terrace Jail, and
handed over to the military police. I was next taken by the red-caps
to Alexandra Barracks, kept there a few hours; then taken by the
military police to the police station at Lambton Quay. Late that
night I was taken from there to Trentham. Next day I was ordered
to take my kit and refused. The following morning I was again
charged before Colonel Potter with disobeying a lawful command. I
again declined to receive a sentence from the Colonel, and was duly
remanded for another courtmartial. I went through the usual
medical procedure, and was again passed fit for hard labour. I was
once more courtmartialled and found guilty, and after waiting a
fortnight for sentence, was told that “it was a washout”—which meant
that no sentence would be promulgated.
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


A few days later I was again taken before a doctor, and, as usual,
passed fit to undergo hard labour; and was taken without any notice
whatever straight from there before a third courtmartial, and again
charged with disobeying a lawful command. When asked if I had
anything to say, I raised the objection that the military law required
that a man should be given 24 hours’ notice of courtmartial pro-
ceedings, and that I had been brought there at a moment’s notice.
The President said. “Oh, that doesn’t matter.” I replied that if that
was so it was not worth my while putting up any defence whatever,
and accordingly I took no further part in the proceedings. I again
had to wait a fortnight before sentence was pronounced. It proved
to be 84 days’ hard labour. Of this I served seven weeks at Mount
Cook Prison.
On the morning of July 13, 1917, I was taken from Mount Cook
along with seven others to the Terrace Jail. Here we were given our
own clothes, shaved, and kept in the yard all day. I saw Mr. Peter
Fraser that afternoon, and shook hands with him as he was going
in to his cell. We were kept in the yard until after dark, when we
were taken inside and handed over to a military escort, which out-
numbered us by two to one. Without being told where we were
going, we were marched through the streets with the members of the
escort all around us, and in this way were taken to the wharf, where
a transport was lying. By this time we recognised that the move
was to forcibly transport us. When we reached the foot of the gang-
way, one of the boys in the*front rank shouted: "Are we going to
walk up the gangway, Mark?” I replied: “Certainly not.” We were
then seized and forced up the gangway. As they were taking me up
I called out to the wharf labourers: “You can tell the citizens of
Wellington that there are eight conscientious objectors forcibly de-
ported in civvie clothes from New Zealand.” They replied: “You
have our sympathy.” I answered back: “We want more than that.”
By this time they had got us on deck. The eight of us were pushed
into the “clink” together, and an armed guard of four men with fixed
bayonets was placed on the inside of the door of the “clink,” and re-
mained there all night.
The eight men thus forcibly placed on board were: Garth Ballan-
tyne, Penwright, Adin, Gray, Patten, Saunderson, Harland, and my-
self. Next morning we were joined by the three Baxters and
Little, and later Maguire and Kirwan were brought from Tren-
tham Camp and placed along with us. That afternoon (July 14) the
boat, the Waitemata, pulled out from the wharf and sailed.
The “clink” was about 22 feet by 10 feet, and the first night out
the whole fourteen of us were compelled to sleep there. There were
no basins, and twelve out of the fourteen were sea-sick. Penwright
and myself alone were able to keep right, and we attended to the
others. The state of the cabin can be well imagined. Penwright
and I cleaned it up in the morning, after getting a drink of tea for
MARK BRIGGS.


the others. We both got ill as a result of the state of the cabin.
We were kept in this “clink” all next day, being left to ourselves.
The third day out a non-commissioned officer told us we were to do
“fatigue.” We said we would not go out. “Then,” he said, “we will
drag you out.” I said, “Carry on.” We were not dragged out.
The fourth day out the same n.c.o. came to the “clink” again, this
time with a guard, took out the kits which had been placed there,
ordered us out, and when we refused to go carried us out separately,
stripped us on the hatchway, and forcibly dressed us in khaki. We
were stripped and dressed in the presence of hundreds of men.
After we had all been dressed, we were pushed back into the “clink.”
As soon as we were back in the “clink” I started to undress, when
some of the guard who had dressed us came over to stop me. Mem-
bers of the guard asked me to keep my clothes on until they were
out of the way. I refused. An officer standing in the “clink” door-
way said, “Tie him up.” “Yes,” I said; “put me in the darkest
dungeon on the boat, and I’ll take them off there.” Eventually they
went away, and we all took the khaki off. They had kept our
civilian clothes, and we remained dressed in nothing but our under-
clothing until after tea that evening, when the kits were brought
back containing our clothes. We immediately donned our own things
and shoved the khaki back in the kits. On this day we were given a
short crop.
From this fourth day out until the day before Capetown was
reached, we were occasionally allowed on deck for fresh air.
Kirwan was in hospital from the third day out until we reached
Capetown. Before Capetown was reached, however, measles broke
out on the boat. Now, the “clink” was situated under the poop deck,
and the other part of the ship under the poop deck was made an
isolation place for the measles cases. Barring one porthole in the
"clink” and one in the adjoining cell, the only ventilation for the
“clink” came through the isolation (hospital) ward. It was not to be
wondered at that four of the C.O.’s developed measles, three (Archie
Baxter, J. Baxter, and Sanderson) being taken off at Capetown, too
ill to proceed further.
The day before our arrival at Capetown we were told by the n.c.o.
that we should have to help load the boat there. We intimated that
we would not do it, whereupon we were told that if we refused we
should be kept below all the time the boat remained at Capetown.
Consequently, during the whole fortnight we were at Captown, we were
not allowed on deck until we were transhipped to the Norman
Castle on the day we were to sail for England.
The first night we spent on the Norman Castle we were placed
on the poop deck, and the only shelter overhead was the gun plat-
form, the planks of which were well apart. We suffered intensely
from the cold, not averaging two blankets each. Next morning two
lieutenants came along, and told us we had to have a bath. I said:
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


“Very good; we haven’t had enough bathing since we left New
Zealand; but,” I added, “if those men are bringing up the kits for
the purpose of getting us into khaki, I am not going to help you by
taking these clothes off —you’ll have to take them from me forcibly.”
One of the lieutenants replied: “We will soon do that.” Orders were
now given, and our clothes were stripped from us and thrown over-
board. The ship’s hose, used for washing down the decks, was then
turned on us, after which they dried us in a sort of way with towels,
and forcibly dressed us up in khaki. We were then left alone on the
poop deck, and eight of us at once stripped off the khaki, and then
went all day in underclothing. The following day they came along
again, and this time the underclothing was taken from us by force,
again the hose was played on us, and again we were dressed in khaki.
As soon as the guard left us we promptly divested ourselves of the
military clothing, and now remained clad only in shirt and singlet.
During the whole day this was our sole attire. Next morning they
stripped us naked, and this time redressed us in just khaki tunic
and pants. We immediately removed these and went naked, using
towels for loin cloths. It has to be remembered that the Norman
Castle carried passengers as well as troops, and apparently the
military martinets thought we would not strip the khaki off in view
of these. However, we remained in this state during the whole of
the remainder of the journey, until within three days’ sail of Plymouth,
when we managed to get possession of a shirt and underpants. We
arrived in Plymouth Harbour clad in these.
It may be mentioned that all through the danger zone we were
kept down below under lock and key. When the guard had to take
anyone up to the latrines he left the door locked. Had anything hap-
pened he could not possibly have got down to release us.
The morning we arrived at Plymouth, and on which we were to
disembark, we were again forcibly dressed in khaki. Several of us
refused to walk ashore. I was dragged along the deck by the n.c.0.,
and was then seized and frog-marched down the gangway on to the
lighter. I was next carried ashore from the lighter, dnd, refusing to
walk to the train, was lifted on to a truck and wheeled to the car-
riage, into which I was lifted. Reaching the flag station at which
we were to disembark for Sling Camp, I refused to leave the train,
and was dragged out, and left lying on the platform in charge of a
non-commissioned officer until a military escort came from the camp
to take me along. Arrived at Sling Camp, I was put in what was
termed the Wellington “clink.” There was a “clink” for each dis-
trict. I found Ballantyne, Maguire, and Adin there. While having
tea a sergeant-major came and asked for my name and regimental
number. I gave him my name, but told him I recognised no regi-
mental number. He angrily ordered me to stand up when speaking
to him. This I refused to do, and another n.c.o. unsuccessfully en-
deavoured to drag me to my feet. The sergeant-major then declared
MARK BRIGGS.


that I was to have no tea if I refused to obey orders, and I thereupon
walked away, and eventually went to bed without tea.
Adin was taken away to the hospital; and on the morning after
our arrival, Ballantyne, Maguire and myself refused to wear the
khaki, and were each forcibly dressed, and were now placed in sep-
arate cells. Immediately we were in the cells, we removed the khaki
again. ,An escort came in, and once more forcibly dressed us and
handcuffed us, fastening our hands behind our backs. We were now
ordered to be placed on bread and water for two days. We refused
to take the bread and water. After tea-time the handcuffs were taken
off, and immediately our hands were free we again stripped off the
khaki. In the meantime, we were given our blankets and mattresses.
On the day following our arrival at Sling Camp, I was lying on the
floor of the cell, in an endeavour to rest rpy shoulders. The effect of
the hands being fastened behind for hours was to cause the shoulders
to ache distressfully, and the only possible way to relieve the pain
was to lie face downward on the floor. While in that position,
Brigadier-General Fulton (the officer in charge at Sling Camp) en-
tered the cell. As soon as he saw the position I was in, he ex-
claimed: “Tut, tut, tut! How long is this going to last?” "As long
as the military oppression lasts,” I replied. He then asked me if
he had the irons removed from my wrists would I promise to wear
the khaki for a couple of days until he could get word from the New
Zealand Government as to what he was to do with me. I said: “I
will make you a faithful promise that when the handcuffs are re-
moved I will immediately remove the khaki.” He said that in that
case he should have to leave the irons on me, as “it was his duty
to consider the health of the men affected, and, of course, he could
not let them go without clothing.”
On the day following that on which we had been ordered bread
and water, the doctor came into my cell, and noticing the bread and
water on the floor of the cell untouched, he asked me if I was not
hungry. I replied that was a foolish question seeing that I had
had nothing to eat all the previous day. He then asked me why I
didn’t take the bread and water. I answered that I had never lived
on that fare before, and if that was the best they could offer me
they had better keep it. He then took my pulse, and casually re-
marked: “You’ll do until to-morrow morning.”
A Methodist chaplain also visited me, and having listened to my
experiences on the boat, asked me if it was worth while one man
knocking his head against a stone wall. I asked him how he could
possibly say a thing like that.when, Sunday after Sunday, in his own
church, he sang:—
Dare to be a Daniel,
Dare to stand alone,
Dare to have a purpose firm,
And dare to make it known.
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


He eventually told me that his own conscience would condemn him
if he endeavoured to sway me from my determination.
We remained twenty-three days in all in solitary confinement cells,
every day of which we were forcibly dressed and handcuffed. The
only time during which we were freed from the handcuffs was at
meal-times, and while we mopped out the cells immediately after
breakfast. We did this latter work because we desired to keep our
cells clean.
In the interval we were visited by various officers, one of the most
prominent of whom would come into the cell and abuse us. On one
occasion this officer came into my cell with a doctor, and ordered the
handcuffs to be taken off. As soon as this was done I removed the
khaki, and stacked it up on the floor between the officer and myself.
While I was doing this he ordered me not to take my uniform off,
but I persisted. He then told me to take the underclothing off as
well, but I told him that was not necessary—that I merely took the
uniform off to demonstrate that they would never make a soldier of
me. The doctor then subjected me to a cursory medical examina-
tion, after which I was once again forcibly dressed and handcuffed.
On another occasion the officer referred to came into my cell, and
looking at me said:' “You b y ape! I’m giving my life’s blood
for my country and the like of you.’’ On yet another occasion he
came to the cell and said: “I know what’s wrong with you, Briggs;
you have Labour tendencies.” I said: “What if I have?” He asked:
“Do you know what we are going to do with Labour after this war
is over?” I said: “No; I don’t pretend to know.” He said: “We
are going to finish them at the point of the bayonet. Do you know
what I would do with you if I had my way? I would stand you with
your back to the wall and riddle you with bullets.” I quietly re-
plied: “Why don’t you do it?” Another day he came along with the
adjutant and the regimental S.M. The officer ordered the handcuffs
to be removed. Immediately this was done he ordered me to get
fully dressed and go out on parade. While he was'giving the order
I was removing the khaki. The adjutant then explained the serious
nature of the position I was placing myself in, and said he would
give me another chance. Thereupon the order to get into full dress
and parade was repeated. I told the officer I absolutely refused to
obey the order. I was now re-dressed by force, and left in the cell
handcuffed. That evening I was taken to the guard-room in front
of the Colonel, and charged with disobeying an order. This Colonel
insisted that I must address him as “Sir.” I told him that if I had
to choose between calling him "Sir” and never speaking again I
would choose the latter alternative. He then asked me if I would
accept a penalty from him, and I told him I would not. We (Bal-
lantyne, Maguire and myself) were next brought up for “summary of
evidence” prior to courtmartial, my two comrades having also refus-
MARK BRIGGS.


ed to obey the order to dress and parade. We refused to make any
statement by way of “summary,” and heard nothing further.
On September 15 I had been sentenced to twenty-eight days’ deten-
tion. This sentence expired on October 13, but I was still kept in
solitary confinement, notwithstanding that I had no sentence. I re-
mained in solitary until I was taken to France.
On one occasion when the officer ordered me to go out for ex-
ercise in charge of a military escort, and I refused, he threatened to
put a rope around me and drag me behind a motor waggon. I told
him that was the only way he would get me out. One Sunday morn-
ing he came and asked me if I would like to go to church. I said,
“Yes.” He then told me that to go to church I would have to get
into full military dress. I told him that if that was all their religion
amounted to I would stay away from church.
In front of three of us, and with a number of n.c.o’s present, a
quartermaster-sergeant once made an unprintable threat as to what
he would do with the sister of a conscientious objector if he had the
opportunity.
Nearing the end of the time we were in Wellington “clink,” Gen-
eral Fulton visited us, and told me that it appeared to him there was a
leader among the conscientious objectors, and immediately after this
Ballantyne and Maguire were removedvto other “clinks,” and I was
taken to Canterbury “clink.” On arrival there I was handed over to
a non-commissioned officer. The n.c.o. said: “Oh, this is the bd,
is it? WeTl b y soon tame you here. You can have it either hot
or cold, whichever you like.” . I replied: “If that’s so, it might as
well be hot from the jump.” Up to this time I was handcuffed with
my hands in front, but this order was now reversed, and my hands
were ironed behind me. I had had breakfast in the Wellington “clink”
before leaving. Some time after I had been in the cell a sergeant
came and asked me: “Do you want any b y dinner?” I replied
not if I had to look to the like of him for it. No dinner was brought
to me. After dinner I was visited by an officer, who asked me how I
was feeling. I replied: “As well as can be expected.” The officer
then asked the n.c.o. if I had had my food all right. The n.c.o. told
him that I had only come in that morning and wouldn’t have my
dinner. The officer then asked me why this was so. I* told him I
could see through the methods that were being employed against me,
that I had had twenty-three days’ solitary confinement in Wellington
“clink,” and apparently the military police didn’t regard that punish-
ment as severe enough, and I had been shifted up there for the pur-
pose of being bullied into being a soldier. I further told him that to
prove to him and the rest of the military authorities that bullying
was no good in my case, I would neither eat nor drink as long as I
was left in that “clink.” He threatened that if I did that they would
forcibly feed me. lat once proceeded to put my promise into opera-
tion. For the first two or three days they didn’t bring me any food;
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


at meal times they would just come and ask if I wanted anything to
eat, and on every occasion I said “No.” I fought against the pangs
of hunger in the daytime and at night slept soundly. During the
latter part of the time food was placed in my cell regularly, but 1
never touched it. On every occasion that the dinner was brought in the
handcuffs were removed, and also on every occasion that the hand-
cuffs were taken off I removed the khaki, and was always forcibly
re-dressed. The doctor came in day by day and took my pulse.
After I had been some three days without food, the principal medical
officer came in in addition to the ordinary doctor. He was very
courteous, and endeavoured to tempt me with suggestions about
drinks of hot milk, etc. I maintained the hunger strike from Tuesday
morning until Saturday night—practically five days.
On the Saturday morning I was taken to the barber and shaved.
About four in the afternoon they came and put putties on me, and
also a pack on my shoulders, and took me out of the “clink.” There
I saw a medical officer, who again endeavoured to persuade me to have
something to eat. I refused, and a Red Cross car was then brought
round, and I was placed in this with an escort and a medical officer, and
taken to the train, on which I was placed with a draft for France.
This was towards the end of October.
We reached Salisbury Station at 7 p.m. and I had something to
eat there with the guard. The men I travelled with were very friend-
ly. We remained at Folkestone for a day or so, and then proceeded
on to the boat for France. I was not ironed while being taken
across to France, although some of the other conscientious objectors
were taken across in irons. We landed at Boulogne, and remained
there one night at what they called “One Blanket Hill.” Next morn-
ing we were taken in motor lorries to Staples, which was then the
Base Camp.
When the newly-arrived troops were paraded, I refused to march
with them, and Captain Wilford (son of the Honourable T. M. Wil-
ford) peremptorily ordered some half-dozen men to carry me on to the
parade ground. When they got me to the parade ground I merely sat
down, and the order was then given by Wilford to take me away to
the guard-room. At the guard-room I was told that after dinner I
would be fully dressed and be taken down to the parade ground for
Commanding Officer’s inspection. I said in that case there would be
someone with me, because I would not walk down there, neither would
I carry the equipment. Eventually I was carried down by the mili-
tary police. They had put the pack on me, and I just sat down, using
the pack for a support until the rest of the draft had been inspected
by Colonel Mitchell. The Colonel then walked over to where I was
with the police, and ordered the removal of the pack, and also in-
structed that I was to be taken to his office as he wanted to talk to
me. In his office he asked me to explain my attitude. I told him I
was an anti-militarist deported from New Zealand, and that I would
MARK BRIGGS.


undertake no military service whatever. He endeavoured to persuade
me to change my mind, and in doing so was very fair and reasonable.
He explained that, for the time being, I was under his charge, and
that while I was there I would not be interfered with; but, he said,
if he received instructions from the General to send me up the
line he would have to obey, and if I refused duty when there I would
be liable to be courtmartialled and shot.
I might mention that on one occasion a military officer of high
rank, while endeavouring to persuade me to undertake military ser-
vice, showed me what purported to be a list of soldiers who had been
courtmartialled and some of whom had been shot for refusing to
obey orders.
For three weeks I remained in the guard-room. At the end of
the first fortnight I was again taken before Colonel Mitchell, who
told me he wanted to save me years of imprisonment, and offered me
light work in the garden. I told him I would scorn to take any
light job and thus be the means of sending the man already in that
job where I was not prepared to go myself. A week later I was
taken out of the “clink” and placed in a tent with the mess orderlies,
and was told I would not be expected to work, but could knock
about the camp. In this way I filled in a month, and then was ap-
proached and told I had to “go through gas.” I refused to go, and
was carried to the gas hut in a hand cart. A gas mask was placed
on me, and I was taken into the gas hut by two men with gas masks
on. I immediately pulled down the top of my mask. It was placed
on me again, and I again tore it down; whereupon I was pulled out-
side and let go.
That night while in bed I was told I was to proceed “up the line”
in the morning with a draft, and was asked if I would walk to the
station. I replied: “Yes, conditionally.” They asked what were the
conditions, and I told them; “The conditions are that there is no rifle
or hostile equipment to carry.” Next morning when I got up I found
outside the hut and pack, rifle and equipment, also a hand cart and
fatigue party. They placed the pack on my shoulders and I sat down.
I was then forcibly placed on the hand cart and taken to the railway
station, and there put on the train for Popperinghe, where we landed
considerably after dark that night. I left the railway truck and
walked up to the camp, leaving behind in the train the rifle and other
equipment. Next morning when I arose there were orders to proceed
to Scottish lines. In the meantime my equipment had been brought
from the station in the waggon sent for the officers’ luggage and
stores, etc. The pack was again put on me, and I refused to walk with
it. I was then taken by the feet, and dragged head downwards some
fifty yards to a tent. I was sent from here under escort to the
Scottish Lines, where I was again placed in the guard-room. The
n.c.o. here was a coloured man, and he came and told me I had to
go out and parade that afternoon. I told him I was not going. The
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


n.c.o. said; “If I can’t take you out any other way, I’ll take you on
the point of the guards’ bayonets.” I did not go out on parade, how-
ever.
I was next interviewed by Colonel Blair, who asked me if I had
a trade, and offered to give me any work about the camp for which
I was fitted. I told him I was not taking on any military
work whatever. I was then sent up in charge of a non-commissioned
officer to the travelling cookers and ordered to peel potatoes. I again
refused, and was duly charged with having disobeyed a lawful com-
mand. For this I was sentenced by Colonel Blair to twenty-eight,
days’ Field Punishment No. 1. I was ordered to be taken from the
Scottish Lines to the compound at Oudredoum to serve the sentence.
The equipment was again placed on me, and, of course, I again refused
to carry it and was dragged out of the “clink.” Finally, when £hey
recognised the hopelessness of getting me to carry the pack, they
asked me if I would go without it, and I said I would. Then the
pack was taken off, and we proceeded to the compound—about three
or four miles away. Arriving there, the police in charge were told
I was a conscientious objector, and wouldn’t perform either military
service or work. One of the military said: “We’ll b y well
soon make you work.” I said: “I don’t think you will.” He im-
mediately ordered me to “grab a banjo” and go over and help fill
sand bags. These sand bags were used to put around the bivouac to
protect it from German bombs and shells. Refusing to obey, I was
dragged over to one of the posts erected for the purpose, and was
fastened to the post. I was, in fact, handcuffed to the post with my
hands dragged round behind me, and my feet were also lashed to it
with a rope. This was early in December, which is practically mid-
winter in France. Needless to say, the cold was intense, and I suf-
fered agonies during the hours I was left in this position. I remained
tied up until dinner time, when I was released for the meal. After
dinner I was tied up to the post again in the same way and left for
at least two hours. This treatment was repeated for three days;
then I was ordered to go to the compound cook-hopse and help the
cook. Again I refused to obey and was taken up before the A.P.M.
(chief officer of the military police), and was charged with refusing
to work in the compound. He said; “I don’t know what to do with
you, but I think a long spell in a military jail would be a good
remedy for you.” I replied: “I don’t think much of your remedy. No
matter where you put me I will be just the same.” He sentenced me
to three days’ confinement in the punishment cell. After I had served
this sentence, I was ordered to do pack drill and refused. They
then charged me with disobeying a lawful command, and got ready
for a courtmartial.
That afternoon or the following day General Russell came to the
compound, and ordered me to be taken out to see him. When I met
him he took me aside, and. with Colonel Blair only present, he told
MARK BRIGGS.


me that they had come to the conclusion that I was honest and
sincere in my attitude. “If you were in Germany,” he said, “they
would shoot you. But we are not going to do that here. What’s
more, we are not going to use German methods on you. lam going
to release you unconditionally, and send you up to the stores at Cafe
Belles for a month. You will go up there, and no one whatever will
interfere with you. At the end of the month I will see you again
and ascertain if you have changed your mind. You know, Briggs,” he
concluded, “you are fighting for freedom; so am I. But I use different
methods from you. Your methods may be right, or they may be
wrong. Mine may be right, or they may be wrong. I didn’t hold
the same ideas when I was your age as I hold to-day.” I went to
Cafe Belles and was there for a month, receiving very fair treatment.
Then the stores were shifted to another district. The morning after I
landed there I was taken over to see Brigadier-General Hart, and he
asked me what General Russell had said when he released me from the
compound. I told him, and he said: “And you haven’t changed your
mind yet?” I said: “No, and not likely to.” He said he wasn’t
going to try to make me, and sent me back to the stores, where I
remained until some weeks later, when Colonel Stuart came to
succeed General Hart. Stuart sent for me, and said: “Well, Briggs,
I have never met you before, but I have heard a good deal about you.
Colonel Mitchell was up here yesterday, and we were talking your
case over. You won’t work, and I don’t know what they sent you
from New Zealand for. You are costing thp New Zealand Government
over £1 for every day you are in France.” I remarked that I wasn’t
getting much of it anyhow. He asked me about my position in New
Zealand and my relatives, and also wanted to know if I was prepared
to subscribe towards a hospital in New Zealand when I got back; I
refused to make any promise, and he told me to return to the stores
for a few days, when I should hear from him.
Not long after this time General Godley visited the place, and his
coming was followed by a remarkable change in my treatment. I
could not help associating the change with Godley’s influence, for, a
few days after his appearance, I was sent for by Colonel Stuart, who,
with a military brusqueness that may have been real or assumed,
told me that I was to be sent 1500 yards behind the lines to work,
and that if I didn’t work I’d take the consequences. I was accordingly
sent—along with Archie Baxter and Kirwan, accompanied by military
police—to a camp called Belgian Chateau.
A military police sergeant was in charge of us. The first night
Baxter, Kirwan and myself were left together in a hut. Next morn-
ing I was taken away, and a captain tried to induce the other two to
go to work. Then he came and told me they had consented to work
—which was not true. He said he really wanted me to work, and
would give me a written statement to the effect that I wasn’t doing
military work. I refused to entertain the suggestion. He then said:
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


“You’re a b y rotter, and I’ll make it hot for you. You’ve had a
pretty rough time, but you’re at the last jump. The military policy
now is either to make or break you.” I retorted; “You might break
me, but you’ll never make me.”
I was kept at this place for three days and handed bully beef and
biscuits and water, after which I was despatched to Otago Camp
(which lay about a mile to the right of all that was left of Ypres
township). On my arrival there I was first put in a hut, and was
next sent for by a captain, who said: “You’re sent up here to work,
Briggs, and work you will. To-morrow morning you’ll put on equip-
ment, take a rifle, go out on parade, and up on the working party
the same as any other man.” The captain put plenty of military bluff
into his demeanour. “If the Hun comes over,” he said, “you’ll use
the rifle the same as any other man.” I replied; “Never as long as
you live will I carry a rifle and equipment up there.” He said:
“Well, you’ll go up without it for a few days; then you’ll go up with
it afterwards.” I replied: “I won’t go up in any case.” He said;
“You’ll go up all right.” I said: “I may, but if Ido it will be in an
extraordinary position.”
Next morning I was sitting on the floor of the hut when the cap-
tain came in, and asked if I was going up. I said: “No.” He kicked
me twice, and then called in four soldiers and told them to take me
up. “Get him there,” he said, “no matter how, so long as you get
him there.” The soldiers seized me and carried me part of the way,
and I was taken the rest of the way on a limber. I explained my
attitude to the men who took me, and they were friendly enough.
That afternoon I went back to Otago Camp.
On the following morning the captain came in again, this time
bringing the military police sergeant with him. The captain again
asked if I was going up, and I replied, “No.” The police sergeant
then grabbed me by the wrists and dragged me out on my back to the
parade ground, where three soldiers were waiting. The military
policeman asked: “Is there any rope about?” and immediately went
to look for it himself. He found a long piece of cable wire, and, com-
ing forward, fastened it around my chest immediately under my
arms. The m.p. and the soldiers then harnessed themselves to the
wire, and went off up the "duck-walk” (a footpath constructed of
planks with battens nailed across at short intervals, to obviate the
difficulty of the soldiers traversing the mud). Along this track —as
far as I could judge, a distance of about a mile —I was dragged on my
back. In the process the buttons were torn off my clothes, which
were dragged away, and consequently my back was next to the
“duck walk.” The result was that I sustained a huge flesh wound
about a foot long and nine inches wide on the right back hip and
thigh. The track crossed the edge of an old shell crater, which was
full of water, and when the soldiers reached it they stopped. The
m.p. asked: “Are you going to walk now? Because if you’re not.
MARK BRIGGS.


you’re going into this shell hole.” I replied I didn’t know where I was
going, but I wasn’t going to walk up there, anyway. He immediately
threw me into the shell hole, and dragged me through the water,
and along the ground, to the next shell crater, and by means of the
long wire again pulled me through the water. When they got me
out on to the bank at the other side, they just picked me up by the
shoulders and tipped me head over heels back into the water. When
I came upright with my feet at the bottom, the water was over my
shoulders. The m.p. said: "Drown yourself now, you b d, if
you want to die for your cause. You haven’t got your Paddy Webbs and
your Bob Semples to look after you now.” They pulled me out, and
dragged me along the ground to yet another shell hole, and they pulled
me through this in the same way. After which I was dragged another
hundred yards or so, when they stopped, and the m.p. asked me if thej 7 .
took me back to camp and gave me a change of clothes over a fire
would I walk up afterwards.
By this time I was absolutely exhausted, and was shaking all over
as the result of shock to the system. I replied: “I’ll never walk up
there as long as I draw breath.” The sergeant then asked if I would
walk back to the camp, and I replied that I would. I made an attempt
to get up, but the task was impossible. Two of the soldiers, seeing
that I was incapable of walking, lifted me with my arms over their
shoulders, and in this way they carried me along with my feet drag-
ging. Half way along I had to ask to be put down, because I was
suffering unendurably from the effects of my treatment, and also
from the manner in which I was being got along. The m.p. replied:
“Keep the b d going.” Eventually they got me to the camp, and
put me back in the hut from which I had been taken in the morning.
They divested me of my clothing—which was all wet and muddy, and
which I was not permitted to see again—and gave me a rough rub
over with a dry towel, and then put a fresh shirt and pants on me,
after which they covered me with blankets, placing a couple of mat-
tresses on top of the blankets. This apparently was to get warmth
into my body. There was only one thickness of blanket under me,
however. They left me for about an hour and a half, when a non-
commissioned officer brought me a drink of tea, and asked me if I
intended to put my name down for sick parade. I replied: “No, I
will not parade before any military doctor.” He said he would bring
a doctor to see me, as I was not fit to be left there. The m.p. visited me
after the corporal had gone, and asked: “Will you be ready for a re-
petition of that treatment after dinner?” I replied: “If necessary.”
'• The soldiers arrived back about 2.30 in the afternoon, and when
they saw me on the floor covered with mattresses and blankets, they
asked: “What’s wrong, digger?” I replied: “They knocked me about
a bit this morning.” One of the men who had taken part in dragging
hie (and who belonged to the hut) told the others just what had
happened. They asked him wliy he had done it. He replied: “I had
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


taken the oath as a soldier, and was threatened with courtmartial if
I refused to do it, and I had also been told that the* extreme penalty
was death for refusing duty on the battlefield, and I wasn’t the bit of
stuff to refuse.” The soldiers expressed intense indignation about the
action of the m.p., and threatened that they would take his life. The
m.p. kept out of the way that evening. Next morning when he was
crossing the parade ground the camp cooks (nine or ten in number)
came out and counted him out. I could hear the, “One, two,” etc.,
and the medical orderly told me what was happening.
The doctor came about four in the afternoon of the day on which
I was injured. He came into the hut with a medical orderly, re-
moved the mattresses and blankets, and also removed my clothing
sufficiently to permit him to see my back. When he saw the extent
of my injuries he uttered an exclamation of surprise and anger, and
told two men in the hut to get a stretcher and take me to the R.A.P.
hut. They removed me there, and the doctor at once examined me,
and ordered my back to be bathed with warm water. He told them:
“Get as much of the dirt out of his back as you can. You won’t get
it all out because it it ground right into the flesh. You will have to
dress his back and send him right away to the hospital.”
The doctor then went away, leaving the orderly to carry out his
Instructions. He returned about half an hour later, and a bed was
made up on a stretcher for me that evening. I was not, however, taken
to the hospital. Next day a bunk was brought in, and I was placed
in this, and so remained for two weeks. During the first week I
suffered indescribable agony; on certain nights I did not sleep at all
because of the burning sensation of the flesh wound. The only time I
left my bed was to get out to the latrines; it was with the utmost
pain and difficulty that I could move about, and whenever I left the
bed I returned exhausted. By the end of the fortnight I could get
out for half-an-hour at a time, when I would saunter slowly up and
down the "duck walk” and then return to bed.
The hut I was in was right in the line of fire. Shells flew over the
camp and lodged a mile away.
In due time orders came to move camp from Ypres sector to the
Somme. This meant the transfer of all the soldiers. Two miles from
the Otago Camp was a light railway used to convey the troops, and
the doctor asked me if I could walk this distance. I agreed to make
the attempt, and succeeded with great difficulty. I was taken by fail
to near Abele. When I reached this rest camp, the sergeant-major
asked me what was the matter with me. I replied that I didn’t feel
too good. He said: “You look b y near dead.”
Here I met Archie Baxter, who had come down on the same train.
The medical hut equipment failed to arrive, and I found myself with-
out blankets that night. Archie Baxter offered me one of his.
I was along with Archie Baxter next morning when a captain
came in and ordered Baxter out on parade with his full pack . up.
MARK BRIGGS.


Baxter refused to obey, whereupon the captain used unprintable
language and attacked Baxter, striking him with his fists and knock-
ing him down, and then kicked him while on the ground. The officer
next lifted him from the floor and again struck him, knocking him
down again. Following on this incident, Baxter was taken away to
the Somme. This attack by the officer happened after Baxter’s letter
to his parents was written, and before he was placed in the mental
hospital. That was the last I saw of Archie Baxter.
After that I was sent to Abele for medical treatment, and, on my
arrival, the doctor was sent for, and saw me at the medical hut. He
ordered me to report there next morning—which I did. Every morn-
ing thereafter I had my back dressed at the medical hut. I was
kept here for about a month, and during that time was twice sent
before Medical Boards. At Abele I found Captain Mitchell in charge.
At this time I was bent double, and couldn’t straighten myself.
Colonel Mitchell had me brought before him, and said: “They knocked
you about at Ypres?” I replied: “Yes, a bit.” He answered: “Yes, I
think a good bit by the look of you.” He remarked that I would not
be well for a good while yet, and then asked me what I intended to
do when I got right again. I answered: “Carry on the same as
usual.” He suggested that I was foolish, and asked if I didn’t think
I would be better doing some light job instead of “getting up against
it.” I replied that I couldn’t help that.
Here I learned for the first time that Ballantyne, Little and Baxter
had each been sentenced to five years’ imprisonment with hard labour,
and that their sentences had been commuted to two years. I also
learned that Archie Baxter was taken to the Somme without Colonel
Mitchell’s knowledge. Had the Colonel known what was being done I
am certain he would have tried to prevent it.
I was next returned to Etaples with a few others for the Final
Medical Board. On the paper sent down with me my complaint was
set down as a form of rheumatism. I went before the Board, and
Dr. Marks said they would treat me for my complaint and patch me
up for a Base job. I told him: “I wouldn’t do a Base job when I
was fit and well, and I am sure I am not going to do it now.” He
then said they would give me treatment and see what they could do
for me. After this I was taken before Major Bowerbank, who asked
me what I had been doing while I was up the line. I told him “No-
thing.” He then asked me how I got into the condition I was in,
and I told him of the treatment I had received at Ypres six weeks
earlier, and showed him the scar of the flesh wound on my back.
I was under medical treatment at Etaples for three weeks, at the
end of which time they told me that they could do nothing more for
me—that rest was the only thing that would do me any good. By
the Medical Board I was classed C 2, P.B. 3 —which meant the lowest
category in which they could place me to keep me in either France or
England. I remained practically crawling around the camp for a
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


fortnight; and then, when coming out of the cookhouse with Harland
one night, a non-commissioned officer said to me: “Be here at half-
past four; they have you on a P.B. draft for up the line again.” I
insisted on being taken before a doctor, and was taken to the medical
hut, where I saw Major Bowerbank. He asked me what was wrong,
and I told him that I had just been told that I was to proceed up the
line with a draft. I asked him to say whether I was fit to even walk
to the station without a pack. The pack and rifle were already done
up waiting for me. The Major told me to go back to my tent; and I
heard no more about being sent up the line.
I was next sent along to Chaplain-Captain Green (Salvation Army),
who wanted to put me on washing down the inside of the Salvation
Army hut. I told him that if there was any work attached to it “it
was a wash-out,” as I would refuse to do any military work. Green
argued that it would not be military work. I pointed out that men
paid five shillings a day by the military were already doing it. In
the end, the Salvation Army officer called me into his room, and
said: “I can’t understand you fellows.” I said: “I am very well
aware of that; otherwise you wouldn’t be in the position you’re in
now.” He began to show signs of anger, and declared that 75 per
cent of the Conscientious Objectors were shirkers and wasters, but
added that he believed there were a few who were genuine, and further
conceded that he thought I was one of the genuine Conscientious Ob-
jectors, because of what I had gone through for the sake of my prin-
ciples. When he found I wouldn’t work he told me to report back to
the orderly room and tell them I wouldn’t do it. I didn’t bother
reporting back —I was aware that when the order was given it was
known that I would not obey it.
I was next sent for by Major Bowerbank, who, as soon as I en-
tered the medical hut, asked what work I could do. I replied I could
do no military work whatever, and very little of any other, even if I
wished to. He said he knew that. “I would send you home to-
morrow, if I had my way,” he told me; “but I haven’t the power to
do it.” This notwithstanding that he was President of the Final
Medical Board. “You have either to do a Base job or go up the line
again,” he added. I replied: “There is one thing certain. I won’t
do a Base job; and if the other is the only alternative it will be up
the line.” He replied; “All right, then,” and I returned to the hut.
He then sent Harland to ask me if I would do certain work at the
Y.M.C.A. hut. I replied, “No,” and Harland went back and told him
I wouldn’t do the job. Harland told me later that the Major said he
might have known from what I had said previously that I wouldn’t
do the work. Harland also told me that Bowerbank added: “I didn’t
wait for you to come back, but went over to see the Commanding
Officer (Major Dovey), and we have decided to leave Briggs’s case
until we can see General Richardson. He is practically aC2 man,
but, so far, he has done no military work. If he took on a job in
MARK BRIGGS.


camp and broke down on it I could send him back.” A few days
later Harland told me that Major Bowerbank had seen General
Richardson, and that I was to be sent to England in a fortnight or
three weeks’ time.
While I was waiting for the order to proceed to England, Mr,
Massey and Sir Joseph Ward visited Etaples, and I heard no more
about the trip to England; but, a little later, a non-commissioned
officer came to me while I was lying in bed, and told me: “They
have you down on a gas stunt to-day, Briggs; I don’t know how you
will get on.” This meant walking about six miles in all, and under-
going a gas test. I replied: “I know how I will get on. In the first
place, I’m not fit to go. In the second place, I’m not going; and if
the military authorities insist on me going they’ll have to drag me
every inch of the way, because I will not try to walk. By what I can
see of them, they want the last drop of blood out of a man before
they will be satisfied, and if they do, let them take it.” I heard no
more about the “gas stunt.”
I was next sent for by Colonel McKenzie (who had now succeeded
Major Dovey). He asked me: “What are you doing in camp?” I
replied: “Nothing.” He said: “You’ve been here five months, haven t
you?” I replied: “Yes, roughly speaking.” He said: “What do you
think of yourself drawing Government pay and eating Government
food and doing nothing for it?” I said: “Government pay? I never
drew a sixpence from the Army in my life.” He said; “Well, you
eat the food. Will you be prepared to pay for that when you get
back to New Zealand?” I replied: “No; I want you to understand I
was dragged from New Zealand and deported. I consider the least
they can do is to feed me while I am away—and they’ve done that
very poorly at times.” The Colonel then said: “Oh, well, lam not
going to discuss your ideas. lam here to decide whether you are
fit to go up the ditches or not.” He added that he was satisfied that
I was not fit to go up the line, and urged that if I would take a light
job in camp it would not be so bad. “But,” he said, “you won t
work.” I replied; “No.” He said; “If I were to send you to Blighty
It would be the same?” I said: “Exactly.” He then asked me if he
sent me back to New Zealand, what'was the first thing I’d do on
arrival there. I told him that I’d first have a rest. He then wanted
to know what was the first thing I’d do after I had had a rest. I
said: “Supervise my own business.”
The following week I saw Colonel Mitchell, who said it was time
I was sent back to England, and that he would see that I was sent
back. A week later I was sent with a draft from France to Torquay.
I arrived at Torquay on Sunday, and on Monday morning I was taken
to headquarters, when an officer asked me for my name and number.
I gave him my name, and told him I hadn’t got a number. He de-
manded to see my pay-book, and I told him I had none. He then
asked me how long it was since I had left New Zealand, and I told
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


him twelve months last July. He then asked how I had got on for
money, and I replied I had never had any money from the military.
He said: “I think you are telling a pack of In —-y lies.” He then
instructed the n.c.o. to Write to the Records Office in London, and
inform them that they had a man there who told them he had left
New Zealand twelve months last July and had never had any money (
off them or a pay-book. Addressing me he said: “This is no place for
you. We’ll d n soon have you out of this.”
I was then sent back to Wellington District Camp, at Granville
Mansions, and remained there ten days in the house and garden, and
never went outside. While in the garden there I was ordered by a
Lieutenant Tipping to go on parade, and refusing, was sent by Tip-
ping’s orders to the guard-room. Two days after I was taken before a
Major and charged with refusing to go on parade. I was asked if I
still refused to go on parade, and replied: “Yes.” I was then re-
manded, and afterwards told by the m.p. that I had been remanded for
a “summary of evidence.” I was held in the guard-room for another
ten days or so, when General Richardson came in with Major Kaye
one evening about seven. The General asked me what I was doing
in there, and I replied that I was a Conscientious Objector. He
asked me what I was there for, and I told him for refusing to go on
parade. He questioned me about my experiences in France, and I
gave him in detail the account of what I had undergone. “Join the
medical corps,” he said, “and I’ll wash your crimes out.” I replied:
“No; I’ll join nothing in this outfit.” It is needless for me to add
that I didn’t concede that I had any “crimes” that needed washing
out. It was rather the other way about as between the military and
myself.
The next day the m.p. had instructions to take me to Major Kaye
(Commanding Officer of Torquay), who said he wished to talk to me as
man to man, not as officer to man. He questioned me about my
religious beliefs, and I assured him that although I had been brought
up a Wesleyan Methodist, I did not base my objection to military ser-
vice on religious grounds. I explained that I was an anti-militarist.
He asked me what would have happened if everybody had been like
me and German Militarism had been allowed to run over us. I re-
plied that if everybody had been like me there would have been no
war. I added that I reckoned that I personally had had German
Militarism over me from the first day the red-caps put a hand on me
in New Zealand. I pointed out to him that one of the strongest
arguments used in securing volunteers from New Zealand was that
their mission was to end German Militarism, but, unfortunately (I
told him), the thing they asked the New Zealand soldiers to end
in Germany was the very thing they were establishing behind the
soldiers’ backs in New Zealand. He finished up by saying that my
ideals were all right, but that they were impracticable.
Eventually I was sent to a farm at Mortonhamstead, and remained
MARK BRIGGS.


there for a month. I was then sent back to Torquay for further
medical treatment, and, after a week there, was recommended to be
returned to New Zealand at the first opportunity.
About three weeks after my return to Torquay I was placed on
board the Ruapeha, and made the return trip to New Zealand without
incident of any moment.
On my arrival in Wellington Harbour, I refused to take either
money or discharge when we were lined up prior to disembarkation.
I “fell out,” and was called back by a non-commissioned officer, and
taken before the Commanding Officer of the boat and a shore officer,
and these made an effort to persuade me to take the discharge papers.
I refused, basing my refusal on the fact that I had never been a
soldier, and, therefore, needed neither money nor discharge. The
officer from ashore then asked the boat Commanding Officer if he had
a guard. The Commanding Officer said: “No; but I can soon get
one.” The shore officer then said to me: “We’ll have to put you
under open arrest.” I said: “If that’s the penalty for refusing mili-
tary pay and papers, you’d better do it, because I have no intention
of taking them.” I was then told to consider myself under open
arrest, and as I walked away one officer said to the other: “We can
put him under close arrest before he gets to the wharf.”
About two hours later I was told that the Commanding Officer of
the boat wanted to see me, and when I got down the Commanding
Officer took me to Brigadier-General Andrews, who had come on
board. When I went into the room General Andrews said: “Well,
Briggs, there seems to be some difficulty in disposing of you.” I
said: “None as far as I am concerned.” Andrews then asked me;
“Well, what was the trouble this morning?” “Merely,” I replied,
“that they offered me military papers and money and a discharge, and
I wouldn’t take them.” “Well,” he said, “yours is a peculiar case.
What do you think we should do with you when we land you on the
wharf?” I said: “I don’t consider you should do anything with me.”
He then wanted to know how I would get on for money and my return
ticket to Palmerston North. I told him that I should have friends to
meet me on the wharf. “If we put you on the wharf without your
military papers,” he said, “you will be liable to be asked for them
and arrested if you haven’t got them. Can you suggest a way out of
the difficulty?” I suggested that he could furnish me with a formal
discharge which wouldn’t require my signature. I told him I would
sign nothing. He then said to the Commanding Officer of the ship:
“This man is not under arrest, is he?” and the Commanding Officer
said, “No.” General Andrews then said to me: “All right, Briggs;;
I’ll depend on your word of honour that you won’t go ashore until
you’ve seen me. Come down here after the soldiers have gone ashore
and I’ll fix you up.”
After the soldiers had gone ashore, I went below, but the General
wasn’t there. I saw another officer, and he advised me to go ashore
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


and return in the morning. I left the ship in a disreputable old
khaki suit, and was met by my brother, Mr. and Mrs. Ballantyne, Mr.
Peter Fraser, M.P., Mrs. Aitken, Mr. Jack Hughes, and others. I put
the evening in with my friends after getting into decent civilian
clothes, and returned to the boat next morning. I went to the office
and saw a shore officer, who exclaimed: “It didn’t take you long to
get into civvy clothes!” I failed to see General Andrews, but one
of the officers answered my inquiries: “Oh, well, you’re as much a
civilian now as ever you were. Your discharge is being made out
and will be posted to you.” Thereupon I left the boat, and in due
time returned to my friends and business at Palmerston North.
In a few days a registered letter from the military, addressed to
me, arrived at the Palmerston North Post Office. A girl clerk clears
the P.O. box daily for my firm, but for this letter the girl’s signature
was refused. She was told that I would have to take delivery of the
letter personally. When I called at the Post Office, I was asked for
my regimental number, and told the postmaster I had no number.
“Then,” he said, “this letter cannot be for you.” I had made up my
mind not to give the military authorities my signature, and, of course,
the postal people’s view of things suited me. So I came away, and
the letter is still at the Post Office —if it has not been returned to the
Defence Department.
(Signed) MARK BRIGGS.
XVI.— ARCHIBALD McC. L. BAXTER.
My object in writing this statement is not to parade my opinions
or principles. Neither do I write it as a complaint against the Army,
for I believe complaints, as a rule, do little good. My object is an
honest one. I wish to make a plain statement of facts which may
prove of some value, and if much of which I have to relate discredits
me in the minds of some people, the public has at least an honest, if
incomplete, statement to judge from, and I might say here at the
outset, that I have nothing to conceal, and, from my point of view,
nothing to be ashamed of. I have often been asked, “What are my
objections to war?” and the argument of the “survival of the fittest”
has often been used in support of military methods. I have wondered
that educated men can be so illogical, for while this law may be
natural enough throughout the animal kingdom, in war it is not the
“fittest” who survive, but a great many of the world’s fittest and best
men are slain, while a still greater number are rendered unfit. lam
against war on this ground, and I wonder that any sane person who
knows the destruction, the degradation, the misery, and the sorrow
MARK BRIGGS.


caused by war, can regard it as anything else than diabolical in the
extreme. Now I have always been a true believer in law and order,
and as a citizen I have regard for the thoughts hnd opinions of my
fellows, and also for their feelings. I believe that a man should seek
to bring his life and actions into agreement with his truest sense of
duty towards God and Man. I believe that the Soul of Man is not,
and cannot be, subject to any earthly State, for no earthly State is
perfect. For this the military authorities designated me a “Defiant
Objector’’ in New Zealand, but in France they told me that they; be-
lieved me sincere, although I had not changed my opinions. I believe
that passive resistance to evil is the power that will yet conquer the
world, and I believe that that form of militarism that goes on the
principle that Man is merely the property of Man, will find that there
are men who will oppose such principles, though they be subjected to
the most barbarous cruelties, or put to death, or shut in cells and
bound with all the chains and fetters that were ever forged on the
anvils of Hell. lam not against the soldier; the troops I came in
contact with know that. I judge no man for his opinions. I have
my failings like other men, but I stand for Universal Brotherhood.
I view all men as comrades and brothers in different stages of moral,
intellectual, and spiritual development, and I know that far above all
earthly States is to be found the awakened Soul of Man struggling
onward and upward, away from long cherished delusions towards
that universal harmony which to know in its fullness would be perfect
comprehension, freedom, and love.
I was arrested at my home in Brighton by the local policeman in
company with another officer. I had not received notice to go into
camp, and had just returned home from a hard season’s shearing. The
local police officer said he had come to see me on business relating
to farming statistics, and I walked with him a short distance from
the house, where his friend appeared, and I was informed that I was
under arrest. I asked for permission to go into the house for my
clothes, and when this was refused, I asked the officer to come in
with me, or go in himself, but he refused, and ordered me into his
cart. My mother then brought out my hat and coat and I was driven
off. I was taken to the Kensington Drill Hall, and from there was
marched down to the Central Battery by four guards with fixed
bayonets, and was there locked in a cell. Next day I was sent to
Trentham Camp, and was there charged before the Camp Comman-
dant with being absent without leave. The case against me was
dismissed, but I was not set at liberty. I was kept a prisoner in
company with William Little, my brother John, and some others in
the “clink.” After a few days, my brother Alex, was brought in, and
we were then sentenced to twenty-eight days’ detention for refusing
our kits,. When we arrived at the Detention Barracks at Wellington,
we were put on bread and water for three days for refusing to take
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


off our civilian clothes and change into denims. We were afterwards
charged before a courtmartial (and got three months’ jail for the
same offence. We were taken back to Trentham when our time was
up, and were sentenced to another twenty-eight days’ detention. We
were sent again to the Wellington Detention Barracks, where we were
asked if we intended to take off our clothes this time. We replied
that we did not, and no further pressure was used. We were locked
in our cell most of the time for about a fortnight, when early one
morning we were marched out by about a dozen military police. We
were put on board a transport, and when we were put into the guard-
room on board we met ten other Objectors who had been put on board
during the night. I had met most of these men in jail, and they
were pleased to meet us again. There were then fourteen of us in
all. The thing we felt most at the time was not being allowed
to bid our friends good-bye. We were kept in that guard-room, and
most of us being sick, we were in a bad way for some time, but after-
wards, by the Captain’s orders, I think, we were taken out on deck
for fresh air, and were also given a chance to keep our quarters
clean.
Before we reached Capetown many of those on board were down
with measles, and about twenty men, including Albert Sanderson, my
brother John and myself, were put ashore at this port. I saw no
more of the other Objectors till I met some of them in France, ex-
cept Robert Gray, whom I met at Sling Camp. He was doing gar-
dening work there at the time. Gray told me that he and his com-
rades had been stripped of their clothes a few days after their ship
left Capetown. He said that their clothes were thrown overboard and
that they were pulled out naked and had had the hose turned on them.
When we were put ashore at Capetown I was sent to the military
hospital at Maitland in company with others, my brother and Sander-
son being sent to another hospital.
After about three weeks we were all gathered up again and sent
to the Castle at Capetown. We remained there for some weeks,
and no men could have been more friendly than the troops who were
with us there. The. lieutenant in charge was a New Zealander, but
had not been in New Zealand for twenty years. He told me that all
he would ask of my brother and I was to answer the roll call. San-
derson had been sentenced to a term of imprisonment in New Zea-
land, and as his time had not yet expired he was sent to a military
prison in Weinberg. All the rest of us were sent after this to Simons-
town. My brother and I were in civilian clothes and were at absolute
freedom. Our stay there did us a great amount of good. A band
of us used to go out each day exploring the country, and we saw many
interesting things—things that were new to us in plant and animal
life; I was sorry that Sanderson was confined to a prison cell while
we roved out at will, through scenes of the most wonderful rugged
beauty. Altogether we spent about three and a half months there.
ARCHIBALD McC. L. BAXTER.


and if we had any wish to escape from the army we had nothing to
do but to walk away, but that would have been against our principles.
My brother, Sanderson and I left Capetown with the other New
Zealanders on a passenger ship, the Llanstephen Castle. There were
about nine hundred negroes on board, who were being sent out by
the South African Government to work behind the lines in France. We
had a good enough time on the voyage and were not made prisoners,
but had complete freedom. Sanderson became ill, and was so far
down at one time that I thought he would never reach England. No
men could have been more friendly than those New Zealanders who
were with us at Capetown and on the voyage to England.
When we arrived at Plymouth we were lined up on the wharf, and
a British officer came along and asked, “Who are these men in civilian
clothes?” When he was told he said he did not know what to do
about us, and went away to find out. When he came back he sent us
along with.the other men to Sling Camp. For some time after arriving
at Sling Camp I was at liberty. I was still wearing civilian clothes,
which I refused to give up, but eventually they were taken away from
me forcibly and I was then dressed in uniform. I was put in deten-
tion for refusing orders, and each day I was taken out by the Military
Police for exercise, always handcuffed, with my hands behind my
back. I was also handcuffed in the same way while in my cell. It
was snowy weather, and for want of circulation I could hardly move
a limb. I was suffering from neuralgia and protested against such
treatment. I think it was the only time I ever did complain in the
Army. The Military Police said it was the adjutant’s orders, but
that they would see the provost-sergeant. The latter came-in and
took the handcuffs off and told me to come out into the guard-room
and have a warm at the fire. I have nothing to say against the mili-
tary police at Sling. I heard the adjutant’s orders, which were that
if I did not choose to promise obedience I could freeze.”
Almost every day I was visited by officers and sometimes by a
chaplain. They argued with me sometimes for hours at a stretch.
One parson told me that he was very much interested and glad that
he had met me. He had heard about me, and had evidently ex-
pected to meet a crank or an egotist, who had no regard for any
law, human or divine. He talked with me for a long time, and told
me that he agreed with me on most points, but that his views were
not so extreme. He offered to do anything in his power for me, and
promised to call and see me again.
After this, the colonel and the adjutant paid me another visit,
and informed me that I was being sent to France with the next draft.
I was glad to hear this, for I knew that my comrades were there,
and I hoped to meet them again. They told me that if I went along
quietly with the other soldiers I would be all right. They asked me
if I would do this, and I replied that I realised that I was in their
power, and that they could send me wherever they wished.
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


When the draft was ready to start, the sergeant, the military
police, and a few soldiers who knew me shook hands with me, and
wished me the best of luck. They asked me what I would do when
I reached France, and I replied: “They can send me to France, they
can send me into the trenches or anywhere they like. All that I
can conscientiously do I will do, but what I cannot conscientiously
do I’ll refuse to do, no matter what the consequences.” They cheered,
and I was then taken out and attached to the draft and sent off.
Next day I arrived at Staples, and there met Patton and Harland.
Patton told me he had been in a compound for twenty-eight days for
refusing orders, and had been punched by a guard while in prison.-
He had been on No. 1 Field Punishment. At the time of which I
write both Patton and Harland were at liberty, and I remained with
them about two days, and during this time had my freedom.
I was then taken before Colonel Mitchell. He said that I was to
proceed to Abele with a draft, and that he would be up there in a
few days, and would see me there.
I went with the draft, and when we reached Abele I was put
in a hut with the other troops, and in the morning was given an order,
which I refused to obey. I was then left for a few days until Colonel
Mitchell arrived. I was taken before him several times for about a
week. He said he did not wish to send me to “clink,” but that he could
not leave me among the other troops. He gave me into the charge
of the military police, and told me to remain with the police for the
time being. I stayed with the police in their quarters for some time,
and was allowed a certain amount of freedom. The police were very
friendly, and I was well treated by them.
Colonel Mitchell had told me that he would look into my case,
and see if he could do anything for me. The next time I was called
before him he told me that he had done all in his power for me, and
that if I did not obey orders he could not do other than treat me as
any other soldier who disobeys; that I was regarded as a soldier by
the N.Z. Government. I explained my attitude, and he said that he
very much regretted to have to punish me, but if I did not obey his
hand would be forced.
I was then taken and given an order, which I refused. I was
taken before him again, and was sentenced to twenty-eight days’ No.
1 Field Punishment. Next day I was taken to a compound, where I
received orders from the sergeant, which I again refused. I was
then reported to the officer in charge, who told me that he would
have to tie me up, but he hated to have to do this to any man,-and
was not doing it to other prisoners. I remained there for about a
week, but was not tied up. An officer came to the compound and had
a conversation with me, and said that I should not be permitted to
live. I was then taken out of that compound and sent to another
called Mud Farm. The men there were being tied up, whether they
obeyed orders or not. This compound was in charge of a lieutenant
ARCHIBALD McC. L. BAXTER.


of the Imperial Forces and a N.Z. sergeant. After I had been there
for a few days, tied up three hours each day, Kirwan was brought in
under escort and put in a tent in the same enclosure with me. There
were a good many prisoners there, but only one New Zealander beside
Kirwan and myself. Kirwan had been sentenced for the second time
to twenty-eight days’ No. 1 Field Punishment for refusing orders.
While doing the first term he had been put in close confinement for
a time on biscuits and water. While we were there we received the
same food as the other prisoners. It kept our body and soul together.
The weather became very cold and rough. The poles on which we
were tied were in a very exposed place by the roadside, in view of
the passers-by. The other prisoners were not tied up in all weathers,
but Kirwan and I were. On one occasion we were tied there in a
bitter snowstorm. I was too numbed to feel when taken off, and
suffered much from the effects.
We were both taken from this place back to Abele, where we
were again taken before Colonel Mitchell, who said that as we still
refused orders there was no alternative but to send us up the lines,
and also pointed out to us what it would mean if we refused to obey
orders under fire. He told me that he thought at one time that I
might change my mind, and I replied that he judged me wrongly, that
I was quite sure of the ground on which I stood. He said he was
sorry if he had judged me wrongly, but thought it most regrettable
that I should take up such an attitude.
We were then equipped with steel helmet and gas mask, and
given into charge of a provost sergeant. We were taken from place
to place behind the lines all that day, and stopped that night at a
place where we met Mark Briggs. On the morning after Kirwan and
I arrived there we were taken before a colonel, in company with
Briggs. This colonel told us that he was sending us up the lines, and
if we disobeyed orders we would have to stand the consequences.
Prior to going up before him, I was given an order by the provost-
sergeant in charge of us, which order I refused. He instantly dealt'
me a blow in the jaw, which knocked me down. Each time I tried
to rise he struck me again. When I had got up the last time he had
gone out of the hut. When I saw him again I asked him if he had
anything personal against me, but he said he had not; he had his
orders and intended to carry them out. I told him that was all I
wished to know.
From there we proceeded with the provost-sergeant to the Belgian
Chateau near the old town of Ypres. Kirwan, Briggs and I were
then taken before an officer. This officer told us what he thought of
us, and asked me why it was that I had refused to obey orders. When
I replied, he complained of my want of modesty in setting forth my
objections, and for saying that I would stand firm on my convictions
and to the truth as I knew it, no matter what happened to me. I
answered that he had spoken freely to me, and that I might as well
ARMAGEDDON“OR CALVARY.


speak frankly and honestly'—that I had certainly no wish to give
offence. He also spoke to Briggs, and then dismissed us. We were
then taken to a hut, and told to stay there until further orders. We
were next brought before a captain, who received us one at a time.
When I was taken in before him he said he wanted me to realise my
position in the Army. He said that I was not justifying my existence.
I told him why I objected and why I refused orders, and he said that
the trouble was that none of the fourteen men who had been forcibly
sent out of N.Z. could claim to be conscientiously opposed to war,
at least not lawfully, as they did not belong to denominations in the
tenets of whose creed war is forbidden. He signed a document and
gave it to me, and sent me to another Camp. This document stated
that I was not under military control. He sent a runner with me,
who took me to this Camp and presented me to Headquarters there.
They took my name, and gave me to understand that I was attached
to the Battalion. I presented the document the captain gave me
and they took a copy of it, and said that they would wait till they
saw the captain. He came to the Camp later in the day, and told me
that I could do anything I chose: that I could start when I liked and
stop when I liked, and that I would not be under any military control
whatever, as the document stated. He said that I would not be asked
to do anything that would be against my conscience. When I asked
whose control I would be under, he said that I would be under his
own private control. I told him I had been attached to the Battalion
as soon as I arrived there. He said that they should not have at-
tached me, and asked me if I had shown them the document he had
I realised that everything there was under military direction, and
given me. I told him that I had presented it, and I also said that
that the paper he had given me was absolutely worthless to me if
any other officer was put in his place. He said he had looked on mo
before as a fanatic, but that henceforth he would regard me as an
absolute obstructionist, and that he would rather see me with my
skull knocked in behind a parapet than that I should ever see New
Zealand again. I said: “Well, sir, I think you are very uncharitable
and unjust, for I have no such wish towards you.” He said: “Well,
at any rate you are not much better than the men who are being
sent to jail in New Zealand.” I said that I had no doubt that they
were sending better men than me to jail. He said that he had in-
structions from Headquarters regarding us, and that he wished to
warn me. He said that these instructions were very harsh, and that
if I did not listen to reason violence was sure to be used against me.
I told him that violence had already been used against me, and that
I was prepared for whatever was in store for me. He then sent me
back to the camp I had just left, the Belgiarl Chateau.
When I got there the provost-sergeant came to the hut I was in
and told me I was to get no food until I promised to obey orders. I
remained there for three days without food. I was not locked up, but
ARCHIBALD MeC; L: BAXTER.


he told me I was not allowed to draw my rations there, and I did not
ask for anything except once, when I asked the orderly in the ser-
geants’ mess if he had any tea left over. He told me there was some,
and said to help myself, as he was not allowed to give me anything.
I took some tea in a tin, but the provost-sergeant came up at the
time, grabbed it out of my hand, and emptied the contents. Next
day the cook called me over to the dug-out and gave me some food.
He gave me food the next day also, and the sergeant did not interfere.
Next day I was sent back to the Otago Camp, and remained there.
About two days after, an officer came to me and said that Kirwan
wished to see me. He said that Kirwan wished to speak to me alone,
and asked me to promise not to influence him in any way that would
thwart the purpose of the Army. I made no promise, but he sent
Kirwan down to see me. Kirwan told me that he had refused orders
all the time he had been there, and that he would always reserve
the right to refuse when he could not conscientiously obey. I agreed
with him on this point absolutely. He told me he was being sent to
a Base Hospital. I did not see Kirwan again.
The captain to whom I have already referred spoke to me again,
and told me that he would see about getting me a hut or dug-out to
myself. When I had last seen him I was in a hut alone, but at this
time I was with a platoon. I told the captain that I would much
rather stay where I was, for all the soldiers were friendly to me, and
that I knew a good many of them before.
I heard one day that Mark Briggs had been badly knocked about.
I went into the medical hut and saw him. The provost-sergeant told
me that Briggs was not expected to live, and that if he did live he
was to be shot. Briggs told me that he had been dragged on a rope
along the “duck walk” for about a mile by four men, and then thrown
into a shell hole. At the time when I saw him there first he was
lying helpless on a bed, and the M.O. came in while I was there and
attended to his injuries. I was about to leave, but he said I could
remain, so I watched him dress Briggs’s back, nearly the whole lower
portion of which was torn raw. Briggs was very pale, and looked like
an old man, but was not downhearted. When I came out of the hut
I met the provost-sergeant, and he said; “Well, have you seen your
friend?” I said that I had seen his own dirty work, and he replied:
“That’s the way you’ll be to-morrow.” He said what had happened
to Briggs was Briggs's own fault, and that no man but a madman
would endure it. Next morning the sergeant came to me and said:
“Now, Baxter, to begin with, we are going to give you the father of
all hidings before you leave this hut.” I told him if those were his
orders, and he deemed it his duty to carry them out, I would make
no complaint. He then ordered the men who were with him to bring
me along. I went with them, and the sergeant led the way to a place
behind the front trenches, where he took me before an officer and ex-
plained the seriousness of my position. The sergeant said that he did
ARMAGEDDON OB CALVARY.


not wish me to be under any misapprehension as to what was going
to happen. He said he was going to give me an order, and if I refused
to obey it I would be instantly shot dead and that he himself would
do the deed. I told them that I fully realised the position. The officer
said that nothing I had to say now mattered, and reminded me that
I was not in N.Z., but in France under shell fire. I was then given
an order by the sergeant, which I refused to obey. The sergeant
struck me on the mouth, and ordered me again, and I again refused.
He then struck me under the jaw, making my mouth bleed, and when
I refused again he said I was to get nothing but this treatment until
I obeyed. He struck me again on the face and on the body several
times. I told him that under the circumstances I would neither obey
nor retaliate though he punched me to death. Some of the troops
who were looking on called out to him to stop, and he then took me
along to a pillbox and ordered me again, and when I again refused, he
kept digging me in the ribs for a while and ordering me again and
again. The work he was ordering me to do was to my mind equal
to combatant service, and I told him I would rather be shot than do
it. He then took me along till we met an officer, and he asked the
officer if he could direct him to a place that was being heavily shelled.
The officer pointed out an ammunition dump at some distance, and
told him to take me along there for a while. The provost-sergeant
took me to this place, which had been heavily shelled a few minutes
before, and ordered me to stand there. When he was leaving me he
said that he hoped that a shell would get me and blow me up to my
Maker. The fire was very heavy for some time, and then slackened
off, and I stayed where I was. When the sergeant came back he said
I was a fool to stay there, and that I must have wanted to commit
suicide. He said that he had done his part, and was not in love with
the job, and that he did not want to have anything more to do with
me, for he believed me mad. He then left me, saying that he would
have to send in a report concerning me, and that in the meantime
I should stay with the Otago boys. I did so, and did not see much
of this sergeant again, for he left a few days later. ,
After this, Colonel Mitchell came to me and asked me how I was
getting on. I told him that I was all right. He asked me if there
was anything he could do for me, and I said that I did not know of
anything. He asked if I had no request at all and no complaints, and
I replied that I had none. He then said he was not going to allow
me to be punished again, and would have to see the General about
me. He told me he thought that I must have a mental twist, and I
replied that he could think what he liked, but that I had nothing of
the kind. He said that he would see Headquarters about me, and that
if I had any request or complaint to make to communicate with him.
A few days after this we left the Ypres front and went back to
Abele, I camped that night in a hut with Mark Briggs and several
others. Briggs could hardly walk. It was a cold night, and when he
ARCHIBALD McC. L. BAXTER.


lay down on the floor I noticed that he had no blankets and offered
him mine, but he refused to take it. The next morning the same
officer who was there when Briggs was knocked about came into the
hut and ordered me to go out to drill, and I told him that I did not
go out on parade. He ordered me again, and I refused, and he then
struck me in the face, knocking me down. I got up and he ordered
me again, and when I refused again he kicked me and then struck
me another blow and knocked me down. While I was down he kicked
me several times about the body. I was knocked out, and he then
ordered four men to carry me on to the parade ground. They picked
me up and carried me out of the hut. When they got me out on the
duck-walk the officer ordered them to lift me up high and let me
fall on my back on the boards. He ordered them three times, but
each time they let me down very gently. He then ordered them to
proceed, and they carried me out on to the parade ground and set
me on my feet, but I felt beat out, and lay down against my valise.
Colonel Mitchell passed along the ranks with some other officers
and asked me what was the matter with me. I told him that I was
right enough, and he passed on. I lay there for an hour or two,
while the troops shifted to another camp not far distant. Four men
came to me, and said that they had been sent to bring me down to
this other camp, and that they had been told that if I would not walk
they were to carry me. This camp was only about half a mile dis-
tant, and I walked with a man supporting me on each side. They
gave me several spells on the way, and when they got there they
took me into a hut and put some blankets over me and brought me a
drink of hot tea.
I lay there until the afternoon, and the officer who had dealt with
me in the morning came in and ordered me to go out on parade, hut
I made no answer. He asked me if I was going out and I said “No.”
He said that he would have me dragged out. He then left me, and
in a while two men came and told me that they had been ordered to
bring me out. They took me out and laid me down a few yards from
the hut. From there I was taken before the Medical Officer, who asked
me what was the matter, I told him that I had not paraded sick of my
own accord but had been brought there, that I was bruised from
head to foot, but had no complaint to make against anyone. He gave
me some tablets, and I was taken back to the hut, and remained
there that night.
Next morning we left that place and set out for the Somme by
train. We were crammed into trucks in the usual way, and as I
was not well I had a hard time. I do not remember the names of the
places we were at out there. My health seemed to have given way,
but I did not go on sick parade. No violence was used while at the
Somme or after. I was taken to a dressing station one morning by
two soldiers. I had to be carried at that time, and had not much
life left in me. I was put on an ambulance waggon and sent off to
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


a hospital, where I was attended to, and a day or two after was sent
to Boulogne, and received into hospital there. After the Medical
Officer examined me he asked me if I had been under heavy shell
fire, and I told him that I had on many occasions. He asked me how I
came by certain marks of old bruises, and I told him some of my his-
tory. He asked me if I had been knocked down by a shell at any
time, and I told him that I had, but that I had not been hurt. He
then told me that he was glad I had told him all about myself, and
that he did not blame me for my opinions. He told me that he would
do anything he could for me, that I had been sent in there a sick
man, and his business w r as to make me well.
I was very weak at this time, and about five weeks later, when I
was sent to England, I had not picked up much,being still just over
eight stone, about three stone below my ordinary weight.
This Medical Officer at Boulogne was one of the broadest-minded
and most generous-hearted men that I have ever met, and he had a
fine sense of humour. It was a good thing for me that I met him
for at that time I was driven to the brink of an abyss. After I had
been in hospital for a few days in England the M.O. came to me and
asked me why I disobeyed orders in France, and I told him what the
orders were, and he began to argue with me on the law of “the sur-
vival of the fittest.” I told him that to my mind the fratricide and the
suicide are much the same, and that the man who kills his fellows,
believing that he is doing wrong, commits moral and intellectual sui-
cide. He told me that I, through what I called passive resistance, and
what he„would call my stubbornness, had put myself in a position of
absolute dependence on the Army, I replied that I was not ungrate-
ful for what had been done for me, but that I thought the Army was
responsible for me, for the military authorities knew what I was before
ever they sent me out, but, if he did not want me there, all he had to
do was to allow me to go out, and that I would look after myself and
find my way back to New Zealand on my own. He talked to me no
more, but sent me to bed for three days for what he was pleased to
call my insolence.
There were a good few of the N.Z. boys there, and they were all
good friends with me, and after a few months I was much better. We
were visited by a N.Z. colonel one day, and he told several of us that
we were being sent back to N.Z. He told me that he had heard about
me, and was surprised to find me so well. He wished us a safe voy-
age home, and then left us. A few days after we were told that we
were to embark at Southampton the following day. We crossed from
that port to Le Havre, and travelled down through France by rail to
Marseilles, and there embarked on the Maraama, after spending a few
days at a place near the town. We went ashore at Colombo for a day
and also at Albany, and then came on to Auckland, and next to
Wellington.
When we came in at Wellington the M.O, called me and said that
ARCHIBALD MeC. L. BAXTER.


I was to go before Colonel Allen and Mr. Myers. I went along with
the M. 0., and he showed me into a room where these two gentlemen
were sitting, and the M.O. introduced me to them and went out. Mr.
Myers asked me to sit down, and then asked me a few questions about
my health. Sir James Allen asked me if I was still of the same mind
with regard to military service, and I told him that I was. He then
asked me if I had been badly treated while in the Army, and said
that they had been charged with treating me and other Objectors very
cruelly. I said that I had received treatment that I would call cruel.
He asked me if I had any complaint to make to him, and I replied
that I did not think that I should make a complaint while the men
against whom I would have to make it were not here in New Zealand.
He then asked me what I was doing while at the front, and I told him
that I was given a document by the Commanding Officer, which stated
that I was not under military control, and all that I had done in the
Army was done by me voluntarily, out of a sense of fairness to the
men I was with. He asked me whether I was a Conscientious Objec-
tor, and I answered that I was called one in the Army, but did not
call myself by any name. He said: “Why did you object to military
service?’’ and I replied, “Because I am against war.” He then asked
me did I know anything about No. 1 Field Punishment, and I replied,
“Not much.” He said that a letter that I had written from France
had been published in the papers, and that I had stated in that letter
that I had been subjected to this punishment, and asked if that was
true. I told him that I did not know that the letter had been pub-
lished, but that it was all quite true.
I think I have told pretty well all that passed at that interview
except that Sir James asked me to describe No. 1 Field Punishment,
and I stood against the cabin wall and showed how my arms were
fastened and how my legs were tied at the knees and ankles. Sir
James asked me, “What do you intend doing now?” and I said, “I
don’t know yet what is going to be done with me,” and he said that
there might possibly be an enquiry into these matters, and I said
that if there was I would speak the truth.
Mr. Myers asked me concerning my condition when in hospital. I
told him that I had been put in an observation ward for a day or two
when I first went in, and that I asked the Medical Officer why he put
me there, and he asked me if it troubled me, and I said that it did,
and the Medical Officer then took me into another ward, where there
were some New Zealande.rs.
This closed the interview, and I went back to my ward, and pre-
sently two friends came on board to see me. I was surprised to hear
from them of a message which had been received by my people from
Base Records, stating that I had been admitted to hospital in the
United Kingdom, and that “my mental condition was causing anxiety.”
I cannot believe that any of the Medical Officers in the hospitals were
responsible for such a statement, and certainly no New Zealand M.O.
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


could make such a statement, for I never met a N.Z. Medical Officer
from the time when I was taken from the dressing station in France
until I went aboard the hospital ship at Marseilles.
Shortly after I arrived at home a statement concerning me ap-
peared in the Otago Daily Times, headed “Baxter Case. —The Con-
scientious Objector,” and it was declared in this statement that I
had set up my will in opposition to the will of the community. Now,
I would like to say in this connection that with me it was not a mat-
ter of setting up my will against the public, but of doing what I be-
lieved to be right, and refusing to do what I believed to be wrong; and
I do not believe that all that was done to me and to other Objectors
was done by the will of the community.
All that I need to say in conclusion is that, although it was said that
I appealed as a Religious Objector, as a matter of fact I did not
appeal before a board on any ground at all, although I sent in a
notice of appeal in which I stated that I would not act against my
belief, and that by the help of God I Would do no violence to any man.
I was told in France that in my case it was not a question of services
at all, but of submission. I did not see that it mattered whether I
appealed or not, for I did not look for exemption. My real appeal
was my conduct in the Army, and I have been discharged with a good
character.
(Signed) A. McC. L. BAXTER.
XVII. —GARTH C. BALLANTYNE.
My objections to military service were based mostly on humani-
tarian reasons and also on political grounds. I have been all my life,
and still am, an absolute pacifist. My experiences, both in and out of
the firing-line, have confirmed and strengthened my opinions, and I
also take this opportunity of stating that under similar circumstances
I would again act precisely as I did before.
I am writing this statement in answer to numerous requests, not
only of my personal friends, but also of many soldiers who have heard
of or seen a little of what I went through. Also I feel it my duty to
make public a, description of British military prisons in France, and
to show people what even New Zealanders are capable of doing when
backed by militarism.
It was at the Alexandra Barracks, Wellington, that I first experi-
enced that cold shiver run down my spine as the cell door shut to and
the bolts shot home. Never will I forget my feelings as I stood look-
ing at the back of that door and analysing my thoughts. I could not
help thinking of the animals in the Zoo, and my sympathy went out
to those poor caged creatures as it had never done before.
ARCHIBALD McC. L. BAXTER.


I had failed to go to camp when called up under the Conscription
Act, and had determined, after thinking things over, that I would not
run away, but would stay quietly at my home and face the matter out.
A civilian policeman had found me there that morning and arrested
* The, and I was awaiting a military escort to take me to Trentham Camp
in the evening. I spent that night in the guardroom, and was charged
next morning, before Colonel Potter, with failing to report to camp
on the sth of March, 1917, as ordered.
On this, my first apearance at an orderly-room, I must admit to a
little nervousness, but I managed to declare pretty emphatically that
I- had no intention of becoming a soldier. This, however, failed to con-
vince the colonel, who merely reprimanded me and told me that if I
■“carried on’’ I should hear no more about my two weeks’ overdue.
Previous to my arrest, I had been unable to ascertain whether
there were any more like myself in camp at that time, so that my
delight can well be imagined when, on being marched to the Q.M.
Stores with a small party of other men, three more besides myself
refused to accept the uniform. The officers at first affected the usual
surprise with which they generally heard of our refusals to obey
orders, but when they found that we were in earnest sent for the
police, and had us all returned to the guardroom, where we lost no
time in getting acquainted with one another.
Twenty-eight days’ detention was the verdict next morning, and
I found myself once more under arrest, returning to Alexandra Bar-
racks.
The time passed fairly uneventfully with no particularly great
hardship, although not being as yet used to imprisonment, I found the
loss of liberty very trying. Here I made the acquaintance of some
more comrades, including the Baxter Bros, and Little.
Again returned to Trentham, I went through the same performance
at the Stores, and this time was remanded for a District Courtmartial,
which took place about a week later. The attitude I adopted at the
trial was to ignore the Court and to deny its right to try me. This
was of no avail, and a week later I found myself, in company with
three others, journeying to the Terrace Jail, with 84 days’ hard labour
ahead of me. On arrival there we went through the same performance
as any ordinary criminals would have done, and shortly afterwards
each of us was deriving great amusement out of the awkward figures
the others cut in their ill-fitting prison clothing, my mates having an
extra laugh at me because my broad arrows showed up very plainly.
Throughout the course of our sentences we were associated with
and treated as ordinary criminals. When I first started to work in
the Mt. Cook Prison I had on one side of me a man convicted of a
hideous sexual offence and on the other a man who had twice been
declared an habitual criminal. I found the conversation of the ma-
jority of the prisoners horrible to listen to. What attracted most of
their attention was the Supreme Court sittings, and they discussed
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


the various crimes with brutal freedom. Whenever I talked with them
myself I strove to draw them out to talk of themselves in order to
hear their ideas of our present system of dealing with offenders
against the law, and from what I heard there and from my own
observations I came to the conclusion that our prisons were making
ten hardened criminals to every one they cured. I hope that sweeping
reforms will soon be brought about.
Of our treatment by the prison authorities I have no particular
complaint to make. We were sent to them as criminals, and as
criminals, no more and no less, we were treated. The fault lay with
those who sent us there.
I was within a week of finishing my sentence, and was looking for-
ward to getting back to Trentham, where I would be able to see my
people in private and not in the presence of a warder, when one morn-
ing before breakfast the principal warder came to my cell and told
me to pack up my kit, as I was “going away.” I remembered after-
wards that he had seemed to put peculiar expression into the words,
although he professed ignorance as to the meaning of our shift,
beyond the fact that I was to return to the Terrace Jail. On coming
out into the yard with my belongings, I was surprised and pleased to
find that the others had received similar instructions. On our arrival
at the Terrace Jail the mystery was not solved, as the warders told
us that they knew nothing, except that we were to be handed back to
the military authorities. Accordingly, we bathed and shaved and our
own clothes were returned to us, and we awaited developments. The
military, however, preferred to do their work in the dark, and so we
had to wait until evening for the escort to arrive. The escort refused
us any information, and we set out, as I thought, towards Lambton
Station. We did not, however, stop at the station, but passed it,
heading for the wharves; and now, for the first time, I realised that
there had been some foundation for the very vague rumours which
had reached us to the effect that we were to be placed on a troop-
ship.
On arrival at the wharves we proceeded to the side of the Waitemata,
and were ordered to go aboard by the escort. This we refused to do.
The escort then used force, and carried or hustled all my mates on
board. The m.p., however, who was standing beside me evidently
did not relish his job, for he asked me whether I was going on board,
and I replied, “Not of my own free will.” “Quite right,” he answered,
“and I am not going to put you there.” I was thus left standing on
the wharf for five minutes or so, during which time a fair crowd of
watersiders, who happened to be changing shift at that time, had
gathered around, and I spoke to them, telling them exactly what was
happening, and asking them to spread the news. A voice replied
that we had their sympathy to which I answered—as Mark Briggs had
also answered—that something more than sympathy was required,
and that it was up to the workers to see that no more were sent
GARTH C. BALLANTYNB,


away as we were being sent. Other m.p. were now returning from
the ship, and on seeing me promptly grabbed me and carried me on
board and down to join the others in the guardroom. A strong guard
was left over us all night to ensure that we should not communicate
with anyone on shore, and although my mother was living within half
an hour’s walk of the boat, and was also on the telephone, my re-
quests to be allowed to communicate with her were refused.
Next morning our numbers were increased by others brought from
the Barracks and from the Camp, and the fourteen C.O.’s now on
board comprised the three Baxter Bros., Little, Briggs, Sanderson,
Patton, Adin, Penwright, Harland, Gray, Kirwan, Maguire and myself.
Whether it was accidental or not I don’t know, but it was certainly
curious that there were among us men from almost every province
of New Zealand.
[To avoid repetition, I have omitted those portions of Mr. Ballan-
tyne’s account of the voyage from Wellington to Capetown, which are
wholly in substantiation of Mr. Briggs’s account. Mr. Ballantyne
mentions that when they were ordered to have their hair cut short the
C.O.’s refused, and were carried out one by one on to the hatchway
by the guard, and there their hair was cut very short. “A sharp
struggle ensued when Briggs attempted to resist the guard, and it
took about six of them to hold him down whilst the barber cut his
hair.” Mr. Ballantyne also mentions that, while they were being
forcibly stripped and re-dressed in uniform on the first occasion, a
soldier with a sense of humour set a gramophone playing “Onward,
Christian Soldiers.” Mr. Ballantyne’s narrative proceeds.—Ed.]
One day we were informed that the doctor had given instructions
that we were to do physical drill. We replied that if we were sup-
plied with skipping ropes, etc., we would take sufficient exercise to
keep us in health. The corporal of the guard went away satisfied, but
returned shortly afterwards and said that he had received instructions
that he was to make us run round the deck and that he was to use
the bayonet, if necessary, to carry this out. When we got on deck,
however, we all sat down and refused to move, in spite of the guard,
who stood around with fixed bayonets. The corporal, seeing that we
were not to be bluffed, again went away, and this time returned with
some skipping ropes and removed the guard.
[Mr. Ballantyne then describes the experiences of the C.O.’s at
Capetown, and their treatment on the Norman Castle, after being
transferred to that boat. His narrative is wholly in line with that of
Mr. Briggs, and is therefore omitted.—Ed.]
On the last occasion on which we were forcibly dressed on the
Norman Castle, before reaching Plymouth, the authorities thought to
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


make use of the fact that the ship was carrying a number of first-
class passengers, including some ladies. Accordingly, we were
divested of the shirt and singlet, dressed in just the trousers and tunic,
and brought round from behind the wheelhouse, which had hitherto
partly screened us, to the forward end of the poop-deck—into full
view of the promenade deck, where some of the passengers were
walking about. Men were placed to prevent us from returning, and
we were released. Without any hesitation whatever we all stripped
stark naked. We were soon returned to our former position, where
we obtained towels, which we put around us as loin-cloths, remaining
in that attitre until within a few days’ sail of Plymouth, when we
obtained a shirt and underpants each, and thus garbed we arrived.
During the latter end of the journey we were returned to the
guardroom; and all through the danger zone we were under lock and
key. The sentry on the door carried the key, which he took with him
when he accompanied any of us on deck to the latrines or wash-
house. If any accidents had occurred during his absence, owing to
the rush of men up the stairs, he would have been unable to return
to release us, and we should probably have been drowned like rats
in a trap. On at least one occasion the key was lost, and some delay
was experienced until the carpenter was brought and the door forced.
At the commencement of our journey, some of us had told the offi-
cers that as they had carried us aboard so they would carry us off
again, and accordingly on arrival at Plymouth we proceeded to keep
our promise. When the boat arrived in harbour, we were once again
forcibly dressed in uniform and dragged up the stairs, along the deck
and down the gangway on to the lighter, and when the lighter got
alongside the wharf we were dragged down the gangway on to the
wharf. Here eight of us were dumped on to a truck and wheeled a
distance of one hundred yards or so to the train, which conveyed us
to Sling Camp, on the Salisbury Plain. Here we were split up and
sent to the guardrooms of the various camps, and I found myself in
company with Briggs and Maguire in the guardroom of the Welling'-
ton Camp. A row between Briggs and a S.M. resulted in our getting
no tea, and we went to bed. On getting up next morning we did not
put on the uniform, but remained in our underclothing. Perceiving
this the provost-sergeant fetched about 20 men, who forcibly dressed
us, and placed us in separate cells, where we immediately stripped off
the khaki again. As soon as this was noticed, we were again dress-
ed, and this time we were handcuffed to prevent our removing the
uniform. For over a fortnight we were thus dressed and handcuffed
each morning and kept in solitary confinement. The authorities also
tried to put us on bread and water, but each time this happened we
refused to eat anything at all, and as they evidently did not wish to
provoke us into hunger-striking we were- generally supplied with
fairly good food.
During this time we were constantly visited by officers and men
GARTH C. BALLANTYNE.


of every rank, who tried to coax, argue, or bully us into doing wofk
of some kind, but we refused even to go out for a walk in uniform.
One very high official made himself particularly objectionable.
What seemed to annoy him most was the fact that we refused to
stand up or to say “sir” when addressing him. He entered my cell
one evening after I was in bed, and asked me one or two questions.
I answered him with a plain “Yes” or “No.” “Why do you not say
‘sir’ when addressing me?” he asked. “Would you not say ‘sir’ when
speaking to your employer?” I replied that I had no objection to
saying “sir” to anyone whom I respected, but that as I had no re-
spect for the rank he held and that what little I knew of him as a
man had not led me to respect him, I did not feel called on to “sir”
him.
As our last sentence of 28 days’ confinement received on the boat
had now run out, it was necessary that some definite charge should
be laid against us in order that we might be kept in the guardroom.
Accordingly, we were one day ordered by an n.c.o. in the presence of
witnesses to go out on parade. This' we refused to do, and we were
charged with refusing to obey an order and were remanded by Colonel
Saunders for courtmartial. A “summary of evidence” was taken, but
as we were not allowed to speak without punctuating our remarks
with “sirs,” we preferred to say nothing.
The officers now began to get the idea that there was a ringleader
among us, so one night we were separated. I was taken to the Can-
terbury guardroom. One of the sergeants of this camp was well hated
by all the troops on account of the severity with which he treated
all prisoners committed to his charge. As soon, however, as I got into
the cell I removed the uniform. Later in the evening, wishing to go
to bed, I knocked at the door and asked to be allowed to go to the
latrine. The sergeant opened the door, but on seeing how I was
dressed refused to let me out until I put on some more clothing. As
I refused to do this, he closed the door again. Later I informed him
that I suffered from piles, and that unless he allowed ,me out I would
be likely to do myself an injury and that I should report the matter
to the doctor in the morning. He then obtained assistance, forcibly
dressed me, dragged me outside and then back again, knocking me
about pretty considerably in the process. He then handcuffed my
hands behind my back and kicked me into the cell, leaving me thus
all night, so I was unable to make up my bed, and the weather being
very cold, I suffered badly from cold and got no sleep that night.
Next morning bread and water only was brought to me, and I
refused to eat it. Later in the day I informed an officer that as the
authorities did not seem to be able to make up their minds what to
do with us, and that as my health must inevitably break down very
shortly under this treatment, I thought that I might bring matters to
a head by refusing to eat anything until a more definite course was
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


determined upon. All that day and all the next I ate nothing, al-
though tempting dishes were placed before me at each meal time.
The next evening I was again taken back to the Wellington Camp,
where a draft for France was drawn up. An escort was in readiness,
and I was marched away, handcuffed, to the train, which conveyed
us to Folkestone. From there we crossed to Boulogne, and proceeded
by motor lorry to the New Zealand Base at Etaples.
On the morning after my arrival there I was interviewed by
Colonel Mitchell, the Camp Commandant. He used all manner of ar-
guments to try and persuade me to do work of some kind, telling me
that I should inevitably be shot if I persisted in my refusals when
I was sent on up the line. He even went so far as to read to me
lists out of General Routine Orders of men who had been shot, to
show me that shooting was not an uncommon thing in the Army. I
found out that two others, Little and Alec. Baxter, had preceded me
at Etaples, and on my inquiring as to their whereabouts Colonel Mit-
chell informed me that they had been sent up to the front line, and
that if they had not already been shot they were probably just wait-
ing for the sentence to be carried out. I replied that in that case
further argument was useless. If my friends were to be shot, then
my place was at their side, and I asked to be sent to join them.
I remained in Etaples about a week, during which time, although I
was kept in close confinement, I was not ill-treated in any way. At
the end of that time I was escorted away with a draft 'to the rein-
forcement camp, which was then situated at Hazebrouck. Here on
entering the guard tent, I was delighted to find Little and Alex. Baxter,
looking in pretty good health. We had much to talk over, and they
informed me that as yet nothing serious had happened to them except
that force had been used to make them go out for a walk every day,
with the equipment and rifle tied on to them, so that they could not
throw them off. I was not, however, to enjoy their society for long,
for early next morning I was shifted to another camp near by.
Here I got into trouble right away over my food. I had heard
instructions given that I was to be treated the same as the ordinary
prisoners, but when their food was brought the sergeant told me that
he was “not going to fetch and carry for the likes of me,” and that I
would have to go on parade with the other men to get mine. I re-
plied that I would parade for nothing, not even my food, so I went
without any that day. On the next day he came and told me that he
was going to take me to the cookhouse to get my dinner. According-
ly, he and another man grabbed hold of me and took me along, but I
refused to carry the food back, whereupon he tied my hands to-
gether, and tied the tea dixie to them. I allowed him to do this
quietly, but as soon as he let go I gave my hands a jerk and spilled
the lot. At this he became enraged, and struck me in the face with
his fist. I remained thus without food or even water for nearly
five days, steadily refusing to go on parade to obtain it.
GARTH 0. BALLANTYNE.


Each morning equipment was placed on my shoulders, and I was
walked along the road between two men for about an hour or so. On
the morning of the fifth day I had become so weak that I think I must
have fainted, for I could afterwards remember very little of how I
got home again. What would have been the end of this I don’t know,
but about this time the camp was broken up, and I again rejoined
Little and Baxter, ray food being brought to me along with theirs.
In the course of a conversation, the Adjutant of the camp told us
that he could get no satisfactory instructions from the authorities as
to how to deal with us, and that they were annoyed with the New
Zealand Government for ever having sent us to France at all. In
order, therefore, to force Headquarters to consider the matter he in-
tended giving us an order, and if we refused to obey it he would re-
mand us for a Courtmartial.
Accordingly a written order was given us, instructing us to parade
at a certain time, fully equipped, to proceed to join up our units.
Shortly before the time an n.c.o. warned us for the parade, and we
informed him that we did not intend going on it, and the time passed
without our making any attempt to do so. We were subsequently
brought before the Adjutant and remanded for a Field General Court-
martial on a charge of refusing to obey an order in a forward area.
We were tried about a week later. Two of the officers on the Court-
martial were of the Imperial Forces and not New Zealanders. I re-
fused to take any part in the trial beyond handing in a written state-
ment, detailing very briefly my previous experiences, a very short
explanation of my position as a C. 0., and also giving as my reason
for refusing to take part in the trial the fact that I did not recognise
the Court’s right to try me as a soldier, seeing that I had not up till
that time signed my name to a single document of any kind.
After the trial I was recalled twice by the President of the Court,
who told me each time that he wished to give me another opportunity
to reconsider my decision. He said that for the crime with which I
was charged the Court could probf.bly bring in one sentence only—
that of death. I replied that I was fully aware of the position, and
that the authorities had taken care that I had had plenty of solitary
confinement in which to fully consider the matter, and that I was
prepared to stand by my statement, whatever the penalty imposed by
the Court. On being taken back to camp after the trial we were,
strange to say, given complete liberty to wander about as we pleased,
the chaplain even offering us money, which, of course, we refused.
Whether the authorities wished to give us an opening to get right away
or to go to one of the neighbouring villages and get drunk, and thus
incrimihate ourselves more definitely, I don’t know, but none of us
ever had any intention of running away, and we were all teetotallers,
so that we were not likely to get into any difficulties in that way.
We had some time to wait for our sentences, and when the New
Zealand camp moved away to another area we were shifted to the
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


reinforcement camp of the 44th Division of the Imperial Forces. We
remained here some time, until one day our sentences were promul-
gated before a full battalion parade, and we found ourselves com-
mitted to five years’ penal servitude. We were then escorted to St.
Omer, to a receiving depot where prisoners were collected from the
surrounding areas, and from where they were dispatched in gangs,
handcuffed in pairs, and surrounded by armed guards, to the various
military prisons.
Here I intend going beyond just my own personal experiences and
giving a description of a British military hard labour prison in France,
because I do not think that there will be published in New Zealand
many other descriptions of these places written by men with such
first-hand information as I was able to gather during my seven months’
imprisonment in No. 10 Military Prison Camp, situated on the out-
skirts of Dunkirk.
This was a hard labour prison for men with sentences of over
three months, and quite different from the field punishment compounds.
Originally, most of the men in these prisons would be sentenced to
five, ten, fifteen and twenty years’ penal servitude, but these long
sentences were given merely to frighten the rest of the troops before
whom they would be promulgated.. According to the law, men could
not be kept abroad with sentences of more than two years’ duration,
so that as soon as the man arrived in prison his sentence was com-
muted to two years’ hard labour. I would like to point out that, as
will be seen from the number of this prison, there were nine other
such places in-France, No. 10 being the newest and also, I believe, the
smallest, although it held about 400 men. Numbers of New Zealanders
have served sentences in these prisons, although they are entirely
under the control of the Imperial authorities, but there would probably
be very few who would care to publish their names in connection
with descriptions of them.
I would like to make it quite clear, however, that the majority of
these prisoners were not criminals, but had merely been guilty of
breaches of discipline or had been absent without leave 'for a short
time. It must be remembered that offences which would hardly be
considered crimes in civilian life, or which might be punished by a
small fine, mean years of penal servitude in the Army. The Governor,
whenever he was speaking to prisoners, was always careful to im-
press on them this fact —that they were not criminals and must not
lose their self-respect, that they had merely been sent there to be
taught discipline: but I do not think that there are any criminal
prisons in which the men are more harshly treated, and it seems to
me that to learn discipline means to lose all self-respect.
Many of the warders in these prisons had served in the pre-war
military prisons of England and Scotland, and most of the rest were
old soldiers, and were therefore not likely to have very sympathetic
natures or troublesome consciences.
GARTH C. BALLANTYNE.


As I have stated, after the promulgation of our sentences we were
taken to a depot for prisoners at St. Omer. We were kept there seve-
ral days, until about 30 men had arrived, and then very early in the
morning we were paraded, handcuffed in pairs, and marched away,
soldiers with fixed bayonets forming a guard right around us. We
travelled by train to Dunkirk, and then formed up again, still hand-
cuffed, and marched to the prison. As we drew near, what struck
me first about the place was the unhealthiness of its situation. The-
ground was very low-lying and swampy, and there was absolutely no
protection from the cold bleak winds and fogs of the Channel. The
prison consisted of a few corrugated-iron huts and sheds and a num-
ber of bell-tents, the whole being surrounded by two high barbed-wire
fences about six feet apart, with sentries at intervals walking between
them. When we got inside the prison I noticed that the iron huts
were the warders’ quarters, the offices, cookhouse, stores, etc. All the
prisoners were quartered in the tents, about sixteen or eighteen men
in each. I also noticed two long low iron sheds, with small windows
high up the walls, which I was very soon to find out contained the
punishment cells.
The idea of the warders seemed to be to "cow down” every new
prisoner from the start, and so, for the first hour or so, we were
rushed about, yelled at, bullied, and had all manner of threats and
warnings hurled at us if we did not jump about and look alive. We
were searched and then taken to have a bath. The prison was at this
time not properly completed, and so the thirty of us were given two
small tubfuls of lukewarm water to wash in. As this was in the be-
ginning of December, the weather was pretty cold, and we had all
been wearing heavy woollen underclothing; but we were told that as
there was no more underclothing in the prison to replace our own
when dirty the sooner we got used to being without underclothing
the better, and so our underpants and undershirts were taken away
from us.
We three C.O.’s were in trouble as soon as we got into the office,
for we refused to sign the books. A warder then took us on one side
and asked us whether we were going to work. We replied that we
did not intend to, and we were taken away and locked up in the cells.
Next morning we were brought out and definitely ordered to work, but
we refused, and were returned to the cells. The Governor sentenced
us to what was known in the prison as “three threes,” which meant
three days’ solitary confinement, three days’ bread and water, and
three days’ No. 1 Field Punishment, the sentences running concur-
rently. We were placed in separate cells.
At 7 o’clock in the morning we were given Boz. of dry bread and a
drink of water. At 8 o’clock our hands were handcuffed behind our
backs with figure-eight handcuffs. Now, ordinary handcuffs have two
links and a swivel between them, thus allowing a fair amount of
freedom of movement. In figure-eight handcuffs, however, the two
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


loops are solid in one piece, so that with these on behind our backs
our whole wrists, arms and shoulders were rendered almost immov-
able. Field Punishment No. 1 means having these on for 12 hours in
the day. We were given nothing further to eat until 5 o’clock in the
evening—ten hours since our last meal —when another Boz. of dry
bread and some water were brought us, and in order that we might
eat it our hands were moved from behind to in front of us, to be re-
turned, however, behind us as soon as we had finished eating and left
there until 8 o’clock in the evening.
The cells in which we were confined were very small,'barely seven
feet square by eight feet high; the walls and roof were corrugated iron
and the floor concrete. Outside the ground was covered with snow,
and inside the iron walls and ceiling were dripping with frost. During
the first morning I sat down on the floor to rest my legs, but I rapidly
became so cold and stiff that without the help of my hands I had tKe
greatest difficulty in getting on my feet again. This was a lesson to
me, and during the remainder of my punishment I walked from cor-
ner to corner of my cell, three short strides each way, for the full 12
hours each day. My arms and shoulders ached almost intolerably,
and .became so numbed with cold that when the handcuffs were re-
moved they hung powerless at my Sides. For weeks and weeks after-
wards I felt the effects of this punishment in my arms.
This much was the authorised punishment, but during the time
that a prisoner was in the cells he was in the hands of the warder
in charge, who administered by kicks and blows such punishments
as he deemed necessary for the “maintenance of good order and dis-
cipline in the cells.” Generally, when a prisoner was sent to the cells
for punishment he was first taken into a cell, stripped naked, and
sometimes handcuffed; then the warder would proceed to administer
a sound thrashing, using both his hands and feet, one warder during
his turn in charge of the cells going so far as to use a heavy leather
belt. Then, when the prisoner was beginning to get groggy, buckets
of freezing cold water would be thrown over him to revive him, and
finally he would be given a bucket and cloth and be told to dry up
his cell before he would be given back his clothes. Often the bumps
and thuds of the poor prisoner against the iron walls and his yells
and cries for mercy could he heard all over the compound.
The next form of punishment we experienced was shot drill. This
is an old form of punishment, abolished years ago in the navy as being
inhuman. It is still good enough, however, for our up-to-date mili-
tary prisons. The shot in this case consisted of a round bag of about
9 inches in diameter, filled with sand, and supposed to weigh 281 b.,
although when the sand became wet it was usually heavier. To do
the drill the prisoner stands with the shot between his feet. The
warder stands with a whistle, and in time to his blasts the prisoner
first bends down, picks up the shot, and balances it on the palms jf
his hands in front of himself; then, on the next whistle he takes three
GARTH C. BALLANTYNE.


quick steps forward, on the following whistle placing it down between
his feet again and standing up straight; then down, up, three paces
forward, down; and so on for perhaps an hour, with only one or two
short rests of a few minutes. Each movement has to be made dis-
tinctly and sharply, and the warder’s whistle is generally just a bit
ahead each time, so that the prisoner has to go his hardest in order to
keep up. It is, in fact, just an ingenious device to tax absolutely the
man’s strength to the utmost. The effect I found was to make me
horribly giddy and to produce terrible pains in my back and forearms.
This punishment was often given in conjunction with No. 1 Field Pun-
ishment.
The prisoner sentenced to No. 1 Field Punishment was stood with
his back to a post, and his hands handcuffed behind the post, and he
was held practically immovable by three straps, one around his chest,
another around his knees, and the other around his ankles. I have
seen men kept thus in driving snow and sleet for two hours, and
when released they could scarcely stand. They would then almost
immediately be put on to shot drill “to loosen their joints.”
About this time Little, Baxter and myself managed to have a bit
of a consultation, and as a result we decided that we would work, see-
ing that the majority of the work done by the prisoners consisted in
the construction of protections against air raids. On our making our
decision known, we were sent out to live in the tents, the authorities,
however, taking the precaution to put us each into separate section
of the prison, so that from this onwards we saw very little of each
other.
I had now a better opportunity of observing the general conditions
of the prison. Rather naturally I suppose, one of the first things that
claimed my attention was the food supply. The rations I found were
as follows: —Breakfast: 1 pint of pretty thin gruel without milk or
sugar and very often without even salt, Boz. bread, 2oz. dripping, and
2oz. cheese. Lunch: Boz. bread and 4oz. bully-beef. Tea: Boz. bread
and 1 pint of soup, in which (if one was lucky) there might be a
piece of fat meat or a potato. This, I found to be very poor fare for
men working long hours at hard manual labour in a bitterly cold
climate. In fact, the men became so ravenously hungry that it was
no uncommon thing, when they happened to be working at the
R.N.A.E. aerodrome or any of the other camps around the prison, and
could get near the cookhouse, to see them sneaking over to the swill
tub and diving into it for pieces of stale bread or a bone with meat on
it, and then literally pushing it down their throats so as to get it
eaten before the warder might catch sight of them. What troubled me
most was the lack of a hot drink of any sort. All we were given to
drink was cold water, and as this was contained in a bucket placed
out in the open it often became frozen, and it was necessary to break
the ice on top to get a drink.
The daily routine of the prison was as follows: —Reveille at 5.30
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


a.m. At a quarter to 6 the gates of the various sections of the prisons
were opened and the men marched out with their towels to wash. Now,
the wash-house would accommodate only about 40 or 50 men at a time,
so that it was necessary to go through in sections, and it would take
about half an hour for the 400 odd men to go through. On this
parade we were not allowed to wear coats, and, as I mentioned before,
vve had no underclothing, so that we had to go out in just a shirt
and trousers, very often with the snow lying thick on the ground
and a cold bleak wind blowing in from the Channel, and at that time
of the year it would be still quite dark. The time during which we
were waiting to go in to wash would be occupied with perhaps a little
physical training or we would be made to double round and round the
square. The first ones to wash would not be allowed to return to
their tents until all had finished. In the wash-house the water in
the taps was very often frozen, so that the basins were filled the day
before. In the morning, to use the water, the ice on the top would
have to be broken, and as the water could not be renewed five or six
men would have to wash in each basin of water. When all had finished
the men would return to their tents, being handed breakfast as they
went in. After breakfast every man had to shave every day. As it
was against the rules for any man to have any edged tools in his pos-
session, we could not each keep our own razors. About six razors
and brushes were placed in each tent every morning" and collected
up again after they were finished with. The razors were supposed to
be kept in order by the barber, as we had no strops on which to
sharpen them ourselves, but as the razors were only very poor issue
ones to start with, and as there were about 300 to do, the state they
were in can well be imagined. Shaving with such razors, water that
was near freezing, ordinary common yellow soap and no glass ;was
indeed a ticklish operation. Just before I came out an attempt was
being made to give each man his own razor, but it was not succeeding
too well. After breakfast, we were paraded on the square and in-
spected by the Governor. (I have seen men sent off this parade be-
cause they were not looking too clean —and it is hardly surprising
under the circumstances that such cases were sometimes found—and
afterwards stripped and scrubbed with an ordinary floor scrubbing-
brush in cold water until the blood was running from them.) After
that we were told off into working parties and marched away to our
work, which, as I have explained, consisted for the greater part in
the building of dug-outs and protections against air raids. In the
winter we stopped work in time to be back in the prison just before
dark, and as the days grew longer we worked later, until we could
work until 6.30, which was the usual knock-off time during the sum-
mer.
It was not customary to stop work for bad weather. All through
the winter we worked, hail, rain or snow; and often when we got
back to prison our boots, socks and clothing would be wet through. We
GARTH C. BALLANTYNE.


had no chance of drying them or of obtaining fresh ones, so it was
just a case of turn into bed to keep warm. I found that I had to place
my socks between the blankets under me to keep them from freezing
stiff during the night.
We worked seven days a week, no distinction being made for Sun-
day; in fact, no distinction was made for Christmas or New Year. We
worked all Christmas Day in a blinding snowstorm, and had, if any-
thing, rather worse food than usual. I do not think that many of
the prisoners will ever forget Christmas, 1917-18.
If you had gone to the majority of these prisoners and asked whai
they most desired, in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred you would
have got the answer: “A good feed and then some cigarettes.” Nearly
every soldier is an inveterate smoker, and short of actual physical
torture the greatest hardship that can be put on him, especially under
trying circumstances, is to cut off his supply of smokes. So great did
the craving for tobacco become with some of the prisoners that I
have seen them picking up dirty cigarette butts off the road and chew-
ing them, and it was a very common practice to gather up the butts,
unravel them, and remake them in pieces of newspaper or anything
else that was handy. A certain amount of tobacco was smuggled into
the prison, in spite of the fact that every man was searched every
night and that the discovery of even a trace would mean days of
solitary confinement, etc.
The general health of the men in the prison was certainly bad.
Practically all looked emaciated and were suffering from chronic
diarrhoea as a result, I think, of drinking too much ice water. It
was no use parading sick for this complaint, as the general cure was
to put the patient into solitary confinement and starve him until he
was better. Boils were also common. Soon after I went into the
prison my hands became badly chapped, my left hand swelled up and
then cracked, forming running sores which I did not get healed for
over two months. Every night I had to go on sick parade to get it
dressed, and this meant, perhaps, standing for anything up to an hour
in the snow outside the medical hut waiting my turn to go in. How
this treatment did not kill some of the men who were there through
illness used to be a constant source of wonder to me. Although both
my hands were wrapped up in bandages, I was not during a single
hour excused duty, but had to carry on my work just the same. I was
not even allowed warm water to wash in, although the placing of my
hands whilst in this condition in very cold water caused me extreme
pain. Later on, one of my heels got frostbitten also, and I was un-
able to put on a boot for over a fortnight. During this time I was
put to work in the tailors’ shop darning socks. Probably neither my
hands nor my heel would have got better until the weather had got
warmer had not my health completely broken down about the end
of March, and I was sent away to hospital for two weeks.
Skin diseases of various sorts were also very common, especially
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


what is known as impetigo. Twice during my imprisonment my face
was covered with the mattery sores of this complaint, which was
doubtless spread about by the razors and shaving brushes.
It was seldom that a man could get any satisfaction by going on
sick parade if he was not feeling well, for to be marked light duty
meant to be worked harder than usual. The commonest occupation
for sick men marked “light duty” was wheeling barrows full of sand
into the prison to make paths and form the parade ground.
The bathing accommodation would have been fairly satisfactory
had sufficient time been allowed to use it properly, but usually the
warder in charge would be in a hurry to get finished with his job,
and he would rush the men through without giving time to have a
decent wash. The supposedly clean clothing issued to us was gen-
erally in a shocking state. There was no reason why in a place like
that proper fumigation should not be carried out and lice practically
eliminated, but the clothes were in such a bad state that almost every
man was crawling alive.
Of recreation for the prisoners there was absolutely none. No
books or papers of any sort were allowed. Sundays were passed the
same as every other day in work; there was no chance of a rest.
A chaplain used to come every second Thursday, and in order that
his coming should not interrupt work the service was held at 7
o’clock in the morning. I think most of the prisoners looked forward
to the service, as it was a change from the deadly monotony of the
prison routine, and a good many enjoyed “having a sing” in the hymns.
It was a very noticeable fact, however, that although a fair volume of
sound was produced in the hymns, “God save the King” was usuallv
a duet for the chaplain and the regimental sergeant-major.
The prisoners were allowed to receive all letters that came for
them, but were only allowed to write once a month, and then under
such heavy censorship that beyond a remark or two on the state of
the writer’s health nothing further could be said, and even that was
liable to censorship if the report was not good. It is a remarkable
fact, however, that although my mother wrote every mail to me, I
did not receive any word from New Zealand at all for nearly twelve
months —until after I had consented to come out of prison and do
medical work, and then the whole lot (over twenty in number) were
given me at once. There were also some letters of mine to my mother
which never arrived.
It was hardly to be wondered at that, under the circumstances,
the men in the prisons became very irritable and bad-tempered. In
fact, every bad trait in their character was here given an opportunity
to develop, for the whole conditions encouraged meanness and de-
ceitfulness, encouraged the men to shirk on their mates, and so to
distrust and become suspicious of each other. Many were the quarrels
I saw over the cutting up of rations, for each man suspected that
his mates would do him out of his fair share if they got half the
GARTH C. BALL ANT YNE.


chance; and so woe betide anyone who cut up the bread before every-
one was there to see it done, and then each man took his turn to put
it up, and, by mutual consent, he always took the last, and, conse-
quently, the smallest piece left, so that he would be sure to divide it
evenly. It was quite an exception to And a man who had sufficient
will power and control of himself to maintain his equanimity, and I
frankly admit that towards the end, in spite of the fact that I was
fully aware of the danger, I was always losing my self-control.
It is inevitable that wherever large bodies of men are gathered to-
gether there will always be found a certain number who are below
the average in intelligence—just a bit “dopey,” a,s they are usually
called in the Army, and I think it is an extremely regrettable thing
that many such men were placed in the Army, where individuality is
not taken into account, and so they get into trouble often through no
other reason than their lack of intelligence to understand their posi-
tion. Many of these men found their way into such places as Dun-
kirk Prison, and then it was a case of “God have mercy on them,”
for the warders and other prisoners would not. Weaklings, who with
careful and proper tuition, become fairly useful citizens in some
cases, became battered derelicts verging on lunacy.
I shall never forget the case of one young chap, scarcely more
than a boy he looked. His life had been made so hard for him in
the Army, that, thinking to escape, he had one day placed his hand
on the rail in front of the wheel of a slowly-moving truck, and had
allowed it to remain there until the wheel passed over it, badly
crushing the wrist. Unluckily for him, the doctors had fixed it up
fairly well, although it still was very mis-shapen, and then he had
been sent to prison as punishment for a self-inflicted wound. There
he was the butt of every warder and the joke of almost every
prisoner. What little intelligence he had was slowly but surely
driven out of him. I had befriended him a little, and he used to
come to me with such questions as to what would happen to him if
he were to eat sand, would it kill him or only make him ill? and
really I sometimes had hardly the heart to dissuade him from such
a means of ending his misery. His was by no means an isolated case.
In spite of the severity of the punishment for the offence, attemp+s
to escape were fairly common. During the time I was there some
fifty odd prisoners made bids for their freedom. Nearly all got clear
away from the prison, but I can only remember three cases in which
they were not caught after a short time. Escapees, on being returned
to the prison, were immediately leg-ironed. The irons were rivetted
on each leg, and the connecting chain, which was about three feet
lohg, was looped up to the belt, so that the man could walk, but with
a slightly-restricted stride. The usual punishment consisted of four-
teen days’ solitary confinement, during which the prisoner would be
handcuffed with figure-eight handcuffs, and would be on bread and
water diet three days out of five. Then there would be twenty-eight
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


days of No. 1 Field Punishment and shot drill on what was called
No. 2 diet, which consisted of porridge and dry bread for breakfast,
dry bread for lunch, and porridge and potatoes for tea. Then would
follow a further twenty-eight days still on No. 2 diet, during which
the prisoner would still wear the leg irons, and would be put to work
around the prison. As the irons were rivetted on they could not be
removed at nights, and specially-made clothes with buttons the full
length of the outside of the legs had to be worn to enable the man to
undress.
It must not be thought either that by going to prison soldiers would
escape entirely the dangers of war, for Dunkirk was the most air-
raided town of either France or Britain. Just before I went there
the Germans had dropped leaflets warning all the inhabitants to
evacuate it, as they intended levelling it to the ground, and for
several months afterwards every fine night there would he aeroplanes
overhead bombing, and although they did not succeed in fully carry-
ing out their intentions, there was scarcely a street in the town
which did not show the effects of the bombs, and an aerodrome not
half a mile from the prison was twice destroyed.
Over a fairly lengthy period also the town was continually shelled
by long-range guns from the land, and was twice bombarded from the
sea. Although the prisoners constructed huge and practically bomb-
proof dug-outs at various camps round about, those for their own use
were of the most meagre description and would scarcely have stopped
an anti-aircraft “dudd,” let alone a bomb.
To return to myself and my two companions. In one or two talks
which we had managed to get together, we had summed up the posi-
tion as follows:We had successfully defied the military authorities.
They had threatened to shoot us if they could not make soldiers of
us. We had deliberately placed ourselves in such a position by the
disobedience of orders that had we been ordinary soldiers we would
certainly have been shot, and the authorities had merely sent us to
prison, thus proving that their threats had been bluff and that they
dared not shoot us. We had also heard through different New Zea-
land soldiers that owing to the stand made by the fourteen deported
men and the outcry which their deportation had caused, the Govern-
ment had decided not to send any more men out of the country against
their will, so that we now came to the conclusion the matter was
purely a personal one as to what our future movements should be.
I gave the matter very long and careful consideration. On the
one hand, we had become fairly accustomed to the prison, and with
the approaching summer weather a great deal of the hardship would
disappear, so that provided my health had stood the strain, and that
was doubtful seeing that although I am just on six foot tall, when I
weighed myself shortly after my release I was only 9st. 121 b. fully
clothed, I could have stayed on there until the end of the war. On
the other hand, I had heard a great deal about the war from the
GARTH C. BALLANTYNE.


soldiers, but I felt that, in my anti-militarist work in the future, if
I was able to gain the knowledge first hand, how much stronger I
would be able to make my testimony. I also felt that by going into
the front line and by there carrying out my work at least as well as
the average soldier, I would silence that taunt which was so often
being thrown at me, that I had refused military service because I was
afraid. So that, much as I disliked placing myself under the control
of the military authorities, when a letter came to me from Colonel
Mitchell offering to obtain my release on condition that I undertook
medical work, I replied that I was ready to do so, provided that I was
not asked to take the oath. My companions had also decided on a
similar course, and, following on a visit to the prison by Colonel
Mitchell, we were released on June 18* 1918. Two days after release
Baxter reported sick, and was sent to England with rheumatic fever,
contracted by exposure and hardship in the prison. After a short course
of instruction in medical work at the base camp, Little and I were sent
up the line as regimental stretcher-bearers. Unfortunately, Little
was wounded on our second day in the line, and died at the casualty
clearing station. I remained at this work until the Armistice was
signed, and then went to Germany with the army of occupation doing
medical work in the regimental aid post.
(Signed) GARTH C. BALLANTYNE.
XVIII.—PRISONERS OF CONSCIENCE.
The wholesale jailing of Conscientious Objectors proceeded apace,
botl* before and after the deportations, until at last between 300 and
400 New Zealand men —many of them with wives and very young
children depending upon them —were held under lock and key. It is
safe to say that far more men were required to look after the C.O.’s
than the imprisoned men numbered. So that the prisoning of the
C.O.’s was not only wrong from a moral viewpoint, but essentially
stupid from a military viewpoint.
To the following sentences must be added, in a great many cases,
additional sentences of 28 days in the detention barracks. Some
of the men served two such sentences before reaching the civil
prison; and the list herewith is only of sentences served in civil
prisons. Thus the sentences inflicted on the New Zealand C.O.’s for
refusing military service ranged from one to four, a large number
of the victims serving three sentences. This list is by no means
a complete record of the men whose possession of a conscience won
for them a prison experience. It does not include the Maori Objec-
tors, whose names I have not been able to obtain; nor yet does it
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


Include all the Europeans. Still, it is formidable enough to furnish
a warning for all New Zealanders as to the menace of an intensified
and intolerant militarism: —
EIGHTY-FOUR DAYS AND DEPORTED.—Socialist, Objectors: P.
Adin, W. Little, Mark Briggs, H. Patton. Religious Objectors; Garth
C. Ballantyne (also Socialist), A. E. Sanderson, L, Penwright, T. P.
Harland, D. R, Gray. Pacifist Objectors: A. McC. L, Baxter, Alex.
Baxter, J. Baxter. Irish Objectors: D. Maguire, L. J. Kirwan.
EIGHTY-FOUR DAYS.—W. Staff.
SIX MONTHS.—Egerton Gill (Religious).
NINE MONTHS.—G. A. Jennings, J. Gribble.
TEN MONTHS.—J. M. Hankers, W. J. Wild.
ELEVEN MONTHS. —Hugh Baxter (Pacifist), H. Bland (Religious),
P.„ Cody (Irish), P. Dixon (Religious), J. T. Hogan (Religious), R.
Hopkins, C. Goodson (Socialist), H. R. Urquhart (Religious), F. Gunh
(Socialist), F. Lamb (Religious and Socialist), R. P. Knape (Socialist),
T. Kells (Religious), H. Smith (Religious), Wall, Walsh, F. Rogersou
(Socialist). Mr. Urquhart also served a sentence of one year under the
War Regulations (Sedition) Act.
ONE YEAR. —C. E. Warden (Religious and Socialist), Arthur Bor-
rows (Socialist), W. Hall, W. H. Jones (Socialist), A. Gunn (Socialist),
P. Gunn (Socialist), Noel Goldsbury (Religious), Roy Brady (Social-
ist), G. Wears Samms (Socialist), James H. Roberts (Socialist), Pren-
dergast, Richard Goode.
ONE YEAR AND ELEVEN MONTHS.—P. R. Clayton (Religious),
F. G. Herbert, A. Parsons, W. Maddern, D. H. Day, J. Stubberfields,
James Walker (Religious), S. E. Salter (Religious), A. J. Oston
(Socialist), S. R. Doming, F. Sumner.
TWO YEARS. —Socialist Objectors; H. Bryant, Norman Bell
(Christian), Frank Robinson, D, T. Sullivan, G. E. Quartermain,
Prank Carroll, Charles Pox, W. E. Robinson, F. J. Gavin, J. S. Mc-
Donald, D. Gunn, Robt. J. Gould, G. Carian, A. Bradley, W. G. Gray, E.
R. Williams, W. Yeomans, Henry Moffatt, H. Wilson, J. Saunders, R.
Tarbutt, J. P. Patterson, A. Sherrock, H. Campbell, Wm. Worrall,
P. C. Webb, M.P., T. Logan, Alex. May, J, K. Worrall, L. J, Woods,
C. Robertson, Howard Hopkins, Barroclough, A. Fraser, A. Harding,
W. White, J. Calpin, A. Fraser, H. R. Gray, W. H. Haydon, M. Kelson!
F. A. Macrae, Jeffreys. Religious Objectors: R. Arthur, I. S. Aichen,
B. A. Allerly (also Socialist), A. J. Aitken, J. A. Brailsford, T. A.
Bentley, H. Blundell (also Socialist), F. Pallesen, L. Robinson, A.
Blanchard, J. B. Goulding, A. Beaton, W. B. Donovan, W. S. Badger,
S. Woods, J. W. Duke, Robin Page, R. J. Halkett, R. A. Stone, J. R.
Olley, Jasper O’Brien, P. C. Patton, A. Page, Pettybridge, S. A. Palmer,
H. Rankin, S. Strong, R. A. J. Palmer, R. J. Irvine, W. J. Young,
J. McCormack, C. H. McCormack, J. Rogers, T. B. Struthers, H. J.
Levett, A. C. Mclntyre, H. Wright, A. H. Varnham, George E. Billings,
J. S. Billings, J. W. Clapham, Ed. H. Dowsett, D, M. Banks (also
PRISONERS OF CONSCIENCE.


Socialist), L. Batten, H. G. Blanchard, Doherty, Ferguson, D. G. Fur-
long, W. R. C. Greenhill, J. Gray, R. Gray, T. H. Ireton, J. G. Holtham,
A. E. Johns, McFarlane, A. 0. Isaacson, Percy Gill. Irish Objectors:
T. Brosnan, M. O’Connor, J. O’Brien (also Socialist), D. Mangan, W.
Malley, G. H. Lloyd, Metcalfe, G. T. Drum, Daniel Brosnan, J. J. Lloyd,
Jordan, D. F. Murphy, T. M. Driscoll (also Socialist). Pacifist Ob-
jectors: S. Fountain, F. F. Fowler, L. Foley. Other Objectors: J. S.
Morris, Daglish, Reed, Doody, Hodgkins, Ash, Pottinger, Gunter,
Murraine, Hannan, Christian, Sheehan, Schultz, Appleby, Cole, A. J.
Morris, Collins, Ryan, Shirer, Dickson, Anderson, Ross, Conway,
Higgins, Hill, Lynch, McLean, Wickes, Stapleton, Skinner, Clark, Hol-
royd, Cunningham, Cook.
TWO SENTENCES (in civil prison).—Donald Baxter (Pacifist), 11
months, 2 years; K. H. Broughton (Religious), 11 months, 2 years;
H. R. Blade (Religious), 11 months, 6 months; J. H. Bennett
(Religious), 11 months, 2 years; A. R. Patten (Religious),
11 months, 2 years; P. Dodge (Religious), 11 months, 2 years; J. J.
Hussey (Socialist), 84 days, 2 years; Davidson (Socialist), 11 months,
2 years; H. Adin (Socialist), 11 months, 2 years; D. A. Jones (Relig-
ious), 11 months, 2 years; H. King (Religious), 11 months, 2 years;
H. C. Kelbey (Religious), 11 months, 2 years; F. Money (Religious)j
11 months, 2 years; J. McKenzie (Socialist), 11 months, 2 years; R. A.
Macrae (Socialist), 11 months, 2 years; D. M. N. McCormick (Relig-
ious), 11 months, 2 years; W. T. Virtue (Socialist), 11 months, 2 years;
S. C. Watchorn (Religious), 11 months, 2 years; C. A. Watson (Re-
ligious), 11 months, 2 years; P. G. Wright (Religious), 11 months,
2 years; W. R. Robertson (Socialist), 11 months, 2 years; C. W. Read
(Religious), 11 months, 2 years; S. B. Read (Religious), 11 months,
2 years; R. Slockdill (Religious), 11 months, 2 years; C. C. Steele
(Religious), 11 months, 2 years; J. Pickering (Religious), 11 months,
2 years; Jones (Socialist), 11 months, 2 years; R. H. Phillips
(Religious), 11 months, 2 years; J. Moye (Socialist), 11
months, 2 years; John Roberts (Socialist), 1 year, 6 months;
A. K. Henderson (Pacifist), 9 months, 2 years; Tom Kelly
(Irish and Socialist), 4 months, 2 years; L. Cody (Irish), 11 months,
2 years.
THREE SENTENCES (in civil prison).—D. Williams (Irish and
Socialist), 84 days, 11 months, 2 years; J. Cody (Irish), 84 days* 11
months, 2 years; Rhys Morrish (Religious Objector), 84 days, 11
months, 2 years.
OTHERS (sentences not ascertained). —Armstrong, J. Brindle.
Church, Craig, Gear, F. T. Johnstone, Scott, Morris, Selby, Newman,
Mills, Spaulding, Bowline, Blackburn, H. Goldsbury, Holtham, Hasse,
Hawker, McManus, McKee, Hedley, H. Ellman, Drummond, Deane,
Granger, Brady, Bolton, Joyce, Jessop, Kells, Kelly, Marshall, Pearson,
Plewes, Gankhurst, Thackeray, Vallance.
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


XIX. —DIFFERENTIATED SENTENCES.
The contrast in the sentences awarded the Conscientious Objec-
tors is most marked. For practically the same “offence” men received
sentences which ranged from seven days’ detention in the barracks
to two years’ hard labour in the common jail.
This differentiation is conspicuous even in the cases of members
of the same family. The sentences inflicted on the Baxter brothers
furnish an illustration. The weight of the military law fell on this
family with unabated relentlessness. There were seven sons in the
family, one of whom is married and has four children, and, therefore,
did not come within the scope of the Military Service Act during the
war period. The six other sons, who are Passive Objectors, were all
seized by the military authorities. Three of them were three times
sentenced in New Zealand (28 days’ detention, 84 days’ civil
prison, 28 days’ detention) and then deported; the other
three were jailed. The brothers were practical farmers, but
the military left the aged parents without a son to work the little
farm. The father is an old man, crippled with rheumatism; the
mother is nearly seventy years of age. After the first three had been
forcibly transported, two of the remaining three (Donald and Hugh)
were called in the same ballot, arrested on the same day, tried by
courtmartial on the same charge, and sentenced on the same day
each to 11 months’ hard labour. Hugh was sent to Waimarino, Donald
to Templeton Prison. When Hugh had served his 11 months he was
released and returned to his home, but Donald was ordered into camp,
and, on again refusing, was sentenced to two years’ hard labour.
Another brother, William, was arrested a few months later, was sen-
tenced to 11 months’ hard labour, which sentence he served, and was
then released. So that Donald was penalised to the extent of nearly
three years’ imprisonment with hard labour, whilst his two brothers,
for the same offence, were only required to serve 11 months. Hugh,
after his release, died of influenza. Through someone’s carelessness,
the military law pursued him past the grave; and in due time his
name appeared in the “Gazette” as a defaulter who was to be de-
prived of all civil rights for ten years. Donald is still in prison, but
William is free.
The Codys are another family doomed to be broken up and threat-
ened with ruin by the Military Service Act. They are also a family
of farmers, and are Irish Objectors. There are five sons, all of
whom were called up under Section 35 of the Act, with the result
that three were ordered into camp. They refused to obey the order,
and the two other brothers were thereupon seized by the military and
sent to prison upon refusing to undertake military service. The
aged father was left to work a large and heavily-mortgaged holding
without the assistance of any of his sons. P. Cody served a sentence


of 11 months, and has not since been re-sentenced. Jack Cody, who
was first arrested in July of 1917, is at present serving his fourth
sentence (including that in the detention barracks). Lawrence Cody
served a sentence of 11 months, and was then given an additional two
years’ hard labour, which he is now serving. Michael Cody was
arrested on August 3, 1918; served a sentence of three months at
Mount Cook; was held 56 days awaiting courtmartial; and is now
serving two years’ hard labour, which sentence will not be completed
until the end of July, 1920.
Another case in point is that of the three Wright brothers (Relig-
ious Objectors), of Auckland. One served 11 months, and was re-
leased; another served 11 months, and was then sentenced to two
years’ hard labour. The third, a Second Division man, was ordered
into camp, but peace being proclaimed, he was not required, and so
escaped either military service or prison.
David Williams (Irish Objector) served 84 days in the civil prison,
wag then ordered into camp, and on again refusing service, was sen-
tenced to 11 months. On the completion of this sentence he was
again ordered to take the uniform, and on refusing the third time was
sentenced to two years. He is still in prison.
Rhys Morrish (Unitarian) served 84 days, after which he was sen-
tenced to 11 months, and was then given a third sentence of two
years’ hard labour, which he is still serving.
C. A. Watson, teacher, was sentenced to 11 months’ imprisonment
without hard labour, on actount of being classed Cl and considered
unfit; and, after serving this sentence, was re-sentenced to two years
—with bard labour.
Kenneway Henderson, artist, Tolstoyan, and anti-militarist for
more than 14 years, was “reluctantly” sentenced by courtmartial to
nine months’ hard labour. When this sentence was completed, he was
allowed to go free for six weeks while peace negotiations were pro-
ceeding; and was then re-arrested and sentenced to two years’ hard
labour.
A letter from a C.O. in Waikeria (1/12/18) says: “Our sentences
have been varied. There are some C.O.’s doing their third term, and
some their first. Some are doing two years, others 11 months. Two
of the 11 months’ men go out the second week in January next, and
others who came here about the same time don’t go out until January,
1920 —and all are in for the same offence.”
Yet another anomaly arises out of the ending of the war. Those
Conscientious Objectors whose sentences expired after the Armistice
was signed were not re-arrested, while others wkose sentences ex-
pired just a short time before that date were re-sentenced—generally
to two years’ hard labour. In this connection, it has previously been
pointed out that “the matter of time (which is out of every man’s con-
trol) and not the nature of the offence became the deciding factor as
to whether a man was to enjoy freedom or be locked in prison walls.”
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


XX.—P. C. WEBB. MR.
Mr. P. C. Webb, M.P. for Grey, took a most prominent part in fight-
ing Conscription both on the public platform and during the passage of
the Bill through Parliament. Along with other members of the Labour
Party and some non-Labour members, he was responsible for beat-
ing the proposal, backed strongly by Sir Joseph Ward, that the
soldiers’ pay should be restricted to 25/- a week, with sixpence per
day allowance for each child. The Labour members and those who
thought with them were able to add 10/- per week to the soldiers’
wage, and 1/- per day to the child’s allowance. When he was drawn
in the ballot, Mr. Webb made it clear that he would not go into camp
unless his constituents desired him to do so. His letter to Sir James
Allen, printed below, fully explains the position he took up. During
February of 1918, he was engaged in vigorously supporting my can-
didature for Wellington North, and took part in the great public
meeting held immediately after the contest. After being drawn in
the ballot he tendered his resignation as M.P. for Grey to give thc-
Government an opportunity to test the will of the electorate; but the
Government was so well satisfied that the constituency was against its
member being conscripted that it made discretion the better part of
valour and refused to accept the challenge. Mr. Webb was returned
unopposed. His appeal was duly dismissed by the Military Board,
and representations made to the Minister of Defence by Mr. P. J.
O’Regan, counsel for the Miners’ Federation and the Grey political
Labour bodies, produced negative results.
Under date March 7, 1918, the following letter was addressed to
Sir James Allen by Mr. Webb: —
Sir, —In view of the replies sent to Mr. O’Regan in answrer to that
gentleman’s representations in my behalf under instructions from the
New Zealand Coalminers’ Federation and the Grey District Labour
Council, I feel it incumbent upon me to address this letter to you.
First, I would remind you that a General Election took place in
1914, notwithstanding the fact that the war was then raging and that
the enemy was threatening Paris. On that occasion the Grey electors
returned me with an increased majority. From the soldiers entitled
to vote in the electorate, I received almost unanimous support, and
they in particular requested me to look after their interests and the
interests of their dependants, and solicited my assistance in protest-
ing against the shameful manner in which their dependants were
being exploited by means of unnecessarily excessive prices. I have
done my best to conform to their wishes, but being in a minority in
Parliament, have been powerless to do more than protest. Further,
my soldier-constituents expressed the wish that, in the event of their


returning to New Zealand incapacitated, suitable employment should
be found for them, together with reasonable recompense for their
injuries. Again, I have complied with their wishes in that connec-
tion, and have protested emphatically against the way in which many
disabled men are being turned adrift unable to follow their ordinary
occupations, and yet deprived of pensions. That the Government has
failed lamentably to cope with the problem of excessive prices, and
that men who have returned disabled are not being properly provided
for is due to no fault of mine, inasmuch as I have repeatedly drawn
attention to these grievances.
After my election in 1914, I stated publicly that if the Grey elec-
tors considered my services more essential at the front than in Par-
liament, on receipt of a requisition, signed by 1000 electors, I would
resign my seat and abide by the will of the majority of the consti-
tuency. No requisition was ever presented, and on my being balloted
for military service, numerously-signed petitions were presented
from my electorate and from the West Coast generally, asking for my
exemption, and I may say that the signatories to these petitions in-
cluded a large number of parents who had sons at the front as well
as a considerable number of returned soldiers and men in camp.
Moreover, these requisitions were supported by the whole of the
miners’ organisations of this country. The Military Service Board,
however, saw fit to ignore these representations, and dismissed the
appeal, although the said Board has repeatedly granted exemption
in other cases on much more slender grounds. I then resigned my
seat and placed myself unreservedly in the hands of my constituents,
who re-elected me without opposition. My constituents then asked
for a re-hearing of my appeal, but this was refused without anyone
being heard in support. Now that my constituents are to be denied
the right of representation, in that I am not to be allowed to prepare
for and attend regularly in my place in Parliament during the coming
session, I feel that but one honourable course is open to me. I have
either to remain true to my constituents or obey the command of a
Board which, they believe, has not treated my case judicially, and
which I believe to have been influenced by a strong spirit of political
prejudice against me. In other words, I have resolved to disobey the
Board and to take the consequences. Incidentally, I intend my action
as a protest against the utter failure of your Government to deal
fairly with the disabled soldiers and their dependants or indeed with
the masses of the people of this country. That your Government has
failed lamentably in its duty by the returned soldiers and their de-
pendants and by the masses of the people of this country is fully
evidenced by the fact that it has won the support of every person who
profits by the sufferings of the masses of his fellow-citizens. Perhaps
under the circumstances it is only common gratitude on the part of
such people that they should have sent their motor-cars to assist in
defeating the representative of Labour in the recent by-election. I
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


would add that it is not surprising that a Government with such a
record as yours should have postponed a General Election.
In conclusion, I may state that my address is Post Office Box 1500,
Wellington.
I have the honour to remain, Sir, yours truly.
P. C. WEBB.
On March 11, at Wellington, Mr. Webb was entertained at luncheon
by representatives of the industrial and political Labour movement;
and at 2.30 on the same day he was arrested and conveyed to Tren-
tham by the military. On March 22 he was courtmartialled at Tren-
tham, when he pleaded guilty to the charge of disobeying an order.
He, however, desired to state his position. During the course of his
address he was repeatedly interrupted by the Court. When he made
the charge that discrimination had been employed by the Boards, he
was ruled out. He was also prevented from referring to the Laidlaw
case to illustrate his argument. When he showed how the police had
been specially exempted, and contended that a member of Parliament
was just as essential as a policeman, he was told: “The Board does
not think that Parliament can be regarded as essential. It thinks
that the men at the head of affairs ate capable of governing the
country.” (To many in the Labour movement this remark read like
a clear indication of the extent to which the military mind is capable
of travelling in the direction of oligarchic rule.) Mr. Webb remarked
that this resembled the autocracy the war was ostensibly being fought
to crush, and the President ruled out all reference to autocracy.
Shortly after this the President informed Mr. Webb that the people
of New Zealand, through the Government, had told him to go to the
front. Mr. Webb retorted that he was elected to oppose the Govern-
ment, and that his constituents were entitled to consideration anyhow.
The President then lectured iMr. Webb on the text that the New
Zealand Government was much more clear-sighted than some other
governments. Mr. Webb thought this -was a matter the people
might be left to decide, and when the President remarked that the
people had elected the Government, Mr. Webb reminded him that the
issue then was not Conscription. Mr. Webb, continuing, pointed out
the implications of Conscription in that under the prevalent secret
diplomacy men could be compelled to fight for principles their own
governments had denounced. He said it was, therefore, autocracy and
despotism. The President said the Court was in possession of enough
information to judge the “accused’s” attitude, and thought he ought
to sit down. He also drew attention to the capacity of the Court to
understand the Labour problem. All its members had been two years
at the front, and knew the feelings of the soldiers. Later on he de-
livered a homily on the virtues of supporting the Government, else the
victory of Germany would destroy the freedom of Labour members of
Parliament and everybody else. He said that “if ‘Private’ Webb
P. C. WEBB, M.P.


believed that the Government he had been maligning did not contain
any man capable of looking after the interests of his constituents he
was justified in his attitude.” Mr. Webb was just about to interject
upon the President’s verbosity that he had “good justification in that
case because my constituents would certainly not allow themselves to
be represented by any member of the Government,” when Colonel Mac-
Donald saw fit to check the President by remarking “that the ‘accused’
should be allowed to make his statements and only interrupted when
he has to be stopped.” At this the President subsided into a silence
long enough for Mr. Webb to finish his speech without further inter-
ruption. Concluding, Mr. Webb said that it was evident that had he
the eloquence of a Gladstone or an O’Connell he would not be able to
secure a mitigation of his sentence. He had no regret for the stand
he was taking. He asked for no clemency. He was proud to be
able to carry his principles to the prison gates. If his principles
were not worth suffering for they were not worth having. He was
sure the day would come when the Government would pay the penalty
for its outrage against his constituency and for the policy of oppression
and exploitation it had pursued ever since the war began.
When the sentence of the Court was promulgated, it proved to be
the usual two years’ hard labour; and Mr. Webb was taken to the
prison camp on the Kaingaroa Plateau, near Rotorua, to serve his
term, which will have expired ere this book i s in the readers’ hands.
On April 6 a public demonstration of protest was held at Grey-
mouth, the citizens of the Grey Valley generally and the Labour or-
ganisations in particular, participating. The following resolution was
carried unanimously:
“That this large gathering of electors of Grey views with indigna-
tion the action of the military authorities in seizing and imprisoning
Mr. P. C. Webb, M.P., and calls upon the Government to secure and
preserve the rights of a member of Parliament to attend to his Par-
liamentary duties and to provide him with the means of attending to
the business of his constituency. We beg to remind the Government
that, according to the decision of the Crown Law Officers, Mr. Webb
has committed no crime within the meaning of the Legislature Act;
and we protest strongly against military authority denying political
expression to an electorate of 8000 electors, backed up by the deter-
mined effort of 20.000 industrialists, of whom Mr. Webb is the only
direct and practical representative and expression. We place before
the authorities the case of Mr. Laidlaw, of the firm of Laidlaw Leeds,
of Auckland, who was exempted by an Appeal Board to serve the
economic interests of his firm, and urge that Mr. Webb’s presence in
the House and attending to the business of his constituency is an
absolute and urgent necessity. We hold that it is an absolute and
inalienable right of an electorate to choose its own member of Par-
liament, and we trust for the sake of political liberty in New Zealand
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


that the Government will ponder long and carefully before it denies
this right to the electors of Grey and to the industrial unions of New
Zealand, of which Mr. Webb is the only practical exponent in the
House of Representatives.”
On April 12 a Labour deputation waited upon the Prime Minister,
Sir Joseph Ward, Sir James Allen, and Mr. Wilford to urge the un-
conditional release of Mr. Webb. This deputation included repre-
sentatives of the Grey Labour Representation Committee, Miners’
Federation, United Federation of Labour, New Zealand Labour Party,
Drivers’ Federation, Seamen’s Federation, Tramway Federation, Wel-
lington Trades and Labour Council, Auckland L.R.C., Wellington
S.D.P., A.P.U., Waterside Workers’ Federation, Enginedrivers’ Federa-
tion, Wellington L.R.C., Otago Trades and Labour Council, House-
wives’ Union, Women’s International League, and others. Mr. James
O’Brien, representing Mr. Webb’s constituents, presented the resolu-
tion already quoted, and a strong point made by the deputation was
that the Imperial Government had not forced any member of the House
of Commons from his constituency to the battlefield. The Government,
however, refused to accede to the deputation’s request, and maintained
its attitude notwithstanding that from every part of New Zealand pro-
tests came from the Labour movement against the conscription of the
Labour M.P.
In April a lightning session of Parliament was held; and, during
this session, a motion to grant the Member for Grey leave of absence
was defeated. This“meant that, although Mr. Webb was held not to bs
disqualified by the terms of his sentence from remaining a member
of the House, his seat became vacant by reason of his absence from the
House for one whole session without leave. A fresh election was
accordingly called. The industrial and political organisations of
Labour in the electorate honoured me with an unopposed selection, and
a main feature of the contest was made the Government’s Conscrip-
tion policy and its jailing of Mr. Webb. The Tory and Liberal sup-
porters of the Government consolidated their forces behind the most
popular local man who could be induced to stand. With a lively ap-
preciation of the Government’s unpopularity, they sought to camou-
flage their campaign with “Independent” colourings. The result of the
contest was a decisive defeat for the Government, and a triumphant
vindication of Mr. Webb’s attitude.
The imprisonment of Mr. Webb was deeply resented by the re-
turned soldiers in the constituency, as was evidenced by the large
deputation of returned men, which, introduced by myself, waited upon
the Hon. Mr. Wilford at Greymouth in the early part of this year to
demand the release of their late member. It is, perhaps, significant
that, with the exception of two local dailies, no newspaper in New
Zealand was prepared to print a comprehensive report of this re-
markable deputation.
P. C. WEBB, M.P.


XXI. —IN PRISON AND DETENTION.
Mr. P. C. Webb corresponded with me with unbroken regularity
from the date of his incarceration; and I almost invariably put his
letters into print. He wrote unselfish letters of encouragement and
strength during the Grey campaign; letters of happy congratulation
when our victory was recorded; letters full of cheery optimism
when the petition failed, and we swept onward to the great victories
of Wellington Central and Wellington South. Then the iron heel of
repression left its mark. On February 2, 1919, Mr. Webb wrote to me:
Since writing to you last I guess the Prisons Department has issued
new Regulations, which prevent me writing anything about Socialism,
Industrial Unionism, the causes of and responsibility for many of the
imported and locally-produced epidemics. I am not permitted to write
anything that reflects on the Government, and must refrain from
making any reference to the class war—even the need for its ending.
Under no circumstances will I be allowed to express my views on the
war or things arising therefrom. Anti-Conscription views must re-
main in abeyance until I regain my liberty. All political questions are
placed in the same category.” All that he could now write about would
be the weather, his own health, and the health of his friends and
kindred subjects. In a subsequent letter, Mr. Webb signed himself
“Yours for Socialism.” The word “Socialism” was erased by the prison
censor, but not sufficiently to make it unreadable—a ridiculous and
childlike censorship, in any case.
About this time “Stead’s Review”—the one publication that pre-
sented a concise and truthful summary of the war situation—was
denied admission to the prisons. “Stead’s” had up to this time been
sent to most of the C.O.’s. The Minister of Justice, in endeavoring to
explain his action in this respect, put forward the excuse that
“Stead’s” had a depressing effect on the prisoners!
An Irish Objector—Mr. Denis Mangan—wrote from Waikeria Pri-
son to a friend outside. His letter is heavily censored, the matter ob-
jected to being covered with blue pencilling in the first place and then
daubed over with black. He is telling his friend that his time will
be up on a certain date in May, and that he and another C.O. will be
free in so many weeks from the date of his letter. The figures are
blotted out, but the word “May” is left in. The letter concludes: “So
good-bye for eight weeks”—words which the Censor apparently over-
looked, and the overlooking of which made his other censorship so
much wasted effort.
In the first half of 1919 a hunger strike was entered upon at Wai-
keria. Seven men began to fast as a protest against the whole prison
system. Five were Religious Objectors, one Socialist, and one Irish.
One man, suffering with cramps, took food on the eleventh day. The


others went to the twelfth day, when it is alleged the strike was
called off as the result of a visit to the prison of the mother of one
of them.
At Papanui (Templeton) a strike occurred, when a West Coaster
refused to do “fire drill.” He told the prison authorities that he had
been jailed for his principles and deprived of his franchise, and they
need not wonder if he didn’t care if their old jail did get burnt down.
He was “dummied,” and a number of the other Objectors went on a
sympathy strike, and were “locked up.” In due time a magistrate
came, and they were tried and deprived of their “privileges” for one
month.
In Kaingaroa, where in the intensely cold weather the Objectors
were in the habit of taking down their blankets to keep themselves
warm on the wet days when they did not go out to work, an order that
the blankets must not be taken was disregarded by Mr. P. C. Webb and
others, and the outcome was a magisterial inquiry, the result of
which is not available at the time of writing.
Mr. Robert Gould, a Wellington waterside worker imprisoned at
Waikeria, whose wife was ill, asked to be transferred to Wellington to
be near her. When his request was refused, he struck work and food,
and was “locked up.” Mr. John BrailSford, 8.A., then struck work
and food as a protest against Gould’s treatment. Both Gould and
Brailsford were removed to Mt. Eden. Mr. Gould’s hunger strike lasted
seven days. He was eventually transferred to Wellington.
Mr. Harry Urquhart, after his release, wrote me that when one
man fell ill at Waikeria, no change of underclothing was given him
for over a fortnight, and no provision was made for a hath or sponge-
down of any sort. The food supplied to him was greasy and unpalat-
able until complaint was made. Only once, when he was very ill,
it was alleged, was an attempt made to take this man’s temperature,
and then the thermometer was accidentally broken. The patient was
locked up in his solitary cell during the night hours; and if he used
the night utensils they could not be emptied until morning. The other
C.O.’s deputed Mr. Urquhart to interview the jailer about the case,
but the only satisfaction he got was permission to see the doctor re
the matter. The doctor, however, peremptorily ordered Mr. Urquhart
out of the office, and told him that it would be time enough for him
to complain when he himself was in the hospital and dissatisfied with
his own treatment. He was further told that the man himself had
not complained—which, he says, was probably true, since his parti-
cular religion would prevent him from doing so.
One of the Objectors, William White, died at Mt. Eden in January
last. According to the statements of men who were his fellow-prison-
ers, White was brought from Waimarino Camp to Mt. Eden on January
18. He was transferred for medical treatment, being sick and unable
to work. It is alleged that he did not receive medical attention until
January 24 —six days after his arrival, and that he was given no
IN PRISON AND DETENTION.


special consideration in the matter of diet. Mr. Brailsford explains
that Mt. Eden diet was at this time dry bread and porridge and tea
without milk morning and evening, and at midday very coarse beef,
potatoes, and sometimes a tiny portion of carrot or other vegetable,
with fish on Fridays. The menu did not include either milk, butter,
or treacle. On the Saturday before his death (it is asserted) White
was deprived of his tobacco allowance for doing insufficient work.
His work, it may be explained, was “napping” road metal. The night
before his death he was heard knocking to attract attention, and some
of the prisoners make the charge that no attention was paid to him.
In the morning, at 6.45, his breakfast was pushed in. When the
warder came back to lock him in at 7.45, White pleaded that the door
might be left open, saying that he “hadn’t a friend in the world and
was feeling very bad.” The door was not left open. When the other
prisoners returned from physical drill, White was rolling about and
sweating in agony in his hammock, and there was vomit on the floor
of his cell. It is alleged that a little later White was told by an offi-
cial that if he got out into the fresh air and did some light work he
would feel better. Not long after this the doctor came, and at once
ordered the man into the prison hospital, where he died almost imme-
diately. His fellow-prisoners complain that when the inquest was
held a number of them who could have given important evidence
were not called. The verdict was that death was due to heart trouble.
On the public platform I have repeatedly made the demand that this
case should be investigated, but my demand has so far been without
effect.
A young school-teacher, writing to his mother, says: “The jail
is full of nothing but Objectors. The doctor asks the prisoners what
they are in for. If they are Objectors, God pity them if they are ill.”
He adds that a soldier was “brought here and made to do salute drill
for two hours on end, until he was exhausted, because he failed to
salute an officer down the street.”
Another letter from one of the prisoners contains the news that
“the Israelite has been 16 days hunger-striking, and is still going
strong. He takes nothing but water.” This refers to an Objector
who belongs to the Christian Israelites.
In a letter from an imprisoned Objector to a friend, by whom it
was sent on to me, the writer, who is a well-known watersider, says:
“I was dragged out of bed to-night at 9 o’clock for asking for more
and better food, and making a complaint about the food supplied being
unwholesome. Treated like a dog.” This note was scribbled with a
pencil (in the “express for Auckland”) on a leaf torn from a note-
book.
A C.O. wrote to his wife from one of the “clinks”: “I am well and
spiritually happy. But, oh, the hardships I have seen other men
endure. I have had to cry—l couldn’t help it.” The same letter
mentions that “one imprisoned returned soldier got word that his
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


mother was dying. They would not let him go to see her. Then a
wire came to say she was dead. Even then he did not get away.”
“And,” the writer added, “he was only in prison for hitting a red-
cap.”
A degrading and revolting practice in the prisons is what is known
as “searching.” are searched at intervals for contraband.
The prisoner is required to strip himself naked, and his clothes and
person are then scrutinised by the warders. While I was in the Terrace
Jail at Wellington the system was described to me by prisoners who
had often undergone the process. Some of them told me of disgusting
and humiliating methods employed by the worst of the officials. Of
course, the better class of official hates the work as much as tfie
prisoner hates the experience. It has been reported to me that Mr.
Donald Baxter, for refusing to submit to this degradation, was deprived
of his “privileges” for a given time. In other words, if my informa-
tion is correct, and I have no reason to doubt its authenticity, Mr.
Baxter was prevented from writing to his mother, from receiving
either letters or visitors, and from enjoying other smaller privileges
because he would not debase himself to the extent required by the
prison regulations. It is needless to say that a vile custom of this
nature is as morally destructive to the official who performs it as it
is to the prisoner on whom it is inflicted. It is a regulation that,
in the interests of common decency, must go.
XXII.—SOME LETTERS.
I have had sent to me copies of letters —sometimes from mothers,
sometimes from fathers almost frantic with grief and suspense—to
Lord Liverpool, Mr. Massey, Sir Joseph Ward, and Sir James Allen.
Some of these letters were pathetic appeals for human mercy. Some
voiced demands for justice, and were full of fierce invective against
the men and the class the workers held responsible for their sorrow.
One of these was a pathetic appeal to the Minister of Defence from a
wife that her husband—“a good father and husband,” she says—(who
had been removed from the Templeton Prison to Christchurch Hospi-
tal, suffering from a relapse consequent on an attack of influenza)
might be permitted to be nursed at his home when convalescent.
One letter to myself was from the West Coast. The writer is the
wife of a C.O. —a farmer. She enclosed a copy of a letter her hus-
band sent to Sir James Allen, He was the only man on his little
farm, and when he was dragged off to prison the farm was faced
with ruin. He was only given a little more than a week’s notice.
Occasionally a father would write to me that his son had been
dragged away by force, that he believed he was in Trentham “clink.
IN PRISON AND DETENTION.


Occasionally there would come a heart-breaking appreciation of my
own efforts on behalf of the C.O.’s; occasionally a pitiful plea that
Labour would endeavour to see that no more C.O.’s were forcibly de-
ported. Men wrote to me of their experiences before the attestation
officers and the military tribunals.
A Southern Objector (Irish) who was called upon to attest, and
refused, wrote: “The officer fairly foamed at me. After a lively ex-
change of words, however, he took hold of himself and cooled some.
Then he invited me into the attesting room, and filled in the usual 24
or 25 lines of questions. He missed out the “present war” lines and
asked me to sign. I refused. . . . He tried all manner of means
to get me to sign the blank order. Of course, I refused to sign any-
thing. He said he would make it as hard as he could for at the
hearing of my appeal. I told him it would be his duty to do that.”
A prominent Churchman wrote that a friend of his—also a Catho-
lic —was drawn in the first ballot and refused to answer the call. He
was arrested and taken to the Detention Barracks, and severely cross-
examined —put through what was next door to the Third Degree—by a
certain officer, by whom he was finally told that “as a member of the
Catholic Church he could no longer attend his religious duties or
receive communion unless he would take the oath and swear to fight
for his king and country.” Of course, this was scandalously untrue.
A Socialist Objector was told by a renegade Labour man at a
sitting of one of the tribunals that he “ought to be thrashed.” The
man guilty of that outburst was not removed from his position.
A Religious Objector wrote that when he informed the Court that his
trust was in God, he was told that he “was trusting in a broken reed.”
Mr. Maguire wrote to Mr. P. T. Robinson, of the Flaxworkers’
Union, an account of his examination and court-martial. “What is
your religion?” the President asked. “Roman Catholic, 1 ’ was the
answer. Q.: “Are you aware that military service is not going against
the rules of your Church?” A.: “Yes; but I don’t object from a
religious standpoint, but from a conscientious standpoint.” Q.: “What
is your definition of a Conscientious Objector?” A.: “A man who
refuses to be hounded into an army for the purpose of killing others.”
Q.: “If a maniac came along and tried to kill your mother or sweet-
heart, and if a gun or sword were close to you would you use them?”
A.: “Under the circumstances, yes.” “Then,” said the officer, “that’s
what the Germans are doing. You are quite justified in taking the
uniform.” “No,” the prisoner replied; "I should only be preparing for
premeditated murder.” The officer returned to the attack. Q.: “You
are an Irishman?” A.: “Yes.” Q.: “Have you any grudge against
the English nation as a whole?” A.: “No; but I have against the
English aristocracy.” Q.: “I see. You prefer to live in luxury and
let some one else go and fight for you?” A.: “I never asked anyone
to go. In fact, I don’t want them to go; and, as for luxury, nobody
gets that but our stay-at-home patriots.” When asked how he pleaded,
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


Mr. Maguire said, as to refusing the uniform, he must be guilty. “Ah,
but you had better plead not guilty,” said the officer, “We wish to
be your friend as well as your judge.” How this worked out subse-
quent events have shown.
Many letters set forth the viewpoint of the Religious Objectors. It
will be sufficient to quote one. From Capetown Military Barracks, on
October 10, 1917, Mr. A. Sanderson (who had been landed there from
the Waitemata because he was ill) wrote to some friends at Lower
Hutt:—“l have always had the comfort of the Word wherever I have
gone, and especially have I found peace in the sayings of the Lord
Jesus concerning His ever-watchful care of His people and the
Father’s love of them. . . . Love and Light and Pehce are in the
Father and our Lord, and in us too, if we abide in him. . . . Re-
member to let it all rest with God in Christ; for He has marked the
way for each one of us. So patience. Let us do to-day what is need-
ful and with trust and prayer . . . casting all our'care upon Him.”
Early in March, 1918, the following came to hand from Mark
Briggs:—“Just dropping you a line while I have the chance. lam
at Staples, in France, still in “clink,” but just of the same mind as
ever. I have had a very rough time of it, but have got through alive
so far. I don’t know what they intend to do with me, but lam de-
termined to see it through, no matter what the consequences may be.
I have had some great experiences. Tell Dad lam getting on as well
as can be expected, that my health is good, and that I have still hopes
of getting back to see him and all my friends some day. Best
wishes to all. Remember me to all my friends; tell them my message
is just the same as ever: 'Workers of the world, unite!’; and to my
enemies you can say that the spirit of Mark Briggs is still unbroken.”
A Christchurch lady—herself the mother of a very talented (and
likewise very brave) lad, enduring imprisonment for the sake of his
religious principles—wrote to Mrs. Ballantyne (Wellington) on Feb-
ruary 3, 1919, of Mr. T. P. Harland, who had just returned from
France: “He had a wonderful story to tell. He, like Garth, event-
ually took medical work, but signed nothing and accepted no pay,
though often near starving. They offered him a suit of clothes in
Lyttelton, but when he heard he had to sign for it he would have
none of it. He is very enthusiastic over Briggs’s heroism, and says
they all felt that he (Briggs) has the right to be the spokesman for
the fourteen; describes him as utterly unbroken intellectually, and
able to give every detail of their martyrdom,”
XXIII.—VARYING VIEWPOINTS.
During the courtmartial trials of the Conscientious Objectors, very
many admirable statements were made by the "accused,” presenting
the respective viewpoints of the men who were prepared to sacrifice
SOME LETTERS.


their liberty rather than sear their conscience. The two statements
which follow are widely different in viewpoint. The first is the ob-
jection of a very sincere Christian; the second that of an equally
sincere Socialist—both of them men of lofty principles, firm purpose,
and transcending courage.
Mr. Harry R. Urquhart, M.A., made the following statement to
the President and members of the Courtmartial by whom he was tried
at Auckland on May 9, 1918:
I am here, as you know, on a charge of refusing to obey a command
of one who is termed my superior officer. The command, namely, an
order to submit to medical examination, seems so simple and innocent
in itself that few people really understand why it is that a man, no
matter what his philosophy of life may be, finds any difficulty in
obeying it.
When, moreover, it is made clear that by submitting to medical
examination there is a chance of being declared unfit for military
service and of thus escaping punishment by imprisonment, the posi-
tion of one who disobeys such an order becomes all the more difficult
to comprehend.
Notwithstanding all this, I have very definite reasons for refusing
to obey such an order:
1. To submit willingly to medical examination is to give the im-
pression that if a man is found fit he will have no objections to going
on with the rest of the full military programme. If this is not so,
and, like me, he has really no intention of becoming a soldier, then
submission to such an order is a mere farce —a taking part in an
absolutely meaningless proceeding. Now, Sir, to me life is too real a
thing for such paltry trifling; hence I cannot submit even to this
apparently simple and innocent command.
2. An order to submit to medical examination is the first of a long
series of military orders. If a man has not the slightest intention of
taking the later orders, then he should refuse to take the first; for the
sooner his position is made clear to himself and to all others the less
confusion of thought will be caused.
3. There is certainly a chance of a man being declared medically
unfit as a result of this examination and of thus escaping many un-
pleasant experiences, and of even being permitted to follow his usual
occupation, but, Sir, men who take the stand which I am taking are
not seeking to make things easy for themselves —they are only anxious
to prove faithful to the light they have, and they would consider it
a species of moral cowardice to attempt to slip through a loophole
such as the medical examination sometimes affords.
4. It is good, too, for officials to be forced into the positiori of deal-
ing with men who refuse to obey orders which they know are in
direct conflict with the Divine Revelation that is guiding our lives.
Officials from the days of'Pontius Pilate have at times been deeply
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


concerned when they have found themselves, in the execution of what
they deem to be their duty, pronouncing sentence on men whom they
know to be thoroughly sincere and whose lives show that they seek
only the true good of their fellow-men.
Many an official at such a time feels himself a divided creature —
he fain would do that as a man which he dare not do as an official.
As an official he is forced to condemn and pass sentence on what as
a man he would most willingly pardon and condone.
The truth of Christ’s teaching may then come home to him with
great forcefulness —that no man can serve two masters. He realises,
possibly for the first time, that he must act as a man of independent
thought or as an official bound down by rules and regulations. He
sees clearly the impossibility of serving both God and Mammon, of
oeing true to himself as a man and true to the State as an official.
It my be that he will learn a lesson —one ot the most important he
will ever learn —that a man must be a man first of all, an official
somewhere after that or not at all, according to the light revealed
to him.
I am not a Quaker, and never have been one, but I profess to be
a follower of Jesus Christ—it may be, like Peter of old, one who fol-
lows at a distance—still, I am seeking to follow and, as the days and
weeks go by, to lessen the distance which separates my life from that
of the Master.
I feel very definitely the leading of Christ—-that Divine guidance
which is promised to every man who seeks it. With the pathway so
definitely pointed out to me, it would be base treachery on my part
to obey commands, even of the highest officials of the land, when
those commands mean the surrender of the light I have and the
treading of a pathway which I know to be fraught with darkness and
confusion.
The question of paramount importance to me, then, is not how
should the crowd who have not this light act, but how should the few
who have it act?
In such a crisis as the present it is assumed that the individual
cannot do any independent thinking, or, if he'does, it is deemed to be
valueless. Now, history right down through the ages has proved
such an assumption to be false. It has not been men in masses but
men in ones and twos who have been responsible in the first place
for the change of thought which has led to important reforms. A
law, then, which ignores such a fundamental axiom of all true pro-
gress is a law which every wise man will expect to be broken.
Even granted that the Christian were willing to wear the uniform
and accept military pay, although as a matter of fact he could not
possibly identify himself so closely with your philosophy of life with-
out most gravely and seriously jeopardising the cause for which he
stands, still the military authorities on their part could not possibly
allow him to enlist, because—however willing he might be to allow
VARYING VIEWPOINTS.


his body to be clothed with a military uniform —he certainly will not
and cannot permit any earthly authority to dress his thoughts in a
uniform of approved pattern. In other words, you may dress him in
a uniform and so make him look like you, but you can never force
him to think like you. If he goes at all, he must go as a free man
and speak those things which God moves him to say. Right along
the line he would be a source of danger to you, for one Christian
in your ranks who is convinced of the sinfulness of the whole mili-
tary position would be a constant sourbe of danger to your cause. You
dare not let him go—it would be madness on your part to seek to force
him to go.
The true Christian follows the light as far as God reveals it to
him. The truer he is to this revealed guidance the more light he
receives and the less the world understands him. It is perhaps suffi-
cient if he understands himself. But, as he steps more and more from
the line which the world thinks it wisest to follow, as he diverges
more and more from that path which is mapped out by convention
and expediency, the more impossible does it become for him to accept
freely a line of life or a definite work set down by another. Hence
the Christian may find it impossible to accept alternative non-combat-
ant work. Your only course is to leave him alone to follow that plan
which God has revealed to him.
To me the words of John concerning Christ —that He is the true
light which lighteth every man that cometh into the world —and the
words of Jesus Christ Himself when He says, “I am the way, the
truth and the life,” are fraught with very deep meaning. I realise
that he who ventures to seek and to follow this light must expect to
come into conflict with conventional ideas as to what is and what
is not expedient. He must be prepared to oppose popular opinion; he
must, even at the risk of being misrepresented and misunderstood,
very definitely refuse to move a step out of that pathway which is
pointed out to him by Divine Revelation.
Such a follower of Christ will walk with all men as far as he
possibly can—he will not lightly nor willingly break the laws of his
country; but he reserves, and must reserve, to himself the right to
break any law, military or otherwise, which comes into conflict with
that Divine law revealed from above.
At a time like the present he arrives at the parting of the ways.
Two voices speak to him —there is first that of the military authori-
ties, loud and insistent, but to the Christian there is yet another voice
—Still and quiet—a voice which can be heard only when the soul of
man is hushed to stillness and is eagerly listening for it.
I hear most distinctly these two voices. I see the beckoning figures,
pointing out their opposing ways; but in my heart and mind lingers
no bewildering doubt. I obey, gladly and willingly, the voice and
beckoning hand of Him whom alone I regard as my superior officer.
Multitudes cannot understand such a philosophy of life; but this is
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


only another proof of the marvellous accuracy of Christ’s knowledge
of men when He predicted that such would be the case—for He said,
“The world cannot receive the Spirit of Truth because it seeth Him
not, neither knoweth Him.”
The Prosecuting Counsel has told you that I am a soldier; that
the Military Service Act of 1916 has created me one in spite of my
opposition to the whole military programme. I should like to say,
Mr. President, that you cannot make a soldier of a man by Act of
Parliament, any more than you can make a Hindu of him by a
similar process. To make a soldier of a man you must secure him
both body and soul. No Government has yet been able to do this. The
fact that there are scores of Objectors in your prisons is proof that
an Act of Parliament cannot make soldiers of men against their wills —
it can only make prisoners of them, and as such they are not a
help but a hindrance to your cause.
So, when the Prosecuting Counsel tells me that in refusing to obey
a military command I am committing the gravest offence that can
be preferred against a soldier, I am not overwhelmed with dismay. I
regard his own position as an infinitely more serious one—for, in
stating that the religious or conscientious scruples of an accused man
can have no weight with the Court and must not receive any con-
sideration, he takes up arms not against me, but against God Him-
self. Sir, you are surely not amazed when I tell you that, in spite
of the so-called grave offence I have committed against military
law, I infinitely prefer my position to that of any member of this
Court, for my offence is one against the law of man alone; yours,
against the law and will of God Himself.
Mr. Colin R. Robertson was courtmartialled at Auckland on Friday,
December 7, 1918, for refusing to be a soldier. When requested by
the Court to state his personal objections to military service, he made
the following statement, to which the Court listened patiently and
without any interruptions whatever. He said;
I am a Socialist, therefore my objections to service in the N.Z.E.F.
as a conscript are based entirely on Socialist principles. I am op-
posed to conscription because, first, it is against the best interest of
humanity, it is a machine of war’s creation for war waging, and no
one, I think, would dare say that war in itself is in humanity’s inter-
ests.
Secondly, it is undemocratic, especially so in the manner in which
it has been ushered into New Zealand.
War is the product of the system of social organisation, or rather
disorganisation, under which we in this age live. It is the product
Of any social system under which the many are economically depend-
ent on the few for the right to work in order that they may obtain
the means of subsistence.
VARYING VIEWPOINTS.


Under the capitalistic state of society the working-class receive
only a small portion of the wealth they produce in the form of wages;
the balance is retained by the capitalists in the form of rent, inter-
est, and profit. The balance becomes capital, and the capitalists seek
fresh fields for its profitable investment.
Since the capitalists of all countries are in the same position, they
must compete one with the other for the limited fields in which this
accumulated capital can be profitably employed. Their interests con-
flict, war ensues; thus, to my mind, the causes of all wars are econ-
omic, all are capitalistic.
In the war being waged in Europe to-day, I see clearly the clashing
of capitalistic interests; the same envious glances cast by one nation
at the trade of another that precede all wars preceded this one.
These things do not concern the working-class of any country. Go
where you will you will find the workers are dependent on the capi-
talists for the right to live; go where you will, you will find the
workers living in the same poverty and want, you will find the same
jails, lunatic asylums, poor-houses, brothels, and all the other evils
of our present wage-system. Therefore, it will be seen the workers
of all countries have the same troubles —to wit, an insufficiency of the
necessities of life. They are all alike' struggling to improve their
lot by striving for higher wages, shorter hours of labour, and more
sanitary conditions of life, all struggling to secure a little more of
the wealth they produce, and ultimately to secure their independence
from the economic oppression of capitalism.
I realise this and therefore refuse to participate in this or any
other war. We are told it is a war of freedom. Freedom from what?
The only freedom I can see to strive for is freedom of the masses of
wage-slaves from their want and misery, freedom from the economic
oppression of capitalism.
We are told it is to punish the perpetrators of the horrors (real or
alleged) on the women and children of Belgium. To that I would
reply: that, if there is anything in the natural law that every crime
brings its own punishment, then the crimes that were practised upon
the unfortunate natives of the Congo in the interests of Belgian capital,
are bringing theirs. The unfortunate part is, that many of the guiltless
workers of Belgium are suffering along with those who were respon-
sible.
We are told it is to secure for the small nations independence; to
that I would reply: If that is the case, why is not independence
granted to Finland by Russia and to Ireland by Britain?
I am opposed to participation in this war or any other, on the
grounds that all wars are wrong and against the best interests of
humanity.
I refuse to hate the working-class men and women of Germany or
any other country allied to her; I refuse to slay and maim the workers
of those countries. I refuse to be the cause of depriving any German
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


woman of her life’s partner, and I decline to be the means of any
child of Germany shedding one tear over the loss of a living father.
For these reasons I must decline to be a soldier, or recognise the
right of any Govenment to force me to become one. I must decline
to recognise the right of any orders given to me by an alleged superior
officer; therefore, I have declined to be medically examined, especially
when I know that such examination is only for the purpose of deter-
mining my physical fitness to take human life.
I seek to make this world a little better for my having been in it,
than it may otherwise have been, and participation in war is not
tending towards that ideal.
I quite realise that for my views and principles I shall have to
undergo certain punishment, but however severe that may be, even
should it involve execution, I would still maintain the same attitude.
I would rather suffer the agonies of a million hells for a period of
time covering a million eternities than develop legs on my stomach
and crawl, centipede fashion, into a heaven (there to bask in the
sunshine of an orthodox God) by violating the principle of humani-
tarianism, which I hold dearer than life itself.
Finally, I definitely state that I decline to perform one single action
that would tend to leave what is now the live pulsating body of a
German working man, with hopes and ideals perhaps the same as
mine, on a bloodstained field of battle a mangled mass of humanity,
with the life-blood welling from great gaping wounds, enriching the
earth from which he sprung and to which he will now return.
* ' •
Mr. Robertson then proceeded to make the following offer:
I am prepared to offer myself to the military authorities for one
purpose and on one condition. It is only by research and experiment
that medical science has reached the stage of development that it has.
It can only advance by still further research and experiment. This
war has provided many opportunities for the advancement of anti-
septic surgery, many operations have been performed which before
the war were considered impossible. Many cases, I believe, of trans-
fusion of blood, grafting of skin, flesh, or bone, etc., have been success-
fully dealt with.
Now, I am a healthy individual. I have lived a clean life, have no
vices that I know of such as drinking, smoking, etc., have never had
a day’s constitutional illness in my life, so would consider that my
blood, bone, and flesh would be in a good enough condition, that por-
tion of my body could be grafted on to the bodies of individuals who
may have been maimed, with a reasonable hope of the injured person
being benefitted.
I therefore am prepared to offer my body to the military authori-
ties for use in any hospital for the purpose herein stated for the
benefit of any soldier who has been maimed at the front. The only
VARYING VIEWPOINTS.


condition I impose is that no soldier after such treatment shall be
re-ordered to the front.
I make this offer in the hope that it will be accepted, and that
because I really wish to do something for the good of humanity.
For the sake of the millions yet unborn and with the hope that the
knowledge of surgery may be increased for the purpose of minimising
the sufferings of those unborn millions may be heir to, I make this
offer, it being the only way I can conscientiously assist the military
authorities.
XXIV.—WANGANUI REVELATIONS.
I have already mentioned that the treatment of the Conscientious-
Objectors was made a part of the Labour Party’s indictment of the
National Government in the Grey campaign. My last election address
in that fight was delivered at Reefton on the eve of the polling day,
May 27. On my arrival at Reefton I found that Mr. Mark Fagan,
secretary of the Inangahua Miners’ Union, had that day received a
letter from Mr. Harry Wilson, a member of the Union, and also a C. 0.,
describing the treatment of himself and other C.O.’s at Wanganui
Detention Prison. Mr. Wilson’s letter was dated May 23, and had
been written from Alexandra Detention Barracks at Wellington. He
firß of all recounted his own experiences after being drawn in the
allot and while “wanted,” his arrest, his first sentence of 28 days’
detention, his second refusal to accept the kit, and his consequent
remand for court-martial, which trial he was awaiting at the time of
writing. He casually mentioned that he had met quite a number of
C.O.’s since he had been seized —“men who have completed eleven
months’ sentences and are back again for their two years”—and then
proceeded to say:—
“We spent part of our detention at Wanganui Barracks, and that
is what I want to let you know most about, as I think it wants as
much light thrown on it as possible. I want you to give Harry Hol-
land the following particulars regarding the conduct of that place so
that he may be able to use it in his election campaign, though I am
afraid there will not be very much time after this arrives, still I
hope he will make the most of it there, and also through the medium
of ‘The Worker.’ What I have to complain about is the treatment
meted out to Conscientious Objectors at Wanganui. Half-a-dozen of
us, including three C.O.’s, were taken up there a little over three
weeks ago, evidently with the intention of breaking us in. We had
not been in the place an hour when I was given three days ‘dummy’’
on bread and water for refusing to ‘ Sir ’ the officer in charge, and next
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


day Tom Moynihan was handed out forty-eight hours of the same for
some like trivial offence. I had three days’ fast and Tom had nothing
to eat while he was in either. Dry bread does not appeal very strongly
to either of us. We had not been out twenty-four hours before I fell
foul of the officer again and this time was ordered two hours’ pack
drill. To do pack drill the victim must have a uniform, and as I
had none they decided to get one for me. When it arrived I refused
to put it on, but that did not trouble them much; they just chucked
me around the cell a bit to let me know they were not joking, and
when I still refused to change, one brave hero went and got a pair
of handcuffs, and after cuffing my hands behind my back, stood me
on my feet, and then playfully bashed my head against the wall,
stunning me for a few seconds. They continued knocking me about
a while longer, and then decided, as I would not put the uniform on,
to put it on for me, which they did, being not over gentle in the
operation.
“The next one to be operated on was Tom Moynihan. Tom is
well known on the Coast. They brought him a uniform one Sunday
morning and ordered him to dress in it. Of course, Tom was having
none, so three or four hopped into him, and after handing out punches
and kicks, one of which landed over the heart, and which he still
feels the effects of, they put the uniform on him and ordered him two
hours’ pack drill. He refused to carry a rifle and also refused to
march, so they tied the gun to his side, and then started him off
round the yard, by turns pushing, punching, kicking, and dragging
him by the hair of his head. Whenever they pushed him off his feet,
as they did on several occasions, they put the boot into him until he
got up again. This sort of thing went on for over an hour, and the
language of the whole crowd was absolutely disgusting. Rather nice
exercise for Sunday morning.
“The next victim, a new arrival, was dealt with the next evening
less than an hour after he arrived. They introduced a little variation
for him. Instead of the gun and pack, they handcuffed him and then
proceeded to drag him round with ropes round his neck until he
could scarcely stand; they also made a point of pushing him against
the wall at each turn, so that by the time they had finished both sides
of his face were like a piece-of raw steak. To finish up with they
gave him a cold bath.
“When the rest of us went out to wash (we were always locked
up when any business of this kind was on), we saw splashes of blood
all round the yard and also on the walls. ... If these outrages
were perpetrated by Germans they would be condemned as brutal
atrocities; but, of course, I am sure the people of New Zealand do
not know what is going on in Wanganui, and it is up to those of us that
do know to expose it as much as possible and also demand an enquiry
into the treatment of Objectors in that hell, otherwise they will go
just a little too far one of these days and kill somebody. . . .
WANGANUI REVELATIONS.


Perhaps the Military authorities imagine they are making soldiers by
this sort of treatment, but, as far as I can see, they are just manu-
facturing rebels. Lieutenant Crampton is in charge of the Barracks.
“Hoping this arrives in time for Harry to make use of it, and also
hoping he sends it along for all it is worth. With regards to old chums,
sincerely hoping they are all doing well and keeping fit. —I remain,
fraternally yours, HARRY WILSON.
“The following is the list of those who were witnesses to what
occurred, and who authorise me to sign their names:—Jim Casey,
Thos. Moynihan, R, G. Halkett, J. Boyle, A. Beaton. J. Fitzpatrick, T.
Bell, H. Wilson.”
That evening I quoted for the benefit of a crowded meeting the
statement contained in Mr. Wilson’s letter. This was the first occasion
on which a public exposure was made of the Wanganui cruelties. On
reaching Christchurch, on my way back to Wellington after the elec-
tion had been won, I received a letter from Mrs. Beck (secretary of
the Women’s International League), who had received a similar letter
to that sent to Mr. Fagan, and who urged that I should endeavour to
arrange a deputation to Sir James Allen for the purpose of both
protesting against and ventilating the outrages. Arriving home the
first week in June, I speedily got into communication with
the Minister’s office. On Tuesday, June 11, I ’phoned
Mr. Dixon (Sir James Allen’s private secretary) asking
him to endeavour to arrange with the Minister to receive a depu-
tation of Labour bodies and other organisations with reference to the
alleged ill-treatment of Religious, Socialist, and other Conscientious
Objectors in detention and prison in New Zealand and abroad. Mr.
Dixon replied by ’phone next day saying that the Minister suggested
that, to save both time and expense, we should make our representa-
tions in writing. This suggestion I placed before the organisers of
the deputation, whose opinion was that the deputation ought to take
place—an opinion that I fully concurred in. Accordingly, on June 14
I addressed a letter to the Minister urging that he should consent to
receive the deputation, and pointing out that the outrages which were
alleged to have been committed were so extremely serious that the
matter ought to receive immediate attention, and finally requesting that
the Minister would take the deputation on Thursday of the following
week. To this letter the Minister replied on June 19, regretting that
his time had been too much occupied to permit him to make an ap-
pointment or receive the deputation as desired, and adding:—
“Departmental enquiries had, however, been held about Wanganui
prior to the receipt of your, letter, and, indeed, prior to your original
enquiry by telephone. lam anxious that the public should be satisfied
that everything is being done to ascertain the truth of the rumours,
and have already arranged with the Minister of Justice that a Magis-
trate shall go fully into the question. This enquiry should be held
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


within the next day or two. In the circumstances, do you still think
it still necessary to hold the deputation?”
It is necessary to digress here to point out that a letter containing
similar facts to those covered in the letters to Mr. Fagan and Mrs.
Beck had also been sent to the editor of "Truth,” by whom it had
been submitted to the Defence authorities; and, when the Government
eventually took action, it issued its instructions as though the letter
to "Truth” was the sole matter it had to go upon. It will, however,
be noted that the letter of instruction to the Magistrate, Mr. Hewitt,
was dated June 20 —the day following the Minister’s reply to my letter
of June 14, and the exact day on which my second letter was de-
livered to the Minister.
To return to the correspondence. On June 20 I replied to Sir*
James Allen (my letter being delivered by special messenger), stating
that there was a unanimous wish on the part of those concerned
that the deputation should take place on the following day (Friday),
or, if this was not possible, at 10.30 or 11 a.m. on Saturday, as on
the latter day I was booked to leave for Auckland by the mid-day ex-
press. Sir James answered promptly by wire on the same day,
regretting that, owing to his own contemplated departure from Wel-
lington on the following Monday, he could not arrange to meet the
deputation on either Friday or Saturday as desired, but intimating
that he would be returning to Wellington on June 30.
This meant a delay that was altogether too long in the opinion of
the deputationists, and on June 21 —all efforts to secure the deputa-
tion having apparently proved futile —I wrote to the Minister ex-
pressing regret at his inability to meet the deputation. In the
course of my letter, which was necessarily lengthy, I said: —
“Under these circumstances, and in view of the delay which must
take place before they could otherwise be heard, the members of the
proposed deputation have asked me to furnish you with an outline of
the main facts which they desired to bring under your notice.
“They also desire me to make the strongest possible protest against
the Magisterial inquiry re Wanganui Prison being conducted in cam-
era. They insist that the public have a right to hear the evidence
from both sides; and they further protest that an inquiry at which
the men most concerned will not be entitled to be directly re-
presented, and apparently some of whom will not even be called as
witnesses, will not have any very satisfying effect so far as the general
public is concerned.
“The principal facts in possession of the parties desiring the depu-
tation are as under: —
“It is alleged that one Conscientious Objector who was taken to
Wanganui Prison about the eiid of April last, was threatened by an
officer, subjected to 24 hours in the punishment cell for refusing drill.
WANGANUI REVELATIONS.


then sentenced to another 24 hours for ‘insolence’ —his judge and
accuser being the same officer. When he refused to put on the uniform
he was forcibly dressed, and was knocked down and kicked in the
ribs while down. He eventually took the uniform off. He was forcibly
dressed a second time, and was again knocked about, and told that if
he took the uniform off again he would be murdered. He again took
it off, and was yet again forcibly dressed. This time he had an 801 b.
pack fastened on his back and a rifle was tied to his hand. While
his hands were tied his head was bumped against the wall; then he
was pushed out into the yard, ordered to march, and struck between
the shoulders with the butt of a rifle. This caused the rifle fastened to
him to fall from its position. He was ordered to hold the rifle up,
one of the guards telling him if he failed to do so he would knock
his b head off. He refused to hold it, and the guard banged jt
up against his ear and the side of his face till the blood was streaming
down his face. After that they tied the rifle with thick string to his
neck so that it couldn’t fall. They then ordered him once more to
march; and when he refused, they took it in turns two at a time to
force him round the ring and punched him till he was black and blue.
He was then dragged along by the hair of the head. A handful of hair
was dragged out. This was more than he could stand, and he struck
his assailant and knocked him down, whereupon he was rushed by
three of the guards, struck, knocked down, and kicked while down.
Asked by an officer was he going to give in, and replying that he was
not, he was subjected to still further assault, was knocked down three
times, kicked on the shins and banged against the wall. An officer
threatened him that he would get this treatment every day as long
as he was there. During one of these series of assaults, he was
kicked over the heart, and suffered for weeks as a result. Eventually,
worn out physically and mentally, he gave in and took the uniform.
“It is further alleged that another Conscientious Objector, refusing
to take the uniform, was forcibly dressed in denims, handcuffed, and
then dragged round the yard by means of a rope tied round his neck.
He was kicked and punched at the same time and pushed against the
wall, and at last (it is alleged) ‘his face was like a piece of steak,
and drops of blood were to be seen all round the yard and on the
wall.’ He was beaten on the hand with a stick and his hand was
swollen abnormally. After having been subjected to this treatment,
he was forcibly given a cold bath.
"A number of other Objectors are alleged to have received practi-
cally similar treatment.’’
I also gave the Minister an outline of the Featherston cases re-
ferred to in ray Wellington North opening speech, and reminded him
that Mr. Massey, after that speech, had told the press that the matter
would be enquired into—a promise which had not been kept. I also
dealt at some length with the cases of the deported men, and parti-
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


cularly with the statement that they had been subjected to “cruci-
fixion,” otherwise Field Punishment No. 1, pointing out that, so far as
I knew, neither Australia nor Canada would tolerate the infliction of
this punishment on their soldiers, and urging that the New Zealand
Government should make the strongest representations to the Im-
perial military authorities to the same effect. In this letter I also
urged, on behalf of the deputation:
1. That an open and full enquiry be held concerning the treatment
of the Conscientious Objectors—both in New Zealand and in England
and France.
2. That the fourteen deported men be returned to New Zealand
for the purpose of this enquiry, as well as a matter of correct policy.
3. That the men who are alleged to have suffered the persecution
described have the right to be represented by counsel, and that no
restriction be placed on them in the matter of calling witnesses from
among the military prisoners and guards.
4. That the military officers implicated in the alleged illegal treat-
ment of Conscientious Objectors be relieved of their duties pending the
investigation of their conduct, and, if found guilty, discharged from
the service and called upon to answer charges in the civil courts.
5. That Wanganui Prison be transferred from military to civil
control.
I concluded with the intimation that I was taking the liberty of
handing the whole of the correspondence to the press early the follow-
ing week, and that I took it as a matter of course that Sir James
would have no objection to this being done.
I departed for Auckland on June 22 as I had arranged to do, leav-
ing the copies of the foregoing letters for insertion in the following
week’s “Worker.” I addressed a huge meeting on the subject of the
C.O.’s in the Lyric Theatre, Auckland, on Sunday evening, at which
meeting a motion was unanimously carried protesting against the
Magisterial Inquiry being held in camera, and on Monday, June 24,
left for Rotorua, visiting Mr. P. C. Webb at zCaingaroa on Tuesday,
June 25. Returning from Rotorua I found that the papers of Thurs-
day had reprinted from the “Worker” the substance of my statements
to the Minister —and the whole of New Zealand was at last in posses-
sion of the major facts concerning happenings most people never
dreamed could take place in this country.
After journeying to Masterton and Napier, where I spoke for the
local Labour Party branches, I returned to Wellington, and found a
letter awaiting me from Sir James Allen, dated June 24, asking for
the names of prisoners and officers referred to in my letter of June
21, and also asking what I meant by "crucifixion” when I referred to
Field Punishment No. 1. The Minister’s letter concluded:
“I am having inquiry made about Archibald Baxter by telegram.
In reply to the specific points mentioned by you, I have to say that -
WANGANUI REVELATIONS.


full inquiry will be held concerning the treatment of Conscientious
Objectors in New Zealand, and further inquiry will be made in Eng-
land and France. I regret that I cannot promise to bring back the
fourteen deported men. I can see no good reason for the men being
represented by counsel, but am having further inquiry made on this
question. No restriction will be placed upon the men calling wit-
nesses from among the military prisoners and guards. If any mili-
tary men are implicated they will be dealt with. The Wanganui
Detention Barracks were established in order that the men might be
saved from any possible stigma that might be attached to being
in civil prisons. If reform is necessary at Wanganui Detention Bar-
racks reform will be instituted.”
Referring to my proposal to give the correspondence to the press,
the Minister gave it as his opinion that it would be wiser to wait
until the inquiry was concluded, when, he said, the public would be
able to judge with the real facts before them.
To Sir James’s request for names, etc., I replied, in effect, that we
should be ready to furnish these when an open inquiry was held.
In due time I received a letter from Colonel Tate, Adjutant-General,
dated 27th June, and setting forth:—“The matter of counsel appearing
at the inquiry into the allegations of cruelty at the Wanganui Deten-
tion Barracks has been submitted to Mr. Hewitt, Stipendiary Magis-
trate, who is conducting the inquiry, and I am directed by the Hon.
the Minister of Defence to inform you that Mr. Hewitt has replied to
the effect that, at present, he does not propose to permit representa-
tions by counsel, but should he at a later stage consider such repre-
sentations necessary, and likely to be useful to him, he will so inti-
mate.”
Public meetings and the ordinary meetings of Trade Unions and
political Labour bodies carried resolutions protesting against a secret
inquiry. A meeting of the Second Division League demanded a public
investigation, and some of the newspapers backed up the demand.
The inquiry was duly conducted by Mr. Hewitt, but, in the mean-
time, the prisoners had been scattered to different prisons, and some
of the officials had likewise been either given “leave of absence with-
out pay” or transferred. It is said, with how much truth Ido not
know, that this policy had been adopted to prevent statements
being “concocted” in connection with the inquiry. In addition, a
number of the witnesses had been forcibly embarked —“shanghaied”
was the term the prisoners themselves’ used to describe the process.
These were men who had gone into camp and donned the uniform,
afterwards deserting and when arrested refusing to undertake ser-
vice. Their position was, of course, greatly different from that of the
C.O.’s. The scattering of the men meant that the Magistrate had to
move from place to place to see his witnesses. My information
(from the men interviewed) is generally that the Magistrate conducted
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


his investigations very fairly; that he was inclined to be “over firm,”
but resorted to none of the bullying tactics which so often make of
court cases a burlesque. He neglected no opportunity of getting the
fullest possible statement from the men concerned, but did not attempt
to confuse any man in the making of his statement, although he
exhausted every fair means to test the accuracy of any statement of
which he was doubtful.
As will be seen, the Magistrate received his instructions
on June 20. I have not been able to ascertain the date on
which he commenced his investigations; but it would, of course, be
soon after receiving his instructions. From the time the instructions
were issued to the Magistrate to the date on which his report was
signed and ready for presentation to the Minister, was exactly three
months, a lapse of time which indicates the amount of care which must
have been devoted to both investigation and report. But, although the
Report was available, as the date shows, on September 21, 1918, it
was not made public until December s—two5 —two and a half months later,
when it was laid on the table of the House as a result of a repeated
effort on my part.
On October 23 I asked the Minister of Defence, without notice,
"whether - the report of the Magistrate’s Court in connection with the
alleged cruelties practised upon Conscientious Objectors at the Wan-
ganui Detention Barracks had yet been presented, and, if so, whether
the Report would be laid on the table of the House.” Sir James
Allen replied that “the report had not yet been before Cabinet. As
soon as it had been considered by Cabinet it would be presented to
the House.”
About the middle of November I fell a victim to the influenza epi-
demic, then raging, and was away from the House for some time. On
December 2, however, I left my bed and (unwisely enough) was in
my place in the House for a couple of hours. During the afternoon
I asked the Minister, again without notice, whether the Magisterial
Report in connection with the allegations of cruelty inflicted on mili-
tary prisoners in Wanganui was yet available; if not, when would
the House be given an opportunity of dealing with it? Sir James
Allen this time replied that “the report was at Defence headquarters,
and he was sorry to say it had not come back to him. He would
make inquiry about it, and get it brought down as soon as he could.”
I was very ill at the time, and found it impossible to remain for the
whole of the sitting, I suffered a slight relapse as a result of my
going out too soon, and was compelled to lay up again, remaining in
bed until the following Friday, when I again ventured out —this time
to make a fight, along with Mr. Peter Fraser, M.P., against the Bill
designed to disfranchise the C.O.’s.
On December 5, while I was away, the Magisterial Report was laid
on the table of the House, and I was, therefore, deprived of the
opportunity of discussing it on that occasion. However, when, the
WANGANUI REVELATIONS.


report was tabled, it almost completely substantiated the statements
of the C.O.’s, and vindicated as well the attitude which had been taken
up by those of us who sought to deputationise the Minister in the
first place. It was, needless to say, a source of discomfiture for the
Government. I have deemed it advisable to reproduce the report in its
entirety in the chapter which follows.
XXV. —THE MAGISTERIAL REPORT.
Marton, 21st September, 1918.
To the Hon. Sir James Allen, K.C.8.G.,
Acting-Prime Minister and Minister of Defence for the Dominion
of New Zealand. •
Sir
[Re alleged ill-treatment of prisoners in the Wanganui Detention
Barracks.]
In accordance with the request contained in a letter dated 20th
June last from Major-General Sir Alfred Robin, K.C.M.G., that I should
enquire into and report upon the above matter, I have the honour to
report as follows:
With the object of having the scope of the enquiry clearly defined I
interviewed the Adjutant-General—Colonel Tate—and the Director of
Personal Services —Major Osburne-Lilly—in Wellington.
My attention was directed to a proof letter addressed to the Editor
of the “Truth” newspaper from a number of military prisoners who
had been confined in the Wanganui Detention Barracks, complaining
of ill-treatment at the hands of the officer in charge, Lieutenant Cramp-
ton, and others of the staff, and it was suggested that I should take
that letter as the basis of my enquiry, and investigate the charges
there made and any cases of similar nature which might, during the
course of the proceedings, come under my notice.
I was informed that I should have an entirely free hand, and
that it was desired that the charges should be thoroughly investi-
gated.
Particularly I was asked to ascertain: (a) To what degree, if at
all, the allegations in the letter to the Editor of “Truth” were correct,
(b) If force had been used, for what purpose it had been used, (c)
Whether it was lawful to use force for such purpose; and, further,
I was asked to make such recommendations as I might think proper
concerning the future conduct of the institution.
Instructions were given to Camp Commandants and other officers
to allow me access to all camps and military institutions, and to per-
mit me to see any soldier or other person whom I might desire to
see; and throughout the enquiry every facility has been afforded me
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


by the Department to ensure a fair and complete investigation on the
matters in question.
I have seen all the prisoners whose names are appended to the-
" Truth” letter, with the exception of three, who are now on active
service, and one —Fitzpatrick—who has escaped from custody, as well
as every person whom any prisoner has desired me to see as being
able to throw any light on the subject.
Having regard to the general nature of the enquiry, I decided to
commence my interviewing the prisoners in order to get a general
idea of the situation, and, having ascertained that, to be guided by
what I should learn as to how I should proceed further. I came to
the conclusion that I could best effect this object by seeing them in
private wherever they might be, and going into the matter with them
man to man, and I have continued this method with all concerned
throughout the enquiry.
Shortly after deciding upon this method of enquiry, and while in
Christchurch, I received a telegraphic communication from Mr. J.
McCombs, M.P., asking that I should allow the prisoners to be repre-
sented by counsel, but, having decided upon the course that I intended
to pursue, and, as the enquiry was a Departmental one in which I
had no power to take evidence on oath, it did not appear to me that
to do so would be either convenient or helpful, and I advised Mr. Mc-
Combs to that effect.
I then proceeded with the enquiry, and have seen and examined,
and, in the majority of cases, have obtained written statements from
prisoners, warders and others at the Paparoa Prison, Christchurch,
the Alexandra Detention Barracks and elsewhere in Wellington, the
Trentham Training Camp, and in Wanganui.
Having regard to the subject of the enquiry, I knew that I might
expect to meet exaggeration on the one hand and prevarication on the
other, and I approached it with this mind, checking the statements of
one against that of another, and examining each person with reference
to the statements of others. I have been able to discover little or
no exaggeration in the statements of the prisoners. So far as I have
been able to check them they are fair and truthful. There are, of
course, discrepancies, but I found none that I can with certainty put
down to dishonest motives; on the other hand, I am satisfied that
many of the statements made to me by members of the Barracks staff
were untrue.
I do not intend to set out in detail the evidence in support of any
of my conclusions or the steps by which I arrive at them, except where
it may be necessary to do so for the purpose of explaining or illus-'
trating any particular matter. To do so would be. to lengthen this
report beyond reasonable limit. I attach hereto the evidence, which
speaks for itself. I have omitted altogether reference to any matter
that I regard as of only minor importance, or that I do not find to be
substantiated.
THE MAGISTERIAL REPORT.


I first deal with the “Truth” letter.
This letter, though purporting to be signed by nine prisoners, was,
in fact, not so signed; it was written either by or upon information
supplied by Harry Wilson, he being one of the first of the prisoners
to leave the Detention Barracks after the methods complained of in
the letter began to be put into operation. As his sentence was ex-
piring, it was arranged between the prisoners that he should take
steps to give publicity to what was going on, and the letter was the
result of this arrangement.
In the main the statements contained in the letter are true, and I
obtained evidence of several other things that are not referred to in
it. As the letter was written before Donovan underwent his punish-
ment there is no reference to his case, nor to the cases of Fitzpatrick
or McConville. There is, however, about the letter an exaggeration
of style that tends to give a heightened impression as to some of the
incidents narrated. Take, for instance, that part of the letter which
deals with Beaton:
“The following day another objector arrived from Wellington, in
charge of Sergt. Smith, of the Red Caps, the late coal dealer of
Petone, Lieutenant Crampton’s right-hand man. On refusing to do
certain things against his principles he was forcibly dressed in
denims, handcuffed, and then dragged round the yard by means of
pull-through ropes around his neck, which nearly choked him. He
was kicked and punched at the same time, and also pushed against
the wall with sickening thuds, until his face on both sides was like a
piece of raw steak, and drops of blood were to be seen all round the
yard and also on the walls.”
This suggests that Beaton was seriously wounded, or injured about
the face, as a result of the treatment. As a matter of fact, he was
seen by Dr. Anderson on the evening of the day on which he received
his punishment. The doctor says there were several scratches on
the side of his face, none of a serious nature, but such as could —and
lam satisfied did—bleed profusely. The statement in the letter as to
the appearance due to profuse bleeding may in a way be correct, but
without the explanation furnished by the doctor’s statement, it con-
veys much more than the truth. Later on I have set out in Beaton’s
own words his account of the affair.
It may be well to state here that, although none of the men were
seriously injured, it is possible, for one who knows how, to inflict
severe punishment without leaving many marks, and that is, I think,
what happened in these cases.
Moynihan and Donovan—especially Donovan —are spoken of as
determined Irishmen who had set themselves to defy the authorities
by refusing to wear the uniform or to drill. These men were ordered
two hours’ pack drill. Neither of them stood it a full hour. Donovan
Is said to have been a man who, in resisting capture, had fought with
two policemen, and Moynihan is described as something of a pugilist.
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


I am satisfied that it would take something more than moral suasion
to reduce Moynihan to subjection if he had made up his mind to
resist. Yet he and Donovan, in less than an hour, were transformed
from determined and defiant objectors to obedient and well-conducted
prisoners.
The amount of force used in each case would, of course, depend,
to a great extent, on the opposition shown.
Pallesen’s case is one of opposite type from Moynihan’s. Pallesen
was a religious objector—l am satisfied a genuine one—who, terrified
by threats and what he had heard from other prisoners as to the
treatment meted out to objectors, decided while he was in Barracks,
to offer no opposition to anything he was asked to do.
Each newcomer as he came in was warned by the other prisoners
of what he might expect if he showed any opposition to wearing the
uniform or drilling. Guard Byrne says he heard Monyihan saying to
another prisoner: “It’s not a bit of good for a man coming into the
Barracks and saying he won’t carry out the rules. I know it. They
made me do it, and if they can make me do it they can make anyone
do it.” Byrne then adds: “What Moynihan said was perfectly true:
when we made up our minds that we must do it we made them do
it. If they had done it in the beginning there would have been no
trouble.” Byrne warned Donovan of what he had to expect and ad-
vised him to submit, giving me as his reason, “That he had. had
enough of it with Moynihan. Moynihan was a marvel of man to stand
what he did.”
Each prisoner -who objected was plainly told by Lieut. Crampton
that he intended to have discipline and obedience, and that so long
as a prisoner was in the Barracks he would have to comply with the
regulations, and that included wearing the uniform and drilling when
required. If the prisoner would not agree to this he was threatened
with the consequence of refusal, and if he still persisted he was
broken In by main force. In Wilson’s and Moynihan’s cases bread and
water and solitary confinement were tried first. Generally speaking,
“breaking in” was accomplished in this way: A weighted pack was
put on the prisoner’s back, and a rifle fastened to his side by*means
of handcuffs and a piece of cord, one handcuff being attached to the
stock of the rifle and the other to the prisoner’s wrist; the barrel was
tied by the cord to his shoulder. If he was wearing uniform, instead
of being tied to the shoulder, the barrel was passed through the
shoulder-strap. The prisoner was then ordered to march, and if he
did not march he was pushed from behind and helped along by the
arms round the yard. When he came to a corner he was pushed
so as to bump against the wall, often so that he would strike it with
his head; at times he was punched and thumped on the back and
on the neck and his heels were trodden on. In some cases he was
kicked. In Donovan’s case, which .1 consider the worst, a rope was
used by which to pull him around, water was thrown on him while
THE MAGISTERIAL REPORT.


on the ground, and he was dragged for some distance along the floor
of the yard. Beaton was also pulled round the yard by means of a
cord, and he, Moynihan and Donovan were caught and pulled by the
hair. From time to time the men would be stopped and asked if they
would wear the uniform and do rifle drill, and if they refused or
would not reply they were driven round the yard again until they were
worn out and exhausted and gave in.
In all, leaving out Fitzgerald’s case, which I have been unable to
investigate fully, there were four cases in which prisoners were ac-
tually broken into submission. They were Wilson, Moynihan, Beaton
and Donovan. The details of each of these cases appear in the state-
ments of the prisoners concerned.
I propose to use Beaton’s own words as giving a fair average of
what happened. He was more severely treated than Wilson, but less
so than Moynihan or Donovan. His statement of what occurred is
accepted by Lieutenant Crampton as being a “fair outline of his
career.” He denies only that he ordered anyone to pull Beaton’s hair,
and says he could not tell who actually tied the rope on. lam satisfied
however, that Beaton’s hair was pulled, and that a rope was tied
round his neck as he describes. He says:
“I am a conscientious objector, I arrived in the Wanganui
Barracks on the 6th May on a sentence of 28 days for being absent
without leave (not rolling up to medical examination). Sergt. Smith
took me up from Wellington. On arrival at the Barracks I was taken
before the O.C. to have my particulars taken. When it came to the
question of what my religion was, I answered, T decline to state.’
He then asked me my next-of-kin. I said I hadn’t thought of it before,
and it would take me a little time to consider. After taking t*he
other particulars, he* charged me with insolence. He asked me how
I pleaded, and I said ‘Not Guilty.’ Sergt. Smith there all the
time. He then sentenced me 10 two hours’ pack drill, and ordered me
to be deprived of my mattrass for two nights. I was taken to a cell,
and told to take off my civil clothes by Sergt. Smith. I refused to
take them off, and Sergt. Smith said, ‘You are very foolish.’ Parmenter
came ift, and he and Sergt. Smith took off my clothes, I not resisting.
The O.C. came in also. They put me into the denims. I w T as not
treated roughly. I was then taken into the office, I think, and a pack
was put on. From there I was taken into the yard and a rifle was
offered to me, which I declined to take. So it was handcuffed to my
wrist —a pair of ordinary handcuffs, I think. Then I was ordered to
march; I think there was only Parmenter, Smith, and the O.C. there
then. I just stood still. Smith then tried to force me to march by
pushing me behind. He pushed me a step or two. As I did not take
it on the O.C. went in and came out with a rope. He fastened it round
my neck. Then Smith took hold of it and commenced to pull me
along, Parmenter pushing behind. . I was pushed and pulled this way
for several minutes. Every time I came to a corner, especially the
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


corner near cell 3, I was bumped into it. The O.C. then ordered
Smith to catch me by the hair. ‘Get him by the hair,’ or something
like that. Smith grabbed me by the hair and kept hold of it until a
handful came out. Then he got hold again, and some more came
out. Then he left the hair alone and went on pulling the rope. When
he had me by the hair he had a short grip of the rope. Hayes and
Byrne then came on the scene. Byrne commenced to punch me on the
back of the head and neck. This was kept up for several minutes.
They were still running me around. Sometimes I fell to the ground.
I was not kicked while on the ground, but I was kicked on the heels
to quicken my pace. When I was on the ground the O.C. looked at
his watch and said he was taking that time off. Occasionally I was
stopped to right the pack, but I was kept going continuously. Smith
was not on the rope all the time; sometimes someone else would take
his place. Hayes was the one that did the kicking on the heels.
It was not a serious affair —it was only to quicken the pace. After a
time I took hold of the rifle and held it up. I found it better for
myself to do that than let it hang by the handcuff. The 0.C., after a
while, asked me if I would put on the uniform. I said ‘No,’ and he
said, ‘Keep him going.’ After a while he repeated the question and I
answered, ‘No,’ and he said, ‘At him again,’ until I was bleeding from
the face, where I had been pushed against the wall. (I could not lie
on my right side for three weeks after.) They kept me going until I
was fair done up. At the latter part the rope was choking me. After
about three-quarters of an hour, I think, I was taken outside the
front of the building to finish my hour. I think he thought he had
dealt enough with me. From the time I took hold of the rifle I
walked myself. The second hour I did the next day on a sentry beat.
—I had given in to drilling. After I had done the first hour I was
ordered and took a cold bath. I consider the treatment I got in the
yard brutal. It is hard to explain it on paper—it doesn’t look any-
thing, but for an untrained man to go through it was very hard. He
is more than a beaten man after a quarter of an hour. After I did
what I was told there was no further trouble.”
In addition to the four cases I have spoken of, I find the following
matters proved:
1. That on the occasion on which Wilson was forcibly dressed in
his cell he was handcuffed, and while so handcuffed was knocked
against the wall of his cell by Corporal Parmenter, so as to strike the
wall with his head.
2. That Moynihan was forcibly dressed on three occasions on the
Sunday on which he was dealt with in the yard—he having between
time torn off the uniform or part of it. That these dressings resulted
in a general melee or, as one of the guards describes it, “mix-up.”
That while these things were going on Moynihan no doubt received
some knocks; that he had his head knelt on by one of the guards,
and that he received a kick on the chest, I am of the opinion that
THE MAGISTERIAL REPORT.


the kick or knock was one of the general results of the scuffle, and
was not intentional.
3. That Badger and Pallesen were dressed in uniform against their
wills, but that, as they offered no resistance, they received no rough
treatment.
4. That Badger had a rifle handcuffed to his wrist and that he was
kicked and punched by Sergt. Smith while being drilled in the staff
yard as described in his statement.
5. That on the occasion spoken of in prisoner Carian’s statement,
and in the circumstances and in the manner described therein he was
kicked by Guard Williams.
6. That Fitzpatrick was ill-treated in the yard by Lieut. Crampton
and Sergt. Smith. I am unable —owing to Fitzpatrick not being avail-
able —to ascertain the full detail of the ill-treatment, and I am satis-
fied that as a result of what happened in the yard Fitzpatrick was
bruised on the arm and was bleeding from the ear.
7. That the prisoners Badger and Pallesen were spoken to by Lieut.
Crampton on the occasion of his taking their particulars in the office,
and by others of the staff on other occasions, in the manner described
in their statements, and that this treatment was in some way as hurt-
ful to them as was physical ill-treatment to the other prisoners.
8. That McConville was assaulted by Lieut. Crampton in the yard
while undergoing punishment drill. In the absence of Fitzpatrick,
who was present at the time, I was unable to make a complete inves-
tigation of this case. Owing to my not being able to get Fitzpatrick’s
statement, and having regard to the denial of Lieut. Crampton and
the statement of Hayes, I am unable to say whether McConville was
actually struck by the rifle; but I am satisfied that Lieut Crampton
caught McConville by the throat, pushed his head against the wall,
and at least threatened to strike him, and that the object of this
assault was to frighten McConville into taking the uniform kit when
it should be offered to him on his arrival at Trentham, and was not
done for anything McConville was doing or had done or omitted to do
in the yard.
From all the happenings it was quite clear that the object of the
application of force was to compel prisoners who objected to do so
to take the uniform and to do the rifle drill with the general purpose
of breaking down opposition to Military Service.
As to whether it was lawful to adopt means of this kind to effect
this object, it is scarcely necessary for me to say anything. If
measures of this kind had been used in a Civil Prison to compel a
prisoner to perform some task there is no doubt as to what would
have been said to them. Turning to the rules for the conduct of
Military Detention Barracks, I find that the only regulation dealing
directly with the subject is Regulation 109, which says: “No member
of the staff shall strike a soldier under sentence unless compelled to do
so in self-defence, and in any case in which the application of force
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


to a soldier is needed no more force than is necessary shall be used. - '
This regulation is practically identical in terms with Regulation 31
of the Regulations under “The Prisons Act, 1908,” being the rules
regulating the conduct of civil prisons.
It appears to me that under this regulation no more force may he
used either in a civil prison or in a military detention barracks (as
at present constituted) than is necessary to prevent a prisoner from
harming himself, his fellow-prisoners, the prison staff or the prison
property, or to convey him to or from some place to or from which
he has been lawfully ordered to go, and it cannot be used to compel a
prisoner serving sentence to perform some task or to do anything in
the nature of a task that he has refused to do.
It was contended by Lieut Crampton that, according to the custom
of the service, force similar in kind to that used by him was applied
in all detention barracks, and evidence was adduced to me as to the
practise in the Abbassia and Citadel Detention Barracks at Cairo and
in some punishment compounds under Imperial rule in France. From
this it appears that force more or less severe is used as punishment
and to reduce refractory prisoners to submission. There was, how-
ever, no question of objection to military service with any of these
prisoners. They were simply cases of defaulters, some of the riff-raff
of the Army. Strong measures would have to be taken in such cases.
But whether force of the kind spoken of was or was not used in those
places is beside the question. Either the regulations under which
they were conducted were different from those in force in New Zea-
land, or much of %hat is said to have been done there was as Irre-
gular as what was done in the present cases.
I am satisfied that Lieut. Crampton knew that what was being done
would not, if called into question, have borne the light of day, but it
is fair to him to say that his position was in some respects a difficult
one. If he had only had the ordinary military prisoner to deal with
I do not think, so far as he was concerned, that there would have been
any trouble over the management of the prison. By the ordinary
military prisoner-1 mean the man who, having no objection to military
service, is doing a term of imprisonment for “absence from parade,”
“drunkenness on duty,” or some such offence, and who, recognising
himself as a soldier, is quite amenable to military discipline and
looks upon his drill as part of his ordinary work.
But side by side with this class of men, Lieut. Crampton had to
deal with two other classes of prisoners—one composed of men openly
“up against and out to beat” military service, the other class com-
posed of men whose religious scruples—though in many cases genuine
—are beyond the understanding of the normally-constituted person.
Neither of these would comply with the regulations, and the Lieutenant
was thus faced with the question of the effect or the example of these
men on the ordinary prisoner. Seeing them doing as they liked—a
favourite practice with some of the more defiant of the objectors was
THE MAGISTERIAL REPORT.


to show their defiance by refusing to address the officer as “Sir” —the
ordinary prisoner would naturally see no reason why he should not
behave in the same way.
Lieut. Crampton says that, before he took actual charge of the
Barracks at Wanganui, knowing that he would have Conscientious
Objectors to deal with, he had visited the Alexandra Barracks, Wel-
lington, for the purpose of seeing in practice the methods applied there.
He says he found discipline in those Barracks very bad, that Conscienti-
ous Objectors were under the control of a corporal and were allowed
to do what they liked. He says that in answer to a question, the
corporal replied, “What can I do? If I ask them to do something or
wear any prison clothing they refuse. They whistle, sing, call out,
and count out the military police, and do what they like.”
He explained that in consequence of what he saw there he resolved
to have a different state of things in the Barracks under his charge,
and, if his description of matters at the Alexandra Barracks is cor-
rect, it was certainly time that a change was brought about there.
The defiant objectors gave him credit for being quite fair with
them. He was determined that military discipline should be main-
tained in the Barracks, and he made this quite plain to them. As
soon as one of them had given in and agreed to “carry on” there was
nothing to complain of on the part of Lieut. Crampton. His attitude
towards this stamp of man was: “Either I beat you or you beat me,
and I’ll take care you don’t beat me,” He took a short cut towards
solving the problem before him, disregarding the fact that prison
regulations are binding on all alike, and that, while they call for
strict compliance on the part of the prisoners, they call with much
greater force for compliance from those in whose charge prisoners are
placed, and in whose hands they are to a very great extent helpless
dependants.
Under the regulations, what appears to me to be ample power of
punishment is given to officers in charge. Under Regulation 131 they
ipay order close confinement, punishment diet, and deprivation of
mattress for any period not exceeding three days. This power is far
greater than that possessed by the jailer of a Civil Prison, and a
prisoner committing a breach of regulations lays himself open to be
dealt with by courtmartial, which may impose still greater punish-
ment. Had Lieut. Crampton dealt with these prisoners throughout in
accordance with this regulation, he would have been within his rights,
but it is very open to question whether, as a matter of principle, it
is right to deal with them at all in this way. It has to be remem-
bered that these men were military objectors; that for refusing their
kit, which really means refusing to perform any military duty, they
had been sentenced to detention; to again offer them the kit or part
of it or to require them to perform acts of a military nature while
under detention and to further punish them for refusal is in effect to
punish them twice for the same offence. If the courtmartial had power
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


to order “bread and water” or to impose other conditions as part f
the original sentence for refusing the kit, good and well; it could —
if it wished—have done so. But if such a court had not that power,
or if it had refrained from exercising it, it is not proper for the pun-
ishment awarded by the courtmartial for a particular offence to be
increased by other means because of a repetition of that offence dur-
ing the period covered by the original term.
I think the practice of sending objectors for a short term to De-
tention Barracks is absurd. It tends to destroy the discipline of the
ordinary military offender and seems to me to serve no useful pur-
pose. I think such men should be treated from the beginning in the
way that it is proposed to deal with them ultimately.
It is not within my province to discuss the general question of the
treatment of such men. Ranging as they do from the shameless
coward and the open rebel to the man who, whatever may be thought
of the soundness of his principles, is sincere and is prepared to sacri-
fice everything for them, it is difficult to devise a means of treatment
applicable to all cases.
During the course of my investigations I have had many conversa-
tions with Objectors and others, and in consequence have formed some
opinion on the subject, and if required I shall be glad to place it
before the Department.
I submit the following recommendations as to the future con-
duct of the institution: —
(1) That .the Barracks be used as a place of detention for
military offenders only, and that objectors to military seivice
snould not be sent there.
(2) That the personnel of the staff be changed. So far as I
can ascertain, none of the present staff possesses any experience
or particular qualification fitting him for this kind of work.
Some are clearly quite unfit to act as prison warders. I suggest
that the new staff be composed of specially-chosen men, none
under the rank of a non-commissioned officer.
(3) That, in addition to the military official visitors pro-
vided for by Regulation 41, the Minister should appoint suitable
persons, being civilians, with duties and powers similar to
those of a visiting justice of a civil prison, and that all mem-
bers of the Prisons Board, the Inspector and Deputy-Inspector
of Prisons and the Stipendiary Magistrate of the district be so
appointed ex officio.
I have the honour to be, etc.,
(Signed) J. GEORGE L. HEWITT.
THE MAGISTERIAL REPORT.


XXVI.—AFTER THE VERDICT.
The long-delayed report, with its verdict of guilty, and the Magis-
trate’s declaration that the officials at the Detention Barracks had
lied to him, while the statements of the prisoners were substantially
true, was like a bombshell dropped among the National Government
supporters; but only the Labour members were ready to force the
Government’s hands in the matter.
On December 6, Mr. L. M. Isitt (Christchurch North) asked the
Minister of Defence, without notice, “whether any punishment had
been allotted, and, if so, what punishment it was, on the men who were
responsible for the cruelties practised on the military defaulters in
the Wanganui Detention Barracks.” Sir James Allen said “the report
of the Commission recommended the removal of the staff. The staff
had all been removed except the lieutenant in command, and he would
have been removed but for the outbreak of influenza, which had ren-
dered it difficult to at once replace him.” Mr. Isitt asked "if that
meant that the men responsible had been dismissed or merely removed
to another position?” Sir James Allen: “The staff has been removed.”
On the same day, also without notice, I sought information from
the Minister as to “whether the House would be afforded an opportun-
ity to discuss the Wanganui Report, and, if so, when? Also, whether
he would lay on the table all the papers in connection with the term
of office of Lieutenant Crampton?” Sir James Allen replied that
“anything that was not of a confidential character in connection with
the officer referred to —and he did not know that there was anything
confidential—he would be glad to lay upon the table. In respect to a
discussion upon the report of the inquiry referred to, he might say
that the honourable member had an opportunity of discussing that
report at any time he liked; but he could not see that there was any
object in wasting the time of the House over a discussion upon the
report now.”
On December 9, Mr. Witty (Riccarton) asked- the Minister of De-
fence, “if it was correct that one Smith, formerly Lieutenant Cramp-
ton’s right-hand man at the Wanganui Detention Barracks, was at
present a sergeant in the military police at Christchurch; and, if so,
was that the removal the Minister spoke if?” Sir James Allen replied
that “he could not tell the honourable gentleman, but would make
enquiries. At present he did not know.”
The papers in connection with Crampton’s Samoan record were not
laid on the table of the House, and when it appeared that all discussion
was likely to be burked, I took advantage of the third reading of the
Appropriation Bill to raise a protest. My remarks are reported in
“Hansard” thus:—
“I wish to refer to the case of Lieutenant Crampton, a man who
was formerly Provost-Marshal, Commissioner of Police, and Judge of


Native Affairs at Samoa. He became involved in trouble with a native
women there. He was courtmartialled three times. He escaped on
the more serious immoral charge, but was found guilty of having
assaulted a woman. It was proved that he had thrashed her with a
stick. For that crime he was merely reprimanded, and his return to
New Zealand was recommended. He came back to New Zealand, and
for some reason best known to themselves, the Defence Department
placed him in control of the Wanganui Barracks, and gave him charge
of the Conscientious Objectors and other military defaulters, and we
have had laid on the table of the House the report of the Magistrate,
Mr. Hewitt, showing that Lieutenant Crampton, while in charge at
Wanganui, was guilty of almost indescribable brutalities, so far as the
prisoners under him were concerned. I want to ask for an assurance
that this man will not be retained as a military officer, that men will
not be placed under his charge, and that he will not be allowed to
exercise the powers over them which he exercised over the prisoners at
Wanganui. I want to go further than that, and demand from the
Government that Lieutenant Crampton shall be placed on trial for the
crimes of which he was guilty at the Wanganui Barracks. I think the
House ought to insist on the fullest explanation by the Government
as to why, knowing Lieutenant Crampton’s record, knowing the serious
charge on which he had been tried at Samoa, knowing that he had
been found guilty of brutally ill-treating a half-caste woman—why,
knowing all this, he was still allowed to retain his position as an
officer in the Defence Forces, and why he was given that important
position at Wanganui. I have made in this House and outside it re-
peated attempts to get at the bottom of this case, and to get Lieu-
tenant Crampton’s record as regards Samoa, but, for some unaccount-
able reason, delays occurred that were irritating, and which seemed
to those of us outside the inner circle, to be altogether inexplicable.
The Christchurch * Sun ’ has given the public the information which T
have given to this House, and I think the position is a most serious
one. ... I ask from the Cabinet an explanation with regard to
Crampton, and an assurance that he will not be allowed to remain
a day longer in the Defence Forces of New Zealand.”
XXVII—THE COURTMARTIAL.
The "trial” of J. W. Crampton, lieutenant, on charges of having
ill-treated prisoners at Wanganui Military Detention Barracks was
commenced at the Drill Hall, Wanganui, on Wednesday, January 29.
The court consisted of Lieut.-Col. Colquhoun (president), Major
Hume, Major Macksey, Major Henty, Major Asworth, Major Talbot,
and Captain Smith.
AFTER THE VERDICT.


Captain Hudson was prosecutor, and Captain Baldwin judge-advo-
cate.
Prior to the date of the courtmartial I had communicated with
the Minister of Defence urging that the men who had been subjected
to the treatment complained of should be permitted to be represented
by counsel —a request which the Minister refused.
The prisoner was represented by Mr. N. G. Armstrong, of Wan-
ganui—who appeared as junior counsel to Mr. Loughnan (Palmerston
North).
The drawing of the class line received some emphasis when
Crampton, under guard, came into court, and immediately sat down
without waiting for the court’s permission. The Army Act provides
that a common soldier must not sit unless the court allows him to
do so, but an officer has the right to sit without the court’s- per-
mission.
I made an application to be permitted to assist the prosecutor,
quoting from the Manual of Military Law, section 42, footnote c, as
follows: —“If the prosecution is.instituted at the instance of a civilian,
that civilian may be in court and assist the prosecutor, but he cannot
speak or take part himself in the prosecution, except as a witness,
as (subject as to the rule as to counsel) the prosecutor must under
this rule be in every case subject to military law, though, of course,
this requirement does not extend to counsel appearing for the prose-
cution.” I pointed out that no one would seriously dispute that I
was the instigator of the present proceedings. The first charge that
men had been ill-treated at Wanganui Detention Barracks had been
made by myself at Reefton on May of last year; and since that time,
both in the press, on the public platform, and from the floor of the
House, I had repeatedly demanded a trial. The present proceedings,
I insisted, arose out of my demands, and were, therefore, instituted
at my instance.
Mr. Armstrong objected to the application being granted. He
contended that the instigator should be something more than the
writer of letters to the Minister and newspaper articles, or the making
of speeches either on the platform or in Parliament. He should
have special qualifications to assist the prosecutor, and he denied that
Mr. Holland had those qualifications. The Judge-Advocate interjected
that the word was not “instigated” but “instituted”—which was a
different matter. Mr. Armstrong proceeded to say that the real
institutor of the proceedings was Crampton himself.
Captain Hudson, prosecutor, pointed out that the question was
rather one of “conferring” and not so much “assisting.” He did not
think that he could be assisted very much by Mr. Holland, but had
no objection whatever to the application being granted. It was the
prosecutor’s duty to ascertain the truth, and he would welcome any
assistance in that direction.
The Judge-Advocate strongly opposed the application. He argued
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


that it would have been necessary for Mr. Holland to have legally
instituted the proceedings to entitle him to the privilege conferred by
the clause he had quoted. Mr. Holland did not come within the
scope of the word “instituted.” It applied only where a civilian could
give material assistance to the prosecutor.
The president, after conferring with the other members, said that
the court was compelled to take its law from the judge-advocate, and
must, therefore, rule that Mr. Holland’s application could not be
granted.
An application by Mr. Armstrong for an adjournment of the pro-
ceedings was successful, the Court deciding to adjourn till February 12.
No Crown witnesses had been brought to Wanganui for the trial,
which seemed to indicate that the adjournment had been arranged
previously.
An incident in connection with Mr. Tom Moynihan reveals that the
Defence Department is so utterly mismanaged that it cannot even
locate the men in its employ. Mr. Moynihan was employed as a
member of the Medical Corps at King George’s Hospital, Rotorua. A
day or two prior to the courtmartial the authorities were
seeking his address in order to call him as a witness. The Wel-
lington office apparently communicated with the Greymouth office,
asking for the address, and the Greymouth office applied to Mr. Moy-
nihan’s father at Otira for the necessary information.
The second sitting of the Court took place on February 12. There
were in all eleven charges against Crampton. The first was that he
had ill-treated Harry Wilson (a Conscientious Objector) by grabbing
him by the neck and allowing two non-commissioned officers to place
a military pack on his shoulders.
Wilson described how Crampton became annoyed because he re-
fused to “sir” him, and also because he told him (Crampton) that he
was not “Private” Wilson, but Mr. Wilson. Crampton sentenced him
to three days’ bread and water; his own clothes were stripped from
him and he was forcibly dressed in uniform. He then described his
treatment by the guards, concluding with the statement that when he
refused to obey Crampton’s order to put on the pack, Crampton
caught him by the hair with both hands and pulled his head almost
to the ground.
While Mr. Wilson was in the box, he was asked by Mr. Loughnan
(counsel for Crampton): “Did the letter sent to ‘Truth’ wind up with
these words: ‘This is signed by eight Conscientious Objectors’?” The
answer was “I don’t think so.” (A reference to Mr. Wilson’s letter
to Mr. Mark Fagan—of which the “Truth” letter was largely a copy—
shows that Mr. Wilson gave the names of the eight men by whom he
had been authorised to sign.)
Captain Hudson sought to ask the witness if he had ever been in-
duced by Crampton to attach his signature to any document; but
THE COURTMARTIAL.


counsel for Crampton strongly objected, and the Court upheld the
objection.
Quartermaster-Sergt. Porter said Smith brought Wilson into his
office, where the pack was kept. Wilson was knocked about until he
put it on. Crampton then caught Wilson by the hair and shook his
head. He then ordered Wilson’s hair to be cut off, and this was
eventually done. Crampton caught Wilson by the neck and pushed
his head down. Crampton and Sergt. Smith were yelling and bawling
continuously at the man. It was mostly bad language they were
using.
Cross-examined by Mr. Loughnan, witness said he was quite posi-
tive Crampton seized Wilson by the neck and pushed him to the
ground. Great violence was used. He could see no reason for the
violence. Wilson was shook as if he were a dog.
Crampton’s evidence was to the effect that he was not handling
Conscientious Objectors, but soldiers. “He received verbal instruc-
tions from headquarters that no Conscientious Objectors would be
sent to Wanganui Barracks.” He claimed he had the right to use
what force was necessary when a soldier obstinately refused to do
his duty. Wilson “showed dumb insolence.” He admitted giving
Wilson three days’ 'solitary confinement on bread and water, and
ordering him to be deprived of his mattress. He denied that he had
seized Wilson by the hair, and also gave an absolute denial to
Porter’s evidence. When a communication came from headquarters
giving the names of eight men whom it was alleged had signed the
“Truth” letter, he “made” inquiries, and the men “voluntarily signed
a document denying cruelty or that they signed a letter to ‘Truth.’
Two of them, he said, declared that all they did was to sign a blank
paper.
On the third day of the Court’s sitting, Crampton’s counsel (Mr.
Loughnan) made an astonishing revelation as to the purpose of the
courtmartial. Crampton, he said, “WAS NOT BROUGHT THERE
TO ANSWER CHARGES LEVELLED AGAINST HIM, BUT IN ORDER
TO CLEAR HIS CHARACTER OF CHARGES MADE THROUGHOUT
THE COUNTRY BY A TOTALLY IRRESPONSIBLE TRIBUNAL,
APPOINTED UNDER GOODNESS KNOWS WHAT AUTHORITY.”
The Court’s decision was reserved.
The second charge against Crampton was that he allowed un-
necessary force to be used to compel Harry Wilson to do pack drill.
During Wilson’s evidence, objection was raised to the term
“slaughter yard,” applied by Lieut. Crampton (according to the evi-
dence) to the yard in which drill took place. Wilson described how
he was pushed and punched by Lance-Corporal Walker, with Cramp-
ton giving orders, while they were endeavouring to make him do pack
drill. He had refused to obey the double quick march because it was
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


a military order. He was firmly resolved not to obey any military
orders.
Quartermaster-Sergt. Porter said Wilson was driven round the
yard with a pack on, and with Smith and another man on either side
holding an arm, and Crampton chasing round giving orders. Cramp-
ton’s orders were: “Keep him going.” There was a little blood flying
around. Wilson was knocked about in a way no sensible man would
treat a dog. He (witness) had told Crampton he was breaking the
regulations. Crampton was in the habit of blackguarding him (wit-
ness) in the office.
When the courtmartial resumed on the fourth day the Judge-
Advocate argued that “the law permitted force to be used for the
maintenance of military discipline.” He combatted the argument of
Capt. Hudson, the prosecutor, that “any force was unnecessary
because under no circumstances could force be used to a soldier except
in accordance with the commands of a competent tribunal.” The
Judge-Advocate then proceeded to “stress the importance of maintain-
ing and enforcing discipline.” If the force used by Crampton was
used to maintain military discipline, he contended, no offence had been
committed.
The Court reserved its decision.
The third charge against Crampton was the treatment of William
Bertram Donovan, who served 25 days’ detention at Wanganui.
In the course of his evidence, Donovan said that on his arrival at
the Barracks, Crampton asked if he would carry a rifle and wear a
uniform. He replied that he would not —that he objected to military
service. Crampton said: “I don’t recognise military objectors here,”
and added: “Take him to the slaughter yard.” After a pack had
been put on him, and he refused to march, Corporal Jenkins put a
rope round his neck, and started to pull him round the yard.
Occasionally Smith and Parmenter pushed behind. When he fell,
buckets of water were dashed into his face while he was lying on the
ground. After about three quarters of an hour of this treatment,
he said he was done and consented to march. Crampton said:
“You have just lasted three quarters of an hour which is five
minutes less than the man who lasted longest.” He (witness)
was again told to march, and he did. While he was marching
Guard Williams was kicking him from behind and Parmenter on
several occasions punched him on the back of the -neck. Smith
also pulled witness by the hair and nose. Accused (Crampton)
hit him under the chin with a cane and told him to hold his head
up. The blow was hard enough to break the skin and make it
bleed. Crampton also hit him on the hand and told him to swing
his arms. His hand was all swollen across the knuckles and he
was also cut under the chin. Lance-Corporal Faulkner on several
occasions pushed him into the wall. At the present time he was
THE COURTMARTIAL.


serving a term of a year and eleven months’ imprisonment for
refusing to take his kit at Featherston. He was a Conscientious
Objector and a Roman Catholic.
Thomas Moynihan, who was at the Wanganui Detention Bar-
racks during May of 1918, deposed that as he was on his way to
his own cell he saw Donovan in the “slaughter yard” with a rope
around his neck, and immediately after heard bumping and scuffling
in the yard, followed by groans and the sound of dragging.
Donald Kerr Porter, son of Colonel. Porter, and who was Quarter-
master-Sergeant at the time, said he saw Donovan being ill-treated.
He was thrown on the ground and bumped against the wall. Witness
thought he was dead. He saw Crampton telling Donovan to get
up, and Jenkins pulling on the rope round Donovan’s neck and
dragging him along a few yards. He (witness) then left. He
expected to hear next day that Donovan was dead.
Crampton admitted that he “put his hand under Donovan’s chin
to make him hold his head up,” but denied that he struck him.
Donovan had a slight scratch on his cheek which witness attribut-
ed to careless handling of the rifle.
J. M. M. Jenkins, corporal, said “the only time Crampton touched
Donovan was to correct the position of the rifle.”
Dr. Anderson, medical officer attached to the Barracks, said he
examined Donovan, but found no marks on his neck.
Thomas William Smith, formerly a sergeant at Wanganui Bar-
racks, gave evidence in support of the defence. He admitted that
water was flung over Donovan, but said if Crampton struck him
under the chin with a cane he did not see it.
The Court’s decision was reserved.
The fourth charge against Crampton was taken on the fifth
day of the “trial,” when he was charged with permitting unnecessary
force to be used to compel Donovan to obey an order.
Donovan and Moynihan gave evidence on similar lines to that ten-
dered by them on the previous day.
Alister Beaton said that while undergoing 28 days’ detention, he
heard scuffling in the yard and a loud groan. He was on his way
from the bathroom to his cell, and looking into the yard saw
Donovan in a limp condition. The next morning he saw red marks
on Donovan’s neck and scratches on both sides of his face.
At this stage the prosecution asked for leave to put in as evidence
the depositions of Private Joseph McConville before Mr. J. G. L.
Hewitt, S.M., at the magisterial inquiry, the witness now being
overseas. Counsel for accused objected, and the Court ruled the
evidence was not admissable.
Benjamin Winch, a member of the Military Police at the Barracks,
made reference to the treatment of Fitzpatrick, and said he knew
.that Donovan had been knocked about.
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


Crampton, in the course of his evidence, said “he had been ad-
vised by the civil police that Donovan was a dangerous character.’’
A rifle had been handcuffed to Donovan’s wrist “as witness wanted
to make sure he could not use it on the staff.” He admitted that
three buckets of water were poured over Donovan.'
Under cross-examination by Captain Hudson, Crampton said: “If
he had allowed a man to beat him, it would have meant the end
of his career at the barracks. There was no difference in the
treatment of a dangerous character, but witness would be more
on his guard.
Arthur George Faulkner, lance-corporal, admitted that he
had helped to pull Donovan along, but said it was untrue that
Donovan was pulled around by the hair or nose. “Donovan tried to
bite Sergeant Smith, and on that occasion Smith caught Donovan by
the nose and pushed his head up.”
On the sixth day, Major Osborne Lilly, Director of Personal Ser-
vices, was a witness. He described a visit made by him to the
Wanganui Barracks and his interviews with the men whose names
were attached to the “Truth” letter. Replying to one of the men, he
said he “formed the impression that Pallesen was not as sound in his
mind as might be expected from a norma.l individual.” He spoke
to all the men except Wilson and Moynihan.
In reply to Captain Hudson, the Major admitted that he had not
carried out his investigations in “a proper legal manner.” Had he
done so, he said, the persons against whom accusations were made
should have been present. “It was not a secret investigation.”
John Malcolm Morris Jenkins said he saw no ill-treatment of Dono-
van; and Sergt.-Major Bell described the methods employed at the
Adessia Detention Barracks in Egypt, under Imperial controls At
the time of his visit in February of last year, there were 200 soldiers
in prison there, and they had some bad cases. All the men were told
what would happen if they refused to obey orders. No refusal was
allowed; force would be applied if a man refused to carry out orders.
“He had seen it used on more than one occasion; it happened fairly
frequently.” If a man refused to put his uniform on he was taken
in a room away from everyone else and given the option of putting
on the uniform himself or having it put on by the staff. If he still
refused he was forcibly dressed. If the man struggled, more force
would have to be used to overcome his resistance, and sometimes he
would get knocked about for his own fault. Witness had seen force
used on several occasions to make a man march. The man was gen-
erally seized by each arm and marched along. If he refused to march
then he would be frequently dragged by the feet. He would be kept
on the move by relays of staff until he decided to march. Another
method was to place him either two or three in a four when the parade
was in columns of fours and give the order to quick march. He had
either to march or be walked over. The method was generally effec-
THE COURTMARTIAL.


tive. A rope was sometimes placed around the man’s waist and he
was pulled round till he was willing to march. 111-treatment and foul-
play were absolutely forbidden in the barracks, such as punching a
man or causing him any bodily injury. There were safeguards
against the abuse of force. The barracks were frequently inspected,
and at such times the men under detention had an option of com-
plaining, and if the soldier could prove that the staff had used
unnecessary force to make him obey orders, the staff would get very
short shrift. Witness remembered a man refusing to shave before
going on parade. He was taken to his cell and forcibly shaved.
These methods were generally successful in breaking down resistance
and making men submissive. The treatment at this barracks-was
very much more lenient than at the Citadel, which was another deten-
tion barracks. The Adessia was known as “The Nursery.”
This witness, under cross-examination, insisted that the Superin-
tendent of the Detention Barracks was the judge of .the amount of force
to be used. “On what would he base his judgment?” asked Captain
Hudson. “On the amount of resistance used by the soldier,” replied
the sergeant-major. “Would he not be guided by rules of Military
Detention Barracks?” was the next question. “No,” was the reply:
'“he would not think of them; it would be a case of man against man.”
Counsel for Crampton argued that the force used “was merely
sufficient to overcome the resistance.”
Captain Hudson, in closing hig case, remarked that accused and
.others had frankly admitted that a rifle was strapped to Donovan, a
rope put around him, and water thrown over him when prostrate.
According to the rules, Donovan should have been reported to the
officer commanding to be dealt with under the Army Act. It was
clear that unnecessary force had been used. There was nothing in
the regulations to show that a man could be handcuffed to an object,
fixed or otherwise. The use of a rope was not authorised in any way,
and was a force that was unnecessary. No one was allowed to strike
a soldier, unless in self defence.
The Judge-Advocate justified the use of water, and described
Donovan’s account of his treatment as "wild.”
The Court reserved its decision.
The fifth charge against Crampton was that of striking John
McConville, a soldier.
Captain Hudson asked leave to withdraw the charge, owing to
McConville, the principal and only witness, being overseas, and the
Court having already ruled that his evidence was not admlssable.
The Judge-Advocate objected to the withdrawal of the case. He
argued that if the evidence for the prosecution were insufficient, the
Court could acquit Crampton.
The Court retired to consider the point, and on its return did not
.announce its decision.
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


The sixth charge against Crampton was that he permitted un-
necessary force to be used to compel McConville to do pack drill.
Owing to McConville having been embarked, his evidence was not
available, and the Court reserved its decision.
The seventh charge against Crampton was that he allowed un-
necessary force to be used to compel Thomas Moynihan to do pack
drill. The case was called immediately prior to the Court’s adjourn-
ment on the sixth day.
On the seventh day of the “trial,” Moynihan entered the witness-
box, and told the Court that while in the barracks, on Ist May, he
was sentenced to pack drill, A uniform was given to him; he refused
to put it on, and it was forcibly put on. He was considerably
knocked about. Lieut. Crampton was not present. At his request,
witness was taken before Lieut. Crampton, and complained that he
had been kicked over the heart. Witness showed him the marks.
Lieut. Crampton asked Corporal Jenkins what it was for, and he
replied that witness had refused to put on his uniform. “Oh, if that
is so, we will soon fix you up,” Crampton said. Witness was
taken back to the cell, where the uniform was again forcibly put on
him. Witness was ordered to pack drill after church. The pack
was put on him forcibly, and witness was ordered to march. Cor-
poral Parmenter bumped his head on the wall, and he was punched
on the back. Lieut. Crampton was present then. Witness was
ordered to march, but did not. He was punched around the yard for
a few turns and bumped into the wall. Parmenter, Jenkins,
and Byrne used to take turns about, and punched him round the yard
for a considerable time. Then they had a confab as what to do next.
Lieut. Crampton came in and out of the yard and asked if witness
would give in. Faulkner grabbed witness by the hair and pulled him
along the yard. Witness struck him. Then they all got on to him and
knocked him about. Faulkner kicked him while he was on the ground.
Lieut. Crampton came into the yard then and made some remarks
to witness which had the effect of stopping him from groaning. He
then ordered the guards to carry on with witness.- He said: “Push
his head through the b wall.” The guards, did their best to
do it.
Someone suggested taking a photograph, which Lieut.- Crampton
adopted, and took photographs. Lieut. Crampton asked if witness
would carry on, saying, “I’ll beat you, Moynihan, I’m a pig-headed
Irishman like you are.” Witness asked to be given one guard at a
time, and he would not care. His rifle was tied on to his left arm
with a string, and kept coming off his shoulder. Faulkner bumped
it against his face, and kept doing it until blood ran down his face.
Jenkins told Faulkner to cut it out as it was spoiling the uniform.
They kept at witness for an hour, and after that he was ordered inside.
Witness then told them he would give in,
THE COURTMARTIAL.


In reply to Mr. Loughnan, witness said he was very violently
kicked on many occasions, first in the cell, and then afterwards in the
yard. He was kicked over the head, on the small of the back, and
on the legs. After witness struck Faulkner, the latter used to be
allowed to get at him, and then knocked him down, and struck him
with his boots. The rifle was tied on to his shoulder with a piece
of string, which went round his neck. Witness was exceedingly sore
after this experience, and was for weeks afterwards. He was black
and blue on the back. He stood to be photographed. Somebody
kicked his feet into position, and Faulkner held the rifle while he
was being photographed. It was before he was photographed that
Faulkner struck him with the rifle barrel. He was examined by a
doctor at the barracks some time after the occurrence. It was not
the next day; it was just before he came away. It might have been
the sth when it took place. He would deny that he was examined on
the 6th. He would contradict Lieut. Crampton if he said in witness’s
presence that he told the doctors that witness had complained tha>
he had been kicked over the heart the previous day. The doctor
did not examine him at any time as to the injury to the heart he
had complained of. After he came out of the padded cell, where
he had been for 48 hours on bread and water, witness was too weak
to carry on, and the doctor examined him. This was before the pack
drill. Witness denied that the barrel of the rifle was put through
the shoulder strap and tied to his wrist at the commencement of the
drill and remained in that position throughout the drill.
Roland Gordon Halkett, who was undergoing detention at the
barracks, said he heard scuffling and struggling in the yard, and
accused asking Moynihan if he would do any drill. Witness heard
bashing and bumping against the wall, and Crampton say: "Give him
some more,” and “Keep him going.” Shortly afterwards witness heard
groans coming from the yard, and accused’s voice telling Moynihan to
get up. Witness saw Moynihan two days after with the marks on his
face.
Quartermaster-Sergt. Porter said that Moynihan, while doing pack
drill, was punched by Parmenter and kicked by Faulkner.
Dr. Anderson said Moynihan complained of an injury to his chest
about the heart, and witness could find no trace of it.
Accused Crampton said Moynihan was given pack drill for refusing
to put on uniform. As he refused to march witness ordered the guards
to take turns in pushing him round the yard. Moynihan finally
agreed to do his drill. When Moynihan came to the barracks first
he declared he would only fight for Ireland, and he (Crampton) ac-
cordingly regarded him as "a defiant shirker.”
Arthur George Faulkner denied that he kicked Moynihan or grabbed
him by the hair, John M. M. Jenkins and Edward Byrne denied that
Moynihan was either hit or kicked. The latter witness, however, said
he was not present all the time.
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


The eighth charge against Crampton was heard on the ninth day
of the “trial.” Crampton was charged with having permitted the
staff to use unnecessary force to compel Alister Beaton to do pack
drill. „
Alister Beaton said Crampton ordered him pack drill for two hours,
also to be deprived of his mattress for two days on a charge of
“insolence.” He was forcibly dressed in denims, and taken to the
yafd, where he declined to take the rifle handed to him. It was
handcuffed to his wrist. He was ordered to march, and refused.
Crampton put a rope round his neck, and he was dragged round the
yard by Sergt. Smith, Corporal Parmenter pushing behind. Witness
was continually being bumped into a corner of the wall, and he
started to bleed freely from the face. At Crampton’s orders Smith
got witness by the hair and dragged him round the yard, a handful
of hair coming out. Smith caught hold again and another handful
came out. After a time witness consented to hold the rifle. While
he was marching round, Private Haines trod on his heels to quicken
his step. During one of the rounds, Private Byrne came in and rained
punches on his back and neck for some little time. After witness
had consented to march, Crampton asked if he would put the uniform
on, and on receiving a refusal, ordered him to go round again.
During one of the rounds, Crampton poked him in the ribs with his
cane. On one of the last rounds, witness fell to the ground; he got
up as quickly as he could, cannoned into the back wall and then hit
the other wall, the blow nearly knocking him out. Crampton then
called a halt and ordered a uniform to be put on him. After a little
more marching, Crampton asked him if he had any complaint to make.
He at first did not answer, but eventually said he had none. Some
time later Crampton asked the men at tea if any who had obeyed
orders had been ill-treated. No one replied. He then asked if any
who had disobeyed orders had been ill-treated Witness told him he
had got a pretty rough handling. He replied: “My God, you did!
And you will get it again.” The night of the pack drill witness was
examined by a doctor, who asked how he got the abrasions on the
face. Crampton answered for witness, and said it was an omission
on witness’s part that day.
Cross-examined by Mr. Loughnan, witness said Bryne was the only
man who struck him. As a result of the blows, the back of his head
and neck were sore and stiff. He did not show this condition to the
doctor. The doctor was making a mistake in saying the scratch on
his face was slight. It was so bad that two days later scabs formed
and prevented him shaving. Witness said he told the Magistrate
that he considered the treatment that he got in the yard was brutal.
It did not look very much on paper, but for an untrained man to go
through it was very bad. He was quite sure the rope was put round
his heck, but it was not tight.
Harry Wilson said he was working when he saw Beaton being
pulled around by a rope.
155
THE COURTMARTIAL.


The Court reminded witness that in his statement to the Magis-
trate he said that Beaton was being “dragged,” and demanded to know
why he now said “pulled.”
Witness replied that he used the words “pulled” and “dragged”
in the same sense. In his cell he heard shouts and orders coming
from the yard, and sickening thuds coming from the wall. He heard
Crampton say: “Push his head through the wall,” and “I would rather
bury you than let you win.” He also heard Crampton say: “Oh,
Beaton, the sight of blood does my eyes good.” This lasted about
twenty minutes. Afterwards witness saw blood on the walls of the
building in the yard where Beaton had been, also splashes of blood
all round the yard. Witness saw Beaton at tea time, and his face was
badly knocked about—his cheeks reminded him of pieces of raw
steak.
R. G. Halkett said he was working in the kitchen when he heard
orders and scuffling coming from the yard. He subsequently saw
Beaton pass the kitchen door, and noticed that his face was bleeding.
Two days later he noticed marks on Beaton’s face.
Thomas Moynihan stated that he saw Beaton in the yard with the
rope round his neck and being pulled along. This was while witness
was passing on the way to his cell. He subsequently heard scuffling
in the yard. He saw Beaton after he came out of the yard; there
was blood on his face and the skin was off. He saw hair in the yard
next morning and blood on the wall. The hair was Beaton’s, and
there was a handful of it.
Quartermaster-Sergt. Porter said he saw Beaton with the pack on
on two or three occasions. On the first occasion witness saw Beaton
punched and knocked against the fence by Smith and Parmenter.
After his pack drill, Beaton and several others were not examined for
several days, perhaps for a week.
Crampton said Beaton’s attitude on admission was one of “defiance
and insolence.” He admitted that the rifle was tied to Beaton’s
shoulder and lashed round his body with rope. It was also hand-
cuffed to his wrist. “He proved most obstinate, and it took two men
practically the whole time to push and pull him round.” For fifteen
minutes Beaton put up a big fight against the force used. The
discipline maintained in the Barracks was everything that could be
desired. He denied saying that “the sight of blood did his eyes
good.” He denied that he gave Smith any order to seize Beaton by
the hair, nor did he see him being dragged about the yard by the hair
of the head. He did not think it extraordinary that Beaton’s nose
began to bleed.
Edward Byrne (one of the staff engaged when Beaton was doing
pack drill) denied that he struck Beaton at any time, or that Smith
dragged Beaton by the hair. Beaton “offered a violent resistance in
the yard.”
Sergeant Smith said that Beaton “did not fight at all,” but would
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


not march. He did not hear Crampton use the expressions alleged
by Beaton, nor did he seize Beaton by the hair and drag him along.
The rope was used not for pulling him round the yard, but for pulling
him to his feet.
After hearing addresses from prosecutor and counsel, the Court
reserved its decision.
The ninth charge against Crampton was that on May 5, 1918, he
permitted unnecessary force to compel William Smith Badger to do
pack drill.
W. S. Badger said he came to the Barracks at the end of May. He
was ordered drill the day after he arrived, Sergt. Smith handcuffed
the rifle to his wrist, and then pushed witness from him with a punch.
Crampton came into the yard, and when Smith told him witness would
not carry on, he ordered his cane to be brought from the office. After
Crampton came into the yard Smith rushed at witness with his teeth
bared. Previous to this Smith had kicked him, but he did not know
whether Crampton was then present. Smith turned witness round,
pushed him, and continued to punch him round the yard. Crampton
came alongside and used very bad language to witness, and tapped
him under the wrist with his cane, telling him to keep him hand up.
Cross-examined by Mr. Loughnan, witness said he had been kicked
and punched by Smith before he was certain Crampton had come into
the yard.
Mr. Loughnan was proceeding to read portions of the statement
witness had made before the Magistrate, when witness asked for the
whole of his evidence to be read, and was told peremptorily by the
Court: "Your duty before this Court is to answer questions.” Where-
upon the witness strongly protested against this procedure. It was
only fair, he urged, that the whole of his evidence should be read.
“Don’t argue,” commanded the Court; “answer the questions put to
you.” Witness firmly denied that he complained to Crampton about
Smith kicking and assaulting him.
Frederick Pallesen said he was being drilled in the yard with
Badger, when the latter put his rifle down and refused to carry on.
“Sergt. Smith then came in, carrying a rope, and he walked up to
Badger and kicked him.” Witness was immediately ordered out of
the yard.
Crampton, in his evidence, alleged that Badger had complained to
him that Smith had kicked him. When witness asked Smith about it
he denied the charge, but admitted that “he had caught Badger by
the shoulders, put his knee behind him, and straightened him up and
gave him a push ahead.” He (witness) “could positively swear that
Badger was not kicked or punched by Sergt. Smith.”
The tenth charge against Crampton was that he permitted the staff
to use unnecessary violence to compel F. Pallesen to do pack drill. He
pleaded not guilty.
157
THE OOURTMARTIAL.


Captain Hudson asked for a ruling on the point whether the force
referred to must be physical force.
The Court ruled that the force used must be physical force, and
the case broke down on the technicality.
The eleventh charge against Crampton, heard on the tenth day
of the “trial,” was that he permitted unnecessary force to be used by
the staff to compel George Carian to obey orders.
George Carian said the morning after his arrival he was ordered
by Corporal Williams to have a bath, and, after bathing, was kicked
and also punched on the back of his neck by the cornoral as he moved
along the passage on his way to his cell.
Eugene Hurlihy said that on the night when Carian came in he
took a fit in his cell, and witness heard Crampton tell Carian that
if he took any of his fits there he would get his guts kicked out.
Smith was in the cell also, and told him if he wanted to die he would
lend him a razor, and if he didn’t have enough guts to cut his throat,
he would lend him a gun, and he could shoot himself. Witness said
he saw no force used on Carian while Crampton was present.
Dr. Anderson deposed that he saw Carian occasionally during his
stay in the Barracks, and he complained only of palpitation of the
heart and generally out of sorts.
Crampton denied the statement made by Hurlihy. No such
language was ever used to Carian. Carian had never laid a complaint,
although every man under detention knew of the proper procedure.
Witness knew nothing of the occurrence at all. Carian was certainly
punished for inattention on parade; he was given an hour’s pack
drill, which witness considered sufficient. Carian, according to a
statement from the A.A.G., Palmerston North, was a confirmed soap-
eater and malingerer.
The Court found Crampton not guilty of the whole eleven charges,
and “honourably acquitted” him.
Immediately after the courtmartial, Crampton was given the posi-
tion of Area Officer, Group 20, Wanganui. The whole of the prisoners
left the Wanganui Barracks on January 6, the building was handed
back to the civil authorities on February 10, and Crampton (who
remained behind to clear up various matters) relinquished command
on March 25, receiving the appointment mentioned above. A further
reference to the case will be found among the Appendices.
On September 2, I placed the following notice of motion on the
Parliamentary Order Paper: “That there be laid on the table of the
House all the papers in connection with Lieut. Crampton’s term of
office at Samoa, including the full report of, and evidence in, his trial
by courtmartial at Samoa.” At the date of publication, lam still
awaiting the opportunity to move it.
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


XXVIII.—ENTHRONING PRUSSIANISM
On December 5, the Expeditionary Forces Amendment Bill was
brought down “by message from His Excellency the Governor-
General.” The legislative fiction of the “first reading” was gone
through. Then, immediately, the Minister of Defence moved the
second reading, briefly explaining the several clauses.
The Bill sought to “extend by six months the period of enlistment
of members of the Expeditionary Force.” This was the language in
which the Minister described the proposal. What it really meant
was the extension of Conscript Service for an additional six months
to the term prescribed in the principal Act. The Minister became
angry when, during the debate on the third reading, I put it this way.
His reason for proposing the change, he said, was that the troops
could not be demobilised in the time provided in the principal Act.
The clause (2) which covered this proposal and clauses 3 and 4 ap-
peared to me to be designed to tighten the military bonds. Clause 5
had to do with military hospitals, and clause 6 was purely a washing-
up clause, to give effect to the section of the principal Act which
provided for the abolition of the Expeditionary Force Reserve after
the termination of the war. Clause 7 was the best clause in the Bill.
It provided for the payment of bonuses to soldiers, but still it was
made clear that this was not to be given as a right, but was to be
regarded as a “free gift,” which might be withheld or deferred or
subjected to terms and conditions at the Minister’s will.
Clause 8 enacted that: (1) The Minister of Defence, as soon as
practicable after the passing of this Act, shall cause to be prepared
and published in the Gazette a list, to be called the Military Default-
ers’ List, in which shall be set out, so far as ascertainable, the names,
occupations, and abodes of all men who since the commencement of
the present war with Germany and before the passing of this Act —
(a) Have been convicted by courtmartial of any offence of such a
nature as to indicate, in the opinion of the Minister, an intent per-
manently to evade or refuse to fulfil their obligations of military ser-
vice in the present war; or (b) having been called up for service with
the New Zealand Expeditionary Force under the Military Service Act,
1916, have deserted from that force or have otherwise made default
in the performance of the obligations imposed on them by or in pur-
suance of that Act in such manner as to indicate, in the opinion of
the Minister, an intent permanently to evade or refuse to fulfil their
obligations of military service in the present war; or (c) having been
members of the Expeditionary Force Reserve constituted by the Mili-
tary Service Act, 1916, have illegally evaded enrolment in that Re-
serve in such circumstances as to indicate, in the opinion of the Min-
ister, an intent permanently to evade military service in the present
war. >


Under clause 9, Religious Objectors (i.e., Objectors who were mem-
bers of churches which declared military service to be contrary to
divine revelation) were exempted from the Military Defaulters’ List.
Clause 10 provided for the amendment of the list “by deleting the
names of men inserted therein in error, by adding thereto the names
of men who have been omitted therefrom in error, and by correcting
or supplying any error or defect in the name or description of any
military defaulter,” with the proviso that “the entry of any name in
the Military Defaulters’ List shall not be invalidated by any error in
the name or description of the military defaulter so referred to.” By
clause 11 it was provided that “any man whose name has been entered
in the Military Defaulters’ List within the time and in the manner
prescribed by regulations under this Act may appeal to a Stipendiary
Magistrate on the ground that he has been entered in the list in
error, and the magistrate shall have jurisdiction to hear and deter-
mine such appeal, and if the appeal is allowed the name of the
appellant shall be removed from the list.”
Clause 12 prohibited the return to New Zealand of military de-
faulters who were not in New Zealand at the time of the passing of
the Act for 10 years after it was passed, rendering them liable, so often
as they returned within that period, to arrest with warrant, to twelve
months’ imprisonment on summary conviction, and to deportation on
the expiry of the sentence.
Clause 13 provided that—(l) All military defaulters are hereby
deprived of civil rights for a period of 10 years from the passing of
this Act. (2) Every man so deprived of civil rights shall be incap-
able — (a) Of being appointed or of continuing to hold any office or
employment in the service of the Crown or of any local or other pub-
lic authority; (b) of being elected or appointed or of continuing to
hold office as a member of either House of Parliament or as a mem-
ber of any local or other public authority; (c) of being enrolled as
an elector or voting at any election of a member or members of either
House of Parliament or of a member or members of any local or other
public authority.
Clause 14 constituted any exercise or attempted exercise of civil
rights by a military defaulter an offence rendering him liable to 12
months’ imprisonment; and under a similar penalty clause 15 pro-
hibits any change of name by military defaulters.
The discussion on the second reading of this vicious measure was
brief indeed, only the Minister and Sir John Findlay speaking on the
motion. No adequate opportunity was allowed members to make
themselves acquainted with the main features of the Bill. It is a sound
contention that no measure involving great changes should be carried
through its second reading until the full text of it has been at least
14 days before the people, so that the electors may have the
tunity of objecting to its provisions if they desire, and also in order
that the members of Parliament may know what they are asked to
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


vote upon. This Bill was rushed through its three readings in two
days, notwithstanding that its enactment involved the ruthless de-
struction of a principle held dear in British law for long years, the
principle that a man should not be punished twice for the same offence.
The members of the National Government had endeavoured to excuse
their jailing of Conscientious Objectors two and three times over for
the offence of refusing to be a soldier by speciously pronouncing that
every time a man was given an order to take a kit and failed to obey
a new offence was constituted. This plea won a hearing from a few
people; but the new law was designed to add ah extra punishment
which could not be explained away by any process of plausibility.
The man who had already served three sentences was now to be fur-
ther punished by having his franchise taken away from him and by
being deprived, so far as the Government had the power to deprive
him, of the right to earn bread and butter for his children. Worse
still, it was to be retrospective in its application—a retrospective
punishment that was to hit the helpless child, the innocent wife,
harder even than it could hit the husband and father who had re-
fused to be a soldier. It was a law that was aimed at the opponents
of the Government which framed it. It was read by some for an
effort on the part of the Government to save itself from the votes of
the victims of its own wretched wrong-doing. Again, not only was it
a retrospective law, but it was a retrospective law made after the
war had ended and when there could be no suggestion that such a
law was needed for the purpose of assisting to improve the war situa-
tion.
When the House went into committee there was again little dis-
cussion on the various clauses. The Labour Party was suffering seri-
ously as a result of the influenza epidemic. Mr. Hindmarsh had died;
Mr. Walker was ill; Mr. Fraser had not wholly recovered from his
attack; and I was in bed, not yet recovered from my relapse.
Clause 12 apparently did not prove stringent enough to suit a
majority of the members. In its original form (as proposed by the
Minister) it read: “If any military defaulter is not in New Zealand at
the passing of this Act, it shall not be lawful for him at any time
within ten years after the passing of this Act to return to New Zea-
land, and if and as often as he does so he may be arrested by any
constable without warrant, and shall be liable on summary conviction
to imprisonment for any term not exceeding 12 months.” Illogical,
illegal, and vicious as the proposal was in this form, it was still not
considered drastic enough, and Mr. Statham (Dunedin Central) se-
cured the insertion of the words “or remains in New Zealand” after
the words “as often as he does so.”
Mr. McCombs sought to add a new clause which, if carried, would
have prevented the additional punishment contemplated by the Act
from being inflicted upon men who had already endured legal punish-
ment for refusing military service. Mr. McCombs’s proposed new
ENTHRONING PRUSSIANISM.


clause read: “Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained, the
name of any man who has before the passing of this Act been con-
victed by courtmartial of any offence of the nature indicated in para-
graph (a) of sectun 8 of this Act shall, after the expiry of the sen-
tence of imprisonment or detention imposed on him for that offence,
be omitted from the Military Defaulters’ List, and notice of such re-
moval shall be published in the Gazette.” This sensible amendment
was emphatically negatived on the voices.
Late at night on December 5 I received a telephone message from
Mr. Fraser to the effect that the Expeditionary Forces Amendment Bill
had been that day rushed through its first and second reading stages,
was almost through the committee stage, and that the third reading
would be taken next day. Mr. Fraser expla.aed the anti-Labour
nature of the Bill; and I resolved that I would get to the House next
day in time for the third reading. We agreed that a fight against the
Bill should be made along the lines of the Labour Party’s declared
policy. •
Mr. Fraser had not fully recovered from his illness, and I was a
very sick man when we met in the Chamber on the 6th. It was on
this day that Mr. McCombs’s amendment was defeated in committee.
It Tvas, in fact, the last item in committee, all the Bill’s clauses having
been disposed of on the previous day. Immediately following the re-
jection of Mr. McCombs’s clause, the third reading of the Bill was
proceeded with. The Government was forcing the already indecent
pace of its rush legislation to permit Mr. Massey and Sir Joseph Ward
to leave for the Peace Conference—which, in any case, they were not
morally entitled to attend as representatives of the people of New
Zealand. Every public interest in the matter of legislation was being
ruthlessly sacrificed to facilitate that quite unnecessary trip—the
whole harmfulness of which in its results we have yet to learn.
Had it not been for the Labour Party, the third reading would have
gone through without discussion. We found there were times when,
the Government whips having cracked, the Government supporters
—Tory and Liberal alike —were prepared to function dumbly. This
was one such time apparently. But our attack produced the miracle.
The dumb spake. . '
It was 10 p.m. when Mr. Fraser rose (in accordance with our ar-
rangement) to oppose the third reading. His speech was unimpassioned,
unanswerably logical, and deeply convincing. But Reason found no
abiding place in the Chamber on this occasion. Mr. Fraser declared
that it was a well-known principle in jurisprudence that retrospec-
tive laws were bad, and pointed out that such laws were beyond the
power of Congress in the United States. The Bill before the House
was not only retrospective, but provided for punishing men who had
already been punished. He appealed for the widest possible toler-
ance, and also for an effort on the part of honourable members to
understand a point of view foreign and antagonistic to their own. He
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


quoted from utterances of Professor Gilbert Murray, the Earl of Sel-
borne, and Lord Parmoor in support of tolerance, and mentioned that
men like Lord Hugh Cecil, Lord Henry Bentinck, the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Lord Kitchener had favoured reasonable considera-
tion of the claims of Conscientious Objectors. He twitted the Liberals
in the Cabinet with having abandoned their Liberalism, and declared
that the House had no right to pass this legislation. He questioned,
indeed, if it had the right to pass any legislation at all. Parliament,
having extended its own life, was not representative of the people,
and the Government was exercising its power to disfranchise a section
of the people who might reasonably be expected to vote against it.
Therefore, the Government’s policy was to disfranchise its political
opponents. If, some day in the future, a Labour Government, follow-
ing the precedent created by the National Government, should set out
to disfranchise the property-holders, would any one in the House say
a word in defence of that action? Yet this was exactly what the
National Government was now doing—disfranchising its opponents.
The war was over and finished, and so far from serving any useful
purpose this Act would only drive certain men (who could be used not
in any military capacity but in a social capacity in many directions)
into the position of permanent outlaws in the community. The most
useful legislation that could be passed to cement the harmony and
goodwill of the people would be to follow the example of South
Africa and bring in a Bill of indemnity and oblivion. The number af-
fected by this revengeful and vindictive penal legislation was com-
paratively small. By.no stretch of the imagination could their pun-
ishment be of any use to the State, but by persisting in this sort of
legislation the members of the Government were providing that while
they professedly set out to defeat Prussianism in Europe, they were
enthroning it in New Zealand.
While Mr. Fraser was speaking, irritation and discomfiture were
written very plainly on the faces of the extreme militarists, and it
was natural to expect that the more uncontrollable among them
would be on their feet when the member for Wellington Central had
finished speaking. But discipline overcame desire, and no one arose.
I was, therefore, compelled to follow my colleague. (I do not propose
outlining my speech here. It will be found in Hansard’s pages.)
Then the storm broke loose. Even in Parliament men are to be
found who mistake hysterical declamation for effective reply, fierce
invective and frothy verbiage for argument, windy shriekings and tor-
rential outpourings for proof of patriotism. All these manifestations
were in evidence on December 6. Round about midnight the three
speeches in reply to Mr. Fraser and myself were made. Rarely have
Parliamentary speeches achieved a lower standard. One was a fren-
zied diatribe —just that and nothing more; and some one has said
that frenzied diatribes are ever the rotten-ripe fruit of attenuated
mentalities. All of the speeches rang like the bellicose pro-
ENTHRONING PROoSIANISM.


duct of militaristic minds Inflamed with age. In none of the
speeches was there an absence of misrepresentation. In at least two
of them there were regrettable and discreditable slanderings of honour-
able and courageous men. It was made to pass for a clinching argu-
ment that "if a man would not fight for his country he should not be
accorded citizen rights in that country.” But the fact was ignored that
the very men who were speaking had refused to let the people decide
whether any man should be required to go out of the country to fight in
a war that he was not permitted to have any voice in entering, as was
also the fact that they reserved to the leaders of their party alone the
right to decide whether when a man went to war he was really
"fighting for his country.” Not only so, but they ignored as well the
case of the men who not only did not fight for "their country,” but as
profiteers took advantage of the war conditions to actually plunder the
wives and children of the soldiers who were doing the fighting for
them.
There was no measure of difference in the intolerance displayed
by the Tories and the Liberals. An incident which revealed the state
of the Liberal mind occurred while Mr. Fraser was speaking. He had
made reference to the Quakers who, during the time of the Common-
wealth and Charles 11., had been sentenced again and again to im-
prisonment because they thought it an act of idolatry to take off their
hats in court, and the Hon. T. M. Wilford interjected: "Do you state
that the men who are in jail are of that class?” Mr. Fraser replied:
"I know that some of them are.” Mr. Wilford then asked: "Would
you like me to read what they have written?” (It should be men-
tioned that Mr. Wilford was then Minister of Justice, and by reason
of his Ministerial office in a position to know the contents of private
letters written to their friends by the prisoners.) Mr. Fraser re-
torted severely: “If the Minister is capable of so dishonourable an
action as taking private letters and reading them publicly.” "But,”
he added, while the Minister nursed his chagrin, “some of those mer.
are men of intellectual and scholastic attainments higher than any
member of this House.” "Bosh!” said the Minister of Justice, inele-
gantly. "It is not bosh,” replied Mr. Fraser; “and the Minister who
is interrupting shows that he has not taken the trouble ” Then
Mr. Wilford, beaten back to his last line of defence, went off at a
wild tangent and irrelevantly asked; “Are you loyal?”
Now, it happened that a day previously I had received a letter from
Mr. Webb, in which he informed me that 21 C.O.’s in Kaingaroa had
addressed a letter to Mr. Wilford, offering to go out and act as at-
tendants and helpers in connection with the fight against the in-
fluenza epidemic. The only condition the C.O.’s laid down was that
the time so occupied should not be counted off their sentences. When
I suggested to Mr. Wilford that he might read to the House this letter
he admitted having received it, but added that he had also received
a similar letter from the long-sentence men.
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


When the Minister of Defence, in making his reply at the close of
the debate, referred to the offer of the C.O.’s to help to fight the in-
fluenza epidemic, the Liberal Minister of Mines found himself capable
of making the spitefully mean interjection: “It would have been a
worse epidemic.” And the Reform Minister of Defence was capable
of agreeing. “Yes,” he said; "it would have been a worse epidemic.”
I have no doubt that both gentlemen, as soon as they were able to
think calmly, deeply regretted the incomparable unfairness of their
remarks (all the more so because the suggestion was quite as un-
truthful as it was unfair).
When eventually the House divided on the third reading of the
Bill, the voting was 54 to 2—the two being Mr. Fraser and myself.
Mr. Walker was ill at the time, and Mr. McCombs had left for home
some time before the division —which took place well on towards 1
a.m. I may mention that our determination to divide the House was
made for the purpose of securing a record of the members ready to
inflict on this country the wickedness of such a measure as that de-
signed by Mr. Massey and Sir Joseph Ward and their colleagues in
the National Government. The division list as it appears in Hansard
reads:—
AYES: Allen, Anderson, Anstey, Bollard, Buddo, Carroll, Craigie,
J. M. Dickson, J. S. Dickson, Ell, T. A. H. Field, W. H. Field, Forbes,
Sir W. Fraser, Guthrie, Harris, Henare, Hornsby, Hudson, Hunter,
Jennings, Lee, Luke, McCallum, MacDonald, Malcolm, Mander, Massey,
Myers, E. Newman, Ngafa, Nosworthy, Parr, Pearce, Pomare, Poole,
Reed, T. W. Rhodes, Russell, Scott, Sidey, S. G. Smith, Statham, Sykes,
Stewart, Talbot, Veitch, Wilford, Wilkinson, Witty, Wright, Young.
NOES: P. Fraser, Holland.
Enemies of the Labour movement have endeavoured to make capital
out of the allegation that in opposing the third reading of the Bill the
Labour Party opposed bonuses to soldiers, etc. This, of course, is not
true. The Labour Party has consistently fought for better conditions
for the soldiers, whether on service or returned. But it is an old trick
of the political adversaries of Labour to attempt to make things look
awkward for Labour members by sandwiching something that meets
with popular approval between the vile clauses of what is generally
speaking a bad measure. It was a tactic that was not unknown to
Bismarck in the worst days of Prussianism. The Labour members
were obliged in this particular instance to vote against the Bill both
by reason of its attack upon the vital principles of Liberty for which
Labour stands, and also because our conference decisions imposed on
us the obligation to fight against any intensification of militarism.
From the viewpoint of the Labour movement, there was nothing that
could have been put into the Bill to make it good enough for any well-
informed Labour Party or any honest Labour man to lend support to
ENTHRONING PRUSSIANISM.


while its major clauses challenged Magna Charta itself, provided for
the strangling of Liberty and the destruction of the prerogatives of the
people: while the Bill as a whole proposed to add tyrannical punish-
ments to punishments already inflicted, to take away from upright,
clean-living, pure-minded men of Religious and Socialist principle
the right to work for the State and the right to vote —a disability not
imposed on the vilest criminal. If the murderer escapes the gallows,
when he has paid the penalty the law demanded, his civil rights are
restored to him; the child-ravisher, notwithstanding his awful crime,
has his right to work and vote restored to him; likewise the burglar,
the embezzler, the pickpocket, the common thief. But the class-con-
sciousness of the ultra-militarists of the National Government could
not tolerate the extension to the highest type of Christian or the
loftiest-minded idealist among the working men and the intellectuals
the privileges of citizenship they readily restored to the proved crim-
inal. The harm that accrues to Society when the ruling class imposes
such a condition iij incalculable. Morality is in its decadence.
XXIX.—THE PROBLEM OF THE CONSCIENCE
Whoever with open mind shall read the story of the Conscience
men of New Zealand all too imperfectly written into these pages will
surely need no argument against the further intense militarisation
of the Dominion. Whoever without prejudice shall read the record of
the atrocities inflicted on these New Zealanders by other New Zea-
landers will not need to be convinced that, while it required great
courage to face the lightning flame that leaped from the wild storm
of war, great courage to brave the hail of death that swept across
the battlefield, it called for even greater courage to enter that fiery
furnace of barbaric torture which Mark Briggs, Archibald Baxter,
Garth Ballantyne, and their comrades passed through. It is of such
men and their courage that the eminent Professor James Ward has
written; “The value of a single man or woman of open mind, inde-
pendent judgment, and moral courage, who refuses to be cajoled, is
only concerned to be right, and not afraid to be singular, deferring
to reason but not to rank, true to their own self, and, therefore, not
false to any man —the value of such a man or woman, I say, is
priceless; a nation of such men would leaven and regenerate the
world.”
The Conscientious Objectors were in conflict with the law of New
Zealand —a law made, it is true, without the consent of the people,
but still a law, with all the organised force of the political class State
behind it. When that bad law was first promulgated I predicted
in the leading columns of "The Worker,” that Labour would mark
down for political extinction every politician guilty of the crime of
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


Prussianising New Zealand, Under that wicked enactment the
Conscientious Objectors became, in the generally accepted sense of
the term, law-breakers. They knew their position; they knew the
price they would be required to pay if they persisted in giving pride
of place to the dictates of conscience. Cheerfully they were prepared
to pay it. When the moment came to decide, as once it comes “to
every man and nation,’’ they never hesitated. Hatred, scoffing, and
abuse they chose "rather than shrink in silence from the truth they
needs must think.” Bitterly they were made to pay for their choice.
The intolerance that dominates the ruling class mind —slumming over
the lessons of history, superficially regarding the psychic realities,
often seeking to instal science as the handmaiden of stagnation—found
wide and ungenerous, often angry and uninformed, expression in
every circle where the problem of the Conscientious Objector became
the subject of discussion. Bishop Sprott, of Wellington, wandered
into a maze of discursive illogicalities which seemed to represent a
surrender of some of the .foundation principles of Christianity. Mili-
tarists, professing Christians and declared Materialists, raved. The
Chief Justice of New Zealand found himself unable to resist the
temptation to join in the contumelious chorus. On a previous
occasion I was constrained to direct public attention to the Chief
Justice’s excursions into the realms of controversial politics, and
then insisted that while the law which prevents public servants
from taking the political platform remains, its provisions must apply
to the Chief Justice equajly with the latest police probationer. In
the course of a recent address I had occasion to say: “We have a
right to expect that whoever occupies the highest judicial position
shall maintain a judicial viewpoint, and shall at no time and under
no circumstances permit himself to indulge in ill-advised attacks—
framed in the language of extravagance—against any section of the
people, whose servant he is held to be, and on all of whom falls the
burden of providing his not illiberal salary. If the Chief Justice
becomes unmindful of the duty he owes to his position; if he strips
off his judicial robes and assumes the attitude of politician and
partisan, then he must not complain if the Labor movement places
duty before every other consideration and offers the fullest criticism.”
In July of last year, apparently as chairman of the Prisons Board.
Sir Robert Stout visited Kaingaroa Prison, and on his return he
delivered a lecture which was largely of a political nature, and the
spirit of which would not have been calculated to inspire the average
Conscientious Objector with a very great measure of confidence in
the impartiality of the Court. The Wellington correspondent of a
South Island paper wrote of this address: “There is a type of Con-
scientious Objector which even jail inmates spurn. This wai men-
tioned by Sir Robert Stout, Chief Justice, in an address on the
prisoners at Kaingaroa Prison Camp. He said there are several
prisoners held for breaches of the Defence Act and military regula-
THE PROBLEM OF THE CONSCIENCE.


tions. Public conscience is evidently becoming awakened even
amongst the law-breakers, for some prisoners who were confined for
ordinary crimes refused to speak to military prisoners, saying they
would not work with them, as they were a disgrace to the Dominion
in shirking their responsibilities under our military law."
From this report I was able to gather that Sir Robert Stout gave
credit to the Quakers who were Conscientious Objectors, and his
antipathy seems to have been directed against the Socialist, Irish,
Religious, and other Objectors whose objections rested on other than
the extremely narrow “religious” foundations provided for in the
Military Service Act. It is extremely regrettable that the Chief
Justice should have found it possible to think, and still more regret-
table that he should have given expression to the thought, that
because the sexual criminal, the embezzler, the thief, or the profes-
sional burglar, declared they would neither speak to nor work with
honest, clean-living men, whose only offence was the possession of a
conscience which forbade the taking of life, the fact betokened the
awakening of a public conscience amongst the criminal class. It may
have meant something altogether different. It may have amounted
to not more than what some unhappy criminal conceived to be the
most effective method of convincing a patriotically credulous chair-
man that the time had arrived when the Prisons Board might safely
favour his release. Even if it meant all the Chief Justice thought,
it was surely most improper for the chairman of the Prisons Board
to diffuse from the public platform sentiments calculated to create
ill-feeling between the prisoners themselves. _ I have thus far assumed
the Chief Justice’s statement to be a wholly correct statement of fact
—that the professional criminals did really refuse to work with or
speak to the C.O.’s. But it is only fair to add that I have interviewed
various Conscientious Objectors released from the several prisons (in-
cluding Kaingaroa), and in no instance have I been able to find
substantiation of the statement. Ido not say that it cannot be
substantiated. I merely say that the released C.O.’s I have inter-
viewed knew of no instance where professional criminals refused to
work with them. On the contrary, the professionals were generally
eager to work in association, but it was not the policy of the Depart-
ment to permit such associated work.
In another paper I find the following included in a report of the
same lecture: “We must have what is termed a State or a public
conscience,” said Sir Robert Stout. “We have heard much of late
of private consciences. It is well to have a conscience of some kind;
it is well to be guided by moral considerations; but if a man or a
woman sets his or her conscience above the dictates of the public
conscience, it does not bespeak an exalted moral attitude.”
The Chief Justice —as a Rationalist of many years’ standing, as a
front-rank Freethinker—must know that a State conscience is some-
thing which can have no existence. Even if it were admitted that a
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


State conscience could exist, that conscience could only find active
expression at the ballot-box. In Australia, where the opportunity
was given, the “public conscience” declared Conscription to be wrong.
In this country a handful of men refused to permit the “public
conscience” to express itself, and set their minority conscience over
the dictates of the “public conscience”; —which explains, I suppose, why
we “cannot boast an exalted moral attitude.” So that the C.O.’s
are not really in conflict with the public conscience, but with the
conscience of a minority who were able to manipulate the govern-
mental machinery in a way which prevented the “public conscience”
from functioning. I might digress at this point to remark that if
Sir Robert Stout really understood the historic development of the
State his utterances would be differently framed.
Whether we accept Christian, semi-scientific, or scientific defini-
tions of conscience. Sir Robert Stout’s depreciation of the “private
conscience” will be found to rest on no foundation whatever. From
almost time immemorial, the Churches have taught that “Conscience
is the Voice of God.” We have been told from the cradle to the grave
that if our conscience tells us a thing is wrong, it is wrong—that the
still small voice that speaks the warning is the voice of God’s own
righteousness. The religious writers who have sought to reconcile
science with religion have proclaimed similarly. “And this is con-
science, the voice of the law of God within us, which speaks far
more strongly than the outer voice of the praise and blame of others,”
says Arabella B. Buckley, in “Moral Teachings of Science.” “As a
man thinketh in his Ijeart, so is he,” is the way it i s put in the
Book of Proverbs. “Conscience,” says Lord Avebury, “is a safe
guide.” Browning calls it “The great .beacon-light God sets in all.”
Byron says something similar:
“Whatever creed be taught or land be trod,
Man’s conscience is the voice of God.”
John Stuart Mill, in his essay, “On Liberty,” demands freedom of
conscience without restriction: “This then is the appropriate region
of human liberty. It comprises first the inward domain of conscious-
ness; demanding liberty of conscience in the most comprehensive
sense; liberty of thought and feeling; absolute freedom of opinion and
sentiment on all subjects, practical or speculative, scientific, moral,
or theological. ... No society in which these liberties are not, on the
whole, respected, is free, whatever its form of Government, and none
is completely free in which they do nr 1 exist absolute and un-
qualified.”
And again: “No one can be a great thinker who does not recog-
nise that as a thinker it is his first duty to follow his intellect to
whatever conclusions it may lead. Truth gains more by the errors
of one who, with due study and preparation, thinks for himself, than
THE PROBLEM OE THE CONSCIENCE


by the true opinions of those who only hold them because they do not
suffer themselves to think.”
Sir George Greenwood, M.P., in “The Problem of the Will,” issued
by Watts and Co., furnishes a Rationalist definition: “Conscience is
merely what one thinks in a particular case on a question of right
and wrong with reference to the proposed course of action. It Is
one’s judgment on a question of practical ethics. ... He who
acts against the voice of conscience does wrong because he does
what he thinks to be wrong. To say that a man should always
follow the dictates of his conscience is no more than saying that he
should always do what he thinks to be right. Conscience, therefore,
is always a safe moral guide to the individual, though it may w make
him do things which the majority of mankind think foolish or ill-
advised, or even criminal.”
Finally, in his “Riddle of the Universe,” the great German
materialist. Professor Ernst Haeckel, to whose school of thought Sir
Robert Stout may be said to belong, puts it this way: “We now know
that each act of the will is as fatally determined by the organisation
of the individual, and as dependent on the momentary condition of
his environment, as every other psychic activity.”
From every viewpoint Sir Robert Stout was wrong. From every
viewpoint—whether religious, semi-scientific, or scientific —the Con-
scientious Objectors were right. They were right because they were
following the promptings of their own conscience. And now that the
hurricane of Hate no longer rages with its war-time fury, it may be
noted that the soldiers who heard the artillery roar along the line
of battle, the brave men who with a laugh on their lips looked Death
in the face, have no words of scorn for the bona fide Conscien-
tious Objectors. The soldiers from the depths of their own souls’
courage, are able to pay sincere tribute to other brave men who saw
differently from themselves, and who, seeing differently, were called
upon to “stand alone” through terrible hours which strained every
mental and physical power of endurance. Not the men who fought,
and fought gallantly, were they who hurled contumely at the men of
conscience; that Hymn of Hate was reserved to be sung by men—
mostly old men—who never fought either Kruger or Kaiser except
with goosequills and fountain pens, from long thousands of miles
behind the guns.
The war is now “ended,” and other wars are either threatening
or progressing. The Prussian Militarists failed to win, but Prussian
Militarism raises triumphantly and detestably its head in every land
—insolently, aggressively, threateningly. The falsehood that the
world slaughter was a “war to end war” stands brazenly naked before
the bereaved peoples. Thunderclouds of revolution are rolling up the
sky, “whirlwinds of rebellion” are shaking the planet. In the back-
ground the fathers and brothers, the mothers and wives, the sisters
and sweethearts, and the orphaned little children, are sorrowing dry-
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


eyed or flooding the earth with their tears. The countries are
counting their dead, their limbless, sightless, and insane men —com-
piling their records of human wreckage and ruin. The soldiers who
fought for Freedom stand aghast to behold her in shackles. The
Democracy they bled for they see imperilled by the stranglehold of
Privilege. The millions who mourn their millions of dead are learn-
ing in heartbreak and bitterness that in the world war, as in all
wars, the people have suffered defeat. But where all other facts are
blurred and seen as through a glass darkly, one fact hurls its rays
of light through the murkiness like a star of the first magnitude.
The greater victory—the real victory—of the war years was won by
the Conscientious Objectors of all countries. The Labour Movement
acclaims their courage and honesty. The Labor Movement denounces
their persecutors, protests against the vindictive action of an unre-
presentative Parliament which awarded an additional punishment of
deprivation of civil rights on top of a multiplicity of other and
barbarous punishments. The Labor Movement demands the immediate
restoration of every civil right to the Conscientious Objectors, and
pledges itself to work unceasingly for such restoration. For these
men with their high sense of personal responsibility as Citizens of the
World may be reckoned among the nation’s best assets. Imperishably
they have written their names on history’s scroll of heroes. Professor
Ward is right; “A nation of such men would leaven and regenerate
the world.” With the record of the shocking treatment they endured
and the fortitude with which they faced worse than death, none in
future days will dare to open lying lips to stigmatise them as
cowards and shirkers. There would be no dictionarial term that
would adequately describe the slanderer who would ascribe cowardice
to such men. They have vindicated the prophetic faith of the poet:
"Truth crushed to earth shall rise again;
The eternal years of God are hers;
But Error, wounded, writhes in pain
And dies among her worshippers.”
THE END.
THE PROBLEM OF THE CONSCIENCE.




APPENDICES.
Appendices I. and 11. are reproduced from Australian papers for
the purpose of showing that the statements of the New Zealand
Conscientious Objectors regarding the barbarities inflicted upon
themselves have not been exaggerated. The exposure made by Mr.
Corboys, M.P., and the statement of Private Sutton (both of Australia)
make it clear that military rule is no respecter of persons. The
common soldier, whether he hailed from New Zealand, Australia, or
Britain, was not always exempted from the atrocious treatment meted
out to the C.O.
APPENDIX I.
Mr. Corboys, an Australian Member of Parliament, who went to
the war as a volunteer, made the following statement in public after
his return from active service:
“A man crimed for a trivial offence was awaiting punishment. He
was ill. We had to make a long march from one part of the line to
another. He paraded ill before the doctor. The colonel of the bat-
talion, who was not a doctor, said that the man was malingering.
They got a rope and tied him behind a limber. They told him to
march, and he couldl-not march; and they dragged him for miles
behind that horse limber, along cobblestone roads. He was cut and
bleeding and half dead. The colonel and the adjutant rode back to
him, and asked: ‘Will you march now?’ He said: T cannot march; I
am too ill.’ They said: ‘We’ll break your spirit; we’ll make you.’
They took him up and lashed him breast high with the rope up against
the back of the cart, and dragged him along in that manner. That
is Prussianism for you, and it happened in an Australian battalion.
It was my own battalion, and my own colonel and adjutant were the
guilty officers.”
APPENDIX 11.
The following appeared in the “Australian Worker” of August 28,
1919, over the signature of "No. 3861, Private P. H. Sutton, 46th Bat-
talion, A.IP.”
In January, 1917, I was doing a sentence of fourteen days’ field
punishment (No. 2) in company with two others. This punishment
consists of being confined to the guard room and parading under the
supervision of a provost sergeant. We were ordered to parade with


the company, fully equipped for drill purposes. Considering this to
be a contravention of the King’s Regulations, we refused to carry ou:
the order. We appeared before Colonel Lewis, of the 47th Battalion,
and were given the option of six weeks’ imprisonment or being tried
by courtmartial. Two of my mates, one of whom has since been pro-
moted lieutenant, accepted the punishment, whilst I requested a
courtmartial, believing myself to be in the right.
On January 28 I was tried and sentenced to two years’ hard labour.
I paraded four times to Colonel Lewis and begged to be allowed to do
the sentence in the front line, where I would have a chance of
distinguishing myself and receiving a pardon. However, this was
refused, and I was sent to Abboncourt Military Prison, France. The
brutality and humiliation suffered caused myself and several other
Australians to endeavour to escape on April 9. I was recaptured and
brought back to the prison, placed in a cell by myself, and most
brutally treated. I was placed in figure-eight handcuffs, and one
military policeman struck me on the mouth with his clenched fist,
breaking four of my teeth. Another policeman also punched me in
the face. I fought back as well as possible, but had no chance, and
was knocked unconscious. When I recovered, I was given a bucket
of water to wash the blood off, and was taken to the Governor, who
awarded me the limit punishment—ls days’ P.D, No. 1, bread and
water twice daily, and 42 days’ P.D. No. 2, which means bread and
water twice daily, and a pint of porridge in addition, also 28 days’
crucifixion. The day after the sentence I was sent to No. 2 Military
Prison, Rouen, and immediately placed in leg-irons and hessian
trousers.
Imagine the humiliation of a man who had left his country with
the highest ideals, who was innocent of any grave offence, being
placed in the position of a dangerous criminal. You people at home,
whilst reading of our victories and feats of arms on the field, could
not have thought it possible that some of your own countrymen,
perhaps even your own flesh and blood, were being tortured in the
military prisons of France and England. I HAVE SEEN MEN DIE
FROM THE SCANDALOUS TREATMENT THEY RECEIVED, AND I
CAN ALSO GIVE THE NAMES OF TWO MEN WHO PURPOSELY
DESTROYED THEIR OWN EYESIGHT TO ESCAPE THE HOR-
RIBLE TORTURE, WHICH WAS DRIVING THEM INSANE.
I will give a few authentic cases of which I was an eye-witness
in the Rouen No. 2 M.P. In the month of August, 1917, 35 Australians
and one New Zealander soldier asked to see an Australian officer in
high command, who was visiting the prison, with a view to having the
treatment exposed. This interview was refused, and the men decided
to do no more work. This was called mutiny. They were all placed
in different cells, and 16 n.c.o.’s of the M.P.S.C. MOST BRUTALLY
FLOGGED THEM, AND THEY WERE ALL SENTENCED TO 35
DAYS’ BREAD AND WATER. The so-called ringleaders were court-
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


martialled. The Australians, Privates Sheffield, Mitchell, Le Guor,
and Little, were sentenced to life terms, AND THE NEW ZEALANDER
AND A SCOTS SOLDIER WERE SENTENCED TO DEATH, WHICH
SENTENCE WAS DULY CARRIED OUT.
In July, 1917, three men, namely Private Lackey (of the Ist Bat-
talion), Private Cook (of the 24th), and Private Dickey (of the 23rd
Battalion), A.1.F., escaped from the prison. They were recaptured and
then handcuffed and flogged into insensibility with a sjambok. This
punishment "was carried out by Sergeant , of the M.P.S.C.,
assisted by Sergeant ,of the D.C.L.S. The unfortunate victims
were then placed in leg-irons and put on bread and water for a
limited period. Privates Rawlinson and Vetchelow, for the same
offence, were inflicted with the same punishment, administered by
the same Sergeant , assisted this time by Sergeant , of
the Scottish Rifles.
Another authentic case is that of Private Worby, of the 6th A.L.H ,
who, in company with Private Connors, of the Ist Battalion, A.I.F,
escaped over the prison wall whilst an air raid was in progress. The
rope broke, and Connors broke his leg in the fall. His comrade car-
ried him a distance of eight kilometres before being overtaken by the
military police. Worby received the same treatment as the others,
but Connors, after being examined by a medical officer, was transferred
to a casualty clearing station, and then admitted to No. 10 Australian
Military Hospital as a patient. The doctor’s orders were over-ruled,
and Connors was removed to prison, where he was placed on a
stretcher in a cell by„ himself. The only convenience provided was
15 paces away, and the wretched man HAD TO CRAWL THIS DIS-
TANCE WITH HIS BROKEN LIMB TRAILING ON THE GROUND.
He was also kept on bread and water for the limited period.
I have the names and addresses of others of my comrades who
have been victims of this Hunnish treatment, and now the war has
been won, lam going to put British justice to the test. I feel confi-
dent I can look to the R.S.S. Labor League to assist me in raising
an agitation which will cause to bring about an inquiry into the
treatment meted out to the Australian soldiers whilst away from their
country. The Australian Government should call on the Imperial
authorities for an explanation, and the responsible officials should be
brought to book for countenancing such an awful system.
The following names may be of some use in case of investigation:
General Humphreville (Director-General of Military Prisons in
France), Colonel Thomas, Majors Mooney, Basher, and Dougles,
Sergeant-Majors Coon, Dorkers, and Moran, and numerous staff-
sergeants and non-coms, connected with the British military police,
whose names I can furnish. I can also bring several witnesses (names
supplied) to substantiate my case, who are prepared to give sworn
evidence in any court of law.
APPENDICES.


APPENDIX 111.
The Parliamentary Order Paper, September 3, 1919, contained the
following:—“Mr. Holland to move: That there be laid before this
House a return showing—(l) The number of members of the New
Zealand Expeditionary Force who, whilst on active service, have been
sentenced to undergo punishment; (2) the number who actually
served sentences so inflicted, and the nature of their punishment; (3)
the number still undergoing punishment, and the nature of their
sentences; (4) the number sentenced to death by order of court-
martial; (5) the number of cases in which the death sentence was
actually carried out; (6) the nature of the alleged offence for which
soldiers were sentenced to either punishment or death; and (7) the
names of the officers constituting the various courtsmartial, and
whether they were in every case New Zealand officers.”
In my Address-in-Reply speech on Septembr 5, I said: “Both Briggs
and Baxter have said that when they first refused duty in France
they were threatened with the death penalty. The General Orders
were taken down and shown to them, and those orders, according to
the officers who showed them, purported to contain lists of New
Zealanders who were courtmartialled and ordered to be shot for
refusing to obey orders.”
APPENDIX IV.
‘Hansard” of September 5 contains a report of my speech on the
Address-in-Reply, in the course of which I made reference to the
Crampton case in the following terms:
“Honourable members will remember the efforts I made last
session to have Lieut. Crampton’s case dealt with. When Mr. Hewitt,
S.M., was appointed to inquire into the Crampton case, I asked that
the men who had been assaulted should have the right of representa-
tion by counsel at that inquiry; Mr. McCombs made a similar request,
but it was refused. The Magistrate went into the matter very fully.
The men concerned had been scattered from prison to prison, and the
guards had also been scattered. The Magistrate visited prison after
prison. He acted as fairly as a man could act under the circum-
stances. He brought in a report which substantiated the charges of
cruelty, and which vindicated my action and the action of the men
who made the charges in the first case. Mr. Hewitt found that the
charges against Crampton were proved; but it took a long time to
get the report laid on the table of the House. After it was placed
before the House we endeavoured to get the Government to take
action on it, but no action was taken; and then, instead of the
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


Government giving effect to the recommendations of Mr. Hewitt,
instead of doing what they ought to have done —the only thing they
could have done in decency at that stage, namely, get rid of Lieu’’.
Crampton as military officer—they set up a courtmartial to try
Crampton, a courtmartial that was nothing more or less than a piece
of whitewashing machinery to save Lieut. Crampton’s position. No
member of that Court betrayed any knowledge of the military law.
The Judge-Advocate was better counsel for Crampton than the lawyer
who was employed to defend him. The men who were the victims
of the atrocities were not allowed representation by counsel, and at
least one important witness was not presented. . . . The prose-
cutor was the one man who seemed to me to come out of the business
with credit to himself. After the courtmartial, and without any
explanation either in this House or to the people of this country as
to why they did it, the Government, altogether ignoring the scathing
report of the Magistrate, Mr. Hewitt, proceeded to appoint' Lieut.
Crampton Area Officer at Wanganui, where, notwithstanding that
unsavoury record of his which comes from Samoa, he will have charge
of very many boys in the period of adolescence. Previously I made
demands in this House for the production of the papers in connection
with Lieut. Crampton’s trial at Samoa. The Minister replied to me
that he would place on the table of the House such of those papers
as were not confidential. The papers have not yet been laid on the
table, and I want to know what portion of the papers will be
regarded as confidential. Will that portion be so regarded which
had to do with Lieut. own admissions at his trial by
courtmartial at Samoa? This matter of the Defence Department’s
action in connection with Lieut. Crampton is something which the
House cannot afford to pass over very lightly; sooner or later
explanations will have to be made, and sooner or later something will
have to be done to determine Lieut. Crampton’s connection with the
Defence Forces.”
APPENDIX V.
The following statement concerning a New Zealand incident was
printed in “Truth” newspaper during July, 1918:
On the morning of Thursday, June 27, at six o’clock, a raid by the
military and civil police was made on this scrub-cutting camp in the
following manner: As I was about one of the first men to rise from
my tent, after the gong had been sounded for breakfast, for the pur-
pose of having the usual morning’s wash, I was accosted by a man
in civilian clothes, who was armed with a rifle, and gave the order to
“Stand, or I’ll shoot.” Thinking it merely a joke on the part of one
of my fellow-workers, I still proceeded, towel over my arm, towards
the creek, a distance of about half a chain from the tent. I had only
APPENDICES.


got about halfway when I was suddenly struck down from behind with
a baton, inflicting a wound an inch long on the crown of my head.
While I was down I was again struck several times with the same
weapon, and afterwards kicked on the thigh, which also shows two
ugly bruises. Naturally, the brutal treatment I was receiving caused
me to call for help, and, on one or two men coming out of their tents,
they were met with a cry of “You will be all treated alike,” this
coming from another man, also in civilian clothes, who, at the same
time, brandished a revolver in a threatening manner. One of my
fellow-workers then asked what was the matter, and why they were
attacking me. It was only then that they announced who they were,
and their object for being there. I then asked: “Why did you not
let me know who you are?” He then said to me: “You are a
deserter.” By this time I was handcuffed and then marched to the
mess galley, where most of the other men had been marched. On
the way to the mess galley they told me that I could consider myself
a very lucky man for not being shot, as they had orders to shoot if
anyone resisted. This I considered was very poor consolation for the
brutal treatment I had received. When I arrived in the mess galley
covered with blood —face, neck, head, and clothes —I was still hand-
cuffed. The cook bathed my face, and it was only after the cook
had asked several times of one of the officers to take the handcuffs
off, in order that I might change my saturated blood-stained clothes,
that they were removed. The result of the hrutal attack naturallv
caused me severe pain and sleepless nights, not mentioning the loss
of time and money through not being in a fit condition to work. In
addition, I also lost my speech for one day, caused through calling
for assistance, and could only make myself understood in a very low
whisper. There was absolutely no attempt to evade or molest any of
the officers, neither before nor after they announced their calling
and their object. If such unnecessary and brutal conduct is adopted
in every instance when a raid is being made, it is a slur on the
traditional “British Fair Play and Justice.” Another matter worth
mentioning is the language used, one man being called a
without any provocation, by a military policeman, who, at the same
time, presented a fixed bayonet, such language being no credit to any
man wearing the King’s uniform. This camp life is hard and
strenuous enough, as anyone who has ever tried it knows, and
surely because I am working in the back-blocks that is no reason
why any officer should take advantage of a man’s position to treat
him like a wild dog. The work done here is extremely valuable to
the country, and it is time some people recognised the fact, instead
of sneering at the man who sacrifices all comforts to work as he does
for an honest living. In conclusion, it may be stated that every man
in this camp had his military papers (self in particular classed C 2),
or gave a satisfactory explanation of himself, which should prove to
you that none of the men had anything to fear from a raid from the
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


military officers. I hope that there will be a full inquiry made into
the matter herein referred to and some compensation granted to me
for the personal injury I received, from the effects of which I am still
suffering, and the loss of time from work. —Yours, etc.,
PATRICK HEALEY.
Vouching for the truth of the above statement are the following
signatures: Ernest Keenan, George Bush, Harry McNae, K. Waltanen,
F. Nelson, F. McClure, Frank Anson, Victor Manninen, S. Eriksen,
William Lyndhurst, A. J. Collier, J. Norman.
APPENDIX VI.
During the first quarter of 1918, the Hon. T. M. Wilford appeared
in a new role, namely, that of the censor of prison reading, and in
his wisdom, concluded that “Stead’s Review” must not be read by
military prisoners, the reason being that it was “so depressing” and
presumably not calculated to induce anti-conscriptionists to reconsider
their attitude. Here follows some interesting correspondence on the
subject:
Hon. Sir James Allen, K.C.M.G., Minister of Defence, Wellington.
Dear Sir, —A client of mine, who is serving a sentence under the
Military Service Act and is now detained at Waimarino Prison Camp,
has written a letter to me. Since his imprisonment, he arranged with
me for the supply of certain books, magazines, and papers, including,
inter alia, “Stead’s Review.” He now writes me a letter intimating
that “Stead’s Review” is not admitted to the prison, but that an
Australian magazine called “Life” and matter of a kindred type is
admitted. My client has not written to complain of this, but mentions
it incidentally. It seems to be an extraordinary thing that “Stead’s
Review” should be denied admission while “Life” is admitted, and I
shall be glad to hear from you the reason of this prohibition and
discrimination, and whether it is likely to be continued. —I have the
honour, Sir, to remain, yours truly, P. J. O’REGAN.
February 13th, 1918.
P. J. O’Regan, Esq., Barrister and Solicitor., Wellington.
Dear Sir,—l am in receipt of your letter of the 13th instant re-
garding the admission of the publication, “Stead’s Review,” to the
Prison Camp at Waimarino.
In reply, I have to inform you that this is a matter which is not
within the control of my Department, and would refer you to the
Minister in Charge of the Prisons Department, the Hon. T. M. Wilford,
who will, doubtless, be able to supply you with the necessary informa-
tion. —Yours faithfully, J. ALLEN, Minister of Defence.
26th February, 1918.
APPENDICES.


Hon. T. M. Wilford, Minister of Justice, Wellington.
Dear Sir, —A client of mine, Mr. P. Cody, who is at present serving
a sentence in the Prison Camp at Waimarino, has written to me to
the effect that “Stead’s Review,” to which he is a subscriber, has been
denied admission to the prison. He adds that another publication
called “Life,” and similar periodicals, are still admitted. I wrote to
the Minister of Defence directly after hearing from Mr. Cody, but he
has now written me to the effect that it is a matter for you. I shall
be glad to hear whether “Stead’s Review” has, in fact, been prohibited
from admission to my client, and if so, why? Thanking you in antici-
pation of an early reply.—Yours truly, P. J. O’REGAN.
4th March, 1918.
P. J. O’Regan, Esq., Wellington.
Dear Sir, —I have to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the
4th instant, in reference to the complaint made to you by P. Cody, at
present undergoing sentence at the Waimarino Prison Camp, of his not
being allowed to receive “Stead’s Review.”
In reply, I have to inform you that the matter is receiving careful
consideration. —Yours faithfully, THOMAS M. WILFORD.
sth March, 1918.
Hon. T. M. Wilford, Minister of Justice, Wellington.
Dear Sir, —I wrote you herein on the 4th March last and received
an acknowledgment from you dated the sth, in which you stated that
the matter was receiving consideration, but, so far, have received no
further reply.
I would point out that in my first letter I asked for no consideration
whatever, but simply made an inquiry whether it was correct that
while “Life” and similar periodicals were allowed admission to mili-
tary prisons, “Stead’s Review” was denied admission. I mentioned
the fact that a client of mine then imprisoned, Mr. P. Cody, had written
to me to the effect that the “Review” was refused admission to him,
and my object wag to ascertain whether this was due to the settled
policy of the Department, or whether it was due merely to inad-
vertence. To my inquiry no reply has yet been vouchsafed, and I beg
respectfully to repeat it. Thanking you in anticipation.—Yours truly,
P. J. O’REGAN.
28th May, 1918.
P. J. O’Regan’ Esq., Wellington.
Dear Sir, —I have to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the
28th ultimo in reference to the publication, “Stead’s Review.”
In reply, I beg to inform you that the circulation of “Stead’s
Review” in the prisons has been stopped because I consider it is so
depressing.—l am, Yours truly, THOMAS M. WILFORD.
Ist June, 1918;
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY.


Hon. T. M. Wilford, Minister of Justice, Wellington.
Dear Sir, —I duly received your letter of the Ist inst., and I
note that the circulation of the “Review” in the prisons has been
stopped because you consider it “so depressing.” I respectfully
submit that this information could have been vouchsafed to me when
I wrote to you 4th March last. Under the circumstances, I am
tempted to conclude that your reply dated the sth of that month was
dictated by the hope that I would not return for further information.
It will, no doubt, come in the nature of a surprise to many people
that a Liberal Minister should have signalised his accession to office
by preventing the circulation of a periodical so dispassionate, accurate,
cultured, and influential as “Stead’s Review.”
In my previous communication I mentioned, incidentally, that no
embargo whatever had been placed upon the circulation in the prison
of “Life,” an Australian publication. Doubtless the vaticinations of
the Rev. Dr. Fitchett are not “so depressing,” though it is submitted
that in so far as the war is concerned, they are woefully inaccurate.
The point, however, which concerns my client, Mr. Cody, and men of
his race and religion, is that “Life” is inspired by a spirit of sustained
venom and hatred of everything pertaining to Ireland and the Catholic
Church, and, under the circumstances, I cannot repress a feeling of
surprise at the discrimination you have seen fit to exercise. It is to
the lasting credit of Mr. Stead that nothing ever appeared in his
“Review” calculated to wound the patriotic or religious susceptibilities
of any section of the community.
I consider the matter„of such public importance that it is my inten-
tion to publish the whole of this correspondence.—Yours truly, P. J.
O’REGAN.
12th June, 1918.
P. J. O’Regan, Esq., Solicitor, Wellington.
Dear Mr. O’Regan,—l have to acknowledge the receipt of your
letter of the 12th instant.
In reference to your conclusions as to my last letter to yourself,
I can assure you that the same are erroneous, and such reply was
not dictated by the hope suggested in yours of the 12th—I would not
so misjudge you.
Your reference to “Stead’s Review” and to your client, Mr. Cody,
show, in my opinion, an absence of logical reasoning. If, as you say,
nothing appears in Mr. Stead’s “Review” calculated to wound the
religious susceptibilities of any section of the community, how can
you argue that any question of religion was in my mind when “Stead’s
Review” was being dealt with? On your own statement you are
surely answered.
I still believe that "Stead’s Review” is depressing, and in this time
of crisis and stress, I firmly and thoroughly believe that only those
APPENDICES.


-efforts which go to help and aid “Our King and Empire” should be
encouraged. My opinion is that Stead’s magazine weakens effort.
I shall certainly have no objection to your publishing this corres-
pondence.—l am, yours truly, THOMAS M. WILFORD.
17th June, 1918.
Hon. T. M. Wilford, Minister of Justice, Wellington.
Dear Sir, —I beg to acknowledge receipt of yours of the 17th inst.,
herein. lam glad to have your assurance that I was in error in
suggesting that you could have given me at once the information I
sought in my letter of March 4th last. It is hardly necessary to add
that I do not suggest that you have been influenced in the slightest
degree by any disregard of the religious feelings of any section of
the community. T thought, and still think, however, that it is not a
little remarkable that no objection should be taken to such a pro-
duction as "Life,” the bias of which, in the direction mentioned in
my previous letter, is obvious and notorious.,
Needless to say, I do not propose discussing “Stead’s Review” with
you. The correspondence has removed the scepticism I felt at the
outset, when I was invited to believe that a Liberal Minister of the
-Crown had seen fit to place such a magazine as "Stead’s Review" on
the Index of Imperialism.—Yours truly, P. J. O’REGAN.
18th June, 1918.
APPENDIX VII.
The Parliamentary Order Paper, September 3, contained the fol-
lowing question and answer:
Mr. Holland (Grey) to ask the Minister of Defence: “Whether, in
view of the fact that peace had been declared, the Government will
consider the advisability of granting a general amnesty to soldiers
undergoing imprisonment, and to other military offenders either
undergoing or liable to imprisonment.”
The Hon. Sir James Allen, Minister of Defence, replied: “It is not
possible to grant a general amensty to all soldiers at present under-
going imprisonment for offences committed overseas, as these unfor-
tunately include a small proportion of serious criminal cases, and
it is not considered that the declaration of peace warrants complete
remission in all cases. Whenever a soldier arrives in the Dominion
as a prisoner, his case is fully reviewed, and, wherever passible, he
is given his freedom. In fact, at present, there is no soldier under-
going a sentence of imprisonment in New Zealand for an offence
•committed on active service overseas, but I am afraid there are a few
still to come out whose cases will not justify a complete remission.
So far as the military defaulters and shirkers are concerned, I may
state that while orders have been given for the release of all those
ARMAGEDDQN OB CALVARY.


who have been classified as bona fide religious objectors by the
special Board, and those who were serving a second or third sen-
tence for offences under the Military Service Act, the Government
does not at present intend to remit the sentences of those who refused
service for other reasons or to cease the prosecution of those who
have so far evaded arrest.”
This means that the Government denies the right of Conscience
to the Socialist, the Irishman, the Maori, and the Christian other than
the Christian as narrowly defined by the Military Service Act. It
also means that the pursuit of the men with conscientious objections
to military service is to be carried to its vicious extreme.
APPENDIX VIII.
Since the main pages of this book have been in print quite a
number of C.O.’s therein recorded as “still in prison” have been
released as a result of their sentences expiring on the one hand and
of small remissions on the other.
Among those released as a result of expiry of sentence is Mr,
P. C, Webb, ex-M.P. for Grey. Mr. Webb has been accorded a
tremendous welcome at Auckland (where two theatres failed to ac-
commodate the thousands who assembled to greet him, at Wellington
(where one of the largest theatres was packed to the doors before
7.30, and many hundreds were turned away), at Christchurch, and
at Greymouth (where the citizens made his return the occasion of one
of the most remarkable demonstrations ever held in New Zealand).
APPENDICES.


PUBLICATIONS . Y H. E. HOLLAND. M.P.
SAMOA
A Story that Teems with Tragedy
A Record of the agony of a Primitive People and their
heroic struggles for Freedom.
A Record of Treaties made and torn up.
A Record of the Island Conflict tf German, American, and
British Trading Interests.
A Statement of Labour’s Position re the Control of
Samoa.
PRICE : 3d. Per dozen, 2/6.
ARMAGEDDON OR CALVARY: The Alternative for the
Conscientious Objectors of New Zealand. Price, 2/ .
THE TRAGIC STORY OF THE WAIHI STRIKE. (In
collaboration with “Ballot Box” and R. S. Ross.)
Paper, 6d.; cloth, 2/-.
SEDITION: Holland’s Speech from in 1914.
Price, Id. '*& s
LABOUR AND THE FUSION: Should Lie Labour Party
have joined the National Government 1 ? Debate with
John Payne, M.P. Price, 2d.
THE COMMUNE OF PARIS: The First G ‘ Socialist
Revolution. Price, 3d.
LABOUR’S CHALLENGE TO THE NATIONAL
GOVERNMENT: Speech on the Address-in-Reply,
House of Representatives, October, 1918. Price, 3d.
IN THE PRESS.
PATRIOTS AND PROFITEERS: A Second Chapter of
N.Z. War Profits.
THE PEACE TERMS: The War Foundations they Build.
Price, 3d.
BOY CONSCRIPTION AND CAMP MORALITY: The
case against Sir James Allen’s proposal for the Four
Months’ Camp Conscription of 18-year-old boys.
Price, 3d.
FOUNDATION PRINCIPLES OF SOCIALISM: A
Summary of Marxian Theory of Value and a State-
ment of Labour’s Objective. Price, 3d.
TO BE PUBLISHED.
IRELAND’S FAMINES AND REBELLIONS; The Ripe
Fruit of Seven Hundred Years of Bondage.




WELLINGTON, N.Z.;
Printed by The Maori-
land Worker Printing
and Publishing Go.,
Ltd., 290 Wakafleld
s: :: Street s : ;:
