

JVrnmltce dhber of
- 1945
Held in
KARDINIA PARK :: GEELONG
under the auspices of their Worships the Mayors of Greater Geelong, the
Church of England, and the Geelong Council of Churches, on the occasion
of the ARMISTICE WITH GERMANY.
NATIONAL
ANTHEM
(No. 17)
God save our gracious King;
Long live our noble King;
God save the King!
Send him victorious,
Happy and glorious,
Long to reign over us;
God save the King!
Thy choicest gifts in store
On him be pleased to pour;
Long may he reign.
May he defend our laws,
And ever give us cause
To sing with heart and voice,
God save the King!
PREPARATION
YOU who have come to this ARMISTICE SERVICE are asked to enter
into its full meaning, so that it may be a worthy act of corporate
THANKSGIVING TO GOD, OF REMEMBRANCE, and of solemn
DEDICATION.
HYMN
No. 5 (Old Hundredth)
All people that on earth do dwell,
Sing to the Lord with cheerful voice;
Him serve with fear, His praise forth tell,
Come ye before Him, and rejoice.
O enter then His gates with praise,
Approach with joy His courts unto;
Praise, laud, and bless His name always,
For if is seemly so to do.
The Lord, ye know, is God indeed,
Without our aid He did us make;
We are His folk, He doth us feed,
And for His sheep He doth us take.
For why? the Lord our God is good:
His mercy is for ever sure;
His truth at all times firmly stood,
And shall from age to age endure.
To Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost,
The God whom Heaven and earth adore,
From men and from the Angel-host
Be praise and glory evermore.
SCRIPTURE (Responsive Reading). Psalm 121:
PSALM 121
Minister: I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills: from whence cometh my help.
People: My help cometh even from the Lord: who hath made heaven and earth.
Minister: He will not suffer thy foot to be moved: and He that keepeth thee will
not sleep.
People: Behold, He that keepeth Israel: shall neither slumber nor sleep.
Minister: The Lord himself is thy keeper: the Lord is thy defence upon thy right hand.
People: So that the sun shall not burn thee by day: neither the moon by night.
Minister: The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil; yea, it is even He that shall
keep thy soul.
People: The Lord shall preserve thy going out and thy coming in: from this time
forth for evermore.
Minister: Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the Holy Ghost;
People: As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.


LET US THANK GOD
For the King’s Leadership:
ALMIGHTY GOD, Who rulest over all the kingdoms of the world, and dost
order them according to Thy good pleasure: we yield Thee unfeigned thanks, for
that Thou hast been pleased to set Thy servant, our Sovereign Lord, King George,
upon the throne of this realm. Direct all his councils and endeavours to Thy glory,
and the welfare of his subjects; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
For Victory:
ALMIGHTY GOD, Judge of the nations, we give Thee hearty thanks for the
mercy shown us in successes granted our arms and those of our Allies. We thank
Thee for the courage and endurance of our sailors, soldiers and airmen, for the vision
of statesmen, and the skill of commanders. And we pray Thee to uphold the spirit
of all peoples of the United Nations that we may be worthy of victory and may so
dedicate ourselves to Thy service, that we may be able to use it to Thy honour and
the benefit of all mankind; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
For the Red Cross Society:
O MERCIFUL LORD, Who, through the teaching of Thy Son, didst reveal Thy
love for all mankind, we thank Thee for the wondrous ministry of the Red Cross
Society. Give to this and the generations that follow the same spirit which inspired
those who have gone before, who began this work in love and poured forth time and
treasure in its service. We thank Thee that there has not been lacking a succession
of faithful men and women to carry on their task. Grant the leaders of this world such
wisdom that good will may abound among the nations of the earth; through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.
For the Courage of the Motherland;
MOST mighty and gracious God, Whose mercy and protection have been upon
our race in ages past, we praise Thy glorious Name that in this bitter war Thou did’st
enable the people of the Motherland to stand with skill and courage in the face of
deadly peril; and we beseech Thee to make us all so truly sensible of Thy mercy that
we may show forth Thy praise by more faithful obedience to Thy holy will; through
Jesus Christ -our Lord. Amen.
THE LORD’S PRAYER
OUR FATHER, which art in heaven. Hallowed be Thy Name. Thy kingdom
come. Thy will be done, in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily
bread. And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
And lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil: For Thine is the kingdom,
the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.
HYMN
No. 25 (St. Anne)
O God our help in ages past,
Our hope for years to come,
Our shelter from the stormy blast,
And our eternal home.
Before the hills in order stood,
Or earth received her frame;
From everlasting Thou art God,
To endless years the same.
Under the shadow of Thy throne
Thy saints have dwelt secure;
Sufficient is Thine arm alone,
And our defence is sure.
A thousand ages in Thy sight
Are like an evening gone;
Short as the watch that ends the night
Before the rising sun.
O God our help in ages past,
Our hope for years to come,
Be thou our guard while troubles last
And our eternal home.
LITANY OF REMEMBRANCE
A Commemoration of the Fallen
O GOD, Who art not the God of the dead, but of the living, and Who dost swal-
low up death for ever, we thank Thee for the hope of life that is eternal. We bless
Thee for the fellowship of the unseen; for those who are all gone into the world of
light; who see Thy face and serve Thee still. Their heroism and their sacrifice, their
deeds and their endurance shall be the heritage of children’s children. With humble
hearts and memories and lowly pride we commemorate before Thee those who have
fallen in the war.


In Memory
Of all the brave sailors, gallant soldiers, undaunted airmen, and noble women who
have been faithful even unto death. Response: We bow before Thee, O Lord.
In Memory
Of poets who left their unsung songs, and did the deeds that shall make others'
songs.
Of those who dropped the instruments of music and the tools of art
Of students who forsook the cloistered paths of learning and in a sterner road laid
down their lives. We bow before Thee, O Lord.
In Memory
Of men of science who, through sacrifice, have found the truths of life and death
and immortality.
Of statesmen who passed from the Senate House to serve upon the field, and came
not back. We bow before Thee, O Lord.
In Memory
Of those who came from shop and office at the urgent call.
Of men who left their husbandry and their daily craft.
And of the poor to whom their country gave no heritage, who yet have died for it.
We bow before Thee, O Lord.
In Memory
Of those who died fulfilling ministries of help and healing.
Of chaplains, doctors, nurses, and workers under the Red Cross, who saved others,
but themselves they did not save. We bow before Thee, O Lord.
In Memory
Of seamen of the transport and merchant services who w r ent down with their boats.
Of fishermen who left their nets to sweep destruction from the seas.
Of workers who in dangerous tasks met accident and death.
And of all innocent and helpless lives that have been sacrificed.
We bow before Thee, O Lord.
In Memory
Of our own, our dearest, and our best.
Beloved sons and brothers, fathers, husbands, friends.
Dear names for ever written in our hearts.
We bow before Thee, O Lord.
The work we do is harder for their absence; the road we tread is lonelier for their
passing. We trust to meet them at the journey’s end; we lift to Thee, O God, the
sorrows of our homes. Give us the grace to make the sacrifice complete. Help us to
live as faithfully and bravely as they died, to cherish their memories in living monu-
ments and greatly to resolve to build the City of our God in the land for which they
gave themselves. For Thy Name’s sake. Amen.
THE LAST POST
HYMN
No. 3 (Stockport)
O Valiant Hearts, who to your glory came
Through dust of conflict and through battle-flame,
Repeat f Tranquil you lie, your knightly virtue proved,
[Your memory hallowed in the Land you loved.
Proudly you gathered, rank on rank to war,
As who had heard God’s message from afar;
Repeat f All you had hoped for, all you had, you gave
[To save Mankind—yourselves you scorned to save.
Splendid you passed, the great surrender made,
Into the light that nevermore shall fade;
Repeat f Deep your contentment in that blest abode,
[ Who wait the last clear trumpet-call of God.
O risen Lord, O Shepherd of our Dead,
Whose Cross has bought them and whose Staff has led,
Repeat f In glorious hope their proud and sorrowing Land
[ Commits her Children to Thy gracious hand.


st H 22 7
PRAYERS OF DEDICATION
O LORD GOD, we beseech Thee to be with us in this hour of victory. Strengthen
our King; give guidance to our rulers; uphold our sailors, soldiers, and airmen, that,
with courage, endurance, and self-restraint, they may meet whatever trials they may
yet be called upon to face. May we as a nation carry on this war without bitterness
or self-seeking, not shrinking from what sacrifices may yet be required of us, desiring
only that Thy way may be established among men, and that the safety, honour, and
welfare of our country may be assured.
Bless and uphold our Allies. May the hearts of men everywhere turn to Thee
for help, so that even this solemn hour may hasten the coming of Thy Kingdom, and
reveal Thee afresh to the world. Make us strong in the faith that Thou wilt defend
the right, and grant us quickly an abiding peace; through Jesus Christ our Lord,
Amen.
ALMIGHTY GOD, grant an outpouring of Thy Spirit upon Thy people in these
days, that everywhere there may come a rekindling of Christian faith, a passion for
righteousness, and a new love for humanity. May there be a great turning of men
to God in our Time, and a more sincere following of Jesus Christ as Saviour and Lord,
Amen.
ACT OF SELF-DEDICATION
(To be repeated by all who will)
TEACH US, Good Lord, to serve Thee as Thou deservest; to give and not to
count the cost; to fight and not to heed the wounds; to toil and not to seek for rest; to
labour and not to ask for any reward, save that of knowing that we do Thy will;
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Son of God, eternal Saviour,
Source of life and truth and grace,
Son of Man, whose birth incarnate
Hallows all our human race,
Thou, our Head, who, throned in glory,
For thine own dost ever plead,
Fill us with thy love and pity,
Heal our wrongs, apd help our need.
As thou, Lord, hast lived for others
So may we for others live;
Freely have thy gifts been granted,
Freely may thy servants give.
Thine the gold and thine the silver,
Thine the wealth of land and sea,
We but stewards of thy bounty,
Held in solemn trust for thee.
HYMN
Son of God, eternal Saviour,
Source of life and truth and grace,
Son of Man, whose birth incarnate
Hallows all our human race,
Thou who prayedst, thou who wiliest
That thy people should be one,
Grant, O grant our hope’s fruition:
Here on earth thy will be done.
OFFERING
(In aid of Distressed Diggers’ Fund)
A PRAYER FOR AUSTRALIA
No. 20 (What a Friend We Have in Jesus)
Come, O Christ, and reign among us,
King of love, and Prince of peace,
Hush the storm of strife and passion,
Bid its cruel discords cease;
By thy patient years of toiling,
By thy silent hours of pain,
Quench our fevered thirst of pleasure
Shame our selfish greed of gain.
Ah. the past is dark behind us,
Strewn with wrecks and stained with blood;
But before us gleams the vision
Of the coming brotherhood.
See the Christlike host advancing,
Fligh and lowly, great and small,
Linked in bonds of common service
For the common Lord of all.
O GOD, grant us a vision of our country, fair as she might be; a land of justice
where none shall prey on others; a land of plenty, where vice and poverty shall cease
to fester; a land of brotherhood where all success shall be founded on service, and
I 5U V
shall not
le commoi
ve each pi
g beauty
I! 1 11
honour shall be given to character alone; a land of peace where order shall not rest
on force, but on the love of all for the country, the great mother of the common life
and weal. Hear Thou, O Lord, the silent prayer of all our hearts as we each pledge
our time and strength and thought to speed the day of her
righteousness; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
and
coming
BENEDICTION
GO FORTH into the world in peace; be of good courage, ho
is good; render to no man evil for evil; strengthen the faint - hea
weak, help the afflicted; love all men; serve the Lord, rejoicing ir
Spirit: and may the blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the S
Spirit come upon us, and remain with us for ever. Amen.
G. Mercer & Co. Pty. Ltd., Printers, Geelong
31508023314773
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
S£ rynr/inA /R.
