





Around
TOORADIN
The Sportsman's
Paradise
by
HAWKEYE




AROUND
TOORADIN,
WESTERN POET.
THE SPORTSMAN’S PARADISE.
BY HAWKEYE.
PRICE SIXPENCE
iBBg
BROTHERTON AND COOPER,
Printers and Publishers,
"Chronicle” Office, Prahran and St. Kilda,


PREFACE.
The following sketches of Tooradin and its surroundings, by
<( Hawkeye,” have been re-printed from the Chronicle at the
request of a number of gentlemen who are interested in the
charming and picturesque township. The plan with the book
will no doubt be eminently serviceable to those who desire to
possess a slice out of the “ beauty spot ” of Tooradin.
Brotherton and Cooper,
Publishers,
Prahran.
November ist, 1889.


INDEX.
PAGE.
To Tooradin ~. ... .. ... o
Tooradin ... ... ... ... 6
Deerside Estate ... ... ... ... g
Tooradin Gossip ... ... ... 13
Outside Tooradin ... ... ... ... \j
A Day’s Fishing ... ... ... 20
Mutton Birding at Cape Wooloomi ... ... 23


TO TOORADIN.
Extract from Prahran and St. Kilda Chronicle, 24th September, 1888.
gIX weeks ago a small railway
station was opened in South
Gippsland and christened Too-
radin. The country it opens up is
almost as unknown to the genetality
of men as the station appeared to
be to the booking clerk from whom
I took ticket. Tooradin lies on
the Gippsland line and branches off
from Dandenong, being thirty-five
miles from Melbourne. The on'y
approach to excitement after leaving
Melbourne is seen at Dandenong, while
waiting for the Tooradin train. The
platform is crowded with the curious
sightseers of Dandenong, and it seems
also as if a knot of Collins-street
auctioneers were suddenly dropped on
the platform. Foremost amongst them
is Mr Donald Munro, on the way to
his property at the Bass. Bass is a
name one hears often going to Too-
radin, and it appears to be the Utopia
of these parts, but of this more anon.
Mr Munro is a very notable figure
dress 3d in his buckskin breeches, top
boots, velvet-looking coat, all ready for
his long ride to Bass, where he leaves
the coach we eventually shall have to
catch. His faultless dress is incon-
gruous with the surroundings. Too
much of the English gentleman and
n >t enough of the Australian bushman
in his appearance. One prefers the
picturesque appearance of a young
stockman on the platform, who has
not been turned out of Haigh’s in
bandbox style. The train to Tooradin
consists of three carriages and a couple
of trucks. TVe have a good repre-
sentative crowd in the compartment I
single out. Four auctioneers, a sea
captain, two speculators and a news-
paper man. I soon learn there the
object of the journey, and that there is
to be a land sale on to-day, otherwise
the sea ciptain and myself would have
had the compartment to oursehes.
When fairly started conversation is
opened up and the bright prospects of
the land of promise are discussed. The
captain is going down to start two
steamers running in Western Port, and
which service will prove a great boon
to the farmers around the inlet. The
captain is a tall, sallow man, deep eves,
black beard, with a power to project
and execute. Mr Munro is greatly


interested in the scheme, and the
ancient mariner produces a chart and
shows how he can cut through sand-
banks and work channels through the
great sanddrifts. All this is very
interesting to us, and we feel in a
measure pioneers of the coming groat
service. Next to the mariner is Mr
Shevill, another Leviathian auctioneer.
How time flies! It seems only the
other day I knew Mr Shevill at
Meeson’s Hawthorn Grammar School,
and I have not met him since until
riding to a remote place called Tooradin
he becomes my fellow passenger.
All this time we are sauntering into
Tooradin. The day is a lazy one, the
sun is warm, and the eyes can without
much persuasion, draw straws. The
railway is a single line. There is no
train behind or before us and the
track is our own. Therefore we lake
the journey easy and saunter slowly
along. The country through which
we pass looks green and well. The
herbage is in plenty, though the waters
of the winter, we are told by the
ancient mariner, have dried up quickly
this year. Patches of cultivation dot
the landscape here and there, but
principally the land is used for pastoral
purposes. Indeed, we are in the land
of milk and honey, and I am told there
is no better land in the colony for dairy
produce. The way lean kine become
fat here is said to be marvellous.
Hedges surround many of the pad-
docks, with an occasional billagong,
skirted and overshadowed with fine
stately-looking gums. In the shade
prize cattle may be seen resting, for
they are bred on this beautiful land.
We stop now and then at wayside
stations, but they are destitute of
character and passengers. We leave
behind our trucks, and like an Irish
postboy, we put on steam at the last
and rush into Tooradin with a shriek
and a whistle that wakes up the echoes
of the place.
Tooradin station has the honor of
standing alone in the centre of a plain
without any apparent reason for it.
The oldest and newest inhabitant of
these parts is unable to say why the
station has terminated where it does,
and they speak warmly of the powers
who are responsible for its location.
The popular opinion is that it should
have been constructed nearer the inlet.
Tooradin station is the present terminus,
but it is proposed to extend the line
to Port Albert, one hundred and
twenty miles further down. Tooradin
farmers desired to give the Eailway
Commissioners a dinner on the com-
pletion of this section of the line, but
they declined to face the ordeal of the
adverse comments the farmers intended
to bestow. The railway authorities
have their own ideas regarding Too-
radin and call it “ Tooraddin” much to
the disgust of many loyal Tooradinites.
Only two trains run a day to
Tooradin, so the arrival of a train
is an event in the minds of local
men. We have a goodly crowd to
welcome us, and the stationmaster is
fully ahve to the responsibilities of
his position when he sees Mr Munro.
The Bass coach waits with its splendid
team of six horses, all lively as
kittens, anxious to go, and threatening
every moment to entangle themselves
with the four horses of the Tooradin
coach From the station, as far as the
4
SKETCHES BY HAWKE YE.


eye can see, is a plain skirted with
fringes of ti-tree, blue gum and divers
scrub. The native grass is splendid,
and it is across this plain the coaches
to the Bass and Tooradin go. No road
is formed, and we will have the
pleasure of a ride in a coach across
springing turf. The customary struggle
with the portmanteaus take place and
the rush for seats. At last all is ready,
a young girl, the only female present,
obtaining the box-seat on the Bass
coach. “ Are you all ready, Mick ?”
cries the coachman to the groom.
“ In a minute,” is the reply. The ex-
amination of traces take place, a strap
is tightened here, a chain drawn closer,
and the word comes, “ Go !” Crack !
crack ! echoes the driver’s whip, as he
draws himself together, the two leaders
plunge forward, they rear once and
and then the Bass coach is off across
the plain. Coaching has a romance no
other form of travelling possesses, and
the Bass coach forms a picture as it
threads through the trees dotting the
plain. The sun shines on the ver-
milion panels of the coach, and the
red gives the necessary animated color
to the scene to render it charming to
the artistic eye. By the time we are
started in the Tooradin coach the
station is empty, with the exception of
the offioials. Following the serpentine
track of the Bass coach we pass through
the old grazing ground of Tooradin
station. I share the inside of the
■coach with Mr Louis Lemme, while his
brother Victor drives behind. Mr
Lemme is down here to-day to sell
some land at Tooradin, fronting the
Inlet, known as Deerside estate, from
the quantity of deer on the run. We
leave the old homestead of Tooradin to
the left, and marvel at the wealth of
clover all around. Perhaps there was
never such a country lor growing
clover. White clover is everywhere
forming splendid pasture for cattle, and
honey for millions of bees. The land
in the Tooradin station is wonderfully
rich, and would, it is believed, produce
anything in the dairy requirements. It
is mooted ta float an immense company
to dairy farm it, and the inhabitants
have belief in its ultimate success.
Half way to Tooradin our leaders com-
mence to play up rough, and one
finally kicks over the traces, and we
enjoy a little mild excitement. It is
just in the centre of some ti-tree scrub,
and the number of b’owflies which
swarm in upon us is marvellous. The
droning of insects is heard, the laugh of
a jackass, tee note of a magpie, and we
are then away once again. As we near
Tooradin we can smell the sea and taste
the ozone. The heat which, amongst
the ti-tree, would almost blister the
paint on the coach, disappears, and
in its place a cool breeze fans the
cheeks. Sharp round a corner, over
as few ruts, which toss us like shuttle-
cocks all over the coach, and we see
Tooradin before us. Embryo Tooradin
I should write; but still Tooradin.
Tooradin consists of an hotel, a post
office, a store and a chapel. These are
built on the banks of an inlet skirted
with mangroves and ti-tree. It is
Saturday afternoon and all the out-
lying farmers are in to attend the sale.
The coach pulls up at the hotel, my
portmanteau is thrown down, and I
receive my first impressions of
Tooradin.
5
ARO UXD WESTERN PORT.


TOORADIN.
Extract from Prahran and St. Kilda Chronicle, Ist December, 1888.
« RIDGE Hotel, Tooradin, before
whicn we have stopped, is one of
those shambling old hotels the
traveller meets with at waysides. It lacks
the debonair character arid spruce smart-
ness of its metropolitan compeers. It
wears the dress of country life, and
with the verdant life of trees and
creepers at one end, is an attractive
bush picture. The farmers, fishermen,
and laborers of the district watch
us alight and the others for that
drink which appears to be the
desideratum of the traveller each time
the coach halts. Mr Victor Lemme
and Mr Shevill, who have come hither
to sell the Deerside Estate, overlooking
French and Philip Islands, appear to
lie well known, and many hearty shakes
of hands they receive from the good
men of Tooradin. Most of these men
are pioneers, and full of quaint stories
of what the inlet was in days past.
They are all fine specimens of man-
hood, healthy, bronzed, strong with
fresh air, pure water, milk, butter and
honey. They have roughed it in the
past. They Have reclaimed apparently
irreclaimable ti-tree swamps. They
have broken sour soil and laid it open
to the sweetening influences of the sun.
They have toiled. They have sown
and are now reaping the fruits of their
industry. It is something to drink
with such men, working giants of
agriculture, and to watch them in the
days of their prosperity adulterate the
pure water I have mentioned they
drank in the time of their toil. “ What
are you going to have, boys p” asks Mr
Victor Lemme in his cheery voice.
The farmers and fishermen after a hint
of bashfulness before the Melbourne
folk name their several weaknesses.
It takes the licensee of the hotel all
his time to minister to the thirsty. A
popular Collins-street auctioneer turns
barman for the nonce and assists him.
There is no gainsaying the fact that
the way the auctioneer serves would
not disgrace Young and Jackson’s best
men. The licensee, one “ Larry ”
Bazaan, ceases work and stands looking
on in wonderment. “ Larry” et uxor are
well known in these parts and quite
famous in their thoroughly independent
way. ISTot well, nor difficult, is it for
the traveller to offend uxor B, so one
must be careful if he loves peace and a
bed of roses.
The inner man refreshed Mr Lemme
and I proceed to survey Tooradin.
From the door of Bnzian’s hotel, the
road stretches across to the inlet.


spannel here with a bridge. The inlet
is really an inland salt river rushing
up like a huge artery from Western
lArt Bay. Above the bridge it is
fringed at the water’s edge with man-
groves. From a healthy standpoint
mangroves have little to recommend
them. Below the bridge the man-
groves have to a great extent been
obliterated, and the result is that the
mud has given place to sea sand. This
is known as “ Sandy Beach.” A theory
exists, and I deem it a likely one, that
these arteries were originally fresh-
water creeks leading into the sea, and
that the advance of the sea has changed
the nature of the water. Be this as it
may their presence contrives to make
Tooradin one of the beauty spots of
Victoria. On their banks anything
will grow in profusion and luxuriance.
The ti-tree is the marvel of all who
have seen it. A common supposition
existed here, as it does now in other
parts of the colony, that where ti-tree
covei’S the land it is inferior. This was
the mistake the pioneers tell us they
made when they first cultivated at
Tooradin. They avoided the ti-tree
land as bad, poor and unwholesome;
now they judge the land by the quality
and size of the ti-tree. Do not suppose
from this that the country around
the inlet is all ti-tree. On the contrary,
it possesses such rich meadow pas-
tures of native succulent grasses as to
make glad the heart of the farmer.
Flowers grow wild which are nurtured
in Melbourne, and Mr Lyne, a pioneer,
tells a story of a young lady from Mel-
bourne who complained that she could
not take any flowers back with her as
a memento of her visit. “ I took my
scythe,” said Lyne, “ and asked her to
follow me into the paddock, and I then
mowed her down half an acre of mari-
golds and marguerites.” The young
lady now breathes no treason respecting
the flowers of Tooradin.
By the time we reach the bridge the
coach with its six horses has passed on
its way to the Bass. On the bridge
we pause in admiration at the beauty
of the scene. Below us the tide is
swiftly ebbing to the sea, and fish of
all descriptions, in about four feet of
water, can be distinguished floating
down on the ebb tide. It is a fact that
the man who loves a rural home may
have one at Tooradin and go down to
the bottom of his garden, bordering
the inlet, and catch a basket of fish
before breakfast. And such fish ! The
fish we obtain in Melbourne are poor
and small compared to them The
whiting hooked are worthy of the
name and fit to grace the dishes of an
epicurian. To the left of the inlet,
alongside Sandy Beach, are the fisher-
men’s neat cottages and their boats.
Their dwellings have the background
of the bush. Their nets are spread
out to dry, and they form a charming
piece of marine life. In one of them
lives “Jimmie Miles,” most popular of
fishermen and a thorough sportsman,
with whom, with others, I shall travel
on a yachting cruise around Western
Port. Looking ahead as far as vision
carries across the water are hills mount-
ing upon hills until they appear
to melt and are lost with the heavens.
The trees and waving masses of foliage
stirred by the sea breezes can be dis-
tinguished in the near foreground, but
as the eye mounts higher they become
7
SKETCHES BY HAWKE YE.


tindistinguishable in the mists which
hang like battle smoke around the
peaks of French Island. Overhead is
the clear blue Australian sky animated
with the feathered life which abounds
in such profusion. As we stand upon
the bridge a flight of swans soar past
us. Their white lined wings stand out in
bold rehef against the sky. Anon the
elegant blue crane lazily floats onward
to the sea, and then a batch of ducks,
followed by some teal. The birds fol-
low the tide. Ebb tide is a signal for
them all to leave the inland waters
and seek the open sea of Western Port
Bay. The full tide will bring them
once more to the “ flushings,” where
they will remain till the turn of the
tide again.
Beached on the shore beneath the
bridge is a capital little steamer re-
joicing in the name of “ Pinafore.”
This is the boat which is going to
prove of such service to visitors and
residents of Tooradn. The ancient
mariner is to command her, and thinks
she will prove a paying spec. The
men who have journeyed from Mel-
bourne to buy allotments in the Deer-
side Estate examine her, and comment
on the good time they will have among
the reaches of the bay in her. The
Deerside Estate lies at the other side
of the bridge, and is a snug hiding
place for hundreds and hundreds of
deer. The deer are a great nuisance
to the Tooradin farmers, and are the
most destructive of any game about the
place. So bad are they that farmers
oft lie in wait for them at cultivation
patches and shoot them to save their
crops. The buck deer possesses a
great antipathy to bulls, and only a
week before my arrival a buck deer had
ripped the stomach of a valuable bull
to ribbons belonging to a farmer
settled beyond Deerside Estate. The
fact of thousands of acres in the
immediate vicinity of Tooradin being
Government preserves allows all kinds
of game to increase and multiply in a
wonderful manner. Indeed all the
time I am here I cannot overcome my
surprise at the fecundity of sea, air,
and earth. All literally teem with
life, and yet Tooradin is but thirty-five
miles by rail from Melbourne. For a
poor man to reside on the inlet I am
told simply spells ruin. For these state-
ments I do net vouch, but that I am
assured so by men who ought to know,
one man being the father of twins, is a
fact.
A land sale at Tooradin is the source
of much excitement, and after inspect-
ing the estate I accept Mr Lemrae’s
offer to be present at the sale of Deer-
side. The sale is to take place at
three and we return to the Bridge Hotel
for lunch. In a country hotel situated
in the midst of a game country in the
close season, one should never ask
questions. The local constable at
Tooradin does his duty and he is a
good-looking fellow into the bargain.
We all receive a scolding—a terrible
sci Iding from uxor B, but the com-
bined eloquence and persuasive powers
of Messrs Lem me and Shevill over-
come the threat of the lady not to let
us have any dinner for being late, and
we dine in pi ace. The vegetables, like
even thing ehe aie phenomenal, and
we f. ast and are made glad on the tat
of the land prior to the sale of Deer-
side,
8
Alt 0 TINT) WESTERN PORT.


THE DBERSIDE ESTATE.
Extract from Prahran and St. Kilda Chronicle, Bth December, 7 888.
SOR humor and variety of life a sale
in the country equals a rural
coursing meeting. Every farmer*
selector, and fisherman gathered at the
Deerside Estate thinks it his bounden
duty to “ chaff” his neighbour, and they
do so to their heart’s Content. There is
an amount of cariosity among them as to
who is the auctioneer, and some of
the well informed point out Mr Victor
Lemme with a dainty flower in his
button-hole. “ Larry” Bazaan is the
boss of the show, and he drives a pair
of horses with a light trap from the
hotel to the ground fetching necessaries
in a wonderful manner. “ How he
does drive!” exclaim the Melbourne
folk: “Drive! do you call it?” echo
the Tooradin people, and then the town
men have a doubt as to whether it is
not only furious locomotion.
The best way to “ run” a sale is, of
course, to provide a good luncheon, in
spacious marquee and what not.
“ Larry,” when the mi itia folk were
here volunteering, bought the tent now
erected on the Deerside Estate, border-
ing the inlet. It is wonderful the
strength and convenience ol the tent,
and “Larry” is jubilant at the price at
which he bought. Mr Lemme will not,
however, sell in the tent but prefers
the open. “ Larry’s” light cart has a
table put in it, the vehicle is drawn
under a large gum-tree, and then Mr
Lemme waits. Waits for the farmers
and others to demolish the spendid
sandwiches and English beer. At
Tooradin all possess good appetites.
Men live here. Doctors die. Medical
men come here to make a practice, and
as they wish to see the inlet, walk
about for a while. They return to
Bazaan’s Bridge Hotel, and are horri-
fied at their appetite, and uxor B. thinks
“ Melbourne men are the hungriest
lot she ever served.” With such an
appetite the doctors groan, and when it
is appeased they return to the city dis-
gusted with the health-giving qualities
of Tooradin. Knowing this I do not
feel astonished as pile after pile of
sandwiches disappear beneath the ca-
pacious jaws of the farmers. All things
give out at last, and the box of sand-
O 7
wiches did, much I think to Mr
Lemme’s joy. He desired to get
througn the sale, as he was returning
to the city afterwards. While Mr
Lemme is reading the conditions the
buyers are very grave. They evidently
regard the selling of Deerside as a
serious proceeding. Mr Lemme runs
the conditions through in the wrell


known business style of the auctioneer,
explaining a point here, elucidating a
clause there, and winds up with “ Now,
gentlemen, start me with a bid if you
please—what shall I say for lot one ?”
To a sale in the country you must
come if you desire to see the notables
of the place. The audience before Mr
Lemme under the gum-tree is some-
what mixed. The three or four specu-
lators and capitalists contrast strangely
with the fishermen. The capitalists
are, however, admired by the beauty of
the place, the whole of the beauty, out
of a delicate compliment to Mr Lemme,
being present. Such a collection of
hats I never saw within so small a
radius. The “ gentleman from Mel-
bourne,” as uxor B. persistently re-
iterated, wore black belltoppers with
which they designed to impress the
natives, but it was not to be. An
hotelkeeper borrowed the local clergy-
man’s hat, put it on his head with a tilt,
and Tooradin laughed at the “ gentle-
men from Melbourne,” The day is a
hot and breezy one, and Mr Lemme
sells without a hat. The local con-
stable, clean in build and clear of eye,
supports Mr Lemme with a due defer-
ence. The first lot put up is a block
adjoining the bridge. We are in the
parish of Kooweerup, the other side of
the bridge and inlet is Sherwood. A
distance past the Deerside Estate com-
mences among ti-tree and reeds, the
first portion of the famous Gippsland
swamp. The bidding for block one is
brisk. Mr George Poole is finally the
purchaser. Mr Poole is a publican at
Sherwood, and an old Prahraqite, as
also is, I might mention, “Larry”
Bazaan. “Larry” at one time kept the
Windsor Castle Hotel and the Limerick
-Arms at South Melbourne, and was
always a broth of a boy. Mr Poole
and Mr Bazaan do not ask each oth-.r
to dinner, and “ Larry” does not look
pleased at Mr Poole’s purchases.
George Poole is a good representative
man of these parts, and he is also a
successful one. He has been and is
now, I think, a shire councillor. His
faith in Tooradin is huge, and Toora-
din with him is to become a minature
Melbourne. Time will show the cor-
rectness of the prophecy. When once
the country is opened up, and that is
coming very fast now, I can see no
reason why Tooradin should not be the
most prosperous of inland towns. All
is in its favor. Excellent land willing
with tilling to give you all the fruits of
the earth ; the sea is here with fish in
abundance; the air is filled with
feathered life, and the railway now
waits t@ transport them to the Mel-
bourne market. Given the right men,
men who are not afraid of work, and
what is to prevent Tooradin becoming
a familiar name for the good things of
a rich country.
The land Mr Lemme is selling to-
day consists of business blocks and
residential sites facing the main road
to Melbourne, and bordered at the back
with one of the arms of the inlet.
How many weary traders, professional
men, and others would jump at the
residential sites submitted by Mr
Lemme, instead of paying the prices
for land they do at Queenscliff and
Sorrento. This is, of course, regarding
Tooradin from a watering-place point
of view, as a spot where a man can
run down and retire for a couple of
10
AROUND WESTERN PORT.


days; where he can have shooting,
fishing, or boating, and if necessity
calls him to Melbourne, he may return
in two hours. I do not, however, think
the source of Tooradin’s coming pros-
perity will be derived from the influx
of Melbourne visitors or persons who
may by the beauty of the locality and
the profusion of legitimate sport be
tempted to purchase blocks of land. If
this were so it would give a mushroom
growth of well-being which might or
might not be stable. My belief is that
any man willing to work, with a fair
amount of farm knowledge, can do well
at Tooradin. At Tooradin it will soon
be possible to buy small blocks suit-
able from every point of view for farms,
and which must be ultimately farmed.
Here, if anywhere in the world, small
ownership will not prove a failure.
Men who write on these topics assert
that the determination of husbandry is
determined by the subdivision of land.
This argument is wrong. For instance,
there are few parts of England culti-
vated better than the Isle of Oxholme,
which is almost wholly divided into
small holdings, and very pretty they
look, too, of a warm summer’s day. It
has been argued that the experiment
has failed in France, and that small
ownership is to be deprecated. But if
this is so how is it that they pay the
enormous war tax without any apparent
diminution of national prosperity,which
has made so many financiers ques-
tion whether France is not a more
wealthy power than England. Coming
nearer home we have the Chaffey irri-
gation colonies, which are all small
holdings and which are going to be
such a great success. The land at
Mildura was good and wanted water.
The Murray was tapped, and the result
is the desert literally blossoming.
When I was at Mildura it would have
been impossible to picture a more
blasted looking country than that
which stretched beyond the snug
homestead built upon the banks of the
river. At Tooradin the country has all
these artificial advantages of irrigation
in a natural state. Water is here in
plenty and the climate is humid and
favorable to vegetable growth. The
biggest liar in the district, who I met
at the sale, assures me that they have
great difficulty oftimes in preventing
the fencing from sprouting out in
leaves. Here again is an example of
the powers of the place. Nowhere in
Victoria could you meet with such a
tall talker. As a tarradiddler he is at
once unique and Gargantuan. He
gives one or two immense bids to Mr
Lemme, and then coolly swears he
never spoke, or that he was dodging a
beetle.
The beetle or the beer settled him
eventually. Ananias had grounds for
his complaint about beetles. Insect life
is represented by myriads and myriads
of species, and were the Field Natural-
ists up in the wonders of Tooradin
they would make the inlet a rendezvous.
The flowers, open pastures, white
clover, and shelter of the scrub atti'act
thousands of diversely colored butter-
flies, and armed with a net the naturalist
could soon obtain fine specimens of beau-
tifully winged species. Ananias com-
menced to tell me about some worms,
white ones, a foot long and three
inches thick, but I could go one better
and be within the confines of truth
11
SKETCHES BY HAWKEYE.


with reference to some grown around
Brandy Creek, and upon the Strezlecki
ranges within five miles of Tarragon.
George Poole claims acquaintance
with many old Prahranitos, and asks
after the old ’uns and the Myall. He
tells some yarns of the Myall Hotel
and the times the boys used to have
together. “ Sam Willis,” says George,
“ can tell you all about Painters.” The
history of the old Myall has yet to be
written. George is going to erect on
the block he has purchased a splendid
hotel which is going to eclipse any-
thing in the district. At Sherwood he
will make and burn his own bricks and
cart them hither two miles. “ Larry”
does not like the proposal, as it is not
supposed there will be any difficulty in
obtaining the license, the Bridge Hotel
being in Sherwood, the proposed one
in Kooweerup. All this time the sale
proceeds merrily. True, there is a
a break in the proceedings for refresh-
ments, which the brisk sellings and hot
weather justifies. Two gentlemen
during the interval have a difference
with regard to a horse, and a sturdy
little Frenchman is very indignant that
they are not allowed to fight it out.
“ You are English, are you P—you was
cowards, fifty times.” Strange
that he has been in Australia forty-two
years and cannot yet speak better than
broken English, and, stranger still, he
cannot understand French spoken by
Frenchmen.
Perhaps those conversant with avium
garritus may be able to explain how it
was that when Mr Lemme was engaged
in selling Swan-street, the swans soared
overhead in flocks of twenty and thirty.
It was a happy augury for the owners
of Deerside, and closed a most success-
ful sale. Every lot submitted was sold
and some gentlemen who had come out
for the trip, purchased allotments on
beholding the riches and beauty of
Tooradin.
12
SKETCHES BY HAWKEYE.


TOORADIN GOSSIP,
Extract from Prahran and St. Kilda Chronicle, 15th December, 1888.
fOORADIN, like all country places,
loves gossip. The inhabitants
gossip across the inlet, gossip
in the road, gossip in the Bridge
Hotel, gossip in the Sherwood Inn.
The man who would understand
Tooradin must listen to the gossip.
To do so he frequents the bar
of the Bridge Hotel, and I find my
way thither after the sale, Messrs
Lemme and Shevill are in high glee at
the ultimate results. The purchasers
are likewise. “ The land must come,"
they say, “ and they will double their
money.” The fisherman will not,
however, sell their lots. The fish in
Tooradin waters are going to make
their fortunes. It was not want of fish
which troubled them in the past but
lack of facilities in placing the fish,
when caught, upon the market. Now
they possess the railway to send their
fish to Melbourne. Formerly they had
to run their cargoes to Hastings, when
the Frankston coach was waiting to
forward the fish to Melbourne. This
cumbersome method of delivery, of
course, rendered carriage dear. The
fish, too, were often condemned on
arrival at Swanston-street fish market.
This entailed great expense on the
fishermen, as well as rendering their
labor futile. They felt it very hard,
after a night's labor, perhaps getting
wet through and full of anxiety, to
receive no recompense. These annoy-
ances are happily now altered. The
carriage is half what it was. Fish also
can be obtained in Melbourne within
three hours of its capture. The iron
horse opens up the country. All these
facilities spell prosperity, and I drink
with “Jimmie” Miles, the foremost
fisherman in Tooradin “ Good luck
to the fisheries.” “Larry” has his
trap at the door, and uxor B. is anxious
that the “ gentlemen from Melbourne”
should not miss the train. Before they
leave uxor B amply proves that she can
take care of herself. The ancient
mariner who journeyed with us from
Melbourne ventured more than once to
nibble some pieces from a cheese on
the counter, such is the appetising
influences of Tooradin air. Uxor B.
the second time opened fire upon him,
and the vials of wrath were spilt, and
if an analytical chemist had made an
examination of the vials gall would
not have been found wanting. “ Listen
to her! ” says the mariner, “ I will
have eaten everything in the house
directly !” “So you would if you had
the chance ! ” retorts the gentle dame.


No one but Mr Victor Lernme could
appease uxor 8., but he was absent.
He was up the road trying the paces
of a splendid pony. He is delighted
with the animal. Some fine horses are
bred around Tooradin, and Mr Lemme
has to thank Tooradin for the splendid
pair of “ kittens” he possesses at the
present time. They were, I am told,
bred on Tooradin station by Mr Lyne.
Among the returning group are two
anglers. The worm at one end and
the fool at the other will not apply to
them. They have had fish more often
than worms at the end of their lines.
Excellent in every respect has been
their day’s sport, and they are return-
ing to Melbourne satisfied. They have
been casting their lines in the inlet
running around Deerside Estate, and
pulling up members of the finny tribe
all the afternoon in view of the auc-
tioneer and purchasers. Such open,
air demonstrations and proofs positive
as these give emphasis to Mr Lemme’s
repeated commendations. The anglers
were fortunate in coming at flood tide,
otherwise their baskets might have
been empty. A wag suggested that it
may have been lucky for the anglers
but unfortunate for Mr Lemme. If
the tide had been out, argued the wag,
Mr Lemme could have sold so much
more land! This joke, however,
touches the question of the marvellous
effects of the tide at Tooradin, and
indeed all over Western Port. “Flood
tide” is no idle phrase. When the
water comes in it floods a marvellous
amount of country, and when it recedes
it leaves sandbanks and mudbanks
plainly visible. Navigation in Western
Port argues a special knowledge. Old
sea dogs are apt to scoff at river navi-
gation, and the landsman follows the
burden of his song. I was wont to
think the same way until I journeyed
500 miles upon the surface of the
Murray in the steamer “ Trafalgar,”
belonging to Echuca and owned by
Wm. Davis and Son, of St. Kilda.
Hidden rocks and sandbanks might be
met at every other bend, and naviga-
tion, with a heavy barge behind the
steamer, was both difficult and danger-
ous. The same with the inlet at Too-
radin and Western Port Bay. The
rocks are an element of danger in
places, but the principal horror is the
fear of being at low water stuck upon
a sandbank. At such times philosophy
is heavenborn. Grin and bear it is the
remedy, or else, if no deep channels
intervene, walk ashore. “ Walk,” I
have written, but I should say “ roll.”
To walk ashore would be to willingly
devote yourself to a worse death by
suffocation than being swallowed by a
quicksand. Most, if not all, the mud-
banks partake of the slimy, ugly nature
of the mangrove which cover them.
Mangroves are hated in Tooradin with
as much warmth as can reasonably be
expended on members of the vegetable
world. “We want all the mangroves
out of the inlet,” says George Lyne,
and there is no doubt their absence
would do away with the mudbanks.
Mangroves are neither ornamental nor
useful in this colony,- gifted with an
abundance; though the pith, soaked in
palm oil, is eaten with fish in Jamaica.
Mangroves are hard to kill, and they
flourish in the inlet and along its
reaches as freely as they do at the
mouth of the Ganges. The only con-
14
AROUND WESTERN PORT


sideration which can be claimed for
them is that they serve as buoys to
show the rnudbanks, but this is dis-
counted when it is reflected that their
roots hold the mud together. Where
mangroves have been cut down beautiful
white sand has replaced the mud, and
sandy reaches will eventually surround
Tooradin. In the Bridge Hotel one
hears reminiscences of being stuck on
a mudbank and subsequent rolling
ashore covered in mud and filth, and
then swimming across a deep channel,
but I put them down as yarns to en-
tertain the gullible traveller. Men-
tioning “swallowing” reminds me of the
yarn indigenous to the district. At
Shepparton the common bet in the
public houses is that the stranger cannot
throw a stone across the Goulburn.
The “ green” men accept the bet and
find that they are unable to obtain the
stone to hurl across, as stones are
scarce in the Goulburn Valley. Here
the bet is that the men can show you a
swallow at any time. Martins and
swallows abound and cover the tele-
graph wires for yards and yards. Still
a time does happen when the genuine
swallow cannot be found ; but it never
happens that the stranger wins the
bet, as his opponent generally shows
his “ swallow,” and intimates that his
failing is beer.
Behind the Bridge Hotel lie num-
bers of what are known as “ Black-
fellows’ ovens,” much after the same
style as you find them outside Swan
Hill. blacks were very numerous
around Tooradin at one time. The
game proving a happy hunting ground
for them. Tooradin is their native
name for the place, but I could find no
one who gammoned to be able to solve
its meaning. The “ovens” have not
been disturbed here, though occasion-
all}' axeheads and flints are picked up.
These ovens are nothing more than
heaps of ashes, being the places where
the natives held their feasts and war
dances after the toils of the chase.
Kangaroo, swan and fish must have
afforded them their greatest sustenance.
Swans were not so numerous in the
early days as at the present time. The
blacks had a weakness for swan eggs,
and few of them could withstand the
delicacy, consequently the swans had
no chance ah ovo. Black swans in the
old days were set down as rara avis,
and poets sang of them as such, but
then, of course, the ancient gentleman
who wrote: —
u liar a avis in terris, nigroque simillima
cygno .”
had not heard of Tooradin or its hop-
pers. The natives here appear to have
the theory common to the Murray
blacks, with regard to their river, that
the various inlets were caused by the
wriggling of an immense snake who
has gone down to the sea. How would
this coincide with the theory of the sea
serpent ? If this could be proved the
solution of the sea serpent mystery,
Tooradin would be famous in more
ways than one ! The blacks did not
worry much after the lighter game the
British sportsmen troubles himself.
Around about Tooradin, especially if
you arc on good terms with the “boys,”
is a plenteous quail country. Bevies
of brown quail frequent the ferny
ridges, and well-fattened quail may be
found sneaking round farmer’s wheat
mows. Quail, we are told, were food
15
SKETCHES BY HAWKE YE.


for the Israelites in tlie wilderness, and
though it is cJoW season, I see some
quail. The first bird I obtain at Too-
radin is not the common bird, but a
rare specimen of brown quail. It met
with a sudden death. 11 is curious to
reflect that the species has lasted 3000
years, and that an historical bird,
mentione 1 in the sixteenth chapter of
Exodus, may be shot, in season, at
Tooradin. Quail make their migratory
flights at night, and he is considered a
smart man who obtains the first brace in
season. Dr Madden, Mr Purves, Q.C.,
and Mr Coldham came down here after
game, and I am told the learned Q.C.
is an excellent shot and a thorough
sportsman, thinking nought of walking
through water up to his middle after
snipe. The snipe shooting is just
finished. Snipe, French consider, are
as fine an eating bird as the sportsman
can bag. The “ long bills” take some
shooting though, and around about
Tooradin they appear to me to fly like
greased lightening.
For most of the above information
and much that may follow hereafter I
am indebted to Mr E. Lyne, son of the
pioneer. “ Et,” as he is fondly called
by his mates, is a splendid specimen of
colonial manhood, tall, strapping, and
strong. He is as fleet as a deer, a
crack shot, and knows where all the
game in the vicinity lies. He rather
discounts some statements made by
Ananias with respect to the vampire
bat. Ananias would have me believe
that it is dangerous to sleep out in the
bush without cover, and that he has
had three calves killed by them. Ac-
cording to him their blood was sucked
as dry as a lemon is squeezed
for a squash. This popular super-
stition may serve to impress the new
chum, but hardly the “ gentlemen from
Melbourne.” The vampires, as they
are called, though they are not vam-
pires or any relation to the bloodsucker
of South America, arc numerous
enough at times. They hang in im-
mense clusters from the trees, and are
anything but pleasant to look at, being
weird and mysterious. They have
bodies like a squirrel, a peculiar sys-
tem of dentition, and the well-known
membranous wings, and are generally
identical with the common bat. They
bear the same resemblance to the true
vampire that a pug pup does to a
bulldog. They are harmless as regards
man, but they are entirely frugiverous
and will clear an orchard of its fruit in
a night.
16
AUO.UND WESTERN POUT


OUTSIDE TOORADIN.
Extract from Prahran and St, Kilda Chronicle, sth January, 1889,
SROM Larry Bazaan’s hotel to
that of George Poole’s at Sher-
wood is not a long cry—some-
where about three miles. Comparisons
are always odious, but these two hotels
do not resemble each other. They have
distinct characteristics. The Bridge is
more a hotel for travel'ers, having
recently been made the coaching house.
Coaches to the Bass stop at the Bridge
Hotel. The Sherwood Hotel is more like
an old farm house, with a big dash of
liberality and kindliness about it. The
front portion of it is brick, and new
weatherboard rooms have been recently
added. It is built just on the crest of
a hill, and is in every respect a most
comfortable house to stop at. The only
objection to it is, of course, its distance
from the Tooradin Inlet. George
Poole, the proprietor of the Sherwood
Hotel, is a fine specimen of a true
Saxon. Big of limb, deep of chest,
clear-eyed, strong and powerful through-
out, he reminds you more of the days
when there were giants in the land
than of a prosperous publican. George
has had an all round experience, and
can turn his hand to anything. His
father and father’s fathers were all
forest rangers, and George is proud of
his Saxon ancestry. In his early days
he visited America and became imbued
with a touch of American smartness—
with a knowledge of how to be cute and
make money. On his return he was
the first to start a real American bar
where the thirsty Britain could obtain
any drink from a mint julep to a cock-
tail. The bar caught on, and George got
the hang of the Britain’s money. A
friend of his was going to Australia—
Australia was a carious place in the days
of the fifty’s—and George and some
friends decided to give him a dinner.
After this was over his friend said,
“ You had better come too, George.”
The idea seized him, he had no sleep
that night, the wonderful tales of the
far off land worried him, and in the
end he decided to try his luck in Aus-
tralia He sold a most profitable
business and staited for what was then
to him the antipodes* There he had
the ups and downs that most success-
ful men have, losing all, gaining much.
He has settled down quietly now and
his heart appears to be centered in his
farming. George does not like the
public house life, he hates drinking and
talks of going into the coffee line.
“ Coffee is the thing, he says, nothing
like coffee, I think I’il build a coffee
palace.” If he does so on that block


he purchased on the Deerside Estate
he should made a fortune.
The grounds of the Sherwood Hotel
extend for a great distance. At the
back of the building is a large stable, a
dairy and milking sheds. The yard
presents the usual farm yard appear-
ance, being full of ducks, fowls, tur-
keys, and I may add, youngsters.
Here you will find a splendid little
fellow, “ Bert,” who knows all the
game spots for miles around, and who,
you would deem, could hardly hold a
gun up to his shoulder, and who is,
nevertheless, an excellent shot. On
the roof of the stable or in the manger
you will find peacocks and peahens,
who contrive to make night hideous
with their death wailing cries. “ By
the peacock !” was wont to be an ex-
cellent oath, and the fabled incorrupti-
bility of the peacock’s flesh made the
bird an emblem of the resurrection ;
but one thinks not of these things as
he tosses in bed cursing peacocks and
their night callings. I am glad to
learn that the peacocks have been dis-
posed of, for their beauty does not, in
my opinion, compensate for their an-
noyance. Dairying is carried on in
rather an extensive manner. George
possesses a fine herd of cows. There
are, I believe, over forty cows to milk
every morning, and no idle hands are
allowed to be about the place. The
milk is made into butter and sent
to Melbourne. Beautiful butter is made
here, and many a housewife would be
glad to obtain a regular supply for her
table from Mrs Poole. The skimmed
milk falls to the lot of the pigs, and
they get nothing else, consequently the
ham, which George cures himself, is
sweet, firm, and good. It is the sort
of ham that one looks longingly at the
mustard pot to see if there is a good
supply of the condiment to draw out
flavors of the pig. That there is in the
Mrs Poole’s house goes without saying,
for she is a most obliging and atten-
tive hostess. Near the cowsheds are
being erected several loose boxes for
racehorses. Some crack Flemington
and Caulfield owners of racehorses
have been on a visit to Tooradin, and
profess to have discovered wonderful
properties in the district for training
horses. George has constructed a race-
course, and he takes great pains over
it, and when the loose boxes are
finished he expects to be able to send
a Cup winner to Melbourne. He breeds
good serviceable horses himself on the
ground, and it is on the condition of
these animals that experts base
their opinion. The coach was wont to
stop at the Sherwood Hotel and not at
the Bridge Inn, but owing to a dispute
the coach proprietors transferred their
allegiance from Poole to Bazaan.
George is not a man to be easily beat—
the Saxon blood predominates —and as
soon as they did this he decided to run
an opposition coach to the Bass. He
had a coach built, brought in some of
his horses, and now regularly runs the
road. The original men don’t relish
it, and they recognise that they have a
foeman worthy of their steel.
Much of Poole’s land was covered
with ti-tree and some of it with small
swamps, but he has drained and re
claimed it till there is a good chance of
the desert blossoming with the rose.
Over this land now the game is in
abundance, and perhaps it is the best
18
SKETCHES BY HAWKE YE.


shooting box in the colony. The
ground being all private property
cockney sportsmen from Melbourne or
elsewhere are not allowed to blaze away
at their own sweet will. The result of
this is that those who put up at the
Sherwood Hotel obtain legitimate sport,
though they sacrifice the yachting they
obtain when at the Bridge Hotel. The
swan and duck, I have explained, fol-
low the tide to and from the flushings.
At Tooradin proper they are missed as
they fly overhead to the back waters.
About a mile away from the Sherwood
Hotel a large inlet rushes inland, and
serves as a natural boundary to Poole’s
property. On this the ducks, swans,
and teal gather in hundreds, and as
there is timber and scrub right up to
the mangroves excellent shots may be
obtained by those who know how to
stalk. To compass a swan is no child’s
play, and I doubt considerably whether
he is worth the trouble he occasions.
From this it will be seen that I am a
pot sportsman and am base enough to
believe in shooting only what is good
for the pot. Swans—black ones—are
not a success. First they have to be
skinned, and then, after being tho-
roughly basted, they are ungrateful
enough to turn out oily.
19
AROUND WESTERN PORT.


A DAY’S FISHING.
Extract from Prahran and St. Kilda Chronicle, 19th January, 1889.
«YER since I read that Abu
Shujah al Bouyah’s, the Persian
fisherman, three sons rose to
sovereign power, I have looked upon
fishermen and fishers as somebody
out of the common run of humanity.
I confess frankly that I know nought
of fishing, and only regard the
finny tribe with the warm feelings
of an epicurean with a little
melted butter, the pinch of ground
parsley, and the Soupqon of lemon,
then I understand and appreciate the
wonders and wealth of the deep.
Fish, I know, have given me the ex-
pression of looking, knowing and say-
ing “ I have other fish to fry,” and a
“ pretty kettle of fish,” but beyond
that I have only a glimmering of a
fool at one end and a hook at the other.
So it was with no great belief in my
powers to catch fish or the exhibition
of any doughty deeds with the rod
that I made one of a party going out
fishing in the Western Port Bay inlet
at Tooradin. The party consisted of a
well-known bank manager, a leading
auctioneer and his charming young
wife, your humble servant, ami the
midshipmite who managed the boat,
and when occasion demanded it,
whistled for the wind. The boat is
stored with good things and a start is
effected from the sandy beach. As
usual the tide is a trouble. There
seems to be no consideration about the
tide in the Tooradin inlet. It is either
neck or nothing. It leaves the place
dry or nigh covers the mangroves,.
We have hardly taken our seats in the
boat when the trouble commences.
The water ebbs quicker than we sail,
and after having gone a hundred yards
our navigator runs out of the channel
end we are shelved, as safely as an
antique piece of crockery, on a sand-
bank. It is apparently a case with us,
and we are to all intents lying :
“ As idle as a painted ship upon a painted
ocean.”
A council of war is at once held. It is
obvious that we cannot stay there
waiting for full tide, because it is our
object to meet that out in the deep
water and catch the fish coming up on
the tide to feed. “ Whose fault is it ?”
The skipper, the man at the wheel, or
the passengers? None will assume
the responsibility and it is put down to
the act of tempes*. It is decidedly
tantalising. A couple of yards away
is the swift deep channel flowing gaily
on leaving with it fish and seaweed,,
and yet we are stuck. True, the boat


has a motion, and one of philosophic
mind can console themselves in the
reflection that he is rocked on a mud
bank, instead of the cradle of the
deep. Nobody on board is particularly
philosophic, so we console ourselves
with a glass of British beer. The sun
beats down with rays that may be
graphically described as tropical—very
tropical. I begin to think that some
one will be burnt. Sailing along with
ever so gentle a breeze is cooling, but
when camped on a mud bank the
feelings are not to be envied. The
situation makes the auctioneer des-
perate, He is not goingto be knocked
down with the heat of the sun, or
knocked up for want of fish, so the
boat hooks are brought into requisi-
tion. After pushing, hauling, shoving,
the bark is floated much to our glee,
and we sail into deep water, much as
we supposed and fondly hope fish
would sail into our shrimps.
A pleasant sail brings us to what
our midshipmite terras a hole—a hole
in the channel in which the fish rest
awhile before proceeding on to Too-
radin. This is a very obliging habit of
the fish, and shows a quality of self
sacrifice seldom met with in the higher
grades of animal life. As the lines
are cast out I begin to think that I
will be able to understand fish and
fishing. “ Why,” I ask the midship-
mite, “ do they rest here ?” “ I don’t
know,” he answers dogmatically; £ ‘ but
they do !” The tide, by the time we
are fairly over the hole wherein the
fish are said to be, is running fast in-
land. Overhead are swans, ducks,
teal and other game soaring to the
back waters. Over the sea flit one or
two yachts trying their luck, which,,
from their constant changing of posi-
tion, is not as satisfactory as it might
be. The fish, the midshipmite is half
afraid, to-day will not bite freely. The
day is just a trifle too bright, and the
fish may not be too hungry. This
statement is discounted and our spirits
revive when we see George Lyon, one
of Tooradin’s pioneers, in a rowing boat
near haul up something. No mariner
wrecked ever looked so anxiously for a
passing sail as I do for the result of
his capture. Surely there are wonders
in the deep and he has hooked one. I
feel as I watch his line rushing in an
enthusiasm for fishing that is almost
indescribable. There are fish in the
water and we may catch some. As the
line is tugged and pulled I can see
that the fish must be of enormous size
—possibly he has a whale or a shark.
A shark in my hurried thought I deem
more likely, as they are plentiful about
here. My disgust may be imagined
when drawn slowly in at the last run
of the reel is a long piece of seaweed
twisted and curled together like the
body of an inanimate snake.
The first capture we make is made
by the auctioneer’s better-half. Much
to her joy and mine she succeeds in
hooking an unfortunate flathead. True,
he is baby flathead, not long out of the
nursery, but still it is first blood. I
take praise to myself in this instance
because I baited the hook. Our supply
of shrimps is bad. It is rather too
early in the season and our bait is
small—most of it bearing symptoms
of spawning. The capture of the small
flathead, however, adds an incentive to
our sport, and we begin to be confident
21
SKETCHES BY HAWKEYE.


that we will catch something directly.
The banker gives us a few reminis-
cences of his fishing in the various
waters of the world and the luck that
attended him. These prove interesting,
and I am glad to see him obtain the
next bite. His line is rather a long
one, and some excitement is caused by
the haul. It, however, proves to be a
dogfish, and the dogfish suffers the
death accordingly. Dogfish here are
the greatest pest. They nibble at the
bait incessantly, and as they feed a great
deal by suction they relieve the hooks
in the majority of cases and escape
themselves. The amount of shrimps
that are wasted is marvellous, and by
some fatality the dogfish appeared to
pay more attention to the lad} ’s bait
than any one on board. One does not,
as a rule, grow tired of baiting hooks
for a lady, and 1 was kept well em-
ployed. It struck me as strange how
the quality of fish ran on this excur-
sion. The banker invariably hooked
leatherheads. These fish are very
beautiful when they come out of the
water, full of beautiful hues and
variegated colors, reminding one
forcibly of parrot fish. Tliey have a
wonderful clear eye, and when skinned
are said to be excellent eating. The
auctioneer’s basket was made up of
whiting—the whiting that Western
Port is so famous for. Fish that it is
a pleasure to eat and look upon.
Such fish never find their way to Mel-
bourne market, yet they are caught in
baskets full here. Mr Lyon, who was
fishing a small distance from us,
was specially fortunate, he having as
fine a basket of fish as ever I saw. For
myself, I caught nothing but shrimps,
but that I was successful the fishers
who desired bait can bear witness. Once
the tide had passed us, nothing was
left but to return, which we did with a
nice little basket of fish for our days’
outing. These were duly handed to
Mrs Bazaan, who in the kindness of her
soul accepted them, and the lady, who
proved such a charming companion de
voyage, and her husband made their
matin meal off some of them.
22
AROUND WESTERN PORT.


AT CAPE WOOLOOMI.
MUTTON BIRDING.
Extract from Prahran and St. Kit da Chronicle, 4th May, 7889.
SAFE Wooloomi is the extreme
point of Phillip Island. It forms
one of two bold headlands at the
entrance of Western Fort Bay—Point
Griffiths being the other. When ap-
proached from the sea from San Remo it
is wonderfully picturesque. It looks
like the head of some huge lizard,
bronzed by the sun, and lumpy as a
nugget. It is full of large fissures,
rents in the red granite of which it is
composed. Yawning declivites abound.
It seems as if some giant—some Brob-
dingnagian—had plucked huge boulders
from its sides and hurled them on the
seashore. Nature has, however, inter-
vened with the softening mantle.
Vegetation, shrubs and trees grow in
the large fissures. Creepers with a soft
yellow flower droop in festoons down
the sides as a veil. The harsh points
are obliterated. The cliff is an iron
Land with the glove of botanic life.
The great sand dunes and sandslips
that occur give relieving lights to the
picture. The water is clear, and looks
as a fabled sea. At the headlands the
breakers may be seen bursting against
“ The cliffs,
That beetle o’er their base into the sea,’'
and as the waves rush with hurried
impetus Gordon’s lines about the
“ white horses ” recur. This is on the
lee side of the cape. On the weather
side the features are changed. A few
straggling bushes of horehound, and
an occasional kangaroo apple tree,
laden with its golden spheres, repre-
sents the vegetation. The grass
struggles hopelessly against the briny
atmosphere and the rush of storm and
wind. The soil on the rocks is dry
and friable. The desolation is marked.
The silence as I watch the sun sink
with two others is heavy and oppres-
sive, yet Nature is giving forth an
organ-like roar below the cliff. Silence
reigns in the heavens. The winds are
speechless. The sun is just dropping
into the sea in a molten ball of fire.
There is a lacK of acromatism every-
where. The heavens are streaked
and emblazoned with ochreous bars,
and striated with carmine tints Huge


splinters of light from the sinking sun
bediz n their colours a thousandfold,
till they sparkle and flash in the bril-
liant effulgence. The clouds hovering
as a billowy canopy are touched with
flushed edges, as if with the pencil of
some Titan. Their centres are ap-
parently bursting with luminious
prisms. The sea reflects the beauties
■of the heavens. The waves in their
inward rush add to the intense and
glowing glories of the fading scene.
Every moment brings forth a kaleido-
scopic change. The earth and sea
have a terrible mysterious feeling—
stimulative of nature worship and awe
at the unintelligible. The majestic
impressiveness of Cape Wooloomi
haunts and appals. Its stern beauty,
rugged grandeur, its fantastic and un-
even lines leave an indelible picture.
The worshipping sentiments which
might spring in the breast of an un-
tutored savage as he gazes on some
glorious tropical sunset is felt. Yain
to reason, Wooloomi is but a blasted
rock, anathemised by cruel winds and
-spat upon by the breaking sea. Idle
to think that botanic life in sundry
patches crouches to the sand powdered
■rock, destitute of the spirit to grow,
wanting the spirit to die. Nature’s
malediction is upon it. The place is
accursed with barrenness. Yet as we
stand upon a red granite border, we
watch the breakers rush with a roar
against the rocks 60 feet below, the
.cullus of Nature fills the soul, and we
look through Nature to Nature’s Gfod.
Mutton-birding, or “egging” as it is
more properly called, is a pastime en-
gaged in during the month of Novem-
ber by small parties of fishermen,
formed at San Remo and Tooradin,
Cape Wooloomi being one day’s sail
from Tooradin, It remains a strange
and unexplained freak of nature that
the mutton birds always arrive, and in
the majority of seasons to the day, the
25th of November, to deposit their
eggs in the cliffs at the cape. T.ley
have done so as long as the oldest men
in the locality can remember, and
though hundreds of the birds are killed
every year and thousands of their eggs
taken, there is no diminution in their
numbers. The cliffs are riddled with
rabbit-like burrows, and it is in these
holes the birds lay and hatch out their
eggs. The eggs are laid immediately
on arrival, but dozens and dozens of
birds drop their eggs and lose their
eggs as they land, tired and exhausted
with a long flight. The birds arrive
always at twilight, and we expect them
in shortly. Whence they come from
no one knows, but it is supposed the v
leave some island in the Straits and fly
hither. The heavens afford no in-
dication of their approach. Seaward,
save for the clouds, the sky is as clear
as crystal. Not a spec, much less any-
thing the size of a man’s hand, can be
seen. We must wait for the birds. As
we do, we take a peep at the cliffs
below. The path to them is rough
and uneven, bordered with a few
straggling ferns. Granite pebbles
crumble beneath our feet. The cliff
itself is solid granite, covered with its
mantle of sand and friable loam. It
runs straight into the sea, and then
sheers away suddenly, a yawning
chasm. As we near the edge the serf
can be heard thundering far below
against the cliff. On our knees and
24
SKETCHES BY HAWKE YE.


hands we creep towards the edge
Here a halt is made while a rope is
fastened to my waist. I stretch my
neck and lean forward, the gulf yawns
before me. The rock slopes suddenly
away, and is slimy with a green weed.
The prospect below is terrible. Nothing
■can at first be seen save the blinding
spray. By degrees through the salt
mist gulls are distinguished hovering
How small they seem! What a
•distance they are below! The setting
sun bursts through the mist as a cloud
lifts, and every spray drop hurled from
its mother wave dazzles for a moment
as a sparkling gem. Then I can trace
two massive granite pillars through the
openings in which the surge fumes,
dashes, and breaks as if it would toss
the firm fabrics on its bosom as
flotsam and jetsam. The granite is
touched with the lightning influences,
and they look as Druidical monuments
pointing heavenward from the bed of
the seashore.
One cannot help thinking of the
lines :
“ Light thickens, and the crow
Makes wing to the roaky wood”
as the first mutton-bird appears in
sight. It comes in a dreamy manner.
It does not appear to know where to
rest. It hovers in our sight above the
spray, which flies upwards from the
waves dashing against the rocks. An-
other bird joins the first, and they
hover in a circle for a moment, and
then it seems as if the whole of the
feathered tribes bad been suddenly
dropped out of the heavens. Clouds
of mutton-birds wheel and whirl, and
then come in. Bullets from a Gatling
gun could not come faster. Plump
right down on the cliff they fall, and
then they flutter with timorous cries to
the burrows. Soon the bowels of the
earth speak with noises. The birds
continue to drop liko hailstones, and it
is with difficulty we can dodge them as
they flutter past. They are making
for the burrows, and the sight is in-
expressibly weird. The whole scene
appears unreal. It is as if you were in
a dream, and were in a nightmare that
only the imagination of a Dore could
conceive. A feathered inferno could
not be worse. Above all the surge and
dash of the waves is heard. The wind
becomes gusty and the face of the
picture is changed as if by magic.
Where all was beautiful, tints glorious,
and effects sublime, a change appears.
The beauties might have been
smudged out with a huge brush of
inky color, so dark and dismal is all.
The noise around increases, and the
sea’s voice is drowned by that of the
myriads of mutton birds. The amount
of burrows are not near sufficient for
the numbers which arrive, and the row
grows greater with the clamour of dis-
puting birds. We might be inanimite
objects for all the notice any birds take
of us, and it is only by thrusting the
hand into the burrow that the power
of the mutton-bird is felt. His sharp
beak will then tell you that his burrow
is sacred. The stron.est birds, of
course, succeed in beating the weaker
ones, and the defeated flutter back to
the cliff and throw themselves over, and
then, as they fall, they mount on wing
and join the whirling flight of their
fellows. The mutton-bird is unable to
mount on wing from the ground, as it
does not possess the power in its legs
25
AROUND WESTERN PORT.


for a spring, and the laws of Nature
and those of necessity thus cause its
habitat to be in the vicinity of steep
cliffs and precipices.
The sight in connection with mut-
ton-birding or “ egging” is, of course,
to see the birds arrive. The “ egging”
takes place the following day, as the
eggs are laid at night. From the front
of the cliff to the camp which we made
on the lee side of Cape Wooloomi was
a rough journey in the dark. The
passage was made more pleasant from
the fact that five snakes, of the tiger
species, were killed during the day.
These reptiles were lying across the
bridle path, basking in the sun, as we
wended our way to the “ egging”
ground, and the thoughts of meeting
their “ lordships” naturally arose dur-
ing our return. Such a bridle-path it
has not been my lot to travel and I
have had my share of rough roads. I
have known what it is to be stuck in a
glue pot in Brandy Creek, I have
crossed some of the worst pinches in
the Strezleckli Ranges, and, when
scrub cutting, fallen into queer places.
I have crossed the Alps, near Harriet-
ville, in July, with snow 6 feet deep, I
have scrambled through granite boul-
ders to see the famous watershed near
Beechworth, I have climbed the hills
near Emu Bay, Tasmania, but never
have I had such a bad time as return-
ing to camp at Cape Wooloomi—what
with fallen timber, the burrows, scrub,
and holes, one or the other of us were
being thrown down every minute.
Half way to home it just began to
dawn upon us that we had a precipice
to clamber down. There was only one
path leading to the beach where our
tent was pitched, and the difficulty was
to find it. For a solid half-hour we
wandered up and down, peering over
the ledge of the rocks here, starting
on a false track there, end at last, hop-
ing against hope that we might strike
the true one. At last we accomplished
it, and never did home seem so sweet
as the sight of our boat beached on the
shore. Soon cur fire was alight. The
waves made sweet music, and, though
alone in the midst of Nature’s wilder-
ness, we felt comfortable. The fear of
snakes, except as possible bed-com-
panions, had gone, and we made our
first meal on some mutton-bird’s eggs
we had collected, but our slaughter of
eggs we arranged was to commence in
the morning.
Whether readers of this sketch have
ever tried the experiment of sleeping
n a boat I know not —whether they
have ever camped at Cape Wooloomi I
am likewise ignorant, but if they have
they can bear me out when I state
that for fleas, colussus fleas, Wooloomi
cannot be beaten. My experience
of mosquitos at Flynn’s Creek, Gipps-
land, has been set down that they
would bite through a gun barrel, but
the fleas at Cape Wooloomi would
make the most bloodthirsty mosquito
blush for positive shame at his puny
powers of penetration. If I say they
sprung out of the sand, and bit through
the keel of the boat, there is just a
possibility of the statement not being
believed, but that they found their
way through sails and rugs is a fact.
Such fleas I never saw and never felt.
'lhe giant, according to the old rhyme,
could smell the blood of an English-
man, but he was a fool to the fleas
domiciled around Cape Wooloomi—
they could smell our blood, and lost
no time in tasting it.
26
SKETCHES BY HAWKEYE.


The boat in which I camped for
the night was, when we arrived,
beached high on the sand. The
tide had gone out quite one hundred
yards. When I turned in for the even-
ing I was to all intents and purposes on
terra firma. Bar the fleas, which with
that persistency that characterises this
well-known insect that escapes by leap-
ing with great agility, and whose antics
has afforded many a goodly housewife
among blankets half-an-hour’s delici-
ous amusement, I might have had a
good night’s sleep. The poor sailor
boy who is rocked in the cradle of the
deep may appreciate these things.
The fleas to him may be as the spray
of the salt water on the wing of
the wave skimming gull, but to me
the fleas were a factor more appreciated
in absence than in company. It would,
however, have taken many of these
insects to have defeated the demands
of nature for sleep. But I would defy
the most consummate bush parlor
knight to have maintained his slum-
ber in that boat. At the early morn
the tide had come in. A storm had
arisen. The waves were rushing in
through the cape with an impetus
which could alone be accounted for by
the strong wind behind them. I was
awakened rudely by the boat tossing
like a cork. For a moment I did not
realise where I was. In a dreaming
wistful manner I peeped over the side.
Then I realised that I was afloat with
twenty or thirty yards between me and
the shore. A single rope acted as a
painter and it was the sole connection
I had with land. If ever a boat de-
served the title of saucy this craft did
on this occasion. She tugged and
pulled at the painter till I expected it
to break, the boat to drift away, and
dash to pieces on the rocks at the
Kilcunda side of the bay. How I
envied the rest of the party snug in the
tent on shore. They accepted the risk
of snakes. They chanced the fall of a
granite boulder. And as I looked ouj
at the grey morning at the fuming sea
I saw the effect of the sendding wind.
I would have given the best half-crown
in my possession to have, to speak in
the vernacular, “ swopped” places
with them. How they slept ! Truly
I thought they must be just men !
How I cursed them as each wave broke
over the boat and the wind howled.
It is along lane that has no turning
and in due course the boat was hauled
to the shore so that I might effect a
safe landing. It was five o’clock and
we were about to have an early morning
breakfast prior to going rautton-birding.
The two dozen or more eggs which we
had collected the night before were
handed over to a self constituted cook.
Hj was the boss of the party. No
other than Jimmy Miles, fisherman
sportsman of Tooradin. Jimmy Miles
has a marvellous faith in mutton bird
eggs. He praises their richness, he
commends their taste and marvels at
their size Indeed, I have heard it
asserted in Quarters that take no denial,
no less than in the precints of the
Sherwood Hotel, that these eggs have
a wonderous amorous faculty. For
that reason they are regarded as next
door to poison for some, and the
young women of the district use them
as infallible love philtres. A bright
wood fire, a wild stretch of beach and
rock, scrub and color, render the break-
27
AROUND WESTERN PORT


fast somewhat romantic. We are
fairly away from the toil and hurry of
the city. We are beyond the reach *
of telegrams, and out of the way of
dunning tailors. True, we have draw-
backs in the way of no European tele-
grams, our news of the world is scant.
We know not what has happened in
our absence. Whether Boulanger has
seized the throne of France, or
whether he has come to grief. These
drawbacks disappear as we watch Miles
break egg after egg into our large pan.
With the care of the greatest chef that
ever lived does he mix the eggs to-
gether and inform us that we are about
to have mutton-bird pancake. This is
supposed to be a triumph of culinary
art. Mutton-bird eggs are a shade
larger than the largest duck eggs.
They are wanting in the shade of the
duck’s egg, being pure white. A
mutton-bird is the most philosophical
bird in the world. When an egg is
stolen from its nest the bird makes up
its’mind to appropriate another bird’s
eoor or else do its best to lay another.
Three minutes is the regulation time
for the eggs to form themselves into a
pancake and then we fall to. When
venturing on strange ground one is
naturally cautious, and I tasted my
first mutton-bird eggs with a decided
mistrust. I would not write such
treasonous matter as to say that pos-
sible our chef did not understand how
to bring forth the delicacies of the egg.
The subtle taste of it may have
evaporated in the open air. I would
not run down the egg unfairly. It may
have been my palate but the eggs had
decidedly a fishy and even oily taste to
me. These eggs have, however, a com-
mercial value. They are obtained in
large quantities, hundreds of dozens,
are forwarded to Melbourne and sold
as duck eggs. Many a loving wife has
put before her lord what she thought
was a remarkably fine duck egg, and
the lord has eaten it in that innocent
belief.
Breakfast over we climb back to the
“ rookery.” Not a bird is to be seen,
but our sticks, with wire on top after
the style of the shepherd’s crooks, soon
pull the eggs out of the burrows.
Fishing for eggs requires practice, and
the benefit of previous experience is
seen by the number which Jimmie ob-
tains in excess of the amateur. Almost
every burrow yields an egg, which the
lord inside does its level best to keep.
How the birds make the burrows in
the hard soil is a mystery. They cer-
tainly cannot do it with their webbed
feet, and the only solution that I can
see is by their sharp, strong, and hooked
beak. The birds of the present genera-
tion have not, however, much trouble
on the score of nests. Their ancestors
have provided their homes. No grass
or lining of any sort is used in the nest.
The ground being so hard it is imper-
vious to water. The cliff, I have said,
abounds in snakes. They live in the
burrows. We had quite an alarming
sensation. The hooked sticks pull the
snakes how beautifully. If a man were
to use his hand and arm to rob some
of the shallow burrows it would stand
a good chance of being bit by the mut-
ton-bird and stung by a snake. One
immense tiger snake, fully five feet
four in length and correspondingly
thick in proportion is a well-known
character to mutton-bird hunters. He
28
SKETCHES BY HAWKE YE.


has escaped many times and bears a
charmed life. On this occasion we root
out the reptile, along with two egg
shells. The astonishment of the man
who pulled him out was too great for
a moment, and the snake had a good
two yard’s start. The edge of the
cliff lay about eight yards distant.
Straight as an arrow the snake
made for the cliff. Reaching it
he elongated himself, stood for a
moment on his tail and took a header
into the waves below, with all the grace
and skill of a professional diver. For
months this snake has made it a
practice of having a morning bath, and
his favorite practice is diving off this
cliff.
The eggs are collected in buckets
and it takes about twenty minutes to
fill a bucket. Robbing the nests of
the eggs is a punishable offence, but
the ranger in those parts does not
trouble Cape Wooloorai. Still it cannot
do much harm, for in spring, in spite
of the number of eggs stolen, each
burrow contains a bird. Young mutton
birds are much esteemed, when split
and salted, by some people. Through-
out Tasmania the card in shops is seen,
“ Mutton Birds for Sale.” I must
confess that when salted and split in
half, the birds look uncommonly like
fishes, and fishes that resemble large
lumps of yellow blubber. The mutton
bird belongs to the Auk family.
29
AROUND WESTERN PORT.










