

C. E. MCPHERSON, C. E. E. USSHER,
General Passenger Agent Western LiNEa General Passenger Agent Eastern Lines.
WINNIPEG. MONTREAL.
ROBERT KERR, passenger traffic manager, MONTREAL.


Around the World
BV XME
Canadian Pacific Route
STARTING FROM LONDON
FROM Euston Square or St. Pancras Station the passenger leaves
London for Liverpool or Waterloo Station for Southampton for his
trip around the world by the Canadian Pacific Railway Company’s
globe-circling routes. At Liverpool or Southampton he embarks on one
or other of a selected number of the finest transatlantic steamers afloat,
and is landed at Montreal, Quebec, St. John, N. 8., Halifax, Boston or
New York, according to the vessel he has chosen. And so marked have
been the improvements in the great passenger lines, both in speed and
safety, as well as in convenience and luxury, so zealous have been the
efforts to make the short voyage a veritable pleasure trip for the ever-
increasing number of people who are no longer content to limit their
travels to Europe and the fringe of the Mediterranean, that the passage
across the Atlantic, once a drawback to extended travel, has now become
one of the inducements. During the greater part of the year it is
tantamount to enjoying the seaside in the society of a party of friends
who, bent on enjoying themselves, contribute to the enjoyment of others.
Pleasant acquaintanceship, and sometimes valuable and life-long friend-
ships, are made during a voyage which is generally admitted to have been
spent with unexpected pleasure.
Should the traveller choose one of the Canadian liners bringing him
direct from Liverpool to Montreal or Quebec, among which for comfort
and safety the ships of the C.P.R.’s own Atlantic line are in the fore-
front he will find the passage of the St. Lawrence not the least attrac-
tive and interesting portion of his route. During the last two days of
his Atlantic journey he will be within sight of land on both sides of his
ship passing scenes of historical interest, made memorable by Jacques
Cartier Champlain, and other early French adventurers who discovered
Canada and penetrated its wilderness, and passing scenery which, fat its
kind is unequalled by that of any other sea-going route in the Vorld.
until the vessel stops at Quebec, where a stay of a few hours is made.
QUEBEC
The tourist, however, may disembark here and spend such time as he
pleases in visiting the Plains of Abraham, the scene of Wolfe’s last vic-
tory, which changed the nationality of Canada ; the beautiful falls of
"Montmorency, which are reached after a short railway run through a
pretty and distinctly French-Canadian settlement, and in inspecting the
ancient and unique city of Quebec, so unlike any other on the North
American Continent, with its semi-military, semi-ecclesiastical appear-
ance, and its mementos of the early wars between the French and Eng-
lish, and subsequently between the Canadians and their neighbors of the
New England States. If he desires to remain over for a day or two,
he will find the Canadian Pacific hotel, Chateau Frontenac, in the centre
of the upper town, commanding a perfect view of the St. Lawrence and
neighboring country, one of the finest hotels on the continent. He can
then take the train, and in a few hours is in Montreal. Should New
York be his landing-place, he will proceed to Montreal by train, which
can be varied in summer season by boat up the beautiful Hudson River
lor a considerable portion of the way, or he may go by Niagara Falls,
joining the Canadian Pacific’s transcontinental train at North Bay from
Toronto.
MONTREAL
At Montreal the traveller will hardly fail, to stay for a short time,
finding comfortable quarters in the elegant new fire-proof hotel which is
combined with the Place Viger passenger station of the Canadian Pacific
Railway Co., and convenient to the ocean Steamer docks. Montreal is
the chief commercial city of the Dominion of Canada, and has much to
interest a stranger. Its beautiful position at the foot of Mount Royal, its
handsome residences nestling among maples, bright and busy tree-lined
streets, and the grand prospect which it enjoys overlooking the broad
St. Lawrence, with the Laurentian Hills, oldest of the world’s mountains,
closing the view in the distance, always evokes the admiration of those who
come from the less favored places. Its mountain park is an adjunct such
as is possessed by no other city on the continent. The evidences of
Montreal’s wealth and commercial activity, as seen in the shipping and
business quarters, the double nationality of its people, and the growing
importance of the city as a mercantile centre, invest Montreal with more
than a passing interest.
Around the World
BY XME
Canadsan Pacific Route
CROSSING THE CONTINENT
At Montreal the Canadian Pacific Railway’s transcontinental route
to Vancouver may, in one sense, be said to begin, and for four days
unless he desires to stop by the way, the tourjst will find a comfortable
homa in one of the Canadian Pacific Railway Company’s luxurious car-
riages, which, constructed on a somewhat different model from the older
plans, are now recognized as being the most comfortable of all cars by
day a drawing-room, by night a comfortable bed-room, with smoking-
room attached. Dining cars are run on all transcontinental trains.
Three hours’ journey takes him to Ottawa, the capital of the Dominion.
It is remarkable for its beautiful Parliament Buildings, library and de-
partmental edifices. „ Situated on a hill, it commands a view of the
Ottawa River and the romantic Chaudiere Falls, so intimately connected
with the French and Indian wars of the seventeenth century, and now
the power which runs the great sawmills that make Ottawa the chief
lumbering centre of the world.
From Ottawa westward the route lies through country rich in timber
and in game, but as yet only sparsely "settled. Lake Nipissing, formerly a
highway to the great lakes for the Montreal voyageurs to the west, is
touched at North Bay (where passengers from Toronto join the trans-
continental train), and on the second day out Lake Superior is reached.
•Massing within sight, for much of the time, of the clear waters and
‘picturesque islands of this greatest of fresh-water seas, the passenger is
carried through and over valleys of engineering work which of them-
selves explain the prophecy—happily falsified—which predicted tlurt a
railway neither would nor could be built through such a country, until
he reaches Fort William, on the Kaministiquia. The transcontinental
train may be left at Sudbury, celebrated for its rich nickel mines, and
passing through Michigan, Wisconsin, Minnesota (chief cities, St. Paul
and Minneapolis) and North Dakota in the United States, via the Soo-
Pacific line, be rejoined at Moose Jaw in the Canadian Northwest.
THUNDER BAY AND FORT WILLIAM
The charms of Thunder Bay and the frequent discovery of minerals
in this district, together with the enormous grain shipments from the
prairies, combine to make Fort William a place of great and growing
importance. Passengers from the East frequently make part of the
journey via Toronto and the Great " Lakes. The Railway Company has
a line of handsome Clyde-built steamers, which run in summer from
Owen Sound to Fort William, where connection is made with the trans-
continental trains. This break in the railway journey is a pleasant and
a very popular route. Leaving Fort William, the line proceeds through
wild and rugged country, which nevertheless has attracted some settle-
ment and is drawing more, and is not without its value to sportsmen.
When the train crosses the Red River into the city of Winnipeg an
entirely new kind of country begins.
WINNIPEG
The tourist is now on the edge of the world’s great wheatfields of the
future, which even in their infancy have for several years raised a large
surplus of the finest wheat, besides other grain. The traveller will prob-
ably stop over for a short time at Winnipeg and inspect the city, which
a few years ago was merely a hamlet of Indian traders gathered around
a Hudson’s Bay Company’s post, but now has a population of about
50,000, and is destined to become the most important city of Western
Canada. It is an important railway centre, from which the O. P. R-
branch lines radiate in all directions. In the proper season he will, if
a sportsman, be able to secure such prairie grouse and wildfowl shooting
as is difficult to obtain elsewhere, and if really desirous to take advantage
of this opportunity he will find many other sportsmen of the plaop willing
to instruct him as to the methods and places. He will find at the offices
of the Canadian Pacific Railway, or of the Dominion Government, officials
who will be glad to give him trustworthy information concerning the
farming and ranching lands of Western Canada.
Around the World
BY THE
Canadian Pacific Route
ON THE PRAIRIES
Leaving Winnipeg, the train passes through a number of small towns
and thriving settlements—a few years ago all uncultivated prairie—for
four hundred miles, when what are known as “ The Plains ” begin.
At Moose Jaw tourists from the Middle States passing through St. Paul
and Minneapolis and travelling by the “ Soo-Pacific Route ” join the
main line of the Canadian Pacific Railway. From a little west of this
point to Calgary, near the Rocky Mountains, about another four hundred
miles, and stretching away south to the boundary of the United States
and for some distance north of the railway line, is the ranching country
of the great western territory of Canada, not so many years ago the roam-
ing grounds of vast herds of buffalo and the hunting grounds of the Cree
and Blackfoot Indians.
SIDE TRIPS
At several points—Portage-la-Prairie, Brandon, Regina, Medicine Hat
and Calgary—the tourist is enabled to journey north or southf of the
main line on one or other of the branch lines whose junctions are at these
points. A stop-over of a few days at Regina enables him to take another
train and visit the prosperous settlement of Prince Albert, on the north
branch of the Saskatchewan, and other points of a district once the great
highway of the Bay Company’s business. From Medicine Hat
the Crowsnest Pass line leads off past the Lethbridge collieries and
Macleod the headquarters of the ranching industry in Soutnern Alberta
through the Crowsnest Pass of the Rocky Mountains, forming a short
route to the principal mining centres or East and West Kootenay, in the
great mineral belt of Southern British Columbia. A fast service by this
route has been inaugurated, connecting with the excellent steamboat
system of the Canadian Pacific Railway Company, whose magnificent
fleet of steamers operates on the principal waters of this region. At
Calgary another diversion may be made and the train taken for Edmon-
ton, formerly the chief emporium of the Hudson’s Bay Company in the
Saskatchewan country, now a growing town, the centre of one of the
most fertile mixed farming districts of the West. From Calgary the
tourist may also take train for the_south, and.jvisit .the .great ranchii?* -
districts and the coal mines along the Crowsnest Pass line, which are
making Southern Alberta famous.
THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS
Leaving Calgary, the principal city of the plains, the Rocky Moun-
tains are plainly in sight, and in about three hours’ time the train enters
“ The Gap,” which is the beginning of five hundred miles of the wildest
and most picturesque scenery on the continent, that has been descried
by Whymper, the conqueror of the Matterhorn, as “fifty or sixty
Switzerlands rolled into one,” and whose scenic magnificence was ternW
“ matchless ” by H.R.H. The Prince of Wales. It is not the intention
to attempt in the limited space of this publication any description of even
the chief points in the several ranges of mountains through which the
tourist passes between the prairie and the sea. Tne rugged, bare, fan-
tastic monsters of the Rocky Mountains, of which the Three Sisters of
Canmore, Cathedral Mtn., Mount Stephen, at the summit, and the Otter-:
tail Range are the chief features, form marvellous pictures of grandeur
and beauty.
AT BANFF
But the tourist should stop over at Banff, in the Canadian Rockies, a
station eighteen miles west of “ The Gap.” Here is an excellent hotel
built by the railway company at some hot sulphur springs of rare curative
properties, and for many miles around is the National Park, a picturesque
district set apart by the Dominion Government and preserved for the
pleasure of tourists and sportsmen. To live like a sybarite where, until
recently, the footsteps of the wandering Indian alone disturbed the solitude
of the mountains, and to ride and drive with comfort amidst the grandest
mountain scenery in America, is at the option of the guest at the Banff
Hotel. Naturally enough, under these circumstances, the hotel during the
season is always well occupied with pleasant family parties and leisurely
globe-trotters. A short distance west of Banff is Laggan station, at which
the tourist stops to visit Lake Louise, the neighboring glaciers and the
other “ Lakes in the Clouds,” where provision is also made for the
traveller’s comfort in picturesque chalets. No written description can
adequately convey their beauty to the mind’s-eye of the reader. Even
more beautiful is the lately discovered Yoho Valley, within easy reach of
Field station and chalet. Surrounded by some of the loftiest peaks of the
northern Rockies, and the birthplace of the North Fork Kicking Horse
River, this is one of the grandest upland parks in the chain. Its most
prominent attraction is doubtless the great Takakkaw Fall, 1,200 feet
high, fully the equal of anything in the Yosemite. At all these points
experienced Swiss guides are stationed during the tourist season, who will
accompany parties to interesting places in each locality. The Canadian
Pacific Railway publishes guide-books to these resorts, which may be had
without charge on application, to any of the Company’s agents.
THE SELKIRK RANGE
Up to the mountains the tourist has breakfasted, lunched and dined
in a sumptuous dining car attached to the train, but in the mountains he
takes his meals, and excellent ones they are, at the charming little chalet
Around the World
BY XME
Canadian Pacific Route
hotels which the railway company has established: The “ Mount Stephen
House ” at Field Station, from which the newly discovered wonderful
glaciers, lofty cataracts and winsome lakes of the Rockies can be visited
at leisure; the “ Glacier House,” under the shadow of that highest peak
of the Selkirks, “ Sir Donald,” and at the foot of the Great Glacier, that
marvellous river of ice, and within easy distance of several others; and
the “ Fraser Canon House ” at North Bend Station, where the fearsome
canons of the Fraser River may be explored. The wonderfully rich gold
and silver regions of the Kootenay can also be easily reached from Revel-
stoke, a station on the main line on the western edge of the Selkirk
Range, by branch line to the upper Arrow Lake, which with the Columbia
River forms a delightful water route to the various mining centres. The
Canadian Pacific’s elegantly furnished and speedy steamers ply on these
waters. The famed Cariboo gold fields are reached by stage from Ash-
croft. The mountains being passed, the tourist soon reaches Vancouver
on Burrard Inlet, and, if the steamer is not about to sail immediately,
goes to the Hotel Vancouver, owned and operated by the Canadian Pacific
Railway Company, noted as one of the best in America for those qualities
which go to make the sum of a traveller’s comfort. But, concerning
these and many other things on the transcontinental journey, are they not
written in the book of “The New Highway to the Orient,” which may be
obtained gratuitously from any of the Canadian Pacific Railway Company’s
agents ? Before starting on his trip the tourist should also procure from
one of the company’s agents a copy of a charmingly written little guide-,
called “ Westward to the Far East,” which will tell him just what he'’
requires to know about Japan and China, and how those interesting
countries may be reached, and as a means of briefly, but accurately,
recording his journey across the continent he will find a copy of the
Company’s Annotated Time Table invaluable. These publications will cost
him nothing. Steamers run daily across the straits to Victoria, on Van-
couver Island, the capital of the province, and a city well worth a visit.
All transpacific steamers stop at the harbor-mouth of Victoria, enabling
passengers to embark. From Vancouver the routes across the Pacific
diverge, that of the Canadian Pacific’s Empress steamship line to Japan
and China being nearly due west, while that of the Canadian-Australian
line lies southwest to Honolulu, H. 1., Suva, Fiji, Brisbane, and thence to
Sydney. Around-the-World passengers by these two routes would meet
again at Colombo, Ceylon. Those intending to visit both Japan and
Australia would meet at Sydney.
We will first follow the Empress route via Japan and China as far as
Colombo. V
ON THE PACIFIC
There is a charm in sailing the Pacific to which everyone yields. Thei
Summer Sea, as Lord Dufferin calls it, has its own pleasant advantages, j
and it is redolent of the most romantic maritime history that has been\
written. In person you are on board a triumph of the shipbuilding art, I
with surroundings that fastidiousness itself is compelled to praise ; in
spirit you are with Drake and Frobisher and the daring buccaneers of
good Queen Bess’ time, who robbed the Spanish galleons in the sacred
name and with the same cheerful religious zeal with which the Spaniards 1
had plundered the Incas and other Indians of South America. A sail in
sight on the Pacific suggests a galleon escaping ; a second one, a buc-
caneer in chase. The steamers traversing the Pacific Ocean, the twin-screw
steamers, Empress- of India, Empress of China and Empress of Japan and
the Tartar and Athenian are superior in speed, safety and luxury to any-
thing that has ever sailed the Pacific, and have given a new charm to this
voyage. They take a specified northern course between Vancouver and
Yokohama, which is the shortest transpacific route by about three hundred
miles, and which also usually enjoys the most pleasant weather. On such
an ocean in such a ship it is impossible not to enjoy the trip from Van-
couver to Japan. And there is much of novelty ; the ways of the Atlantic
libers are not those of the Pacific. There is an Eastern air in the latter
•vriiich will be new to many. The servants are not called “ stewards,”
but “boys”; they are not black-jacketed Europeans, but white-frocked
Celestials. There is no luncheon on board, but there is luxurious “tiffin,”
and so on.
YOKOHAMA
In about ten days after leaving the shores of British Columbia the
steamship is in Japanese waters, the first port reached being Yokohama.
Unless in a very great hurry indeed, the tourist will here leave the
steamer and take a little time to see Japan. There is so much to be seen,
ai-u s>u luuch oi what is to be seen detenus on the time oi >ear, that, lor
detailed information a tourist must either turn to the book already
mentioned. “ Westward to the Far East,” or he can obtain a “ Murray s
Guide to Japan” or “Japan as We Saw It” on the train, and with
one or other of these can regulate his daily programme with the greatest
economy of time and money and the maximum amount of sight-seeing.
Japan has lately become the desired goal of all who travel for pleasure,
and who, jaded with the Old World and the American Continent, desire
to see a phase of Eastern civilization unlike that to be met elsewhere. The
descriptions of it written by Arnold, Griffis, Oliphant and other men of
literary reputation have fired the desire of the accustomed traveller to
visit the land of the cherry blossom and the chrysanthemum, and none
have regretted the trip. A country which, during the present generation,
was a sealed book to foreigners, with which they could trade only across
ROUND THE WORLD
B Y THE
Canadian Pacific Route
a bridge and under a jealous watch, suddenly overthrew the chief officer
of state, reverting in its allegiance to a still more ancient regime, and at
the same time opened its ports, purchased steamships, built railways,
adopted European costume and European arms, and generally effected the
most extensive peaceful revolution that the world has ever seen. Japan is
now in that condition in which the two systems are working side by side —
the one developing, the other dying. It is therefore a most interesting
time to visit the country while yet most of the old life remains, and
ancient domestic customs and traditions surprise and delight the European
stranger.
OTHER CITIES OF JAPAN
The temples of Nikko, the bazaars of Osaka, the commerce of Nagasaki
and the antiquities of Kioto can be seen as easily and conveniently as if
they were all in the neighborhood of London or New York. By consulting
the guide to which reference has been made, it will be seen that there
are a number of trips to be made in Japan, taking Yokohama as a starting
point. Tokio, Nikko, Kioto, Nagasaki, Fujiyama, the sacred mount, whose
general appearance a thousand Japanese artists have made familiar to the
world; the several points on the Inland Sea, and even Hakodate, a very
characteristic Japanese seaport in the north, may be seen in a short time.
There are railways to the chief cities, and a Japanese company has steamers
plying between Yokohama and the porta. Guides, when required, and
servants are always to be had without delay; there is a regular scale of
payment on a moderate basis for every service the tourist requires, and
everything can be found at, or ordered from, his hotel. A round-the-world
tourist, having two years in which to complete his tour, can well
afford to linger in Japan, even if so doing should necessitate hurry in
other places; but by waiting over for the next steamer following that
by which he arrived, he will have three weeks or a month in Japan, besides
ample time to see the most interesting places in China, Australia and
India, as well as in Egypt and the Mediterranean. From Yokohama the
steamer proceeds to Kobe, the two cities being also connected by rail.
THE INLAND SEA
Most of the leading foreign firms doing business in Japan are repre-
sented at Kobe. It is the starting point for Osaka, one of the brightest
and most attractive of Japanese cities, and also for Kioto, as well as for
other interesting points. From Kobe the steamer route lies through the
Inland Sea and on to Nagasaki. The passage of this smooth, island-
dotted water will suggest to the American and Canadian travellers the
Thousand Islands of the St. Lawrence removed to Japan and peopled with
the polite little people with whom sampans take the place 'of canoes.
Nagasaki is one of the most interesting cities of Japan. It was the first
city, and for about two centuries the only one, at which foreigners were
permitted to trade. During a great part of that time the Dutch at one
time and the Portuguese at another traded from the Island of Deshima,
which is connected with Nagasaki by a bridge, and European trade with
Japan was carried on through them. But even the most sketchy descrip-
tion of what the traveller will find in Japan to interest and delight him is
cut of the question within the prescribed bounds of this publication.
SHANGHAI
A run of about four hundred miles from Nagasaki brings the tourist
to the Woosung River, on which Shanghai is situated. There is a Chinese
town at Woosung, where passengers are transferred into smaller steamers
tor Shanghai, and about a dozen miles up the river the great mercantile
centre of Northern China is reached. As it is approached, after passing
the har a little above Woosung, the traveller sees in the fleet of junks,
the forest of masts and the presence of European men-of-war under various
flags, evidences of Shanghai’s commercial importance. It is the chief seat
of trade of the Yang-tse-Kiang River and the northern parts of China, it
being the most northern of the five treaty ports open to foreign trade.
Besides the Chinese town, there are three foreign settlements, the English,
American and French. The English and American form one municipality,
while the French have laws and regulations for themselves. There is no
want of social intermingling and amusement amongst the residents. In
each of the settlements is a good hotel, and there is an excellent club in
the town and another in the country, to which ladies are admitted as
members. With a proper .introduction, the traveller will find time pass
pleasantly enough at Shanghai. In the season there is excellent shooting
in the lower flats of the river. If time permits, the tourist can take a
steatner to Hankow, the great tea port, on the road to which he will pass
Nankin, one of the most celebrated of the cities of China, but one which,
not being a treaty port, is closed to foreign trade. From Shanghai con-
necting steamers, run to Tientsin, the port of Pekin, and other northern
Chinese ports the greater part of the year. Southward the traveller con-
tinues his journey in one of the Canadian Pacific Railway Co’s steamers,
and next anchors at Hong Kong.
HONG KONG
This is an island lying off Kwang-tung, of which province Canton is
the capital. It is a British Colony, the capital and indeed the
only city of which is Victoria, though generally referred to in
conversation as Hong Kong. It has a beautiful harbor, crowded with
merchant vessels of all nations, numerous junks, innumerable sampans, or
ROUND THE WORLD
BV XME
Canadian Pacific Route
native boats, and usually several men-of-war. There are good hotels
here, and a well managed club. Strangers are hospitably received, when
introduced by friends of the residents, and in the autumn and winter
the climate is pleasant enough. The wet season, which is the least invit-
ing time in which to visit Hong Kong, commences in May and continues
until August.
CANTON, MACAO AND MANILA
From Hong Kong steamers ply to Macao and Canton, respectively
forty and ninety-five miles distant. Macao is an old Portuguese settlement,
and is well worth a visit. Canton, however, is the city which a tourist
reaching Hong Kong will naturally be most anxious to see. It is the
capital of the Kwang-tung province, and was inaccessible to Europeans
until it fell before the combined English and French attack in 1858. Prior
to this Europeans visited only an outer portion of the city separated from
the main city by wall and water, and devoted to the hongs and residences
of the foreign merchants. Now, however, the pagodas, yamens and extra-
ordinary streets of Canton may be traversed by foreigners. It is a city
alive with population, and its principal streets are well filled with curio
shops.
There are several steamers which run regularly between Hong Kong
and Manila in the Philippines, a distance of between 600 and 700 miles,
and sometimes they call at Amoy en route.
HONG KONG TO AUSTRALIA
Tourists desiring to see Australia, as well as Japan and China, can
at Hong Kong take passage by a steamship of the China Navigation
Company, of the Eastern & Australian Steamship Company or of the
Nippon Yusen Kaisha and proceed via Torres Straits to Sydney, usually
calling at Manila and at several other points on the way. At Sydney
the direct Australian “ Around the World ” Route, presently to be
described, is again joined.
SINGAPORE
From Hong Korn?, the tourist continues his globe-trotting trip in one
of the “Peninsular & Oriental” or “North-German Lloyd” or “Messageries
Maritimes” steamers through the China Sea to Singapore, about five days’
voyage. Singapore is a very busy and important place, and a rendezvous
and coaling station of the British East India Squadron, a large trade being
done with the Malay Peninsula. Its population comprises men of every
Eastern race and there are a number of interesting places to visit outside
the town. It is famous for its flowers and fruits. From Singapore the
route to Europe is continued through the Straits of Malacca, via Penang
to Colombo, where tourists from Australia join the main route.
COLOMBO
in Ceylon’s spicy isle, is one of the most interesting points on the route.
There are some good hotels in Colombo, and it is noted for the beauty of
the drives in its vicinity. It is a great place for jewellery of all descrip-
tions unseen in shops at home, as well as for precious stones, imitation
ones and other curios. Some of the finest jewels seen in the shops of
London, Paris and New York are purchased at Colombo. Kandy, the
capital, is reached by rail over a picturesque route.
AUSTRALIAN ROUTE FROM VANCOUVER
We will now return to the alternate ** Around the World ” Route.
The first port of call on this route, after leaving Vancouver and Victoria,
8.C., is Honolulu, the capital of the Hawaiian Islands, which is reached
after a run of about seven days. Steamers as a rule arrive in Honolulu
early in the morning, and usually their stay is from eight to thirty hours.
The acquisition by the United States of the Hawaiian Islands has given
them greater political and commercial importance, but to the tourist they
possess other interesting characteristics. The scenery of the chief island
is the most attractive of its kind; the views obtained, both of land snd
sea, the fiery brilliance of the Kilauea Volcano, the drives and rides
through luxuriant growth, and in a soft genial climate, and the customs
and occupations of one of the most interesting of Southern races, combine
to make a short stay in the mid-Pacific Isles a pleasant experience. Excel-
lent arrangements exist for the accommodation, both while stopping and
travelling, of tourists visiting all the islands. From Honolulu the routes
is continued to Suva, Fiji, on one of the largest of the group of 225
The landscape is grand—hill and valley being clothed with beautiful and
luxuriant vegetation. There are many curious sights to be seen in this
former home of barbarism. The steamer proceeds direct from Suva to
Brisbane, Queensland, the youngest of Australia’s capitals, and thence to
Sydney, New South Wales. The world’s interest in the Australian common-
wealth has of late years been largely increased by the development of its
commerce as well as by its* political growth and aspirations. Sydney and
Melbourne are now only two of the important cities instead of being as
they once were, the only two. Adelaide, Brisbane and others are rushing
to the front of Southern cities, and personal observation, while satisfying
those who desire to understand the present and possible future of Great
Britain in the south seas, is made an agreeable task in a country where
Europeans and Americans find so many natural conditions reversed, and
where the luxuriance of semi-tropical growth surrounds the ideas, cus-
toms and manners of Northern Europe. The construction of railways in
Around the World
BY XME
Canadian Pacific Route
Australia has made easy of reach the great wool-raising plains, the rich
gold fields that helped so much to make Australia famous, and has enabled
tourists to visit one colony another easily, and in a short time.
Sydney is famous for its beautiful harbor, and its early existence as the
headquarters of government and centre of business in the first half of the
century, has given it a pre-eminent distinction. In the proper season it
is a delightful centre from which to make excursions through the beautiful
country and waters of the neighborhood. Melbourne, though younger than
Sydney, is distinguished by its rapid strides in growth and commercial
importance since the discovery of gold. There are numerous pleasant
towns within rail communication of Melbourne, along the shores of Hob-
son’s Bay—St. Kilda, Brighton, Geelong, etc. From Melbourne and from
Sydney there is steamship communication with Tasmania, the two chief
cities of which are Launceston and Hobart.
Passengers for New Zealand may transfer at Suva to the Union
S. S. Co.’s steamship direct to Auckland, or they can travel by way
of Sydney. These gems of the southern seas, which England conquered
almost foot by foot from the Maoris, the finest and most intelligent of all
natives of these latitudes, have acquired celebrity both from the commer-
cial value of their industries and from the peculiar beauty of their scenery
and luxuriousness of climate. Their mountains, lakes and cascades, their
geysers, of which travellers have spoken in such enthusiastic strain, are
sui generis, because the latitude and climate make these vistas unlike cor-
responding freaks of nature in northern climes. Wellington and Auckland
on North Island, and Dunedin and Christchurch on South Island are the
principal cities.
From Sydney or Melbourne the ** Around the World ” tourist crosses
the Indian Ocean to Colombo, where those taking the Japan-China route
are met. Here those travelling via the Peninsular & Oriental S. N. Co.’s
Line or the Messageries Maritimes have the option under certain conditions
of continuing the journey straight to Aden, or deviating to Bombay or to
Calcutta and through Hindostan to the Arabian Sea; those travelling by
the Orient-Pacific Line, the North-German Lloyd or Messageries Maritimes
proceed direct across the Arabian and Red Seas.
INDIA f
Should the route via Calcutta be chosen, the tourist is transferred
to another steamer, and in about four days reaches the Hooghly,
on which Calcutta is built, about ninety miles from the sea. Calcutta
is the seat of the supreme government of India, the capital of the com-
merce of Bengal, and from its handsome buildings has been called ** The
City of Palaces.” Its history is almost the history of the British in India.
It was founded by the establishment of a small trading post in 1690, and
remained in that insignificance for nearly a century, until Clive, in aveng-
ing the iniquity of the “ Black Hole ” of Calcutta, deposed Surajah
Dowlah and commenced the operations—military, political and commercial
—that resulted in the present Indian Empire. Calcutta is the solidity of
Europe grafted on the barbaric splendor of the East. The fashions and
manners of London jostle the customs and traditions of the Mogul Empire.
It is associated with the names of England’s greatest soldiers and states-
men, and its history is a story of the most marvellous triumph of western
over eastern civilization that the world has ever read. Calcutta has a
number of good hotels and other conveniences for the comfort of travellers,
and every information can readily be obtained as to the several routes into
the interior. There is rail to Cawnpore, Lucknow, Agra, Delhi and other
places rpade famous in the Sepoy mutiny and re-conquest of India in 1858;
The beautiful city of Agra, which in its own,way is without a rival, is a
little to the north of the main route to Bombay. Here is the celebrated
Taj, which Sir Edwin Arnold declares to be the crown of all the triumphs
of Mogul art. The Imperial tomb, built of white marble, cost three
million sterling and occupied twenty thousand workmen for seventeen years.
A little beyond Agra is Delhi, the city of Aurungzebe and the capital of
the Mogul Empire, the capture of which, with the seizure of the king,
was the crowning victory of the British arras in the great mutiny. Bom-
bay, on the Arabian Sea, is perhaps the pleasantest and most beautiful of
the English cities in India. It is on an island connected by bridges with
the mainland, and is divided into a native and a European town, the
former being especially interesting from the bazaars and native manufac-
tures there carried on, as well as from the motley nature of its Indian
population. The European portion is remarkable for the handsome resi-
dences of the merchants, in which art and science have been employed to
provide the comforts and luxuries of eastern life. Near Bombay are the
celebrated towers for the reception of the dead. From Bombay the steamer
crosses the Arabian Sea to Aden and thence up the Red Sea to Ismailia,
where passengers intending to visit Egypt disembark.
EGYPT
From Port Said and Ismailia there is rail communication to Cairo and
Alexandria, from either of which points the tourist can take passage in one
of the much-written-about Nile Dahabeahs and leisurely examine the land
of the Pharaohs, climb the pyramids under which they are buried, investi-
gate the Sphinx, and, if he desires, visit some of the battlefields of the
recent wars against Arabi Pasha and the Mahdi. From October till May
is the season for doing Egypt and the Nile. After that the weather
becomes warmer than is argeeable to the majority of European and
American travellers, and one service of boats specially designed for such
tourists is discontinued.
Around the World
BY XME
Canadian Pacific Route
THE MEDITERRANEAN
Then at his leisure, always remembering that his ticket is good for
two years from the date of issue, the tourist returns to Ismailia
and selects the route by which he will travel to England. There are several
at his option, varying somewhat by the different lines. He can go by the
all-sea route through the Mediterranean, calling at Brindisi and Malta,
and passing Gibraltar on to London; or by Marseilles and Straits of
Gibraltar; or from Alexandria to Brindisi or Naples and Genoa, the
birthplace of Columbus; or he may disembark at Brindisi, Naples, Genoa
or Marseilles and continue his journey overland through Europe. By the
time he reaches London the Canadian Pacific Railway Company’s globe-
circling tourist will have had an opportunity to see the latest and the
oldest civilizations in the world. The frontiers of the far west have been
succeeded by the double civilization of the Japanese, and the ancient
and unchanging methods and customs of the Chinese. The novelty of
Australian life has closely followed the wondrous beauty of the sub-tropi-
cal isles of the Pacific. The Hindoo traditions'have jostled those of the
Moslem, where the fashions of Piccadilly are side by side with the rem-
nants of Aurungzebe’s Empire, and the evidences of Egypt’s antiquity
and the monuments of forty centuries have been observed from the deck
of a London tourist organizer’s boat. Not only will the tourist have
experienced the pleasure derived from the strange and beautiful sights
which he has seen, but he will have gained an insight into the trade and
economy of those eastern and western peoples whose easy intercommuni-
cation is so rapidly influencing the trade and political relations of the
world. ’ ! i J
The tourist may invert the order of his journey, and by leaving Eng-
land in the early winter may visit the cities of the continent, the points
of interest in Egypt, India, Java, China, Japan and America each in the
pleasantest season.
CAPE OF GOOD HOPE-CAPE HORN
While interest in South Africa is so predominant, it may be the desire
of the traveller to visit the Dark Continent. He is enabled to follow his
inclination by taking the Shaw, Savill & Albion or the New Zealand Ship-
ping Company’s lines (which run alternately) from London or Plymouth
to Santa Cruz, the port of Teneriffe (Canary Islands), famous for its
“ peak ” and rich in British and Spanish naval associations, sail down the
West African coast to Cape Town, where Table Mountain and Table Bay
and the interesting English colony are to he seen, thence across the Indian
Ocean to Hobart, Tasmania, where steamer connection is made with Sydney,
from which point the voyage can be continued by the Canadian-Australian
line to Vancouver, nr by way of China and Japan to Hong Kong, where
one of the White Empresses of the Canadian Pacific Railway Company is
taken to Vancouver, the North American Continent traversed by the Cana-
dian Pacific Railway, and England reached by one of the Atlantic liners
from Montreal, Quebec, St. John, N. 8., Halifax, Boston or New York.
Cape Horn and Brazil may also be visited in another tour by proceeding
from London to Sydney via Canada, Hawaii and Now Zealand, or via
Canada, Japan and China, thence to Sydney, and re-embarking at Hobart,
Tasmania, or Wellington. New Zealand, on the Shaw, Savill <fe Albion or
New Zealand Shipping Company’s steamers, the traveller doubles Cape
Horn, gets an insight of South American life at Monte Video or at Rio
de Janeiro, with its magnificent harbor and wonderful Botanical Gardens,
touches at Teneriffe and then sails direct to Plymouth and London.
THE success of the Canadian Pacific Railway Company’s globe-circling
excursions has been so marked that the Company has arranged not
only to continue them, but, with its growing system and ever-
increasing connections, to offer the travelling public additional privileges
and new and attractive routes.
Tickets for the tours hereinafter described can be obtained at the
rates namod, and numerous variations and side trips may be made either
free of charge or at slight additional cost.
Sterling payment, as named, or its equivalent, will be required in all
countries except on the American Continent, where gold, as named, or its
equivalent, must be paid.
Two years will be allowed as the time during which tickets may be
used, and stop-over privileges will be given at#all points of interest.
The tickets are first-class throughout, and include meals and berths
on ocean and Canadian Pacific lake steamships between Owen Sound and
Fort William, but not on railways or other steamers. Tickets for meals
and sleeping car berths on the Canadian Pacific Railway, when travelliriQ
between the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, via their main line and Toronto
or Montreal, can be obtained by holders of Hound-the-World tickets for
£6, or $30.00 in gold.
Canadian Pacific Railway meal coupons will be good for meals only
while in transit, and will not be received in payment for additional meals
or rooms while stopping over at hotels. To provide for various routes which
are different in time, etc., more coupons than are generally required are
supplied, and the Company therefore, will not refund on unused coupons
at end of journey, but expect them to be returned to the Company.


G ROUTE 13—£157 OR $764 GOLD
Same as Route 10 to Sydney, Australia.
Messageries Maritimes (French Mail Line) Sydney to Melbourne, Ade-
laide, Fremantle, Colombo, Aden, Suez, Port Said, Marseilles, Calais,
Dover (or Boulogne and Folkestone) and London.
c ROUTE 14—£142.10 OR $694.35 GOLD
Same as Route 10 to Sydney, Australia.
Aberdeen Line Steamships to Melbourne, fPort Natal, Cape Town,
Teneriffe, Plymouth and London.
c ROUTE 15—£142 OR $691.85 GOLD
Same as Route 10 to Sydney, Australia.
Lund’s Blue Anchor Line Steamships to Melbourne, fPort Natal, Cape
Town, Las Palmas, and London.
ROUTE <6-£l3o. OR $632.70 GOLD
(THIS ROUTE IS NOT REVERSIBLE)
Same as Route 4 to Sydney, Australia.
Connecting Steamer to Hobart, Tasmania, or Wellington, N.Z.
Shaw, Savill & Albion Company’s (Limited), or New Zealand Shipping
Company’s (Limited) Steamships via Cape Horn, Montevideo or Rio de
Janeiro and Teneriffe to Plymouth.
Railway or steamship to London.
ROUTE 17—£157, OR $764 GOLD
_ (THIS ROUTE IS NOT REVERSIBLE;
Same as Route 10 to Sydney, Australia.
Connecting Steamer to Hobart, Tasmania, or Wellington, N.Z.
Shaw, Savill & Albion Company’s (Limited), or New Zealand Shipping
Company’s (Limited) Steamships via Cape Horn, Montevideo or Rio de
Janeiro and Teneriffe to Plymouth.
Railway or steamship to London.
ROUTE 18—£130, OR $632.70 GOLD
(THIS ROUTE IS NOT REVERSIBLE)
Railway or Shaw, Savill & Albion Company’s (Limited), or New
Zealand Shipping Company’s (Limited) Steamships, London to Plymouth.
Shaw, Savill & Albion Co.’s (Limited), or New Zealand Shipping Co.’s
(Limited) Steamships via Teneriffe and Cape Town to Hobart, Tasmania.
Connecting steamer to Sydney, Australia.
Canadian-Australian Royal Mail Steamship Line to Brisbane, Suva (Fiji),
Honolulu, H. 1., and Vancouver.
Canadian Pacific Ry. direct route to Montreal, Quebec, St. John, N. 8.,
or Halifax, or to Boston or New York via Montreal and direct lines.
*Choice of Transatlantic S. S. Lines to Liverpool or Southampton.
Railway to London.
ROUTE 19-£157 OR $764 GOLD
(THIS ROUTE IS NOT REVERSIBLE)
Same as Route 18 to Sydney, Australia.
China Navigation Company’s or Eastern & Australian Steamship Com-
pany’s or Nippon Yusen Kaisha Steamships to Hong Kong.
Canadian Pacific Railway Company’s Royal Mail Steamship Line via
Shanghai, Nagasaki, Kobe and Yokohama to Vancouver.
Canadian Pacific Railway direct route to Montreal, Quebec, St. John,
N. 8., or Halifax, or to Boston or New York via Montreal and direct lines!
"Choice of Transatlantic S. S. Lines to Liverpool or Southampton.
Railway to London.
ROUTE 20—£165, OR $804.50 GOLD
Same as Route 2 to-Hong Kong.
North-German Lloyd S. S. Line, Hong Kong to Singapore, Batavia,
Macassar, German New Guinea, Townsville and Brisbane to Sydney!
Australia.
The routes as detailed herein for convenience read from and to London,
Eng., but the rates quoted will apply from any intermediate point, except
that passengers commencing the journey at Rio de Janeiro, will be charged
£l6 13s. extra, and the journey, with its numerous variations, unless when
otherwise stated, can be arranged in either direction at option of pas-
senger when tickets are purchased, in all cases return to the starting
point of ticket is included.
„ ROUTE 1-£125 OR $6lO GOLD
P.~ London to Liverpool or Southampton.
• V.z' of Transatlantic Steamship Lines Liverpool or Southampton
Quebec. Montreal, St. John, N. 8., Halifax, Boston or New York.
Canadian Pacific Railway direct route from Quebec, Montreal, St.
John, N. 8., or Halifax, or direct rail lines from New York or Boston to
Montreal, thence Canadian Pacific Ry. to Vancouver.
Canadian Pacific Railway Company’s Royal Mail Steamship Line Van-
couver to Yokohama, Kobe, Nagasaki and Shanghai or Hong Kong.
Peninsular & Oriental Steam Navigation Company’s Steamship Line
Yokohama, Kobe, Shanghai or Hong Kong to Singapore, Penang, Colombo,
Aden, Ismailia, Port Said, Brindisi, Malta (or Port Said and Marseilles),
Gibraltar, Plymouth and London.
ROUTE 2—£.126, OR $6lO GOLD
Same as Route 1 to Vancouver.
Canadian Pacific Railway Company’s Royal Mail Steamship Line Van
couver to Yokohama, Kobe, Nagasaki, Shanghai or Hong Kong.
North-German (Norddeutscher) Lloyd Steamship Co.’s Line, Yokohama,
Kobe, Nagasaki, Shanghai or Hong Kong to Singapore, Penang, Colombo,
Aden, Suez, Port Said, Naples, Genoa, Southampton and rail to London.
ROUTE 3-£125 OR S6IOGOLD
Same as Route 1 to Vancouver.
Canadian Pacific Railway Company’s Royal Mail Steamship Line,
Vancouver to Yokohama, Kobe, Nagasaki, Shanghai or Hong Kong.
Messageries Maritimes (French Mail Line), Yokohama, Kobe, Nagasaki,
Shanghai or Hong Kong to Saigon, Singapore, Colombo, Aden or Djibouti,
Suez, Port Said, Marseilles, Paris, Calais, Dover (or Boulogne and Folke-
stone) and London.
via Owen Sound and C. P. Lake Steamship Line to Sault Ste. Marie,
thence rail via St. Paul, Minneapolis and Moose Jaw (Soo-Pacific Route).
9. Vancouver to Yokohama, via Can. Pac. Local Steamers (B.C. Coast
Service) to Victoria, 8.C., thence Can. Pac. Royal Mail Steamships.
10. Vancouver to Sydney, via Can. Pac. Local Steamers (B.C. Coast Ser-
vice) to Victoria, 8.C., thence Canadian-Australian Royal Mail Steamships.
11. Peninsular & Oriental Steamships from Yokohama, Kobe, Nagasaki or
Shanghai to Hong Kong (i.e., between any two or more of the ports
named), instead of C. P. Ry. Co.’s Steamships, when route of passengers
is by Peninsular *& Oriental Steamships beyond Hong Kong.
12. North-German (Norddeutscher) Lloyd Steamships from Yokohama,
Kobe, Nagasaki or Shanghai to Hong Kong (i.e., between any two or more
of the ports named), instead of Canadian Pacific Railway Company’s
Steamships, when route of passengers is by North-German (Norddeutscher)
Lloyd Line beyond Hong Kong.
13. Messageries Marltimes Steamships from Yokohama, Kobe, Nagasaki or
Shanghai to Hong Kong (i.e., between any two or more of the ports
named), instead of Canadian Pacific Railway Company’s Steamships, when
route of passengers is by Messageries Maritimes beyond Hong Kong.
14. London to Cape Town, via Shaw, Savill & Albion Company’s Line,
thence via New Zealand Shipping Company’s Line to Hobart, Tasmania,
or London to Cape Town via New Zealand Shipping Company’s Line,
thence via Shaw, Savill & Albion Company’s Line to Hobart, Tasmania.
ORIENT-PACIFIC STEAMSHIP LINE
20 From Marseilles to London, by Peninsular & Oriental overland express
(including sleeping car on rail journey), £5 9s. lid., or $29.75 gold for passengers
by .Route 1, £4 9s. lid., or $21.86 for passengers by Routes 4 and 10.
note.—lt passenger provides for his own transit Brindisi, Naples, Genoa or Marseilles to
London, the following allowances will be maue, £4 or $19.5U gold by Homes 1, 2 and 3, £5 or
$24.30 gold by Houles 4,5, 0,7, 10, 11, 12, 13, 20 and 21.
DESCRIPTIVE PAMPHLETS
CANADIAN PACIFIC RAILWAY CO.’S
EASTKOIINI*—T-eave London (Tilbury ' Aug. 12th, 1904, and alternate Fridays there-
after, calling at Plymouth, Gibraltar, Marseilles. Naples, Port Said, Suez, Colombo, Fremantle,
Adelaide an”d Melbourne and arriving at Sydney in about 43 days.
WKSTBSOrXD—Leave Sydney Aug. 13th, 1904, and alternate Saturdays thereafter,
calling at Melbourne, Adelaide, Fremantle, Colombo, Suez, Port Said, Naples, Marseilles,
Gibraltar, Plymouth, and arriving at London (Tilbury) in about 44 days.
NOKTH-GERMAN (NOHDOEUTSCHER) LLOYD STEAMSHIP CO.
EASTKOl'Xl>— Leave Southampton Aug. 9th, 1904, and alternate Tuesdays thereafter,
for Snar.o-hai, calling at Gibraltar. Genoa, Naples, Port Said, Suez, Aden, Colombo, Penang,
Singapore, and reaching Hong Kong iu about 36 days, Shanghai 40 days, and Yokohonia in
ab °lleave a Southampton Aug. 15th, 1904. and every third Monday thereafter for Sydney, calling
at Genoa, Naples, Port Said, Suez, Aden, Colombo, Fremantle, Adelaide and .Melbourne, and
arriving at Sydney in about 49 days.
\V KSTIBOIIXIB Leave Yokohama Aug. 20th, 1904, and alternate Saturdays thereafter,
calling at Kobe. Nagasaki, Shanghai, Hong Kong, Singapore, Penang, Colombo, Aden, Suez,
Port Said, Naples, Genoa, Gibraltar, and reaching Southampton in about 50 days.
Leave Sydney Aug. 20th, Sept. 17th, Oct. 15, and every third Saturday thereafter, calling at
Melbourne, Colombo, Aden, Suez, Port Said, Naples, Genoa, and reaching
Southampton in about 51 days after departure from Sydney.
MESSAGERIES MARITIME (French Mail Line)
E ASTIBOBJX'IB— Leave Marseilles Aug. 31st, 1904, and every fourth Wednesday there-
after, calling at Port Said, Suez. Aden, Bombay, Colombo, Fremantle, Adelaide, Melbourne,
aud arriving at Sydney about 40 days.
Leave Marseilles Aug. 7th, 1904, and alternate Sundays thereafter, calling at Port Said,
Suez, Aden or Djibouti, Colombo. Singapore, Saigon, Hong Kong, Shanghai, Hiogo (Kobe)
and arriving Yokohama in about 38 days.
WEST ISO EX' 18-Leave Sydney Aug. loth, 1904. and every fourth Monday thereafter,
calling at Melbourne, Adelaide, Fremantle, Colombo, Bombay, Aden, Suez, Port Said, and ar-
riving at Marseilles in about 39 days. .
Leave Yokohama Aug. 12th, 1904, and alternate Fridays thereafter, calling at Kobe, Shan-
ghai, Hong Kong. Saigon, Singapore, Colombo, Aden or Djibouti, Suez, Port Said, and arriv-
ing Marseilles in about 39 days.
ABERDEEN LINE
Expected to leave London Aug. 23rd, 1904, and every third Tuesday thereafter for Sydney,
calling at Plymouth,Teneritfe, Cape Town and .Melbourne.aiid arriving Sydney in about 4o days.
Expected to leave Sydney Aug. 27th, and every third Saturday thereafter, tor London,
via Melbourne, Albany, Durban, Cape Town, Teneriffe and Plymouth, arriving at London in
about 51 days.
LUND’S BLUE ANCHOR LINE
Expected to leave London Aug. 19th, 1904, and every 4th Friday thereafter for Sydney
calling at Las Palmas, Cape Town, Adelaide and Melbourne, arriving Sydney in about 50 days.
Expected to leave Sydney on Aug. 26th, 1904, an d every 4th Friday thereafter lor London, via
Melbourne. Adelaide, Albany, Natal, Gape Town and Las Palmas, arriving London in about 5
days.
Full Particulars Can Be Obtained From Any of the Following Ag°ncies :
Adelaide. South Australia, Aust. United steam Nav. Co., Ltd.; Thos. Cook & Son.
Amsterdam. Holland, & Zoon, Singel No. 155.
Antwerp. II. Debenham, Continental Traffic Agent, A Quai Taverniers.
Auckland, New' Zealand. Union S. S. Co. ot N.Z. Ltd.; Thos, Cook & Son.
Baltimore, Md.,J.H. Thompson, Freight and Pass’r Agent. _ rn
IBerilin, fiermany, Carl Staugen, Fnedrichstrasse 72; International Sleeping Car Co-, 69
Unter den Linden. , , , „ ,
Itonihav. India. Ewart. Latham & Co.; Thos. Cook & Son, 13 Esplanade Road.
lBoslon,’ Mass., H. J. Colvin. District Passenger Agent, 362 Washington Street.
■Brisbane, Hneeiisland, The British India & Queensland Agency Co. Ltd.
■Bristol, Eng., F. W. Forster, Bristol Traffic Agent, 18 St- Augustine s Parade.
■Brussels, Itelginni. Thos. Cook & Son. 41 Rue de la Madeleine; International Sleeping
Car Co,, Nord Station. • ' .
■Buffalo. X. V., R. A. Burford, City Passenger and Freight Agent, 233 Main Street.
Cairo. Egypt. Thos. Cook & Son, near Shepheard s Hotel; International Sleeping Car Co.,
Maison Henbane, Rue Bab el Hadid. n
Calenfla. India. Thos. Cook & Son, 9 Old Court House St., Gillanders, Arlmthnot & Co.
Cape Town. Soul h Africa, Thos. Cook & Son, 146 St. George’s St.; Win. Anderson &
Cilieasrof ■ . Shaw, General Agent Passenger Department, 228 South Clark St.
Cologne, tier many, Thos. Cook & Son, 1 Domhof; International Sleeping Car Co.,
Central Station. v , ~,
Colombo. Ceylon, Bois Brothers & Co.; Thomas Cook & Son, Victoria Arcade, York St.
Constantinople, Turkey. Thos. Cook & Son, 12 Rue Cabristan; International Sleeping
Car Co., Pera Palace Hotel.
Copenhagen, Denmark, Joachim Prahl, 12 Ostergade.
■ ■elroif, ylieh., A. E. Edmonds, City Passenger Agent, 7 Fort St. w.
Frankfort, tiermany, International Sleeping Car Co., I Kaiserstrasse.
Cilasiiow, Scotland. Thos. Russell, Traffic Agent, 67 St. Vincent Street.
Halifax, \.S.. J. D. Chipman, City Pass r and Freight Agent, 10/ Hollis St.
Hamburg, Germany, Thos. oook & Son, 39 Alsterdamm.
Havre, France. Hernu Peron & Co. (Ltd), Ticket Agents, 4 Rue Aufrey.
■ long Kang. China. D. E. Brown, General Agent, China, Japan, etc.
Honolulu. 11.1.. Theo. H. Davies & Co (Ltd).
Kobe, Japan. G. Millward, 14 A, Maye-Mnchi.
Liverpool, Engr., J-J-Gilbertson, Traffic Agent, 24 James St.
London. Enuiand. Archer Baker,European Traffic Manager, F. SV. Flanagan, General
Passenger Agent, 62-65 Charing Cross, S.W., and 67-68 King William St., E.C. .
Madrid. Spain. Thos. Cook & Son, 5 Carrera de San Geronimo; International Sleeping
Car Co., 18 Calle de Alcala. _ , ,
Malta. .Tnos. Cook & Son. 308 Strada Reale; Turnbull, Jr., & Somerville. Correspondents.
Mar«|lieftc, -M ich,. Geo. W . Hibbard, Gen. Pass’r Agt., Duluth, So. Shore & Atlantic Ry.
Melbourne. Australia, Union S.S. Co. of N.Z. (Ltd).
Minneapolis. .Minn.. W R Callaway, General Passenger Avent, Soo-Line.
Monte-Carlo, Monaco, Thomas Cook k Son. Credit Lyonnais; International Sleeping
Car Co., Riviera Palace Hotel. „ ~ , _ .
Hon ( real, line., Robert Kerr, Passr. Traffic Mgr.; C. E. E Ussher, Gen. Passr. Agent.
Moscow. ICnssia. inter. Sleeping Car Co., Hotel Metronole.
Naples. Italy. Thos, Cook & Son, Piazza del Martiri; International Sleeping Gar Co., So
Corso Re dTtalia .... n n »
Nice. France* Thos. Cook & Son. 16 Avenue Massena; International Steeping Car Co., 2.
Avenue Massena and Riviera Palace Hotel. _ .
New Vork. N.Y., E. V. Skinner. Assistant Traffic Manager, 408 Broadway.
( Thos, Cook & Son, 1 Place de I’Opera.
Paris, France, - International Sleeping Car Go.. 3Pi ace de Topera.
\Hernu, Peron, & Co, 61 Boulevard Haussman, near St. Lazare Station.
Philadelphia, Pa., H. McMurtrie, Freight and Passenger Agent, 629-631 Chestnut Stree
Hnehec. line., j. Hone, Jr., City Passenger Agent. 30 St. John St., Palace Hill.
Home, Italy, Thomas Cook & Son, 54 Piazza Esedra di Ternini ; International Sleeping
Car Co., Place San Silvestro.
Rotterdam. Biol land. Max. G. Frcudberg, 209 Leuvehaven.
Sf. John, X. 18., 0. B. Foster, District Passenger Agent.
St. Paul. Minn., W. S. Thorn, Assistant General Passenger Agent, boo Line.
Sf. Petersburg, Russia, International Sleeping Car Co,, 5 Perspective Newsky.
San Francisco, l al.. M. M. Stern, District Freight & Passr. Agent, 62/ Market Street,
Palace Hotel Building.
Shanghai. China, Jardine, Matheson & Co.
Sydney, Australia, ( wm°”dttf(fineralYassLgel : Agent Car-Auslralian S.S. Line,
Toronto, Out.. A. II Notman, Assistant General Passenger Agent, 1 King Street East.
Vancouver. E..J. Coyle, Asst. General Passenger Agent.
Vienna. Austria. Thos. Cook & Son, Stetensplalz 2; Schenker & Co., International
Sleeping Car Co., Maximilianstrasse, 12.
Warsaw. Russia. International Sleeping Car Co.. 2 Rue Kotzebue. „ .
Washington. David H. Morse. Freight and Passenger Agt., 1229 Pennsylvania Av
Wiesbaden, liermany. International Sleeping Car C0.,3«nnd37 theatre Colonnade.
Winnipeg. Man.. C. E. McPherson. General Passenger Agent, Western Lines.
Y okohama. Japan. Win. T. Payne, General Traffic Agent for Japan, 14 Bund,
Messrs. Thos. Cook A Son are Agents tor the Canadian Pacific Railway Company
in all parts of the world.
Intending passengers desirous of informing themselves concerning the
countries and places through which they are to pass, or may visit, should
obtain the following publications:—
ROYAL MAIL STEAMSHIPS
WESTBOUND
STEAMSHIPS Van- K h xNaga- Shanghai Hong
SIEAM(SHU'S couvor hamn Kobe saki (Woosung) Kong
AEK. ARR. ARR. AKR. ABR.
19(14 19 u4~ 1904 19U4 19u4 19u4
Empress of Japan July 4 July 18 July 19 July 21 July 23 July 26
Empress of China. ... July 25 Aug. 8 Aug. 9 Aug. 11 Aug. 13 Aug. 16
Empress of India. .. > Aug. 15 Aug. 29 Aug. 30 Sept. 1 Sept. 3 Sept. 6
Empress of Japan .. Aug. 29 Sept. 17 Sept. 2l Sept. 23 Sept, 2-7
Athenian Sept. 5 Sept. 19 Sept. 2G Sept. 22 Sept, 24 Sept. 27
Empress of China. ... Sept. 19 Oct. 8 Oct. 10 Oct. 12 Oct. 14 Oct. 18
Tartar Oct. 3 Oct. 17 Oct. 18 Oct. 20 Oct. 22 Oct. 25
Empress of India. ... Oct, 31 Nov. 14 Nov. 15 Nov. 17 Nov. 19 Nov. 22
Athenian Nov. 14 Dec. 3 Dec. 5 Dec. 7 Dec. 9 Dec. 13
“The New Highway to the Orient” and “Westward to
the Far Fast,” which are to be had free of charge on application to
any Canadian Pacific Railway agent.
Handbooks of information issued by the various steamship lines con-
necting with Canadian Pacific Railway are to be obtained on application to
their respective agents.
The Canadian Pacific Railway Company also issues several pamphlets—
“ Quebec,” “ Montreal,” “ Western Canada,” “ British Columbia,”
“ Summer Tours,” “ Fishing and Shooting,” “ Climates of Canada,”
“ Trans-Pacific Handbook,” “ Across Canada to Australia,” “ St.
Andrews-by-the-Sea, ” “ Glaciers, ” “ Challenge of the Mountains,” etc.,
which are handsomely illustrated, contain a great deal of informa-
tion, and are distributed gratis.
21. On Route 1 from Colombo to Panang by Penin. & Orient S. N. Coj
to Calcutta, thence by British India S. N. Co. (or vice versa) £l6 or $7B gold.
22. Should passengers desire to arrange other variations in the route they
are requested to communicate with the agents of the Canadian Pacific
Railway Company.
TICKET CONDITIONS
The following are the conditions on which the tickets will be issued: —
That they will not be transferred.
That they will be good for passage within two years (24 months) from
date of issue.
That they will be used in the direction in which issued.
That they will include meals and berths on ocean steamships and on
Canadian Pacific Lake Steamships between Owen Sound and Fort William,
but not on railways or other steamers.
That they will admit of stop-over at any steamship port of call or any
point on the Canadian Pacific Railway.
In other respects the regular rules of the various companies interested
will apply, and passages are issued only on the conditions stated in the
passage tickets and handbooks.
Passengers by this line transfer at Hong Kong to Manila steamers
DISTANCE TABLE
EASTBOUND
MILES
London to Liverpool 201
T Hong Shanghai Naga- Kobe i ? oko ' Van ‘
SIEAM.SH.II S Kong (Woo-mng) saki hama couver
DEIT ARR! ARR. ARR. PEP. ARR.
1904 1904 1904 1904 1904 1904
Empress of Japan.. July 13 July 15 July 18 July 19 July 22 Aug. 3
Athenian July 20 July 23 July 25 July 27 July 30 Aug. 13
Empress of China.. Aug. 3 Aug. 5 Aug. 8 Aug. 9 Aug. 12 Aug. 24
Tartar. Aug. 10 Aug. 13 Aug. 15 Aug. 17 Aug. 20 Sept. 3
"■ n _c r ,n.. t i i \ ..... on i .in Qi\ C.. O IA.
MILES
Shanghai to Hong Kong.... 810
Hong Kong to C010mb0.... 3,096
Vancouver to Honolulu 2,435
Honolulu to Suva, Fiji 2,780
Suva to Brisbane, Qd 1,540
Liverpool to Quebec 2,661
Liverpool to Montreal 2,833
Liverpool to St. John, N.B. 2,721
Liverpool to Halifax 2,342
Liverpool to Boston 2,997
Liverpool to New York.... 3,130
Southampton to New York.. 3,101
Quebec to Montreal 172
St. John to Montreal 481
Halifax to Montreal 756
VARIATIONS ON EXTRA PAYMENT
The following variations in route (in either direction —unless otherwise
stated) will be allowed on payment of the additional amounts herein
shown at time of purchase of tickets or on application to agent of the
C. P. Ry. at London, Eng., New York, Montreal, Vancouver, Hong Kong
or Sydney, or agent of the Steamship Co. at London, Colombo, Hong Kong
or Sydney, when variation is arranged:
1. From Atlantic port of landing to Vancouver, via direct rail lines to
Chicago, St. Paul and Moose Jaw (Soo-Pacific Route), £2.0.0, or $lO.OO gold.
2. From Atlantic port of landing to Vancouver, via direct rail lines to
Chicago, St. Paul and Winnipeg, £3.0.0, or $15.00 gold.
3. From Atlantic port of landing to Vancouver, via direct lines to
North Bay, Sault Ste. Marie, St. Paul and Winnipeg, £1.0.0, or $5.00 gold.
Note.—lf passenger provides his own passage between Atlantic port o> lauding and
Vancouver or Victoria, an allowance ot £lO 65., or $50.00 will be made.
It passenger provide» his own transatlantic passage, an allowance oi £lO 65., or $50.00 will
be made.
If passenger provides his own transatlantic passage and also passage between Atlantic
port of landing and Vancouver or Victoria, an allowance of £l5 Bs, 3d., or $75.00 will be made.
4. Toronto to Montreal, via St. Lawrence River and Rapids (meals and
berths extra), £1 135., or $B.OO.
5. From Hong Kong or Sydney by North-German (Norddeutscher) Lloyd
Steamships to Aden, thence Deutsche Ost Africa Linie (German East
Africa Line) to Tanga, Dar-es-Salaam, Zanzibar, Mozambique (or via Mom-
bassa, Kilwa, Lindi, Mikindani and Ibo to Mozambique), Beira, Delagoa
Bay, Duroan, East London, Port Elizabeth, Cape Town, Las Palmas, Lisbon
and Flushing to London, £3O, or $146.00 gold.
6. Passengers by the P. & O. from Sydney or Hong Kong to London, can
proceed via India on payment of an additional sum of £5 ($24.30 gold),
for which they will be furnished with one passage from Colombo to
Bombay and thence to Aden, or if there is room in P. & O. steamer leav-
ing at a suitable date, by P. & O, Steamer from Colombo to Calcutta
and from Bombay to Aden, but will have to pay their own railway fare
across India from Calcutta to Bombay, if they take that route. The
P. & 0. Co. do not guarantee connection between their various India,
China and Australia steamers at Colombo.
7. Passengers by P. & O. from London to Hong Kong or Sydney can pro-
ceed via India on payment of an additional sum of £5 ($24.30 gold), for
which they will be carried by steamer from Aden to Bombay and from
Bombay to Hong Kong or Sydney, if there is room in P. & O. steamer
leaving at a suitable date, but will have to pay their detention expenses
and rail fare in India, Bombay to Calcutta, and local steamer fare,
Calcutta to Colombo, if they take that route.
8. Passengers by the P. & O. may, on payment of the following amounts
in addition to the £5 ($24.30 gold) called for in paragraphs 6
and 7, at the time of purchasing around the world tickets, have them
made to include overland rail passage across India, viz., £6 ($29.20 gold)
between Calcutta and Bombay, via Allahabad and Jubbulpore, or £9.55. ($45
gold) between Calcutta and Bombay via North-West Provinces through
Benares, Lucknow, Cawnpore, Agra, Delhi, Jeypore and Ahmedabad.
9. Passengers by Messageries M ritimes between Hong Kong and
London, will be carried via Bombay between Aden and Colombo on pay-
ment of an additional sum of £5 ($24.30 gold), but if they travel by rail
across India and by local steamer between Calcutta and Colombo, will
require to pay their rail fare in India and the local steamer fare
between Calcutta and Colombo, as well as the additional £5 ($24.30 gold).
Passengers by essageries Maritimes between Sydney and London will be
carried via Bombay between Aden and Colombo without extra charge as the
Australian steamship* of this line run via Bombay.
10. From Port Said to Marseilles via Jaffa. Beyrout, Smyrna, Con-
stantinople, Piraeus (Athens) and Naples, instead of direct when through
tickets read via Messageries Maritimes, £9, or $43.80 gold.
11. From Port Said to Marseilles via Bevront, Syrian ports, Hhod-s or Vathy, Smyrna.
Constantinople, Piraeus (Athens) and Napes, instead of direct, when through tickets read
via Messageries Maritimes. £l4, or $68.15 gold.
12. From Hong Kong to Manila. Philippines, and return, £7 3s Iod. or $35.00 goitl.
13. From Yokohama, Kobe or Nagasaki to Sydney instead of Hong Kong to Sydney, by
Australian Steamship on Routes 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17 and 19 £4 10s, sd. or $21.85 gold .
14. From Hong Kong to London, etc, by China-Manila S.S. Co, to Manila, thence North-
German Lloyd S.S. Line by way of Singapore, Penang, Colombo, Aden, Suez, Port Said,
Naples, Genoa, Southampton and rail, instead via North-German Lloyd S.S. Line direct, £4 IDs.
or $22.00 (goldi.
15. From Brisbane by rail to Sydney, £2 13s, or $12.90 gold; from Sydney by rail to Melbourne,
£2 145., or $13.15 gold :to Adelaide £S 18s., or $19.00 gold. These rates can be obtained only
on presentation at railway ticket office of certificate from purser of steamship.
16. From Sydney to Auckland, N.Z.. and return, £lO 15s, or $52.35 gold.
17. From Sydney to Suva, Fiji via Auckland, instead of direct, £2 145., or $13.15 gold,
18. From Sydney to Suva. Fiji, via Auckland aud Wellington, instead of direct. £4 10s., or
* 21 19? From Brindisi to London, by Peninsular & Oriental overland express (including sleeping
car on rail journey), £lO 10s., or $51.10 gold, for passengers by route 1; and £9 10s , or £46.25
gold for passengeis by routes 4 and 10.
BAGGAGE
The Canadian Pacific Railway Company will, on its railway and steam-
ship lines, allow 350 pounds of baggage free for each adult ticket, pro-
portionately for half and quarter tares.
The same allowance will be made on Canadian-Australian, Shaw
Savill & Albion and New Zealand Slapping Co.’s Steamships.
The Peninsular & Oriental S. N. Co., and the Messageries Maritimes
(French Mail Line) allow 336 pounds free for each adult passenger.
The North-German Lloyd Steamship Company between Southampton and
Sydney, Hong Kong or Shanghai, and the Orient, Aberdeen and Lund’s
Blue Anchor Lines will allow 40 cubic feet measurement.
The Transatlantic S. S. Lines will allow 20 cubic feet measurement.
All in excess of these weights will be charged for at regular rates.
The free baggage allowance on the English and Indian railways is
only 112 pounds, and on the French railways 60 pounds ; across European
continent, Brindisi to London by Peninsular & Oriental express, 66 pounds
per adult.
Baggage for steamship cabins should not exceed 3 feet in length, 1
foot 9 inches in width, and 1 foot 3 inches in depth.
All baggage should be marked with owner’s name and address in paint.
All baggage is entirely at owner’s risk unless insured.
Brisbane to Sydney 510
Sydney to Colombo 5,556
Sydney to Hong Kong, via
Empress of India... Aug. 24 Aug. 2 5 Aug. 29 Aug 30 Sopt. 2 Sept, 14
ill Jii 1-1.1 wI k null.. . . .I.n^ v > . a. ' t ~• .
Empress of Japan . Sept. 21 ept. 23 Sept. 26|Sept. 27 Sept. 30 Get. 12
Athenian Oct. 12 Oct. 15 Oct. l 7 oct. 19 Oct. 22 Nov. 5
Torres Straits 4,900
Colombo to Calcutta 1,260
Colombo to Bombay 875
Empress of China... Oct. 19 Oct. 21 Oct. 24 Oct. 25 Oct. 28 Nov. 9
Tartar Nov. 2 Nov. 5 Nov 71.\0v. 9 Nov- 12 Nov. 26
Boston to Montreal 341
Colombo to Port Said 3,488
Bombay to Port Said 3,059
Port Said to Brindisi 930
Port Said to London, sea
route 3,225
New York to Montreal.... 384
New York to Toronto 558
Montreal to Toronto 338
Toronto to Owen Sound.... 122
Owen Sound to Fort William. 554
Montreal to Vancouver 2,902
Toronto to Vancouver, via rail 2,760
Vancouver to Yokohama.... 4,283
Yokohama to Shanghai, via
Inland Sea 1,178
CANADIAN-AUSTRALIAN STEAMSHIP LINE
ROUTE 4—£130, OB $632.70 GOLD
Railway, London to Liverpool or Southampton.
* Choice of Transatlantic Steamship Lines Liverpool or Southampton
to Quebec, Montreal, St. John, N. 8., Halifax, Boston or New York.
Canadian Pacific Railway direct route from Quebec, Montreal, St.
John, N. 8., or Halifax, or direct rail lines from Boston or New York iu
Muntreul, thence Canadian Pacific Railway to Vancouver.
Canadian-Australian Royal Mail Steamship Line, Vancouver to Hono-
lulu, H. 1., Suva, Fiji, Brisbane and Sydney, Australia.
Peninsular & Oriental Steam Navigation Company’s Steamship Line,
Sydney to Melbourne, Adelaide, Fremantle, Colombo, Aden, Ismailia, Port
Said, Brindisi, Maita (or Port Said and Marseilles), Gibraltar, Plymouth
and London.
SOUTH BOU N D
Mono- „ „ Union S.S. Co. Of
STEAM- vau ' lulu, Brisbane Sydney N.Z. Steamship
SHIPS C ° UVCr H .j’ con’ect’g at Suva
Leave Leave Leave Arrive Arrive L-ave Arrive
1904 1904 1904 1904 1904 1904 1904 1904
Port Said to London, via
Brindisi 3,570
Plymouth to Hobart, via
Cape of Good Hope 11,630
Wellington to Plymouth, via
Cape Horn 11,830
Manuka. .June 24 July 2 July 12July 17 July 18July 19july 22 July 27
Aorangi. . July 22 July 30 Aug. 9 Aug. 11 Aug. 15 Aug. 16 Aug. 19 Aug. 24
Mlowera.. Aug. 19 Aug. 27 Sept. 6 Sept. 11 Sept. 12 Sept. 13 Sept. 16 Sent. 21
Manuka... Sept. 16 Sept. 24 Oct. 4 Oct. 9 Oct. 10 Oct. 11 Oct. 14 Oct. 39
Aorangi Joct. 14 Oct. 22'Nov. INov. 6 Nov. 7 Nov. 8 Nov. 11 Nov- 16
DISTANCES BY SEA ARE IN NAUTICAL MILES ; BY LAND IN STATUTE MILES.
CONDENSED TIME TABLES
The time by railway or steamship given herein is not guaranteed, as it
is subject to change. Steamships may leave ahead of time at inter-
mediate ports. It is given for information of passengers to assist them in
mapping out their trip. Close connections between trains and steamships,
or between steamships at ports of change, although they can generally be
depended on, are not guaranteed. For full and latest particulars the cur-
rent time tables and handbooks of information published by the different
companies are recommended.
THE CANADIAN PACIFIC RAILWAY COMPANY'S ROYAL MAIL
MEAMSHIP LINE 10 JAPAN AND CHiNA
Consists of the Steamships Empress of India, Empress of Japan and
Empress of China, each 485 feet in length and 6,000 tons gross register,
and the Tartar and Athenian. The Empresses have made some remarkable
records on the Transpacific Route, bringing Yokohama within twenty-one
days of London and fourteen days of New York and Boston. They are
fitted with twin-screws and have all the modern improvements and latest
appliances known to marine architects to insure speed, safety and comfort.
The hulls are of steel, with double bottoms extending the full length of
the vessel, and are divided into numerous watertight compartments, render-
ing them practically unsinkable. The engines (10,000 horse power) have
developed a speed of over nineteen knots per hour. The saloons, library
and staterooms are marvels of beauty and luxury. They are lighted
throughout by electricity, are thoroughly well ventilated, and for comfort
excel anything afloat. The Tartar and Athenian are respectively 4425 and
3882 tons gross register, and are well equipped steamships with excellent
passenger accommodation.
NORTHBOUND
ROUTE 5—£130, OR $632.70 GOLD
Same as Route 4 to Sydney, Australia.
North-German (Norddeutscher) Lloyd Steamship Company’s Line,
Sydney to Melbourne, Adelaide, Fremantle, Colombo, Aden, Suez, Port
Said, Naples, Genoa, Southampton, and rail to London.
ROUTE 6—£130, OR $632.70 GOLD
Same as Route 4 to Sydney, Australia.
Orient-Pacific Line Sydney to Melbourne, Adelaide, Fremantle, Colombo,
Suez, Ismailia, Port Said, Naples, Marseilles, Gibraltar, Plymouth and
London (Tilbury).
ROUTE 7-£l3O OR $632.70 GOLD
Same as Route 4 to Sydney, Australia.
Messageries Maritimes (French Mail Line) Sydney to Melbourne, Ade-
laide, Fremantle, Colombo, Aden, Suez, Port Said, Marseilles, Calais.
Dover (or Boulogne and Folkestone) and London.
ROUTE B—£lls OR $560.30 GOLD
Same as Route 4 to Sydney, Australia.
Aberdeen Line Steamships to Melbourne, fPort Natal,' Cape Town,
Teneriffe, Plymouth and London.
ROUTE 9—£115, OR $560.30 GOLD
Same as Route 4 to Sydney, Australia.
Lund’s Blue Anchor Line Steamships to Melbourne, fPort Natal, Cape
Town, Las Palmas and London. •
ROUTE 10—£157, OR $764 GOLD
Railway, London to Liverpool or Southampton.
* Choice of Transatlantic Steamship Lines, Liverpool or Southampton
to Quebec, Montreal, St. John, N. 8., Halifax, Boston or New York.
Canadian Pacific Railway direct route from Quebec, Montreal, St.
John, N. 8., or Halifax, or direct rail lines from New York or Boston to
Montreal, thence Canadian Pacific Railway to Vancouver.
Canadian Pacific Railway Company’s Royal Mail Steamship Line,
Vancouver to Yokohama, Kobe, Nagasaki, Shanghai and Hong Kong.
China Navigation Company’s, or Eastern & Australian Steamship Co.’s
or Nippon Yusen Kaisha Steamships. Hcng Kong to Sydney, Australia,
through Torres Straits.
Peninsular & Oriental Steam Navigation Company’s Steamship Line,
Sydney to Melbourne, Adelaide, Fremantle, Colombo, Aden, Ismailia, Pori
Said, Brindisi, Malta (or Port Said and Marseilles), Gibraltar, Plymouth
and London.
ROUTE 11-£157 OR $764 GOLD
Same as Route 10 to Sydney, Australia.
North-German (Norddeutscher) Lloyd Steamship Company’s Line,
Sydney to Melbourne, Adelaide, Fremantle, Colombo, Aden, Suez, Port
Said, Naples, Genoa, Southampton and rail to London.
ROUTE 12—£157 OR $764 GOLD
Same as Route 10 to Sydney, Australia.
Orient-Pacific Line to Melbourne, Adelaide, Fremantle, Colombo, Suez,
Ismailia, Port Said, Naples, Marseilles, Gibraltar, Plymouth and Londo*
(Tilbury).
*Bee note headed “ Transatlantic Steamships” page 12.
■(•Aberdeen and Lund's Steamships d . not call at Port Natal eastbound.
S Sydney Brisbane
C „ Hono- -.T- Union S.S. Co. of
S £ v . a ’' lulu. Y a " N.Z. Steamship
* IJI 11.1. couver con’ct’g at Suva
j Leave Arrive Leave Leave Leave Arrive Lea- p Arrive
1904 i 1904 1904 1904 1904 1904 19u4 1904
Manuka Aug. B|Aug. 10 Aug. 11 Aug. 16 Aug. 24 Sept. 1 Aug. 10 Aug. 14
Aorangi .. Sept. 5 Sept. 7 Sept. 8 Sept.l3 S‘*pt. 21 sept 29 >ept, 7 Sept. 11
6 Oct. *ll Oct. 19 Oct. 27 Oct. 5 Oct.
3Nov. BNov. 16 Nov. 24Nov. 2 Nov,
EUROPE
Mlowera.. Oct. 3}Oct. 5 Oct.
Moana— Oct. SljNov. 2 Nov.
Same as Route 5 to starting point.
ROUTE 21-£l4B OR $720.25 GOLD.
Same as Route 4 to Sydney, Australia.
North-German (Norddeutscher) Lloyd Steamship Company’s Line,
Sydney to Singapore via Brisbane, Townsville, German New Guinea,
Macassar and Batavia, and from Singapore to London via Penang,
Cplombo, Aden, Suez, Port Said, Naples, Genoa, Southampton, and rail.
, VARIATIONS WITHOUT CHARGE
The following variations in route in either direction will be allowed
without extra charge, provided application for same is made at time of
purchase of ticket or at the offices of the Canadian Pacific Railway at
London, Eng., Liverpool, Eng., New York, Montreal, Vancouver, Yokohama
or Hong Kong, at the office of the Canadian-Australian Royal Mail Line
in Sydney, at the office of the Peninsular & Oriental Steam Navigation
Company «r North-German (Norddeutscher) Lloyd Steamship Company or
the Messageries Maritiaies at London, Eng., Hong Kong or Sydney, or at
the offices of the Shaw, Savill & Albion Company (Limited), or New, Zea-
land Shipping Company (Limited) at London, Hobart or Wellington or at
the offices of the Orient-Pacific Line, or Aberdeen Line, or Lund’s Blue
Anchor Line, in London or Sydney.
1. From New York to Gibraltar, Genoa or Naples, via Ounard Line or
North-German Lloyd S. S. Co., or Hamburg-American Line; from Boston
to Gibraltar, Marseilles, Genoa or Naples via White Star Line; thence via
Peninsular <fe Oriental Steam Navigation Co.’s Line. Norfh-German
(Norddeutscher) Lloyd Steamship Co.’s Line or Messageries Maritimes.
2. From New York to Vancouver, via direct line to Niagara Falls,
Toronto and Fort William.
8. From Montreal to Vancouver, via Canadian Pacific Railway to
Toronto and Fort William.
Trains leave London for Liverpool, Southampton or Plymouth, and vice
versa, by the various railways almost hourly.
Transatlantic steamships leave Liverpool for Canadian, and Liverpool and
Southampton for United States ports, and vice versa, almost daily.
And about every four weeks thereattei.
PENINSULAR & ORIENTAL STEAM NAV. CO.
EASTBOUND
NORTH AMERICAN CONTINENT
TRAINS LEAVE
Leave London for Brindisi, Port Said, Aden and Bombay every Friday, usually calling
at Gibraltar and Marseilles, and for Colombo and Sydney, Aug, sth, 1904, and alternate Fri-
days, arriving Brindisi in 9 days, Port Said 12 days, Aden 17 days, Bombay 22 days, Colombo
23 days and Sydney 43 days. Overland Special, London to Brindisi, leaves Friday In week
following departure of steamers, overtaking them at Brindisi.
Leave Bombay for Colombo, Aug. 24th, 1904, and alternate Wednesdays.
Leave Colombo for Calcutta about Aug. 25th, 1904, and alternate Thursdays; for Singapore
and Hong Kong about Aug. 29th, 1904, and usually every alternate Monday, a few hours alter
arrival of the mail steamer from London.
Leave Colombo lor Sydney about Aug. 29th, 1904, and alternate Mondays, arriving Fre-
mantle in about 10 days, Adelaide 14 days, Melbourne 16 days, and Sydney about 19 days.
THE CANADIAN.AUSTRALIAN ROYAL MAIL STEAMSH P COMPANY’S LINE.
Consists at present of the steamships Moana (350 feet in length, 4000
tons gross register), Mlowera (360 feet in length and 3,500 tons gross
register), and the steamship Aorangi (389 feet in length and 4,250 tons
gross register), with a speed of seventeen knots. The steamships are fitted
with all the latest appliances for speed, safety and comfort. The state-
rooms are large and handsomely furnished.
New York for Montreal, and vice versa , mornings and evenings. Time about twelve hours.
New York for Toronto, via Niagara Falls, and vice versa , mornings and evenings. Time
about sixteen hours.
Halifax for Montreal, mornings; Montreal for Halifax, evenings. Time about twenty-five
hours.
Quebec for Montreal, mornings, noons and evenings ; eastbound mornings, afternoons and
evenings. Time about four and a half hours.
Montreal for Toronto, and vice versa, mornings and evenings. Time about nine hours.
Toronto for Owen Sound and Fort William via Lake Route in summer, three times a week,
as advertised in current time table ; eastuound from Fort William, ditto. Time about forty-six
hours.
Montreal to Winnipeg and Vancouver, mornings, and during summer evenings also
(double daily service ; eastbound from Vancouver about noon, except during summer, when
they leave mornings and evenings (double daily service). Time four and one-half days in
summer, five days in winter.
WESTBOUND
THE PENINSULAR ORIENTAL STEAMSHIPS
Leave Hong Kong for Singapore, Penang and Colombo, Aug. 27th, 1904, and every alternate
Saturday at 1.00 p.m., arriving Colombo in about 12 days-
Leave Sydney for Colombo, Aug. 20th, 1904, and every alternate Saturday, arriving in
about 19 days. Steamers usually leave Melbourne 3 days, Adelaide 5 days and Fremantle 9
days after leaving Sydney. „
Leave Colombo lor Bombay and Colombo for Aden (direct), Port Said, Brindisi and Lon-
don about 24 hours after arrival from Hong Kong (steamers from Australia run througn
direct to Aden, etc.), arriving Bombay in about 3 days, Aden vdavs, Port Said 12 da\s,
Brindisi 15 days: London overland from Brindisi 17 days, and via Gibraltar about 24 days.
Leave Calcutta Aug. 30th, 1904 and thereafter twice a month tor Colombo.
Leave Bombay for Aden, Port Said, Brindisi, Plymouth and London, every Saturday at
2.00 p.m., taking about one day lees for journey than from Colombo.
CHINA NAVIGATION CO., EASTERN &. AUSTRALIAN S.S. CO. AND
NIPPON YUSEN KAISHA.
Steamers leave Hong Kong for Sydney and Sydney for Hong Kong, about once every three
weeks, via Torres Straits, calling at Port Darwin, Thursday Island, Cooktown, Brisbane, etc.
Time, about 20 days. Steamers usually call at Manila also.
SHAW, SAVILL &. ALBION CO (limited)
Leave London for New Zealand Aug. 25th, 1904, and about every fourth Thursday thereafter
via Plymouth, arriving Teneriffe iu about 5 days, Capetown about 21 days, Hobart about 40
days, and New Zealand xbout 45 days from Ply outh. .
" Leave New Zealand for London Aug. 18th, 1904, and about every fourth Thursday there-
after, usually calling at Rio de Janeiro, Teneritfe and Plymouth, and arriving at London iu
about 42 days.
NEW ZEALAND SHIPPING CO. (Limited)
Leave London for New Zealand Aug. 11th, 19°4. and every fourth Thursday thereafter, and
Plymouth on Saturday following, arriving Teneritfe in about 5 days, Capetown about 21 days,
Hobart about 41 days and New Zealand about 46 days from Plymonth.
Leave New Zealand for London Aug. 4th, 1904, a->d every fourth Thursday thereafter
calling at Montevideo, Teneriffe, and Plymouth, and arriving at London in about 43 days.
Are also of modern type and are furnished and operated in the thoroughly
efficient manner well-known to Indian travellers.
TRANSATLANTIC STEAMSHIPS
Around-the-World passengers are entitled to transatlantic accommoda-
tion usually rated at from £lB to £2O between European ports and New
York, Boston, Halifax, St. John, N. 8., Quebec and Montreal, provided
berths at the rates named are vacant. If accommodation at such rates is
not available by any particular steamship, or if accommodation is desired
for which a higher rate is usually charged at that season of the year by the
Steamship Line, the additional charge will require to be paid by the
passenger.
CANADIAN PACIFIC RAILWAY COMPANY.
ATLANTIC STEAMSHIP LINES.
(Subject to Change without Notice.)
From Liverpool Steamship
Tuesday, July 12 Lake Erie
11 19 Lake Manitoba ......
“ Aug. 2 . Lake Champlain
11 u 16 Lake Erie
“ “ 93 Lake Manitoba
From Monthkal
Thursday, July 28....
“ Aug. 4 ...
“ “ 18....
4. From New York to Vancouver, in summer (May 15th to October 31st),
via direct line to Niagara Falls, Toronto and Owen Sound, thence O. P.
Lake Steamship Line to Fort William.
5. From Montreal to Vancouver, in summer, via O. P. Ry., Toronto,
Owen Sound, and C. P. Lake Steamship Line to Fort William.
6. From Montreal to Vancouver, in summer, via C. P. Ry., to Sault Ste.
Marie and C. P. Lake Steamship Line to Fort William.
7. From Montreal or Toronto to Vancouver, via North Bay, Sault Ste.
Marie, St. Paul, Minneapolis and Moose Jaw (Soo-Pacific Route).
8. From Montreal or Toronto to Vancouver, 15th May to 31st October,
Shaw, Savill & Albion Co. (Ltd.) New Zealand Shipping Co. -Ltd.) Orient-Pacific
Line, North German (Norddeutscher) Lloyd Steamship Company, Messageries
Maritimes (French Mail Link), Aberdeen Line and Lunds’ Blue anchor Line.
The fleets of these companies are composed of magnificent, full-powered steamships.
“ Sept. 1.
“ “ K
“ “ 23 Lake Manitoba
“ Sept. 6. Lake Champlain...
“ 2» Lake Erie ....
“ “ 27 Lake Manitoba....
“ “ 22 ....
“ Oct. 6
“ ' ‘ 13
THE CANADIAN PACIFIC RAILWAY
The longest continuous railway in the world under one management,
extending from the Atlantic to the Pacific, over 3000 miles of uninter-
rupted line. It is the most comfortable, interesting, shortest and cheapest
route across the western continent. Its sleeping and dining cars surpass
all others in elegance and convenience, and railway travel is made a
pleasure instead of, as heretofore, a weariness. The greatest natural
wonders on the continent are on the line of the Canadian Pacific Railway.
Steamships sail from Montreal at daybreak, passengers-embarking the even-
ing previous any time after 8 p.m.. and from Quebec about 3 p.m.. shortly
after the arrival of the OP R. andG.T.R. trains from the West, Passengers
*See note headed “ Transatlantic Steamships,” page
■(•Aberdeen and Lund’s Lines Steamships do not call Port Natal eastbound.
from the Lower Provinces make close connection with the steamships by the I.C,
R. train arriving at Quebec Thursday at 11.55 a.m.


