

THE ARGTfS MONDAY, DECEMBER 18, 1876
ARRIVAL OF THE S.S, KENT.
This new screw steamship, which arrived yesterday
from London, is the fourth built during the last few
years by Messrs. Money Wigram and Sons, of Black-
wall-yard, for the Melbourne trade, and she cannot
prove otherwise than a valuable acquisition to the
fleet, which comprises the Somersetshire, Northumber-
land, and Durham. Each succeeding steamer has shown
some improvement on its predecessor, in build or
machinery, or passenger accommodation, and the Kent
may be fairly said to combine the merits of the
three steamers just named. Although as near
<o the Durham in appearance as possible, the
Kent shows more style and finish, and the lower and
topmasts being in one makes her look very nice and
clean and trim aloft, and while the tonnage is nearly
the same, She has more beam, and a finer entrance
and run. Guided by experience in the building and
equipment of their previous steamers, the owners
have introduced improvements in their new vessel in
keeping with the ocean travelling requirements of the
present day, and the passengers, on arrival yes-
terday, were little less than enthusiastic in their
praise of the Kent, and the accommodation and
general arrangements for their comfort on board,
ihe Kent was commenced in December, 1875, from
the draughting of Mr. Clifford Wigram, one of the
owners, and was successfully launched in July of this
year. Her dimensions are as follow Length, 286 ft.
4in.; beam, 39ft 2in ; and depth of hold, 26ft. 4in.,
giving her a capacity of 2,304 tons. Tne promenade
on the poop deck is 114 ft. in length. The saloon is
large, and the cabins are roomy and well-ventilated,
and there is abundant evidence in the fitting up that
solid comfort has not been subordinated to superficial
adornment. After being launched the Kent was
towed to Deptford to receive her machinery. The
engines are the manufacture of Messrs. Humphreys
and Tennant, of Deptford, and are on the vertical
compound principle, the diameter of the cylinders
being S6im and 80in. respectively, and the length of
stroke 4ft. They are of 800 horse power nominal, but
capable of working up to 1,600-horse power, and in all
essentials they are a counterpart of those with which
the Durham is fitted, and which have already been
described. On the trial trip to the Nore and back
they worked beautifully, and on this her first run
out to Australia they have given the utmost satisfac-
tion. The consumption of coal on the voyage has
been on the average 18 tons and a half per day—
a very small amount considering the work done.
Mr. G. A Miles, who was formerly in the Northum-
berland, is chief in the engine-room of the new steamer,
and reports of the working of the machinery in terms
of very great admiration. The Kent has brought out
a full complement of passengers in all classes—saloon,
second, and steerage—and as an outcome of the feel-
ing entertained by them for the treatment they re-
ceived on board, they presented addresses to Captain
Gibbs and Mr. Miles, chief engineer, and also to Mr.
R. Ticehurst, chief officer. The address was presented
by Mr. J. G. Dougharty, and a purse of sovereigns for
the purchase of a piece of plate was also presented
by Dr. Caisns to Captain Gibbs, on behalf of the
saloon paisengers. The addresses will be found in
the shipping advertisement columns. Captain Gibbs,
who has been appointed to the Kent, was formerly in
the Yorkshire, and with him for officers be has Mr. B.
Ticehurst as chief, Mr. Brock second, Mr. Dyke third,
and Mr. Woodcock fourth. The duties of purser and
chief steward have devolved on Mr. Hill, formerly of
the True Briton, and it says something for his
tact and efficiency to have ministered so success-
fully to the creature comforts of such a large
number of people. The voyage of the Kent has been
essentially a steaming one, the winds having favoured
her very little throughout, and although it has been
accomplished in 51 days 17 hours from Plymouth to
Cape Otway, it is believed from the way she shaped
that she will yet do it in 48 days. The log contains
for the most part a record of light head winds, strong
head winds, and head gales, and when the winds did
prove fair, they also proved unsteady. Heavy wea-
ther was fallen in with on November 1, and again on
November 17, when the wind shifted in a sudden
and violent squall from S.S.E. to south. The
foresail was split, and the lower foretopsail
jackstay carried away during the squall. In crossing
the Southern Ocean the screw was dispensed with for
several days, and under canvas a speed of 250 knots
was obtained from moderate breezes. The Kent, after
filling up in London with a cargo consisting chiefly of
measurement goods, proceed* d to Plymouth, and took
her departure thence on October 26 at a quarter to 8
p.m., and pasted Eddystono at 10 pm. A very good
run was made to the equator, which was crossed
on November 9 in long. 16deg. 32min W., and the
meridian of the Cape of Good Hope was crossed on
November 24 in lat. 48deg. 7min. S. The longi-
tude of Cape Leuwin was crossed on the 11th
inst.. and the steamer at noon on Saturday last
was 126 miles from Cape Otway, which was passed
at 11 p.m. on the same day. The Kent has made
her maiden voyage thus far under favourable auspices,
and has been successful in accomplishing it in some-
thing like two dajs’ time less than the other steamers
of her fleet on their fimt voyage The early hour at
which the steamer Resolute left the bay > e-terday
morning to meet thf Kent precluded many people
from going down with her. Amongst those however,
who ventured we e Sir James and Luiy M Gulloch,
whowenttomeet Misslnglie.a niece of Lady M Oullocb
Mr A B Bose, senior immigration officer, was
also in attendance, and had the vessel cleared
before she was berthed alongside the pur. There
was the usual inspection of the ’tween deck accom-
modation. Dr. Lawrence, who had the physical well-
being of the passengers to look after, accompanied
Mr Bose during the inspection, and everything was
found to be clean and in exceedingly good order.
There was great cheering when the steamers met, and
a very warm welcome was accorded to Captain and
Mrs. Gibbs and the officers. The Kent will have quick
discharge with her Inward cargo, and will b 9 de-
spatched by the agents punctuailyJiod»te^^^^ MMM
