

EMIGRANT TRACTS.—No. XVII.
EMIGRANT MANUALS.
No. IV.
Arrival in the Colony
BY
WILLIAM H. G. KINGSTON, ESQ.,
AUTHOR OF HOW TO EMIGRATE.”
Published under the Direction of
The Committee of General Literature and Education,
Appointed by the Society for Promoting
Christian Knowledge .
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR THE
SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN
KNOWLEDGE;
SOLD AT THE DEPOSITORY,
GREAT QUEEN STREET, LINCOLN’S INN FIELDS;
4, ROYAL EXCHANGE;
AND 16, HANOVER STREET, HANOVER SQUARE;
AND BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.
1851.
Price Fourpence.


HOBART TOWN, VAN DIEMEN’S LAND.


EMIGRANT TRACTS.—No. XVII.
EMIGRANT MANUALS.
No. IV.
Arrival in the colony;
B If
WILLIAM H. G. KINGSTON, ESQ.,
AUTHOR OF “HOW TO EMIGRATE.”
PUBLISHED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF
THE COMMITTEE OF GENERAL LITERATURE AND EDUCATION,
Appointed by the society for promoting
CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE.
LON DON:
PRINTED FOR THE
SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE
SOLD AT THE DEPOSITORY,
GREAT QUEEN STREET, LINCOLN’S INN FIELDS
NO. 4, ROYAL EXCHANGE;
10, HANOVER STREET, HANOVER SQUARE;
AND BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.
1851.


London:
Printed by James Tmscott, Nelson Square,


ARRIYAL IN THE COLONY.
The voyage is drawing to a termination; the
land of your adoption is in sight, and all are
eager to tread its shores. Now is about to
occui the most important epoch of your
lives—the commencement of a new career;
the stern work of life is to begin again; the
active duties from which you have for a time
been relieved. For the last few months you
have been under strict discipline ; you have
had few or no temptations, perhaps, to your
besetting sins; you have had your duties
marked out for you, and you had no inclina-
tion to disobey them. Now you are to be
your own master; you will be left to your
own devices to act for yourself. Your fate
will be much in your own hands; if you
persevere steadily in well-doing, resist tempt-
ation which may on all sides assail you, and
a 3


are industrious and frugal, you may rest
assured of founding a happy home for your-
self and your descendants in the land before
your sight. Now is the time, almost more
than any other, for reflection —for grateful
thanksgiving to the merciful God who has
conducted you across the deep waters to the
land of promise, and also for earnest prayers
to Him for further protection and guidance
in the path which is set before you. Pray to
God for strength, then gird up your loins,
brace your arms, and with a cheerful confident
heart be prepared like a man to encounter
whatever may occur.
To young women I also address myself.
You will have temptations and troubles to
encounter, very great and sad perhaps, to
which if you yield they may prove your utter
ruin and destruction. You, therefore, have
need of prayer, of courage, and reflection.
Who, indeed, has not; men and women, old
and young, on all occasions of life ? Rarely,
unhappily, do we think of this, but I trust
that you will not have gone down in a ship
on the great waters without having your
minds more especially awakened to the great-
ness and goodness of God, and without feeling


your own helplessness, and the urgent neces-
sity of reliance on Him. If there is a chaplain
or a religious teacher on board, he will
doubtlessly perform divine service, and pub-
licly offer up thanks for your safe arrival.
Do not fail to join, not only in word, but in
heart and feeling. Now is the time, if you
have had any quarrel with any of your fellow
passengers, to make it up; part in friendship
and good will with all; you are about to be
scattered over the colony, perhaps some even
may never meet again. I am, however, far
from saying, that should you have observed
any bad character on board—a person of
whom you cannot approve, that you are to
associate with him; on the contrary, carefully
avoid him, pray for him, but beware of imi-
tating his faults.
You will have learned much, I hope, from
books, and also to manufacture a number of
useful things. Do not forget your learning,
and keep the things you have made as relics
of your voyage, and to aid in making your
cottages neat and pretty. At last the anchor
is dropped, the voyage is ended, and you find
that you have arrived at a place as much
English in every respect, except, perhaps, in


scenery, as the one you have left; while the
houses, the churches, the carts and carriages,
remind you of England. In New Zealand
or the Cape, a few natives may appear in the
boats, but at all events they will speak En-
glish, and most of the people will be English
also. No one is allowed to visit nor to leave
the ship till the Government Emigration
officer has come on board and inspected her
and the passengers. His duty is to make a
report to the Governor of the colony as to
the condition of the ship, her height between
decks, her state of cleanliness, and general
fitness for carrying passengers, as also as to the
moral and physical condition of the emigrants.
He then goes among them, and questions
them as to the treatment they have received
from the officers during the voyage, and
whether they have found the food good and
abundant. He particularly presses them, if
they have any complaints, to make them
without fear at once, and assures them that
they will receive ample justice. It is a duty
emigrants owe to those who may follow them,
not to conceal any misbehaviour of the
master, surgeon, or other officers; at the
same time that it is their duty to those officers


who have treated them considerately and
well, to show their gratitude by presenting
them with a written testimonial of good con-
duct. When complaints are made, and found
to be from sufficient cause, those who have
been guilty have been severely punished, and
not again employed by the Government com-
missioners : surgeons, in some cases, have
been deprived of their salaries; the master
and his mates have been fined or imprisoned;
and the owners, whose duty it was to select
proper officers, have not received payment for
the passage of the emigrants. One shipping
house was deprived in this way of £SOO, and
most justly so, on account of the mis-
behaviour of its officers.
If no complaints are preferred, the officer
simply draws up his report on the condition
of the ship and passengers, and afterwards
allows visitors to come on board. Ihe first
person who presents himself is the emigrants
chaplain; he will, if the ship has no chap-
lain belonging to her, call all the passengers
together, and entreat them to offer up their
thanksgivings to Heaven for their safe arrival,
and he will then exhort them as to their con-
duct in the land to which they have come. His


next duty is to take a list of all the passengers
of the Church of England, and of all wishing
to be in communion with that church, and
will receive the letters recommendatory from
their foimer pastors to the bishop and clergy
of the colony. He not only prays with them
and preaches to them, but he gives them
every advice in his power, and all the in-
formation they can require about the colony;
such as where they can best procure lodgings,
the amount of wages given, where they are
most likely to find work, how to travel up the
country, and, indeed, will answer any ques-
tions they may ask. He will also forward
their letters recommendatory to the clergymen
of the districts to which they purpose to pro-
ceed ; he informs them where divine service
is performed on shore, and invites them all to
attend; he will also answer any question as
to the respectability of persons wishing to
engage their services, especially those of the
single women; indeed, he will caution them
against any he knows to be improper cha-
racters.
As soon as visitors are allowed to come
on board, the ship is generally crowded with
settlers wishing to engage servants. The


emigration officer stands by to see that
contracts are properly drawn up, and has
directions to dissuade any single women
from engaging in the service of persons of
known bad character. Unhappily, the worst
vices of the old country have been carried to
our colonies, and much caution is necessary.
In the neighbourhood of most ports there is
a sort of hospital or refuge, to which the
single women at once proceed, and are placed
under the superintendence of an experienced
matron j it is then notified in the public
papers that so many have arrived, and that
settlers requiring female servants may apply
between certain hours. The matron has the
power of refusing to admit any objectionable
persons, and she superintends all engage-
ments. The married people and single men
may sleep on board the ship for a fortnight
after arrival, and receive full rations, after
that time those on board Government ships
who are not engaged, are allowed to remain
in a sort of barrack on diminished rations for
another fortnight; and, in some cases, if still
unsettled at the end of that time, they are
obliged to labour on some public works : but
I may say that they never, or at all events


very rarely, unless they hold out for absurdly
high wages, remain so long without an
engagement.
In Adelaide, and some of the other capitals
of the Australian colonies, a Labour Office has
been established, where the settlers who want
servants enter a statement of the description
of servant they require, the duties expected
to be performed, and the wages to be given;
also are here entered the names, characters,
and qualifications of all those who are seeking-
employment.
The first thing, therefore, that on landing
an emigrant will do, is to go to the Labour
Office, and see if there are any places likely to
suit him, and if not he will enter his own
name and qualifications, and the wages he
will take. Very likely in and about the port
at which he has landed there will be no set-
tlers requiring servants, but he is very certain
to find some up the country, and he will
therefore do wisely to make inquiries of the
emigration officer or chaplain where he is
most likely to find employment, and at once
to shoulder his knapsack and to march boldly
up into the country. It is the most foolish
and dangerous thing an emigrant can do, to


hang about a capital, either idle, or picking
up odd jobs, as some are fond of doing.
They are just enabled to live, perhaps, but
they are all the time taking no steps to esta-
blish themselves, and improve their condition
in life. The capitals, also, from imperfect
drainage, are the least healthy places in the
whole colony; so that unaccustomed to the
climate as he is, he is very likely to be at-
tacked with sickness, and then the doctor’s
bill will quickly run away with all his wages.
I say on no account remain in the capital.
The most wealthy and respectable settlers
are to be found up the country, who will not
only give better wages, but will treat their
servants better. The country is more healthy
than the town, food is.cheaper, and there are
fewer temptations to spend money than in
the town.
It is a general complaint of the older co-
lonists, that the greater number of emigrants,
especially those who have in England lived in
towns, are afraid to venture up into the bush,
and thei’efore neither advantage themselves nor
the colony. Now, I hope those who read
this little book will be wiser, and will set off
boldly into the interior, even if it were to the
B


distance of three or four hundred miles away
from the coast.
A very energetic lady, residing in New
South Wales, who saw the great importance
of providing situations for new comers, espe-
cially for young women, used to collect a
number together, and carry them with her up
the country, dropping them at the different
farms where servants were required. In this
way she accomplished very much good, and
many a bachelor settler who could not leave
his farm or cattle station to go into Sydney
to look for a wife, was very glad to receive
one recommended by her. Sometimes she
used to receive commissions to bring up wives,
and if the parties met, and liked each other,
she gladly aided their union. I can scarcely
urge too strongly the importance of going up
the country. It is generally the custom for
settlers who want servants to send a waggon
or a dray to the port to carry up the families
and luggage of those they engage, and thus
without any trouble or expense the emigrant
will be conveyed to the spot where his work
is to commence. These drays are drawn
generally by eight bullocks, and are well
suited to the rough roads or tracks into the


interior. The best time to arrive in the
Southern Colonies, to which my present ob-
servations refer, is about December or
January, the end of the summer, when the
sheep owners send down their drays to the
ports laden with wool, and are thus able to
carry the new comers back in them. If you
have a family, and are obliged to go into
lodgings while looking out for employment,
take care that the house is well drained, and
in a healthy situation. You will probably
be able to procure one in the outskirts of the
town at from 65. to 85. per week. House
rent is of course dear, but if you go into the
country, a rough hut of logs, which you can
build yourself, will answer every purpose of
comfort.
Let me particularly advise no man, even if
he has a little capital, to set up for himself
till he has served a master for a year or more,
and made himself thoroughly acquainted with
the ways of the country. His capital can be
in the mean time left at interest with proper
security, while he is gaining wages to add to
it, and knowledge to employ it properly. If
two men arrived, one with £SO. and the other
with nothing, and the one with £SO. set
b 2


up for himself, and the other took service,
and at the end of a year commenced farming,
I should say that the latter at the termination
of another year would be the richer man of
the two.
The following paragraph out of a letter
from the wife of an emigrant whom I know,
shews what advice practical people —those
who are settled in the colony, would give.
“ The man and his wife that we succeeded
had £SB. per annum, but they had been
here five years, and have now set up for
themselves. We were very well content to
get £4O. for it was a home for us, and at the
end of the time we shall have had six months’
experience, and we shall be £2O. in pocket.
They had only engaged for six months.
An acquaintance of mine, an old Western
Australian colonist, thus writes : “ Plenty of
boats will be alongside the ship with settlers,
who come for the purpose of hiring servants.
In fact, the danger to the labouring man is,
that too much attention will be shewn him
among so many applicants for his assistance,
that he will be apt to overrate his services.
I recommend him to engage himself to the
first respectable man who applies to him, at


fair and moderate wages, till he has been
in the colony twelve months, and is better
acquainted with colonial pursuits. Above
all things, try and let your engagements be
in the country away from the towns ; you are
then sure to save nearly all your wages, and
in a few years you will, if sober and indus-
trious, be able to accomplish that for which
I gave you credit for leaving England —the
possession of a freehold farm and stock to
leave to your children. Those who do not
do this, must love the bottle better than the
plough and the spade. To the industrious
labourer every chance will be given by his
employer, who will invest his wages for him
in the savings’ bank if he wishes it, or sell
him land or stock on reasonable terms; and
till he feels himself strong enough to go en-
tirely on his own land, employ him a part of
the week, and the rest he can work on his own
property. My advice, is then, on landing,
push into the country without a moment’s
delay; you will find settlers’ teams which will
take your wife and children and luggage for
nothing. When there, turn shepherd, stock-
man, ploughman, bullock driver, or split-
fencing. If you cannot work at any of those
b 3


employments, do any thing on a farm to make
yourself useful, till you have learnt how.
You will find plenty of persons willing to
instruct you, and you can then command the
highest wages in the colony, and never mind
what your previous occupation has been.
“ All that I have here stated has been done
by many persons I know well in the colony,
who when they landed were indentured ser-
vants, and now, and for some years past, have
been respectable settlers, owners of land and
stock.” This advice from an old experienced
colonist is so sound, and applicable equally to
all the Australian colonies, that I have given
it in his own words.
Another letter from South Australia says,
“In the town many things are dear. All sorts
of household furniture, clothing, wood, water,
and house-rent, are very dear; but we do
not feel any of those expenses living in the
country, about fourteen miles from the town.”
The following is a paragraph from a letter
sent to me from Samuel Davenport, Esq., one
of the oldest and most influential settlers in
South Australia. “ This colony is essentially
the country of the poor man ; his poverty
falls from him when he reaches these shores ;


and there are substantial reasons for this in
the general and steady prosperity of the
classes immediately above him, and growing
out of him. The fine weather of the entire
year never impedes 1 service.’ ‘ Service’
ever in demand, is therefore well paid ; and
so well paid, as ever to be producing a capital
for the servant. Capital thus obtained is in
the hands of working men, who appreciating
the transition to property made by themselves ,
value it; and remaining still working men,
though no longer servants, their talent not
laid up in a napkin, is at once turned by
themselves to good account in farming,
carting, the exercise of various trades, See.;
and this self-obtained mastership, held with
an honourable pride, they are steady to
maintain.”
The following is out of a letter from the
brother of a servant in my family who had
not been heard of for some years. “ Come
men, women, and children, for you can do
well here. I am getting good wages; my
wages is £l. per week, with ooard and
lodging; good farming men can get from
12s. to 15s. per week, with board and lodging;
then all you that are farming men, young and


old come, for we have plenty here to eat and
drink, and plenty of money. Next year Ido
intend, if please God to spare my life, to go
on my own land.”
I might quote numberless paragraphs from
letters I have received from the colonies, all
giving the same advice, namely —go up the
country at once; put all foolish nonsense
about savages and wild beasts out of your
head ; engage as a servant to an old settler,
and work till you have gained sufficient
knowledge, and laid by wages to enable you,
with a tolerable chance of success, to go on
your own land.
A friend of mine who has visited Australia,
kindly wrote for me the following advice,
which is applicable to intended settlers of all
degrees, though intended more especially for
those with some capital.
“ Remember, that unless you have made
up your mind to adopt the colony as your
permanent home, you had better at once go
back to England, Think not that you can
be a sojourner in the land; that you can in a
few years realize a fortune and carry it with
you to England. Thousands have been
ruined by such ideas; they have neglected


that which would have given them small and
gradual profit, in searching for a royal road
to wealth, and are now T , after having expended
their capital, acting as servants to those who
perhaps started with no other capital than
strong arms, and a prudent head.
“ You are a capitalist —that is, you have at
least £3OOO. You may be a sheep farmer
then. However, this is the smallest sum
with which a stranger to the country should
commence sheep farming. The necessary
expenses of a small flock bear a much larger
proportion to the gross profits than where the
flock is large. You will not therefore make
much profit the first two or three years.
However, if you are willing to rough it at
first, and live industriously and frugally, you
may commence wdth that capital, and in a
short time your flocks and profits will both
increase.
“ At the present price of land, £l. per acre,
purchasing land for sheep-runs is out of the
question. Moreover, within the counties,
where alone land is sold by the Government,
all the valuable land is already occupied.
You must, therefore, go beyond the boun-
daries, and become what is called a squattei.


As the flocks and herds of the settlers increase,
fresh lands are constantly occupied, and new
stations and runs formed ; but no new emi-
grant, or, as he is called in colonial lan-
guage, new chum, should think of going to
the extreme bounds of the settled districts,
or to form new stations.
“ By law, all the land beyond the boundaries
of the counties is considered absolutely the
property of the Crown, and may be let for a
term of fourteen years for a small rent to in-
dividuals, who acquire no further property in
the land thus leased to them, than the right
to use it for grazing during the term they
occupy it, and upon their relinquishing it
the land reverts to the Crown, who may lease
it to another. Such is the law; but custom,
often, as in this case, more powerful than
law, has established a certain right of transfer
in the lessee. On the formation of a sheep
station, houses for the owner and his men,
stores, and wool sheds must be built; hurdles
for penning the sheep at night, and rails to en-
close a paddock for the horses must be made.
Thus, no sheep station is formed without
considerable outlay ; and therefore, when a
person wishes to give up a station, he sells


his sheep and ‘ the right to the run’ on which
they are. This phrase is well understood,
and the purchaser, though he does not di-
rectly give anything for the right to the lun
and the buildings upon it, yet in reality pays
for them by giving more per head for the
sheep; and this is sufficiently recognized by
the Government, who never refuse to grant a
lease to the purchasers upon the ordinary
terms, or to allow the lease already granted
to be transferred.
“On your first arrival, do not be in a
hurry to purchase. You will probably hear
of many most eligible investments; stations
which just suit your means, and situated in
the best part of the colony; or if costing
more than you possess, part of the purchase
money may be left on mortgage at <£.lo, 01
£B, per cent. Listen to no such tempting
offers; incur no debt; remember the old
adage, ‘ out of debt, out of danger.’ You do
not expect or wish to get rapidly rich; in-
dependence is your object. Place, theiefore,
your money in one of the banks; and if you
have a family, seek out some quiet lodging in
the neighbourhood of the capital. Such aie
to be found. Hotels and lodging houses are


very dear; in fact, as expensive as in London.
Having done this, make enquiries as to what
runs are to be disposed of. Newspapers are
d.idy published which contain advertisements
offering every thing to the public, from a run
capable of maintaining 50,000 sheep down to
a bark hut.
Attend the auctions which are daily and
hourly taking place; listen to the talk in the
coffee rooms, which is of ‘ new countries/
sheep, bullocks, &c.; make enquiries of those
to whom you have letters of introduction.
On all occasions keep your ears open and
your mouth shut ; hearken attentively to all
advice; buy nothing. By such means you
may form an opinion as to where you may
wish to settle. Good sheep runs are to be
obtained in all directions. Much depends
upon fancy, still more upon particular cir-
cumstances, which are always varying. No
geneial advice written now, can assist a per-
son some months or years hence.
“ Having by such means decided upon the
country which you may think most desirable,
and perhaps heard of a run which may suit
you, buy a good, useful horse, a short leg'ged,
clean-shouldered animal, one which has been


accustomed to the bush, as the country is
called, cares not for the luxury of hay and
corn and grooming, has lived always on the
native grasses, and will not roam far at night.
See that he has good sound legs and feet, and
has been well shod; and above all, see that
he has not a sore back, or the marks of
ever having had one; buy a bridle, a pair
of hobbles, such as you see on a tinker’s
donkey in an English lane, and perhaps a
tether rope—both the latter are to be used
when needful, as a precaution against his
straying at night. I will presume that you
are furnished with an English saddle, —not a
cheap one made by advertising tradesmen,
but one manufactured by one of the most ex-
pensive sadlers in the west end of London;
the tree of it of an average size, but more
stuffed than is usual in England. After you
have been in the colony a few months, and
have ridden some few hundred miles, you will
know that a pound or two extra invested in
pig-skin has saved both your’s and your
horse’s. Then, having provided a means of
conveyance, buy a good warm blanket, rolling
up in it a change of linen, a square of soap,
a tooth brush, and a pocket comb. A bush-
c


man will consider you equipped for a journey
of 1000 miles. If you fix upon the country
to the west, or south-west of Sydney, you
will start on horseback from Sydney ; if upon
the country which lies upon the north and
north-west, you will take a place for yourself
and horse by the steam-boat, either to Mait-
land or Port Macquarie, or Moreton Bay,
according as it may be the best part for your
destination. Grudge not the passage money
for your horse. You have both a better
choice of horses, and they are far cheaper at
Sydney than elsewhere. When a new chum
is in want of a horse up the country, he pays
dear for being allowed to buy one.
“ Having reached the place from whence
your journey on horseback commences, strap
your blanket in front of your saddle, and
start with a bold heart and a cheerful spirit
to make personal observations on the coun-
try you propose to fix in. Take only a
few pounds for your first day or two’s
journey.
“ In the country, an order or cheque upon
a banker or agent in Sydney, for all sums, as
low even as a few shillings, passes current.
For the first few days you will find regular


inns, at intervals of about twenty-five or
thirty miles, a fair day’s journey, where there
is good accommodation for man and beast.
You will also probably meet with some other
person travelling the same road, whose society
will be agreeable to you, and his experience
useful. Should you, however, not meet with
a companion and guide, you will have no
difficulty in finding your way; the road,
though not macadamized, and marked with
mile-posts and finger-posts, is plain and easy,
from the numerous tracks of drays conveying
wool from the interior.
“ After some time, the inns, however, cease;
you must then rely upon hospitality or your
own resources. Each settler, or each shep-
herd at whose hut you arrive, will receive you
with the frankest and most open-hearted
hospitality. You will no longer, perhaps, get
corn for your horse, or wine and beer for
yourself, but all it contains will be at your
service in the freest manner; and after a hot
ride of eight or ten hours you will soon find
that mutton chops, damper and tea, are no
contemptible fare. On the road take every
opportunity of learning something about
sheep farming, and particularly about that
c 2


district and that run on which you con-
template settling.
“ The squatters are frank and free in their
conversation; and every run, its qualities
and capabilities, and the character of the
different flecks, are well known to all the old
settlers. You will thus learn whether the
district in question has many good runs in
it, —whether the flocks offered you have been
clean, that is, free from scab or catarrh—and
whether the run has always been well watered,
or whether, in the droughts which occa-
sionally occur, the water-holes have failed.
Learn, also, the names of the different species
of trees, and remark their peculiarities; there
is no surer criterion of the nature of the soil
than the trees it produces. ‘ Apple tree flats
and stringy bark ranges/ i.e. a country where
a species of Eucalyptus called the apple tree,
from its similarity to the old trees of that
kind in Worcestershire and Herefordshire,
abounds on the flats; and another species,
called the stringy bark, on the hills, are best
adapted to sheep.
“ Arrived at the run you wish to see, ride
round the boundaries of it; inspect each of
the sheep stations; see that the water-holes


at which the stations are placed have the ap-
pearance of being permanent ponds; and that
the run is of sufficient size to bear a con-
siderable increase on the number of sheep you
intend to commence with. If not satisfied
with the first run or district you visit, travel
to others: fear not that you are wasting
time—each day will give you experience, and
save you pounds in the end. Having at
length satisfied yourself of the quality of
the sheep, and the eligibility of the run, make
your bargain. At the present prices you wall
probably get a good flock, with the right to
the run and the buildings upon it, for about
6s. per sheep. Do not expend your whole
capital in this purchase. Preserve something
to start with, and for the first year’s expenses.
“ You must remove your goods and family
from Sydney. You must lay in the first year’s
stores flour, tea, sugar, tobacco, sheep-
clothing, wool, bagging, tools and imple-
ments of all kinds, &c. &c. You must pur-
chase a dray or two, and a team of oxen,
taking care that the dray is well made, and
of seasoned wood, and the oxen well broken,
and one or two more saddle horses. All this
will require ready money, for it is far better
c 3


to start with a smaller flock than to incur
a debt with the Sydney merchant, whose
charges, commission, and interest, would form
a heavy burden upon your first returns.
“ Having thus provided yourself with ne-
cessaries, now waste no time. Start imme-
diately for your station. Your presence is
required there, and you escape the heavy
expense of living in Sydney. All your goods
will easily go on one dray, if a single man;
on two, if with a family. You have, I hope,
brought nothing of agricultural implements
or patent inventions from England; the
clothes of yourself and family, and a few
books, should be your only baggage. If a
single man, after starting your dray their hrst
day’s journey, to see that nothing breaks, and
that the bullocks are tractable, you may ride
on to your station, leaving your dray to follow.
If, however, you have a family, your pre-
parations must be more extensive, and your
progress slower. A dray will not travel more
than twelve miles a day upon an average;
and it may be convenient that the family
should travel with the drays; in this case,
they must camp out at night—no great hard-
ship in that climate, where persons sleep in


the open air winter and summer without in-
convenience—but you should provide yourself
with a small tent for the females. Two
blankets sewn together make a very good one
stretched upon poles; this, with a mattrass
or two, will make them comfortable enough
when they cannot reach a house where ac-
commodation can be obtained.
“ Having thus reached your destination,
commence your new life in earnest. The
first, and most important business, is to look
after the sheep. Daily, and as often as pos-
sible, visit each of your stations; see that
the shepherds take their flocks out early on
to their allotted feeding ground, that they do
not themselves stray upon your neighbour’s
run, or allow any of his flocks to come upon
your’s. Both scab and catarrh, the curse of
Australian sheep farming, are easily com-
municated ; whether they are infectious or
contagious, I shall not pretend to say. The
neglect of this caution, therefore, has often
infected a whole run, and seriously injured
the flocks for years. See, also, that the hut-
keeper has cleaned out the sheep-yards in
which the sheep are folded at night. This
will take up much of your time; but neglect


not other things. Although the land is not
your’s, and it may be uncertain how long you
may remain settled there, yet that is no
reason why you should not make yourself as
comfortable as possible.
“ Some settlers, making the uncertainty of
their residence an excuse, have lived on for
years without gaining any additional com-
forts, Additional comforts and luxuries in
England generally require an increased out-
lay of money; in Australia, they require only
an increased outlay of personal exertion.
Lose no time, therefore, in making a garden;
a few months will give you an ample supply
of vegetables, whilst a few years will produce
the most delicious fruits. Enclose, also, as
soon as possible, a paddock for your saddle-
horses and milch cows. These are the first
things to attend to, there are many others
which experience will suggest. As the in-
crease of your flock is your object, you will
not at first part with any ewes, but as the
wedders become fat sell them. If no demand
for them by the butchers, have them boiled
down, their fat and skins will probably rea-
lize six shillings a piece; care not for the
markets being low; sell them when they are


fat; the markets may probably rise in a
short time, but then your sheep may, from
drought or other causes, have lost their con-
dition. Turn your money as quickly as pos-
sible, is good advice to all traders; to none
more so than those with small means. In
like manner sell your wool in Sydney for
what it will fetch; it may do for a person
with large flocks to consign his wool to Eng-
land, and thus take the chance of a better
market; but the small flock-master should
deal for ready money; he should sell his
wool, and, with the produce, buy his stores,
and pay his expenses. Your only rent is
that which you pay for your run, ten pounds
per annum, and two pounds ten shillings
additional for each 1000 sheep above 4000.
You have no rates and taxes, no expense
necessary to make an outward show; no en-
tertainments for the purpose of ostentation ;
your own station provides most of the neces-
saries of life; your luxuries are tea, sugar,
tobacco, and a little wine. You can readily
calculate your expenses. Avoid borrowed
capital and debts to your agent in Sydney,
and each year must see you a more wealthy
man; so that in a few years, you may be


able to purchase a homestead in the settled
districts, to which you may move with your
family, whilst your sheep station—or perhaps
by that time stations, may be managed by
overseers, with an occasional visit from your-
self. In this way may you realise your ex-
pectations independence for the present,
comfort and wealth in your declining years,
and a certain provision for all your children.”
The foregoing remarks apply equally to
every colony in Australia, to New Zealand,
and the Cape of Good Hope. In selecting a
locality in which to settle, do not forget to
choose one where there is, or will shortly be
established, a church and a minister of the
Church of England, Ascertain, also, if there
is a school, or likely to be one, to which you
may send your young children. Do not, in
your hurry to grow rich, neglect the ad-
vantages of education; and remember, that
though your children may be making money,
how they will bitterly and reproachfully blame
you when they grow up, if they are not able
to take advantage of it, and enjoy the plea-
sure which books and knowledge afford.
Even though a lad may be gaining 10s. a
week, it will be far wiser to send him where


he may gain a sound religious education.
However, in many instances, I fear you may
have no opportunities of sending your chil-
dren to school, but that is no reason why you
should not give them schooling yourself, or
get some educated person to visit you at
times to instruct them. You will have some
of the books given you on board ship. Get
others, and in an evening, or a Sunday, and
whenever you can, set manfully to work to
teach to the best of your power. There are
many times when a shepherd or cattle-keeper
in Australia is off watch, and not obliged to
keep his eyes on his charges, when a book
would be of the greatest value and im-
portance, and a lad who knows how to read
a little, will soon teach himself how to read
perfectly, to his own very great amusement
and satisfaction. I hope that one and all,
old and young, will have done their best
while on board ship to learn this most im-
portant accomplishment.
Learn, also, if there is a medical man in the
neighbourhood, that you may have his as-
sistance in case any of your family are sick,
and most particularly be careful that the
place you settle in is healthy. Avoid oc


cupying a cottage on low land, or on the
bank of a river, or near any marshy ground.
Choose a hill, or some high spot, round which
the pure air circulates freely, and near which
there are no mists. This is of very great im-
portance, especially in a warm country.
A caution too many emigrants neglect, is
not to spend more money than they can pos-
sibly help, till they can clearly see the return
it will give them. The disposition of some
persons is to buy every thing that is offered
them with a flattering account of it, without
considering whether they absolutely require
it or not. This observation refers equally
to the making preparations for the voyage, as
also to the first arrival, or rather to the time
when the new settler begins to receive his
wages.
I am sorry to say, that there are, in all the
sea-ports of our colonies, sharpers and un-
principled persons, who perhaps have not en-
tirely lost their character, as well as plausible
fellows who pass as respectable, who are on the
look out to take advantage of the ignorance
or credulity of new arrivals, who may have a
little money in their pockets. While I tell
you this, I do not mean to say that every


body who is ready to give you advice is an
interested person or a sharper. Far from it,
and I trust that you will find many ready and
anxious to give you advice and assistance,
and benefit you greatly. Only the more you
trust to constituted authorities the better, for
they cannot have any other motive than to
advance your good. Always distrust those
who try to disparage such constituted authori-
ties, especially when you discover strong
discrepancies in their account of matters.
More particularly if you have any capital,
do not form a partnership with any person,
unless you have known him for years, or have
seen him under trying circumstances, so that
you may form a correct opinion of his charac-
ter. A partnership once formed, is like ma-
trimony, not easily broken. Two or more
men may, however, join together for mutual
aid and convenience in carrying out any
work, such as splitting shingles, cutting
timber, or clearing ground.
It must be remembered, that I am at-
tempting only to give such general advice as
may be applicable in most instances to all
colonies alike. Those emigrants who require
a more detailed account of any particular
D


colony so as to guide them on arrival, must
procure a separate description of that colony,
but I scarcely think that they will find such
necessary.
We will suppose that you have arranged
for the journey up the country, either in the
dray of your future employer, or if you go on
your own account, in a hired cart or waggon,
or if a bachelor, on horseback, or on foot, in
company with other men. Of course, it
would not be advisable to travel alone on
foot through a country with which you are
not acquainted. If you are obliged so to do,
note well the land marks, the most con-
spicuous hills and trees. A small pocket
compass will at times be very useful, if you
remember the bearing of the place you wish
to reach. In a new country it is important
to make yourself at once acquainted with
the relative positions of various places, so
that although you have not a compass, you
may by the aid of the sun find your way
easily from one place to another. You must
remember that in the southern hemisphere,
the seasons are changed, and winter when it
is summer in England, and that the sun a
noon is in the north instead of in the south.


We will suppose, then, that you have begun
your journey in one of the above mentioned
styles. In the older colonies there are fine
roads for a considerable space into the in-
terior, and on them you will find very good
inns. Even in the newer colonies, when
there is a probability of there being much
traffic, an inn very soon makes its appearance.
And here I cannot refrain from giving an ex-
tract from a very graphic letter which I have
in my possession, from a farmer’s daughter,
and for some time a lady’s maid, who with her
husband, a groom, emigrated from Eltham, in
Kent, last year, to South Australia: —“You
must now fancy you see me perched upon a
dray, drawn by eight bullocks; we travelled
very well for about three miles, when the roads
became bad, and the rain came down in
torrents; we had then a steep hill to get up;
I was too frightened to stay on the dray, so
I walked up, or rather crawled on all fours :
it was then getting dusk, and we had six
miles to go before we could get shelter, and
to add to our comfort we got bogged, and
two of the bullocks took the sulks, and would
not draw at all. I thought to myself, it’s all
very well to sit by the fire-side in England,
d 2


reading of travelling up the bush, being
bogged, &c. &c., but it is not so pleasant in
reality. However, at last, we arrived at a
very comfortable inn, got a good tea and
supper, and such a comfortable bed that we
had not had for four months. The next
morning was a beautiful one, and off we
started again in much better spirits ; we had
eighteen miles to go, and the scenery all the
way was magnificent: certainly I had not
travelled much in England, but wherever I
had been, I never saw any thing equal to the
scenery in this country. We arrived at our
new home at about seven in the evening,
and you may be assured I was agreeably
surprised to find not a mud hut, but a toler-
able comfortable house, in the midst of what
appeared to me to be a beautiful park, but
what in reality is only a piece of waste land
for wild cattle to feed upon, and instead of
damper and dried mutton, we found beautiful
home-made bread, fresh meat—beef and
mutton, fresh butter, and such beautiful milk;
in fact, we have the best of every thing to eat
and drink : there is plenty of work—but we
cannot expect to be kept for nothing.”
All emigrants cannot expect to be as for


tunate as my friends; indeed, few have the
practical knowledge which they had, and
which enabled them at once to obtain a good
situation. It is at all events better not to
expect more than a log or mud hut, and
damper. Sometimes in travelling you will
have to camp out in the woods, and to build
a temporary hut with boughs; but this, far
from thinking a hardship in that temperate
climate, you will find very delightful. Far,
very far, superior is it to sleeping in a hot
crowded room, with the noise of voices, or of
loud swearers in your ears, and the stifling
smell of spirits and tobacco smoke.
At last the journey is ended, and you arrive
at your location. If there is not a cottage
already built, the first thing you will do is to
set about erecting one. The style of building
must depend on the materials at hand. In a
previous Manual I have described a method of
building mud cottages. You may construct a
hut of rushes, and make it weather tight and
comfortable. First put up a frame-work of
stout timber, and form your door and win-
dows, and fill up the intervening spaces with
thin poles, between which you twist the
rushes. Slab huts are easily and cheaply
d 3


run up, and keep out the rain very well for a
time, but are very hot in summer. A brick
or stone cottage is the best, if you have the
means of erecting one. My space will not
allow me to describe how to build all these
descriptions of cottages, but there are a few
general rules which may be applicable to every
dwelling. Of the position I have already
spoken. Let it be high and dry. Do not
let the flooring rest on the ground, but raise
it with stones, or dig under it, so as to let the
air circulate freely. Thoroughly drain the
ground under your cottage. Dig a trench
round it, and a channel from the trench, so
that all the moisture may run off. Even in
England stagnant water or damp earth is
very likely to produce fever or cholera, and
in a hot climate still more so. Let all recep-
tacles for filth be away from the cottage, and
lower than it stands, and on no account throw
dirty water or kitchen refuse out on the
ground near your cottage, as lazy untidy
housewifes are too apt to do. The best way
is to throw every thing into a deep tub, so
that a small surface only is exposed, and
which may be emptied every day into a hole
in the ground, or into a drain which will


carry it off altogether. Also, never let that
abomination a dung heap appear near your
dwelling, as is so generally seen in Ireland
and Scotland, and even in some parts of
England. All the time the inmates cannot
tell why they are miserable and sick, why
they have fevers, and cholera, and agues.
Half—aye, the greater part of the sickness
from which we suffer, arises from our own
folly in creating the very causes which pro-
duce sickness.
When Adelaide was first built it was a
very healthy place, now there is much sickness
there, and why ? Because thousands of people
collected, and ran up houses in every direc-
tion, without dreaming of making drains of
any description; to use a strong expression,
but not too strong —actually living in the
midst of their own filth.
My readers, therefore, must remember after
the repeated warnings I have given them,
that it will entirely be through their own in
excusable folly if any of them get sick by the
neglect of the very easy precautionary mea-
sures I have pointed out to them. If any of
their children get sick of fever and die, they
must be answerable.


When Englishmen first arrive in those
colonies, they are apt to be attacked by dy-
sentery. To guard against it, a wise person
will eat. but little meat, will not use violent
exercise, will swallow no stimulant, and will
occasionally take some laxative medicine.
It is well worth while to make your cottage
both inside and out as neat and pretty as you
can, for the so doing will add much to your
comfort and happiness. If you make a rule
never to sit with your hands before you doing
nothing, you may contrive to get a great deal
done in that way. A porch in front of your
cottage with seats in it, is as good as another
room, and looks pretty ; so do benches on the
side where there is most shade in an evening
or mid-day. At either time it is pleasant to
be able to ask a visitor or a stranger to sit
down and rest himself, without disturbing
the household work going on inside.
All depends on your own ingenuity, whether
your cottage is neat or not. First, you should
saw out as many boards as you can, and put
up shelves on which to place your crockery
and cooking utensils, then pegs to hang up
your clothes, hats, and shoes. Let every
thing have its proper place. Out of very


rough branches you can easily manufacture a
crate such as crockery is packed in in Eng-
land. Two or three of these will be very
useful. One to hold your day’s store of fire-
wood, another for brooms, brushes, dust-pan
and such like things; a third may serve for
litter of any sort. Cupboards are useful, and
you may easily put up such as will serve
your purpose, with shelves inside, or without
shelves, but having pegs instead, on which
your wife may hang up her gowns and
bonnet, Sec. It will be better than putting
them away in a box, indeed I am supposing
that you have not got a chest of drawers, nor
are likely to get them for some time to come.
You will have learned, I hope, on board
ship, to make a number of useful things, such
as salt-boxes, soap-boxes, candle-boxes, cruet-
stands. Set to work to make some of these
for your wife, as also some mats and brushes.
If you have not the same materials you have
before used, you will probably find some
which will answer the purpose as well. A
good settler should be able to turn all sorts of
materials to use. You will find grass, or
rushes, or flax, or fibre of some sort to make
what you require. You may easily make


standing bed places for all your family out of
rough branches. You will find leaves, or
straw, or fern to stuff the ticking I recom-
mended you to bring, to serve as a bed.
Take care that whatever you put in is
thoroughly dried in the sun and picked fine,
and that no insects are harboured in it.
Feather beds in that climate are very ob-
jectionable, and the flock beds you have used
at sea are likely to be damp and unwholesome.
You should make also your own tables and
stools. If you have a few shillings, they
could not be better expended than in buying
a few planks of an inch and a half thick for
the purposes I have mentioned.
Among other things a book-case in a con-
spicuous place must not be forgotten, for 1
hope you will have books to put into it; a
safe for your meat to hang up in the shade,
and in a thorough draught; and you should
make baskets to hang up, to hold a va-
riety of things. Many a gentleman settler
without money to spare, has built his own
house exactly as I describe: and at the cost
of a few shillings for planks, hinges and nails,
he has made himself as comfortable as he
could wish.


And now with regard to your moral be-
haviour. I need not say do not get drunk,
but depend on it, it will be far better for your
health and prosperity if you avoid spirits, and
fermented liquors altogether. You do not
require them in that climate, as you will soon
discover if you abstain from them for a short
time. A necessary caution is not to eat
largely of meat on arrival. Meat is cheap
and good, it is true, and masters allow more
than is required, and in that warm climate
less in reality is necessary than in England; but
people are apt, from finding this abundance,
to eat more than is good for them, and many
have suffered severely, and some have died
in consequence from gastric fevers.
In Australia there are a number of emanci-
pated convicts, many of whom it is to be
feared have not much improved by the dis-
cipline they have gone through. I do not
say treat them as outcasts, but I would urge
you very strongly to be very careful to avoid
their faults, and to do your very utmost to
reform them by setting them a good example.
You must remember that as the seed is sown
so will the plant grow up. You are the seed
of a new country, which will some day be as


populous as England, and according to the
example you set, and the way you bring up
your children, so will a very large number of
the future population be bad or good men.
Bear this always in mind—it is a matter of
the deepest importance.
It has been often remarked, that many per-
sons when they first arrive in the colony are
discontented from not finding things exactly
as they expected. The change of life is very
great; every thing is new and strange, and
there is often no little hard work to be done,
so that doubtless some if they had the power,
would, without giving the country a trial, go
back again to the poverty or inconvenience
they quitted in the old country. I mention
this, that should any feel such sensations they
may not be discouraged, for the most dis-
contented have in a few months become not
only perfectly reconciled to their lot, but so
fond of the country that nothing would induce
them to quit it.
Among the most important cautions I can
give you, is not to neglect to keep holy the
Sabbath. Unfortunately this commandment
is in many of our colonies systematically
broken by a large portion of the community.


Perhaps they at first were not Sabbath
breakers, but on their arrival they probably
would not go to church because they had not
unpacked their things, then the next Sunday
they had so many affairs to attend to, and
the next Sunday still more, and so on. It is
both your duty to keep holy the Sunday, and
also your worldly affairs will, depend on it in
the end, flourish far more than if you neglect
it. If you cannot reform your neighbours, at
least withstand the bad example they set you.
Do not suppose that custom will make it
right. Life is full of trials and temptations,
and this is one of them which you must
strive hard to withstand.
There is another subject also of vital im-
portance, about which I must speak to you.
The priests and followers of the Bishop of
Rome are making strenuous efforts to regain
in the southern hemisphere, especially in Aus-
tralia, that ascendancy over the minds of the
people which they have so justly lost in most
countries in the old world.
Far be it from me to create any ill feeling
in your minds towards any class of Her Ma-
jesty’s subjects, but I should feel myself very
blameable did I neglect to warn you against
E


the wiles and stratagems of some of the
members of that proselitizing community,
whose aim is to aggrandize their own eccle-
siastical establishment, and to destroy every
other, especially that of the Church of Eng-
land, which they feel to be their greatest op-
ponent. Their aim is universal supremacy.
To attain it they well know that they must
pervert the minds of all Christian believers,
and deprive them of the truth. To do this,
it is extraordinary what persuasive arguments
they can make use of, what art they employ.
Were you to listen to their priests, you could
scarcely believe that they are not the most
excellent and pious of men, though you may
suspect them when they deprive you of your
Bible, and offer up your prayers in a tongue
you cannot understand. One of the most
successful means they employ to mislead
people is to captivate, and then to con-
fuse the senses. To do this they ornament
their churches in the most rich and gaudy
way j they allow only a solemn and sombre
light to enter them ; they fill them with in-
cense, while the best music they can engage
is employed in their services, thus sight,
smell, hearing, are all attacked at once; cer


tain salvation is offered to all who will belong
to their church, equally certain damnation is
pronounced to be the fate of all who remain
without its pale.
I cannot further enter into the subject, but
tlmugh I would warn you to be kind and
forbearing towards the Roman Catholics, and
by your good example to win them over to
the truth, yet I would again warn you of the
incalculable deceitfulness of their priests, and
would beseech you ever to beware of them
and their advocates, lest they succeed in
blinding and misleading you. A very large
number of Irish Roman Catholic girls have
been sent out, and most of them will marry
emancipated convicts, and others with little
or no religion. The Romish priest at once
steps in, and claims the right of visiting them
whenever he pleases, and all the children are
brought up as Roman Catholics.
Thus, if the truth is not widely disseminated
among them, they will in a few years become
the most numerous sect, and when once they
feel their power, unless their practice is com-
pletely altered from what it has been for many
centuries, they will instantly commence an
attempt to put down all opposing faiths with
e 2


fire and sword. Remember that their great
boast is that they do not alter. I would
advise you, in whatever part of the country
you are, to endeavour to get a clergyman to
visit you, and to request him to appoint some
layman among you to perform the services of
our church during his absence. A letter
addressed to the Bishop of the colony ex-
pressing your earnest desire to have a clergy-
man sent into your district, will, I am sure,
always bring one among you, though he may
not be able to remain permanently with you.
You will find it very advantageous to your
neighbours and to yourself, if you establish a
lending library in your district. Let all the
families within a certain distance club together
the various books they possess, and place
them in a central position, under charge of
some one willing to undertake the office of
librarian. Have them all covered with stout
paper, and strengthened and marked with
their names outside, and a list made of them.
Subscribe also a small sum to buy fresh books,
from 2d. to 4c?. per week, and get the clergy-
man, or some gentleman of education to
select them for you.
Many of you will have come out to the


colony through the assistance of the Govern-
ment, or of charitable gentlemen and ladies,
or of relations or friends ; now, it is a duty
you owe to those at home, as soon as you
can save up money sufficient for the purpose,
that you should in return send home sums to
defray the expense of the passage of any re-
lations or friends who may be willing to join
you. Both you and they will benefit by their
coming, and they can repay you when they
in like manner have saved enough from their
wages to do so.
This is a very important point. Any man
who is successful in the colonies, ought to
consider it a disgrace to allow any relations
to remain badly off in England. The other
day I heard of an old man of eighty years of
age, whose children had established them-
selves in Australia, starting off to join them,
they having sent home the necessary funds
for him to do so. He arrived safe and well,
and I doubt not will enjoy some years more
of life, and add to the happiness and content-
ment of his dutiful children. This is not a
solitary instance. I have frequently seen
very old people accompanying their children,
who would not have gone could they not
e 3


have taken their parents with them. Depend
on this, it was a blessing to both the old and
young. If you have relations or friends in
the workhouse in the old country, I say it
will be a foul disgrace on you, if, while you
are flourishing in the new, you allow them to
remain, when some £ls. or less would set
them free. The Colonial Government are
anxious to facilitate your so doing, and have
accordingly made some excellent arrange-
ments. They have also made arrangements to
enable settlers to obtain a double benefit for
the money they have saved, by at the same
time purchasing land with it, and paying for
the passage of their friends to the colonies.
The following extract from the Govern-
ment regulations will better explain the system
to be pursued.
“ Money intended to be invested in the
purchase of Crown lands, under the ordinary
regulations of the Government, may be de-
posited in the Colonial Treasury at Sydney,
Melbourne, and Adelaide, in even sums of
not less than £5. each; and on all money so
deposited there will be allowed interest at
the rate of 5 per cent* per annum, for any
period not exceeding five years from the date


of the deposits, during which the money shall
remain unapplied to the purchase of Crown
lands.
“ For all deposits under this notice a
receipt will be given, which will be available
as cash at any Government land sale, or in
payment of any Crown land, which having
been once offered at auction, may be open to
selection, or for any lands beyond the settled
districts which may be purchased under the
pre-emptive rights conferred by Her Majesty’s
Order in Council of the 9th March, 1847 :
but no sums deposited will be returnable in
any other shape than a credit in the purchase
of land.
“ Receipts for deposits under this notice
will be transferable, but they must be trans-
ferred by endorsement, in the same manner
as bills of exchange. The last person to
whom any receipt shall be given, shall be
considered as the holder of it, and it will be
received at the Colonial Treasuries at Sydney,
Melbourne, and Adelaide, from him or his
agent only.
“ Every depositor, or the last endorsee of
his receipt, (should the original depositor and
the previous endorsees have failed to avail


themselves of the privilege,) will be allowed,
at any time within two years of the date of
the deposit, to demand that any portion not
exceeding 80 per cent, of the amount de-
posited, shall be applied towards the payment
of passages to this colony, for such emigrants
as he may nominate, provided that such
emigrants be eligible in all respects for free
passages, under the regulations of the Colonial
Land and Emigration Commissioners.
“ Settlers who, without being purchasers of
land, may desire to aid their relatives and
friends at home, by procuring a passage to
the colonies, may remit sums of money for
that purpose by depositing them in the
Colonial Treasury. But as it is not intended
to extend this privilege to remittances for
other purposes than emigration, all such sums
must be placed under the control of the
Colonial Land and Emigration Commis-
sioners. If not so employed, they will be
returned to the depositor.
“As an encouragement to settlers who wish
to apply their savings towards bringing out
their relations and friends, the Government
will defray part of their passage money, even
though their friends may, from age, or from


Christian and Sur-
name of the pro-
posed Emigrant at
full length.
Age.
Trade
or
Calling.
Where living, in
Great Britain or Ire-
land.
extent of family, be ineligible for free pas-
sages, under the regulations of the Emigra-
tion Commissioners. A depositor paying
about two-thirds of the passage money, the
other third is defrayed by the Government.
“The two following Forms will help to
illustrate the system.
[Place of Residence and Date.']
“Sir, —Having become the purchaser of
Crown lands in this colony, for which I have
this day paid into the Colonial Treasury the
sum of , I beg to nominate the under-
mentioned persons for passage to this colony
at the public expense.
Signature of Depositor.
“ To the Hon. the Colonial Secretary.”
“ Sir, —I beg leave to deposit in the Colonial
Treasury the sum of pounds sterling, to
be applied by the Colonial Land and Emigra-


1
( Christian and
| Surname of the
Emigrant at full
length.
Age!
I Trade or I
Calling. |
Where liv-
ing, in Great
Britain or
Ireland.
To be paid ‘
towards cost
of Passage.
_ 0) •
X * 5. -O o
0) c c aJ *5
.ph * eg
ol S g|
ch 5 H 3
Total.
£. s. d.
£. s. d.
£. s. rf
tion Commissioners in aid of conveying to
this colony the under-mentioned persons.
Signature of Depositor.
“To the Hon. the Colonial Secretary.”
In consequence of these regulations, 1
framed the following plan for the repayment
of loans, and thus creating a constantly cir-
culating fund for emigration. lam certain
that if local emigration societies will select
honest industrious persons as emigrants, who
have relations and friends remaining in Eng-
land, and will advance moderate sums to
enable them to emigrate, the persons so as-
sisted, will, in ninety-nine cases out of a
hundred, repay the money into the Colonial
Treasury for the purpose of enabling their
relations to follow them, and they, in their
turn, will do the same.


The following Form of a promissory note
was lately signed by a person assisted to
emigrate to South Australia.
“ X promise to pay into the Colonial Treasury
of South Australia, to the order of Her Ma-
jesty’s Colonial Treasurer for the said colony,
six months after the date of my arrival in the
colony, in the ship ‘Sultana,’ a.d. 1850, the
sum of six pounds sterling, to assist in de-
fraying the expense of a passage to the
colony of a person to be nominated by
William H. G. Kingston, Esq. of 8, York
Gate, Regent’s Park, London.
Signed
Witnessed by
Ship ‘ Sultana,’ 20th March, 1850.
“ I wish him to nominate my brother ,
or some of his family, now residing at .
Instead of putting the name of a nominee,
that of the person to be assisted may be
inserted.
He signed a second at 12 months date,
for another £6.
The man is a bricklayer, and as he will
make from Qs. to Is. a day, he will probably
be able to pay the whole £l2. in six months,
and have two members of his family sent out.


Cost of
Steerage
Passage in
Private
Ships.
Average
Wages of
Labourers.
Price of
Provisions.
Price of
Land
per Acre.
Canada, East ..
„ West..
Nova Scotia.,..
New Brunswick
Prince Edward’s
Island
I f (
j £5. 10s. |
£6. to £7.
2s to 2s 6 d
per day.
£20. per
year, with
Board and
Lodging.
£17. do.
(
Flour, about 1
6 d. per stone. I
) Meat 2\d. to /
j 4 d. per lb.
Tea 2s. to 3s.
per lb.
3s. to 5s.
sterling.
About
6s. Id.
Is. 9 d.
2s. 6d.
8s. to 15s.
Abstract of the Colonization Circular
of March, 1850.
The following are the rates of wages and
prices of the principal articles of consumption
in the Colonies, according to recent returns,
together with the rate of passage and price of
lands:—
NORTH AMERICA.
AUSTRALIA.
New South Wales and Victoria.
In the Sydney district, the current rates of
wages in the country in August, 1849, were
as follows:—agricultural labourers, £l4. to
£lB. a year; bricklayers, blacksmiths, car-


Sydney District.
Victoria District.
S.
d.
s. d.
Bread (seconds) per lb. 0
H
o if
Tea
i
10
2 3
Sugar
0
3*
0 4
Coffee
i
1
0 10J
Meat
0
U
0 If
penters, masons, and wheelwrights, £36. to
£3B. a year ; shepherds, £l6. to £lB. a year.
With the preceding rates , hoard and lodging
is also given. Bricklayers, blacksmiths, car-
penters, masons, and wheelwrights, get about
ss. a day; common labourers about 3s. a day,
without rations. In the Port Philip district,
(now Victoria) the current rates of wages in
this country, in June, 1849, were as follows:
agricultural labourers, £22. a year; brick-
layers, blacksmiths, carpenters, masons, and
wheelwrights, £36. to £3B. a year; shepherds,
£l9. a year, with rations and lodgings; brick-
layers, blacksmiths, carpenters, masons, and
wheelwrights, get about 6s. a day, without
rations.
In both districts there is a great demand
for female domestics.
The prices of the principal articles of con-
sumption, in the summer of 1849, were as
follows:
F


SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
The rates of wages, in September, 1849,
were as follows : agricultural labourers, £3O.
to £4O. a year for married couples; £26. to
£3O. a year for single men; shepherds, £2O.
to £25. a year, with board and lodging;
bricklayers, blacksmiths, carpenters, and ma-
sons, 6s. 6d. a day; wheelwrights, 7s. a day;
and common labourers, 3s. 6d. a day, without
board and lodging.
The prices of the principal articles of con-
sumption are as follows : —bread, 1 \d. per lb.;
tea, 2s. per lb.; sugar, 3 d. per lb.; meat, 2 \d.
per lb.; potatoes, 1 \d.
van diemen’s land.
The rates of wages, in August, 1849, were
as follows: —agricultural labourers, £l5. to
£2O. a year ; shepherds, £2O. a year; brick-
layers, ss. Qd. a day; blacksmiths, 4s. Qd. a
day; carpenters, and masons, ss. a day;
wheelwrights, 4s. 3d. a day; and common
labourers, 2s. 6d. a day.
The prices of the principal articles of con-
sumption were as follows :—bread, 2d. to 2 \d.
per lb.; tea, Is. 6d. per lb.; sugar, 3d. per lb ;
coffee, 9 d. per lb.; meat, 3d. per lb.


WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
The rates of wages, in July, 1849, were as
follows:—agricultural labourers, and store-
keepers, £24. to £3O. a year, with board and
lodging; bricklayers, blacksmiths, carpenters,
wheelwrights, and harness-makers, 6s. a day;
and masons, and common labourers, 3s. a day,
without board and lodging.
The prices of the principal articles of con-
sumption are as follows : —bread, 2 \d. per lb. ;
tea, 2s. per lb. ; sugar, 3d. per lb.; coffee,
10 d. per lb.; meat, 3\d. per lb.
In the Australian colonies, the usual al-
lowance of provisions to labourers is 10 lbs.
of meat, 10 lbs. of flour, 2 lbs. of sugar, and
i lb. of tea, per week.
The Government price of land is £l. per
acre: the smallest lots contain 40 acres.
Land may be purchased from private indi-
viduals, in lots of various sizes, at from ss. to
10s. per acre.
The cost of steerage passages, including
full allowance of provisions, medicine, medical
attendance, and fuel, is from £l5. to £2O.
p 2


NEW ZEALAND.
The rates of wages, in 1848, were as fol-
lows :—common labourers, 6c?. to 3s. 6d. ;
bricklayers, 6s. to Bs. ; blacksmiths, 3s. to ss. •
carpenters, 7s. to 10s.; and masons, 7s. to 95.;
masons’ labourers, Is. 6d. per day, without
board and lodging.
The prices of the principal articles of con-
sumption, in 1849 were—bread, 4 d. per 21b.
loaf; tea, 2s. to 3s. per lb.; sugar, 4c?. per lb.;
pork, 3c?. per lb.; beef, 6c?. per lb.
The price of wood land varies from £3. to
£lO. per acre; of fern land, from 10s. to 30s.
per acre.
The cost of steerage passage, including full
allowance of provisions, &c., is from £lB.
to £2O.
CAPE OF GOOD HOPE AND NATAL.
The rates of wages in the different districts
of the Cape of Good Hope vary very much in
the Cape division: in 1849, the wages of do-
mestic servants averaged from 15s. to 18s.;
and of farm servants from 9s. to 15s. per month.
The cost of steerage passage is from £lO.
to £ls; and price of land, from 2s. to 4s.
per acre.
The price of all Crown land in the Australian


Colonies may be reckoned at £l. per acre,
but near the towns it fetches a much higher
price. Sometimes it is to be procured from
private persons considerably under that price,
especially in Western Australia, as also in
parts of New South Wales.
The expense of erecting a dwelling fit for
an agricultural labourer in any one of the
Australian Colonies varies from £5. to £3O.
and even to £4O. according to size and ma-
terials; so that if a man is handy, and can
work himself, he can get a tolerably com-
fortable cottage over his head for about £lO.
to which he must add the price he must pay
for the ground to build it on. He will pro-
bably, however, find it more advantageous to
rent a small piece of ground for his cottage
and garden, till he has saved up enough to
purchase and stock a farm of his own.
The rent of a lodging for a mechanic’s
family in a town varies from 3s. to 6s. per
week. A mechanic able to build a cottage,
will, however, as soon as he can afford it, buy
a piece of ground, and erect a dwelling for
himself. Labourers and their families, how-
ever, who engage for a term, are provided
both with a dwelling and provisions, and this
f 3


is generally the best arrangement for a master
as well as a servant. I may safely say, that
all rough craftsmen, and strong labourers are
certain of finding ample employment in any
one of our Colonies, but that young men who
only understand how to use the pen, unless
they will turn shepherds, have a very poor
chance indeed of obtaining their bread. And
now, my friends, I must bid you farewell, by
offering you the description I wrote some
time ago of the
CHARACTER OF A GOOD COLONIST.
To become a successful colonist, a man
should possess good health and strength, good
spirits, and good humour, great forethought,
great judgment, great perseverance, great cou-
rage, and a firm trust in Providence; and with
these, as his stock in trade, if he beforehand
gain all the information to be gained of the
land he is about to visit, it will not be his
own fault if he do not get good returns for
the capital he employs. Droughts or blight
may come, it is true, and destroy the produce
of his fields; but the man of forethought,
knowing that such an infliction has before
occurred in that land, will have a reserve of


his capital in store to meet the emergency ;
so likewise murrain may visit his sheep or
cattle, but he will be prepared for the conse-
quences. He will not speculate unless he
can bear the loss of the venture, because he
knows that though large profits may sometimes
be made, at others no returns may be forth-
coming. His land will be fertile, and his
produce will find a good market; for he will
have selected the first by a thorough inspec-
tion in person and from his own judgment,
or from that of some one in whose knowledge
and honesty he has good reason to place
confidence; and not without due regard to
having water-carriage, or some sure means of
conveying the latter to a market, either then
existing, or which will assuredly before long
spring up : and he will ascertain that good
water exists at hand, that the air is pure, and
free from damp; for he knows that health
depends on these circumstances, and that with-
out it wealth is valueless. His object is to lead
a happy life, and to make those around him
happy and contented ; to do his duty to God
and man; and when he dies, to feel that he
has not lived in vain ; and that those he leaves
behind him will follow in his steps, will be


virtuous and prosperous in this world, and
will meet him again in that Great Colony,
where all the righteous who have ever lived
will be collected together. The savages in
his neighbourhood will not injure him, for he
has treated them with humanity—as his fel-
low men, and they will protect him from their
fellows at a distance ; the fame of the good
white man goes abroad, and he plants the
first seeds of civilization among them. If
they are by nature fierce and savage, his fore-
thought and courage make him prepare to
defeat their attacks, till he can prove to them
that he is their friend. His equals respect
him, and he can always, if he requires it, gain
credit, for he is known to be honourable and
wise. His good humour and good nature
enliven his family circle, and all who come
casually within its focus. If accidents, against
which human forethought cannot guard,
occur, he receives their infliction with an
unrepining spirit, he exerts all his energies
to recover from them; his fellow men are
willing to aid him, and while life remains he
is engaged in the manly struggle; and at
last, if death claims the victory, he yields
without trembling to his fate, knowing that


God is just, and will protect those he leaves
behind.
A man, to be a good colonist, must be no
slave to routine. He must be ready for every
emergency; his previous acquirements may
be of little use to him, except in having
sharpened his wits ; he must be ready to put
off all his former habits, and to adopt such as
are most suited to his new career, except his
religion and morality, as they are adapted to
all states of life. He must be willing to turn
his hand to any thing; to plough, to shear,
to build or dig, to abandon all the physical
luxuries of civilized life, but to preserve the
refinement of mind and manner which he
gained in the world he has quitted. The
colonist who was a gentleman in England,
not only remains so in the Bush, but takes a
higher grade if possible, though his mansion
is a log hut, and his wealth is in flocks and
herds; for he is a more independent man,
and he can afford to be more liberal. He is
no longer engaged in a struggle with the
world ; he no longer fears being pressed down
below his proper level; he has no favours to
ask for —no votes to give; he will not have
to petition for posts at Court, nor offices


under the Government for his sons—of
daughters, the more he has the better; for
all are certain to marry enterprising spirited
gentlemen like himself, and thus to form a
happy family society around him. He knows
that he shall float calmly and boldly along the
stream of life respected by himself, and re-
spected and loved by others, till his course,
run in honour, is ended in satisfaction, and
as his children and grandchildren surround his
death-bed, he feels that he has played his part
well in life, and has not lived in vain.
The wise colonist remembers that he is a
colonist, and not a mere adventurer or so-
journer in the land for the purpose of reaping
a fortune, and then returning to the country
from whence he came. He never looks back,
but he keeps the future steadily in sight. That
way lies his road. He is to create a home for
his declining years, an heritage for his chil-
dren. He feels that a British colony is a
part of the British empire; that he lives
under the same laws and the same institutions
as his fellow subjects—those laws and those
institutions which he loves. He feels that he
is every whit a Briton, and that his children are


so, although his eyes may never again rest on
the green fields and waving woods of England,
though his children may see the spot where
he was born. He is not a cosmopolite; he
does not pretend to love every nation and
every land as much as his own, but he con-
siders that the laws and institutions of the
honest, brave, and hardy Anglo-Saxon race
make England what she is, and all those he has
with him. He soon learns to love his home-
stead in Australia or Canada, as much as the
estate which may have descended to him
from a long line of ancestors, but from which
stern necessity has compelled him to part.
His children call the land of his adoption
their own dear home; and he looks with
pride and satisfaction on the rich fields, the
orchards and gardens which his industry and
perseverance have planted in the wilderness ;
and as he counts the numerous flocks and
herds into which his first limited stock have
increased —remembering that had he lingered
on in England from want of energy to break
his bonds, he should now be a care-worn,
anxious man, with poverty staring him in the
face, and a family destined to struggle on in


difficulties, and to sink from the grade their
fathers occupied; he blesses Heaven, which
kindly guided his steps thither, and gave him
resolution and sense to become a Colonist.
THE END,
London :
Printed by James Tniscott, Nelson Square,




