

DEPARTMENT OF MINES.
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY.
BULLETIN No. 1.
ARTESIAN WATER IN THE WESTERN
INTERIOR OF QUEENSLAND,
EGBERT L. JACK, E.Gr.S., E.E.G.S.,
Corresponding Member of the Mew Academy of Sciences, &c.,
Government Geologist for Queensland.
(A paper read before Section C, Australasian Association for the Advance-
ment of Science, Brisbane Session, 16th January, 1895.)
AUTHORITY: EDMUND GREGORY, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, WILLIAM STREET,
1895.




(teetislanU,
DEPARTMENT OF MINES.
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY.
BULLETIN No, 1.
ARTESIAN WATER IN THE WESTERN
INTERIOR OE QUEENSLAND,
ROBERT L. JACK, E.G.S., T.R.G.S.,
Corresponding Member of the New YorTc Academy of Sciences, &c.,
Government Geologist for Queensland.
(A paper read before Section C, Australasian Association for the Advance-
ment of Science, Brisbane Session, 16th January, 1895.)
BRISBANE:
AUTHORITY : EDMUND GREGORY, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, WILLIAM STREET,
18 9 5,




ARTESIAN WATER IN THE WESTERN INTERIOR
OF QUEENSLAND.
Foe the last seven months two members of the Q-eological Survey
staff were engaged on work bearing on the question of artesian water
in Queensland. Mr. A. Gibb Maitland was in the field for the whole
of that time, and the writer for the greater part of the time, with some
interruptions. The work is still unfinished, but the economic interest
of the subject may be held to justify an account of the results so far
being laid before the Association.
The bulk of the rain which falls in Queensland is intercepted by
the belt of elevated country near the east coast. The country to the
west does not receive, on an average, more than from a half to a third
of the amount of rain which falls in the eastern coastal districts. It
so happens that owing to the nature of the soil, the western interior
supports grasses of a kind, infinitely superior to those of the coast, but
in the long intervals between rains the rivers dry up for the most part,
till it becomes a long day’s journey from waterhole to waterhole. The
result is that only a small proportion of the magnificent land is actually
“ available ” for pastoral purposes, the distance to which cattle can
“ feed back ” from the water before thirst compels them to return to
drink being the limit of the country which can possibly be used. I
may be excused for quoting what I wrote in the beginning of 1882,
in an account of the Transcontinental Railway Expedition, to show the
state of the country in dry seasons
“On making inquiries as to water between the Cloncurry and
Win ton, I learned that the country was about at its worst, there
having been no rain for nine months except in very local showers.
The usual route up the Gilliatt River and Mackinlay Creek to
Beaudesert, and thence to Belkate, on the Diamantina, was practically
closed for the season. I determined to go by Eastern Creek, where
there had been some little rain. We had camped on the night of 20th
December on the Gilliatt River, where it is crossed by the Hughenden
Road. The waterhole had fallen to a puddle about 10 feet in
diameter, and when we arrived we found it in possession of a large
mob of cattle. After the water had been boiled twice and skimmed
and decanted it was good enough to make tea with. The horses,
however, could not be expected to like it, and on the 21st five of them
were missing. They were not found till four o’clock. I thought we
could reach the Eight-mile Waterhole on Eastern Creek (distant about
8 miles from our camp) before dark. We struck Eastern Creek just
after sunset, about 2 miles below the Eight-mile Hole. In creeks in
the “ downs” it is very hard to tell which is the main channel, and we
unfortunately selected one of the mouths of a tributary called Sadowa
Creek. Finding no water in this, and in the belief that we were
running up Eastern Creek, we followed Sadowa Creek for miles in
the dark, when we had to camp (at 11 o’clock at night) without water.
In the early morning of next day we packed up and retraced our
steps. We found in Eastern Creek, a little above its junction with


Sadowa Creek (surveyor’s tree 33), a waterhole, which we afterwards
found out to be the lower part of the Eight-mile Hole, but far separated
by the drought from the upper part. The hole was very small. The
water could not last another week, and a wide btorder of treacherous
clay surrounded it. A large mob of cattle was cuowded on the banks,
but the animals only ventured in one by one, aft’ter thev had become
fairly maddened by thirst. Then they had a struggle for life in
getting out. Four head of cattle were hopelessly bogged-—alive, but
doomed to a lingering death. We tied all the horses up, and watered
them with the tin dishes. We had to run Eastern Creek down (8 miles)
to Edington Station, which wms the nearest plaice where water was
certain, and we did not dare to camp the horses beside the boggy
waterhole.
u On the 24th w r e again started to run up Eastern Creek. We
found the Eight-mile Hole to be about 2 miles above the boggy hole
at the 33-mile tree. In the latter four more cattle had got bogged.
Thirteen miles further we passed another waterhole, but it was far
too boggy to water the horses. In 5 miles more we camped on a
little waterhole, apparently due to recent rain. On Christmas day we
passed a waterhole at 2-| miles, but it was dangerously boggy. At
miles and 111 miles we passed two waterholes wdth stony bottoms
and quite safe. At 20|- miles we camped on a fourth waterhole. The
next day (26th) we followed the creek up for 19 miles without seeing
any water, when, as the heat was terrible and one of the horses was
knocking up, we camped for a time. All the water we had seen in
Eastern Creek had been due to recent rain, which had apparently not
extended beyond the limits of our yesterday’s journey. After 7 more
miles of travelling, mainly south-—the creek having in the meantime
run out—we camped (still without water) on the open downs to rest,
as several horses were now quite exhausted. We packed up again
just before sunset, and in 10 miles reached the Diamantina and camped
on a waterhole about a mile and a-half below Kynoona.”
The visit (Ist and 2nd January) to Winton is thus described :
“ The town depends entirely on a waterhole in Mistake Creek, 2
miles distant. The waterhole (which is narrow) at the date of my
visit had shrunk up to about 400 yards in length, and was said to be
8 feet deep at the deepest point. It was expected that it might stand
the demands made on it for three weeks or a month longer, when,
if the drought still remained unbroken, the population of Winton
Would have to migrate in a body to Conn’s Waterhole with their flocks
and herds.”
I shall only trouble you with one more extract, descriptive of the
journey from Manuka towards Charters Towers:—
“The heat and drought had been telling very severely on the
horses, and we were obliged to leave one at Manuka and let the others
rest for two days. We left Manuka at 5 p.m. on 10th January, and
travelled on by the moonlight. About 7 o’clock in the morning we
reached and camped at a waterhole, due to recent rain, beside a straw
building known as the Stone Hut (40 miles). One of the horses had
to be left 15 miles short of the water, but was brought on to the
camp in the afternoon. On the 13th we left the Stone Hut and
camped —as one of the horses was too weak to go further—on a drop
of very filthy water 10 miles further down Eockwood Creek. The
water was due to, the previous: day’s rain. We cut a hole in the clay


Tan Yean ...
6,400,000,000 gallons.
Malmsbury Coliban
... 3,255,000,000 „
Prospect
... 10,812,313,000 „
Enoggera ...
... 1,000,000,000 „
on the margin, and let the surface water into it by a trench. The
comparatively clean water thus obtained was ladled into tin dishes,
from which we watered the horses. Two of the weak ones got stuck
in the clay bed of the waterhole and had to be pulled out by main
force.”
These impressions of a traveller faintly represent the old
condition of affairs in times of drought, but the experiences of
residents might furnish still more moving pictures: townships and
households on short allowance of water • the feverish expectation of
the team s coming from a long distance with a supply of water which the
horses must have partly consumed on the journey; the travelling of
stock in search of water and grass; the consternation on a station
already short of water on the arrival of the statutory notice of the
passing of a travelling mob, and the vigilance of the owners in
seeing that the mob travels over the run at the statutory pace and
clears out within the statutory time. Such tales must be heard over
camp fires or in the homesteads of the pastoral districts before their
full import can be realised.
Such being the condition of affairs, it became necessary to supple-
ment the scanty supply of water provided by Nature, and the question
was felt on all hands to be one of national importance. Much was
done by the G-overnment and private individuals in the way of con-
serving water in dams and tanks; but the cost was great, and the
supply disproportionally small. In 1885 the trouble came to a head,
for not only were cattle and sheep dying by hundreds of thousands,
but even some of the western towns were threatened with extinction
from the want of water. Mr. J. B. Henderson, Hydraulic Engineer,
and the writer were therefore sent out to study the structure of the
western country and report whether there was a chance of success in
boring for artesian water, and, if so, to determine the site of the first
experiment. I came to the conclusion (in confirmation of speculations
first made in 1881) # that the whole of the western downs offered a
promise of artesian water, and Mr. Henderson selected Blackall for
the first bore, as that township appeared to be in the direst straits.
There are now over 200 bores in the interior, most of them successful,
in the aggregate, I calculate, capable of producing 125,000,000
gallons per day, or 45,625,000,000 gallons per annum, and, in fact,
producing not much less, since only a few of the bores are controlled.
Such figures convey only vague ideas to most minds, and Mr.
Henderson has kindly, at my request, supplied me with the capacity
of some of the best known Australian reservoirs for comparison.
Boughly speaking, the annual discharge of the Queensland artesian
bores is 7 £ times the capacity of the Tan Tean reservoir, 14 times that of
the Malmsbury Goliban, 4-j times that of the Prospect, and 45 times
that of the Enoggera reservoir. f It is difficult to estimate the improve-
ment which these bores have effected in the conditions of life in the
West.
'lt is now well known that all our artesian water, with trifling
exceptions, occurs in the Bolling Downs or Lower Cretaceous forma-
tion. Over this formation the tipper Cretaceous or Desert Sandstone
See “ Transcontinental Railway Report,” pp. 2 and 3,
t The figures are


lies unconformably. The latter must have covered an area of at least
500,000 square miles, but has now been reduced by denudation to
isolated tablelands.
The fact that water will find its own level affords the simplest
explanation of artesian water supply. If we find a porous stratum
sandwiched between two impermeable strata, and cropping up at a
higher elevation than the site of a bore which pierces the porous
stratum in question, the problem is solved, whether the water-bearing
stratum, when mapped out, form a circle and the stratum be con-
tinuous within the limits of the circle, like a porous earthenware
saucer sunk in clay, or whether, on the other hand, the stratum die out
when traced along its outcrop or followed down the dip into the bowels
of the earth. In the latter case the stratum is simply a pipe of more
or less irregular sectional area, which the bore converts into an inverted
syphon. In a clear syphon the water would rise with all the force due
to the pressure of the head of water; but a syphon closely packed with
sand is not only a syphon but also a filter, and in proportion to the
openness or compactness of the sand the flow will be strong or feeble.
In mapping the eastern limit of the Lower Cretaceous formation,
we find that at the base there is a series of soft, gray, very friable
sandstones, grits, and conglomerates. This sandstone absorbs water
with avidity. The rock is, moreover, so destitute of cement, or it may
be that the cement is so soluble, that a lump of it on being saturated
with water falls away to a heap of sand. We can therefore under-
stand how, underground, where such strata are saturated with water,
they may be correctly described by the drillers as “ sand ” instead of
“ sandstone.” To this rock we felt it necessary to give a distinctive
name, the “ Blythesdale Braystone,” as it is well developed atßlythes-
dale, near Roma, and somewdiat resembles a sandy rock much in demand
in the west of Scotland, under the name of braystone, for holystoning
and scrubbing purposes.
This sandstone is first met with near the New South Wales
border, at Whetstone, on the Macintyre River. The exigencies of
travel took us down the Macintyre to G-oondiwindi, and up the Weir
River, where nothing but alluvial soil is met with till we reached
Tarewinnaba, on the Weir. At this point the braystone is first seen,
and is at once covered by the Desert Sandstone. A cake of Desert
Sandstone extends from this point north, east, and west. The eastern
and northern margins of this tableland were traced, and it was found
that the Desert Sandstone overlaps the Ipswich Coal Measures, which
are exposed in several places where the Condamine has cut through
the overlying Desert Sandstone. On the north-western margin of
this tableland, near Surat, the Desert Sandstone directly overlies the
upper or shaly beds which give rise to the Rolling Downs, and which
form by far the greater proportion of the strata of the Lower
Cretaceous formation, so that the Blythesdale Braystone may be
assumed to crop up beneath the Desert Sandstone somewhere between
Dogwood Creek and Wiconbilla Creek. At Bendemere, on Yuleba
Creek, the Desert Sandstone having been denuded by the stream, the
upper shaley Rolling Downs Beds are directly in contact with strata
understood to belong to the Ipswich Coal Measures, and the non-
appearance of the Blythesdale beds is accounted for by a “ fault.” A
few miles to the west the Blythesdale braystones are met with in
great force, being succeeded to the north by the older (supposed)


Ipswich Coal Measures, and to the south by the newer shaly members
of the Lower Cretaceous formation. As the hraystone is traced north-
westward by Blythesdale, Eoma, Taboonbay, Donnybrook, Hogan-
thulla, and the heads of the Warrego, its south-western edge merges
into the downs formed by the shaly members of the Lower Cretaceous,
and to the north-east it disappears under the Desert Sandstone (which
is itself succeeded by bedded basaltic lavas). Nothing is more certain
than that no member of the Lower Cretaceous formation appears on
the north-eastern side of the Desert Sandstone and basalt tableland
which forms the divide between the waters draining southward into the
Great Australian Bight and those draining eastward into the Pacific.
In some places, however, as at the head of the Warrego on the Bight
side, and at the head of the Nogoa on the Pacific side of the almost
imperceptible watershed, the denudation of the Desert Sandstone
(which apparently has a very uneven bottom) exposes larger or
smaller areas of the Blythesdale Bray stone.
On the divide between the head waters of the Warrego and
Barcoo the Desert Sandstone remains as a tongue which covers the
whole of the outcrop of the Blythesdale braystones, and on its western
margin directly overlies the shaly members of the Lower Cretaceous
formation. A glimpse of the braystones is seen at the head of
Birkhead Creek, covered to the north and east by the Desert Sand-
stone, and succeeded to the south-west by the shaly beds of the
Eolling Downs,
Further north, on the head waters of the Barcoo and the Thom-
son, the Desert Sandstone extends as a comparatively narrow tongue
as far west as Barcaldine. Prom beneath this formation the Blythes-
dale braystones emerge at a point on the heads of Aramac Creek,
about 35 miles north-west of Jericho, and have been followed north-
ward through nearly 2 degrees of latitude, until it is again covered
by the Desert Sandstone, in the vicinity of Corinda Station. The
western edge of the Desert Sandstone rests directly on the Lower
Cretaceous shales from this point as far as Hughenden, and the
Desert Sandstone forms an unbroken escarpment of about 80 miles in
length, and entirely conceals the Blythesdale braystones from view.
The convenient phrase, “ the exigencies of travel,” must again be
employed to explain the difficulty of running with accuracy two lines
which may be 20 or 30 miles apart. Granting that the two men
employed can do a good deal on horseback, they must keep in touch
with the main camp, for a survey party as well as an army “ marches
on its belly,” according to the saying of Frederic the Great, and on a
long journey horseflesh must be husbanded with care. For this reason
attention was, north of the Warrego, mainly directed to the delimita-
tion of the outer or eastern boundary of the Lower Cretaceous forma-
tion. The presence of the Blythesdale braystones, however, has been
ascertained, as has already been mentioned, at different points as far
north as Corinda Creek, a tributary of Torrens Creek, operations
having had to be suspended at Hughenden.
In the region where an attempt has been made to map the whole
area covered by the outcrop of the Blythesdale braystones —viz., from
near Chadford, on a head of Yeulba Creek, to the Warrego, the out-
crop forms a belt varying in width from sto 25 miles. The invariable
position of this belt on the outer edge of the Lower Cretaceous area
leaves no room for any reasonable doubt that it is composed of the


teds lying at the hase of the formation; hut apparent dips have proved
confusing and unreliable, so that I have no confidence in any estimate
of the total thickness of strata represented by the outciop, I incline
to the belief that on the whole the angle of dip is very low—perhaps
in many instances no more than the fall of the ground. However, an
angle of 1 degree, or 1 in 57, would give a thickness of 46.0 feet for
an outcrop of 5 miles wide; and from the evidence afforded by
numerous bores I am prepared to admit that this thickness is by no
means overestimated.
Hitherto it has been convenient to speak of the series of beds
designated the Blythesdale Braystone as being of similar composition
throughout. This, however, is not the case, as the braystone of
normal composition is “ parted ” in places by beds of sandy shale
and Calcareous sandstone. We may imagine coarse sandy and
gravelly sediments brought down to the margin of a shallow Lower
Cretaceous sea by numerous tributary rivers, and spread out along the
shore and out to sea by the action of waves and currents. Such
material could only travel along the bottom, being too coarse and of
too high specific gravity to remain in suspension, as a general thing,
far from the mouths of rivers. The influence of wave-action, at least,
would cease when the sea attained even a moderate depth. lam
inclined to believe that the sea in which the Blythesdale Braystone
was deposited and distributed—viz., the sea which divided the Aus-
tralian continent from north to south into two islands—-was very
shallow throughout, and may have been swept from end to end by
currents sufficiently powerful materially to aid wave-action in the
distribution of the sand and gravel. Otherwise Ido not knowhow to
account for the wide distribution of the sand and gravel which is
evidenced by the artesian wells. I imagine, further, that the later
but continuous period to which the argillaceous Lower Cretaceous
deposits belong was one in which a marked subsidence of the interior
of this sea took place. The wide distribution of the Blythesdale sands
has a parallel in a newer geological period in the enormous extension
of the Desert Sandstone. Unless I had seen it with my own eyes, I
should have had a difficulty in conceiving that heavy gritty sand could
be so widely distributed as it is in the latter ease; but, having seen it,
I can believe that the Blythesdale sands may be equally extensive.
It may be assumed that the Blythesdale and Desert Sandstone
periods were both characterised by heavy rainfall, producing rapid
denudation of the land, and possibly by prevalent rough weather at
sea, causing violent wave-action. At the same time the intercalation
of some argillaceous sediments among the Blythesdale braystones need
cause no surprise, as they would be the natural result of occasional
spells of dry weather on land or comparative calms at sea. The wonder
is that there should be so few. It is not likely that the intercalated
argillaceous sediments are continuous over the whole area occupied by
the Lower Cretaceous formation. They are more likely to be lenticular
at the margin, and to spread out and thicken towards the interior of
the area. The Blythesdale braystone, therefore, although it may locally
be split up into two or more beds by the intercalation of comparatively
impermeable strata, I believe to be practically a continuous deposit.
It has already been mentioned that the Blythesdale Braystone is,
over a large area, covered by the Desert Sandstone. Taking this into
account, and also the fact that the actual breadth of the outcrop, where


it is not covered by the Desert Sandstone, has not been mapped, we
are still uncertain of the total area of the outcrop. I think, however,
we are safe in assuming an average breadth of about 5 miles. In his
Annual Eeport for the year 1892, Mr. Henderson made what I then
thought a very liberal allowance when he based a calculation of the
area of gathering-ground on the assumption that “ the aggregate
breadth of the outcropping edges” was one-eighth of a mile. In the
light of the recent investigation I feel tolerably confident that the
breadth of the basal beds (the Blythesdale Braystone) is at least forty
times as much, not to speak of beds of similar composition on higher
horizons, which makes a material difference in the conditions of the
problem. Assuming that the total length of the ribbon representing
the outcrop in Queensland of the Blythesdale Braystone is 1,000 miles,
and its average breadth* 5 miles, this outcrop alone would give a
gathering-ground or intakeof s,ooosquaremiles. An average of thirteen
meteorological stations along the line of outcrop, taken from the map
issued with Mr. Henderson’s last report, gives roughly for this area a
mean annual rainfall of 27 inches, which is considerably greater than
that of the interior of the downs country.
The comparative altitude of the outcrop of the Blythesdale bray-
stones and the western country where the artesian wells are situated
is an all-important factor in the calculation. The surface level has
not been reliably ascertained at the sites of most of the private (suc-
cessful) bores. From Mr. Henderson’s last report we learn that the site
of the Government bore at Tambo is 1,325 feet, and this is certainly one
of the most elevated sites, Muckadilla comes next at 1,169 feet. The
greater part of the area over which flowing artesian water has been
obtained” is much lower than either of these two places. The Blythes-
dale braystones attain their highest observed altitude of 1,700 feet
above the sea-level at Forrest Yale, on the Maranoa, and the altitude of
the outcrop gradually falls to 800 feet at the Hew South Wales border,
and probably is almost at the sea-level near the Gulf of Carpentaria.
I cannot speak with confidence of the extension of the lowest beds of
the Lower Cretaceous formation into Hew South Wales and Victoria,
but as the cliffs on the coast near Coorang are supposed to be Tertiary,
the lowest beds of the Lower Cretaceous, if present, must be beneath
the sea-level at the Great Australian Bight.
The outcrop of the Blythesdale braystones is crossed by several
large streams, Blyth’s, Bungil, Bungeworgorai, and Amby Creeks, the
Maranoa Eiver, IToganthulla Creek, the Warrego Fiver, Birkhead
Creek, and the eastern tributaries of the Thomson Eiver. All of
these streams run only for a small portion of the year, but while they
run a rock of the bibulous nature of the Blythesdale Braystone must
be absorbing water greedily, and the water must not only spread
laterally but must also fill up as much of the underground portion of
the stratum or strata as had been emptied by leakage.
Two kinds of leakage might affect the bibulous beds at the base of
the Lower Cretaceous formation in a sufficient degree to be worth
consideration for the present purpose. Suppose the beds to dip
seaward and beneath the sea, and either to rise to the ocean bed or to
dip at a lower angle than the slope of the sea-bed, there would be a
leakage into the sea. And again, suppose (what we believe to be
actually the case) the outcrop of the beds to occur at gradually lower
levels till it attains the sea-level, .there would be a leakage in the form


of springs or into river beds all along the line. In either case the
leakage, however compact the beds might be, would not cease till the
water-level in the beds was reduced to the level of the sea, unless the
head of water were from time to time replenished.
Some evidence has been adduced to prove that leakage of the first
kind actually takes place. Professor David, in a lecture in November,
1893, described “powerful springs of fresh water at Port Macdonell,
rising up from the floor of the ocean at somelittle distance from the shore
and discolouring the water for some little distance around.” Again,
Mr, G. S. Griffith, in the Deports of the Australasian Association’s
Christchurch meeting, says that “ along the south coast of Australia,
between Warrnambool and the Murray mouth, the sea literally bubbles
up with fresh water which has leaked up through the sea-sands.” Mr.
E. E, Pittman says in the paper just read before this Section —The
artesian basin may extend to the southward, possibly even under the
Eocene beds of the Lower Darling, the north-western portion of
Victoria, and part of South Australia to the Coorong, where fresh
water has, I believe, long been known to escape from the beach.”
The observations of Professor David, Mr. Griffith, and Mr- Pittman all
evidently refer to the same district. If Lower Tertiary rocks form the
cliffs, the fact that the water leaks from them above the sea-level has
no direct bearing on the question of an outlet for the Lower Cretaceous
strata. The Tertiary cliffs may, for any evidence there is to the
contrary, extend beneath the sea, and leak out there sufficiently to
account for the phenomena referred to by the observers quoted. I
cannot deny that the Lower Cretaceous formation may crop out at the
sea bottom still further out to sea, but the fact is not proven, and in
the nature of things it is not likely to be proven.
Nor is evidence of the second kind of leakage to hand. The out-
crop of the Blythesdale Bray stone as it falls away from its highest
altitude at Eorrest Yale down to the Macintyre Kiver is not very con-
spicuously marked by springs. Indeed, given a continuous outcrop of
a stratum such as this falling away from a higher level to a lower, it
is easy to understand that water permeating the stratum would simply
saturate it, and would never, except where locally covered by clay, rise in
the form of a fountain, though it might fill hollows in its surface, such
as are made by river courses or covered by alluvial sands and gravels.
The mapping of the “ Blythesdale Braystone” is the work of the
last eight months, and consequently no observations have yet been
made to determine the proportion of the water brought down by any
given river crossing their outcrop which is absorbed by the bibulous
strata. A calculation on similar lines has, however, been made by
Mr. H. C. Bussell, with regard to the Darling Elver. Mr. Bussell
writes* “ The mean rainfall on the Darling Biver catchment for
the past ten years has been 22T4 inches, and of this only 1|- per cent.,
or 0 - 33 inches of rain, passes Bourke in the river. If 25 per cent, of
it, which is equal to 5'53 inches of rain, passed away in this river, as
it does in the Murray, there would be seventeen times as much water
passing Bourke as now actually does pass .... and we ought,
therefore, to have an underground water supply at least equal to sixteen
times as much water as passes Bourke now. . . That we do not
find it in the Darling is to my mind proof that it passes away to
underground drainage.”
» in “ The Source of the Underground Water in the Western Districts,” Jouru. Eoyai Society
N. S. Wales, 1889.


Referring to Queensland localities, Mr. James Tolson says* : — 1
“ I have seen 10 inches of rain fall within 24 hours on the high desert
country between Uanda and the Cape River Hold Field, and not a drop
run off the surface, the whole of it having been absorbed by the
porous formation. I have also ridden through Torrens Creek after
its being uncrossable for a week at the Lammermoor Crossing, and
with a width of 70 yards, when the water was well above the saddle-
flaps, and 40 miles lower down on the same day the stream was not
more than 30 yards wide, and not up to the horse’s knees ” The first
part of the above shows the absorbent qualities of the Desert Sand-
stone, and the second of the Blythesdale beds.
Mr. Russell’s figures, if applicable to Queensland, prove more
than the absorption of the water by porous strata. If they are
reliable—and 1 see no reason to doubt their accuracy —and again, if
they are applicable to Queensland (which is very likely, considering
the exceptionally bibulous character of the Blythesdale Braystone),
the bibulous rocks at the base of the. Lower Cretaceous must
annually, or at least every wet season, absorb an amount of water
which would severely tax my arithmetic. And if the bibulous rocks
absorb such an amount of water, they must first have been drained of
water to a like extent. How would such a drainage be effected P
Certainly not by the bores, or there would have been a difference in
the character of the rivers of the district before and after the com-
mencement of boring; and the output of the bores, great as it is,
is, after all, a mere bagatelle compared to the amount which would be
“ lost ” by the rivers of Queensland, supposing them to behave like
the Darling. This reductio ad absurdwn need not be further dwelt on.
Certainly the drainage of the Blythesdale braystone is not effected by
the bores. The only conceivable agent capable of effecting it is the
leakage in the sea bottom. Thus, although we have no direct proof of
the latter, I hold that it is proven if once it be shown that the
Queensland rivers suffer a loss of water comparable to that of the
Darling.
If the foregoing conjectures as to the drainage of the upper
portion of the Blythesdale Braystone and its periodical replenish-
ment by rivers in the wet seasons be correct, it is possible to conceive
of a long drought reducing the water to the sea-level in such of the
strata as are open at one end to the sea. If the strata can imbibe as
much as the parallel case of the Darling would lead us to infer, they
must lose, by leakage into the sea, nearly as much as they imbibe,
and the amount drained from them by the bores will be insignificant
by comparison. If the water-bearing strata communicate with the
sea', the water can never fall below the sea-level, but if it stood long
at that level it would become salt. Some hold that the water of our
artesian wells is sea water raised to the surface by heat or the expan-
sion of gas; but if it were sea water it would not lose its salt by
filtration, and moreover it would be forced up along the bedding-
planes of the strata, and issue along the line of outcrop in salt water
springs. That the water of the bores is fresh (or contains only such
mineral salts as it might acquire from the containing strata) proves
that it gravitates from the outcrops of the strata and not from the
sea. Numerous well-known instances of fresh-water springs rising
* “Australasian Pastoralists* Eeriew,” 15tli December, 1892.


out o£ the "beach sands, and even in the bottom of the sea, show that
even a feeble pressure at the back of an underground stream of fresh
water is sufficient to keep out the salt water.
It has already been mentioned that the Desert Sandstone covers
a large area of the outcrop of the Blythesdale beds. Although the
former is less bibulous than the latter, it is still very absorbent. Mr.
Tolson’s remarks about 10 inches of rain having fallen on this forma-
tion without making the streams run are very much to the point, and
I can confirm his obseiwation from a large experience of Desert
Sandstone country. ."Mow, the Desert Sandstone, thus saturated with
water, lies like a full sponge on the top of the outcrop of the Blythes-
dale braystone, and must tend to equalise the supply by feeding the
latter long after the rivers have ceased to run.
The water-bearing beds of the Lower Cretaceous formation may
not only be supplied from above by the Desert Sandstone, but I
strongly suspect may be reinforced by the agency of strata geologi-
cally on a lower horizon. Till lately the best information available
led me to the belief that the Trias-Jura formation on Ipswich Coal
Measures was succeeded conformably by the Lower Cretaceous or
Bolling Downs formation, but in the last trip I have seen unmistak-
able evidence of an unconformability between them. It may be that
the bibulous lower members of the Cretaceous rest directly on sandy
members of the Ipswich Coal Measures, which dip in the same direction
in the manner shown in the following diagram :


In this case the sandstone beds above the Toowoomba basalts and
the Murphy’s Creek beds below would feed the Blythesdale Braystone,
and still further tend to equalise the supply by making good the loss
entailed by the supposed connection of the latter with the ocean.
I have spoken so much of the Blythesdale braystones that I may
have created the impression that they are the only water-bearing beds
of the Lower Cretaceous formation. Their importance warrants the
attention they have received, but there are water-bearing beds on higher
horizons. Many of the bores have struck two or more supplies of
water. Sometimes the first supply does not rise to the surface. A
second may reach the surface and flow over, while a third may con-
siderably increase the supply. The feeble supply of the upper beds
may be explained by the fact that they do not crop out at high
altitudes. As a rule the higher beds must be more limited in extent,
and must draw their supplies for the most part from local sources—•
in other words, they crop up where the rainfall is least, and the outcrop
has less chance of being crossed by streams running long enough to
fill them up with water.
It is not asserted that all the strata in which artesian water has
been struck have a connection with the sea. The Blythesdale Bray-
stone as a whole probably has such a connection, for on no other
theory can we account for the loss of water by such streams as the
Darling River and Torrens Creek ; but it “ stands not within the
limit of belief” that sandy beds only a few feet or yards in thickness
can persist for hundreds of miles. Such a closed tube as would be
formed by a bed thinning out at a depth, not being subject to leakage
at the sea-level, would, on being tapped by a bore, form an inverted
syphon in which water would rise nearly to the level of the head of
water formed by its outcrop ; and if it were drawn upon by numerous
bores (the chance of its being replenished being less than that of the
lower beds) the water might in a long drought be reduced to the level
of the site of the lowest bore, or, in other words, could not flow again
till the head of water had been added to by further rain.
The varying depths at which the water-bearing beds are met
with, even in bores not far apart, prove that the strata are subject
to considerable undulations or dislocations. Another circumstance
indicative of undulation is the temperature of the water of the
bores, which is, in many instances, greater than the depth at which
the water has been struck would warrant on the supposition of a
normal increase with depth. This argument for undulation has been
well enforced by Professor David in his article on Artesian "Water in
New South Wales and Queensland, in the Transactions of the Royal
Society of New South Wales for 1893. Another explanation of the
high temperature has been suggested —viz., that the water has come
in contact with igneous rocks still retaining a considerable amount of
their original heat. This is an explanation, however, which I hold
to be inconsistent with the fact that the Lower Cretaceous is a forma-
tion in which absolutely no evidence of comtemporaneous igneous
action within the Queensland area has been detected, in which respect
it presents a strong contrast to the preceding Trias-Jura and the
succeeding Desert Sandstone. The effect of a dislocation or fault
throwing down a bed of sandstone sandwiched between impervious
claybeds wmuld be to stop any communication with the sea which it
may have had originally, and convert it into a closed tube.


An idea prevails in some quarters that every successful artesian
bore is successful because it lias struck the channel of an underground
river; but against this theory some fatal objections may be raised. A
river ceases to be a river when it enters the sea. Now, the Blythesdale
beds are marine, as their outcrop (the nearest part to the old coast-
line) contains marine fossils, as do the argillaceous strata above them ;
and we cannot imagine a river bed meandering through a sea-bottom.
Besides, the wide area over which the water-bearing beds have already
been met with in bores renders the idea that they are all river beds in
the last degree improbable.
The mountains of New Guinea have been pointed to by some as
supplying the necessary “ head ” for the artesian water of the interior
of Queensland. Lower Cretaceous rocks are known to exist in
Queensland not far from the Gulf of Carpentaria, and it is more than
likely that the base-beds of the formation are actually below the sea-
level in Queensland, and that they may sweep beneath the Gulf and
the western portion of Torres Straits, and rise to the surface in
Dutch New Guinea. But this necessarily implies that these beds
must crop out beneath the sea, and such a leakage would be the result
that I doubt if any head of water in New Guinea would raise the
water in Queensland above the sea-level.
The Himalayas and even the Ancles have been supposed by others
to be the gathering-ground. It is not conceivable that any fissnre or
network of fissures could be kept open from the Andes or Himalayas
to Queensland. Neither is it conceivable that any stratum could
extend continuously for such distances, remain without interruption
of such a character as to be a channel for water, sweep beneath the
intervening oceanic depths and be protected throughout by a cover of
impermeable rock ; all of which conditions would have to be fulfilled
before we could accept this theory.
Another theory, that of “rock-pressure,” is thus concisely
formulated in the “ American Geologist” (vol. Y,, p. 300) by Mr. Eobert
Hay : —■“ All rocks in the earth’s crust contain some water. The more
porous rocks contain the greater quantity. At a distance below the
surface the superincumbent strata subject the rock masses to
enormous pressure.” On the assumption that the average specific
gravity of the deep-seated rocks of Kansas is 3, Mr. Hay calculates
that “ a prism of the rocks to the depth of 600 feet, and 1 inch
square, would weigh 718 lb., which is equivalent to a pressure of
52 atmospheres. If, then,” he continues, “25 feet be taken as the
measure of a column of water equivalent to one atmosphere, the rock-
pressure would be more than the equivalent of a column of water
twice this height. Let a water-bearing stratum at a depth of 600 feet,
as at Eichfield, be pierced by the drill, we should then have the rock-
pressure of 52 atmospheres squeezing the water out of the rock pores,
and, granting sufficient plasticity in the rock and a sufficient quantity
of water, it must rise in the tube which has only a pressure of one
atmosphere upon it. ... A bed rock with mobile molecules at or
near saturation under this enormous pressure must cause in a narrow
tube a flowing well.”
Now, in such a stratum -as Mr. Hay has imagined, the effect of
pressure would simply be to close up the spaces between the solid
grains, and diminish the stratum'’s capacity for carrying water, and the


surplus water would be forced into tbe underlying or overlying strata,
if these were sufficiently permeable, or, if not, the surplus water would
be forced out at the outcrop of the stratum. In any case, the water-
carrying capacity of the stratum would be permanently impaired, or, if
the pressure were great enough, entirely destroyed.
Another idea is that there are in the bowels of the earth vast
reservoirs of water—not filling up the interstices of porous strata, but
actually filling up void spaces among the rocks—and that the presence
of superincumbent rock is such that on these reservoirs being pricked
by a bore the water rises as in the tube attached to a squeezed rubber
bag. I can imagine the roof of such a reservoir tumbling in, in which
case the water could only rise to an extent dependent on the bulk of
the rock which had fallen into the water ; or supposing the whole
mass of water to be displaced by an equal mass of rock, it must either
occupy the space formerly occupied by the rock or get away laterally
into crevices in the rocks above the former surface of the water, if
such crevices are available, but at most would not rise above the level
of the rock which had fallen in. To take the case of a shaft com-
municating with extensive underground workings : Let us suppose
the workings to become filled with water and the roof suddenly to
collapse. If the quantity of water were large enough to fill up the
shaft and flow over, it would probably do so at first, and even flow
over the mouth of the shaft; but the water would simply stand in the
shaft, .supposing the latter to be water-tight, and there would merely
be a tube filled with water, and in no sense an artesian supply. If, on
the other hand, an underground reservoir were to remain unfilled up
by the tumbling in of the rocks above it, the rise of water in a bore
tapping it would depend on the head of water supplying the reservoir,
no matter how extensive the latter might be. My belief is, however,
that such underground reservoirs are not common objects in nature.
Caverns in limestone in which large streams disappear, to reappear at
lower levels, are by no means unknown, but such caverns are for the
most part confined to levels within the reach of the solvents conveyed
by the atmosphere.
, If is not within the scope of a single paper to consider the whole
subject of artesian water. My object in addressing this Section has
been to point out what light has been thrown on the question so far as
it affects Queensland, by recent investigations. We have shown that
an intake at sufficient altitude to account for the flow of water in
the artesian bores of the west exists along the eastern margin of the
Lower Cretaceous, and having found a simple explanation in agree-
ment with known physical laws, I go no further in search of another.
I have argued that the loss of water by the Darling Eiver, and pro-
bably a similar loss of water by the Wbstern Queensland rivers, proves
that the water-bearing strata must leak into the sea, and hence that
unless the strata be periodically replenished the sea-level would ulti-
mately become the level to which the water would rise. A drought
sufficiently long to bring about this result would no doubt have for a
prior result the destruction of the greater part of the land fauna of
this part of Australia, including the genus homo. Ear short of this,
however, we can conceive of the temporary diminution or cessation of
tbe flow of some, at least, of our artesian wells. The amount of
water contributed to the water-bearing strata of the Lower Cretaceous
formation every wet season by such rivers as the Darling is so great,


and consequently tlie amount of leakage into the sea
the quantity abstracted by the artesian wells, large as it is, and even
if it were ten times greater, is insignificant by comparison. Finally,
as the leakage into the sea is so vast, and is entirely beyond human
control, the draught on our underground supply made by artesian
wells is not worth controlling. I make no apology for the fact that
my views on this important question are not those which I held twelve
months ago. My colleague, Mr. Maitland, and I went out into the
field with the object of laying a foundation of facts for the guidance
of ourselves and others who may wish to rest their theories on solid
ground. It is for others to judge whether we have succeeded,
By Authority ; Edmund Gregory, Government Printer, William street, Brisbane*




