









fi3*SB
ARTHUR REDIVIVUS
THE ARTHUR SYSTEM
FOR THE
* "
PREVENTION OF PROXIMATE DECAY OF
THE TEETH,
REVIVED AND EXTENDED BY
H. HAYES NORMAN, D.D.S.
ADELAIDE JUNE, 1892. .
HUSSEY AND GILLINGHAM, PRINTERS AND LITHOGRAPHERS,
WAYMOUTH STREET.




mitt / prz^i
I - (A. 02.
The writer dedicates this little work, although a mere
skeleton, to
LEONARD W. SICKLE, M.R.C.S., Eng.,
L.R.C.P., Lend.,
MOUNT BARKER, S.A
He knows of no one in South Australia, in the Parent
Sciences of Medicine and Surgery, who takes, and
has taken, more interest in Dentition
and its subsequent troubles.


> '''


PREFACE.
CRAWFORD, speaking at a Con-
vention of Dental Surgeons in the
United States within a few weeks of the
present time, in a paper on “ The Care of
Children’s Teeth,” made the following
remarks :—“ The care of the temporary
or deciduous teeth has not received the
attention which the importance of the
subject demands. If dentistry everaccom-


plishes the good it is capable of accom-
plishing for humanity, this department of
practice must be more closely attended to.
That at least 95 per cent, of the school
children are affected with dental caries
. c
bodes more evil to the people from
the health standpoint than any other fact.
The fathers and mothers are more derelict
in their duty in regard to the care of their
children’s teeth than in any other par-
ticular, and he believed that this dereliction
was largely responsible for the death-rate
of children in this country.” — Cosmos,
April, 1892.


This somewhat gloomy picture is re-
flected here in South Australia, and the
writer trusts his honest attempt to point
out the remedy may meet with a lenient
consideration at the hands of his readers.
Rockville House,
North Terrace,
June , iBg2.




ARTHUR REDIVIVUS.
Chapter I.
SOME twenty-two or three years since a
celebrated and skilful American Dental
Surgeon, Robert Arthur, M.D., D.D.S.,
Professor of the Principles of Dental
Surgery in the Philadelphia and Pennsyl-
vania Dental Colleges, published a work
on “ The Prevention of the Decay of the
Teeth,” based upon his actual tests and


practice during the preceding twenty
years.*
The writer of these pages offers
them, hoping that they may be of use,
as an abbreviation of Dr. Arthur’s work
and a compilation.
The writer has added some remarks
and observations founded upon the twenty
years’ experience that he has gained since
the time when in the United States he first?
learnt and practised Arthur’s system.
Wherever original matter is added, it
will be prefaced or accompanied with the
* See Appendix, p. 57.


words “ The writer,” so that Dr. Arthur
and other authors referred to shall not be
credited with opinions or statements to
which they might possibly object. The
writer offers a sincere apology to Dr.
Arthur for much mutilation aud disfigure-
ment of the original, rendered necessary
to bring it within the price limit of a
pamphlet to be distributed at cost, or
under, and within the size that Parents or
Guardians in this age of high pressure
and hurry can read.
And here, also, the writer desires
to acknowledge his indebtedness to the
o


works of Sir Jno. Tomes, F.R.S., and
Chas. S. Tomes, M.A. (Oxon.), F.R.S.,
M. 8., D.D.S., etc. Also to the work
entitled “The American System of Dental
Surgery,” by W. F. Litch, M.D., D.D.S.
It is scarcely necessary to add that
the compilation is not written to teach
Dentists, but to reach Parents and
Guardians of young people, so that they
may be afforded an immunity from the
more serious form of dental decay.
An old proverb still holds good
“ An ounce of prevention is worth a pound
of cure.”


Chapter 11.
At about the time Dr. Arthur first pub-
lished his work, the writer was in America
studying Dentistry, and learnt the special
process referred to in this pamphlet.
Subsequently, in the early seventies, he
came to Adelaide, and, during the follow-
ing years, from time to time has operated
on the teeth upon the system advocated
by his teacher, Dr. Arthur.


To Dr. Arthur the dental world owes
some vast improvements in the practice of
Dentistry as he found it, notably the
discovery of that peculiar property of
I
absolutely pure gold to become self-
adhesive when once made hot. So that a
filling, or stopping, properly made thereof
cannot crumble, but is homogeneous, and
hence can be built into a decayed tooth
till its original form is restored. This, in
itself, revolutionised the art of stopping
teeth, and was a wonderful advance.
As before stated, the writer of these
pages practised Arthur’s system in Adelaide


in the early seventies, and the return to
him, quite lately, of many patients with
their teeth so operated upon, .sound and
healthy, while fellow-teeth not so operated
upon were found to be decayed, needing
painful, tedious, and expensive operations,
has inspired him with a desire to extend
the benefit to all wishing to receive it.
But the writer is more particularly anxious
that very young children should be so
treated, that they may be spared the
excessive pain they so constantly are
compelled to suffer from decaying teeth,
being even debarred from the relief


sought by their elders In tooth extraction.*
At that time, say 1871, the work was
excessively disagreeable, if not painful, to
< *
the patient, and most exhausting to the
health and energy of the operator. The
operations were then performed with steel
files, scrapers, and small chisels, together
with corundum wheels,! revolved by a
surgical foot-lathe. The forms of the
corundum wheels were crude, and being
thin and brittle, they frequently broke be-
* Children should be taken to a dentist at the age of three
(3) years.
f Small grinding-wheels made of crushed mineral, used for
cutting gems.


tween the teeth, and portions were thrown
into the throats of patients —moreover,
cutting and lacerating tongue and cheeks.
Hence, of late years, the writer has
only occasionally followed up the treatment
as recommended by Arthur, though he
fears his duty would have been better
performed had the operations been less
intermittent. But the recent invention of
thin metallic diamond discs and of vastly
improved dental engines has rendered
these operations so devoid of pain or in-
convenience that children of the tender
age of four years submit without a murmur.


Chapter 111.
It is a matter of common observa-
tion that the teeth of each succeeding
generation are becoming more and more
subject to caries.
Indeed, young and healthy child-
ren of the tender age of 4 years and
under are constantly presented to the
dentist with the temporary molars de-
cayed and aching, and with alveolar


abscess * at their roots, between which
is developing the permanent tooth
called “ bicuspid.” What chance,
* Abscess in the socket of the tooth. An apparent proof
of the rapid decadence of the temporary teeth is furnished in Dr.
Arthur’s work, which goes no farther, so far as concerns these
teeth, than advising that the temporary molar on its proximate
side to the first permanent molar (vide b Fig. 15) should be cut
away to protect the permanent tooth. Had the temporary
teeth been as defective as now, when Arthur wrote his work
(a. d. 1870), he doubtless would have advised the carrying out of
his system on the temporary shortly after they were all erupted.
The writer, some 12 or 13 years afterwards, noticed that his
first-born child (then a baby boy of four years) was developing
proximate decay of his teeth, and they were, with the exception
of the lower incisors, immediately ]]- spaced. The happy result
was that from the time of dentition till now he has never, to the
writer’s knowledge, had one minute’s pain from toothache.


the writer asks, has the permanent
tooth to be healthy when growing in a
bath of pus? The advice then given is
that the child mlist continue to suffer, lest
the premature extraction of these teeth
should cause irregularity and trouble with
the permanent teeth that are to follow.
And when dentition is complete, it is
almost an unknown case to see a young
person now, of either sex, of the age of
twelve years with a sound and healthy set
of teeth.
The writer knows, he is sorry to say,
of many young ladies who, before they


were brought to him, had lost all their
teeth while yet under the age of seventeen
years.
The writer points out that in the case
of the young persons referred to as losing
their teeth before their jawbones are de-
veloped, the evil is that absorption of
the sockets or alveoli steadily proceed-
ing year by year, they are, towards the
early middle period of life, left with so
little jawbone that it is almost impossible
for them to retain or wear artificial teeth.
The spongy portion of the jaw, t.e ., the
sockets (called the “ alveoli ”), is all


absorbed down to the ivory-like portion of
the base. The gum becomes a mere thin
membrane tightly stretched over the bone,
and, under the artificial plate, becomes,
as many patients say, “ always painfully
hot.” Thus, not only do these young
sufferers lose their teeth, but also a
large portion of the jawbones. The writer
is indebted for the three illustrations
(Figs, i, 2, and 3) to Pitch's “ System
of American Dentistry,” illustrating this
absorption.
In this Province, and, doubtless
in all English-speaking communities, it


is a very common occurrence to find the
first permanent molars, which are “ cut ”
at six years of age, immediately to the rear
of the last of the temporary set, decayed
not only in two, three, or four places on
their crowns, but where they are in contact
(vide with the temporary set just
above the gum, or —as adults would say of
their own teeth—“ in between the teeth.”
If decay occurred only on the crowns,
although to be regretted, it would not be
so serious a difficulty for a competent
dental surgeon to render the teeth in this
variety of decay as sound as if no decay


had ever occurred. Indeed, the writer has
no hesitation in saying that he should per-
manently save 999 out of any 1,000. He
does this by altering the conditions that
predisposed the tooth to decay. Fig. 4,
from Sir Jno. and Chas. Tomes’ “ Dental
Surgery,” shows a section of molar tooth
with decay progressing, having commenced
at the bottom of a deep little pit through a
fissure in the enamel in which agents
favourable to caries had been forced.
Decay spreads from this point rapidly in
the tooth-bone beneath, the enamel only
breaking down as the decay undermines it.


Thus, as patients say, “ the hole has only
come quite lately.”
To alter the condition here that
occasioned the decay, the operator cuts or
breaks down the overhanging walls of
enamel till the cavity is like a circular room
with the ceiling removed, and thus extends
his filling well beyond the circumference of
the original pit in the enamel —thus flatten-
ing the top of the tooth and doing away
with the pit, which had formerly been a
meat and vegetable trap. The' red lines
show the extent and shape of the filling.
But when the decay in the tooth is


“ between,” i.e., on its side touching its
neighbour, it is then difficult or impossible
to alter the conditions that predisposed the
decay. The writer seriously thinks that
decay in this position occurs in this
Province much nearer the gum — i.e., in
a much more dangerous part —than it
does in the teeth of Europeans and
Americans. At least, Arthur’s book shows
the decay occurring at ;v, Fig. 5, while
the spot we mostly find is at y, Fig. 5.
Wherever two teeth touch at their sides,
there you must have a triangular space
formed by the gum as a base and the sides


of the teeth as the angles {vide Fig. 4).
In this the fluids of the mouth and debris
of food lodge and decompose, and undergo
an acid re-action {vide Fig. 4). To demon-
strate how this inciting condition to decay
can be done away with, and the teeth at
their sides rendered, in the main, self-
cleansing —as taught by Arthur —is the
object of these pages.


Chapter IV.
As everyone knows, we are each during
life provided with two sets of natural teeth.
Just here the writer may say that persons
frequently state positively that they have
heard or even known some who have been
fortunate (or unfortunate enough ?) to cut
a complete third set ; but such a phe-
nomenal occurrence has never, as far as he
knows, come under the cognisance of a


dental surgeon capable of forming a correct
opinion. The error probably arises from
some of the permanent teeth being retarded
in their eruption (or cutting), and appearing
later in life.
The first, or temporary, set of teeth
consists of twenty —ten in each jaw—
upper and lower, and are nearly all erupted
by, say, the third year (vide Fig. 6). At
about the sixth year the four first permanent
molars —one at each side of the mouth,
upper and lower, immediately to the rear
and in contact with the last of the tempo-
rary molars —make their appearance {vide


Fig. 7). These valuable, perhaps the most
valuable of all the permanent teeth, are
nearly always mistaken by mothers as part
of the temporary' set, as the trouble of
teething having been over for three years,
their eruption has not been noticed. Thus
these teeth are frequently wrecks when the
little patients are first presented.
At about six months after these teeth
erupt, the temporary teeth should begin to
fall out. Alas ! they do not always do so,
but require surgical interference, as the
permanent teeth, now in the eruptive stage,
brooking no delay, hasten up beside them,


producing irregularity and trouble. The
temporary teeth should all be replaced
by the permanent at about the twelfth
year, with the exception of the wisdom
teeth, or third molars, which generally are
erupted at from the eighteenth to the
twenty-first year.
The writer desires here to refer to a
curious matter in connection with these
teeth, viz., their apparent gradual suppres-
sion by a process of evolution. It has been
noticed during the last fifty years that
many persons are deficient in their wisdom
teeth ; while in others they are diminutive


—almost appearing as supernumeraries.
In order to understand the system
practised by the writer for the purpose of
eradicating decay between the teeth, or
preventing decay, if in time , the reader
will do well to make himself familiar, by
consulting Figs. 5,8, and 9, with the names
of the teeth, their position, structure, etc.
The four upper front teeth are called
“incisors,” and are two on each side of the
middle line of the face (vide a, b, Fig. 8).
The next tooth on each side is the “canine,”
“ eye-tooth,” or “ cuspid.” The next two
to these on each side are known as the


“ bicuspids,” ist and 2nd {vide d, e, Fig. 8.)
Then follow the “ molars,” of which there
are three —also enumerated from the front
backwards (vide f, g, h, Fig, 8.) The top
portions of the teeth, used in grinding,
are known as “ grinding surfaces ” ; and
the side of the tooth that is nearest to a
central line of the face is called the
“mesial”; and the surface of the same
tooth furthest away from the centre, the
“ distal.” It will also be necessary for the
reader to make some acquaintance with
the form and structure of the teeth, so that
what is known as decay may be clearly


followed {vide Fig. 9). The visible portion
of a tooth is the “ crown ” ; and that portion
beneath the gum is the “ root.”
The crown {vide Fig. 5) of the tooth
is composed of, firstly, the“ cuticle*” ( a, a ),
* The writer thinks that to defects in this cuticle, or
skin, must be attributed the cause of decay between the teeth.
If the cuticle be perfect, it is difficult to account for acids, etc.,
attacking the lime of the enamel. Holy Writ—Job xix., 20
“lam escaped with the skin of my teeth.” Our rising genera-
tion do not seem generally to escape from their illnesses with the
skin of their teeth perfect. It may perhaps interest some to
know that this cuticle, or skin, was first demonstrated about
70 years since by Nasmyth, of Edinburgh, whose nephew they
will remember as living on North Terrace in this city. The
cuticle of the teeth is generally called “ Nasmyth’s membrane,”
in honour of the discoverer.


or skin which covers the enamel (b), and that
covers the “ dentine ” ( d ) or tooth-bone.
The root is covered with a substance inter-
mediate between dentine and enamel, and
called “ cementum,” (c)
The enamel, when perfectly formed,
entirely covers the crown of the teeth;
yet, from the imperfect union of the
different portions which commenced their
formations, at the highest portions of the
crown, there are, in the teeth of most
English-speaking people, two or more
defects {vide Figs. 10 and 11). In the
lower molars there are generally four


such, corresponding to the points of the
compass. On reference to Fig. 8, similar
defective places will be seen on the masti-
cating surface of all the molars and the two
bicuspids (/, J, k. l, m, n)- The “ nerve ”
of the tooth, as it is popularly called, is
the remaining portion of the pulp by which
the dentine, or tooth-bone, is formed. As
the forming tooth goes on towards comple-
tion, this pulp —originally the full size and
shape of the tooth —gradually diminishes,
until it occupies comparatively a small
part of the crown (vide p. Fig. 5).


Chapter V.
As soon as the teeth erupt through the
gums they are subjected to a process of
decomposition by which they are more or
less rapidly destroyed, unless some arti-
ficial means are employed to arrest its
progress. The writer thinks it would be a
difficult task—if not an impossible one —
to find in any rank of life a set of teeth
free from decay ; while the ravages have


become so general that it is not an un-
common thing to find the permanent molars,
cut at the sixth year, hopelessly decayed
by the eighth or ninth year. This decay,
or caries , has been attributed to various
causes ; but it cannot be put down to ill-
health or general debility, for extensive
dental decay is found in otherwise healthy
young people who have never had a day’s
illness since the completion of first den-
tition. And, again, some very great
invalids have more or less perfect sets of
teeth.
The hard portion of a tooth is prin-


cipally lime.* This substance is, as is well
known, decomposed when certain acids
are brought into contact with it. A striking
illustration of the effect of an acid upon a
body composed of lime is to be found in
the familiar experiment of immersing an
egg in vinegar. When this is done, the
lime is removed from the shell, leaving the
contents of the egg enclosed in a tough
membrane composed of animal matter not
liable to be affected by so dilute an acid.f
* See foot-note p. 34.
f Holy Writ—Proverbs x., 26: —“As vinegar to the
teeth, and as smoke to the eyes, so is the sluggard to them
that send him ” (irritating).


It has been stated by Sir Jno. Tomes
and others that the mucus of the mouth is
acid as a general rule, in states of health,
while the saliva is alkaline, and to this fact
is attributable the infrequency with which
we see decay of the lower incisors. But
the writer of these pages thinks that the
shape of the lower front teeth has more to
do with it, for they are, at their sides,
nearly parallel, and so do not afford a
favourable field for the lodgment of food,
stagnation of mucus, etc.*
* Otherwise it is difficult to account for the first bicuspid
•only two teeth away, and subject to the same influence —


The fragments of many kinds of food,
particularly vegetable, lodged in close
contact between the teeth, generate an
acid. Even when the fragments of food
do not undergo this change, they serve to
assist in retaining the acid secretion of
the mouth in contact with certain portions
of the teeth. Whatever may be the source
of the agent causing decay, the disorder
being so prone to approximate decay. All dentists know by
experience that the narrow necks of these teeth render them
particularly liable to breakage in extraction. Is not the narrow
neck the predisposing cause of the caries, as well as the liability
of breakage, and the absence of a neck in the lower incisors
the cause of the immunity from decay ?


is always observed to commence at points,
or places favouring the lodgment or reten-
tion of particles of food or the secretions
of the mouth. This, then, is a sufficient
explanation of the nature of decay of the
teeth for the purpose of this treatise.
The teeth are made up of a sub-
stance of such a nature that it is decom-
posed by acids, which either exist, are
taken into, or are formed in the mouth,
but are so feeble in power as to act slowly,
and therefore require to be retained for
some time in contact with them to produce
the effect which is called decay. Whenever,


therefore, a defect in the continuity of
the enamel of a tooth exists, as shown in
Figs. 8, 10, and 11, decay is sure to occur.
As decay occurs apparently only
where the enamel is defective, it may be
inferred that if the enamel be removed,
decay will attack the dentine, or tooth-
bone.
It is, indeed, popularly believed that
the enamel is intended to protect the teeth
from decay, and that one of the most
certain consequences of its removal is the
rapid destruction by this disorder of a
tooth deprived of its protection. This


belief, as widely spread as it is, both in and
out of the dental profession, is a fallacy.
It is surprising, indeed, that it should ever
have been entertained by any one worthy
of the name of dentist who had eyes to
see what daily offers itself to even careless
observation. In fact, the cutting edges of
the incisors, and frequently the high cusps
of the bicuspids and molars,-are worn
down to the dentine by 30 years of age,
and quite hollowed, being softer than the
enclosing ring of enamel ; yet decay at
these places is never seen —the very
friction occasioning the wear preventing


it. The writer of this pamphlet has in his
possession one or more teeth where the
enamel from the masticating surface is
absent through the arrest of formation
by illness, but the teeth are engirdled
in remarkably good enamel ; and there ,
in the enamel , caries has occurred,
while the masticating surface , unprotected
•with enamel, remains sound. Besides,
the argument against the removal of
the enamel for the prevention of decay
falls to pieces, since, with millions upon
millions of teeth, the decay occurs before
the enamel is interfered with, proving


that it, at least, is not a protective
covering. Indeed, it is only a vitreous
covering intended to prevent the too rapid
wearing away of the tooth-bone beneath—
much as a tool-maker faces the iron
hammer with a cap-plate of steel ; and
Arthur does not teach the removal of
enamel from where it is so required to
prevent wear and tear, but from the sides,
where it is of little or no use :
“ Human enamel is incapable of
protecting the dentine, or tooth-bone,
from decay, while the dentine, if de-
prived of its enamel, undergoes a change,


and effectually protects itself ."—Arthur,
The defective points on the grinding
surfaces of the molar teeth have been
shown. Decay is certain to occur at these
points in most cases. But on all other
surfaces of teeth towards the lips and
cheek, and the inside of the mouth, and
where they are in contact with each other,
the enamel is originally formed without a
crevice or fissure.
Is it necessary to say that decay
occurs where the teeth are m contact ?
Sir John Tomes, one of the most able of
living histologists, kept a record of cases


of extracted teeth during his services at
a London hospital, and found that 349
bicuspids {vide d, e, Fig. 8) had in a given
time been extracted where the enamel was
originally perfect, and but 27 for decay
where it occurred in defective places on
the grinding surfaces.


Chapter VI.
It has been explained that decay does not
usually attack a tooth except at such
places as favour the lodgment and reten-
tion of particles of food.
On the broad grinding surfaces of
the molars and bicuspids decay would
never occur if there were no fissures in
which the food could lodge.
The alteration of the condition by


means of a stopping which levels up the
spaces arising from the formation of pits
in fissures of the enamel effectually dis-
poses of the danger at these places. (Vide
Fig. 4.) But the attack of decay is not
confined to defective places on the crown;
it occurs also where the enamel is perfectly
formed, upon the surfaces in contact.
Here, unfortunately, it progresses con-
siderably before its presence is suspected
or detected. The operation of filling the
cavity then becomes tedious, difficult, and
expensive, and attended with very con-
siderable pain. Fig. 12, a, from an actual


mouth, shows that only two teeth are
decayed, namely, those in contact. It is
obvious that had these two teeth not been
in contact, decay would not have occurred,
for each of the faulty teeth is sound on
the sides free from contact.
It is now proposed to describe
explicitly how a self-cleansing space
should be provided between each two
teeth. At three years of age the tem-
porary set of teeth is complete {vide
Fig. 6), and the resulting surfaces in
contact should be cut away, forming \J-
shaped self-cleansing spaces, as indicated


in the diagram (Fig. 6) in red ink. At six
years of age the first permanent molars {vide
a, a, Fig. 7) to the rear of these temporary
teeth erupt, and a \/-shaped self-cleansing
space should be provided between it and
the last temporary molar by the cutting
away of sufficient from the latter. If the
last of these temporary molars should have
been extracted, this big permanent tooth
comes up too far forward, thus crowding
out the two bicuspids and eye tooth {vide
c, d, e, Fig. 8), which erupt between the
front tooth and itself at the age of io,
11, and 12 years. It is all important


that the last of the temporary molars
be retained till the second bicuspid,
which is underneath it, is ready >to take
its place.
At about six months after the first
permanent molar is
porary front teeth,
lower, should begin
out, to be replaced
central incisors, the
“ cut,” the four tern-
two upper and two
to loosen and drop
with four permanent
two upper of which
should be spaced and polished, cutting the
V from the tongue side, so that the outward
appearance of the teeth be not interfered
with. (Vide Figs. 16 and 17.)


The other and succeeding teeth are
the lateral incisors (£, Fig. 8), first
and second bicuspids {d, e, Fig. 8),
and the eye teeth'(c), in the order named.
These should be cut apart with similar \J-
spaces, as represented in Fig. 13. At 13
years of age the 12-year-old molars
(x, Fig. 14) will be in position, and should
be then separated from the sixth year molar.
( w , Fig. 14.) This will complete the
operations for the prevention of decay
between the teeth, and thus save much
expenditure of money and pain to the
patient.


The writer feels that a deep-rooted
prejudice and the teaching of ignorant and
incompetent dentists will weigh with some,
yet he hopes that his actual experience of
32 or 33 years, with his well-known love for
saving teeth, may induce others to give
their children or those entrusted to them
the same advantages that the children of
the writer obtain.*
The writer feels that in the curtail-
ment of Dr. Arthur’s lucid and forcibly
written book much is left out that should
have been inserted, and that the abbrevia-
* See foot-note p. 19.


tion has in many cases marred the beauty
of the original.
If, however, the foregoing pages
induce some 'to follow the teachings so
imperfectly conveyed, the object of the
writer will be achieved.


APPENDIX.
Dr. Arthur, after a further ex-
perience of nine years (1879), when
making some few suggestions, of interest
only to the profession, thus writes : —“ I
have little to add. The method of treat-
ment described I have always found
effective when resorted to sufficiently
early. So generally is this treatment
successful that I have come to consider


fillings in the front teeth as inexcusable
on the part of a dentist who has had
the care of a patient from childhood.*
f 1 •* #
There may be exceptional cases but they
are very rare.”
* See writer’s foot-note p. 16.


Hossfy & Gillingham.L








Fig. 3. —An Upper and Lower Jaw showing the sockets or
Alveoli all absorbed. In the Upper Jaw the absorption is down
to the base of the nose.
Hussey & Gillingham L


' ' *


Hussev & Gillingham.Lith




Kossev & Gillingham Li




Hussey & Gillingham Lit


alii
RB!9H|
-r i w®
rk-.'^p
IB®
i*
31 >: .-iJiN.-'v
r ’
. ■:.: .". sv . •
■ iT'^^V;
£±:f ;z
i~ -H r -
mat
«i|
' .
lIP
i;^PI
*r r #7
f.-'A' ?£giW’ij
■U «|§||
■»; - ;--#^y j : - "^tf*r
