

Arthur J.
LIDDY'S
Australian
Ballroom
Guide.
DANCING IN AUSTRALIA.
ROSS BROS., LTD.,
PRINT, SYDNEY.




ARTHUR J. LIDDY'S..
Australian Ballroom Guide,
Dancing in Australia
By ARTHUR J. LIDDY,
Teacher of Dancing.
FERNDALE ACADEMY
Oxford Street,
Woollahra ,
SYDNEY, N.S.W.


CONTENTS.
PAGE.
3
Preface
5
Advice to Pleaders
Waltz
Schottische
Mazurka
15
Military Schottische or Two Step ...
17
Bon Ton Schottische
La Rinka
Lancers •••
28
Quadrilles
Alberts


PREFACE.
IN writing this little guide on Dancing, I
would like it to be distinctly understood that
it was never intended to teach you how to
dance; but rather as a help to what you have
dancing earnt at t^le hands of a teacher of proper
At this stage permit me to make mention of the
way the set dances are spoilt, entirely due to one
reason 0“ly, that is to the fact that those per-
« n V S < 1; , of , d,,lr ‘K ‘he figures of" each
se .t» aS i • ey should be done, simply romn or iumn
?° m ° ne end of th ® roo “ to
XJ^ er - thr ough other sets, thereby spoiling all
pleasure in the room. If those persons under-
stood what they were doing they would not take
their places on the floor of a ballroom until the’
had committed to memory the correct figures ‘of
Jh 0 se t dance, which unfortunately are going out
described 11 ’ d pr’ “ Üb -‘’ t - the «>■>*« Ibovl
described Proper dancing is a pleasure to all
and a pastime our ancestors, from time immemorial
have cultivated; so, dear, reader, if yoTSSh to
dance properly go to some competent teacher
and learn correctly how to dance.


Do not under any pretence be led to believe
that you can acquire the art from watching ot ers,
as -this is the reason of nearly all the dances
being spoilt at the _ present date; watching others
and copying their example, not fi •-
sidering whether they know how to do cor
rectly that which they are trying t( J h af this
nlish To my critics let me say that this
Snide has been written to try and . help those
IZ wish to dance correctly and is therefore
Ce in accord with present-day customs, and
not as dancing was in the olden days.
I have not attempted the theory of dancing,
nor have I used professional terms in describ-
ing movements of any dance m this guide,
for the reason that I want it to be easily
understood by anyone who cares to peruse its
pages.


Advice to Readers,
To Gentlemen, —
Be always courteous to the Ladies, as
they are not allowed to take the initiative.
Ask the ladies if you want them to dance
with you. Stand in front of the Lady you
wish to ask, and you can say: “May I have
the pleasure of this dance?” or “Are you
engaged for this dance?” If she refuses you
do not _ be offended, ask, if necessary, all the
ladies in the room. Perhaps a little incident
related to me by a gentleman pupil who came
to me for private tuition may not be out of
place to relate here. He told me that he at-
tended a dance one evening, not being able
to dance too well. He asked one young lady
if she would dance with him. She replied
straight out, No. He asked another. She re-
plied, No. He asked, so he told me, nine
ladies, each one replying “No.” The last lady
that he asked he ventured to her the follow-
ing question: “Why will you not dance with
me Is there anything against me? Am I
objectionable ?’’
She replied, rather timidly: “But I can’t
dance.”
She ought not to have to make an asser-
tion like that she ought to learn. It is
simple enough. Everyone ought to learn.
There are many teachers of the art. But
be careful in your choice.


The Waltz.
This dance is the most popular and the
most enjoyable of all Ballroom Dances, but
unfortunately it is _ the most difficult to mas-
ter. My first advice is for you, if possible,
to go to a teacher and take private lessons
for waltzing. To describe by words a manner
to teach the novice is a task not easily ac-
complished by -writing - , for the reason if a
dozen persons came to me for private instruc-
tion, I would perhaps give each a different
method, because we all have different peculiar
habits when learning to dance, but in writing
a description in a book I am limited to one
description only, so for choice I intend to
describe each dance as easily as it is pos-
sible for me to do by words, so do not,
dear reader, be wearied if the descriptions
take a lengthy page.
To begin let me say you are going to teach your-
self in a room of your own by yourself at first.
The steps will apply the same for either sex, but
when with a partner they are taken alternately.
Position.—Stand perfectly erect, with your shoul-
ders level, with your hands at your side, and your
body limp. Place your heels together, with the
toes turned out, and the knees very slightly bent.
Do not forget that it is very necessary always in
waltzing properly that you should turn your knees
outward, slightly bent, and your body and limbs to
be flexible.


Steps.—Slide your right, foot out in front about
the same step you would take if you were in the
street walking smartly-; then with the left foot slide
it in front of the right foot a similar step, as if
walking, then slide the right foot up level with the
left foot, and, standing with the heels together and
the toes turned out.
The above are the 3 first or forward steps. Now
come the 3 second or backward steps. Slide the
left foot back behind the right foot same distance
apart as before, then slide the right foot behind the
left foot same distance apart as before, then slide the
left foot back level with the right foot. Bring
your heels together. That completes our first les-
son on waltzing. You will be required now to
practise the above steps until you have satisfied
yourself that you are able to do them with suffi-
cient confidence, that without hesitation you could
do them correctly, keeping time to the music of
a waltz played by some person, or by that person
counting the numbers 1,2, 3,4, 6,6, as if hum-
ming the tune of the waltz. *
I cannot impress upon you too fully how you
must master the above steps as they are the ABC
of our lesson. The foundation, in fact, of all
dancing.
. W< ? will n °w commence our second lesson, that
is, the steps we will take in turning. Begin as
before by sliding the right foot forward, now with
the left foot slide it across straight in front of the
right foot, turning round and facing the opposite
t Cl r f th f n i, W}tll - the r , ig ’ ht foot slide it ba ck to
the left foot, bringing the heels together. Now


slide the left foot back, turning the heel of the
left foot a little out to the left, the toe ?f the left
foot turned towards the heel of the right foot.
Then slide the right foot right behind the left foot,
pointing the toe of the right foot in the opposite
direction you took, it from. The position you
should be standing in now ought to. be thus . ihe
toe of the right foot pointing straight down the
room the way you are going, and the left foot t e
toe pointing to the left hand side of the. room,
IVthe heel ot the left foot *straight behind he
right foot one full walking pace. . Then slide the
Ipfi foot to the right foot, bringing the heels to-
gethS and facing the direction that you were m
Sen Von began the 6 steps, but 8 full paces fur-
ther down the room. Practise , the above lesson
by yourself until you are able with ease and com-
fort to go around a fairly large room,, keeping
time to the tune of a good wait*. Haying satis-
fied yourself that you are able to do both of the
above lessons correctly, secure a partner and prac-
tise the first lesson in the following manner: Stand
directly in front ot each other at. a full pace apart.
The gentleman facing the direction you are. going
and the lady with her back to the direction
you are going. The gentleman, places his right
IZ around the lady’s waist, his right hand jessed
lie-htlv in the small of the lady’s back, and with
his left hand he takes the .lady’s right hand and
holds it at a comfortable distance out to his let-
hand side The lady places her left hand on he
gentleman’s right arm (be careful to avoid placing
your hand under the gentleman’s shoulder). Now be-
gin the first set of 6 steps takmg them alterna ely,
that is, the lady starting back with her left foot,


and the gentleman forward with his right foot.
The more you practise these first steps together
before attempting the second lesson the easier you
will find the second lesson will be for you.
Try and secure someone able to play or hum a
correctly timed waltz when practising, as you must
be aware that the main success of your dancing
depends entirely on your keeping time with the
music. Begin together the second lesson in the
same manner as you began the first lesson. That
is, the gentleman starting forward with the right
foot and the lady back with the left foot.
Do not keep your heads too stiff, but look over
your partner’s right shoulder. Do not press your
partner to you, as this is very bad form, and I am
sure not done by persons wishing to dance cor-
rectly. If a ladv finds that her partner presses
her too close she should have no hesitation in tell-
ing him so.
I do not claim for myself the distinction of in-
venting any new dance, nor do I say that my de-
scription is the only way that the waltz can be
accomplished, but what I do claim, however, is that
my systems are simple enough if carried out pro-
perly that even the most awkward will acquire a
certain degree of proficiency in a short space of
time.
It has been my sole desire at all times to instill
into my pupils a refined and chaste manner of
dancing, and of holding their partners, that if gen-
erally carried out would at once disarm the ene-
mies of dancing of their keenest weapon.


I admire the art I profess to teach, and am
grieved to see so much that is ungraceful and un-
becoming practised and imparted. lam sure that
very little real enjoyment can be derived from im-
perfect dancing any more than imperfect music.
Still, where dancing is good it is almost im-
possible to over-estimate its value as a diver-
sion. Seriously, we all have sufficient care
and trouble in this world that if however we can
have some innocent and rational amusement oc-
casionally we would be drawn, as it were, “out of
ourselves,” and I should be pleased to think that
anthing said in this book has helped my readers
to sometimes pass a few pleasant hours.
Apart from all its health-giving, invigorating,
beneficial influences, if this alone were the pro-
vince of dancing, it would not be a thing to des-
pise.
Only the puritanical, who regard all worldly
pleasures as sinful, or the misanthropic, to whom,
for want of sympathy with their fellows, such plea-
sures are vain, would do so, not the truly philo-
sophical.
The Creator has endowed us with faculties for
enjoyment and amusement. May we not, then,
infer that He means us to exercise them?
The glorious sunshine, the songs of birds, the
myriad beauties of Nature, enliven for us the gold-
en hours of summer; by the cultivation of dancing,
music,, and 'kindred arts, we may ourselves en-
liven the gloomy hours of winter.
Perhaps, dear reader, lam wearying you. Let
us go back to our next lesson:


The Reverse Waltz.
As the name implies. The Reverse. The oppo-
site. _ Meaning-, of course, only the steps, not the
position.
Now, the steps of the reverse waltz are taken
and practised in the same manner as the steps of
the waltz we have just learned, but with the op-
posite feet. Now, if you remember, we started by
sliding- the right foot forward, now with the re-
verse we instead of the right foot, slide the
left foot forward, and also turning in the opposite
direction, but going the same way round the room.
Remember, start the first or forward steps with
left foot, and the second or backward steps
with the right foot. y
In bringing this section of my guide to a close,
1 would remark that it has not been anywhere an-
nounced that its mere perusal would enable you to
dance without the aid of a master, but, for all that
1 trust you may find a good deal in it that will
help you to dance well. I know, at least, that it
contains some information that you are not likelv
to obtain elsewhere, and possibly more practical
instruction than all the dancing guides or books on
dancing put together.
The Schottische.
. The steps of the schottische w-ill have to be prac-
tised by the lady and gentleman separately, as
their steps are different. I will explain the steps
for the lady first.


Stand with your back to the! way' you. are go-
ino- ! and moving straight back, slide the ngnt
foot back,* taking the, heel of the left. foot back to
the hollow of the right foot. Again slide me
right foot straight back, also taking the heel f
the left foot back to the hollow of the ngnt
nause) by rising on both toes. Now slide the
left foot straight back, taking the right heel ba k
into the hollow of the left foot, again - s A de h tn i
left foot back, and again taking * e rl^ t h “l
hark to the hollow of the left foot. (Pause again,
rfsintr on toes.) Then, starting with your right
foot forward, waltz around twelve steps, ending
last 3 steps of the waltz, straight back in-
‘mad of furS. so as to be prepared to start the
schottische again.
The Steps for the Gentleman. —Stand facing the
direction you me going and slide ‘l>e left foo
forward, taking the right foot up to the bed
the left foot, again repeat by sliding the left to
forward, and taking the right, foot up to the heel
of the left foot (pause by rising on the
Now slide the right foot forward, and ta \ e
left foot up to the heel of the right foot, repeat
bv taking the right foot forward and taking the
Mt footupto the heel of the right (pause by
rising on both toes). Now begin the waltz in
£ following manner Starting with the left foot
slfde it in front across the right foot a .full pace
forward turning around, carry the right foot
■ Tiehind pointing the toe and standing in
Sf same position as described in the sth step in
the waltz then continue the same steps as the
~'7. ripscribed until you have completed 12
steps in all. Remember not to turn on the last


3 steps, as you have to prepare to start the schot-
tische forward again, so instead of turning on
the last 3 steps of the waltz you go straight
ahead, as described in the Ist 3 steps of the first
lesson of the waltz.
Hold your partner in the same position as you
held her for the waltz.
Never attempt to reverse in any dance unless it
be the waltz only. Reversing is very vulgar Tn
any dance but the waltz, as it is only meant to
give dancers a spell from the continuous waltz-
ing the one way.
Holding your partner correctly, you start, the
gentleman with the left foot forward, and the
lady back with the right foot.
The gentleman should place his foot in the
spot that the lady takes her foot away from in
doing the four first steps of the schottische.
The Mazurka.
This dance has of late years gone out of date,
to give way, perhaps, to some of the new dances.
My reason for including it is that I have always
found it one of the best dances to get a begin-
ner accustomed to the movements of the waltz,
with a partner, as in this_ dance there are at the
end of the first four sliding steps to the side 6
steps of the waltz, which if practised properly
with a partner help you a great deal to place your
feet in the proper position of the correct waltz.


I will describe first the steps for the lady. You
stand facing- your partner, and sideways to the
way you are going around the room, and with
the right foot slide it sideways to the right, one
full pace bringing the left foot up level with it.
Then again slide the right foot to the right,
bringing the left foot up to it. Pause (by ris-
ing a very little on the toes). Then, with the
right foot again to the right, bringing the left
foot up to it again, slide the right foot to the
right, bringing the left foot up level with it
again. Pause. Now you waltz around 6 steps
of the waltz, starting by placing your right foot in
between your partner’s feet, finishing the 6 steps
in a position readv to start the sliding steps with
the right foot to the right side.
Now, Gentlemen. —Hold your partner in the
same manner as before described, but remember
that instead of facing the way you are going you
stand so as to go sideways to the left.
The steps are as follows: —With the left foot
slide it to the left one full pace, bringing the
right foot up level with it again, slide the left foot
to the left, bringing the right foot up level with
it. Pause (by rising slightly on to your toes).
Then again slide to the left with the left foot,
bringing the right up to it, and again with the left
foot to the left, bringing the right up to it.
Pause. Now begin the 6 steps of the waltz,
starting as described in the waltz steps of the
schottische, that is with the left foot slide it in
front and right across behind the lady’s right
heel, and do the other five steps as described in
the first 6 steps of the waltzing part of the schot


tische. Prepare to begin immediately you finish
the 6 steps the sliding to the left again. Be
careful in this dance not to swing your partner’s
arm up and down like you would the handle of a
pump but hold it still—not too stiffly— ou t to
the side.
There is another Mazurka which has gone com-
pletely out of date, that is the Polka Mazurka, so
1 will not describe it in this small guide, but will
include it in nay larger work, which I am pre-
paring, the title of which will be ‘‘Dancing:
Theory and Practise.” For the Australian Ball-
room.
Military Schottische, or Two-Step,
Position Gentlemen stand with their partners
on their right hand side, and both facing the way
you are going, with your heels together. Now
the gentleman places his left hand on his hip, and
with his right hand he holds the lady’s left hand
up level with her shoulder, with the elbows pointed
backward (not downward). The lady places her
right hand on her hip. Now begin the steps as
follows: —Gentleman with the left foot and lady
with the right foot, place it in front, with the toe
on the floor and the heel slightly raised off the
floor. _ Now, with the same foot carry it to the
back with the toe on the floor. Then again, in
front, with the toe down, and again behind, with
t S e Perhaps you will ask yourself,
Why does he keep repeating “with the toe on the
floor ? _ Well, the reason I repeat this is: You
see all kinds of steps performed by different people


when performing these new dances. Some even
go so far as to introduce “high kicks,’ 7 thinking,
perhaps, I suppose they are. inventing some new
dance. We will proceed with our steps- Ihe
position we are in now is the gentleman standing
with his partner on his right hand side,_ his left
foot behind, and the lady with her right foot
behind. Now walk forward four paces, ending
the fourth step by bringing the feet toge-
ther. Now let hands go, and both turn around
and face the opposite direction. The lady
will now be on the gentleman’s left hand
side. He with his left hand takes the lady s
right hand, and you both place the other hand on
your hips. These movements must be done Quick-
ly, without pausing with your next steps, which
are the gentleman with the right foot in front
with the toe down, and the lady with the left foot
in front, with the toe down. Now carry that root
behind, then place it in front again, and then be-
hind. Walk forward four steps, bringing the feet
together. Turn and face your partner’s position
as if ready to begin the Mazurka. Gentleman
sliding with the left foot to the left one step, nnd
the lady at the same time slides with the right
foot to the right one step, again the same one
step. Now slide back one step together, gentle-
man sliding to the right with the right foot and
fady sliding’ to the left with the left foot; ag’am
the same another step. Now waltz twelve steps
and ready to start again.
Please, dear reader, do not suppose for one mo-
ment that I want to teach you something different
from anyone else; far from it. The dance above


described is proper steps, and, as I said in my
opening- remark, that dancing was being spoilt by
people trusting to learn the dances from watch-
ing others without first ascertaining whether they
whom they are watching know what is correct.
The Bon-Ton Schottische.
Position same as the Military Two Step, side by
side with your partner. Gentleman’s left foot in
front, toe down. Lady’s right foot in front, toe
down. Now on this step you count 1,2, Then
with that foot carry it behind, and count 1, 2.
Now, walk four paces, bringing the feet together.
Still going the same way, the gentleman now places
the right foot in front, and the lady her left
foot. Count 1, 2. Now behind, and count 1,
2. Walk four paces, bringing the feet together.
Turn round and face the opposite direction. The
lady should now be on the gent.’s left-hand side.
Gentleman places his right foot in front, and the
lady her left foot in front toes down). Count 1,
2. Now same foot behind. Count 1, 2. Walk
four paces, bringing the feet together. Then
gentleman with the left foot in front, and the lady
with the right foot in front. Count 1, 2. Now
behind. Count 1,2, and walk four paces, bring-
ing the feet together, turn and face your partner, as
in the previous dance, and slide as before. One step,
then again another step; now 3 steps in the same
direction smartly, counting 1,2, 3. Now both slide.
Gentleman to the right side, lady to the left side, 1
step, and count 1; then another step, count again
1; then 3 steps smartly, counting 1,2, 3; then waltz
24 steps. This dance is the most popular of all the


latest dances, as it is so simple that even the most
awkward find in it confidence to try.
Do not raise the foot off the floor in either of the
last two dances.
The La Rinka.
Stand side by side with your partner. The
lady on the gentleman's right-hand side. Stand
with your heels together. Now take each other's
right hand without shifting your position; take
also under the right hands your partner’s left
hand. Now begin the steps together, the open-
ing steps in this dance are the same for the gen-
tleman as for the lady. Both slide the right foot
forward, bringing the left foot up to the heel of
the right, and again slide the right foot forward,
bringing the left foot up level with the right.
Now both with the left foot slide it forward, bring-
ing _ the right foot up to the heel of the left.
Again with the left foot, slide it forward, and
bring the right foot up level with it.
Now both with the right foot slide it forward
and bring the left foot up level with it. Now
slide the left foot forward, bringing the right foot
up level with it. Now slide again the right foot,
bringing the left up level with it, then slide the
left foot forward, bringing the right up to it level.
Now let your partner’s left hand go, turn and face
vour partner, holding your partner's right hand.
Bow by inclining the head forward. Now pass
the lady under your right arm whilst both chang-
ing places, that is walking to the opposite side,
still holding right hands. Bow again. Again pass
the lady under your right arm and bow again.


• take your Pawners as before,
m the last two dances, ready to slide to the side!
Gentlemen slide to the left and ladies to the right
side. One step,_ then again slide another step in
the same direction. Now slide back one step
(gentlemen to the right, ladies to the left), then
repeat the slide the same way again. Now you
waltz around together 24 steps. This dance if
done slowly, and every couple in the room keep-
ing the same time, is one of the most spectacu-
lar of ail dances.
The best plan when at a dance where these new
dances are introduced is for all who are taking
part to promenade around the room, the lady walk-
ing- with her left arm lightly through the gentle-
man s right arm. And when all are ready, to be-
gin together. s
The Lancers.
SET DANCE.
Four couples. Two couples at tops and two
couples standing- at the sides. The gentlemen to
remember that their ladies must in this dance he
always on their right-hand side. We will sun-
pose we are at a dance. _ The Lancers are an-
nounced. The music begins. It is a popular air.
You know it, perhaps. So much the better. We
walk over to the lady who is to be our
partner, and offer her our right arm. She


places her left arm in our right arm. We are
only beginners, or perhaps we have not been to a
dance for a long time, so we forget the figures.
We will take sides and watch the top couples.
Ist couple is the couple at the end of room that
the music is at. 2nd couple facing the Ist. 3rd
couple are the couple on the left-hand side of the
Ist couple. And the fourth couple on the right
side of the Ist couple. We are the 4th couple.
Ist figure all turn and face your partner, and
bow to partners, then turn and face the corners,
that is the gentleman faces the lady on his left-
hand side, and the lady faces the gentleman on her
right hand side, and bow to corners.
Now, remember who is your corner, as you will
be required to dance with your corner several
times. Now, top couples only. Take their part-
ner’s right hand, and advance to the centre of the
set four paces, meeting the opposite couple, now
walking backwards again to your places. Ad-
vance again in the same manner as before to the
centre, and turn the opposite couple to places, that
is, the gentlemen waltz or swing with the opposite
lady back to her original place, then the gentlemen
walk back to their own partners, turn and face the
corners, and all walk sideways 4 paces to the right
side and back 4 paces to the left side. Waltz or
swing with the corners to the ladies’ places.
I might here mention that waltzing in the set
dances was never allowed a few years ago, but as
this guide is written to give the reader an idea as


to dancing' at the present date, I am endeavoring
to explain the set dances as they ought to be done
now. That is. Dancing ag it is. Not as it was.
Please do not under any circumstances gallop up
and down the room, as you simply spoil all plea-
sure of the Lancers, and appear to onlookers as if
you had suddenly gone mad. Now the side
couples begin, that will be you and your partner
and the opposite couple. Side couples take their
partner’s right hand, and advance four paces to
the centre of the set, now backwards four paces,
then advance four paces again, and waltz or swing
with the opposite couple back to the lady’s place,
the side gentlemen walk back to their own part-
ners, turn, and face the corners, and walk four
paces to the right side and back four paces to the
left side. Waltz or swing with corners back to
the the lady’s place, then side gentlemen walk
back to their own places and stand still whilst the
top couples repeat as before, and after they finish the
side couples repeat. That finishes Ist figure.
2nd Figure.—Bow to partners and to corners as
before. In the 2nd figure you will again have an
opportunity of watching the top couples before
you will be asked to lead, but you must be on the
alert, as it will not be long before you are
asked to take part. You will observe that the
top gentlemen take their partners by the right
hand, and with her they advance to the centre of
the set (4 paces), then back again to their places.
Then the gentlemen still holding his partner by
the right hand stands still but extending his hand
whilst the lady moves into the centre of the set,
then they bow to each other, the lady then passes


under the gentleman’s arm, and they, still hold-
ing hands, change places and bow again. They
then waltz or swing back to their places. Now
the side couples part from their partners and fall
away to make top lines the side gentlemen go to
their right hand side, and the side ladies go to
their left hand side form top lines and advance in
two straight lines 4 paces forward and back 4
paces. Then advance again and waltz or swing
with your own partners back to your places. Now
the side couples begin. Gentlemen take their
partner’s right hand, and advance 4 paces, now
back, place the ladv in the centre of the set, and
bow, pass the lady under your arm, walk into the
centre and bow again, then waltz or swing back
to places, the top couples fall away to make side
lines, advance 4 paces in two straight lines, now
back, advance again, and waltz or swing back to
places. Top couples repeat, then side couples re-
peat.
3rd Figure.—Bow to partners, then to corners.
This figure is danced by all the couples at the
same time. Your partner and the other three lad-
ies all advance to the centre. You then, with the
other three gentlemen, advance and join hands in
a ring, the ladies passing to the outside, placing their
hands on your wrists. In this position you all turn
around in a circle to the left till you arrive again to
your own places.
The four gentlemen now advance to the centre,
turn, and face your partner, making a very slow
bow. Recollect that the music is here marked


rallcntarid o , i.e slower and slower, so you must
not hurry. Now present your left hand tn tvf«
fhefr Sfh °T S[le ’ * h ? other
he centred Z r °l S , m pf form of a cress i 5
„ cemre or the set. Place your ritrht arm
riares w?ttn. P f art T r ’ S Wai l t ’,!S nd walk Mound to you”
places without releasing: hold of hands. Now let
JP and fad away to your places. Repeat this
figure the second time in the same manner hut if
you choose you may in the second pS? walk back
wards instead of forward. The first way is the
sensible, as you are liable to stand on the counle
walking immediately behind you. P
W h of e -f S - als ° another way of dancing this figure
sSpdon of S it n wo„b ardy -u if ever - introduced, a dS
instead of helpM ' PerhapS ’ only prove confusing
T^° U more^^orroct^ OW a* partners aIK -i to corners.
« f 1 m ° dern way of dancing this
partners’ ° W J : ~ T j G t( ? p cou P les take their
p hands and walk over to the rmmio
on their right-hand side, bow to S s coSe S
other right hfJjds* 1^3 ’ the ladies give each
:c nt aa.nos across the gents. With rio-ht
hands th ¥S joined, walk round* four steps to the
Ho-hf h. W|th y ? ur left foot - Now unjoin you?
hack four %/ IVe > *1 left - hands across > and walk
right foot After^thi^f ngrht ’ b ? g \ nmn * with the
yo*u as °you i£S. g**


SrWSS, time- ° T e he ‘moS'emem if«
P i e le by ieft Vd? to?*B ow” P asfthe Sfr undfr
JSS % |mf nl f o o.« to .he *
give right £ an( Js a 'Then left hands across and
paces to the left. Then le t na Form the ring
walk four P ac - o the gide couples
of four, and circle toi ntacc an( j bowing,
and repeat the movement of bands across
ing.
N.B.—To put the arms outside the girls’ waists,
s 3 rsJbf■sa.t’ssar.»
able; it is outrageous.
Fifth Figure.—We now come to that terror of
wrong hand, that n amiss,
Then comes one who finding some st | ieone sud .
lma y gSe ak their cwm bm which turns out to be their


neighbour’s. And when at length they reach
their right place, they find, to their dismay, that
they are dancing with the wrong partner. Just
think, dear reader, if you were to be the cause of
this. Would you not hide your face for shame?
But no; you will not so far disgrace yourself;
you will get through the figure all right enough
if you only pay attention to what I am about to
say, and keep a cool head. First, then, there must
be no misapprehension about right and left. Think
of which hand you throw with, which side your
heart is—anything, in short, that will help you to
remember. Above all, do not forget your sex-
You smile; but indeed it is no uncommon thing to
see a gentleman dancing where the ladies ought
to be, and vice versa. You will have a natural
inclination to follow your partner in the chain
especially, I suppose,_ if they are interesting; but
you must not. In this figure you will have little
to do with your partner. Now we will commence.
Chain.—Give your right hand to your partner—
say good-by, as it were—leave her, and go round
to your right, giving your left hand to the next
lady—the one on your right—then your right hand
to the next lady—the one who was opposite—then
the left hand to the next lady—the one who was
on your left—and once again your right hand to
your partner, whom you will meet in the opposite
place. Pause just a second, and then go on
again, continuing in the same direction, away
from your partner, giving your left hand to the next
lady, then the right to the next, then left, and
once more the _ right to your partner, whom you
will meet this time in your own place. But it is


of no use beginning to talk, for, directly the first
couple have led round the figure, you will see that
the opposite couple are falling in behind. You
have to stand with your partner behind them, and,
lastly, the second couple behind you. Thus you
form two lines, one of gentlemen—black and
sombre —the other of ladies —bright and varie-
gated—all with the faces turned one way. Now
the gentlemen cross behind the ladies, who pass
before them in the contrary direction; that is,
you pass behind your partner four steps to the
right, while she passes before you four steps to
the left, then cross back again behind the lady, and
stand as before. Now the gentlemen wheel around
to the left, and the ladies around to the right.
You, being the fourth couple, follow the person
in front of you. Do not touch them, but simply
follow them, and keep going round, round, round
till you are in line again. Now fall away and
make two lines, the gentlemen on one side, with
their hands joined, and the ladies on the other side
with hands joined. Now, all together advance and
retire in two lines, and once again you recover your
partner, whom you waltz or swing back to your own
place. Do not delay in getting back, either. Now,
chain again. Right hand to partner—left hand to
next person—right hand to next —left hand to the
next —and right hand to your own partner pause-
off again—left handl to the next—right hand to the
next—left to the next—and right hand to your own
partner. This time you fall in immediately behind
the second couple, and then proceed in exactly the
same manner, only your faces will all be turned in
the opposite direction.


who lead X around and l you opposite you
isiiiiisi
angles to the direction they have previously Jw
ta behind you Alio B ™'’ !? e oth “ cou P les falling
and recrossing the g'entLmin^Sways^rossTng s^
lead" left you
ricrht Vo„ ° u il6 i ,* 5 an< l the lady round to the
separate! Jnd,‘ taking the hand" of fh° Ur ° Wn pla< L e >
S TI? partners, and finish with the chain
of?' It Tt, hu l’ y ° U See ’ the chain is done five times
couple t'S ‘sMrfe?
take Tf v«„ ? er ° ne °, f you have made a mis-
o-o you are a gentleman and you see other
mel'by mis C tX n ?n b .h hind h t!le ™
you are at fluff if ain , y °u wil! know that
are at tauit, if, 0 n the other hand, ladies are


following, then it is he. In either case the game
is up” and chaos and confusion are the inevitable
result. Mind, it is not you who is the delinquent.
N ote . —The above is the traditional and correct
form of the final figure, and if you study it. atten-
tively you will easily be able to take part in any
variation that happens to be popular with the par-
ticular set in which you move.
Do not in this dance, or, in fact any dance, be
guilty of stamping the feet on the floor, as this is
the most vulgar thing you could do.
The Quadrilles.
First Figure.—Four couples. Two at tops and
two at sides. Music begins. Bow to partners
Turn and bow to corners, as? in the previous dance
(the Lancers).
Top couples take the partners’ right hand and
advance to the centre of the set four paces, now
back again; let hands go; now cross right over
the opposite side, the gentlemen on the outside and
the ladies on the inside. When the two couples
meet in the centre of the set after Passing . e P
posite couple, the gentlemen cross behind their own
partners, and both lady and gentleman turn around
face inwards. Now, take your partner’s right hand
again, advance four paces; now retire; now rign
across to your own places, the gentlemen passing


behind their partners as before. Now swing or
waltz with your own partner around the set back to
your own places. Now the side couples begin the
S | andl^ 8 ’ st . lß - . Sldes repeat exactly the same
then sidTs S replat? USt Then tOPS repeat again ’
ne?f°T d n Fi&ure i- Bow to partners. Bow to cor-
vanc'e uples / a l m the Previous figure, ad-
now both i 5 s }° tlle , centre > then back again;
Soslte sS S and .^ entleman cross over to th? op-
posite side, the ladies passing m the centre of the
site Walk st raight across to the oppo-
site side and turn around. Now the ladies will be
“ ' h e^s e fi left : h “ d si*. Now take you?
partner s left hand and advance and retire- now
straig-ht across to the opposite side, which is your
own place; turn around and bow to the opposite
couple, and swing or waltz around the set back to
your own places. The sides begin now and do ex”
figure ame " B ° th tOP and Slde couples repeat
NmStfSfir d^ FlffU f r i e ‘~ Bow t 0 partners and corners,
wfih’thefrlpfl f 6n i lem a n and the Second (only)
of the set lv ands \ dvan u Ce and meet in the centre
around g 6ach other your left hand - Walk
vour lrS yOU can y°nr own partner, give
to the onnnsitp° U viband, and balance across
Swing oTwlta bfck to X«s. ° PP ° site C ° Uple '
this°m 'the S iady and se “ nd ffenlleman repeat
s in tbe same manner. Then the third gentle-


man and the fourth lady; then, lastly, the third
lady and the fourth gentleman.
Fourth Figure.—Bow to partners, then to corners.
The first couple (only) take their partner’s right
hand and advance four paces and retire. Advance
across to the opposite couple; the gentleman at that
end takes the advancing lady’s left hand with his
left hand, and with his right hand he takes his
partner’s right hand. The first gentleman will not
have anyone’s hand. Now advance four paces, back
again; now cross to the opposite side, where is stand-
ing the gentleman by himself. He will now take his
partner’s right hand and the other lady’s left hand,
and holding their hands he advances four paces,
then back again, then straight across to the oppo-
site side, where stands the second gentleman by
himself. Now, all four form a ring and waltz around
to the opposite side to which is your own place.
Bow to the opposite couple. Then swing or waltz
back to places. The second couple now lead off
and repeat the above.
Then the third couple, and after them the fourth
couple.
Fifth Figure.—Bow to partners, then to corners.
All form 1 a ring; walk around the set till you reach
your own places. Now the top couples only. Swing
or waltz around the set back to their own places.
The top ladies chain, i.e., they advance with the
right hand and meet the opposite lady in the centre
of the set; give the lady your right hand and the
left hand to the opposite gentleman. Leave the


lady’s hand go. walk around with the
giving the lady back again your rio-ht
wa k back to places. ThVfoS Ihe fhg rinl ’agaTn
Walking around the set back to places. The side
Sef Thf Z sid°T J' sht n around ““ ** back to
places. Ihe side ladies chain with the right han-1
to the opposite lady, left hand to opposite LntlT
man, walk around' and right hand back to lady and
then to places. Then repeat from the beginning!
The Alberts.
part°ners CO and eS ; Tw ° tOPS and ,_ tw ° sides - Bow to
figure 13 and t 0 corners at opening of each
the Fi Quadime r s e ° f ' he AlbertS !s the First Fi^ure
FiSreonht Lasers. ° f ** is th <= Second
FiL h r e ™'heLfnclrs. 0f A ‘ berlS is the First
the & iS a h
and f WaItZ P artner s around the fet back
.V pla s4” » tf y -t-
--side and ( waltz with her around the set back to his


place. Form the ring again, and then the gentle-
man waltz the lady on his left around the set back
to his place. Form the big ring again, balance,
and then the gentleman with the lady who is on his
left side waltz around the set back to his place.
Form the big ring again and balance Now, the
lady who is on the gentleman’s left side should be
his own partner, whom he waltzes around the set
back to their own places.
The music now ceases for a moment, then begins
again. You all waltz around the room until the
music stops again. This is one way of doing this
most popular waltz; but there are several ways other
than this, which I will describe in my larger work
which is now being written.
The End.


"PERNDALE”
Fnvaie Dancing Academy
~
44 OXFORD STREET,
UDooliahra, Sydney, N.S.QI3.
Opposite Centennial Park.
TEL. 136 PAD.
Mr. &• Mrs. Arthur J. Liddy,
Proprietors.
PROFESSIONAL TEACHERS OF DANCING.
Correspondence Invited.


Arthur J.
LIDDY’S
Australian
Ballroom
Guide.
DANCING IN AUSTRALIA.
ROSS BROS., Ltd..
print, SYDNEY.
