

ARTIFICIAL LIMBS
A LECTURE
DELIVERED 27TH SEPTEMBER, 1916
BEFORE
MEMBERS OF THE RED CROSS SOCIETY
NEW SOUTH WALES BRANCH
By
Sir THOMAS ANDERSON STUART, M.D., LL.D., D.Sc.
DEAN OF THE FACULTY OF MEDICINE
UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY
A Member of the Executive of the Branch
SYDNEY: WILLIAM APPLEGATE GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
*85277— A 1917-




ARTIFICIAL LIMBS
A LECTURE
DELIVERED 27TH SEPTEMBER, 1916
BEFORE
MEMBERS OF THE RED CROSS SOCIETY
NEW SOUTH WALES BRANCH
By
Sir THOMAS ANDERSON STUART, M.D., LL.D., D.Sc.
DEAN OF THE FACULTY OF MEDICINE
UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY
A Member of the Executive of the Branch
Sydney ; William Applegate Gullick. Government Printer.
*85277 —A 1917.


PRINTED BY THE AUTHORITY OF THE
HON. GEORGE BLACK, M.L.A., MINISTER OF HEALTH.
Sydney, 14 November, 1916.


ARTIFICIAL LIMBS.
Artificial limbs have never at any former period been
so perfect as they are now. They convert many a hope-
less, useless cripple into a cheerful and self-reliant,
self-supporting member of the community, and it is
practically the work of the past fifty years. Artificial
limbs have, nevertheless, been in use from ancient times,
as we learn from early writers and from the relics of an
artificial leg found in a Roman tomb at Capua in Italy,
taking us back to 300 8.C., and now preserved in the
Museum of the Royal College of Surgeons in London.
It was made of a core of wood fashioned to represent
the form of the lost member and covered with thin
pieces of bronze, the upper third was hollow to receive
the “ stump,” as the remaining portion of a limb is
named; the whole was fastened on round the waist,
for a bronze belt was found around the waist of the
skeleton.
The Steel Hand of Carslogie.
In Sir Walter Scott’s Border Antiquities is an
account of the steel hand in possession from time


immemorial of the family of Clephane of Carslogie, in
Fifeshire, and given by an ancient King of Scotland to
a Laird of Carslogie who had lost his hand in the service
of the King. There is also the iron hand made in 1505
for the German knight and brigand, Goetz von
Berlichingen, by a mechanic of Nuernberg. This city
in more recent times became famous for the making of
toys. What are they making now?
From that time till the present a great variety of
appliances have been invented culminating in the
Carnes arm, patented in its completed form in 1913, and
to be described hereafter.
What an Artificial Limb should be.
The dictum of Lt.-Col. Openshaw, the Senior Surgeon
of the Roehampton Hospital, is that “ any and every
amputation can be fitted with an artificial arm or leg,
even amputations at the shoulder joint and at the hip
joint.
An artificial limb should be light, durable, useful, and
natural-looking Obviously it is desirable to ha\ e as
little weight as possible to carry about, but more impor-
tant than this is the fact that it has to be attached to,
and be wielded by a stump, which is often short and weak.
The leverage against the stump is often considerable,
the more considerable the shorter the stump, and just
because of this adverse leverage the wearer will often
say that the limb is too heavy to wear, when it is really
the stump which is short and weak. This should
always be explained to the wearer, who is apt to think
that the artificial limb supplied to him is of no use to
him —perhaps it will come all right when he has learnt
how to use it, and when his stump has developed
strength by exercise.
The New Demand for Limbs.
Even in peace time the universal employment of
machinery in factories, on railways and steamships, and


the use of motor cars have led to much more frequent
mutilation than formerly, but in this war an appalling
demand has arisen for artificial limbs, partly because of
the incredible numbers of men engaged, and partly
because of the use of high explosives, which rend men
asunder as the old fashioned black powder could never
do. In all the principal belligerent countries it has been
recognised, that if a man has lost his limb in the service
of his country, the least the country can do is to provide
a substitute and maintain and renew it until he dies.
Thus all these countries have been compelled to arrange
for the supply of artificial limbs and for the training of
cripples, so that they may afterwards become more or
less useful members of the community. In Australia,
unfortunately, the authorities have not even yet atten-
ded to the matter, so that as our limbless men began to
return in September, 1915, this Society stepped in and
provided the limbs, and the Society entrusted me with
the duty of advising in this Department. This is how I
came into this kind of work.
In England the Queen Mary’s Auxiliary Hospital at
Roehampton, London, has 300 beds, and deals with 300
cases a month. Similar Institutions have been estab-
lished in Scotland and in Ireland. In these Institutions
a speciality is made of artificial limbs, which are made
in the Institution itself by workmen, themselves, some
of them, wearing artificial limbs. The whole is under
the supervision of surgeons specially skilled in such
matters (orthopaedic surgeons), and the treatment is
without doubt generally the finest that science can
suggest, and money provide. The poorest man in the
King’s Forces now receives as a right what even the
wealthiest could not buy only a couple of years ago, so
great is the progress that has been made. At Brighton
the Pavilion Military Hospital for Limbless Soldiers has
610 beds, and here amputation cases, which are suffering
from some condition of the stump that does not allow of
the proper fitting of an artificial limb, are treated by
operation and otherwise. At Hammersmith is a more
or less similar hospital with 800 beds. When ready for


a limb the patient is transferred to Roehampton where
he is fitted with a limb and where also some twenty-four
different callings are taught or retaught to the men, and
for the men who have successfully gone through the
trade courses, a well organised employment bureau finds
work after they have been discharged.
In France extremely complete arrangements have
been made. A Central Committee of orthopaedic sur-
geons has settled on types of limb appropriate to the
different amputations, and samples have been distri-
buted to the makers in each region, so that the supp y
of efficient limbs is ensured, and in each region a meal
committee approves of the limb and its fit before it is
issued to the wearer. No necessary expense is spared
the question of the kind of limb to be supplied is based
entirely on the highest attainable standard of usefulness
to the patient, in view of the calling which he will
follow.
In Vienna there is a hospital with 3,500 beds, 1,300
of which are for amputation cases. The rest are for
iniuries to the joints, ligaments, muscles, smews, nerves,
&c The trades and callings in which the men are
educated or re-educated at this hospital so as to render
crippled men more or less independent of pension or
charity are agriculture, gardening, stonemason, uphols-
terer, Cartwright, turner, cooper, furrier, musician,


woodworking, drawing, typewriting, carpenter, joiner,
shoemaker, tailor, weaver, watchmaker, hairdresser,
dentist, locksmith, smith, house painter, paperhanger,
copyist, bookbinder, photographer, architect, artist,
saddler, basketmaker, cinema-operator, and toy maker.
If a patient refuses to be treated and trained his pension
is withheld, and this proves a very effective means of
coercion. The paramount necessity
of early regaining their capacity for
work and self-support is strongly
insisted upon. A temporary limb is
supplied at the earliest moment possi-
ble —it may be only six weeks after
the amputation, for stumps that are
not used often get weak, and the sub-
ject of obscure neuralgic pains, which
quite disappear when they are put to
manage the artificial limb. Crutches
are dispensed with as quickly as possi-
ble, for they only retard the man’s
education in the management of his
new limb.
The Waraha Crutch.
This crutch is a Sydney production
which has been supplied by the Red
Cross to many men who speak well of
it. The head rests on rubber cushions,
and is adjustable, so that jolt and armpit
troubles are lessened, and the handle is
adjusted to the length of the arm.
The Mental Factor.
In all cases it is found that the
patient’s desire to work is of the greatest
importance —no limb is good enough for
the man who does not want to use it. It
is the same with every instrument or tool;
it must be used willingly and intelligently
—then, have we not all seen the finest
The Waraha
Crutch.


work produced by the rudest implement in the hand
of the skilled workman? With artificial limbs it is with
brains that they are used, and I show you a letter
written by a lad who has two artificial arms (see
vignette on title-page), and written some six weeks
after he began to wear the limb. You will see how
well it is written, and the lad says that the character
of the writing is like that of his writing before
he lost his limbs. This is because it was the same
brain that directed the movements of the natural
and of the artificial limb. In large establishments
there are demonstration-rooms where demonstrators
teach men how to get the best results out of
their artificial limbs —like other instruments the wearer
must learn how to use them. Moreover, the wearer
must have confidence in his limb. If he thinks his leg
may not support his weight he will never step out
briskly and fearlessly, as he would on his natural limb,
and he would, therefore, also be the less natural in his
movements. At their best the artificial limb is a poor
substitute for the natural limb, and it is only by
intelligent practice in the use of it that even the best
artificial limb can be made anything like a successful
substitute. We should not expect too much from it —
it is entirely wanting in feel; what can we do with our
natural limbs when they are “asleep” from pressure?
Apart from intelligent use, the length of the stump, and
the original fit of the limb are important factors, and
we must not lose sight of the kind of work the man is to
engage in. A movable ankle may be better for one man,
a non-movable for another
Construction of the Limbs.
Willow wood or American bass, from specially
selected trees, is generally employed for the socket,
that is the part receiving the stump. In Australia it
is mostly willow that is used, for it is very light,
strong, straight-grained, easily worked, and not too
porous. The wood should be worked so that the


&■£<:>>* a.
IT^y^L
Jj
■&ZAAJ .CL
. cc**\sol- *>C.
faj
& oA/r>«>iAt c*L
- ~LJU> r. f-vyi^aZ^x^j
j£>4^L
v
->w>k
Letter written by the aid of a Carnes Arm.
85277—D




grain follows the line of the greatest strain, permitting
us to get the greatest strength with the least weight
and bulk of material. The tree is best left standing
after being ring-barked for perhaps two years, then it
is cut into suitable blocks, seasoned under cover, and
perhaps dried in a kiln. Ihe tendency to crack is
provided for by metal rings, and by enveloping the
outside of the finished socket with wet rawhide,
which as it dries shrinks and binds the socket
firmly. The surface of the wood inside
is varnished to prevent moisture and
secretions penetrating, for the limb
would then become foul and malodo-
rous, and would be apt to make the
stump and scar unhealthy. For this
same reason leather is not a good
material for a socket. There should
be holes in the socket, so that the
interior is well ventilated to prevent
the accumulation of moisture from the
limb. Thus the scar is prevented from
becoming soft and sodden. The hol-
low of the socket must be tapering
or sloped just as the stump is, so
that the pressure is exerted where it
is wanted. If this is not attended
to the patient will stuff in cloths, &c.,
to pack the stump in the socket, and
so get firmness; but this is bad, for
the stump gets moist and unhealthy,
A Wooden Socket.
especially in Australia and in summer. In the case
of the leg, grooves must be provided for the shin-bone
and for the outer bone of the leg —these bones are
near to the surface and but poorly covered by soft
tissues.
For the joints good steel must be used, judiciously
combining strength with lightness. Aluminium is
often employed when lightness and small bulk are
desired, and Dr. Kent Hughes writes to me that the
best leg he saw in England the other day was made
85277—8


of aluminium with standardised parts, so that it could
be assembled for any particular case in some fifteen
hours. It would take us too far to go further in mere
matters of detail. I am glad to say that in Australia
we have excellent limb-makers, who produce as good
and well-finished limbs as one could desire to see. In
view of the necessity for repairs and renewals, which
mav at any time be needed, it is well to encourage
local manufacture, and moreover, with local manufacture
we can study individual cases.
The artificial limb should be such that the patient
likes to wear it. If he does not like it, he will not
wear it. When the limb really fits him the physical
and mental comfort which it brings to the wearer is
beyond expression—it converts the desponding into
hopeful, active, useful men and women. The artificial
limb should be natural-looking, as well as useful, and
the Germans are supplving two limbs, one strong and
simple, provided with hook or ring, or other device,
for the man’s everyday work, and a Sunday arm, for
walking out. To most patients the principal con-
sideration is that the limb should be of practical use
in their work, for this governs their earning power,
and most wearers are poor men. That the limb and
its movements are natural-looking are of great moment
to the wearer, it helps them to get employment. Further
—remarks by friends and others, however well inten-
tioned, very soon become an annoyance to the unfor-
tunate, whose defect is too obvious. It is kindest not
to notice it.
Onlv the best artificial limbs should be used. It is
too great a risk to take, that of the limb breaking or
getting out of order just when it is most wanted, and
patients should remember that limbs with movable
mints must be carefully used, kept well oiled, and
always protected from injury. Yet with every care
they go wrong and their parts wear out, so that pro-
vision should be made for repairs. On this account
efforts are now being made to adopt standard limbs
with standardised parts, so that when parts break or


wear out they may be replaced without delay. Rich
men keep spare limbs in their possession to provide
for accidents, and this is about the only advantage
possessed by the artificial as compared with the natural
limb. Where the ankle is movable renewal may be
wanted in, say, three years, but where there is no joint
at the ankle the leg may last for eight years or more.
The original cost for a leg from the hip joint downwards
is in Sydney about £35. With the amputation through
the thigh, above the knee, £25; below the knee, £2O.
Ordinary arms, from above the elbow, cost, say £ 2O ;
below the elbow, say £l5; but the Carnes arm, to be
described later on, imported from America, costs £5O
in Sydney, and it is worth the money.
The Stump.
If all goes well after the operation the artificial limb
may be fitted in some six weeks, but on the other hand.
the stump may not be ready for
months. The fitting of the
socket is all important; there
must be no discomfort nor injur-
ious pressure at any point. The
scar must not be submitted to
any pressure or irritation, but
must be quite free in space, and,
as already said, this space must
be ventilated, so that the scar
may not become sodden and
tender from the accumulation
of moisture and secretions from
the skin. Many stumps require
attention before a limb can
be fitted; there may be tender
or painful points, due to the ends
of the nerves not having been cut
short enough, and as these are
sometimes intolerably painful on
A Simple Thigh
Stump.


pressure, they must be removed by the surgeon. There
may be sharp angles of bone or spicules may have
crown out; these too must be removed. There must
be no pressure on the important nerves or blood vessels,
so that the fitting of a socket is really a matter requiring
a great deal of experience. A plaster cast of the stump
is made, and it is to this cast that m the first instance
the socket is fitted.
The girth of the stump may vary, for after the
application of an artificial limb, the stump generally
becomes smaller from the pressure of the socket. It
A Lacer for Thigh
Case
is, therefore,- often advisable to
wear tight bandages, or what is
called a “ lacer,” or corset,
laced on to the stump tightly
for some weeks before the arti-
ficial limb is applied, for if this
is not done, when the stump
shrinks the socket is too large,
and the limb being less firm in
its place is uncomfortable and
less useful. On the other hand,
the exercise of the stump in
managing the limb tends to in-
crease its volume. One way
or another it may take a
couple of years for the volume
of the stump to settle down. Patients should have all
this explained to them, for otherwise they think that
the limb is a misfit, or that they are not going to be
able to use it, and they grow despondent, when there
is no real cause for it. In the German hospitals they
are given a temporary limb—this enables the limb to
be supplied early, and gives time to the stump to
settle down before the permanent limb is supplied.
The effect of the facer in reducing the bulk of a stump
is very remarkable. Some stumps are very swollen
and fatty after amputation, and the lacer in a few


weeks may reduce a stump from say, 12 inches to
8 inches in circumference. Very careful massage may
also help the absorption.
When a stump is not exercised by an artificial limb
it withers away; all its muscles and the muscles
attaching the stump to the trunk lose their development,
and so the deformity goes on increasing. The artificial
limb gives the muscles something to do and prevents
Double Leg Amputation.
A Simple Leg Stump.
the neuralgic pains in the stump already referred to.
The shoulder remains round, the breast well filled,
the buttock round, and so forth. If the wearing of the
limb is delayed, the weakening of muscles of the stump
makes the artificial limb feel heavy and unutilizable.
With use and exercise the muscles regain their lost
powers and the limb loses its heavy feel. In the case
85277—C


Double Leg Case—Railway Porter.
Double Leg Case —Ticket Collector.


of the leg, the sooner crutches are dispensed with the
sooner, as we have seen, will the patient be able to use
his new limb properly. The patient should be warned
that the limbs will most likely be uncomfortable a,t first,
the stump has to get used to it, has to be exercised to
manage it, the wearer has to learn how to use it, and
so there are many times of discouragement. It is a
question of try, try again. There are plenty of cases
Double Leg Case — Skating.
with both arms artificial, and others with both legs,
and they get along quite well with their artificial sub-
stitutes, and are able to support themselves and their
families in their own usual calling and position in life.
The surgeon has to keep carefully in mind what the
condition of the stump will be after the wound is healed
in relation to a possible artificial appliance designed to
more or less replace the lost part. The question of the


man’s possible employment comes in, and the matter
has become so important that the British War Office
Double Leg
Case at Work.
especially the leg, a great difficulty is
often presented when the muscles have
been allowed to contract for so long a
period that the joint is no longer freely
movable. For instance, if the ampu-
tation has been between the ankle and
the knee, the knee is bent, and may be
it cannot be afterwards straightened.
Such a stump is only in the way; it is
worse than useless. If the amputation
is between the knee and the hip, the
stump of the thigh is kept upwards at
the hip and the joint becomes more or
less fixed in the bent position. In
either case it may be difficult to fit a
useful artificial limb. In the arm the
same difficulties present themselves
has recently issued a special memorandum
on the subject. It is no use leaving a
mass of tissue over the end of the bone
with the idea that this will form a perma-
nent pad. The best stump for bearing
weight is one that ends in a natural
weight-bearing surface, such as the heel,
in what is called a Syme’s amputation
of the foot. In other stumps the pres-
sure is distributed over the stump, taking
care that the pressure is kept off certain
places.
Every stump should be covered by a
sock shaped to suit it, partly for the
sake of cleanliness, for the socket 15 kept
free from secretions of the skin and the
scar is kept healthy. The ventilation of
the interior of the socket has already
been spoken of.
In both the arm and the leg, but
Double Leg Case
on Bicycle.


owing to the stiffening of the elbow, but even after the
application of the artificial limb, the exercise may
gradually lessen the stiffening. But the risk of stiffening
of the joint is always an anxious care for the surgeon,
for it so materially affects the patient’s outlook on the
future.
Artificial Legs.
In the case of the leg, stability is as important as
mobility is in the case of the arm. The artificial leg must
bear the weight of the body and permit such strains
as will allow it to be used in all the exigencies of the
daily life of the wearer. Naturally a heavy man needs
a much stronger and heavier limb than a woman does
who is half his weight, and it must not only carry the
wearer’s weight, but also anything the wearer may
carry, push, pull —it must have a margin of strength for
emergencies. The plaster cast, to which the socket is
in the first instance fitted, should as far as possible be
made with the limb bearing weight as it would be doing
when the socket is in use. The weight may be borne
either by the socket fitting the more or less tapering
stump, or by the sitting-bone resting on the upper edge
of the socket, as is necessary when the amputation is
at the hip or high up in the thigh. The end of the
thigh stump in many cases is not a good weight-bearing
surface; it is not naturally a weight-bearing surface,
and when it is to be used it should be well covered with
the soft tissues. The shaft of the thigh bone and the
bones of the lower part of the leg are so small when cut
across that they do not give enough surface to carry
weight, but the end of the thigh bone at the knee is so
broad and expansive that it does bear weight very well
—as it naturally does. It is the sloping part of the leg,
immediately below the knee, that is best suited to bear
weight. The heel, as we have seen, being naturally
weight-bearing forms a good end to a weight-bearing
stump. When the hip itself has been removed, an
artificial substitute may be provided, modelled to
correspond to the natural. The weight of the limb is


in part borne by a belt round the waist, or by a suspender
round the shoulder or attached to a corset or a vest.
Anyhow, it must be firmly attached to the body of the
wearer, or he will feel it heavy and inefficient. Some
stumps are, as we have seen, worse than useless, being
only in the way. The longer the stump is, the more
easily, is it fitted with an artificial limb as a rule. The
best stump in the leg below the knee is one about 5
inches long; if longer, it becomes too small and tapering,
but even 1 inch will do. The simplest artificial leg is the
old-fashioned bucket with a wooden peg; the “peg-
leg,” the “ wooden-leg ” of literature.
The weight was borne by* the edge of
the bucket or socket, the stump hanging
free within it; its defects were the
absence of bend at the knee and ankle,
and its sinking in soft ground. Various
artificial legs have been attempted,
more or less successfully reproducing
the natural movement, such as the
Anglesey and the Beaufort legs. The
Beaufort leg, invented by Count de
Beaufort in 1851, is laced on the thigh
stump and has a knee-joint but no
ankle-joint. The foot has a continu-
ously curved sole, and over this the
wearer rolls, so to speak. The knee-
joint permits the leg to bend when
the wearer sits down and when the
leg is raised from the ground in
Bucket Leg.
walking. As the limb is raised in walking, the leg
is urged forwards by a spring within the knee-joint,
but when the leg is extended it is checked by certain
bands which imitate the action of the natural ligaments
of the knee.
It has been a much disputed point as to whether the
artificial limb should or should not have movement at
the ankle-joint. Many wearers complain that without
this movement they have great difficulty in going down
hill. Their heel reaches the ground a long time before


the flat of the foot comes to the ground, and as they
roll over the hard heel they feel unsteady and uncom-
fortable, but, on the other hand, the weight-bearing
lower limb should have stability, and this is more likely
to be attained if the ankle has no joint. The fact is
that the question must be decided in each case by what
the wearer requires for the calling in which he desires
Anglesea Leg.
The Beaufort Leg.
to engage. If he is to be a navvy, or an agricultural
labourer, any calling which requires him to be steady
on his feet, then he is better without the ankle movement,
but if he is to walk about town, up-hill and down-hill, he
is perhaps better with the ankle movement. Even
then, every individual case requires consideration. The
slower the walk, the more in proportion is the ankle
used and the less the knee; as the walk quickens the
less in proportion is the ankle used and the more the
knee. It is contended, therefore, by some makers
that in ordinary city life where the walk is, say, 3 miles
an hour, the ankle is not used so much as to require a


ioint. The disadvantages of the movable ankle are
that it requires so much more control by the patient
it is so much more costly and likely to get out of
Mechanism of Movable
Ankle.
order and it wears out the
socks at a terrific rate. It is,
therefore, a very expensive thing
to wear, quite apart from the
first cost, but here again the
preferences of the wearer must
be attended to and these are
not always mere matters of
taste. They often depend upon
what is his natural walk, and
this depends on all sorts of con-
ditions—heredity, height, weight,
occupation, training—do we not
all recognise a friend by his
walk long before we see his face?
With the sponge-rubber feet invented by Mr. A. A.
Marks of New York, to whom for this and many other
devices crippled humanity owes an immense debt, the
patient rolls over the yielding heel; the body then rolls
on to the ball of the great toe, in which is a wooden core,
Sponge-Rubber Foot.
and the rubber toes bend at the same time. When the
foot is raised from the ground the rubber, aided by a
steel soring embedded within it, brings back the toot
to its shape again. The absence of the ankle-joint lessens
the weight considerably, lessens the annual bill for


repairs, and lengthens the life of the limb. Finally,
the risk of a break-down with a jointed limb is an ever-
present menace and possible catastrophe. I can, there-
fore, see many advantages possessed by these rubber feet
without ankle joint, and I do not hesitate to recommend
them for a great many wearers. There are other makes
with solid rubber; they too have their points to recom-
mend them, but the pneumatic rubber feet, blown up
like a cycle tyre, are not worth considering.
In order to overcome the absence of a movable
ankle-joint in the Beaufort leg, the foot is, as I have
said, rounded from heel to toe, and thus the wearer
rolls over the foot and requires no movement at either
ankle or toe. In the jointed ankle a spring lifts the
toe as the leg swings forward, and thus it is less likely
to come into contact with the ground.
Even when the complete lower limb is wanting,
amputation having been at the hip-joint, an efficient
substitute may be provided, and the complete lower
limb, from the hip downwards, should not weigh more
than from 7 to 8 lb. for men, and for women, say, 4 to
5 lb. And yet several men have applied to the Red
Cross Branch in Sydney for new limbs on the ground
that they could not get on with those given them in
England on account of their bad fit and great weight.
The legs which they wore weighed 13 to 14 lb., while
in Sydney excellent legs in every way good are made
weighing only 7 lb. This has also been the experience
in Melbourne, according to the letter of Dr. Kent Hughes
in the Australian Medical Journal of Ist July. The
natural leg is much heavier than this, but then it has
all its muscles intact to manage it. The shorter the
stump, the heavier the limb feels. Put your finger,
like a stump, into the end of a piece of metal pipe, which
is like the socket, and you will feel how much more
difficult it is to move the pipe, the shorter the length of
your finger inserted into it, and yet even a very short
stump may be of great use in directing the movements
of the artificial limb. When there is no stump, the limb
is controlled by the body being thrown forward carrying


the limb with it. I have spoken only of the regular
straight-out amputations. There are all sorts of
variations for partial losses of the lower limb; these
require individual treatment and cannot be dealt with
in this place.
The foot should be clad in sock and boot, just as the
natural foot is. The artificial foot, being hidden from
view as the natural foot is, the best friends of the wearer
may be quite unaware of his defect. This is very
different from the hand, the natural appearance of which
can never be copied, and so the artificial hand is always
gloved. When the ankle-joint is movable it is so very
hard on the sock that it is a very important consideration,
seeing that most wearers are poor people; a man told
me the other day that he required a new sock every day.
Artificial Arms.
In the arm, mobility is the desideratum, and as far
as possible, the restoration of the power of prehension
is aimed at —grasping a knife and fork, a pen, and so
forth. These are the properties which are specially
required in the upper limb —lightness, for the greater
the weight the greater the effort to move the limb, and,
of course, the greater the weight to be carried about by
the wearer. The modern arm weighs about ito 2J lb.
Durability—seeing that the fingers move, grasp and carry
one finger of the Carnes arm will bear 25 lb. —and
seeing that the joints are necessarily small, there is
a considerable wear and tear, and thus the material
used is important. The Carnes arm is of a sort of
vulcanite, containing a vegetable fibre, so that the
material is hard and tough. It is particularly import-
ant in the case of the upper limb that it should conceal
the loss of the natural limb, and as far as possible
restore the natural appearance of the dismembered
side. It must be natural-looking, and this is not a
merely sentimental affair, but is extremely important.
It should assist the opposite hand, carry moderate
weights, pick up a pen and enable the wearer to write


and to pick up money and small objects from a table.
It should take a knife and fork, cut food and carry it
Arm Case—Driving.
to the mouth, and it should be capable of taking, in
some way, special implements enabling a workman to
Arm Case—Rowing.
work; a hook or ring to take the handles of rakes,
brushes, barrow, to grasp bundles, and so forth. The


utility of an artificial arm depends greatly on the nature
of the stump. In the case of the upper limb the surgeon
will have preserved everything that can be left the
more that is left the more is the stump likely to be
useful. Even where there is no stump, the arm having
been removed at the shoulder-joint, an artificial arm
can be fixed to the body and serve certain useful purposes.
The simplest and cheapest artificial arm for an
amputation below the elbow costs about £J> in Sydney,
and is essentially a leather sheath laced to the stump
and bearing a block at the end
to which a ring, hook, knife,
and various other devices may
be attached. An excellent ex-
ample of such a limb is figured
and described in the British
Medical Journal, 15th January,
1916. It is wonderful what
the wearer can accomplish with
it, but then he uses his brains
when he uses his arm. More
complicated, and, of course,
more expensive arms have
been invented in great num-
bers to imitate the natural
form and movements of the
elbow, wrist and fingers. As
far back as 1845 such an ap-
paratus was made, and by it
Arm Case—Navvy.
the French singer Roger could grasp a sword and
draw it from its scabbard on the stage, pick up a
pen, and so on. The fingers may be made of wood,
rubber, felt, or, as in the Carnes arm, of a special kind of
fibre in vulcanite. The Beaufort arm, which was given
by the French Government to the victims of 1870-71,
is described as remarkably efficient and cheap. It
had wooden fingers to which was opposed a movable
thumb, which could be operated by a cord passing up
to the shoulder and across to the opposite shoulder, the
movements of which pull upon the cord and move the


thumb. Other forms have rubber hands and fingers.
It is an extension of the principles contained in the
Beaufort arm that have culminated in the Carnes arm
to which I shall now refer.
This Carnes arm is made in Kansas City, by a company
devoting,itself exclusively to the making of arms and
hands, and the principal officers and many of the work-
men wear the limb they are engaged in making, and
these workmen earn their wages. The inventor, W, T,
Carnes, was a machinist who lost his arm and made the
Mechanical Details,
Carnes Arm.
Carnes Arm.
first limb for his own use, working with one hand and
his teeth. This has been greatly improved, and with
the present form the wearer can work at the bench,
lathe, and in many other ways, so perfectly that casual
observers never notice that the arm is artificial. The
fingers bend and straighten fully, the wrist rotates, the
elbow bends, all operated by shrugs or hunchings of the


shoulder and movements of the stump itself without
anv assistance from the other side. From my own
observation these limbs f most
mav easily pass unnoticed. From the shoulder piece
Siree cords pass down to operate the elbow wrist and
hncer-ioints and I have seen a man operate these arms
only a few days after having been fitted, but of coume
a much longer time and greater attention and intelligence
are needed to get the best results—as is the case with y
mechanical device. Does it not take a long time
to teach the natural hand to do things? There shou d
Shoulder Straps for Carnes Arm,
be a certain length of stump for these arms. They are
best if the bone is left at least 3i to 5 inches from
shoulder, and the better the longer the On
the other hand if there is only an inch of bone the an
may be fitted, and wonderful to relate, even lf none ° f
am bone is left, the amputation h a™g been at the
shoulder-joint, the Carnes arm may be fittedl and yield
nuite valuable use. Most wonderful of all—the catalogi
of the company even shows the photograph of a man
who has had the arm fitted on both shoulders with quite
good results. For such a case the patient must go to the


factory to be fitted, but for ordinary cases a plaster
cast of the stump is sent and is sufficient. Lieut.-Col.
Openshaw, at Roehampton House, is attempting to
make a stump for a British officer who has lost both
arms at the shoulder-joint. We must surely wish him
every success in his ingenious enterprise. Many of
these arms have been purchased by the British Govern-
ment for the men at Roehampton Hospital. The
inventor and his company deserve the greatest praise,
and I think that we may fairly accept their claim, that
they take pride in their work and do not regard it merely
as a “ cold-blooded business proposition.” With these
limbs the men can raise the whole arm, bend the elbows,
wrist and fingers, and rotate the wrist-joint. They
hold papers, strike matches, pick up coins, take up a
pen and write, and I have shown you the writing.
They carry weights up to 75 lb.; they may do
practically anything, depending upon the intelligence
and perseverance of the wearer. From the Company’s
catalogue we see pictures of wearers following well
over 100 different occupations. For a man who has
been dependent on others to be able to dress himself,
feed himself, shave himself, play musical instruments,
work the typewriter, and so on, and support himself
and his family without attracting too much attention
to his defect, no words can express the benefits. We
can enter into the joy of the man who can now handle
his knife and fork instead of having to “ order hash
Combined Knife and Fork, as used by Lord Nelson.
when he wanted steak,” Think of even being com-
pelled to use the combined knife and fork for one-
handed men, such as Lord Nelson used, turning it round
according as he wanted to cut or to lift the food.


Before concluding, I should say that it,hajbe» very
difficult for me to find an y e f ”Xd I have
correspondents m America a 6 / both
asked to send me up-to-date difficulty,
replied that they hav |: en ™ e me thing special beyond
what" hav; myself had
I am bound to express my A. Marks of New
York^from w«4 of my'illustrations are taken,
and to the Catalogue of the Carnes Company.
Sydney ; William Government Printer. -1917.


M. 3 spn
J o/ma c <A
'm-. /iu> - / /-
Jsyfuv / /a */t


. J V
UU /foU3
/& "MimJ. - *JI •
(&7** *V •
