

ARTICLES
ON THE
PRINTED BY ORDER OF THE
■ r *
FOR THE
THOMAS RICHARDS, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, PIIILLIP-STREET
PROPAGATION OF OYSTERS
COMMISSIONERS OF FISHERIES,
INFORMATION OP THOSE ENGAGED IN THE CULTIVATION OF OYSTERS
ON THE COASTS AND RIVERS OF NEW SOUTH WALES.




ARTICLES
ON THE
'ROPAGATION OF OYSTERS
PRINTED BY ORDER OF THE
COMMISSIONERS OE EISHERIES,
FOR THE
INFORMATION OF THOSE ENGAGED IN THE CULTIVATION OF OYSTERS
ON THE COASTS AND RIVERS OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
For private circulation only.
SYDNEY:
18 —85
THOMAS RICHARDS, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, PHILLIP-STREET.
LLO t T)iS t { i X




OYSTERS AND THE OYSTER QUESTION.
(A Lecture delivered at the Royal Institution , by Professor
T. 11. Huxley , 11th May , 188 S.)
If the conversation which takes place at dinner-tables, especially
in that incipient stage of content which follows upon the bad
quarter of an hour of waiting, is a fair test of the public interest
in any topic, I imagine that the great oyster question may be said
to be that about which the general mind is most exercised.
It is a matter which concerns me personally, because, since it is
known that I hold the office of Inspector of Fisheries, I am
almost sure to be attacked before I have had time to squeeze my
lemon, with inquiries why oysters are so dear, and why I do not
do something to make them cheaper, just as if I were the minister
for molluscous affairs and responsible for their going wrong. So,
perhaps, I may be permitted to say publicly, once and for all, that
at present I have nothing to do with sea fisheries, and there-
fore that oysters are out of my province. Twenty years ago,
however, when I was a Sea Fisheries Commissioner, they were
very much in it on their practical side; while it must be near
double that time since they first began to interest me from a
scientific point of a view; and I have thought it might be inter-
esting to many if I tried to put together into brief compass the
pith and substance of as much as I have been able to learn in the
course of my zoological life about the facts upon which any rational
discussion of the oyster question must be based.
And first, as to the structure and ways of the oyster, of which
we must obtain some knowledge, if the discussion is to have a
sound basis. I suppose that when the sapid and slippery morsel—


which is and is gone like a flash of gustatory summer lightning—
glides along the palate, few people imagine that they are swallowing
a piece of machinery (and going machinery too) greatly more
complicated than a watch. But so it is. The oyster possesses
representatives of all the most important organs of the higher
animals, and is endowed with corresponding functions. The
“ loves of the oyster” may he mythical, and we may even he
sceptical as to its parental tenderness; hut no parent can take
greater care of its young; and though the oyster seems the type of
dull animal vegetation in its adult condition, it passes through a
vagabond, if not a stormy youth, between the time in which it is
sheltered by the parental roof and that in which it “ranges itself”
as a grave and sedentary member of the oyster community.
Most people are familiar with the appearance of a live oyster,
as it may be seen any day in a fishmonger’s shop (Fig. 1). It has
a shell composed of two pieces or valves, the one of which is thick
and has a convex outer surface, while the other is thinner and
flattened. The contour of each valve is irregularly oval, with a
small end, which usually presents a triangular prominence known
as the umbo or beak (urn), and which answers to the back or
dorsal region of the animal. When this is turned upwards, the
opposite or ventral margin is seen to be evenly curved, and to be
gradually continued into the curved line of the front margin ( ant ),
while the hinder margin [post) is usually straighten By attention
to these characters the right valve can always be distinguished
from the left; but in the great majority of cases it is more easily
known because it is the flat valve. If the oyster is fixed, it is the
convex valve which is attached, and free oysters naturally lie on
this valve, inasmuch as the other is the lighter and the more easily
raised by the mechanism which will be presently described.
The exterior of the shell is rough, and usually of a brownish-
green colour. It is marked by lines which run approximately
parallel with the contour of the shell, around a common centre
placed at the summit of the umbo, and indicate the successive
layers by the apposition of which the shell has been deposited


upon the skin of the animal. The inner face of each valve has
the well-known white and opaline or iridescent aspect which apper-
tains to nacre or mother of pearl, except the flattened or concave
surfaces of the umbones, which are marked by parallel lines
answering to the lines of growth on the exterior. At the bases of
the umbones the valves are joined together along a short trans-
verse line, in a sort of hinge, by a band of dark-brown elastic
substance, the ligament (I.), which, in the middle of the hinge,
forms a thicker cushion. About the centre of the inner face of
each valve there is a large well-defined rounded depression like a
scar, which marks the place of attachment of a strong and impor-
tant muscle.
Fig. 1.- —An Oyster with the bight valve of the shell removed,
Natural size.
sh, shell; um, umbo ; I, ligament; m, mouth ; p, palps ; hr, branchiae ;
mt, mantle; add, adductor muscle ;h, heart; cl, cloaca; ant, anterior ;
post, posterior side.


Each valve is sometimes solid throughout, but in old oysters,
and especially in those that live in deep water, the substance of
the valves, and more particularly of the thick convex left valve,
contains wide cavities, separated only by thin layers of nacreous
substance, which are full of sea-water.
In structure, the nacre or mother of pearl is very dense, hard,
and finely laminated ; but the superficial outer layer is made up
of small polygonal prisms, and is somewhat friable. Each of these
substances, the nacreous and the prismatic, consists of layers of
organic matter impregnated with salts of lime.
If the oyster has been left at peace for some time in its native
sea-water, the edges of the valves beyond the hinge will be seen to
be separated by a chink, which is wider opposite the umbones;
but, upon the least disturbance, the chink is closed and the shut
valves cannot be thrust asunder without the expenditure of an
amount of force which usually breaks them.
An expert oyster-opener, however, mindful of the maxim, arte
non vi, gets them apart with the utmost ease. A strong flat-
bladed knife is introduced between the margins of the valves, and
the knife being kept close to the inner face of one of them, is
swept round the region of the muscular impression. If the opera-
tion is properly performed the shell at once gapes widely ; and it
will now be found that if the valve which has sprung up is pressed
down it immediately returns to its former position. The shell
that before could hardly be forced open, now will not keep shut.
The reason of this becomes apparent if the soft body—the edible
part of the oyster—which lies within the shell is carefully cleaned
out, so that the interior of the valves can be seen. On looking
towards the hinge, the thick elastic cushion formed by the middle
of the ligament will be found to be compressed when the valves
are brought together j and when the external pressure is removed
its elastic reaction suffices to thrust them apart. In fact, it is like
the spring of a door, arranged in such a manner as to keep the
door ajar. While the oyster is alive the great muscle already
mentioned, which is called the adductor (Eig. 1, add.), the ends of


which are attached to the two scars on the inner face of the valves,
is always ready to overcome the elasticity of the ligament and
close the valves when need arises; and what the judicious oyster-
opener does is to cut this muscle close to one or other of its attach-
ments. Thus, the force by which the valves are made to gape is
elasticity of a purely mechanical character, and is as active in the
dead as in the living oyster, while that by which the valves are
closed is the contractility which inheres only in living muscle.
Hence a dead oyster is readily known by its persistent gaping.
We shall see that a certain amount of separation of the valves
is necessary for the discharge of all the functions of the living
oyster. Hence, it is of advantage to the animal that this condition
should be assumed and maintained without any muscular exertion ;
while intruders and enemies can be shut out, or at any rate sharply
pinched at any moment, by calling the adductor into action.
If one valve is removed very carefully, so as not to injure the
soft body within, the form of the latter is seen to have a general
correspondence with that of the interior of the shell. It is there-
fore flattened from side to side, with the left side convex and the
right flattened (Fig. 1). Its contour is oval, with the long axis
perpendicular to the middle of the hinge ; and there is a short
dorsal side which answers to the latter, and is excavated in the
middle, in correspondence with the convex ventral face of the
cushion of the ligament. The dorsal half of the anterior edge of
the body is convex, that of the posterior edge is nearly straight,
or even slightly excavated, while the ventral margin continues
back the curve of the anterior edge. The cut end of the thick
adductor muscle is a conspicuous object, and corresponds in shape
with the adductor impression on the shell j that is to say, it has
the form of a half oval, the straight side of which looks dorsally
and a little forward. The upper and anterior portion of the
muscle is darker than the rest, and sharply defined from it (Fig. 1,
add).
J ust above the straight side of the muscle, a dark patch indi-
cates the place of the heart, which may be seen pulsating in the


chamber or 'pericardium which contains it (Fig. 1, h). Above this,
the surface of the body is covered by a smooth and delicate skin
or integument, through which, in the breeding season, the reticu-
lated whitish tubes of the reproductive gland shine.
The chief part of the body of the oyster, which for want of a
better name may be termed the trunk , is a somewhat pyriform
mass, which extends from the ventral contour of the adductor to
the posterior half of the dorsal region, and lies much more in the
posterior than in the anterior half of the body (Fig. 2 (A) ).
The rest of the body of the mollusk is chiefly formed by two
broad folds of the integument which are given off from the lateral
margins of the trunk on each side; extend backwards, forwards,
and downwards ; and, closely applied to the inner surfaces of the
valves, end by thickened free margins, which have two rows, an
inner and an outer, of close-set papilla;. These free folds of the
integument are called the lobes of the mantle (Fig. 2 (B), r.mt,
l.mt). Their surfaces are attached by a series of delicate muscular
fibres to the inner surface of the shell, at some distance from its
margin and from their own free edges; and, in the living state,
the fringe, beyond the line of attachment, extends to the edges of
the gape and plays the part of a sensory apparatus. The margins
of the mantle lobes pass into one another above, at the anterior
and posterior ends of the dorsal integument respectively, so that
the cleft between them does not extend on to the dorsal surface.
The lobes are much deeper in front and below than behind ; hence
the cavity which they inclose is correspondingly deeper and
shallower in the respective regions. If one lobe is cut through,
immediately beneath the anterior end of the dorsal integument,
and turned back, it is seen to bound a wide space which extends
back a long way, in fact nearly to the posterior side of the trunk.
This is the vestibule (Fig. 2 (A), vb), and the dorsal integument
which covers it is the anterior hood or cucullus (Fig. 2 (A), c).
Projecting into this is seen a sort of cone, which at its upper and
front end bears the wide slit-like mouth, bounded by broad lips,
one above and one below. The angles of these lips are produced,,


like an upper and lower moustache, into two broad triangular
flaps, the so-called labial palps (Fig. 2 (A), p). Below these, the
mantle lobes, throughout their anterior and ventral regions, include
a wide space termed infrabranchial (Fig. 2 (B), in.br.ch.), because
the four plates which constitute the gills or branchice, and are
commonly called the “beard,” project into it and form its roof.
Each of these plates or lamellce is Y-shaped in transverse section
(Fig. 2 (B) ). The adjacent upper ends of the four Y’s (YYYY)
are united together, while the outer ends of the right and left Y’s
respectively are attached to the corresponding lobes of the mantle.
Hence the gill plates hang down, like so many elongated Gothic
sickle-shaped pendants, from the roof of the branchial cavity,
which is formed by their conjoined edges. On the posterior side,
the cavity inclosed between the pallial lobes is deep below, but
rapidly becomes shallower above, where the lobes are narrowed to
mere bands. The two bands pass into one another at the posterior
end of the dorsal integument—and form a rudimentary posterior
hood, the velamen (Fig. 1 (A), ve), which is very large in many
other lamellibranchs. The intestine projects beneath the integu-
ment as it runs obliquely downwards, over the posterior face of
the adductor, to end in the short but prominent tubular vent. The
posterior interpallial space into which this opens answers to the
cloacal chamber of other lamellibranchs (Fig. 1 and Fig. 2 (A),
cl). It is continued forwards, between the trunk and the dorsal
faces of the gills, into a long suprabranchial chamber (Fig. 2 (A),
su.br.ch.), which extends forwards and upwards, in front of the
trunk, as far as the anterior and superior ends of the gills. For
their anterior third, the dorsal edges of all the gills become
attached to the front face of the trunk. The suprabranchial
chamber thus becomes subdivided into four passages, which end
blindly in front, The intralamellar cavities, which are inclosed
by each Y-shaped branchial plate, communicate, either indirectly
through these passages, or directly, with the suprabranchial
chamber, and this widens behind into the cloacal chamber, which
opens freely on to the exterior upon the posterior side of the
body. But the suprabranchial chamber, its passages, and the


intralamellar cavities, would be completely shut off from the
infrabranchial chamber by the walls of the gill-plates, were it not
that these walls are perforated, like a sieve, by multitudes of very
narrow parallel slits.
(A)
Fig. 2. —(A) Dissection of an Oyster from the left side. —(B) Trans-
verse Section of the same taken along the line a. b. in A.
D. dorsal; V. ventral; A. anterior ;P. posterior side ; mt. mantle ; r.mf.,
l.mt., its right and left lobes ; c. cucullus, or anterior hood ; ve. velamen
or posterior hood; vh. vestibule ; cl. cloaca; m. mouth; p. palps; g.
gullet; st. stomach ; i. intestine ; r. last part of the intestine ; an. vent;
Ir. liver; pc. pericardium; an. auricle ;v. ventricle of the heart ; br.


sa.br, ch.
branchiae; gp. the four lamellae of the branchiae or gill-plates, of which
two make up the left branchia [l.br.), and two the right (r.br.); su.br.ch.
supra-branchial chamber ; in.br.ch. infra-branchial chamber, the position
of the ‘ ‘ spat, ” or mass of eggs, being shown in the transverse section;
u.g. urogenital aperture. The duct of the left reproductive gland is seen
passing from it and ramifying over the stomach and intestine. In the
transverse section, the caeca of the gland are shown forming a layer
immediately beneath the integument. Those of the right gland are
marked r.g,; g. position of the two principal nervous ganglia ; add,
adductor muscle.
The arrows in A indicate the course of the inflowing and outflowing
currents.


The mouth of the oyster leads into a wide gullet, which passes
back for a short distance, and then dilates into a spacious stomach,
the lower and anterior end of which is continued into the long-
conical first part of the intestine, which passes downwards in front
of the adductor, closely applied to its anterior contour. The next
portion of the intestine then bends sharply upon itself and turns
forwards parallel with the first part; crosses this on the right side,
runs up along the back of the stomach, bends forwards and down-
wards, and turning back on the left side of the stomach (thus
forming a completely circular loop) passes at first backwards and
then downwards to the vent, the place of which has been already
described (Fig. 2 (A) ).
The stomach and the circular loop of the intestine are surrounded
by a dark brown or greenish organ, the short branched tubules of
which unite into larger tubes or ducts which open into the stomach.
This organ is known as the liver—though it by no means exactly
answers to the organ so called in the higher animals, but secretes
the fluid which is the chief agent in digestion.
The heart (Fig. 2 (A) lies in a spacious pericardial cavity ( pc )
situated between the flat face of the adductor muscle, behind and
below, and the mass of the digestive viscera in front and above.
It consists of a large dark-coloured auricular division ( au ), partly
divided into two, which is situated below and in front, and which
communicates by two short tubular passages with the pear-shaped
ventricle ( v ), the long axis of which is directed upwards and back-
wards. Large arterial trunks are continued from the ventricle,
one upwards and backwards along the posterior moiety of the
circular loop of the intestine, one forward along the anterior
moiety, one downwards to the adductor. The successive con-
tractions of the auricle and the ventricle may be readily seen in
the living oyster. The blood is colourless, and contains numerous
colourless corpuscles. It is conveyed by the arteries to all parts
of the body, and thence proceeds to a large venous canal, which
lies in the middle line of the anterior face of the trunk. From
this it passes through the renal organs to the gills, and is thence


returned by a main vessel on each side of the auricular division
of the heart. The branchiae consist of the four sickle-shaped
plates already mentioned, which extend, in pairs, from the palps in
front and above, to near the level of the vent behind (Fig. 2 (A)
hr). Unlike a sickle, however, it is the convex edge of each which
is sharp, while the concave edge is broader. Each plate or lamella,
as we have seen, is Y-shaped, consisting of two laminae which
bound the intralamellar cavity, and join below to form the edge
of the lamella. It can be shown that each gill-plate answers to
half the gill of those lamellibranchs in which the structure of the
branchia retains its primitive simplicity. Consequently the oyster
has two gills, and each lamella is a hemi-branchia made up of two
lamince. Of the three partitions which separate the supra-branchial
passages, the right and left represent the stems of the branchise,
while the middle one is formed by the adherence of the edges of
the inner laminae of the two inner hemi-branchue to one another
and to the anterior face of the trunk. Even to the naked eye the
surface of the hemi-branchia appears marked with regular parallel
transverse lines ; and a low magnifying power shows that these
lines are the optical expression of a series of parallel foldings of
the lamina. The re-entering angles of the opposite folds corre-
spond and are united together for some distance, so that the intra-
lamellar chamber, or cavity of the hemi-branchia, is divided into a
series of parallel transverse tubular cavities, which are widely
open above, but which narrow and apparently become closed below.
The lamina itself consists of close-set parallel branchial filaments.
Each of these filaments has the shape of a lath, about TaVoth of
an inch thick, and five or six times as wide ; and they are set
edgewise, with their flat faces not more than Wooth of an inch
apart. At intervals, transverse bands unite these lath-shaped
branchial filaments together. The outwardly turned edges of the
“ laths ” are closely beset with very long vibratile hair-like pro-
cesses, known as cilia; and, during life, these work in such a
fashion as to drive the water through the narrow clefts between
the branchial filaments into the cavities of the tubes, whence it
escapes into the supra-branchial passages and chamber, and thence


makes its way out by the cloacal chamber. The place of the water
thus swept out of the infra-branchial chamber is, of course, made
good by a corresponding flow between the pallial lobes into it.
Hence, while the oyster is alive, and in its proper element, a
powerful stream constantly sets in on the ventral and anterior side
of the body, and pours out from the cloacal opening on the posterior
side. The direction of the stream is marked by the arrows in Fig
2(A).
It is upon the proper maintenance of this current that the life
of the oyster depends; for these animals feed upon the micro,
scopic organisms, largely consisting of diatomaceous plants which
live in the sea ; and as they possess no organs for seizing such food,
they are almost entirely dependent for their supply of nourish-
ment upon the indraught caused by the cilia on the gills, and
especially upon those which line the edges of the branchial plates
and direct a portion of the current towards the mouth. The
anterior ends of each pair of hemi-branchise are attached between
the two palps of the side to which they belong. The applied sur-
faces of the j>alps, between which lies the commencement of the
mouth-cleft, are ridged and richly ciliated, so that anything
brought by the ciliary current of the gills is led directly into the
oral cavity. The cilia which line this eventually drive it into the
stomach. Thus the unimpeded action of the cilia of the gills is
essential to the nutrition of the oyster ; but it is not less necessary
to its respiration, to the carrying away of the waste products of
the renal and alimentary organs, and to the expulsion of the repro-
ductive products; for all these processes depend, either on the
flow of water through the laminae of the gills, or upon the current
which sets out from the supra-branchial and cloacal chambers.
Hence the importance of tolerably clear water to oysters. If
turbid water, laden with coarse sediment, enters the infra-branchial
cavity, particles of mud, too large to be moved by the cilia, lodge
upon the gills, and gradually obstructing the current, interfere
with the primary functions of feeding and breathing to such an
extent as to injure, or even to destroy the animal.


„—^
It would be out of place here to give any account’ of the com,
plicated renal organs of the oyster recently discovered and described
by Dr. Hoek ; but it is necessary to notice the openings by which
the cavity common to them and the reproductive organs debouches.
These are the small slit-like apertures (Fig. 2 (A), ug), situated
one on each side of the lower and front face of the trunk, which
open into the supra-branchial cavity.
For the comfort of those lovers of oysters who entertain strong
views upon the vivisection question, and who may be perturbed
by the reflection that they not only vivisect their favourites but
swallow them alive, it may be well to remark that the nervous
system of the oysters is more poorly developed than that of any
of their allies among the lamellibranchiate mollusks. Only two
out of the three pairs of nerve masses, or ganglia, which these
animals ordinarily possess have been clearly made out, while, of
these, the pair which is most likely to represent the sensorium of
higher animals is exceedingly small. Moreover, no organs of
special sense have been demonstrated. So that, if any reasoning
from analogy is permissible on this subject, it is probable that the
sensibility of the oyster is infinitesimally small. Of course Ido
not suggest that this consideration can have any value in the eyes
of those who maintain that the infliction of suffering on animals
for the benefit of mankind is absolutely unjustifiable. Rigorists
of this class are bound to denounce the brutal deglutition of
oysters, no less than the cruel crushing of fleas, and the infamous
poisoning and drowning of flies and cockroaches.
Yet one other morphological observation may be permitted.
The oyster, as we have seen, possesses one very large adductor
muscle, but only one. Almost all other laraellibranchs {e.g. cockles,
mussels, razor-fish) have two \ one in front, near the mouth ; and
one behind, in a position which exactly answers to that of the
single adductor of the oyster. The latter, therefore, is called
monomyary, or one-muscled, while the former are dimyary , or
two-muscled: and a series of forms can be selected among the
sea mussels and the scallops which show the posterior adductor


becoming larger and larger, while the anterior diminishes, until,
in the oyster, it disappears.
Daring the summer and autumn months, from as early as May
to as late as, or even later than, September, according to circum-
stances, of which the temperature and the depth of the water in
which the oysters live appear to be the most influential, a certain
proportion of the oysters in an oyster-bed pass into a peculiar con-
dition, and are said by the fishermen to be “ sick.” In about half
of these sick oysters, a whitish substance made up of innumerable
very minute granules, embedded in and held together by a sort
of slime, collects in the infra-branchial chamber, filling up the
interspaces between the mouth and the gills, and between the gill-
plates themselves, and even occupying the vestibular cavity so
completely that it is difficult to understand how the processes of
breathing and feeding can be carried on (Fig. 2 (B).)
This granular slime is what is known as “ white spat,” and the
granules are the eggs of the oyster. By degrees, the granules
become more or less coloured ; and the mass, acquiring a brownish
hue, is termed “ black spat.” This change depends on the develop-
ment of the young, which acquire a certain degree of coloration
within the eggs. At the end of a period, the length of which
varies with the temperature of the water and other conditions, but
appears rarely to exceed a fortnight, the mass of black spat breaks
up, and the young, hatched out of the eggs, leave the mantle cavity
of the parent in which they have been thus incubated. They be-
come diffused through the water, and swarm in vast multitudes at
the surface of the sea.
A single full-grown oyster produces, on the average, about a
million of these free-swimming young or larvae. If a glass vessel
is filled from the stratum of surface water in which the larva; swim,
and held up to the light, it will appear full of minute particles—
only iFoth of an inch long, and therefore just visible to the naked
eye—which are in active motion. An ordinary hand magnifier is
sufficient to show that these minute organisms have very much the
aspect of the Eotifera, or “wheel animalcules,” so common in fresh


water. They have a glassy transparency, and are colourless,
except for one or more dark brown patches; while, at one end,
there is a disk, like the “wheel” of the Rotifers, the margins of
which are apparently in rapid motion, and which serve as the
organs of propulsion. When this propeller is moderately active,
the larvae dance up and down in the water, with the disk upper-
most ; but when the action is more rapid, they swim horizontally
with the disk forward.
How long the larval oysters remain in this locomotive state,
under natural conditions, is unknown, but they may certainly
retain their activity for a week, as I have kept them myself in a
bottle of sea-water, which was neither changed nor aerated, for
that period. But, sooner or later, they settle down, fix themselves
by one side to any solid body, and rapidly take on the characters of
minute oysters, which have the appearance of flattened disks, - 2 J o th
of an inch more or less in diameter ; they are therefore perfectly
visible, as white dots, on the surface of the substance to which
they adhere. In this condition, the name of “spat” is also applied
to them. The locomotive larvae being practically invisible in the
sea, this spat appears to be as it were precipitated out of the
water; and, since great quantities appear at once, the oyster
fishermen speak of a “fall” of spat.
It is important to observe, that when oyster fishermen say that
there has been no “fall” of spat in a given season, all that is
really implied is that the young fixed oysters have not made their
appearance. The fact of the absence of a “ fall of spat ” does not
justify the conclusion that the oysters have not bred as usual.
It is quite possible that just as many eggs have been deposited
in the branchial cavity, and that just as many larvae have been
set free as in other years; but that the larvae have been destroyed
by those changes of temperature to which they are so sensitive,
or by other causes. But of course it is also quite possible that
the oysters have been really barren, or that, although the eggs
have reached the mantle cavity, the larvae have not hatched out.
Oyster eggs, no less than hens’ eggs, may be addled.


It is obviously useless to speculate upon the causes of a “ failure
of spat,” until by the examination of samples of oysters from
time to time, and by sweeping the superjacent water with a fine
towing net, the exact nature of the particular case of failure has
been ascertained. There is much reason to believe that the
fertility of oysters preserved in parks is greatly diminished,
although the oysters themselves may be improved in fatness and
quality by the process, and that this is especially the case when
the water in which they are preserved has a low degree of salin-
ity ; and it is very desirable to ascertain the nature of the modifi-
cations effected in the structure and functions of the reproductive
apparatus of the oyster under these circumstances.
It is unfortunate that the same word “ spat ” should be applied
to things so different in their nature as the eggs and unhatched
young of the oyster, contained within the mantle cavity, on the
one hand, and the young fixed oysters, on the other ; while there
is no familiar name for the very important stage of development
which lies between the two. “ Brood,” “ fry,” and “ spat ” would
be very convenient names for the three stages, if “ brood ”
were not already in use for the smallest of the young fixed
oysters. Perhaps the most convenient course will be to use “ fry”
for the eggs or embryos which are contained within the mantle
cavity of the parent; “ larvae ” for the locomotive stage; and
“ spat ” for the final condition.
In order to become spat, the larva appears invariably to fix
itself by one side (almost always the left); and, if the surface is
favourable, the extent of the surface of adhesion becomes very
considerable, and the oyster is fixed throughout life. But, if the
surface of adhesion is small, the oyster, as it increases in size,
readily becomes detached and lies free, though motionless, on the
bottom.
The young oysters grow very rapidly. In five or six months
they attain the size of a threepenny piece ; and, by the time they
are a twelvemonth old, they may reach an inch or more in diameter.
The rate of growth varies with the breed of oyster, and with the


conditions to which it is exposed ; but it is a roughly accurate and
convenient way of putting the matter to say, that, at two years,
the oyster measures two inches across, and at three years, three
inches. After this, which may be regarded as the adult age, the
growth is much slower, and the shell increases in thickness much
more than in circumference.
The natural term of the oyster’s life is not known, but there is
reason to believe that it may extend to twenty years or more. An
excellent authority, Professor Mobius, is of opinion that most of
the adult Schleswig oysters are from seven to ten years old, and
that, though oysters over twenty years of age are rare, he has met
with occasional specimens which had attained between twenty-five
and thirty years.
Oysters breed long before they are full-grown, very probably
in the first year of their age, certainly in the second. Their
productivity appears to reach its maximum at five or six years,
and afterwards to decline ; but much further observation is needed
before any definite rules can be laid down on this subject.
These are the most important obvious phenomena presented by
the reproductive processes of the oyster. 1 We must now consider
them a little more in detail, and under those aspects which are
hidden from ordinary observation.
The oyster, like other animals, takes its origin in an egg, ovum,
a minute, relatively structureless, protoplasmic spheroidal body,
about T- io-th of an inch in diameter, by a long series of develop-
mental changes which take place in that ovum after it has united
with another living particle of extremely minute size, the sperma-
tozoon, and in consequence of the fertilization effected by that
union, just as the ovule of a plant develops in consequence of the
influence of the pollen upon it. And the first problem is, Where
1 It must be remembered that the account here given holds good only of
the Ostrea edulis of England and Northern Europe. In the Portuguese
oyster (0. angulata ) and the American oyster (0. virginiana) the eggs are
set free at once, and are not incubated in the mantle cavity of the parents.


are these ova and spermatozoa formed ? Does each oyster produce
both, or are they formed in distinct oysters ? This is, in fact, the
vexed question of the sexes of the oyster, which has been the sub-
ject of so much discussion, and for which the answer is gradually
shaping itself, thanks mainly to the recent labours of Mobius and
Hoek.
I have already stated that if the surface of the trunk of a full-
grown oyster is examined carefully with a lens, or even without
one, a curious ramified and more or less reticulated whitish mark-
ing, which is very obvious in the breeding season, is observable
beneath the thin integument. By appropriate methods of investi-
gation it is easily detemined that this marking is produced by the
ramifications of a tubular organ,—the reproductive gland —the
trunk of which debouches into a cavity common to it and the renal
organs, which again, it will be recollected, communicates by a
narrow slit with the supra-branchial chamber (Fig. 2 (A), ug.)
The trunk of the gland, on each side, passes upwards and back-
wards, in front of and above the adductor and muscle, and gives off"
a multitude of branches, some of which cross the middle line and
become inextricably united with those of the other side, while
others form a network beneath the skin which covers the stomach
and the liver. From this network, blind offshoots are given off"
perpendicularly inwards, and extend for a variable depth into the
interior of the body. The whole extent of the walls of the tubes
of this reproductive gland is lined by nucleated cells, and it is by
the metamorphoses of these cells that the ova, on the one hand,
and the spermatozoa, on the other, are produced.
During the breeding season, an examination of the adult oysters
on an oyster bed shows that the number of individuals the repro-
ductive glands of which contain hardly anything but ova is about
equal to that of the individuals in which the reproductive gland
contains hardly anything but spermatozoa. I say “ hardly any-
thing ” because competent observers have affirmed that careful
search will always reveal a few spermatozoa in the former, and a
few ova in the latter. Whether this be so or not, there can be


no doubt that, practically, oysters, while actually breeding, are
either males or females.
When the ova or spermatozoa are ripe, they flow out of the
reproductive gland into the surrounding water. The spermatozoa
are carried away by the exhalent currents of the oyster in which
they are developed, and are doubtless drawn in by the inhalent
currents of adjacent oysters, the eggs of which they fertilize.
And, as the eggs already exhibit the first of that series of changes
which lead to the formation of the larva, when they leave the
reproductive gland, it would appear that they must undergo
fertilization while still within that organ.
The eggs which pass into the supra-branchial chamber must also
be driven out by the exhalent current; but it would seem that,
when they reach the hinder edge of the branchial partition, they
come within the influence of the inhalent current, and are thereby
swept back into the infra-branchial chamber. Here they accumu-
late, and becoming embedded in a viscid albuminous matter, secreted
by the parent, constitute the “ white ” t fry (Fig. 2 (B) ).
From the nature of the case, this account of what takes place
is not the result of direct observation ; but it seems to be by far
the most probable explanation of the facts which can be observed.
In an oyster which contains white fry, in fact, the reproductive
gland is flaccid, and contains nothing, or hardly anything, but a
few unexpelled ova.
The case is different, however, with oysters the eggs of which
have been laid so long that they have passed into the condition of
“black spat.” Here many, or, as I have recently found in one
case, the great majority, of the tubes of the gland contain develop-
ing spermatozoa, while only a few exhibit ova. And Dr. Hoek
has recently made the important observation that, if an oyster
which contains fry is kept for a fortnight in an aquarium by itself
and then examined, the reproductive organ will be found no
longer to contain ova, but abundant developing and fully formed
spermatozoa.


After producing eggs, in fact, the female oyster changes its sex
and becomes male.
The conclusion, first advocated by M. Davaine many years ago,
that the same individual oyster is alternately male and female, is
therefore unquestionably correct. What has yet to be made out
is the period of recurrence of this extraordinary alternation of
sexes. Do oysters change their sexes once or more than once in a
season 1 Until this point is ascertained, all calculations as to the
proportionate number of oysters which breed during a season,
based on the observation of the proportion of those which at any
given time contain fry, are obviously unsafe. If, for example,
the alternation took place once a month, not more than half the
oysters might at any time contain fry, and yet, in four months,
every oyster might have spatted twice.
In the case of the Portuguese and the American oysters, in
which both the reproductive products pass at once into the water
and no incubation takes place, artificial fecundation is easily
effected. The embryos develop normally, pass through their
changes within the egg, and their locomotive stage, into the con-
dition of fixed oysters rapidly, when confined in properly arranged
aquaria. It is probable, therefore, that artificial breeding will
sooner or later be practised on a great scale with these oysters.
In the case of our own oysters, artificial propagation by the
methods practised in the case of the Portuguese and American
forms, which involve the destruction of both parents, is obviously
out of the question, unless some substitute can be found for the
process of incubation, during which it is probable that the young
oysters receive, not merely shelter but nourishment, from the
parent. But a careful study of the conditions under which our
oysters breed freely will no doubt enable oyster cultivators to
imitate these conditions—and to place their breeding stock under
circumstances in which hurtful influences shall be excluded, while
the larvae are prevented from wandering too far, and facilities are
afforded for their attachment. The oyster grounds at. the mouth
of the Scheldt, of which a very interesting account was given by


Dr. Hubrecht at one of the conferences of the International
Fishery Exhibition 1 seem to be in a fair way of realizing these
conditions.
It has been seen that the young animal which is hatched out of
the egg of the oyster is extremely unlike the adult, and it will be
worth while to consider its character more closely than we have
hitherto done.
Under a tolerably high magnifying power the body is observed
to be inclosed in a transparent but rather thick shell, composed,
as in the parent, of two valves united by a straight hinge (fig.
3A. h). But these valves are symmetrical and similar in size
and shape, so that the shell resembles that of a cockle more than
it does that of an adult oyster. In the adult, the shell is com-
posed of two substances of different character, the outer brownish,
with a friable prismatic structure, the inner dense and nacreous.
In the larva there is no such distinction, and the whole shell
consists of a glassy substance devoid of any definite structure.
The hinge line answers, as in the adult, to the dorsal side of
the body. On the opposite or ventral side, the wide mouth (m)
and the minute vent (an) are seen at no great distance from one
another. Projecting from the front part of the aperture of the
shell there is a sort of outgrowth of the integument of what we
may call the back of the neck, into a large oval thick-rimmed disk
termed the velum (v), the middle of which presents a more or less
marked convex prominence. The rim of the disk is lined with
long vibratile cilia, and it is the lashing of these cilia which pro-
pels the animal, and, in the absence of gills, probably subserves
respiration. The funnel-shaped mouth has no palps ; it leads into
a wide gullet, and this into a capacious stomach. A sac-like
process of the stomach on each side ( r. 1,, 1.1.) represent the “ liver.”
The narrow intestine is already partially coiled on itself, and
this is the only departure from perfect bilateral symmetry in the
1 Papers of the Conferences. ‘ ‘ Oyster Culture and Oyster Fisheries in
the Netherlands,” by Professor Hubrecht.


whole body of the animal. The alimentary canal is lined through-
out with ciliated cells, and the vibration of these cilia is the means
by which the minute bodies which serve the larva for food are
drawn into the digestive cavity.
There are two pairs of delicate longitudinal muscles ( r.s ,, r.i.)
which are competent to draw back the ciliated velum into the
Fig. 3.—The Larva oe the Oyster.
A ; side view, B ; front view, v, velum with its long cilia ; oe, oesopha-
gus or gullet; st, stomach; r.l, 1.1, right and left lobes of the “liver”;
i, intestine; an, vent; a.add, anterior adductor muscle which alone exists
in the larva; r.s, r.i, superior and inferior muscles which retract the velum
into the shell, sh ; h, hinge of the shell.


cavity of the shell, when the animal at once sinks. The com-
plete closure of the valves is effected, as in the adult, by an
adductor muscle, the fibres of which pass from one valve to the
other. {Fig. 3a. ad.) But it is a very curious circumstance
that this adductor muscle is not the same as that which exists in
the adult. It lies, in fact, in the forepart of the body, and on
the dorsal side of the alimentary canal. The great muscle of the
adult, on the other hand, lies on the ventral side of the alimentary
canal and in the hinder part of the body. And as the muscles
respectively lie on opposite sides of the alimentary canal, that of
the adult cannot be that of the larva which has merely shifted its
position; for, in order to get from one side of the alimentary
canal to the other, it must needs cut through that organ. But, as
in the adult no adductor muscle is discoverable in the position
occupied by that of the larva, or anywhere on the dorsal side of
alimentary canal, while, on the other hand, there is no trace of
any adductor on the ventral side, in the larva, —it follows that the
dorsal or anterior adductor of the larva must vanish in the course


o£ development, and tliat a new ventral or posterior adductor
must be developed to play the same part and replace the original
muscle functionally, though not morphologically. 1
This substitution is the more interesting, since it tends to the
same conclusion as that towards which all the special peculiarities
of the oyster lead us ; namely, that, so far from being a low or
primitive form of the group of lamellibranchiate mollusks to which
it belongs, it is in reality the extreme term of one of the two
lines of modification which are observable in that group. The
Trigonice, the arks, the cockles, the fresh-water mussels, and their
allies, constitute the central and typical group of these mollusks.
They possess two sub-equal abductors, a large foot, and a body
which is neither very deep nor very long. From these, the series
of the boring bivalves exhibits a gradual elongation of the body,
ending in the ship-worm ( Teredo ) as its extreme term. While, on
the other hand, in the sea mussels, the Aviculce, and the scallops,
we have a series of forms which, by the constant shortening of the
length and increase of the depth of the body, the reduction of the
foot, the diminution of the anterior of the two abductors, and the
increase of the posterior, until the latter becomes very large and
the former disappears, end in the oyster.
And this conclusion that the oysters are highly specialized
lamellibranchs agrees very well with what is known of the
geological history of this group, the oldest known forms of which
are all dimyary, while the monomyary oysters appear only later.
When the free larva of the oyster settles down into the fixed
state, the left lobe of the mantle stretches beyond its valve, and
applying itself to the surface of the stone or shell to which the
valve is to adhere, secretes shelly matter, which serves to cement
the valve to its support. As the animal grows, the mantle deposits
new layers of shell over its whole surface, so that the larval shell-
valves become separated from the mantle by the new layers which
1 The larva of the cockle has at first, like the oyster larva, only one
adductor, which answers to the anterior of the two adductors which the
cockle possesses in the adult state.


crop out beyond their margins, and acquire the characteristic pris-
matic and nacreous structure. The summits of the outer faces of
the umbones thus correspond with the places of the larval valves,
which soon cease to be discernible. After a time the body becomes
convex on the left side and flat on the right; the successively
added new layers of shell mould themselves upon it, and the
animal acquires the asymmetry characteristic of the adult.
Oysters are gregarious, in consequence of the vast multitude of
locomotive larvae which are set free simultaneously, and which,
being subjected to the same influences, tend to settle about the
same time in the area to which the swarm drifts. Millions of
oysters are thus aggregated together over stretches of the bottom
of the sea, at depths of from one or two, to twenty or more
fathoms, and constitute what are known as oyster beds.
Although oysters live and grow well enough in estuaries, in
which the salinity of the water undergoes large variations, accord-
ing to the state of the tide and the volume of fresh water that is
poured in, yet they do not flourish permanently and breed freely
in water with less than 3 per cent, of saline constituents. Thus,
the Baltic is at present unfit for their support ; and the east coast
of Schleswig, washed by its brackish waters, is devoid of oysters,
while certain parts of the west coast are famous for their oyster
beds. Gravel, stones, and dead shells—commonly known as
“ cultch”—form the most favourable bottom, as they facilitate the
attachment of the young. Disturbed muddy bottoms, on the other
hand, are fatal, for reasons which have already been given. But
it is a curious fact that, even where a large extent of sea-bottom
presents apparently the same conditions, oyster beds occur in some
localities and not in others.
The struggle for existence is as intense in the case of the passive
oyster as in that of the most active of animals. Oyster competes
against oyster for the common store of food suspended in the
water, and for the dissolved carbonate of lime out of which the
shell must be made. Innumerable other animals, sponges, coral-
lines, polypes, tunicates, other bivalve mollusks, especially mussels


and cockles, live in the same way and abound on oyster beds, often
attached to the shells of the oysters. Prof. Mcibius counted as
many as 221 distinct animals of various species on one oyster-
shell. All these compete with the oyster for food, while, on the
other hand, they may occasionally supply food to the oyster in the
shape of debris, and perhaps of their eggs and microscopic larva?.
From birth onwards oysters are the prey of many animals.
The minute larvae, as they swim about, are probably swallowed by
everything which has a mouth large enough to admit them; and,
as soon as the young oysters have become sedentary, they are eaten
by everything which has jaws strong enough to crush them.
Ground fishes, such as rays and fish of the cod tribe, easily break
them up when they have grown much larger; while starfishes
swallow them whole. Even the half-grown oyster, with a shell
strong enough to resist most teeth, and too big for the maw of an
ordinary starfish, is not safe from the depredations of the dog-
whelk (Purpu'i ci and the whelk tingle (JbLurex er'inctceus')
which effect a burglarious entrance, by means of the centre-bit
with which Nature has provided their mouths. It is very curious
to watch a dogwhelk perched upon an oyster shell and patiently
woiking, hour after hour, until the little and apparently insignifi-
cant tunnel, by which the insidious enemy will get access to the
fat prey within, is completed. If you pull him off, he puts on as
soft a look as the most innocent snail could do, as who should say,
“ Why prevent me from establishing closer intercourse with the
dear neighbour at the other end of my tunnel V’ The guardians
of the oyster, however, who have not much of the “friend of
humanity” about them, ruthlessly arrest the operations of the
tunnellers by sudden squash with boot or hammer. And well
they may, for they have few more dangerous adversaries. In the
Bay of Arcachon, 14,000 whelk tingles were picked off 100 acres
of oyster ground in the course of a month.
Other animals injure the oyster indirectly by mining in the
shell. The boring sponge, Cliona, does this; and a very curious
instance of mischief done in this way by a burrowing annelid


(Leucodore) was recently brought to my notice by Sir Henry
Thompson. The Leucodore drives burrows into the shell and lives
in them without any evil intent towards the oyster. But the
burrows fill with fine mud, and this, spreading into the vacuities
of the shell, gives rise to inky patches, which look unpleasant
when the oyster is opened, and damage its commercial value,
though, as I can testify, the flavour of the oyster is nowise
impaired.
The larval oysters are extremely sensitive to cold, and any
sudden fall in the temperature of the air during the swarming
time is fatal to them. Even the adult oyster is readily killed by
sudden frosts, if the water is sufficiently shallow to allow the
change of temperature to penetrate. Great heat is equally per-
nicious. At Arcachon immense numbers of oysters were killed
by the hot summer of 1870.
To this long list of influences against which every oyster has to
struggle successfully, if it is to attain maturity, larger knowledge
will doubtless add many others. But these are enough to enable
us to understand why it is that the increase of a given stock of
oysters may be, and usually is, very slight, notwithstanding the
prodigious fertility of the individual oyster. A very large pro-
portion of the oysters in a bed, under ordinary circumstances,
breed during the season ; and, as each adult female oyster, on an
average, gives rise to a million eggs, one would expect a prodigious
increase, even if nine-tenths of the young were destroyed. But
from the small proportion of half-grown to full-grown oysters
(40-50 per cent.) it is clear that the real addition to the oyster
population, in most years, is very small. It is probable, in fact,
that unless the conditions are unusually favourable, not more than
two or three out of every million of the fry of the oyster ever
reach maturity.
It is obvious that the conditions of existence of the oyster are
of an extremely complicated character, and that the population
of an oyster bed, under natural conditions, must be subject to
great fluctuations. A few good spatting years, accompanied by


a falling off in the number of starfishes and dogwhelks, may increase
it marvellously, while the contrary conditions may as strikingly
reduce it.
Man interferes with this state of things in two ways. On the
one hand he is one of the most efficient of destroyers, and on the
other, he is the only conservator of the mollusks, albeit his con-
servation is with a view to ultimate destruction. Let us consider
him first under the aspect of destroyer. In some places oysters
are taken at low tide by the hand ; but usually they are captured
by means of the dredge, which is essentially a bag, the sides of
the mouth of which are fashioned into scrapers. The dredge is
drawn slowly over the oyster bed for a certain time, and the
oysters, with multitudes of other animals, stones, and the like,
are scraped into the bag. This is then hauled up, and the contents
emptied on to the deck ; the oysters are picked out and the refuse
is returned to the sea.
There can be no doubt that the great mass of oysters in an
oyster bed may be removed by systematic and continuous dredg-
ing. But those who are best acquainted practically with the
nature of that operation will be least inclined to believe that all
the oysters on a bed could be cleared off in this way, even if the
attempt were made ; and, as it must cease to be profitable to dredge
long before the point of entire clearance is reached, it is plain that
in practice the attempt will not be made. It may be doubted if
ordinary dredging ever fails to leave some thousands of oysters,
great and small, on a bed of any extent.
Thus, if we admit, for the sake of argument, that an oyster
bed may be exhausted by ordinary dredging, the reason why the
oysters vanish is not obvious. For, supposing only a thousand
oysters left, they ought to suffice to restore the bed by degrees.
I am aware that it is said that, in the meanwhile, the enemies and
competitors of the oyster have got the upper hand, that the
ground has been spoiled by accumulation of mud, and so on. But
this reasoning leaves out of sight the fact that the oysters have
not been there from all eternity. There was a time when there


were no oysters on the ground, and when the oyster larvse immi-
grated, fixed themselves there, increased and multiplied, in spite of
all obstacles. "Why should they not do so again 1
The question is further complicated by the consideration that it
is by no means certain whether the population of a given oyster
bed is kept up by the progeny of its own oysters or by immigrants.
As I have pointed out, it is ascertained that the larvse, even under
very unfavourable circumstances, may swim about for a week;
and it has been estimated that they are ordinarily locomotive for
two or three times that period. Even if we suppose the average
period of freedom to be not more than three days, the chance that
an oyster larva will eventually settle within a mile of the spot at
which it was hatched, in any estuary or in the open sea, must be
very small; for, in an estuary, and almost always in the sea, one
of the two alternating currents of water is dominant, and a floating
body will drift, on the whole, in that direction, often many miles
in the course of a day.
The opportunity of observing the natural formation of a new
oyster bed is rare, but the details of the process have been care-
fully watched in at least one case. Up to the year 1825 the
Limfjord in Northern Jutland consisted of a series of brackish-
water lakes communicating with one another, and opening on the
east into the Kattegat. In the last century, unsuccessful attempts
were made to plant them with oysters. But, on the 3rd of
February, 1825, a great storm broke through the dam which
separated the western part of the Limfjord from the North Sea ;
in consequence of this, the water of the fjord became gradually
salter, the brackish water plants and animals disappeared, and
North Sea animals took their places. Among these, in 1851
oysters were observed, and year by year they extended over a
larger area. In 1860 only 150,000 were taken; at present there
are ninety-eight beds, and in 1871-1872, 7,000,000 of full-grown
oysters were exported. There could have been very few oysters
before 1851, when the first were noticed. But supposing the
first entered as early as 1840, then, in thirty years, they spread


themselves over an area of about sixty-four English miles, so that
every year, on the average, they advanced more than two miles.
The oyster beds are, at present, three-fifths of a mile to five miles
apart, so that the larva; must have been able to wander for at
least five miles. 1
During this slow process of immigration, it is obvious that the
enemies and the competitors of the oysters had just as good a
chance as the oysters themselves; and yet the latter have estab-
lished themselves with great success. Why should they be unable
to do the like elsewhere ?
I must confess myself unable to arrive at a conclusion on the
question whether what is called “ overdredging”—that is, dredging
to the extreme limit at which it is commercially profitable to
dredge—is alone competent permanently to destroy an oyster bed
or not. That oyster beds have disappeared after they have been
much dredged Ido not doubt. But the commonest of all fallacies
is the confusion of post hoc with propter hoc ; and I have yet to
meet with a case in which it is proved by satisfactory evidence
that an oyster bed has been permanently annihilated by dredging,
when the spatting seasons have been good, and when there has
been no reason to suspect an inroad of destructive mollusks or
starfishes.
Man intervenes in favour of the oyster, by the process which is
known as “ oyster-culture.” This consists in collecting the spat
as soon as it has attached itself, and removing it to conveniently-
situated natural and artificial shallows, known as “ oyster-parks,”
where it can be protected from its enemies, and at the same time
nourished.
Practised at Whitstable and elsewhere from time immemorial,
this process has more recently been developed by laying down
fascines of twigs, or tiles, in the way of the oyster larvae during
the spatting season. In good spatting years, the quantity of young
oysters obtained in this way is prodigious. In 1865, Mr, Nichols,
1 Mobius. Die Auster und die Austern-wirthschaft, p. 52,


the foreman of the Whitstable Company, told the Sea Fisheries
Commissioners that in the year 1858 the spat was very abundant,
and that the brood gathered in that and the three following years
formed the stock from which the market had ever since been
supplied; but he added that they did not expect a good spatting
season more than once in every six years, and that, within his
recollection, there had been no spat upon the flats, where it is
usually collected, for a period of thirteen consecutive years.
It will be observed that oyster culture is not oyster breeding,
but simply a means of profiting by the abundant produce of those
years in which the young successfully reach their fixed stage. The
supply is therefore very precarious. Moreover, it is by no means
easy to find localities suited for oyster-parks, which must be pro-
tected from storms, and yet have free access to the sea; shallow,
and yet not liable to become too hot in summer or too cold in
winter; open to currents which bring nutriment, and yet not
liable to be silted up by mud. Even when all these conditions are
fulfilled, much labour and watchfulness are needed to keep the
beds clean and free from the incursions of enemies. And, when
all that skill and industry can do is done, ostreiculture is attended
with no less risk and uncertainty than agriculture in a variable
climate. Favoured by one or two fortunate spatting years, M.
Coste made ostreiculture the fashion a quarter of a century ago.
A large capital was embarked, in France and in this country, in
establishing oyster-parks, but it may be questioned whether more
than a small fraction of the investment has ever found its way
back into the pockets of the investors, and in many cases the
results have been disastrous.
The increasing scarcity and dearness of oysters were subjects of
complaint twenty years ago, and the outcry has become louder of
late years. Three causes, and only three, so far as I know, have
been assigned for this unsatisfactory state of thing: first, the
increase in the demand for oysters, owing in large measure to
modern facilities of transport, consequent upon the vast develop-
ment of the means of locomotion ; second, an unusual succession


of "bad spatting years : third, over-dredging, that is to say, the
removal of so many oysters from the oyster beds that the number
left is insufficient to keep up the stock.
That the first and the second of these causes have had a great deal
to do with the matter is beyond doubt; but, whether any harm
has resulted from simple over-dredging is a question respecting
which very different opinions are entertained, and I have already
stated my reasons for reserving my opinion on the subject. But I
shall suppose, for argument’s sake, that all three influences are in
operation, and proceed to ask what can be done by legislation to
mitigate their evil effects.
A sumptuary law, restricting the consumption of oysters per
head, is not practicable in these days; and therefore, the first
cause of dearness, great demand, must be left to cure itself by the
increase of price to which it gives rise. Xor is the second cause
of scarcity within the reach of legislation. The seasons cannot be
rendered favourable to oyster spatting by Act of Parliament,
But it is very generally believed that the enforcement of what
is called a “ close time” is an effectual remedy for over-dredging.
Oyster “ close time” means that oysters shall not be taken during
the months of May, June, July, and August, which are supposed,
not quite accurately, to cover the breeding season of the shell-fish.
But surely nothing is more obvious than this,, —that the pro-
hibition of taking the oyster from an oyster bed during four months
of the year is not the slightest security against its being stripped
clean (if such a thing be possible) during the other eight months.
Suppose that, in a country infested by wolves, you have a flock of
sheep; keeping the wolves off during the lambing season will not
afford much protection if you withdraw shepherd and dogs during
the rest of the year.
These considerations are so obvious that I cannot but think that
the cry for close time for oysters must be based on a confused
notion that, as close time is good for salmon, so it must be good
for oysters. But there is really no analogy between the two things
which here pass under the name of “ close time.” Close time


for oysters is merely protection of oysters during the breeding-
season. Close time for salmon is not merely protection of salmon
during the breeding season: it means a practical limitation of the
capture of salmon all the year round, by the weekly close time>
supplemented by the license duties on rods and nets. You might
protect the breeding grounds of salmon as strictly as you pleased
and as long as you pleased ; but, if too many of the ascending fish
were captured, the stock would fall off, and if all were captured it
would come to an end.
If the protection afforded to an oyster bed is to be made equiva-
lent to that given to a salmon river, measures must be taken by
which the undue diminution of the stock of oysters, at any time,
may be prevented. The most effectual way of doing this is to
form an estimate of the number of oysters on a bed before the
commencement of the open season, and to permit the removal of
only such a percentage as will leave a sufficient stock. And
regulations of this nature have long been carried out in the
Schleswig oyster fisheries and in those of France. A subsidiary
regulation, tending towards the same end, is that which enforces
the throwing back into the sea of all half-grown oysters. As oysters
produce young before they are half-grown, this procedure must
contribute to the breeding stock.
When, nearly twenty years ago, my colleagues, Sir James Caird,
Mr. Shaw-Lefevre, and I, had to deal with the oyster question, I
am not aware that any of us doubted the value of protection of
public oyster beds in the open sea, if it could only be made efficient.
What we were quite clear about, however, was—
(1) That the close time regulation which then existed was
always useless, and sometimes mischievous.
(2) That the regulation prohibiting the taking of half-grown
oysters interfered with the transfer of oysters from the
public beds, where they were exposed to all sorts of
dangers, to the private grounds where they were protected.
(3) That it was practically impossible to establish an efficient
system of protection on our public oyster beds.


And therefore we came to the conclusion that the best course
that could be adopted was to abolish all the delusive and vexatious
regulations which were in force; and to see what could be done
by giving such rights of property, in parts of our shores favourable
to oyster culture, as would encourage competent persons to invest
their money in that undertaking. 1
Our recommendations were carried out. But as the complaints
about the scarcity of oysters went on increasing, the matter was
re-investigated by a Committee of the House of Commons in 1876.
This Committee published two reports, a valuable minority report
by Mr. Shaw-Lefevre, and a singular majority report drawn up by
the Chairman.
The latter states that the Committee “ have come to the con-
clusion that the supply of oysters round the British coasts has for
1 “10. We have made diligent inquiry into the condition of the oyster
fisheries, and have devoted a large section of our report to the discussion of
the evidence which we have obtained. We find :
“ That the supply of oysters has greatly fallen off during the last three or
four years.
£ ‘ That this decrease has not arisen from over-fishing, nor from any causes'
over which man has direct control, but from the very general failure of the
spat or young of the oyster, which appears, during the years in question,
to have been destroyed soon after it was produced. A similar failure of
spat has frequently happened before, and probably will often happen again.
“ That the best method of providing against these periodical failures of
the spat is to facilitate the proceedings of those individuals or companies
who may desire to acquire so much property in favourably situated portions
of the sea-bottom, as may suffice to enable them safely to invest capital in
preparing and preserving these portions of the sea-bottom for oyster culture.
By which terra “ oyster culture” is implied, not the artificial breeding of
oysters in the manner in which salmon are bred artificially, but the collec-
tion of the brood in years when that brood is plentiful and its preservation
by the application of due skill and care, as a source of supply during the
years when the spat fails—a process in vogue among British fishermen from
time immemorial.
“ That no regulations or restrictions upon oyster-fishing, beyond such as
may be needed for the object just defined, have had or are likely to have
any beneficial effect upon the supply of the oysters.”— Report of the Com-
missioners appointed to inquire into the Sea Fisheries of the United Kingdom,
1866.


some years steadily decreased ; and that, though to some extent,
cold seasons have contributed to cause this diminution, the principal
cause is to be found in the continual and constantly increasing
practice of over-dredging for them in open waters, without allow-
ing sufficient close time. Your Committee have also obtained
evidence from France, in which country regulations for close
seasons, for some years, have been more or less rigidly insisted on:
and it appears to them that, in proportion to the stringency with
which these regulations have been enforced, the supply of oysters
has increased.
“ Your Committee have therefore come to the conclusion that it
is desirable to make provision for a general close time for oyster
fisheries, and that it should extend from the Ist of May to the Ist
of September in each year.”
In consequence of this recommendation we have got back to the
old close time ; which, as I hope I have already sufficiently proved
is of not the slightest value for the purpose which the Committee
intend it to serve.
It will be observed that the Committee attach much weight
to the evidence received from France. It is undoubtedly very
weighty ; but I think that if the Committee had given it the
attention which it deserves, they would have seen that it tells dead
against their recommendation.
In the first place, the Committee do not seem to have noticed
that the French regulations involve, not merely a breeding season
close time, such as they recommend, but that they restrict the
fishing during the open season to a few days, or stop it altogether,
at the discretion of the administration. The difference of the two
systems is that the French regulations are adequate for the purpose
of preventing over-dredging, while the English regulations are not ;
and that is a somewhat essential difference.
But there is another point of still greater importance, which is,
that a careful study of the French statistics, and of the very
excellent reports on the various French oyster fisheries made to


the Committee by Mr. Hall, leaves it very doubtful whether the
French system of protection, stringent as it is, has had any
appreciable effect on the fisheries.
Let us take the case of the famous oyster-fishery of Cancale,
Mr. Hall says, in a noteworthy passage of his Report, which, one
would think, the majority of the Committee can hardly have
considered with due care :
“ The oyster beds of Cancale and Granville extend over that
part of the bay of Mont St. Michel which lies beyond extreme
low-water-mark, and as far out as the lies Chaussey ; they also
stretch for six or eight miles along the coast north of Granville-
They are remarkable as presenting instances of beds existing under
identical natural conditions, subjected to identical regulations, and
offering results of a very varied kind. They are also interesting as
being beds which, notwithstanding the enforcement of preservative
regulations for a considerable number of years, have become, on
the whole, unproductive.
“There appears to have been no time since 1853 when the
observance of the close season, a limitation of the fishing during
the other months in greater or less degree, and the prohibition of
the removal of undersized oysters, except to the etalages or storing
beds of the neighbourhood, have not been enforced at Cancale.” 1
The bay is marked out into a series of beds, named from west to
east, Bas de I’Eau, Corbieres, Vivier-6-le Mont, La Raie, St.
George, Beauvais-6-le Mont; while, beyond the last, is a large area
left as a reserve and not allowed to be fished.
From 1862 to 1866, inclusively, hardly any spat was observed
in the bay. In 1866, the northern part of the Raie bank, which
had already shown some signs of increase in 1865, produced a
considerable spat. In 1867 it was fished, and yielded 1,007,000
oysters. But, in the following years, so large a number of dog-
Avhelks showed themselves upon it that it was thought better to
fish the bed than to let the oysters be fruitlessly destroyed. The
1 Report of the Select Committee on Oyster Fisheries, 7th July, 1876,
Appendix, pp. 260 and 261.


dogwhelks were cleared away, and the bank, which, though much
thinned, still held oysters, was left to rest in 1870. In 1871,
however, all the oysters had disappeared, while cockles had taken
their place, and remained up to the time of the report.
In 1871 the southern half of the Raie bank, which had pro-
duced no oysters since 1862, showed so many that in 1871—72 it
yielded a crop of 2,070,000 ; and from that time, though fished in
alternate years, it became the richest bed in the bay, and in 1876
showed a large quantity of brood over its whole extent. While
the southern half of La Itaie thus became productive, St. George,
which adjoins it and from which it probably derived the colony
which peopled it in 1869, became sterile, without any apparent
cause. That it had not been over-fished was evident from the
fact that a large number of oysters still existed upon it. No spat,
however, had been seen on St. George since 1874.
On the other side of La Raie, the southern half of Vivier-6-le
Mont, which touches the southern part of the former, and on
which no fall of spat had taken place since 1862, showed a fair
quantity in 1872, before the newly-imported oysters in La Raie
had had time to spread themselves over it, and up to 1876 it was
fairly productive. On that part of Beauvais-6-le Mont which was
productive in 1876 more or less production has always taken place.
No spat has ever been observed on the reserve ground, and in
1876 it was tenanted by only a few old oysters. Cultch has always
been abundant, and cleaning by trawling has been permitted since
1867.
It will be observed that under the same conditions, and subject
to restrictions of a stringency which no one has dreamed of in the
public oyster-beds of this country, a fertile area (La Raie, N.) has
become barren, and a barren area (La Raie, S.) has become fertile;
while the others (Yiviers and Beauvais), after undergoing great
impoverishment, are rather more productive at the end than at
the commencement of the period of fifteen years. And all this
time the oysters have perversely refused to settle upon the ground
kindly reserved for their reception by the administration.


TABULAR VIEW OF THE OYSTER FISHERY IN THE BAY OF CANCALE,
Between' I860 and 1875.
The numbers in brackets represent the number of tides during which fishing was permitted. In 1873-4 the fishings of Cor-
bidres, Viviers, and La Raie (s), and in 1874-5 those of Bas de 1’Eau, Corbieres, and Viviers, and those of St. George and
Beauvais, are not given separately.
Bas de 1’Eau
(S.W.)
Corbieres.
Viviers.
La Raie
(S.)
La Raie
(N.)
St. George.
Beauvais.
(N.E.)
1860-61
1,945,260 (6)
"S AS61-62
6,200,600 (3)
2,800,400 (2)
( 3,460,600 (3)
1,220,000 (4)
| 1862-63
1,020,000 (3)
109,300 (1)
539,150 (2)
643,300 (2)
111 500 (3)
X | 1863-64
840,000 (3)
1,504,000 (4)
0
800 000 (8)
s I 1864-65
w
0
108,000 (1)
109,000 (2)
658,000 (3)
1865-66
200,000 (2)
155,000 (1)
03
176,000 (2)
0
1866-67
M-
o
667,000 (2)
0
1 007,000 (2)
1867-68
&
0 .
£ (
860,000 (8)
41 1 000 (2)
1868-69
188,000 (1)
215,000 (2)
0
9
ft
370,000 (1)
220,000 (1)
340,000 (2)
1869-70
Spat.
o
1,642,000 (2)
1870-71
1 650 000 (4)
1871-72
Spat.
2,070,000 (2)
780,000 (1)
1,038,000 (2)
1872-73
3,560,000 (3)
•+3
I 2,140,000(2)
1,600,000 (4)
_
is
S'
1873-74
7,350,000 (5)
>>
o
1
1,766,000 (4)
1874-75
5,070,000 (3)
>>
4,272,000 (4)


The history of the oyster fisheries of Arcachon is not less
instructive.
The Bay of Arcachon may be almost said to be made for
oysters. It has the shape of an equilateral triangle, nine or ten
miles on the side ; and it debouches by a channel, 30 fathoms
deep at the mouth, situated at its northernmost angle, into the
Bay of Biscay. The winds and waves of this stormy region have
thrown up a range of high sand dunes along the western boundary,
and these dunes, covered with pines, shelter the bay from the
violence of the westerly gales. The difference of height between
high and low water (ordinary tides) is 15 to 16 feet. At flood
tide, the whole surface of the bay, except an island in the middle
(He des Oiseaux) is covered, but, at ebb tide the greater part is
dry, except in so far as it is traversed by narrow channels, vary-
ing from 40 to 10 feet in depth, formed by the water as it retires
into the deep outer passage at the ebb and returns at the flood.
The interspaces between the channels thus laid bare at each ebb
are called “ cressats.” The bottom is composed of sand and shells,
with more or less mud. The quantity of the latter constituent is
said to be gradually increasing ; and, in many parts, old oyster
beds are silted up and covered with mud. The salinity varies,
being least in the northern angle, where much fresh water flows
in. Elsewhere the saline constituents amount to 3 per cent, or
more, and in hot and dry seasons they may exceed those of the
Atlantic water outside.
M. Tolle says, in his report to the German Government on the
oyster fisheries of France ;
“ The cressats are the old oyster beds of Arcachon, once thought
to be inexhaustible, which yearly yielded seventy to seventy-five
million oysters of diffei’ent kinds and sizes, of the value of 225,000
francs. But in course of time, especially between 1830 and 1840,
fixe demand becoming greater and oysters scarce, they were so
exhaustively fished that in the year 1840 the produce was only
1,000 francs.” ( Bericht , p, 9.)


According to this, the produce of the beds before 1830 was
75,000,000 yearly, while in 1840 it had sunk to 330,000 or
thereabouts, that is, less than iriroth of the previous yield.
“ It was only after this almost complete exhaustion of the beds
that the Government took means to prevent their further destruc-
tion. The Prefect of the Arrondissement sent a vessel to watch
the beds and enforce the strict observance of the law. But too
late. The attempts of private persons to repopulate the beds also
failed. This condition lasted till 1859.”
In 1860, however, at M. Coste’s suggestion, two parks, on the
Crastorbe and Grand Ces cressats (north of the He des Oiseaux)
were established by the Government; and, in the following year,
numerous concessions were made to private individuals. These
were stocked with oysters, so that, between 1859 and 1861,
15,000,000 of oysters were laid down in the parks.
Such is the account given by Tolle and Mobius. But I am
wholly unable to reconcile the assertion that the natural beds had
failed before 1860, with the statistics given by Mr. Hall in his
already cited report. Mr. Hall states that, in the year 1860-61,
no fewer than 19,000,000 oysters were fished on the natural beds.
Hence it follows that in 1859-60 there must have been at least
19,900,000 half-grown oysters, and in 1858-59 at least the same
number of one-year oysters, and therefore, that there must have
been a fall of spat sufficient to produce these in the preceding
season. And in fact Mr. Hall states that in 1857-58 there was
an “ abundant” spat, and that the weather during the spatting
months was “fine.” Mr. Hall further observes that, until 1860-
61, “no register was kept of the produce of the natural banks,”
so that nothing is accurately known of the yield of the beds in
1857-58 or the subsequent years up to 1860-61.
How, it is to be observed that in these years, as in those which
preceded them, fishing was “ permitted without restriction from
the Ist of November to the Ist of April,” the only condition being
that oysters less than five centimetres (about 2 inches) across must
not be taken; and it was only in 1860-61 that the new restrictive


regulations came into force, the fishing being limited to not more
than fourteen days in the whole season, and less than three hours
in each day, on the average.
And what followed upon the adoption of these severe regula-
tions It Simply that for five years the oysters on the natural beds
steadily and rapidly diminished,
In 1861-2 ... ?.. 19,000,000 were taken.
1862-3 15,097,320 „
1863-4 5,154,170
1864-5 2,697,460
1865-6 ... ■... 2,012,940
Then comes a very slight improvement—
-1866-7 3,266,730
1867-8 3,711,730
1868-9 3,648,230
In 1870, a large number of oysters were killed on the beds by
the great heat of the summer, and no fishing was permitted.
But instead of any falling off, the next year shows a manifest
increase,
1870-1 4,997,540
After this the beds were fished only in alternate years, and
yielded
1872-3 7,441,720
1874-5 40,360,000
The outcome of all this is that, under one continuous system
of extreme restrictive regulation, the returns show—
Ist. For five years (1861-66) a rapid decrease, down to a ninth
of the produce of 1860-61, which was the end of a long period of
slight regulation.
2nd. For five years (1867-71) a slight and slow increase up to
about one-fourth of the produce of 1860-61.
3rd. For five years (1870-75) an increase, rising in the last year,
1875, to 40,360,000 (that is to say, seeing that 1874 crop was
not fished, 20,000,000) ; or, practically, the same yield as that
with which the fifteen-year period started.


It is certainly astonishing to have this case held up as an
example of the efficiency of regulations, and especially of the
enforcement of close time.
Thus, even if the open-sea oyster beds could be watched and
protected as efficiently as those of the bays of Cancale and
Arcachon, such protection is no guarantee against the greatest
fluctuation in the produce of the beds and the disappearance of
the oysters from some of them. But who that knows anything
practically of the manner in which the open-sea oyster leads are
fished can imagine that any such protection is practicable 1 Is the
Government to survey the oyster beds every summer, and then
send a gunboat to watch every oyster bed, and limit the quantity
of oysters taken 1 And if it does not do so, what is to prevent
the clearing of every open-sea bed (so far as it can be cleared)
during the open season 1 Or suppose a law to be passed pro-
hibiting the capture of undersized oysters, is it better to leave
these oysters to take their chance of becoming the prey of dog-
whelks and starfish, or to remove them to safe and sheltered
pai'ks 1
I have not yet been able to obtain answers to these questions
in a sense favourable to protective legislation, from any one
practically conversant with the facts of the case. People rave
about protection, and when you ask them how they propose to
give any real protection to open sea-beds they cannot tell you.
I for my part believe that the only hope for the oyster con-
sumer lies first in oyster culture, and secondly, in discovering a
means of breeding oysters under such conditions that the spat
shall be safely deposited. And I have no doubt that when those
who undertake the business are provided with a proper knowledge
of the conditions under which they have to work, both these objects
will be attained.
T. H. HUXLEY.


ON THE PROPAGATION OF THE SPECIES IN THE
OYSTER.
(From Lectures on Comparative Anatomy , by Sir Everard Home ,
Bart., V.P.R.S., F.S.A., Ax., 1828.)
That many animals have in the same individual both the male
and female organs, and impregnate their own ova, has been
already mentioned, and illustrated in the teredines and the different
kinds of eel.
The oyster and fresh-water muscle are of this kind. In the
oyster, which has no organs fitted for locomotion, and is consequently
confined to the same spot, its propagation could not be otherwise
carried on ; but this argument does not apply to the fresh-water
muscle, which has a foot, and is capable of moving from one place
to another.
Mr. Bauer and myself were engaged for five seasons in examining
the generative organs of the oyster before we were satisfied respec-
ting the mode in which the ova left the ovarium and passed out
through the oviduct. In the year 1826 we completed this inves-
tigation, and illustrated the appearances that were observed by
magnified drawings of the different parts ; and the oyster, we have
already asserted, is probably the most simple in its structure of all
the animals that can come under the knife of the anatomist as the
subject of dissection.
We have already stated that the substance which performs the
office of brain and spinal marrow, is even smaller in them than in
the fresh-water muscle. There being no organs for locomotion in
the oyster, it cannot go in search of food, but is reduced to the
necessity of taking whatever is brought to it by the fluid that


surrounds it. The only expenditure of muscular action that we
know of, except the peristaltic motion of the intestinal canal, and
the action of the heart, is the contraction of the great muscle by
which the two shells are closed, which is only occasionally brought
into action to exclude attacks from its enemies. No exertions of
the oyster itself are required to keep the shells open ; that is done
by an elastic ligament at the hinge, which, the moment the muscle
that kept the shell shut relaxes, by its elasticity makes them fly
open.
The ova are so exceedingly small, that it is very difficult to
discover the situation of the ovarium ; and this is only to be done,
in the first instance, in the breeding season, and even then requires
the aid of the microscope.
In this country, where the oyster beds are not allowed to be
disturbed during the breeding seasons, we labour under consider-
able disadvantage ; and I am indebted to my friend, Mr. Copeland
Hutchinson, who afforded me an opportunity of examining some
oysters taken from a private bed near Sheerness, once a week,
during the whole time they are not brought to market for sale.
In France, where there are no such restrictions respecting the
oyster beds, they are sold in Paris throughout the four months in
the names of which there is no r equally as in all the others ; and
as fishes are considered to be in season while breeding, and after
they have spawned to have no flavour, for it would be an affront
to give an epicure a shotten herring, I took advantage of the
opportunity which offered itself from being in France in July, 1826,
to taste the oysters, but cannot consider them good at that period.
This may arise from the ova having previously escaped from the
ovarium, and therefore the oysters are then under similar circum-
stances with fishes that have spawned.
The ovarium is not evanescent as soon as the breeding season is
over, although to the naked eye it would appear so; for new ova
begin very soon to form in it. The ovarid may be considered
double, as in fishes having the liver separating them; one lying


immediately under the membrane that lines the convex shell; the
other, immediately over the membrane covering the flat shell. The
ova hang on pedicles attached to the membrane of the ovarium,
and this membrane becomes thicker and more conspicuous as they
increase in size.
They are large enough to assume a distinct form in the month
of March. When they have arrived at their full size, a white
liquor of the consistence of cream is met with, in which they
appear to float, probably secreted for their fecundation.
This happens towards the end of June, and a tube has now
become”visible, although not before distinctly seen. It opens by
one end in the edge between the two ovaria, and the orifice com-
municates with both of them. At this time the ova drop from
their pedicles, and therefore have arrived at their full growth ;
and there can be no doubt of their impregnation having taken
place in the ovaria, for those that are detected passing along this
tube, which is the oviduct, have already acquired a shell, and each
ovum is inclosed in a vesicle, so that the size of the ovum can no
longer be ascertained, but the cell met with in the pearl, as I shall
explain, must be an exact cast of it, when it has completed its
growth.
The ovaduct forms a sheath in which the intestine is inclosed,
and terminates in an orifice between the lips at the mouth of the
intestine, from which the young oysters pass out mixed with a
purple mucus intended for their nourishment. From this situation
the opening and shutting of the shells of the parent oyster must
throw out the young along with the salt water. In this stage of
their growth, they are often a prey to small gelatinous sea-worms,
which get within the shells of the parent oyster, and gorge them-
selves with the young, their stomach being found quite distended
with them.
The parts which I have endeavoured to describe will be much
better and more clearly comprehended by inspecting the annexed
drawings 3 I shall therefore not go into a more minute detail.


The structure of the liver is so analogous to that of the ovaria,
when they contain ova, that, were not the colours different, they
could not he distinguished from one another. This will he readily
seen in the drawings.
In the oyster there appears to he no connection between the
oviduct and the branchiae ; hut the membranes of the branchiae, and
the fringed edges of the mantle by which they are inclosed, are
much thicker and more vascular during the breeding season; and
many peculiar appearances upon the edge of these enveloping
membranes are much more conspicuous during that period. For
this reason, although I am by no means acquainted with their use,
Mr. Bauer has given a faithful representation of their appearance,
from which every one may draw his own conclusions.
The stomach and course of the intestinal canal has on a former
occasion been explained.
The heart has two auricles, as in the teredines ; and the vessels
from the ventricle supply the great muscle for closing the shells ;
in the same manner as in the teredines, there is a large artery goes
to the muscles of the boring shells.


MICROSCOPIC SEXUAL CHARACTERISTICS OF
OYSTERS.
(The microscopic sexual characteristics of the American , Portu-
guese, and common Edible oyster of Europe compared by John
A. Ryder.)
In the issue of “Forest and Stream,” of November 30, just past,
in an article by the writer, page 351, middle column, it is remarked
“I regard Davaine’s observations upon the histology of the
reproductive organs of the European oyster as of little value,
being made before the introduction of improved methods of
investigation. His figures of the finer structural details have
apparently been made from crushed fragments.” In passing
this judgment upon Dr. Davaine’s work I have been severer than
the state of the case demanded, as will be seen in the sequel,
though Ido not yet admit that his methods of research were what
they should have been, for until now we have had no adequate
description of the structures in question. Until recently I have
maintained with reservations that the sexes in the European
oyster were probably separate, as in the American; more recent
investigations with more refined methods have proved to me that
in this I was in error. In my article in “ Forest and Stream” I
also took occasion to refer to a statement in Cegenbaur’s
“Elements of Comparative Anatomy,” English edition, page 380,
where he says:—“ln the oysters we find an intermediate step
toward a separation of the sexes, inasmuch as these organs are
not active at the same time in the same individual; but the male
and female organs alternately so.” The writer, in commenting
upon the above, there wrote ;—“ This quotation tacitly admits
the unisexuality of the European oyster, to which it evidently
refers. The last part of the remark, however, is founded upon the


slenderest kind of evidence; in fact, upon no evidence except a
surmise, as such an alternate activity of the two parts is improbable
(for obvious reasons); besides, it is not possible to demonstrate
such an alternation of sexual activity in the same individual.
As every one knows, the soft parts of an oyster cannot be
examined without opening the shell, which necessarily makes the
needed second observation to confirm this alleged alternation of
sexual activity a physical impossibility.” lam now in a position
to go still further, and to assert that the first part of the quotation
from Gegenbaur is also erroneous, because we may find both eggs
and spermatozoa in the same follicle at the same time.
What, then, is the true state of the case ? This query we
propose answering.; but before we set out it will be necessary to
give some account of the methods of investigation used in order
to arrive at a definite conclusion. Thin sections of those portions
of the animal in which the reproductive structures are lodged are
of the first importance. After trying various methods, which
were found for the most part unsatisfactory, the preparations of
sections was finally conducted as follows:—After the soft parts
were removed from the shell they were thrown into a chronic
acid solution of from one to two per cent., in which they were
allowed to remain for several days, and in some cases the hardening
solution was even renewed. This was done in order that the
hardening agent might act upon the whole of the soft parts and
harden them throughout. Unless the chronic acid is allowed
some time to act upon the entire animal it will not be uniformly
hardened, the centre of the body remaining soft. After hardening,
the animals should be thoroughly washed and soaked in water for
a couple of days, to remove all traces of the acid before they are
finally put into alcohol for permanent preservation. Hardened
material so preserved will make good sections months afterwards.
Portions of the body-mass of different individuals should then
be cut out. It is best to cut up the body into thick slices or
blocks in a transverse direction, large enough to be conveniently
held between the fingers. It was also found advisable to take


such thick slices of the hardened body-mass from several indi-
viduals, since it was discovered that scarcely any two had the
reproductive glands developed to exactly the same degree of
maturity. This point is important, as it has enabled us to
follow up the development of the reproductive organs in
the connective tissue which invests them. After considerable
experiment and disappointment in the effort to imbed these thick
hardened slices so as to cut sections with the microtome, the
method of imbedding was abandoned altogether. The thick blocks
or slices were entirely freed from alcohol by soaking in water for
a day, then removed, after drying them off as much as possible
with blotting-paper or a soft linen cloth, to a thick solution of gum
arabic, in which it is best to allow them to remain from twenty-
four to forty-eight hours, so as to be thoroughly saturated. The
superfluous gum may then be poured off, and the blocks of tissue,
soaked as they are with the gum, covered with strong alcohol. In
twenty-four hours the blocks will be found hard enough to cut.
The blocks of hardened tissue are simply held between the thumb
and forefinger, and the sections made with a section knife with the
free hand. When cutting sections it is necessary to keep the knife
well wetted with alcohol, so that the sections may readily slide off
on the upper side of the blade. Water should not be used to wet
the knife, as it would get on the block of tissue, dissolve the gum,
soften the surface to be cut, and injure the succeeding sections.
The sections are lifted from the knife as fast as cut, with a
camel’s-hair pencil, and thrown into a dish of water, in which the
gutn will dissolve out in a few minutes.
The sections are then ready to be stained ; and in order to clearly
differentiate the hermaphroditic character of the reproductive glands
of Ostrea edulis, a special staining re-agent must be used. The
one which gives the best results and acts most quickly will be
given here. Equal parts of dense alcoholic solutions of safrain
red and methyl green are poured together and diluted with about
eight times their combined volumes of water, producing a dark
purplish solution of about the colour of claret wine. Into this the
sections may be thrown and allowed to remain until completely


saturated with colour, or until they are opaque. They may remain
in the staining fluid from one hour to a day, but two or three hours
is a sufficient length of time. When removed from the staining
fluid they are too deeply stained to be mounted at once, and
must therefore be ti’ansferred to 95 per cent, or absolute alcohol,
and stirred about in it until the safranin red is no longer given off
in clouds from the sections ; but it is important to note that if the
sections remain in the strong alcohol too long the whole of the
safranin will be washed out. In order to prevent this, when it is
seen that the section has acquired a rosy red hue, combined with a
bluish-green tint in the parts stained by the methyl green, the
object should be at once removed from the alcohol, thrown into oil
of cloves, and mounted in balsam or damar. The extraction of the
superfluous colour requires from five to fifteen minutes, according
to the thickness and character of the section, and should on no
account be allowed to proceed too far ; if it does, the peculiar and
important staining effect of the safranin is lost. As first pointed
out by Flemming, it has the peculiar property of staining the
nucleus and its contents, while it may be totally removed from
other parts of the cell ; in fact, as in the oyster egg, it may be
entirely removed from the nucleus and left only in a part of the
nucleolus. The methyl green, on the other hand, does not tend to
stain the eggs, but rather the spermatozoa and the cells from which
they are derived ; and it is one of the most astounding facts known
to histological chemistry, that although both of these dyes, to
begin with, are intimately mixed together in the staining fluid,
the different histological elements of the section exert some kind of
selective power by which they absorb and hold mainly the one
colour only. This peculiar property of the two colours, even when
mixed together, enables one to distinctly map out the relations of
the sexual elements in the reproductive follicles, the nuclei
of the avarion ova being stained red by the safranin, and the
heads of the spermatozoa bluish green by the methyl green. The
foregoing is mainly the method to which I have had recourse in
working out the sexual characteristics of Ostrea edulis. Simpler
staining methods suffice in the case of Ostrea virginica and Ostrea


angulata. A single colour used is staining sections of 0. edulis is
liable to lead to error, in consequence of the peculiar mode in which
the spermatozoa are packed together in oblong clusters, which are
often of about the size of the ovarian ova. This egg-like appear-
ance of the masses of unripe spermatozoa in the follicles of the
reproductive organs of the common oyster of Europe misled me
when examining section stained only with eosin or carmine. The
monochromantic effect produced by one colour only gave no hint as
to the real relations of ova and spermatozoa in the follicles until
high powers were used with special manipulation of the light.
The characteristics of the reproductive organs of Ostrea edulis ,
0. virginica, and 0. angulata , are sufficiently marked to be very
precisely described and figured so as to enable any person to
appreciate the differences, especially between the first and last two.
0. edulis is essentially hermaphroditic in the structure of its re-
productive organs, while the other two are as distinctly monoecious
or unisexual. A marked difference is also to be noted in the
relative size or calibre of the reproductive follicles in the herma-
phroditic and in the unisexual species. In 0. edulis the calibre
of the generative tubules appears to be relatively much greater
than in 0. virginica and 0. angulata ■ nor are the tubules so
densely crowded together as in the latter species. Up to this
time this difference appears to me to be so marked that I think
it would be possible to distinguish sections of 0. edulis from those
of the other two species by means of this one character. In
other respects the history of the development of the reproductive
tissues in both specious seems to be similar. In all, the sexual
tissues arises as a linear interstitial differentiation between the
coarse connective tissue cells of the animal, only that in 0. edulis
the rudimentary network does not form quite so close a meshwork
as in the other two forms here considered. The tubules have a
more extensive anastomosis with each other in the unisexual
species than in the hermaphroditic. In all the forms fine vessels
pass off from the dorsal and ventral somatic arteries, which tend
to branch into vessels of a capillary fineness amongst the repro-
ductive follicles. Thus the glandular portions of the reproductive


organs are effectively nourished by supplies of blood passing from
the great vessels given off by the heart. These are the principal
characteristic features of the reproductive follicles in the herma-
phroditic and unisexual forms which are noticed upon comparing
the two together. The most important differences between the
two forms are to be found, however, in the mode in which the
generative elements are produced in each type, which we will now
consider.
In 0. edulis the reproductive glands, when well developed, show
in many cases a lining of large nearly mature ovules or ovarian
eggs at intervals j and insinuated between them large coarsely
granular bodies may be observed, in which large irregular nuclear
bodies are often imbedded. These nuclear bodies are further
distinguished from those of the ovules by their oval or oblong and
often irregular form, and by containing a dense mass of granules
which absorb safranin in such quantity as to become opaque.
This granular chromalin, as it would be designated by Flemming,
is usually aggregated at the centre of the nuclear or cellular mass,
whichever it may be, and is furthermore apt to conform to a certain
extent to the external outline of the body which contains it.
From these bodies the rounded granular cells appear to arise,
which fall into the cavity of the tubule or follicle, there to undergo
further segmentation, and finally break up into spermatozoa, with
spherical heads and filiform tails or flagella. Even (in some cases)
where no spermatozoa are as yet revealed by the methyl green,
these rounded spermogens or spermatoblasts are to be seen free in
the centre of the follicles. Usually, however, the spermatoblasts
have been crowded towards the external end of the tubule, where
they have undergone differentiation into spermatozoa. The
spermatozoa are often on this account so crowded together at the
outlet of the tubules, passing even into the superficial ducts, that
when acted on by the methyl green they are revealed as a dense
almost opaque dark bluish-green mass. The ovules, on the other
hand, which may be quite nearly mature, remain unstained, except
their spherical clear neucleus and nucleolus, which is double, as if
formed of two conjoined spherules. If the safranin has been


washed out of the nucleus, the one spherule of the nucleolus only
is apt to retain the colour. The peculiar nucleus of the ovules at
once distinguishes them from the elements which later break up
and become the spermatozoa. Apparently every phase of the
spermato-genetic process is underway in the follicles, while
more or less nearly mature ovules may be adherent to the
walls of the same tubules. In some specimens I find the
tubules to contain nothing but ova, with little or no trace of
spermatoblasts ; in others, again, both classes of products may be
present in about the same condition of maturity. In still others
little else but spermatozoa are to be found, but, adherent to the
walls of the follicles, cells are to be found which have the nucleus
so characteristic of the more mature ovules. These, lam inclined
to believe, are the representatives of what will later become ova,
and not the representatives of spermatoblasts. It is a singular
fact that the spermatozoa have a tendency in 0. edulis to
cling together in masses of about a uniform size. Though the
spermatic particles which compose these masses are somewhat
separated from each other, if compressed together they would
evidently form a body about the size of the spermatoblasts from
which they were derived. Eater they tend to break up and form
a more homogeneous granular mass at the outlet of their parent
tubule, where the latter joins the out-going efferent duct. While
it is true that some sections of 0. edulis show little evidence of
the presence of anything else but the product of one sex, it appears
to me that there is sufficient evidence of the hermaphroditic
character of the generative glands of the species presented by a
pretty large series of sections taken from about fifty individuals
from different localities along the coasts of Wales, Scotland, Eng-
land, France, Holland, and Germany. Sometimes a portion only
of a section will be hermaphroditic, showing that different parts of
the generative glands of the same animals may be of different
sexes. The result of this arrangement is that it is scarcely possible
for the eggs to escape impregnation by the milt generated along-
side of them, and we may, I believe, fairly assume that Ostrea
edulis is a self-fertilizing hermaphrodite.


The condition of things in the generative tubules of Ostrea
virginica and angulata is very different, as may be gathered from
the following account: —ln the first place, I have never found any
evidence of hermaphroditism either in the living animal or in
spawn from the gland and ducts of 0. virginica, and the physical
test used to determine the sex of the products in practical work,
during the last season, afford the most positive demonstrations of
the unisexuality of that species. Examining sections, however,
we never find either in the reproductive follicles of 0. virginica
or of 0. angulata any evidence of the co-existence of ovules and
spermatozoa.
In fact the mode of spermato-genesis in the unisexual species is
very different from that of the hermaphroditic. As indicated in
Brooks’ figure of a pai’t of a section of a male oyster, the sperma-
tozoa are peculiarly arranged in the follicle or tubule. Upon
applying a high power (500 to 800 diameters), I find that the-
heads of the spermatozoa show a very marked tendency to be
arranged in rows like beads, and not in oblong clusters as in the'
hermaphroditic species. Moreover, the walls of the generative'
tubules are lined by relatively very much smaller spermatoblasts
than those found free in the reproductive follicles of the her-
maphrodite form. This spermatogenetic layer is often very
marked in the males of the unisexual species, and even at an early
stage of the functional activity of the testicular organ presents
much the same structure that it does later. The rows of sperma-
tozoa already alluded to also have a tendency to be bent towards
the outlet of the tubules, giving rise to a fringe-like appearance
on either side of the follicle, with a clearer space between the
edges of the fringe-like masses of spermatozoa. In fact, it is
plainly to be seen that the spermatozoa are being budded off from
the spermatogenetic layer, and that the appearances just described
are a result of that process. It results from this that the
structural peculiarities of the testicular tubules are very charac-
teristic, so that once recognized they will never afterwards be
confounded with the arrangement observed in the ovary of the
females, where, as in the hermaphrodite species, the ova may be


seen in different stages of development, tliougli where the majority
of the ovules have attained nearly full development. It may
happen that few of the nascent ovules closely adherent to the walls
of the follicles are visible.
The distinction between Ostrea edulis and the American and
Portuguese species is therefore very marked and important.
Mdbius (“ Die Auster und die Austernwirthschaft.” Berlin, 1817,
p. 19), says of their species : —“ Oysters are hermaphrodites. In
the largest number of individuals, in the whole reproductive organ
I found only spermatozoa, but no eggs. In seven oysters which
carried blue brood in the beard, the sexual gland contained only
spermatozoa. Three oysters with the younger white embryos in
the beard had no spermatozoa in the sexual gland. In the most
of the brood-bearing oysters the sexual gland contained neither
eggs not spermatozoa. Of 309 oysters which were taken on the
25th of May, from four different banks east of the island of Sylt,
and afterwards examined from May 26th to June Ist, 18 per cent,
were hermaphroditic, and of the remaining 82 per cent, one-half
were egg-bearing, the other half sperm-bearing. In none were the
sexual products completely mature. From these observations I
conclude that the eggs and spermatozoa do not develop simulta-
neously but successively in the sexual gland ; that spermatozoa
may be developed very soon after the discharge of the ova, and
that probably one-half of the oysters of one locality during a breeding-
period produce only eggs and the other half produce only sperma-
tozoa. To the same effect are the statements of Lacaze-Duthiers ;
but Davaine seems to have first noticed the peculiar aggregations
of spermatozoa in oval masses in Ostrea edulis. Brooks thinks
“ Gerbe’s statement that among the 435 European oysters one
year old he found thirty-five with young, 127 with ripe eggs, and
189 with ripe semen, seems to be sufficient to show the incorrect-
ness of Lacaze-Duthiers’ conjecture that the functionally male
condition precedes the functionally female condition.”
This is about the state of the controversy at present in regard
to the breeding habits of Ostrea edidis. The only authority, as far


as I am aware, who distinctly takes the ground that eggs of this
species are fertilized in the reproductive organs is Horst, who says,
“Not only do the embryos pass through their first stages of
development within the mantle-cavity of the adult, and impregna-
tion occurs internally instead of externally, but it may also be
said that the eggs and spermatozoa come into contact in their
passage out of the generative glands. It is barely possible, indeed
probable, if my memory serves me rightly, that Davaine has put
similar observations upon record. Horst also distinctly asserts
that the normal development of the embryos of Ostrea edulis
cannot take place outside of the parent. M. Berthelot, according
to Mr. Brandly, has discovered that the fluids in the mantle-cavity
of 0. edulis contain albumen in a notable proportion, upon which
the young are supposed to be nourished. Mr. Brandly has found,
by direct experiment, that in the case of 0. angulata it is possible
to artificially impregnate the eggs. His attempts to fertilize the
eggs of 0. edulis with the milt of 0. angulata , and vice versa , were
unsuccesfully repeated at different times for the last two years.
I am now also uncertain in regard to the identity of the species of
which Lieut. Winslow succeeded in iartificially impregnating the
eggs at the mouth of the St. Mary’s River, in the Bay of Cadiz,
Spain, which he says were natives, the variety having existed and
flourished in the bay for as far back as could be remembered. I
quote his description of the specimens he used in his experiments,
as follows : —“ In appearance they were quite similar to the
American species ( Ostrea virginica ), having long shells of from 1
to 3 inches in length, rougher and thicker than is usually the case
with the European oyster.” This remark raises the question
whether the experimenter was not really working with 0. angulata
instead of 0. edidis. The locality where he got his specimens, and
where he conducted his experiments, also makes it not improbable
that he was in reality working with the native unisexual species,
0. angulata.
To return to the question of the breeding habits of Ostrea edulis :
it appears to me that we cannot very well question the authority
of Mobins, Lacaze-Duthiers, and Horst, in regard to the bisexual


state of the reproductive organs. My investigations also give some
countenance to the fact of a preponderance either of eggs or of
spermatozoa in different individuals ; in fact in some cases the one
or the other seems to he almost exclusively the mature product.
But we are not yet in a position to arrive at a conclusion in this
matter, because of the scantiness of the observations which have
hitherto been made. The hypothesis that the spermatozoa are
drawn from without into the generative ducts by the ciliary action
of the gills and mantle may be dismissed with the remark that
microscopic investigation, to my mind, has effectually disposed of
the probability of any such a state of affairs. We may see the
spermatozoa in course of development in the same follicle with
the ova, which is conclusive proof that the milt has not been
derived from without, from the water into which it had been dis-
charged by neighbouring individuals. In truth, we find in some
cases the spermatozoa present so deep down in the utmost ramifi-
cations of the generative follicles that it is not conceivable that
they should have been drawn in from without. As to the alter-
nate activity of the organs in producing ova and spermatozoa,
there is a possibility that such is the case, but, as stated at the
outset, there is as yet no conclusive proof of the fact.
Certain it is that I have yet to see sections of 0. edulis in which
both ova and spermatozoa are not present in some condition of
development at the same time. If the one be not present in a
fully developed state, developing traces of it may be discovered ; or
even a very minute quantity of developed milt or a few developed
eggs may be present in some one follicle, while in the others there
are perhaps exclusively eggs or exclusively milt in a developed
condition. lam aware that this view of the matter is opposed to
the current doctrine that Nature provides against continuous inter-
breeding ; but when we find the eggs and milt about equally
advanced in development in the same follicles, what is there to
prevent self-fertilization; in fact, what else can be the mode of
reproduction ?
In some of the sections of 0. edulis examined by me the ovules
already measured -5-5 of an inch in diameter, showing them to


be about twice the size of the ripe eggs of 0. virginica and
0. angulata, in both of which the ova are of about the same size
when mature. Estimates which I have made, based on the figures
of the eggs of 0. edulis given by M. Davaine, show them to be
iso of an inch in diameter. Estimates based on the figures of
Lacaze-Duthiers give of an inch, while Mobius and Horst
give the size of the young fry at T +«- of an inch in diameter. The
spherical heads of the spermatozoa of the three species here dis-
cussed measure about the same, or approximately T 3 thro of an inch
in diameter. The clusters of spermatozoa of 0. edulis measure
approximately t l o - of an inch in diameter. The spherical unseg-
mented spermatoblasts which break up into spermatozoa in
0. edidis measure oVo of an inch in diameter. The nucleus of
the ovarian eggs of 0. edidis measures not quite of an inch in
diameter. The nucleus of the ovarian egg of 0. angulata measures
approximately r - 3 V 3 of an inch in diameter, which is about
that of the nucleus of the egg of 0. virginica. The large
spherule of the anucleolus of the egg of 0. edulis measures 2 - t V O
of an inch in diameter; the small spherule, which is stained red by
the safranin, measures 4 - 3 Vo of an inch; the long diameter of the
conjoined spherules is n Vo of an inch. The long diameter of the
nucleolus of the egg of 0. angulata and 0. virginica is about 40V0
of an inch. A slide in my possession containing some of the brood
of 0. edidis shows that, even after it has acquired both valves of
the shell within the beard of the mother oyster, the brood varies
greatly in size. I find, for example, that such fry measures from
tto of an inch down to as small as T £ 6 - This brood, like that of
the American oyster, has not yet acquired any umbowal pro-
minences at the hinge end of the valves. Before this occurs in
the American oyster embryo considerable growth has taken place ;
but when the shell already covers the body, the whole embryo,
contrary to what is found in the European species, measures little
(if any) more in diameter than the egg, or about - 6 J o of an inch.
Later, when the embryo has grown considerably, and when it is
on the eve of attaching itself permanently, it measures from
A down to A of an inch in diameter.


The mode of fixation of the fry of both species is probably the
same ; but the mode of incubation (the one in the mother, the other
in the open water), we see is widely different, differing as greatly
in this respect as do the eggs in size and details of construction,
as shown by the measurement which I have given. It must not
be forgotten, however, that the material from which I prepared
my sections was received from Europe in January and March,
when it is to be supposed that the reproductive organs were not
yet fully developed, and that consequently the dimensions of the
ovarian ova as found by me are rather to be considered as being
below than above their true ones when fully developed at the
height of the spawning season.
It is a very remarkable fact that one finds individual specimens
of oysters in which the reproductive organs have undergone total
atrophy or wasting away at the completion of the spawning season.
Examining sections through the body-mass of spawn-spent oysters
taken from their native waters in August last, I find that the
whole of the connective tissue subjacent to the mantle, and
between the latter and the liver, especially over the sides of the body-
mass, has disappeared, together with all traces of the reproductive
organs, including the superficial branches of the efferent ducts.
At the first bend of the intestine there is still some of the con-
nective tissue remaining; but even here and in the mantle it has
changed its .character entirely, and become very spongy and
areolar, instead of solid, and composed of large vesicular cells,
such as are met with when the animal is in a better condition of
flesh. In fact it appears as if this mesenchymal or connective
tissue substance, had been used up and converted into reproductive
bodies (generative products), in the case of the spawn-spent and
extremely emaciated individuals. In sections of individuals in
various conditions from that in which the rudimentary network of
generative tubules has just appeared in the connective tissue, on
up to those in which the reproductive tissues are enormously
developed in bulk and proportion to the mass of the remaining
structures, there is a perfect gradation from their complete absence
to their full development.


This would appear to be very strong evidence in support of the
theory that the reproductive follicles or tubules are developed
anew each season, directly from the specialization of certain strings
or strands of connective tissue cells.
Many animals manifest a periodic development of the glandular
portions of the reproductive organs; but I know of no form in
which there is any such presumptive evidence that these organs
are annually regenerated and finally altogether aborted, as seems
to be the case with the oyster. Together with the changes here
described, the most remarkable changes in the solidity and con-
sistence of the animal takes place. The shrinkage of a spawn-
spent oyster in alcohol or chro. mic. acid solution is excessive, and
will, when complete, reduce the animal to one-tenth of its bulk
while alive. This shrinkage is due to abstraction of the water
with which the loose spongy tissue of the exhausted animal is
distended. A so-called “ fat ” oyster, on the other hand, will
suffer no such excessive diminution in bulk when placed in
alcohol or other hardening fluid. In consequence of this variable
development of the reproductive organs, as well as that of the con-
nective tissue of the body-mass, the amount of solid proto-plasmic
material contained in the same animal at different times under
different conditions must vary between wide limits. And inas-
much as the nutritive and reproductive functions of animals are
notoriously inter-dependent, it follows, in consequence of the
enormous fertility of the oyster, that a vast amount of stored
material in the shape of connective tissue must be annually con-
verted into germs and annually replaced by nutritive processes.
Plentitude or dearth of food are also to be considered ; but it now
becomes a little easier to understand the physiological inter-
dependence of the reproductive functions and the so-called fattening
process.
To a great extent, what has been remarked in the proceeding
paragraphs of the wasting away of the reproductive organs in
Ostrea virginica seems to apply also to 0. edulis and 0. ang'idata.
The last species has an extraordinarily thick body-mass, with the


stratum of reproductive follicles of remarkable thickness, averag-
ing a much greater development than I have ever seen in any
other form. When the contents of this great mass of tubules has
been discharged, a diminution in the bulk of the body-mass must
naturally ensue, probably accompanied by a wasting away of the
connective tissue and tubules, such as apparently occurs in the
American species. From what I have seen of the generative
tubules of O. edulis in sections, they are evidently regenerated
much as in 0. virginica. In a few specimens I find them almost
entirely gone, or present only in an extremely rudimentary state.
Sydney: Thomas Richards, Government Printer.—lBBs.


run 2




