

Jlstcnsiontibc aitb the |Ract foiled:.
A DISCOURSE:
Delivered on Sunday after The Ascension
A. RUSSELL, DEAN OF ADELAIDE
PRICE SIXPENCE.
ADELAIDE: *
PRINTED BY ANDREWS, THOMAS, 0- CLARK,
GRENFELL-STREET.
1876.




PREFACE.
So many persons have asked to see this sermon, that I have agreed
to print it. I do so not without hope that the promoters of the
Races, when fully made aware of the shock to the best and
soundest feelings of the community which is given by the main-
tenance of the evils complained of, will set themselves in good earnest
to the work of removing them. The exclusion of the book-makers,
the refusal of all sanction to systematic betting in connection with
the Races, and the exclusion from the Racecourse and its precincts
of the drinking booths, —these are the things which are demanded.
It remains to be seen whether any reform can be effected radical
enough to meet the necessity of the case. But even the earnest
attempt to effect such a reform will command sympathy. I am
quite aware of the way in which the general, lay mind contem-
plates such an appeal when coming from a clergyman. When a
discourse like this is preached, containing no offensive insinuations,
and keeping within the fair limits of argument and persuasion, the
remark is—“ Well, a very fair statement from the clerical point of
view.” But this will not pass. I am not considering the subject
fiom a cleiical point of view at all. I ask for an honest answer
to the question—“ Are the things I have spoken of real evils?”
And if they are, ‘ ‘ What means are you going to take to remove
them?”
A. R. .




ASCENSIONTIDE AND THE RACE WEEK.
To-day I take no text; but will choose as my topic—“Ascension-
tide and the Race Week.” This year the Church brought, in its
course, to you and to others, the message of the Ascension; but
here it found few to listen to it except the children who were
brought hither that they, at least, should be taught to pray that
they might “in heart and mind thither ascend” where the
Saviour is. Those who have the management of such things chose
that time for the annual sport of the Races; and on the day which
the Church has set apart for meditation on the most glorious of
all Christian mysteries, the Christian populace of Adelaide was
streaming forth, in the spirit of no Christian holiday, to take its
pleasure in its chosen way. The only Ascension Day hymns of
those who went forth were shouts of eagerness over the horses and
their riders panting for victory in the race-course ; and their most
serious meditations were troubled calculations of gain and loss, as
they reckoned up what they had ventured on this horse—what
bets they had laid against that. The festival, as usual, had its
deep potations, its hilarity of the noon-tide, succeeded by its
dismal reaction and degradation in the evening; and those who
fatten on the vices of the weak had their time of carnival. The
reputable, decorous citizen who had gone and taken his pleasure
in a decent way, as a mere spectator, saw little of the sodden faces,
the gloomy tempers, or the wild pretence of joviality with which
people of the other sort returned to town; and, no doubt, he
washed his hands of all responsibility for the unusual contribution
to the dissipation of the city. lam not, as yet, asking whether


this is a kind of annual festival which, in the pleasure it gives, or
in what it leaves behind, is worth the time and the occupation of
mind, and the vast expenditure. But even now, I ask, with
disdain of the disregard of all fitness of the time and the occasion,
and with serious reproach to those who profess to call themselves
“ good Churchmen,” whether this was a fit way in which to keep
the Christian Ascension-tide 1 I value no Churchmanship which
is not devout; and it is to those who are so that we look to say to
the wealthy promoters of this national sport—“ If you must have
your races, and your gathering of those who promote them ; if
you must import your yearly detachment of book-makers and
their train ; if you must have your betting-books and your
apparatus of privileged gambling, with all the excitement,
and the drink, and the evil passions of men of the
lowest sort that usually illustrate the sport— at least, have some
respect for Christian usages. Treat with less open and less
offensive scorn the holy days which the Christian tradition of so
many centuries has handed down. Even if you who despise them
are the majority, do not so insolently trample on the feelings of
the minority.” So great a scandal as that of last week is, I affirm,
a reflection not merely on the Christianity, but on the good taste
and the good manners of our community.
And now, turning away from the incongruity and the profane-
ness involved in what we have seen during the last week, I come
to look upon the scene itself. Sometimes our sermons, like Our
Lord’s, should bo preached not merely on some sacred topic from
Holy Scripture, but on what we see going on before our eyes.
And as our celebration of Ascension Day was so interfered with,
and the course of natural meditation interrupted by the general
excitement of the populace over these races, I will not this morning
attempt to pursue any Ascension-tide meditation. In the evening
service we shall hove another occasion for that. I accept the


interruption, and ask you to consider with me the nature of it.
Every amusement considered fit for Christians should be subjected
to a Christian estimate. And this is what we ought to be
prepared to apply to the race-course as well as other amusements.
Of course, I am aware of the great disadvantage uhder which I
approach this subject. It is a fashionable amusement. It has the
favour and approval of the higher classes; and, indeed, without
their wealth and their patronage could not continue to flourish.
This, of itself, draws a great many with the multitude; and
though there are some who say they do not follow any fashion,
that is only because they do not know themselves, for in their
feelings, at least, any prevailing fashion somewhat influences even
those who are least conventional. But the question for us is,
whether, being a fashion, it is a good fashion—whether it is such
a fashion as those in a higher position ought to set. There are
some considerations which they ought fairly to entertain if they
are to justify the fashion, as it now exists, to their conscience.
Again, it is a popular amusement; and there is a great charm in
any scene where multitudes of people of high and low degree are
assembled together. The constant movement, the picturesque
groups of people, the contagion of the general excitement, the
opportunity for differing judgment, for doubt, fear, hope; the
gaiety of the colours; the beauty and grace of horses perfectly
trained, and eager for the race; the frequent jest, the merry
raillery, light laughter, and absurd episode—all these are pleasant
features of the scene, fairly accounting for the popular enjoyment.
And it seems an ungracious thing [even to suggest a doubt about
the propriety of what makes so many human beings happy. For
it is as an amusement that it is popular. And when a preacher
sets himself against anything that is at once fashionable and
popular in the way of amusement, he is, as I say, at a great
disadvantage; for he must be perfectly well aware that he has


enlisted against him, at the very outset, the strongest prejudices
of a great number of people.. They have made up their minds,
and, what is more, they have by their conduct already committed
themselves to the thing he objects to, and do not mean to be
influenced by anything he may say. But, for all that, I appeal to
your dispassionate judgment. Do not think that I am here
intending merely a protest for the relief of my own soul. There
would be no good in that, for you are already prepared to take
that for granted, and would not be much influenced by it one way
or the other. Nor do I mean to condemn a thing because it is
not to my own liking; for I remember that here, at least, you
have no right of reply, and that my office of prophet in the
Church, though it gives me authority to declare God’s will, gives
me no right to set forth my individual likings or dislikings as if
they had any more claim to respectful consideration than another
man’s. But the prophet must be sometimes moralist as well. If,
then, in the latter character, I put before you reasonable objec-
tions which commend themselves to your own moral sense, then
you will be bound to admit that you must give some attention to
them ; that if you have committed yourself to the approval and
support of a system which you cannot, on the whole, justify to
your conscience, it will become your duty to do what you can to
free yourselves in the future from complicity in things which you
have thus been driven to acknowledge to be wrong. You know
that I speak not from want of sympathy with the amusements of
the people, nor from any belief that the time spent in amusement
is so much subtracted from Christian life. On the contrary, you
know how often I have insisted that, because they do form a proper
portion of Christian life, therefore we should see that our amuse-
ments be such as are fit for Christian people. If you set recrea-
tion on on one side as being only a distraction of the soul from
what is good, the effect of this must be to deprave and demoralize


its character. If, therefore, there be any amusement found which
draws together people in great multitudes for the purpose of
enjoying it, this would be altogether in its favour, provided it can
be proved to be the right kind of amusement. But I think I
might mention to you kinds of popular amusement which suggest
no such serious misgivings as those which are felt in reference to
the race-course. No one has a word to say against the cricket or
the football match ; against great gatherings for rifle competition >
against the trials of strength and skill in which our countrymen
delight, although they are all merely bodily exercises, and the
gratification they give is chiefly of the senses; and I will add
that no one need have a word to say against horse-races, if they
were conducted in the same spirit, and with the same object.
But the fact that Races, as they are, are disapproved of by many of
those who have the keenest sympathy with popular open-air
enjoyments, as such, should at least lead you to ask yourselves
what is the difference between the two sets of cases. What are
the things that are objected to 1 Are they right things, or wrong
things 1 Are they the mere fancies of people who have no incli-
nation for that kind of amusement, and, in a narrow spirit,
condemn what they cannot appreciate 1 Or are they of such a
nature as should distress every healthy conscience 1 You know,
as a matter of fact, that this disapproval is felt; that it is not
confined to the ungenial or the strait-laced; that it is, in part,
shared even by some who cannot deny themselves the pleasure of
frequenting the are, at intervals, conscious of a shade of
uncomfortable feeling passing over their minds at this thing or
that thing, which they confess to be nothing less than abominable.
Perhaps I shall better answer these questions if I ask first—
What, apart from the pleasure, is the chief reason of usefulness or
necessity given for upholding the Turf? It is, we are told,
because it affords so strong an inducement to raise the best


possible breed of horses, that its discontinuance would lead to an
inevitable deterioration in the horse stock throughout the country,
on which so many of our industries depend. Now, that a race-
course may)* afford a test of the capacities of the horse and of the
highest training, I suppose no one will deny; but the question is,
whether such a test could not be provided as well, or better,
without those features of the existing racecourse which are found
'tobe so degrading, and so ruinous to character. Only if it cannot
do we declare against the Racecourse. I do not apologize for
entering on a style of discourse very unusual in the pulpit, for I
have felt that it would be useless to enter on the subject at all
unless one could enter on it in all its details. If this plea of use-
fulness is not an afterthought intended to silence objections, it is
surely a very obvious question to ask—Why this particular kind
of live stock should be dealt with in a manner so different from
every other? The agriculturisti is stimulated to the utmost
possible exertion by the rewards of excellence bestowed at Shows
and Exhibitions, and Ploughing Matches, and the like, where the
decision is made by competent judges, where the result is not
dependent on the integrity of the jockey, and cannot be affected
by any trifling accident at the last moment, and from which the
element of uncertainty and risk is as completely excluded as it
can be from anything human. But it is on this very element of
uncertainty and risk that the Turf at the present day may be said
to subsist. The greater the uncertainty, the greater scope for the
gambling propensity. The majority of those who combine to make a
race so great an event, in spite of all that is said about “that noble
animal, the horse,” care little or nothing about the horse. They lay
their bets, they take their odds, they “ hedge” to keep themselves
safe, they deal with the whole thing as a nice calculation of a
* I say “may,” for there are those who hold the opinion that the peculiar and excessive
training, as at present condncted, is deteriorating to the physique alike of horse and man.


certain variety of casualties and events, in which there is the
strangest mingling of cool thinking and strong excitement. It is
all a play of wits animated by a lust of gain, in which, provided
there is no express and technical fraud, any kind of advantage may
be taken of the ignorance of the inexperienced. The honourable
men at the turf hold themselves aloof from all this; they train
the horse for lawful ends, but they have no sooner trained him
than he becomes a mere pretext or occasion for the exercise of al]
this evil ingenuity. You have a right to judge every institution
by its fruits; and where, as here, do you find such a spawn of
unclean creatures constantly coming to the birth ? There is a
pei’fect vocabulary of phrases for the various forms of fraud and
trickery which have grown up in connection w r ith the turf, in the
stable, on the training-ground, in the various acute devices of
the bookmakers, and in the betting ring. The “blackleg” is the
unique production of the racecourse as it is. Who that has ever
been present at a great racecourse but must remember the disgust
with which, after enjoying the exciting scene of the noble horses
running in gallant rivalry, or the various humours of the crowd—
he came upon the low, villainous countenances of the creatures
who hover like vampires about the place, finding there their
natural prey? Those wdio support the turf for the sake of the
breed of horses cannot deal with all this as if they had no
responsibility for it. For, as a matter of fact, the betting-book is
not the accidental accompaniment of the race ; it is the essence of
it; that on which as an institution it subsists. Well then, I ask,
have I, who have the custody of souls of men, nothing which I
ought to say about such an abuse? Are these the associations,
these the habits of mind into which I should be willing silently
and without warning to see the young and inexperienced under my
care annually beguiled? It is at least one part of my duty to
persuade men to observe the eighth commandment, and there are


things that occasionally come to our knowledge in a confidential
way which, if they could be revealed, might serve to show
employers at least that in exposing the young to such'temptations
they are doing injury not only to them but to themselves.
So long as the whole complicated system of modern betting con-
tinues to be the very basis of the horse-racing system the race-
course may justly challenge the disapproval of religious men. If
you ask me why it is wrong to gamble and wrong to bet, and to
give you Scripture and verse for it, I answer that if I were to
give you mere Scripture and verse I might be giving you no more
than a formal rule not touching your conscience, and I do not
pretend to give you any. That is not the way in which I would
deal with any moral question; but I say it is wrong to gamble, and
wrong to bet, because the experience of mankind has shown it to
be pernicious to the moral character, tempting men from the paths
of industry and honesty, infesting their imagination with wild
impossible dreams, and leading them into the worst possible com-
pany, making them greedy and crafty and unprincipled. It can
hardly be otherwise when they find themselves pitted against' the
general rascaldom of the country. It is true that men may
gamble and bet and yet be honest, but this is because of the
strength of their natural character; and they are never to forget
that there are weaker souls around them who will imitate them in
their evil without being able to imitate them in their good; and if
through the example they have set any have been encouraged to
run moral risks which to them have proved fatal dangers, then the
men who set the example cannot say that it is no concern of his.
He may say that he is free from this innocent blood, but he will
not be any the more free because he says it.
Here, then, I lay my finger on the great blot. If there were no
more than this, this alone would remove the racecourse out of the


class of amusements which are -fit for Christian people. In your
Anti-Gaming Act you have laid your hand on a few of the petty ;
disreputable, almost insignificant kinds of gambling, and put a
peremptory stop to them; and then with a glow of complacent self-
admiration you say, We are such a moral people! And all the
while at the racecourse gambling on the largest scale is maintained
as an almost consecrated institution. You secure for it the highest
patronage you can obtain ; you prepare for it, by sending through
all the colonies the preparatory notes of prophecy to whet the
jaded appetite and kindle expectation; and then follows a w r eek of
wild excitement, in which no useful or profitable thing can be
done. Yes, we make clean the outside of the cup and the platter,
but none the less are we Pharisees at the core. Ask fathers and
mothers whether the racecourse and the betting ground are pre-
cisely the school in which they would wish their sons to learn.
Ask any father whether to the known betting-man he would
willingly commit the happiness of his daughter. And yet to send
our sons to the racecourse, and expect them not to learn such
lessons, would be to ignore the connection between cause and
effect. If you can expel this from your racecourse, then have
your races by all means. Then, too, the occasional cruelty of the
racecourse will disappear; then you will see no torn and bleeding
flanks of gallant horses, tortured. by the frantic application of the
spur. But if without betting you cannot maintain the racecourse,
then every principle of morality calls on you to let it go. At
least, not without warning and not without witness shall it be
maintained; and warning given on such a subject should be given
in no mealy-mouthed phrase. It should be given in language so
plain and clear that there shall be no doubt about its meaning,
and in language so urgent that it shall reach the conscience. But
if you would know the character of the moral influence exerted by
the racecourse as it is, you must seek to form your estimate not


meiely fiom the racecourse itself; you must seek it in every
haunt of dissipation at the close of the day, in the wan faces with
lack-lustre eyes that appear in our streets after such a day of
pleasure, in the immense increase to the ordinary drunkenness of
Adelaide, in the wi'etchedness of many a home when night has
fallen. Much of this is due not to the mere concourse of so
great a mass of people, but to the excitement which runs like fire
in their veins, and seeks to feed itself with the fresh excitement of
strong drink; and the craving once created, there are the drinking
booths at hand to gratify it. To this also you may add the
corrupting influence of the imported vice which the race week
always brings.
If you think that in anything I have said to-day I have
at all overstepped the mark in the warmth and urgency of
my language, then I would ask you, in conclusion, to listen to a
few remarks on the same subject made by the Rev. H. R. Haweis
certainly the least strait-laced, and, as some would say, the most
outrageously liberal of living moralists and divines. He said—“ I
do think that of all the institutions in this country more wrong-
doing is connected with the racecourse than is connected with any
other similar institution; and if you have no hope of being able to
do anything towards the purification of the system of betting,
cheating, dishonesty, lying, and debauchery that goes on during
the races, I think you had better keep away; and if you cannot
impart a better element, if you don’t see your way to sanctioning
what is good, but only add by your presence to the influence of
deplorable excesses—then, if this be so—if, in other words, an
institution is so incurably corrupt as at present constituted that
nothing can mend it, it may be best to treat it from the ascetic
point of view, and say—lt cannot be cured so long as it exists
under these conditions; it must be struck down and re-constituted
before I go there.”


These are calm words, but nothing more crushing could be said.
And now, having spoken throughout under a sense of the respon-
sibility attaching to me as placed in charge of human souls, those
who would be influenced by anything I may say will see clearly
what my advice would be. As for the rest, they' will have to
justify to their own conscience how they can sanction the system
in spite of such mauifest evils. May He who is our mighty
helper in all the strife of conscience within us enable us to have a
right judgment in this and in all things.
}-< r
William Kylliu Thomas, Printer, Greniell-street, Adelaide.


