

ASLEEP IN JESUS
SERMON
I2ST MBMORIAM,
REV. WILLIAM F. MAIN,
fixit?
St. Giles’ Church, Norwood.
[.PUBLISHED BY REQUEST ]
Adelaide :
Sands & McDougall Limited, Printers, King William Street.
1893.




H, M992
ASLEEP IN JESUS.
IN MEMORIAM
MRS. NEILS ON (Maggie Gilchrist),
2nd July, 1893.
1 Thessalonians, 4, 14. —“Them also which sleep in Jesus.”
It is death of which the Apostle speaks. And death
ofttimes beautiful!
He who hath bent him o’er the dead,
Ere the first day of death is fled—
The first dark day of nothingness,
The last of danger and distress, —
Before Decay’s effacing fingers
Have swept the lines where beauty lingers;
And marked the mild, angelic air,
The rapture of repose that’s there—
The fixed, yet tender traits, that streak
The languor of the placid cheek;
And —but for that sad, shrouded eye,
That fires not, wins not, weeps not now;
And but for that chill, changeless brow,
Where cold obstruction’s apathy
Appals the gazing mourner’s heart,
As if to him it could impart
The doom he dreads, yet dwells upon;
Yes, but for these, and these alone,
Some moments, ay, one treacherous hour,
He still might doubt the tyrant’s power ;
So fair, so calm, so softly sealed,
The first, last look, by Death revealed !


Yes, death is ofttimes beautiful; and this is the sleep which
is named in our text. And yet there is a difference. The
slumber thus described in poetic numbers is that in which
all mankind may quietly rest. Its beauty is that which
appears when all thought, emotion, passion are forever
gone, and have resigned their old control over face and
form ; a beauty imprinted by the hand of natural law on
the God-created frame when life is fled. But it is a beauty
which may characterise the worn-out tabernacle of any or all
of the children of men. It may stamp the features even of
them who have died in mortal sin, and so, without any good
hope of awakening to everlasting life, or to aught else but
shame and everlasting contempt. But this is the sleep of
those who sleep in Jesus.
Who sleep in Jesus! But who are they, and what is
meant by these strange, beautiful words ? In reply to
these questions, let it be observed that this does not
apply to the whole man. It is a complex nature with
which we are endowed —matter and spirit, body and soul.
These are diverse one from the other, and so the one
may sleep while the other wakes. This is matter of nightly
experience, when, amid the body’s rest, the soul is wander-
ing through the varied realms of thought and fancy. And
thus it is with that other sleep, of which this is but the
passing image. In death the body sleeps, the spirit wakes.
Thus we are taught by Him who created both. God, we are
told by our blessed Redeemer, “is not the God of the dead,
but of the living,” and so He is called “ the God of Abraham,
and of Isaac, and of Jacob.” When Jesus ascended the
Mount of Transfiguration, He received a welcome visit
from two of His departed saints, the legislator of Sinai,


and the prophet of fire. When hanging on the cursed
tree, Himself at the point of death, His words to the re-
pentant, believing malefactor at His side were these —
“This day shalt thou be with me in Paradise.” “Ye,”
says an Apostle to believers yet on earth, “Ye are come, are
come to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men ”
Asleep ?—No, but “ to the spirits of just men made perfect.”
Those whose robes have been made white in the blood of the
Lamb are, are now, before the throne of God, and serve —
not shall serve, but are serving—Him “day and night in
His temple.” And when He comes to judge the world, it is
to be with an attendance of ten thousand of His saints, saints
who are now on high. No, brethren, it is not the whole man
that sleeps. The man himself, the spirit unclothed, is at
once translated to those mansions made without hands, which
are eternal in the heavens. It is but the worn-out fabric of
the flesh that sleeps. “ After life’s fitful fever it sleeps well,”
undisturbed in its calm repose till the resurrection morn.
And then it too shall wake.
How this is to be—how atoms of the body that have
turned to dust, or have been scattered to the four winds
amid flames and smoke, or been dispersed amid the waves
of the mighty deep—how these shall be again combined I
know not. Whether indeed the same atoms shall be re-
combined at all to constitute the spiritual body of the
redeemed, I know not. Science tells us that no particle
of these bodies of ours is now the same as in childhood,
or youth, or riper years; and yet we are the same men,
matured, that we were in early youth. In matters such
as these I walk in darkness, for there is much in heaven
and earth that is not known in man’s philosophy. But


this I do know, that there is a whole infinity of things that
God can do that seem to us impossible, contradictory,
things of which man cannot dream in loftiest flights of
intellect or imagination ; that at the last trump, when He
comes again for His redeemed, their dead bodies, if not
identical, yet fruit of the seed once sown in the grave,
shall arise as new and spiritual bodies, and, reunited to
the living soul, shall accompany the descended Saviour,
as He wings His glorious flight to His eternal throne.
For, “ them which sleep in Jesus will God bring with Him !”
It must needs be so. Are not his disciples united to the
living Saviour—members of Christ as the branch of the vine ?
—“ members,” says an Apostle, of His body, of His flesh, and
of His bones.” “ This is a great mystery,” he adds, and the
mystery is deepened,] when we remember that thus we are
united even to the Father Everlasting, It was our Saviour’s
prayer that “ they all,” His people, namely, “ may be one,
as thou, Father, art in me and I in thee, that they may be
one in us ” —“ I in them and thou in me.” Thus it is that
we fall asleep, “in Jesus.” And does not this ensure that
we shall rise from the sleep of death ? We are one with
Christ, and so one with His Father; can He then leave
even our worn-out frames to perish ? Himself, God manifest
in the flesh, Himself risen from the grave, “ can the Head
rise, and leave the members dead ?” Nay ! they are under
the guardianship of the Prince of Life. Buried forever out
of mortal sight, the bodies of His saints are visible to His
all-seeing, all-loving eye, and, under His protection, are
being purified from all the grossness and corruption of the
fleshly life of earth, that they may thus be fitting tabernacles
for souls which have been cleansed in the blood of Christ—


thus be fitted to dwell amid the unsullied light of that
glorious habitation into which can enter nothing that defileth,
where all are abiding amid the light of God. Sleeping in
the dust of earth, yet these poor mortal frames of ours shall
awake to everlasting life, for God hath “ ransomed them
from the power of the grave, He hath redeemed them from
death.” And so we can rest content in the assurance, that
“them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with Him.”
Now the body sleeps, but the soul wakes. For, no
sooner has death stilled the throbbing pulse and sealed the
eyelids down, than the spirit of which it has been so long
the habitation—the spirit, attended by the swift-winged
messengers of God, takes flight to her everlasting home.
There the ransomed soul will cast herself before the throne
of God, in adoring gratitude and praise ; there shall she be
crowned with the crown which the Saviour has prepared for
all those that love Him ; there, harp in hand, she will join
with the vast company of the E.edeemed in singing the song
of Moses and the Lamb; there she will enter on a being of
such felicity as is possible to those alone, who are now made
pure as Christ is pure, and perfect as their Father in heaven
is perfect.
But it is not a life this, only of bliss and praise. It is
objected by some to the Christian’s heaven, that they do not
want a heaven where there is to be nothing but waving of
palms and singing of songs eternally; and so they will have
none of it, or of our Christ, O ! fools, and blind. Where
does the word of God ever teach that this is all ? Even the
bare natural conception of God as a God of love, as a God
who in love and wisdom and might adapts all parts of His
works to all others, might assure them that the conditions of


the redeemed in heaven will be adapted to their nature. He
has constituted us with high spiritual powers, of emotion,
thought, imagination, will, wherewith to serve Him. With
these we serve Him now. Think you it will be other then ?
It cannot be. Our powers will then be exalted, not depressed
or withdrawn. Intellect will be developed by research into
the handiworks of God ; imagination, in contemplating the
beauties of Himself and all creation ; love, in enhancing the
blessedness of our Father’s children ; and will, in employing
every power in His high service. Heaven a place of sloth
and idleness, and sybaritic enjoyment ? No! A place of
rest indeed. But only rest from pain and weariness, and all
that can hurt or annoy; yet rest that consists in the well-
ordered employment of our powers for the glory of God and
the well-being of all His creatures. Yes, beloved ! Those
who fall asleep in Jesus, awake before the throne of God,
are now serving as by-and-bye we too shall serve day and
night in His temple. And when these poor frames of ours
shall rise, not now the prey of corruption, but in yet more
glorious guise than when first man came from his Creator’s
hand, then shall they but add to our felicity, not only as now,
but as they prove the perfected instruments of our lofty
service.
And now, who are they that are the heirs of this high
blessedness ? Ah, my friends, the answer is not far to seek.
It is not those —we dare not lay the flattering unction to any
soul by saying it can be those —who have lived and died in
opposition to or in separation from God. “ Who sleep in
Jesus !” It is they who, in the consciousness of guilt and
condemnation, have taken Him as their Saviour and Lord;
who have repented of their sins, and put their trust in Him ;


who, trusting Him, and so redeemed by Him from death,
are endeavoring now to serve Him by consecrated lives ;
it is they who, having lived be it long years, or even but
a little time in His service, have also died in His faith ;
these it is who sleep in Jesus, they whom God will bring
with Him. Brethren, will not we live such lives that we
may die this death —falling asleep in Jesus, to awake amid
the infinite, unending blessedness of our Father’s home ?
And, in view of the service and the glory that are to
follow this earthly life, say, redeemed of the Lord, say
“ what manner of persons ought we to be in all holy
conversation and godliness!”
Into such a train of thought have I been drawn by a
recent event which has plunged one of our homes in tears,
and which has mournfully affected us all. It was a lovely
day when many of us were assembled here to witness the
union of a maiden young and fair to the husband of her
choice. It was only a fortnight ago, and but two years
to a day from that on which she wore her bridal veil,
when many of the selfsame congregation were again
assembled, but in a widely different scene —met in God’s
Acre, near by, to lay her poor remains into the keeping
of the grave till the resurrection morn.
It is twenty-five years since Margaret Neilson—
Maggie Gilchrist, as she was fondly known to us —came
to her parents, a gift from God to be trained for Him ; and
faithfully have they fulfilled their trust. From the first
she was of a marked vivacity, and was characterised by a
very loving nature, one which, until she met the wonted
fate of youthful womanhood in marriage, found its highest


outlet in her love for her parents. To her their will was
law, and, as womanhood drew nigh, her anxiety but
deepened to save the beloved mother from toil and care.
In the parental home she was a veritable “ beam of sun-
shine.” As I have often observed, there was in her a vein
of dry, quiet humour, which, however, while exciting mirth,
was never unkindly. In all childish quarrels she was
peacemaker. This characteristic indeed abode with her
throughout life. It was but at a recent date that she
learned of an estrangement between friends in whom she
took a deep interest. Yearning for a reconciliation, she
penned a tender, womanly letter to one of them, praying
him to be reconciled to his friend. And so potent was
this Christly influence that he went at once to the other’s
house. The breach was healed. The friends are now
in constant loving intercourse, and only mourn their long
estrangement.
Up to her eighteenth or nineteenth year she had lived
a gentle, amiable life, that manifested all natural graces as
nourished in a Christian home. But she was not yet a
child of God. She had habitually listened to the preaching
of the word, its warnings and its messages of mercy; and
this, as it seems, when her heart was much moved at a
time of deep distress through parental sickness, led to
deep anxiety as to her state before God. At length she
applied for admission to the membership of the Church
and to the table of the Lord. She explained to me that but
the night before she had surrendered herself to Jesus, trust-
ing Him as her Saviour, and accepting Him as her Lord, and
that she now desired to confess her discipleship. Her pro-
fession of faith was highly gratifying, but the Session felt


that time should be had for testing the genuineness of her
faith. Months were thus allowed to elapse, and then she
was gladly received into the Church.
As the fruit of conversion, her natural dispositions
now developed into Christian graces. Heretofore a scholar,
she now became a teacher in our Sabbath School. Her
class loved her, and she loved class and work ; although
it was often a grief to her that she had not been more
earnest with them, too often losing sight of what should
be the true aim of Sabbath School teaching. And having
loved her scholars, she loved them to the end, sending
a loving message of farewell to them and her fellow-
teachers, ere she passed away. Nor was her anxiety for
them alone. Yearning for his highest weal, one of her
last requests was to one she deeply loved, that he might
be faithful in his attendance at the house of God, and
take active part in the Saviour’s w r ork. And she loved
her Church, a love manifested by her attendance in
health, and by her readiness, quiet and unobtrusive, to
help in its affairs.
Her married life was a happy one. But soon her once
robust health became uncertain. This resulted in a
dangerous illness, from which, however, she partly re-
covered. Going from home in search of strength, on her
return she had a relapse. After a time she was removed
to her father’s house, for a mother’s tender nursing. But
nothing could stay the progress of her disease. The fiat
went forth that she must die. Wisely and lovingly, parents
and husband decided that she ought to know the truth at
once. She took the new's from her father’s trembling lips
with a simple resignation w'hich he felt to be heart-breaking;


and, by God’s good hand upon her, where he felt that he
ought to support and comfort her,’ she was enabled to do
that for him.
From first to last I had the privilege of being her
frequent visitor. She talked freely of her death, and that
with hope and joy. Sad, with nature’s sadness, at thought
of giving up life so young, and leaving all she best loved
on earth, yet the sadness was less than the joy, for she
was assured that she was going home to be forever with
the Lord. And the ground of her assurance was this:
not that she had lived what all would regard as a blameless
life, although men might be apt to think that enough; not
this, for she knew her righteousness to be but as filthy
rags; not this, but only and solely that Jesus had died
that she might live, and had redeemed her from all iniquity.
This was the root of her resignation and joy. Once only
did she betray signs of fear. Doubt had arisen as to her
safety for eternity, this in a time of exceptional weakness
and suffering. Asking me whether I thought she was safe, I
reminded her of Him in whom she had believed, and that
her safety lay, not in her feeble faith, but in Jesus’ strong
hold of her. She was satisfied, and thereafter no doubts
or fears seemed to gather around her deathbed. And so
it was to the end. On her last day of life she had been
almost utterly insensible to all external things till I called
at midday. Asking if she knew me, there was no response.
She could not see, could scarcely hear. But when I asked
her if she still trusted in Jesus, the beloved name caught
the dulled ear, and she answered “Yes.” “Did she find
Him to be a very present help in this her time of need ?”
As if gathering all her strength to reply, she breathed out


the words, that seemed almost to come with a rush to
her lips, “ Yes, no doubf.” When I saw her again she was
unconscious, and soon after she breathed her last sigh, and
quietly fell asleep in Jesus.
Farewell, sweet soul! ‘ “ Thou hast gone from the earth,
and w'e will not deplore thee.” Thou hast gone from the
earth, with all its sins, and pains, and evils, to that high
home where all is peace, and all is joy. Thou hast fallen
asleep in the arms of Him whom thou hast loved beyond
earth’s dearest friend. And now, awake no more to sleep,
thou art hymning the praises of Him who redeemed thee,
and by whose gracious hand it is that thou art now arrayed
in robes washed and made white in the blood of the Lamb !
Living still, no more to die, thou art serving Him with thine
every power disencumbered of all fleshly restraints. Every
power possessed by thee on earth is now put to loftier use
than here below; and thy supremest joy is this—that, serving,
thou servest under the benignant eye of Him in whom is
fulness of joy for ever and for evermore. Farewell !
And you, O you who were dearest to her of all the
earth, who loved her with a love so tender and true, and
who now so deeply mourn her loss, weep, I pray you, O weep
no more. Not yours is it to mourn as those who have no
hope. She is not lost, this friend, this daughter, sister, wufe
of yours. You have the sweet remembrances of her gracious
life. You have the knowledge that when she fell asleep she
fell asleep in Jesus, and that now, awake, she is satisfied
with His likeness, whom she loved even better than you,
loved with a love that can arouse no jealousy in loving
heart. Not to eye or arms of sense can she ever return.


Yet may it not be that, even as in dreams the messengers
of God came to holy men of old, in like manner by her
Father’s will she may appear again to you in visions of the
night? And lo ! when Jesus comes for you, as He came
for her, to take you home —ah ! may it not also be that she
may be waiting to welcome you at the celestial gate? to
welcome you to her own loving bosom, and into those
blessed mansions which your dear Redeemer and your
Lord has gone before you to prepare. And so, beloved,
dry those tears of yours, and weep no more.
And as for us, dear friends, whoever we be, who knew
her, or who knew her not, is it not true that to us she
“ being dead yet speaketh ?” These are the annals of a
quiet life, such as that of most; and it is the example of
such a life we therefore need. To childhood and youth
does it not tell how, by a loving heart, even though it be
not yet awake to the love of Jesus, you may sweeten home
and gently quell the risings of angry passion ? how filial
obedience and filial love gladden parental hearts ? how a
daughter can strengthen the hands and encourage the heart
of a weary mother ? Does it not tell, besides, the solemn
truth, that even the fairest, sweetest life is no ground of
hope for that eternity whither we are wending ? There are
many lives, thank God for it, adorned with graces which
seem to be relics of Eden before the Fall. But some forget
that no graces or works of ours are righteous in God’s
sight; that “ the trail of the serpent is over them all
that the best and fairest lives must needs be cleansed
in the blood of Jesus. Thus felt she who is now passed
away. Fair and seemly as her life was, she knew herself
guilty, condemned. And the knowledge awoke a deep


anxiety thqjt was never quenched till quenched in the
blood of the Lamb. And so, let us also trust, not in self,
but in Jesus only.
Does not this life remind you, young friends, who have
consecrated your lives to Jesus as your Redeemer and Lord,
to aim ceaselessly at the development of your higher life,
and to work while it is yet day, for the night is surely
coming when you can work no more. And yet once
more, are we not told by this life of the blessedness of
seeking Jesus, not in sickness, but in health ? Years
before she dreamed of being called so soon away, and
while yet in the bloom and vigour of youth, then it was
that she took Jesus for Saviour and Lord. How perilous
to have left this over till sickness came! Be it so with
none of us. Especially you, young friends, would I ask to
accept Christ as your Saviour now, making no delay. Take
Him as your Saviour and your Lord —not merely for a
happy death, that indeed —but that you may live man’s,
woman’s noblest life in devotion to His service. Living
this life, you will —like her who has now gone to her
eternal home —sink sweetly to slumber in the arms of Jesus,
to awake amid the fulness of joy in your Father’s house.


