

ASLEEP IN JESUS
A Sermon
DELIVERED ON
LORD’S-DAY EVENING, MAY 13, 1877
BY
B. J. HENDERSON
AT THE
BAPTIST CHURCH, STAWELL
In Memoriam of the late Rev. Zerubable Davies.
MELBOURNE:
WALKER, MAY & CO., 9 MACKILLOP STREET
(OFF 56 BOURKE-STREET WEST).
1877.




ASLEEP IN JESUS
A Sermon
DELIVERED ON
LORD’S-DAY EVENING, MAY 13, 1877
BY
E. J. HENDDESON
AT THE
BAPTIST CHURCH, BTAWELL
In Memoriam of the late Reb. [?]ernbabel Dabies.
MELBOURNE:
WALKER, MAY & CO., 9 MACKILLOP STREET
(off 56 BOURKE-STREET WEST).
1877.


To the Reader,
This sermon is published by request, and intended
for private circulation among the relatives and friends of the
deceased. It is printed almost verbatim as delivered from
the pulpit.
I am happy to have this opportunity of paying a tribute
of loving respect to the memory of my dear friend and
brother in Christ, the Rev. Z. Davies.
Yours sincerely,
E. J. HENDERSON.
Baptist Manse, Stawell.


In Memoriam.
“ For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them
also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with Him.”—l Thess. iv. 14.
Isr the Providence of God, one who for several years
ministered in holy things to this congregation, and who,
since he resigned the pastorate of the Church, has been a
regular worshipper within these walls; one whose blameless
life, and many Christian excellences, had secured for him a
large place in the esteem and affection of us all; one whom
many regarded, and, we think, most worthily, as a Father in
Israel, has been called to his rest; and we are 'gathered here,
to-night, to give public expression to the love and respect
\ve cherish for his memory; to acknowledge the loss we
sustain in his removal, and to comfort one another, in our
sorrow, with the consolations of the Gospel.
Having resided for more than twenty years on the Reefs,
and taken a prominent part in most public movements,
especially those of a religious character, the Rev. Zerubabel
Davies was known to the great majority of the inhabitants
of this district. In his death, Stawell mourns another “old
resident ” gone to his long home. His name was in all the


Churches here. It is not the denomination to which he
belonged, alone, that will miss him, although it is but
reasonable that that Church should miss him most deeply.
His removal must be regarded as a loss to the cause of
religion generally in the town. From no community could
a man of his stamp be spared without the public at large
feeling that they had sustained a serious loss. We could ill
spare him ; for, alas! there are too few like him. But the
Lord, who lent him to us for so long a time, had a right to-
resume the gift when it pleased Him ; He can also send
others to fill up his place.
The verse which we have taken as the basis of our
discourse, on the present occasion, is not, perhaps, such as.
you had expected would be chosen; but we have selected it
in preference to others which presented themselves to our
mind as suitable, because it has afforded much support and
comfort to the widow of our departed brother, under the
great affliction which has befallen her, and we thought it
would show our sympathy with her. if we made these words,,
which are so sweet to her now, the text of our memorial
sermon. Ho one can say the passage is inappropriate. It
is brimming over with the truest consolation. It points to
the foundation of the Christian’s trust, the source of all his
hope. “ For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again,
even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring
with Him.”
Every one here, we suppose, believes the historic fact
that, eighteen centuries ago, Jesus died and rose again.
How this historic fact has certain vitally-important moral
relations, which bear most intimately upon “ us men and our
4


salvation.” For us Christ lived in the flesh ; in death He
gave Himself for us ; for us He rose from the grave, and
now for us He ever lives. He “ bare our sins in His own
body on the tree ”(1 Peter ii. 24). He “ died for our sins,
.according to the Scriptures” (1 Cor. xv. 3). He “was
delivered for our offences and was raised again for our justifi-
cation” (Rom. iv. 25). The resurrection of Christ was as neces-
sary as His sacrificial death. His rising from the sepulchre
intimated the accomplishment of His justifying work. If
we regard the resurrection as performed for and upon Christ
by the Everlasting Father, rather than as being the Act of
Christ Himself, it follows that God raised Him from the
dead to signify to the universe that a satisfaction full and
■ complete had been made to Him, the Father, by Christ, on
the sinner’s account. If the body of Jesus—that body
which was wounded for our transgressions and bruised for
our iniquities—were still lying cold in death in that old
Eastern sepulchre, we should have the strongest presumptive
■evidence that the work of Christ for us was inadequate :
that, however gracious and merciful His intentions, He had
•come short of accomplishing what it was in His heart to do.
But, since God has raised up Jesus; since He did not
“ suffer His Holy One to see corruption there can remain
no doubt at all as to the perfect sufficiency of Christ’s
■atoning work. The resurrection of Jesus was the Father’s
Amen to the dying Saviour’s “ It is finished ” : the seal of
High Heaven set to all that Christ had done, confirming it
for ever.
We see, then, that Christ rose from the sepulchre not
only for Himself and on His own account; not simply as


an isolated and especially favoured member of the human
family; but as the Representative, the Head and Type, of all
who put their trust in Him. As it is by believing on His
name that we are united to Him in His vicarious death, so
it is, by believing, that we participate in the power and
glory of His resurrection-life. The resurrection of Christ
is inseparably connected with the resurrection of God’s
children, not only from the death of sin unto the life of
righteousness, but also from the power of death and of the
grave, for it is not in this life only that we have hope in
Christ. On the other hand, our resurrection from the dead
is inseparable from His. Christ’s resurrection—our resur-
rection. God hath joined them together ; let no man put
asunder. Look at St. Paul’s words in that ever-memorable
fifteenth chapter of First Corinthians, “If there be no resur-
rection of the dead, then is Christ not risen. ... If the
dead rise not, then is Christ not raised : and if Christ be not
raised, your faith is vain—ye are yet in your sins : then
they also which are fallen asleep in Christ are perished.”
Perished 1 This, then, is the dread, appalling conclusion to-
which we are forced, if we have not a living Christ—that even
the best men, even those who have fallen asleep in Christ,,
are perished. If Christ be not risen, we have no good news
to proclaim to you concerning a futiu’e state ; no consolation
to offer you who sorrow for departed friends. To speak to
you of hope in such a case would be to mock your anxious
heart, by spreading an aurora on the surface of an eternal
night. But “ the Lord has risen indeed ! ” He is “ alive
for evermore.” We believe it. May we not say, we know
it 1 Herein is our hope—a hope which makes not ashamed —


a blessed, an abiding hope ; it is our present possession ;
we have it as an anchor of the soul—sure and steadfast,
entering within the veil. What Christ is, that shall we be,
according to our capacity; where He is, there we shall be,
for we “ shall see His face ” (Rev. xxii. 4).
Mourners in Zion, the Risen Christ is your Comforter!
When we would draw near to sympathize with you, we
would seek to bring Christ nearer. There is no consolation
for the sorrowing and bereaved out of Him. Miserable
comforters are they who take no Christ along with them.
They but harrow up the soul, where wounds they wish to
bind. Only He can say, “ weep not ” who bids our dead
“arise.” Only He can give us peace who says, “I am the
resurrection and the life . . Whosoever liveth and
believeth in Me shall never die” (John xi. 25-26). In the
prospect of our own death, too, this is our confidence. Our
faith rests on the good promises of our Lord—not on mere
pleasing fancies. If we are able to say, “I know that
my Redeemer liveth,” the thick clouds which overhang the
grave, and hide with their sombre drapery the glory beyond,
will be shot through with countless rays of light proceeding
from the Throne of God and of the Lamb—
Jesus lives ! Henceforth is death
But the gate of life immortal:
This shall calm our trembling breath,
When we pass its gloomy portal.
Jesus lives ! For us He died;
Then alone, to Jesus living,—
Pure in heart may we abide.
Glory to our Saviour giving.


Those -who, by faith, are made one with Christ, in His
death and resurrection, will also be gathered with Him unto
God, the Father. Our text evidently refers to the great
final gathering together of the saints at the general judg-
ment, when the celestial body shall have been united to the
perfected spirit. But the soul of the believer does not rest
in the grave from the day of Death to the day of Judgment.
The soul does not go into the earth at all, but at once enters
into “an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled.” To depart
this life in faith is to be with Jesus. God will not let the
precious souls of His righteous dead wander in ethereal
plains; He will not leave them alone to find their way any
whither, but will gather them unto Himself in Christ, who
died for them and rose again. “ Let not your heart be
troubled,” said Jesus to His disciples; “ye believe in God,
believe also in Me. In My Father’s house are many
mansions; if it were not so, I would have told you. Igo
to prepare a place for you . . . that where lam there
ye may be also ” (John xiv. 1-3). You remember, too, how
Jesus prayed—“ Father, I will also that they whom Thou
hast given Me be with Me where I am; that they may
behold My glory” (John xvii. 24). That prayer God has
heard. Ever since the day of Christ’s triumphant ascension,
a multitude which no man can number, washed in the
Redeemer’s blood, and ransomed from the power of the
grave, have been admitted to “ the mystery of glory.” O
what a glorious company, gathered from many, many lands,
have been brought together there ! Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Martyrs ! —the flower and pride of' the Church
Universal—are there. Still, God is bringing His children


home ; and we will meekly suffer them to go. Earth
may be the poorer ; but heaven is enriched by such
acquisitions. To this “ General Assembly and Church of the
Eirst-born in heaven ” our brother has recently been added.
We are glad he was counted worthy of the promotion; and,
while we cannot but mourn our loss, we would not, if we
•could, bring him back to a world like this. He now sits
with Christ “in heavenly places.” He no longer sings with
us “ a day’s march nearer home,” for he is at home, in his
Father’s house. We look forward to the time when the
■summons will come to us, and we shall be where he now is.
Oh ! bring us home at last!
Have we much farther through the night to go t
Have we not almost past
The wilderness ? Thou wilt not leave us so ?
Oh ! bring us home at last!
Our Father ! bid our weary wanderings cease.
Uplift the veil o’ercast
Between our spirits and the home of peace.
In the verse before us death is likened to a sleep—“ Them,
also which sleep in Jesus.” Christ Himself called death a
sleep. Of one whom He loved in the days of His flesh,
■and who was dead, He said to His desciples, “ He sleepeth.”
Christ, having loved His own, loves them to the end; so
He will not call death—their death—by a hard or terrible
name, but by a name of peace and gentleness. “ Precious
in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints ” (Psalm
•cxvi. 15). Death —a sleep—is a sweet figure. Yet we
believe it to be an earthly, rather than a heavenly conception
and prospect. It is a beautiful view of death from our


stand-point. As we look, through our tears, on the familiar
face, so calm and still, to which the long-lost expression of
slumbering childhood has returned, we say, “ He sleeps.”
But angels who behold the emancipated spirit forget the
“mortal coil,” and cry, “He wakes.” To the eyes of human
affection, the pardon and peace of God seem written in lines
of rarest beauty upon the cold cheek and marble brow of
the departed, and, as we bend over the loved presence, we
whisper, “ So He giveth His beloved sleep.”
This calm and peaceful expression our faith takes hold of,
and carries over to an endless future, thinking naught of
aught corruptible. Death, we know, is not a thing, nor is
it a being, such as painters portray, nor —strictly con-
sidered—is it a state; but rather the transition from one
state of being to another. While we believe that “ sudden
death is sudden glory,” the idea will cling to us that some
pause is experienced by the soul in passing from time into
eternity, from the finite into the infinite. There must be,
it seems to us, a melting away of the spirit into the glory
beyond. This we commonly call dying, and it appears so-
much like sinking into a deep, quiet sleep, out of troubled
dreams, that we call it by this name—a sleep. Appro-
priately too, is death called a sleep, because the life has not
terminated. Its course has not even been interrupted for a
moment, however much it may seem to have been. If we
could only look beyond that bend in the river of life which
we call death, and which hides its farther progress from our
view, we should behold it flowing on without cessation,
spread out into a sea of bliss. Death, too, because it
precedes a glad waking, may be likened to a sleep. The


night of weeping is past; and the morning of joy has
arrived, in which all care is forgotten. Sights are seen, and
sounds are heard, the like of which, for beauty and harmony,
were never seen or heard before. As from a night of
refreshing slumber, we wake up invigorated and buoyant in
spirit: so from the sleep of death do souls awake with
renewed and quickened powers, and in that realm of
blessedness find employment for all the attributes of a
sinless and glorified manhood. Death—a sleep—speaks to
us of the calm, the serenity, the peace of the quiet haven ;
but not of heaven’s ceaseless activities, its songs of seraphic
joy, its fellowships of love, its deep discoveries of the
hidden things of God. It tells us of the “ sea of glass,” but
says not that it was “ mingled with fire.”
"While we have been speaking thus, our thoughts must
have reverted to him who has so recently fallen asleep in
Jesus. His death so calm, so still; the peaceful look of his
countenance after his decease made it very appropriate to
say, “ Our friend Davies sleepeth.” We called to mind the
lines of Blair :
“ Sure the last end
Of the good man is peace ! How calm his exit!
Night dews fall not more gently to the ground,
Nor weary worn-out winds expire so soft.”
Although the sleep of death will cut off for a time our
communion with him, he is not less our friend and brother
because he sleeps. The infant slumbering on its mother’s
knee, or in the cot, is not less her child because it slumbers.
We love our brother not the less, but the more, since he has
gone from us, for we feel that we ought to have loved him


far more than we did. Our love he reciprocates with a
greater, holier, love than ours—the love of a perfected spirit.
We are still “one in Christ.” Still members of the same
Church ; we, among the militant, fighting the good fight of
faith; he, among the triumphant, the good fight ended. The
Jordan of death alone divides us. “He is not lost ; only
gone before.”
If, to believers, death is falling asleep in Jesus, why
should they fear to die 1 Death cannot separate them from
the love of Christ, and that is every thing. Living or
dying, waking or sleeping, they are the Lord’s. Christ,
whose they are, has conquered death, and taken away its
sting, in bearing their sins. He reigns supreme over death,
as over life. He owns death, and it cannot harm them while
He lives.
“That darksome night
la also Thine, 0 Lord,
When Thou sweet sleep to Thy beloved givest :
For while they needs must die ! Thou ever livest,
And o’er Thy dear ones keepest watch and ward,
Till darkness ends in light.”
On such an occasion as this, it is appropriate that some
reference should be made to our departed brother; and in
the remarks which will be made, we feel assured you will
all agree. There is but one opinion concerning him, formed
by all classes and all denominations of Christians, that he
was “ a good man, full of the Holy Ghost and of faith.”
Quite a gloom was cast over the town when it became
known that the Rev. Zerubabel Davies, had suddenly passed
away from amongst us. Although he had been suffering for


some months from an internal ailment, which it was generally
considered would ultimately prove fatal, and, a few days
jrrior to his decease, had sustained an unusually severe attack,
his friends did not anticipate a serious issue. He, himself,
does not seem to have had any presentiment of the nearness
of his end. Within an hour of his death he walked round
his garden, and gave a bouquet of flowers to a little school
girl who was passing. Such a sudden call as this is calcu-
lated to impress us with a sense of the uncertainty of life.
Surely there is but a step between us and death. How
necessary that we should be prepared to meet our God. If,
like him, we believe in Jesus, and do the will of our Father
in Heaven, we are ready whenever the summons may come ;
but, if it is otherwise with us, we are not prepared.
We cannot but regret, and we hope it is not wrong to do
so, that our departed brother had not an opportunity of
leaving behind him a dying testimony of the power and
grace of God ! The last words of God’s servants form one
of the richest heritages of the Christian Church. He has
left to us, however, what is far more important and valuable
—a living testimony : the testimony of a long life devoted
to Christ and His cause. The reply made by Whitfield,
when asked, on one occasion, how So-and-so died, is not less
striking than true—“ Madam, there is a question far more
important than that : How did he live V’ Well you know,
friends, far better than we can tell you, how Zerubabel
Davies lived during the more than twenty years he has
been going in and out among you. Perhaps the Good Lord
did not permit him to speak to us from a dying bed, as we
could have desired, in order that our attention might the


more exclusively be directed to the manner of his walk and
conversation, and so a holy ambition be stirred up within
us to live the life of the righteoiis, and leave the manner of
our death until death shall come to us.
To say that Zerubabel Davies had given no occasion of
stumbling to any would be to say much, yet not enough.
For many years he has been in the midst of you—a living
epistle of the Lord Jesus. The “ fruits of the Spirit”
abounded in him, and they are these—“ Love, peace, long-
suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance.”
Godless men, who cannot see God anywhere else, see God
in men like him, and are obliged to confess that there is a
sweetness and a power in religion to which they themselves
are strangers. Whatever power he may have had in the
pulpit—and he had not a little —w'as rendered doubly
powerful by his Christianly demeanour in every-day life.
We may say of him, as some old poet has said of good
John Bunyan,—•
‘ ‘ He, in the Pulpit, preach’d Truth first, and then
He, in his Practice, preach’d it o’er again.”
Like many more, who came to this strange land in the
early days of colonial life, he Las passed through very
varying circumstances. He has had his “ crooked ”as well
as his “ pleasant places.” But in prosperity and adversity
he was “ the Christian.” Many, after leaving the religious
associations of life at “ Home,” and arriving in this , new
country, throw off religious restraint, forsake the God of
their fathers, and become careless and worldly. So did not
he. The character he bore at “ Home” he did not lose here;


but, by the grace of God, maintained to the end. We
glorify God in him.
Our brother did not give persons who knew him the
impression (a most erroneous one) that a religious life is at
all of a gloomy character. That he rejoiced in God his
Saviour no one could doubt. Christianity was to him a
thing of moral beauty, and a joy for ever. His bright
smile, his hearty laugh, his kindly greetings, we shall not
soon forget them. Children loved him, and soon lost their
bashfulness in his presence. Our young people had always
a good word ready to say of him. His genial character
commended the religion he professed.
The last time our brother attended the House of God was on
the Wednesday evening of our Christian Conference Meetings,,
April 25th. He did not feel able to go, he said, but the
subject under consideration was one very dear to him, and
his thoughts had been occupied upon it very much of late—
“ Christ the Righteousness of Believers” (1 Cor. i. 30), and
he afterwards expressed himself as much pleased with the
meeting. His views on this important doctrine we have
found to be very clear and broad. They gave colour, as
they ever will do, to the whole of his Christian experience
and life. He resigned all claim to creature merit, and
trusted alpne to the finished work of Christ for acceptance
before God. We rarely heard him pray without his quoting
that favourite passage of his “ That I may be found in Him
(Christ) not having mine own righteousness, which is of the
law, but which is through the faith of Christ; the righteous-
ness which is of God by faith ” (Phil, iii-9). And so at last
was he found ; righteous in the Righteous One, and now he


wears the crown of righteousoess which Christ has given
him.
This pulpit, draped in black, reminds us that Zerubabel
Davies was one who served at the altar, a minister of the
New Testament. Nearlylialf a century has passed away
since he entered the Christian ministry, in connection with
the Baptist denomination in Wales. He had the honour of
accompanying the celebrated Christmas Evans in one of his
evangelistic tours through the Principality, and many a
pathetic and pleasing story he could relate of that great and
eccentric preacher. A gentleman, whom we see present in
this Church to-night heard Mr. Davies preach in Wales
some forty-five years ago, and when he next saw him, Mr.
Davies was officiating at a funeral service in the very
Cemetery where now his body has found its quiet resting-
place. This friend at once recognized him, although the jet-
black hair had become gray, the voice, the manner, the
presence, generally, was unmistakeably that of Zerubabel
Davies.
Mr. Davies preached in both Welsh and English : the
first Welsh sermon preached in Melbourne was, we are told,
delivered by him. The Welsh language being his native
tongue, he was more at ease, as it is reasonable to suppose
he would be when addressing a Welsh congregation,
although he spoke in English very fluently, and often
eloquently. It was, we believe, in his Welsh sermons more
particularly that the striking characteristics of his preaching
were most apparent, and when he warmed up in dealing
with his subject, he not unfrequently reminded those who
heard him of the grand old days of Welsh preaching, such


as, in the time of John Elias and his cotemporaries, roused
the people to the deepest spiritual concern. There was, too,
a quaintness and a humour displayed in many of his Welsh
sermons ; a genial pleasantry, which put him at once on
good terms with his audience, and chained attention to the
end of his address, which was rarely displayed in any of his
English discourses. His English hearers never had the best
of him as a preacher, although, from what they did have, it
may be with some hesitation that they concede this point.
His English discourses, plain, • practical, forcible, ever
exhibited a sanctified mind, a thorough acquaintance with
the Oracles of God, and an earnest desire to be useful to the
hearer. Whether speaking to an English or Welsh congre-
gation, to a few miners in a hut, or to a fashionable
audience in one of our larger churches, Christ the only
Saviour was his theme ; Christ, first, midst, last. Nor did
he labour in vain. Many of his spiritual children had gone
before him to heaven, and were, doubtless, waiting to
welcome him home; many remain behind to bless his
memory, and to follow him as he followed Christ. In
them, and in the faithful earnest words he spake while he
was yet with us—-words called up by your memories afresh
through his recent removal—“he being dead yet speaketh!”
Although our brother was much attached to his own
denomination, and was a Baptist from conscientious con-
viction, he was ever pleased to preach in the pulpit of other
churches, whenever opportunity offered. Many years ago,
and prior to the appointment of a resident clergyman to the
Episcopal Church here, he acted hr the capacity of lay
reader; and, at the termination of the engagement, his


services were suitably recognized by that congregation.
There is no Protestant denomination represented in the
town which is not indebted to him for his help. It was,
then, a fitting tribute of respect to his departed worth, that
the ministers of the different churches in the neighbourhood,
as well as some from a distance, should follow him to his
last resting place, and stand together, with uncovered heads,
around his open grave. He loved all who loved our Lord
Jesus in sincerity.
What God was pleased to bestow upon him of this
world’s good he used for Him as became a faithful steward
of his Master’s possessions. He honoured the Lord with
his substance. A considerable amount of his annual
income was devoted to the cause of religion and of charity.
His benevolence was unostentatious, and he was silent
about his own good works. Many a poor family in Stawell,
many a widow and fatherless children, many a sick home,
will feel the loss of Zerubabel Davies. This church will miss
him : he was one of its chief supporters, from its commence-
ment ; a wise counsellor, a lover of peace and concord, a
helper in every good work. Within the circle of this church
he will long be held in remembrance by reason of the things
he has done.
Our brother was not less a Christian at home than he
was when abroad in the world. We will not lift the veil
which overhangs his domestic life : the household is ever
the holy of holies of a truly Christian man. Those who
were privileged to visit there know how he “ ordered his
household after him.” They saw abundant evidence of the
love and tender consideration subsisting between husband'


and wife, father and children. Theirs is the greater loss :
we sympathize with them in their deep sorrow, and pray
that, at last, they may meet in heaven a family unbroken.
We had no idea, when we visited our brother during his
late sickness, that it would be unto death. But we found
him prepared to go hence whenever it was God’s will to call
him. On one occasion, the Friday before he died, we read
to him those assuring words from the prophecies of Isaiah
—“ When thou passest through the waters I will be
■with thee, and through the rivers they shall not over-
flow thee,” &c., which he felt to be very precious.
Before leaving him, he said, “ What a mercy that
the soul may be at rest when the body is racked
with pain; but the state of the physical frame has,” he
added, “ a great effect often on the mind.” It was, for many
years, his habit to withdraw to his study before retiring to
rest, for meditation and prayer. On the Sunday evening
prior to his death, his younger daughter overheard him
pleading very earnestly with God, and noticed that he
continued in prayer longer than usual. When he returned
to the sitting-room, she said to him, “ Father, if you were
to die suddenly, you would not be afraid, would you 1” “ Oh,
no, my child,” he made answer; “my trust is alone in
Jesus, and I can have nothing to fear. I feel as confident
about my end as I think we are warranted in being, from
the Word of God.” Nothing to fear ! Blessed confidence !
“ Who shall lay anything to the charge of God’s elect 1 It is
God that justifieth; who is he that condemneth 1 It is Christ
that died; yea, rather, that is risen again” (Rom. viii. 33-34).
On the following Thursday, at noon, as he sat where he


was wont to sit, in his easy chair, and in the presence of his
medical adviser, with whom he was conversing, he calmly
passed away—almost without a struggle. So died, on the
3rd of May, 1877, and on his 71st birthday, the Rev.
Zerubabel Davies. He fell asleep in Jestis, and was
gathered to the heavenly home.
‘ ‘ When at last the end shall come
What, 0 Lord, is death but this —
Door of our dear Father’s home,
Entrance into perfect bliss,
Peril past and labour done,
Sorrow over, peace begun.”
It is now that he has gone from us that we are able to
judge, as we could not before, how greatly he was beloved,
and how widely his influence had extended. To this church
he was bound by many ties of endearment. He has gone
down with some of you into the waters of holy baptism;
he has presided at the table of communion, breaking the
bread, and pouring out the testamental wine for you; he
has united some of you in the sacred bonds of matrimony;
he has officiated at the grave, where you buried your sweet
little ones; he has wept with you when you wept, and
rejoiced with you when you rejoiced. No more will you see
his face or hear his voice ! Forget not all he said to you
from this platform. Live as he told you to live—live as he
lived—as all the faithful servants of God live, “ whose faith
follow, considering the end of their conversation, Jesus
Christ —the same yesterday, and to-day, and for ever.”
Amen.
Walker, May, and Co., Printers, 9 Mackillop Street, Melbourne.
