

Aspects of
Conscription
BY
ROBERT W. CRUICKSHANK.
“IN NO CIRCUMSTANCES would I agree to send men
out; of this country to fight against their will.”—
Rt. Hon. W. M. HUGHES, P.C.,
Prime Minister.


CANADA’S ATTITUDE.
SIR WILFRED LAURIER (Leader of Opposition):
“HE INSISTED WE MUST REPEL THE IMPUTATION
THAT THIS IS A PRELUDE TO CONSCRIPTION.
THERE MUST BE NO CONSCRIPTION IN CANADA, and
we should have an authoritative statement from the
Premier on this subject.”
SIR ROBERT BORDEN (Premier):
“IN REGARD TO CONSCRIPTION, HE WOULD
REPEAT TO-DAY WITH EMPHASIS THE STATEMENT
WHICH HE HAD MADE PUBLICLY MONTHS AGO,
THAT THERE WAS NO INTENTION TO INTRODUCE
CONSCRIPTION.”


Aspects of Conscription.
AUSTRALIA’S ATTITUDE.
The gravity of the present crisis in the Australian Labor Movement
(caused mainly by the mostunscrupulous press campaign in our history
and the indecision of some of our Parliamentary leaders) makes it
imperative that every democrat should be up and doing. Those who
can act should act, those who have something to say should say it
fearlessly. This is no time for placid acquiescence in this or that
principle; it is a time for militant action in preservation of the rights
and liberties for which the Australian people have fought since the
inauguration of responsible government. Under the glittering cloak
of patriotism and loyalty an insidious attempt is being made to place
the iron shackles of military despotism on the fair limbs of Australia,
and unless the people awake to the real danger of the situation they
may find themselves forever committed to policies entirely alien to all
our national aspirations and political and social ideals.
When the present European war began Australia was engaged in
the peaceful development of her resources. She was at amity with
all the nations of the earth, and although linked by tie's of love, language
and kinship to the Mother Country, Australians took no part in the
government of the United Kingdom, nor were they in any way
responsible for Britain’s foreign policy or international obligations.
We neither elected the statesmen nor appointed the diplomats who
controlled the foreign relations of the Imperial Government. The whole
trend of Australian policy was to build up a self-reliant nation,
capable of its own defence in case of attack, and free to act under all
circumstances as an enlightened and sovereign people. Our Defence
Acts were framed to protect us from invasion. The theory that
Australian defence means the compulsory deportation of our citizen
forces to foreign battlefields is entirely new, and diametrically opposed
to the spirit and letter of all our defence measures. If admitted, it
means that “home defence” is a mere shibboleth which should be
consigned to the limbo of meaningless phrases.
It has been recognised for many years that in the event of a great
European war the high contending parties would be the Triple Entente
on the one side, and the Central Powers on the other. For nearly fifty


years the civilised nations have all been preparing for the Armageddon
which they regarded as inevitable. Everyone knew that when the
clash came it would be on a titanic scale, and everyone also knew
who the combatants would be. The only surprise was one agreeable
to the Allies, Italy breaking from the Central Powers and joining the
Triple Entente. So it is obvious that nothing has transpired in this
war to justify any change of Australian defence policy. The situation
that has arisen is the situation that was expected and foreseen. Our
policy was developed with all the facts on the table in front of us.
German military literature, of which there is an abundance, did not
disguise the policy of the Prussian Junkers. Germany is undoubtedly
anxious to extend her frontiers in the East and West of Europe, but
we have no evidence of any intention to attempt to annex, or interfere
in any way whatever with the self-governing powers of Canada, South
Africa, Australia or any of the British dominions. In fact, all Germany’s
efforts at oversea colonisation had ended in such dismal failure that
some of her leading statesmen were strongly advocating the abandon-
ment of her colonial policy altogether.
Australia’s attitude from the hour that war was declared has been
one of intense and heroic loyalty to the Mother Country. Although
a vast continent with a meagre population, and of extremely restricted
resources, our sons have rallied to' the flag in a way that has astonished
the whole world. Starting with an offer of 20,000 men Australia has
now an army of nearly 300,000 volunteers under arms, at home preparing
and abroad fighting. A truly marvellous achievement for a young
non-military nation of less than 5,000,000 souls all told. And yet there
are some stinking-fishites who maintain that we have not done our
best, and that some form of compulsion is necessary to make the
young Australian do his duty! That war loan money has not been
coming in fast enough to pay our war expenses must be admitted, but
it must be emphatically denied that the manhood of Australia has
shown any inclination to shirk the posts of danger. Our army, at
home and abroad, in the expeditionary and citizen forces, now surpasses
in strength that of any other nation in the world of equal population.
And it is costing the State over £100,000,000 a year, or about £2 per
week per adult male in the Commonwealth. If this is not a magnificent
tribute to the success of the voluntary system, and to the self-sacrifice
and loyalty of the Australian people, it would be interesting to know
what the advocates of compulsory deportation would call it. To cast
a stigma upon a nation which has done so much, and is prepared to do
so much more, and create bitter internal feuds by adopting conscription,
would be suicidal and deplorable and a black stain upon the glorious
record of our voluntary patriotism and achievement. Labor cannot
countenance such a conspiracy without incurring the contempt of
every loyal, freedom-loving Australian.


The advocates of conscription who expound their faith with so
much vehemence and ingenuity very seldom get down to such common-
place things as facts. They seem to be particularly eager to hurl
feckless charges of disloyalty and cowardice against everyone who fails
to accept their views, but they never by any chance show us a picture
of their scheme with the details filled in. But he is a very foolish
person indeed who proceeds with a structure before he knows what it
is going to be like when finished. For instance, it would be interesting
to know where the conscriptionist proposes to get his new army. We
have only an insignificant unemployed class in Australia. Nearly every
fit person, male and female, is employed in some branch or other oi
industry, and each is doing the amount of work which is considered
the safe maximum without over-strain or over-fatigue. For it should
be remembered that you do not in the long run get the best results
out of workers by attempting to drive them at full speed all the time.
Now, if we adopt conscription, and try to send, say, another 50,000 or
100,000 men out of Australia, what industries is it proposed to abolish,
and how will the abolition affect the persons financially concerned and
the community as a whole? We must, of course, provision and equip
our own troops as fully as possible from our own resources, because
if we are compelled to send the cash abroad, we will deplete the local
supply, and have no money left for future war loans or other purposes.
We can keep on raising war loans for a considerable time so long as
we spend the money raised in the country; but if we are compelled,
through lack of labor, to send our money elsewhere, we will have so
much less at hand for future requirements. At present we spend a
large part of our war loans locally, and the money is no sooner spent
on one lot of materials than it becomes available as a future loan for
more, and so on. As a matter of fact, a number of investors in the
war loan no sooner lend their money, at 4| per cent., than they get it
back again in payment for orders received. And it must be remembered
that our last war loan resulted in raising less than £23,000,000, just
enough to pay our present war expenditure for about 13 weeks. Where
the money for an increased war outlay is to come from is not explained.
It is an incontrovertible fact that the vast majority of our workers
are engaged in the production of primary and secondary necessaries.
Now, conscription must mean a diminution of production, in ratio
corresponding to the number of workers we send away, and the
diminution of production must lead to a reduction of our national
resources. To withdraw a large body of men from necessary industries
would inevitably spell disaster, because, unlike older countries, we
have absolutely no unemployed population to draw upon, and no luxury
industries to suppress. Therefore, it seems clear that the wisest policy
AUSTRALIA’S PRESENT POSITION.


for this country to follow is to allow its citizens to volunteer as each
feels that he can be spared, and the enormous army which this young
country has already raised is abundant proof that no compulsion is
needed to force a sense of responsibility upon its citizens. Besides, it
is obvious that the Allies in Europe have an immense reservoir of suit-
able men, who can be secured on a much sounder economic basis than we
are able to apply. It seems to be a fatuous policy to take too many men
out of a thinly populated country, 12,000 miles from the theatre of
war, at a cost of £1 ss. per day per man, while the Allies have a huge
reservoir of men at their door, in Russia, who are fighting for 2s. 2d.
per month. The Muscovite Empire can put 125 men in the field for
the cost of one Australian. And they have millions to spare, whereas
we have none. No huge, undeveloped country, with a population of
less than 5,000,000 people, and a crushing national debt, can afford the
luxury of a large conscript army, costing £1 ss. per day per man. Our
present expenditure is running to considerably over £100,000,000 per
annum.
But suppose that the conscriptionists got their way, are they
prepared to face the problems which the new policy would bring with
it? Are they ready for moratoria covering all the unpaid debts of the
conscripts who would be called to the colors? Will the landlords be
prepared to go without their rents until the war is over? It is estimated
that in Paris at this moment the unpaid rents alone amount to
£80,000,000, and for the whole of France to £300,000,000. Then what
compensation do the conscriptionists propose to allow the conscripted
farmer, whose farm would fall into decay while he was at the front?
Because it must be remembered that the old men, women, and children
who would be left behind would not be able to do all their present
work and the work of the deported men as well. If we had a large
unemployed population, and a number of luxury industries (such as all
European conscript countries “enjoy”), the position would be different,
but we have to deal with things as they are—and we have no surplus
population and no unnecessary industries.
One of the most foolish arguments used by the conscriptionists is
to compare our policy with that recently introduced into Great Britain.
There is no analogy whatever between the two cases. Britain could
raise an army of four or five millions from her chronic unemployed
alone. Nearly a million of her surplus population are starved out every
year and emigrate to America, Canada, Australia and elsewhere. What
is the value of a comparison between little Britain, with her teeming
millions, and vast Australia with her millions of miles of unpopulated
plains? To tens of thousands in the congested cities of the Old World
the war has come as a blessing. It is giving them work and food and
clothing, and they are prepared to take the risks of war rather than


starve in the slums. Not so in Australia. The application of
conscription to this continent would mean a revolution. It would teai
to pieces the well-knit fabric of our social and economic life, and leave
nothing but threads and patches behind. Is it worth while? Would
the few extra unsuitable men whom we might force into the fighting
line be worth the cost? Would it be wise statesmanship to create
internal chaos merely in order to slavishly follow the example of older
countries whose problems are entirely different from onr own?
Australia is not a decisive factor in the war situation. If we trans-
planted the whole available adult male population, and left the coun-
try to the crows and the kookaburras, we wouldn’t, appreciably
shorten the war. All that we would do would be to impoverish the
country and bring it to bankruptcy and economic wreckage. Would
we assist the Empire by becoming a finanical millstone round her
neck?
AUSTRALIA’S FUTURE.
There are many big problems with which the people of this
continent will be called upon to deal when the great carnage has ceased
at the other side of the globe. And' perhaps the greatest and gravest
of them all is the part which this nation intends to play in the
international history of the future. On the settlement of this question
everything else depends. Australia occupies the unique position of an
island continent inhabited by a virile, homogeneous white race, with
all the materials at hand for the erection of a noble and original social,
political and, economic structure. No other nation in the history of
mankind has been blessed with so many natural advantages, and one
likes to think that Australia has been divinely ordained to fulfil a
glorious mission and to teach the world a great lesson. We are
thousands of miles away from all potential human disturbances, and
Federation has poisoned the seeds of internal antagonisms. In the
memorable words of Henry Parkes, we are truly “One People with one
Flag and one Destiny.”
What are we going to do about it? Are we going to lead the world
along the paths of peace and goodwill, or are we going to travel the
old blood-stained way? Are we going to be a militarist State, trailing
a clanging sabre at our side, while we, as individuals, become the
slaves of a military caste, trembling impotently in the presence of the
hideous Frankenstein of our own making, or are we to say to the nations
of the earth: “We are a young, peace-loving people, trying to build up
an ideal civilisation under the Southern Cross. Our hand shall not be
raised against any man, but woe to the murderous invader who attempts
to disturb our peace.” When one thinks of the grandeur of the prospect,
of the mighty part, for the eternal salvation of humanity, which this


infant nation may yet be able to play in the history of the future, the
mind becomes ecstatic at the splendor of the vision.
In the beautiful words of Emerson may it be said/ “Not in an
obscure corner, not in a feudal Europe, not in an antiquated appanage
where no onward step can be taken without rebellion, is this seed of
benevolence laid in the furrow, but here, where the forest is only now
falling, or yet to fall, and the green earth opened to the inundations
of emigrant men from all quarters of oppression and guilt; here, where
not a family, not a few men, but mankind, shall say what shall be;
here, we ask, Shall it be War, or shall it be Peace?”
One wonders If we have the men with the courage to do the right
thing—men who are not afraid to be called weak?
The Worker Print, St. Andrew’s Place, Sydney.
