



R


ASTRONOMY
YOUNG AUSTRALIANS.
JAMES BONWICK, F.R.G.S.,
AUTHOR OF “ GEOGRAPHY OP AUSTRALIA,” ETC., ETC.
MELBOURNE:
PUBLISHED BY SAMUEL MULLEN,
COLLINS STREET EAST.
1866.


PREFACE
SECOND EDITION.
A cheap edition of the “ Astronomy for Young.
Australians” haying been desired, to meet the
requirements of the Public Schools of the
colonies, Mr. Bonwick respectfully submits the'
present issue to the favourable attention of
Teachers.
St. Kilda,
November 1, 1866.


ASTEONOMY
YOUNG AUSTRALIANS.
Fine ship was buffeting the waves, like a
rong swimmer in his sport. The clouds
-shed wildly to and fro, but left many wide
aces of blue to be dotted with stars. The
was in high spirits, throwing up spray, as
|d quench the bright lights that looked down
upon it.
BS'he vessel quite enjoyed the fun, and her
pro-w bobbed in the current, and gathered up
tire foam to send it flying up the rigging, or
Ifeave it hissing and fuming by her sides. How
■fkittish she was this evening, as the light clouds
over her head, and the wind puffed her
|«ghingly along! She was young and strong.
Ifer timbers were tight; and her yards well
Irraced. She had just left port, painted and
clean, with a new suit of sails, and her copper
'as bright as a fresh-coined penny.
i| And where was she going? Laden with the
treasures of English cotton and woollen mills,
pf iron-works, and other she was
gjvay to the far-off land of Australia, on the
other side of the round globe.
nd whom had she got on board? There
3


were sailors to manage the merry ship; there
were passengers, going from the white cliffs of
old England, to dwell in the gum forests of
the kangaroo home
As the shore of Britain melted away in. the
distance, men and women hung over the bul-
warks, dreaming of sweet vales they left
behind, and sighing deeply as they thought of
loved ones there. How long would it he
before they saw those vales again, or smiled
with friends beside that hearth of love !
The love of one’s country, as the land of our
friends, the joy of freedom, the defence of the
right and true, is a duty as well as a delight.
And those bom in the new land of Australia
should cherish so beautiful and healthful a
home, and help to make it happy in the virtues
of its people.
One little intelligent fellow, about ten years
old, hung closely against his mother’s dress,
and caught hold of his father’s hand. James t
knew his parents must feel sad at leaving deSf
ones behind; and he inwardly resolved to be a
great comfort to them now by being a good,
loving son.
The last speck of land was gone, and every
body turned round to the ship, preparing to
make that a home. Mr. and Mrs. Marple
thought of their only child, for others had been
left to sleep in a church-yard far away. He
was their hope and joy. They determined to
add to his happiness, and secure him from the
evil of idle ship-life, by improving his time and
his mind.


This very evening, therefore, the kind father
took James beside him in a quiet corner on
deck. They spoke at first of aunts and uncles,
cousins and friends. Then a plunge of a por-
poise turned their eyes to the sea, or a scream
of sea-fowl set them talking of natural history.
A sober chat followed, and a moral lesson came.
A sudden unrolling of clouds brought out
such a dazzle of starry splendour, that both
gazed Avith delight upon the ever-wondrous
heavens. It was then that Mr. Marple
determined, among other subjects, to make
the boy understand astronomy. This he was
to do by leading the lad himself to observe;
and, under his direction, to find out the laws
of the universe himself.
A few stars were pointed out. There was
the North Polar star, that keeps such a con-
stant place. There were the gentle Pleiades.
There was the beautiful Belt of Orion to the
south. There was, too, though very near the
waves to the southward, the bright Dog-star,
Sirius.
DAILY MOTION OF THE EARTH.
The following dialogue took place one even-
ing on deck: —
“Well, my little fellow, what is there which
so attracts your attention? for you have
scarcely moved for this last half-hour.
I have been looking at the stars, father.
What is so wonderful in them this evening?


There is something wonderful in them which
I never noticed before.
What is that ?
I will tell you. When I first came upon
deck after tea, I saw a bright star rising like
as if it came out of the water. While looking
at its pretty light, it seemed to get higher and
higher up the sky.
Did it run away from the other stars, and
get a head of them?
No. But I thought it did at first, until I had
watched, and then I found that the stars
around about kept at the same distance from
my bright star, and appeared to keep company
with it while climbing the sky,
' And what else did you see?
Afterwards I thought I would watch the
beautiful Sirius. This seemed to be moving
on, too. Then I looked at others. But they
all appeared to be rolling along after one
another.
What do you make of all this?
I can make nothing of it.
What puzzles you, my boy?
Several things. I cannot understand where
all the stars are rolling to, why they all keep
together so cleverly in their motion, or why
they are moving at all.
Did you see any stars setting as well as
rising?
Yes, father.
Well, as I want you to find out this subje<
yourself, I shall allow you to stay up later th:
evening, to give you time to make a few mm


observations. Now, follow your bright star a
little further. Look at that blue one overhead,
and trace his journey. Have your eyes upon
Sirius, and the band of Orion.
I will, father, and thank you.”
The hoy was left at his star-gazing, and
intently was his mind fixed upon his work. It
was no vacant stare he gave at the heavens.
He had an object before him.
The conversation was afterwards renewed by
the father:—
“ I should think you were sleepy, James.
No, father: the stars kept my eyes open.
How, now, does your star get on?
Look up there. He has got as far as that.
Where is the blue-coloured one?
O, that has gone down to the western edge.
What of my old friend Sirius, and his
neighbour Orion?
They have been travelling the same road.
Well, you must stop star-gazing to-night.
But will you not explain the reason of this
curious motion, my dear father, before I go down?
No, my lad, you must have another look at
the stars to-morrow evening first.”
The little fellow retired slowly and thought-
fully to his berth; and dreamed of stars and
ships in mingled confusion. How he longed
for the sun to leave off his shining! He never
watched that orb so as he did that day! He
saw it rise, ascend, descend, and set. When
7
YOUNG AUSTRALIANS.


the short twilight was over, the little twinkling
bodies came out one by one, as a few western
clouds changed from gorgeous red to colours of
a darker hue. He first distinguished Sirius,
and then the band of Orion. The blue star
took some time to come forth; but when it did,
there it was right overhead, as it had been early
the last evening. The bright star was again
on the tip of the distant waves. He stared
again. He remembered how he had left them
all the night before, and now the stars seemed
in their old places again. His kind father came
up to him.
“0, father,” cried the boy, “all my stars
have gone back into their places again this
evening.
Did you see them travel hack as you saw
them travel forward?
No. But there they are, though Ido not
know how they got there.
I think I saw you looking pretty often at
the sun, to-day. Did you notice anything
peculiar about his movements ?
Yes. I noticed that he seemed to go the
same road as my stars did the evening before.
But you saw him ascend in the east, rise
nearly overhead, and then set in the west.
You did not observe your stars do that.
No, father; but I have it. It took a long
while for the sun to go all that distance; and
I fancy that if I had watched my bright star
as long, I should have seen that set in the
west also.
Certainly you would.


Well, but how did they get back into their
places again?
How will the sun manage to get on the east
side, to-morrow morning?
Ah! I see. What will explain the movement
of the stars will explain the movement of
the sun.
I think you will find it so.
There is only one way by which I can
account for this —they must all turn round
the earth. Is that it, father?
Everybody used to think so.
But what sui'prises me is this; as the stars
are turning round us, none get before or behind
the others. They keep the same distance apart.
Do you not know that all the stars are stuck
in a huge mass of blue stuff, called the sky,
and that when the sky turns all of them must
turn with it, and, unless they tumble out, they
must keep in their places?
O, father, you are joking.
Well, then, if they are not joined together,
why do they move so uniformly?
That I cannot tell.
No two of the stars are of equal distance
from us. They are all scattered through space,
like a lot of marbles in a scramble.
Then if they had to move round the world,
I am sure they never would keep in such order,
especially as some would have to go so much
faster than others; for they have a much greater
distance to go. They cannot turn round the
earth in that way. But yet they seem to do so.
Yes. But just look forward. Do you see


how the head of the vessel is dipping into the
Bay of Biscay?
I do, father.
But do you notice that as the how of the
ship sinks and rises, all the stars to the south-
ward seem to daiice up and down?
Now I understand. Like as these stars
appear to dance- about according to the motion
of the ship, so the apparent motion of the stars
i-ound the earth in twenty-four hours must be
flowing to the motion of the earth. The earth
turn over once a day. It is easier to
imagine this, than to imagine such extra-
ordinary motions to take place among the stars.”
ROTUNDITY OF THE EARTH.
It was fine fun for the healthy, hearty
English boy to be tossed about in the Great
Atlantic. What a noble, towering wave was
that which raised up the ship, but only to let
it down in the deep trough of the sea, while
its crest hung over it, as if to drive it to the
bottom!
As the day passed off, and the sombre clouds
thronged the western horizon, James got toned
down, and became thoughtful and still. Then
was his face turned from the waves to the stars,
being never tired of watching their motions
and admiring their beauty.
10
ASTBONOMY FOB


He had long been regarding the heavens one
evening, when he turned, as he heard his
father’s step, and exclaimed—
“ The more I study the stars, father, the
more their motions bother me.
How is that, my son?
When we first left England I saw the Polar
star and Great Bear a good height up in the
heavens, toward the north, and Sii’ius low
down toward the south.
Have they been playing any tricks with you?
I do not know that. But as we have heeir
sailing towards the equator, I have observed
the Great Bear going gradually down, and
Sirius as gradually coming up. lam afraid I
shall lose the Polar star altogether soon.
And now I have another trouble. Ido not
know what to make of a number of new stars
coming up from the southward.
Would it be owing to the shape of the earth,
think you?
Aye, I never thought of that.
If we were sailing on a flat surface all this
long way, would you see these ups and downs
of the stars?
No, I think not. The truth is, it seems to
me that we have been going up a hill, if the
stars do not move.
That wdll account for your Great Bear going
down; but what should cause these new stars
to appear in the south?
Why, that looks as though we were getting
up to the top of the hill, and should have to
go down on the other side.


What shape, then, do you suppose the world
ought to be, to account for these curious appa-
rent motions of the stars ?
I fancy it ought to he round, and that is
what I have always been told it is, father.
I want to ask you whether you have noticed
anything peculiar about the apparent daily
motion of the stars. Do they all rise in the
east and pass over to the west ?
This is just the subject I wanted to speak
about. I thought at first that they did so,
and ought to do so. But I have since found
out that this is not the case. They do not all
describe the same sized circle.
What have you observed?
Some make a regular sweep across—others
only rise to pop down again. Yet there is a
more wonderful thing. The stars near the
North Polar star perform their circle without
going under at all. Then the greatest puzzle
is, that the Polar star always keeps its place
without any turning.
You do not think that the stars describe
circles each day of different sizes according to
their distances from the Polar star?
No. I feel sure that it is all a cheat of the
eye, though I don’t see where the cheat is.
I thought you were quite settled in your
mind that the apparent motion of the stars
was owing to the revolution of the earth.
True, father; yet I see no connection
between the movement of the earth and the
stationary place of the Polar star.
What appearance would the heavenly bodies


present, were the earth like a big drum rolling
over?
Why, I should fancy that then they would
all rise in the east and pass over, in an orderly,
proper manner, to the west. Though I have
been told that the earth is round I do not
understand how that should affect the motion
of all the stars, as we see them.
Come, let us see. If the world be round,
then some parts would describe a less circle
than others in the daily revolution.
Of course, father.
Would there be any portion that would not
turn at all?
Yes; the poles, or extremities.
Where would be the most motion ?
At the equator.
Then, if the- stars be still, and the earth
move and be round, would not —
0, I know all about it now. The stars over
the pole would appear still, because the pole is
still. The stars over England would appear
to describe a larger circle than those of the
Great Bear over Sweden. Where we are now,
the stars overhead describe a very large circle.
And at the equator the greatest circle of all?
Yes, yes,—and I can now see why the Great
Bear seems to go away from us, as we get up
the hill toward the equator. That constella-
tion is opposite to a paid of the earth a good
way to the north of us. As we rise higher
from that place, we must appear to rise higher
than the stars over it. How I do long to
stand under that bright Belt of Oxdon, and


under Sirius ! And how I should like to see
the pretty Cross stretched over the mast-head!
Wait a bit, my lad, and you may see all
these wonders in time.
How delighted I am to make out that all
those funny motions among the stars are
simply owing to the world being round.
SIZE OF THE WORLD
It was while half tired of ship life already*
and longing for the excitements of shore
in a new country, that the boy turned round
to his father, and said, with a sort of yawn—■
“What a long while we shall be getting to
Australia, father.
It is a great distance to go, James.
Well, I think the earth must be a good big
ball to roll about among the stars.
You ought to know its size.
1 have been told that it is 25,000 miles
round; but who has measured it.
Why as to that, you and I might measure
it some evening by the stars. You know that
the great space between the Belt and Polar
Star is one-quarter of the great circle of the
heavens.
Of course.
Every circle is reckoned to be divided into
spaces called degrees, of which 360 go to form
the circumference; so that one-fourth will be
ninety degrees. You can imagine that space
divided into ninety of these portions, called
degrees.


What rare compasses that would take!
Those two bright stars overhead, which are
about twice the same distance apart as the
apparent diameter of the Sun, would he nearly
equal to one of these ninety portions. Now,
you know that if you were at the pole, you
would have the Polar Star above you; and, if
at the equator, Orion’s Belt would he over
your head.
I understand all that, father.
You know, then, that you might he in a
place where one of those two bright stars
would he overhead, and you might journey
on to another place further south, where the
other one would be at the zenith or overhead.
This is all clear to me.
Then if you measured the ground you had
gone over, it would be equal to one-ninetieth
part of the space between the pole and the
equator, or about seventy miles. Can you
tell hoAv many miles it would be from the pole
to the equator?
That would be seventy times ninety —which
is 6300.
But that is only one-quarter of the way
round—is it not ?
Yes; the whole distance round would he four
times 6300, or about 25,000 miles.
Well done —we have measured the circum-
ference of the world.”
THE EAETH NOT QUITE ROUND.
“ Father,” exclaimed James one day, “ the


captain has been giving me a riddle which I
cannot guess. He asks where a pound of shot
is not a pound. Is he joking with me ?
Not at all, lad. A bag of shot weighing a
pound in London, or even in Melbourne, will
not weigh a pound on the equator.
What queer things you do tell me! How
can that be ?
You know that the world attracts you.
Yes; I know when I jump up I am soon
brought down, and sometimes unpleasantly
so, too.
As the world is round, and everywhere the
world pulls things down to its surface, it is as
if it were drawing all to the centre. This is
called the Attraction of Gravitation.
And I suppose that like as fire is hotter the
nearer you get to it, so does the attraction get
greater the nearer you get to the centre of
the earth.
True; but can you guess how this gravita-
tion can be weight?
I know when I pull a thing, it is as if I
pushed it, or put a weight on it. So the pull-
ing of the earth will make the thing attracted
feel as if a weight were on it.
And can you not see- why a pound should
somewhere not be a pound?
No; unless I made a big hole towards the
centre, and then the pound weight would be
heavier. But you told me the world was round,
and it must be as far from the centre at
London and Melbourne, as at the equator.


But if from trial it be found that the pound
really is less at the Line, what would it prove?
It proves what I can’t see, that the earth at
the equator is farther off the centre than what
it is at London or Melbourne, and that would
make the earth not a true Globe:
Neither is it my son: though the difference
is but little. It is about a dozen miles thicker
down to the centre at the Line than at the
poles.
Then, as London and Melbourne are each
neaidy half-way between the line and the pole
they will be nearer by six miles to the centre
than the equator is.
You have solved the problem, and under-
stand that the world is not a sphere, but what
is called an Oblate Spheroid, being flattened at
the poles.
As I cannot easily find out by weighing that
a pound is not a pound: can you tell me any
other way of proving that the earth is not
quite round, dear father ?
Yes, I can. Do you see the reason why the
pendulum returns down when it is moved up?
The gravitation, to be sure.
If a thing weighs heavier in one place than
another through a difference of gravitation
will there be a difference in the two places
with the pendulum?
I should fancy that where the earth pulled
the harder the pendulum would come 1 down
the quicker.
If it came down quicker it would rise
quicker; that is, the beat would be quicker.


What effect would this have upon the clock?
The faster it beat, the faster the wheels
would be moved, and the faster the hands
would turn on the face.
Just so: the clock would he faster in time
when the pendulum beat quicker, and slower
in time when the pendulum beat slower.
But how could I find this out, father?
This way. It is ascertained that in London
a pendulum must be 39i inches from the top
to the middle of the swinging-bob to beat a
true second at a time.
Then I am sure the London pendulum
will not he pulled down so hard at the equator,
and so it will be longer coming and going.
What must I do, then, to make my London
pendulum beat seconds on the equator?
Why, shorten it a little bit.
Yes; or, what is the same thing, move up
the weight at the end of the pendulum a little.
I must shorten it one-tenth of an inch, or else
it will lose sixteen hours in the year.
Then all the clocks carried to Melbourne
from London will he wrong.
Will they go too fast or too slowly in
Victoria?
They will be a little too slow, as Melbourne
is nearer the equator than London is.
If a Melbourne clock-maker want his second
pendulum to beat seconds in London what
directions must he give?
He must tell the folks in London to lengthen
the pendulum a bit.
You will see that by the world being


flattened at the poles the degrees of latitude
will differ. One close to the equator measures
68f miles, in Victoria about 69 miles, in
England 69 J, while in Lapland it would be
69*.
What would be the mean length of a degree?
About 69miles.
Let me multiply that by 360, to find the
mean circumference of the world; I have it —•
24,858 miles.”
ANNUAL MOTION.
The ship was much delayed in the Region
of the Calms, as it is called; that is, near the
equator.
After a while the astronomical dialogue was
resumed. •
“ Well, James, look now at your twinkling
friends, and tell where you are.
I suppose by the North Polar star resting
upon the waters to the north, that we must be
noAV nearly on the top of the hill, by the equator.
We are so, my lad. But what time did the
sun rise this morning?
At six, and it set at exactly six this evening.
Do you know what day of the month it is?
The twenty-third of September.
Have you ever observed the sun to rise and
set at six o’clock before, on the voyage ?
No, father.
Well, then, you will recollect hereafter that


you were upon the equator on the twenty-third
of September, when there was equal day and
night. But did you not know of equal day and
night at home?
Yes; about half-way between winter and
summer.
Just so; that is, at the end of September.
Why should it be so there in England and
here too?
We will try and find out. I think I have
pointed out to you the Pleiades.
I know them well. They are in the Bull
cluster.
There happens to be a band of twelve con-
stellations forming a broad circle of the
heavens.
Is that what is called the Signs of the Zodiac?
The same. Can you repeat them ?
Yes, father. Aries the Bam, Taurus the
Bull, Gemini the Twins, Cancer the Crab, Leo
the Lion, Yirgo the Virgin, Libra the Scales,
Scorpio the Scorpion, Sagittarius the Archer,
Capricornus the Goat, Aquarius the Water-
bearer, Pisces the Fishes.
Over there to the eastward is one of these
that rose as the sun w r as setting. The sun is
seen opposite one or other of the twelve con-
stellations in each month of the year. It is
observed, for instance, to rise each morning
for a month in the constellation of the Kara,
and for the next month in the Bull.
How can it be among those stars when you
say they are so much farther off?
By saying it is in such a constellation, I


mean that it is in a line between us and that
cluster of stars.
Why, then, the sun appears to go a journey
between the stars and us for a whole year.
Then it will rise in the Ram twelve months
after it had been seen opposite that constella-
tion. I wonder how this can be. Did you
not say, father, that neither the stars nor the
sun really moved?
I did.
Well, then, it must be either the stars turn-
ing about the sun, or the sun taking an
annual trip about them, and yet the stars do
not move, and the sun does not.
Let us leave the sun and his trip for a little,
while we have another talk about the stars.
Notice that red star just rising there on the
larboard side.
I have it, father.
As I want you to remember it, take my
pocket-book and mark off with the pencil a
picture of the star and its four neighbours,
putting a cross under the one that has just
risen.
There it is,—the under one of this cluster
I have sketched. I shall know him again.
Now, then, you must go below, and resume
your observations to-morrow. I took the exact
time —seven p.m. —when you saw the star
rise. You must look for it at seven to-moiTow
evening.”
At four minutes before seven the next night,
up rose the pretty object, and stole a glance at
the boy across the ocean.


“ Father, father! it’s up, it’s up!” sang out
the happy lad.
His father looked at his watch, and said—
“ Your star did not come to his time. It
was four minutes to seven o’clock when he
appeared, and that is four minutes too soon.
How is that, father? I must ask you, for
it is of no use asking the star.
Perhaps you will still wonder when I tell
you that to-morrow evening it will be eight
minutes to seven before it gets up at this
place.
Why, this is like the sun among the stars—
always getting out of his place. But the sun
gets right after a year.
Do you think our star will ever get right—
so as to rise at seven some other evening?
I do not know, father.
If it rise four minutes earlier every day
when will it be an hour earlier?
In half-a-month; and twenty-four hours
earlier in twelve months. But that is the
time when it will be visiting at night again.
So you have ascertained that the stars go an
apparent journey round the earth in a year;
like as the sun takes a year to go his apparent
course among the stars.
Then both must have the same cause. As
I found the daily motion of the stars was owing
to the real daily motion of the earth, I suppose
this yearly motion of the stars must be caused
by some yearly motion of the earth.
Either the sun turns round the earth once
a year, or the earth does round the sun.


Well, father, the sun appeared also to turn
round the earth once a day. Ido not think I
could run round the deck in two minutes
while I am two hours doing it. Then, as I
am satisfied it did not have a daily motion, I
am the more disposed not to trust to this
apparent yeaidy motion. It is more likely, too,
that the Tittle world should run round the
great sun, than that the great sun should
revolve round the earth.
I perceive you are as settled upon the
annual or yearly motion as you were upon the
diurnal or daily revolution.”
THE SEASONS.
“ James, my boy,” said Mr. Marple “do you
know why there should be winter and sum-
mer?
No, father, I really cannot tell. I know that
in England the sun was higher up in the day,
and that he stopped up longer in summer
than in winter. But then as I believed that
the sun ran about as he liked, I was not sur-
prised at his change of place. Now, however,
I am very anxious to know more about this
subject.
When wei’e weTn the circle of the Pleiades,
that is, the place where at some time or other
of the twenty-four hours they would be over-
head ?
o,that was long before we got to the equator.
Yes, it was about 1500 miles to the north


of us. Now we are in the circle of the Virgin
cluster.
But the Bull and the Virgin belong to the
twelve constellations, of which we were talk-
ing, forming a broad circle, along which the
sun appears to travel.
True. But they are not in an upright
circle. Their line will cross our equator Line.
If that be it, the sun does not appear, then,
to go round us over the equator.
No ; for if it did, it would be seen overhead
at that place every day at twelve o’clock;
whereas it shifts its course continually. One
day it is over one part at noon, and upon
another day over another part.
Why, if the circle of the Zodiac be inclined
to the circle of the equator, it will cross it in
two places. I suppose that is the reason why,
on the 'celestial globe, one constellation, as the
Virgin*, is over the equator circle; others, as
the Bull, over some place to the north of it;
and some others, as the Scorpion, to the
south.
You guess rightly.
Then if that be it, the sun must appear to
cross the equator twice in the year.
It does so on the 91st of March and 93rd
September. These are the vernal or spring
equinox, and the autumnal equinox. March
is the vernal equinox of London, or equal day
and night in spring; but it is the Australian
autumnal equinox. In September the Aus-
tralias have the spring equinox, and the
English the autumnal. The sun is seen


iverhead to the furthest north on the 21st of
rune, and to the furthest south on the 21st of
December.
Why, the first is the summer of England,
and the last the winter. Then I suppose that
is the reason why in summer the sun looks so
high up at noon. Then in winter, as it is
shining more over parts south of the ecjuatoi,
the north would neither see nor feel so much
of him.
That is correct. You now see why the
Australian summer is at the time of the
English winter.
Yes, father; because they are on opposite
sides of the equator. But you know that the
sun does not really move about like this. I
want to know what does move.
The earth, to be sure.
I understand that; hut neither the rotundity
nor motion seems to explain this mysteiy of
the Zodiac. But let me see. When the world
swings round the master light, is it obliged to
keep bolt upright—north pole up and south
pole down ?
How would your equator then be, James .
Eight opposite the sun. But that will not
do, for it is not always opposite to the sun.
Perhaps the world goes waddling along like a
duck, first on one side a little bit, and then on
the other. This would bring the sun opposite
to either place.
It would be a very regular waddle. We will
try your scheme Pick up that round wooden
ball there. Carry it round the capstan, and
B


see whether by twisting it from one side to the
other you can keep the south pole shone upon
for six months, and the north pole shone upon
for the other six months.”
James now makes a trial. But after all
sorts of turns he failed in producing the
English Avinter and summer in the proper
time and for the proper length of time.
I must give it up, father.
Just slant your ball a little out of the per-
pendicular, and carry it round your sun with-
out moving it from its position.
Capital! It explains the whole. When it
was in front of the capstan, the south pole
was toward it; that was the Australian sum-
mer. When I went to the right side, neither
end was inclined toward it; this was the sun
over the equator. When I came to the back
of it, the north pole was toward it; this was
the English summer. When I reached the
left side, my equator was opposite to it; this
was the sun’s second crossing of the Line.
When I got to the front again, there was my
south pole pointing to the capstan again.
Then you really understand the seasons. Of
course the spring in England is the autumn
of Australia. But I have something else to
recall to your recollection. Have you forgotten
the old church on the hill at home ?
No, father, and never shall. How pretty it
looked when the sun rose over it upon a fine
spring morning, with the birds all alive with
their song, and the bees down upon the
flowers!


Did the sun rise over the church at hay
.rvest ?
No; I remember then it came up from
ehind the squire’s house to the left of it.
Where was the sun first seen upon a cold
■inter’s morning?
Aye, I fancy I see his red face looking lazily
>ver the parsonage to the right of the church,
md that when we had done bi’eakfast, too.
How came the sun to jump about in that
;anner ?
Why, do you see, he did not hop from one
ide to the other. He would get a little further
rom the church each morning till he rose over
he squire’s house: then, as if ashamed, he
eemed to creep back to his old place. After-
wards he appeared to take it into his head
gradually to get on to the parsonage, and then
ie would once more "turn to the church.
Which was on the north-side of the church,
ames ?
The squire’s house. Now, I think I can
jxplain all without your questions this time,
ny dear father.
Then go on by all means.
The sun rose over the squire’s house in
summer, for that was the north side; the
lorth pole was then inclined to the sun. At
spring it was half-way between the squire s
md the parsonage; this was the sun over the
jquator. In winter the sun rose at the furthest
xart to the south; this was where the north
>ole was turned away, and the south side
urned to the sun.


Well, then, you have satisfactorily explained
the seasons.”
PRECESSION OF THE EQUINOXES.
It was with no little impatience that James
had waited for the first appearance of the
Southern Cross, the emblem of Austx’alia. He
first noticed it Avhen a long way north of the
equator, and each evening afterwards bestowed
a considerable attention upon it. As he made
southing on his voyage the glorious constella-
tion rose,higher and higher in the heavens.
Hour after hour would he sit, marking its
progress, wondering much to see it mox’e or
less upright accox’ding to the time of night, and
more or less declining from the pex’pendicular
at the same x’etuxming hour of evening upon
diffex’ent days.
James could undex’stand the seeming
to pex'fox’m a cix’de round the south pole of the
heavens, as he had seen the Bear x’ound the
north pole, from the x’otundity of the earth and
its daily motion.
It was quite natux’al, then, that the lad
should be so enthusiastic when he spoke of
the constellation to his father in these texnns:
“ O that pretty Southexui Cross! I like it
mox-e and moi'e as I get down to the south. I
did feel sad to see the old Bear drop gradually,
night after night, till it seemed to sink for ever
in the northern Atlantic; but I have a new
friend here, that keeps rising higher and higher


each night, as if to welcome us to our southern
home. How it would please many boys in
Europe to see the Cross!
But it was seen in Europe formerly.
Another puzzle, dear father. Did it run
away from the south pole to have a look at the
north one?
It was not a run, but a gradual slide out of
its place, and as gradual a slide back into it
What a queer trick! Is it on its rambles
,ow, I wonder?
It is always on the move.
Yes; I know it describes a circle in the
sky once in twenty-four hours, but that is
owing to the world rolling over to get its daily
light.
Yet it has another motion; not really its
own any more than the other. And this leads
it further away from the central point over
our south pole, and then bi'ings it to its place
again.
Well, I am glad it is here now for me.
Will there be time for my London cousins to
catch a glance at it when it wanders north-
ward again?
0 no, no; it does not move quite so fast as
that. But if Abraham had been sojourning in
southern Europe, instead of Asia, he could have
seen it, though it was then making its way
back to the south.
How could the Cross slip away from the
other southern stars to go on such migrations?
Not so. All the stars keep their places rela-


tivelj to each other, as you see them do in the
nightly progress from east to west. In the
daily motion none get before the other, nor
did the Cross get before its neighbours.
Well, lam fairly done. That is a riddle.
Look at the question, boy. What makes the
apparent daily motion of the stars ?
The real daily motion of the earth.
And if, then, you observe any other peculi-
arity of movement among your bright friends
up there, to what may you reasonably ascribe it?
I should imagine some peculiar twist, roll,
or slipping of this world of ours.
True. And if there be seen among the polar
stars, north as well as south, a slight but
regular movement, a sort of a swing round, so
that some stars get farther off the spot we call
the south pole of the heavens, while others
approached it nearer, and yet so swung round
that at last all find their old places again, how
could you get a motion of the earth to make up
for all that ?
Ah! I must contrive that the world should
do three things. It must roll over once a day,
roll round the sun once a year, and yet wriggle
about in another way at the same time.—Stop
a bit—l have it. My top turns round itself,
and pretty quickly, too; it shifts about on the
floor almost in a circle as it turns round; and
I see it, especially when it is quietly spinning,
have a slow roll of the head, like a sailor when
walking ashore, as if its head were a little giddy.
You have hit it exactly, my good fellow.
The three motions of your top are much like


the three motions of the world. That top-
heavy slow swinging of your top while it is
spinning in full force is like a sort of head-
rolling of the eai'th. The poles seem to
have a roll of their own, independent of the
regular roll.
Yes; and that would make the Polar stars
seem as though they were swinging. But how
long are they before they are in their regular
places again?
Astronomers calculate 25,850 years.
But will not this changing make the star-
charts of the ancients all wrong?
Indeed it does. Aries the Ram, for instance,
as a sign, is the first thirty degrees on the
celestial globe; but as a constellation it has
shifted to between the thirtieth and sixtieth
degree on the ecliptic. This is called the pre-
cession of the Equinoxes.
How is that ? I know when the equinoxes
are—March 21st and September 23rd—when
it is equal night all over the world.
The European vernal equinox took place
at the first point of Aries. But by this pre-
cession, or more properly recession, or going
backward of the stars, the Equinox takes place
when the sun is in Taurus the Bull, two
thousand years after it was in the Ram.
I see. The stars not only get earlier four
minutes a-day to accommodate the earth in its
annual motion, but make a change to accom-
modate the swinging of its pole.
Can you tell me, James, how much the stars
slip back in a year ?


Let me calculate it. There are 360 degrees
in a circle, and sixty times as many minutes;
that is, 21,600. As" it is 25,000 years in the
circle, the stars would not shift one minute of
distance, and the sun’s apparent size in the
heavens is thirty minutes, or half-a-degree.
By this Precession a star comes to the same
spot about twenty minutes later every year. It
is, as it were, sliding back. In Europe, James,
one effect has been to bring what we call the
Polar star within one degree of the north pole
of the heavens; whereas, a few thousand years
ago it was twelve degrees off it. The bright
star of the Lyre Constellation will some day
he the North Polar star.
Ah, hut in 25,000 years the present Polar
star will he in its old place. The end of the
little Bear’s tail seems now fastened on the
north pole; but it must be a sort of greasy
pole for the stars to slip off it as soon as they
get near it.”
FIXED STARS NOT FIXED.
It had been a sultry day. The sun rose
with a fiery glance, and the sea blushed with
a deep red as his hot beams glided over the
heaving surface. The clouds hung heavily
and gloomy in one part of the horizon, sending
back to the sun a glowing, angry look in
exchange for his fierce gaze. It was not long
before the massive clouds came rolling up, as
they were pressed forward by the western
breeze, which was rushing forward as hastily


as the rest. The sun tried to frighten the
advancing vapours, but could not. They came
onward till they covered the sky, and drove
the bright rays from the gilding of the waters.
The wind, rejoicing in its power to drive
the clouds, now flew r upon the ocean and buf-
feted the waves. Affrighted at its blows, they
fled hither and thither in their distress, and
mingled their roar of terror with the shrill
shrieks and cries of their invisible foe.
It was a storm. The captain, who had been
attentively watching the signs, and losing his
breakfast, saw what was coming, and prepared
for it. The sails were taken in, and the ship
made snug and safe. The storm came with a
wild burst all at once, and reeled the vessel
almost upon its side. But the officer was
there, the helmsman was awake to his duty,
and the lounging barque kept on her course
in spite of her erratic movements.
James was not insensible to fear. He was
but a boy. And when, in addition to the noise
of wind and billows, the thunders came
pealing from the heavens, he instinctively
clapped his fingers to his ears, as if to drown
the sound and his fears. The vivid stream of
lightning, as it darted from cloud to cloud,
played round the ship, or plunged madly into
the sea, added to the interest and the terror.
But the echoes died away to whispers. The
clouds put on their snowy robes. The ripples
gently laughed on the bosom of the ocean.
The sun, no longer angry, smiled kindly
upon the scene. In the evening, a few lines


of vapour were motionless in the sky; and the
long, uncertain heavings of the waters told
that a calm was softly ruling all.
The boy was found by his father looking at
the placid face of the heavens.
“ What, boy ! at your old post, staring at
Orion again.
I’ll tell you what I was thinking of, father.
You see the world is like this ship—always on
the rock, never really still —and I was thinking
how pleasant rest is, and what a lot of it they
must get up there in the fixed stars.
Not so; we are now learning that they are,
like some hoys, not so steady as they look.
You surely don’t mean to say that such
respectable old folks as Sirius and his bright
friends ever go dancing about in the heavens
like giddy Yenus and Mercury? I know they
appear to tumble about over our masts in a
storm at night, but that is because the ship is
rolled over by the winds and waves.
It is really true that they do not keep to
their places, though the change of position is
so very slight as not easily to be discovered.
Your friend Sirius, for instance, has been
closely watched, Dog as he is, for two thousand
years. We know what his place was that time
ago, and what it is now ; and it has shifted to
the southward half-a-degree.
That is as much as the apparent diameter
of the sun. But has he any company in his
rambles ?
Yes; the Bull's Eye, Aldebaran, has kept
up pace with him.


Quite right to have an Eye upon the Dog.
But has any exact difference of position been
observed since we have had good telescopes?
The star sixty-nine of the Swan has been
well watched for fifty years, and found to have
gone on four minutes —the eighth part of the
moon’s face. A star in the Indian has moved
seven seconds in the year. They are not fixed,
like the ancients thought they were, in a
crystalline sphere; or riveted, as Aristotle
taught.
Pray, is our sun no more fixed than the
rest of them ?
He, too, is on the move.
But where are they all going to ?
That has been a matter of dispute. Some
thought the stars were dancing round Sii’ius.
But Madler, the German astronomer, would
have us believe that they have a greater fancy
for some spot near the Pleiades. Others think
of Hercules. But all would take many millions
of years.
DISTANCES AND SIZES OF THE
STARS.
James had a long talk with the captain one
day about the telescope, and got a capital
lesson about the magnifying power being
according to the character and size of the
glasses used. The sailors called the instru-
ment the “ Bring ’em near;” and it does make
distant objects look as if near. It was explained
to the boy that the stars were of different


magnitudes or sizes, first, second, third, &c.,
according to their relative distances. The
following conversation followed between the
father and son:—
“Now, my hoy, I must try and give you
some idea of the penetrating power of light,
that you may get an idea of the enormous
distances of the stars. You are aware that the
more distant they are the less their light. A
star of the first or nearest magnitude will have
one hundred times the light of one of the
sixth magnitude. A telescope, therefore,
gathering one hundred times the ordinary
light, will make the sixth look as near as the
first.
And will it he one hundred times further off?
No; light increases or diminishes according
to the square of the distance.
I know. If the light be one hundred times
less, the star will be ten times further off, for
the square of ten is one hundred. I can
understand now that a thing is only seen by
the help of light. I do not see many stars,
because their light is too little for my e} r es to
take in. The telescope has bigger eyes to
take in the light of the distant stars and
nebulae.
The pupil of the eye is but one-eighth of an
inch in diameter. An object glass of twelve
inches diameter is, therefore, ninety-six,, or say
one-hundred times as long. As the light seen
is according to the square of the diameter, the
telescope of twelve inches will receive one


hundred times one hundred, or ten thousand
times more light.
But is there a way of measuring the quantity
of light ?
There is. We find that the sun has twenty-
two thousand millions of times more light than
the nearest of the fixed stars.
Then, the square root of this ought to tell
how much further off it is. Let me see. It
will be about 150,000.
Yes. If the sun were put back 150,000
times further than it is, it ought to look as
brightly as that star. If it does not, it is
because it is really smaller than the star.
What! 150,000 times 95 millions!
But that is nothing; for it is only to the
first rank. What of the twentieth magnitude?
Yes. But you say the nebulae are further
off than that.
I may tell you that if the sun moved three
times as fast as the world does, in its six
hundred millions of miles a year, it would take
two hundred and fifty millions of years to get
to as far as Lord Eosse’s telescope could see.
That takes my breath away.
Hear a little tnore. Light comes from the
sun to us in eight minutes. It will take sixty
thousand years to come from one of those stars
Lord de Eosse saw. In fact his telescope has
enlarged our universe one hundred and twenty-
five million times.
Then I think religious people ought to
thank astronomers for showing them more of
the greatness of God. Those who only thought
37
YOUNG AUSTRALIANS.


of him as the Creator of the three thousand
stars, to be seen by the naked eye, could not
have such a notion of his vast power as those
who know of millions upon millions of suns.”
After this, James was left to digest such
wonderful lessons. When his first astonish-
ment had passed away, his curiosity was
excited to know more about the distances of
the stars, so that he might form a simpler idea
of the thing. He took, therefore, another
occasion of bringing up the subject in these
words:—
“Father, do you really believe the stars are
so far off?
I am obliged to believe many things I do
not undei’stand, upon the testimony of trust-
worthy witnesses; but in this case I can form
a good guess of the truth. Do you remember
what I once told you of the parallax, or angle
of observation of the sun or moon ?
Yes. That of the moon was 57 minutes,
and the sun 8| seconds. A degree is 60
minutes, and a minute 60 seconds.
Very well. Then 67 minutes, or 3420
seconds, will be four hundred times as much
as the other. If the moon be 240,000 miles
off, the sun will be four hundred times further
or 96,000,000.
But how do you get this parallax?
Distances are calculated by the angle made
in looking at an object from two places. The
two lines of sight cross one another. A great


base is needed to view a distant object, or
else no angle can be observed. Astronomers
take the diameter of the earth’s orbit.
That is twice ninety-five millions of miles.
With that base—that is, looking at a star
from both sides of onr orbit, or at six months’
interval—we could get the two lines crossing
one another, and so making an angle. The
further the object, the more minute the angle.
Only a few of the fixed stars could be observed
in this way, as they generally are too far off to
give an angle.
I know an equilateral triangle has its three
angles equal to two right angles; and with
ninety degrees for one right angle, each angle
of the triangle will have sixty degrees. But I
suppose no star parallax could be one degree.
No; nor a minute, the sixtieth part of one
degree. When the object makes an angle of a
second, or sixtieth of a minute, from a base
line of one hundred and ninety millions of
miles, the distance of the star will be about
twenty millions of millions of miles.
Is there any star making the second angle?
The alpha of the Centaur is about that, and
is one of the nearest of fixed stars.
That the nearest to us, and yet so far! Do
tell me the distance of some others.
There is one, 61 Cygni, of the Swan, with
one-third of a second; and, therefore, three
times the distance of the alpha Centaur.
There is a star in the Lyre which is one-fifth
of a second. Grand Arcturus is one-eight.
The North Polar Star is one-tenth. Pretty


Capella, of the Kid, is one-twentieth ; that is,
twenty times farther back than a Centaur.
As it looks one of the brightest stars, it must
be very large.
What of old Sirius?
The angle he makes with our orbit diameter
is one-fourth of a second; so that he is about
80,000,000,000,000 miles.
Thank you, dear father, for these terrible
long figures.
Their great distance may give us a good
guess of their great size,
I know the size of the sun to be half-a-degree
in the heavens, at a distance of ninety-five
millions of miles, and yet it is really eight
hundred and eighty-six thousand miles diame-
ter, I have been told. When, then, a star is
millions of millions of miles away, I am sure
it must be a big one to be seen at all.
It is so. If the sun were thrust back as far
as the star a Centaur, it is calculated that it
would not shine with more than one-third of
the light that star now gives us; it must,
therefore, be not more than one-third its size.
But you said Sirius was four times farther
off than the Centaur, father.
Yes; and it gives four times as much light.
It is, then, probably four times as large. It
must be, therefore, many times larger than the
sun.
I am sure it ought to have more planets
turning round it than the sun has, or else
have them much larger in size.”


CONSTELLATIONS.
It was a calm, still, moonless night, which
closed in with raven wings a glorious sunset
in the South Atlantic ocean. The gay clouds,
in brilliant dress, that hung about the sun as
he glowed to his evening rest, had gradually
changed their garments for those of more
sombre hues; and then, as gradually, had
changed from mountain shapes to feathery
forms, till softening night dissolved them into
invisible vapour.
The stars came stealthily forth; a few
holder ones rushing first to the front, while
the more modest stars feared to show them-
selves till the last sign of daylight fled.
First, second, third, fourth, and other
magnitudes thus successively gleamed from
the cloudless arch, above and around the boy.
After a time he said—
“ Why were the Ram, Bull, Lion, Scorpion
and others so called? I have often wondered
at their odd names, and have tried to make
out a hear in the Great Bear, or a dog about
the stars near Sirius, but never could see any
resemblance to the animals.
I don’t wonder at your surprise. Some
learned astronomers of our day pretend that
the ancients by the Nile and Euphrates had
no meaning in the names they gave to the
constellations. This is not likely, especially
as we know that the signs of the Zodiac
were pictured in their temples.


But who gave the names to the other stars
that are not signs of the Zodiac?
The ancients. But it is time now to sleep
away all thought of the stars in the care of
Him who cares for the stars?’
During the night our young friend had a
disturbed rest. The constellations kept circling
round him; while lions, bulls, fish and crabs
were mingled in strange confusion. They
glared at him with their hollow eyes till the
boy was quite frightened, and cried out in his
sleep.
The morning sun awoke the boy, and put
to flight the stars. When sweet evening came
the twinkling lights stole forth again, and the
astronomical dialogue was renewed by James.
“ Please, father, I want to know the various
constellations.
We will class them, my son, into North
Polar, South Polar, and Equatorial.
The North Polar star, at the end of the
Little Bear’s tail, is a capital guide for the
north pole; but I don’t see any Little Bear
southward, walking round his tail-tip, like a
horse tethered in a paddock, so that I may
discover the south pole.
No, we have not a South Polar star, and no
bright stars at all near the south pole of the
heavens.
Let us have a little more about the Zodiac
first, father. I know the twelve signs are con-
42
ASTRONOMY FOR


stellations over the tropics; but I don’t know
why you call them the Zodiac.
Zodiac is from a Greek word, meaning a
small figure of an animal, as they are nearly
all animal figures.
How many northern and southern constel-
lations are there ?
In the ancient celestial atlases we find
twenty-one northern and fifteen southern,
besides the Zodiac; then more were added of
new ones named or old ones subdivided, till
we have, including the Zodiac, sixty-two
northern and fifty-five southern constellations.
Of course, the old astronomers of Egypt
and Babylon could not have seen all the south
polar stars?
We should hardly fancy it. Strange tricks
have been played with the names of the con-
stellations. Only think of English writers,
sixty years ago, wanting to have your Orion
called Nelson; and the University of Leipsic,
to please the French emperor, proposed to steal
the belt and sword from Orion, and call them
the constellation of Napoleon.
lam glad they didn’t, though. But how is
the line drawn to distinguish the spaces of the
constellations?
Their sizes vary. Orion, for instance, takes
up a great space in the heavens, while others
occupy little room.
How many stars go to make up a constel-
lation ?
You mean those seen by the naked eye.
These differ in number. I will run over some


of the Zodiac. Aries has 66, Taurus 141,
Gemini 83, Cancer 85, Leo 95, Virgo 110,
Libra 51, Scorpio 44, Sagittarius 69, Capricor-
nus 51, Aquarius 108, Pisces 113.
But there must be a lot fnore seen in them
bj the telescope.
Yes. The six stars of the Pleiades turn out
to be 188. In Orion there are 2000 stars
easily distinguished. Your three in the belt
are 80, and the star in the sword you find to
be a dozen.
Will you kindly show me, dear father, how
I can find the south pole of the heavens, as
there is no bright star near it?
I will try and give you a rough chart. Look
at the Southern Cross. Draw an imaginary
line from the top star through the one at the
foot; and four times that distance in the same
line will bring you to the south pole of the
heavens.
Yes; and if I had that point over my head
I should he where no one else has been—at
the south pole of the earth. Now I have my
centre, I would like to describe a circle at the
distance of the Cross and know the stars
inside of it.
Begin, then. Look at the two bright ones
pointing toward the Cross beside it. They
are the Pointers to the Cross. A lot of bright
stars together, on the other side of the Cross,
are in the Ship, Argo. Follow on the circum-
ference that way, and you arrive at a large
star, a little north of our course, called Cano-
pus. From the Cross to Canopus is one-


quarter of the circle round the pole, and it is
filled up with the Ship.
What a ship !
It goes northward, too, to Sirius, the Dog-
star. Canopus is half-way between Sirius and
the south pole, and is in the line between
the two.
That is a capital point, for I know them.
South of the Ship, between it and the pole,
are the little Flying Fish. The Table Moun-
tain and Chameleon, with feeble stars, are
between the Fish, again, and the poles.
Now I have that quarter of the circle, well.
Keep on to the right, still away from the
Cross and beyond Canopus, nearly as far
again, and you see a bright star in our circle,
which is called Achernar, at the bottom of the
long EiverPo.
Not the Italian river, but the Celestial
one.
That heavenly stream runs northward to
Orion. Now, between Canopus and Achernar
we see but few stars, although we pass the
constellations of the Painter’s Easel, Rhomboi-
dal Net, and Clock. Between Achernar and the
Pole are the tiny stars of the Little Hydra.
But between the Little Hydra and the Flying
Fish, resting like on the Table Mountain, is
the beautiful Nubecular Major, the great
Magellanic Cloud.
Now I know where lam again. The Rhom-
boidal Net is on one side of the Cloud, and the
Flying Fish on the other. The Table by the
Pole is south of it. But what is north of it,


for Canopus is not quite in a line with the
Cloud and the Pole?
The Sword Fish is on the Cloud. But go
again to Achernar, and draw a line thence to
the Pole.
Why, it goes right through the Little Magel-
lanic Cloud,
That Cloud is between the Hydra and the
Toucan. That bird’s head beyond Achernar
is in our circumference of the Cross. A little
further on that round line is the bright star in
the Peacock’s head; though the Indian, with
his arrows, stands between the Peacock and
the Toucan.
The very place for a hunter. But go on,
please, for you are fast completing the circle,
by getting back to the Cross.
The end of the Peacock’s tail bi’ings us
three-fourths round; and above it, from the
Pole, is the Southern Crown.
I see it; but it ought to hang over something
better than a Peacock’s tail.
It so happens that the Telescope comes
between them. Below the Peacock, and close
round the south pole, is the constellation
Octant. Now for the last quarter, between
the Cross and the Peacock.
I know part of that —the Cross’s Pointers.
But what are those three stars a little below
the Pointers, toward the Peacock?
They are the Southern Triangle. Between
the Cross and the Pole is the Fly; while
between the Triangle and the Pole is the Bird
of Paradise.


What a cold place to put so delicate a bird!
But to what constellation do the two Pointers
to the Cross belong ?
To the Centaur’s two fore feet. The last of
my circumpolar stars are those of the Altar,
lying north of the Triangle, a little to the left
of the Pointers. You may see them on the
edge of the Milky Way—two stars close
together, and four others to the right further
apart. The Compasses, hardly to be noticed,
are between the Altar and the Pointers.’
This was a long lesson, requiring much
study afterwards. When Mr. Marple thought
the lad knew the southern stars near the pole,
he was ready to advance with the constellations
again, and proposed to take a fresh round.
“We will,” said he, “take another sweep
round the heavens, embracing the space be-
tween our old circle of the Cross and that
over the equator, though I will not take
equatorial stars now.
May we begin at the Crown, father ?
Between the Cross and Crown is the Altar.
North of and near the Crown is Sagittarius
the Archer, beside which is the Scorpion.
How can I tell that ?
The Scorpion has a line of bright stars
coming down south to the Altar, with a twist
like a curl in its tail.
What is that bright red star at the upper
end of it ?


Antares of the Scorpion. The bright star
near it further north is in the Libra or Scales.
The fine star as far fx’om the Pointers as they
are from the Pole is in the shoulder of the
Centaur, half horse and half man.
Is he fighting anything ?
Yes; he is running his spear through the
mouth of the Wolf, which is stretched between
Antares and the Pointers. The Centaur comes
down to the Cross, and goes up north to the
great Hydra, on which the Crow is perched.
What a beautiful star that is over Centaur,
about twice as far from the Cross as that from
the Pole!
That is Spica in the Virgin, close to the
Crow. That makes up one quarter of our
second circle. Looking still to the right, and
north of the Cross, do you see any good-sized
stars ?
No, father, there is nothing worth looking
at for the next quarter beyond the Cross and
Ship till we get to Sirius.
Yet there are the Pneumatic Pump and the
Mariner’s Compass. The great Hydra stretches
itself all from the Scorpion, under the Crow,
the Cup, and the Sextant, from near Antares
to Canis Minor, the Little Dog.
Where is the Little Dog?
To understand that we must go on to our
third quarter of the circle. You know Sirius
and the three starred belt of Orion. The
Belt is exactly over the equator. The three
stars lead you down south to Sirius, and a line
at right angles brings you to Procyon of the


Little Dog, which thus forms a triangle with
Sirius and the Belt. Get the Pole, Canopus,
and Sirius in a line, and a little further to the
north, on the one side you have the Belt, and
on the other Procyon.
Though I see no stars of any consequence
between the Great and Little Dogs, is there
any constellation there?
Monoceros, the Unicorn, keeps them apart.
The Hare and Noah’s Dove are on the other
side of Canis Major. They are both south of
Orion. In the Dove, a little out of the line
alf-way from Canopus to Sirius, is the pretty
*hact. The five stars in a line between
Canopus and Sirius are in Canis Major, the
Great Dog Constellation.
What a gay show of stars between the Pole
and Orion! But what a blank beyond to the
right. I see one, however, opposite to Sirius,
forming a parallelogram with it, the Belt, and
Phact.
That is Zaurack, in the Eiver Po; and the
great space beyond that, to the right, far
north of Achernar, is Cetus the Whale. The
star Menkar or Menhab, a little north of
Zaurack, is in the Whale’s head, while Diphda
is in its tail. Achernar is about .half-way
from Diphda to the Pole. Between the two
are the Chemical Furnace, the Sculptor, and
the Phoenix.
I don’t care about these. Have you not
nearly got round, father?
The last quarter of our circle lies between
the Southern Crown and the Whale’s tail.


That will be north of the Peacock and
Indian. What is the bright star between the
Whale’s tail and Achernar?
The head of the Phoenix. And forming a
triangle with it and the tail is the noble
Fomalhaut of the Southern Fish, under the
sign Pisces and near the toe of Aquarius.
The Goat Capricornus is to the right of
Fomalhaut.
Why, there is nothing hardly between
Fomalhaut and the Crown.
Between the Peacock and the Crown are the
two stai’s close together, forming the foot of
Sagittarius, whose body stretches from the
Crown to Capricornus; while the Crane and
the Microscope lie between the Peacock and
Fomalhaut,
It would require a good telescope to see that
faint-looking Microscope.
You will see seven stars in a line, left of the
Peacock, dipping down toward the Pole—these
form the Crane.
And a long-necked fellow it is, too.”
Another rest was necessary here, to enable
James to connect in his mind the last collec-
tion of constellations with his circumpolar
ones. His father then took him to those
about the equator and north of it, and thus
introduced him to the twelve signs of the Zodiac.
“ You have learned, my dear boy, 'the names
of these signs; I want now to teach you their
positions.


Yes; I would like to know how big the Bull
is. Do his horns poke the polar star, while
he hangs his tail over the equator?
Our Bull is a funny one, for he has no tail,
because he has no hind quarters. If he reached
from the pole to the equator, a few Bulls would
fill up the sky, and leave no room for Bears,
Swans, Hunters, and other creatures up there.
Now look at the Orion’s Belt, and run down
the line of the three stars as you did to Sirius,
but in the opposite direction, as far north as
the other is south.
I have it—a beautiful star between the Belt
and the pretty Pleiades.
That is Aldebaran, the Bull’s eye. Your
Pleiades are in the Bull’s neck. The Hyades
are the cluster near the eye.
What is the great star, a little out of the
road, between Aldebaran and the Belt?
That is Betelgeux, in the shoulder of Orion,
who is looking up to the Bull. Betelgeux is
on the north side of the Belt; and Rigel, of
Orion’s heel, is at the same distance to the
south of the Belt. Aldebaran, Rigel, and
Menkar, of the Whale’s nose, form an equi-
lateral triangle.
Aides the Ram is to the right of the Bull,
near where his tail should be, and Orion is to
the left or east, but a little southerly. But
now for the Twins.
Are they the two right north of Procyon,
and forming the corner of a right-angled
triangle with Betelgeux and Procyon?
They are the Twins, Castor and Pollux,


though the latter is the larger. Cancer the
Crab is to the left of the Twins.
I cannot see so much as the claw of him. But
I see a splendid star further to the 'left, with
Procyon between it and the Belt.
That is Eegulus in Leo the Lion. It is one
of his forepaws, and beyond to the left is
Deneb, of the Lion’s tail. The little lion is
north of Leo, and between it and the Great
Bear, the favourite constellation of England.
Virgo the Virgin should come next. I can
see Spica, which is twice as far from the Cross
northward as the Cross is from the Pole.
Spica is in the ear of corn held in the
Virgin’s hand. The Virgin’s head touches the
Lion’s tail at Deneb.
What a tall lady she must be! But what is
that staring star forming the head of a triangle
with Deneb and Spica?
The Arcturus of Job, in the knee of Bootes
the Husbandman, standing on Mount Moenalus.
The small stars between Arcturus and Deneb
are in the hair of Berenice. The Northern
Crown, between Hercules and Bootes, is seen
nearly overhead in England.
You have got a long way from us now,
father. Please come back to the Virgin.
Well, then, you know the Southern Crown,
at any rate. Sagittarius is right over it
nortlrward, while Antares of Scorpio is to the
right a little.
The stars of Libra the Balance must be
somewhere between Spica and Antares, I
suppose.


The two stars together in the equator, just
north of Scorpio, are in the old man Ophiu-
chus, who is south of Hercules. There is a
serpent on each side of him.
What nice company!
Yes, with the club of Hercules shaking over
his head, and Poniatowski’s Bull ready to toss
his shoulder. But he has the shield of the
Polish hero Sobieski behind him, which hangs,
too, over the head of Sagittarius.
How shall I find Aquarius ?
He has his foot on Fomalhaut, he leans back
on Capricornus, and has Pisces, the Fishes, on
the other side.
What is the great star north of Capricornus ?
That is Altair, in Aquila the Eagle, whose
wings are spread over the equator. Aquila is
between Ophiuchus and Aquarius.
As we have got over Aquarius, and come to
Pisces, which are over Cetusthe Whale, I sup-
pose we are at Aries again.
We are. But I should like you to know
that Pegasus, the Flying Horse, is over Aqua-
rius, and that the Swan and Lyre are between
that and Hercules, and north of the Eagle.
Taking a line from the south pole through the
Whale’s tail, we have a bright star in the back
of Pegasus, called Algenib, not far from the
junction of the equator and ecliptic in Pisces.
The star beyond Algenib, further north, is
larger, though,
Alpherat is its name, and it is one of the
eyes of Andromeda, the lady with the chains
on her hands.


0, I know all about that story, father. The
ancients said she was fastened to a rock in the
sea, and a monster was gnawing at her. But
a warrior, called Perseus, came with his sword
and, delivered her.
Then, as you have Andromeda’s eye, you can
fancy the Zodiacal Fish biting her, and Perseus
with his sword to the left. There is a triangle
between Aries and Andromeda.
What a dazzling star that is, forming the
north corner of a triangle with Aldebaran and
the Twins.
Yes, Capella, or the Little Kid, in the arms
of Auriga, is certainly very fine. Auriga’s foot
is on the Bull’s head. Half-way from, Alpherat
of Andromeda to Capella, is Medusa’s Head,
just over the Pleiades.
We have gone round, I think, father, but I
do wish I could see the old Bear again.
You have only to imagine yourself following
out a line from the Belt through Castor and
Pollux.
Yes,but I should have to dive down into the
ocean to reach his claws.”
DOUBLE STARS.
“That wonderful tell-tale, the ‘telescope,'
reveals the double character of some stars,” said
Mr. Marple. “ There are six thousand stars
which are thus double.
That is singular.


There are some in the Pleiades, in the Dog,
in Orion, and in the Southern Cross and
Crown. But the most wonderful part of my
story is yet to come. Some of these double
stars revolve round each other.
What! Great suns at a tremendous distance
from one another, walk round one another?
Why, if they have planets round them, like
our sun has, these must have a fine double
journey to make. How many of these strange
stars are there ?
About 650 of them are Binary or revolving.
But which stands still to have the other
revolving round it?
They both move, each one round the other.
A regular polka in the heavens, father.
And yet I suppose they are not just like a
gentleman and his lady partner.
I don’t know that; for it has been observed
that a number have different colours to their
companions. While one is blue, the other
will be yellow. One shall be green, and its
mate will be orange. One-half ai’e white, and
one-tenth ai’e both blue.
That does please me. How I should like to
be in a planet where my sun should be blue,
and its companion sun red. It would he so
funny to get up in the morning and see my
sun blue, throwing a blue tint on everything.
Then, when the other sun rose, a rich red
would steal over the blue, and change every-
thing. But when the blue sun had set, the
red one would have it all its own way, and
bathe my world in its ruddy light.


That fancy is good, and not very improbable
either; especially if the other sun should come
pretty near your sun at times, as it is likely
they move in an ellipse.
Can you tell me, dear father, how long these
pleasant binary stars take in performing their
polka?
One in Hercules takes thirty-one years. In
our old Great Bear, a binary pair take sixty-
one, and in Leo eighty-tAvo. In the Swan Ave
have 178 years, and in the Virgin 182. In
the Crown Ave have two several times given of
608 and 736 years. It is believed that one
pair are 1200 years. The North Polar Star
is double, and is thought by some to revolve
in 6000 years.
Please, father, tell me some more about the
colours of the double folk.
The Polar double stars are red and Avhite.
In Scorpion, there is a Avhite one and a lilac
one; in the Centaur, we have both orange ; in
Andromeda, crimson and green; in the Lion,
gold and green; in one of Scorpio, Avhite and
plum; in Castor, yelloAV and green; in Antares,
both are bright red; Arcturus was all red in
1841, and yellow in 1852.
I wonder lioav far these partners are from
each other.
That is difficult to ascertain. The binary
stars of the SAvan are thought to take 450
years going their circuit, and yet to be billions
of miles aAvay from each other.
There is little danger of quarrelling at that
distance apart, father.


Astronomers talk of stars running against
one another. ' There are also triple stars.
Three stars polkaing in and around each
other ! That is odd. Where are there any ?
In the Lyre and Scorpion. In the latter the
colours are white, grey, and yellow. In the
Swan the largest star is very yellow, and its
two mates are blue. But more wonderful still,
in Orion there are four stars thus rolling round
each other,”
PERIODICAL AND VARIABLE STARS.
It was upon a lovely evening, when off the
coast of South America, ready to slip aci’oss by
the side-help of the South-east Trades to the
Cape of Good Hope, that Mr. Marple found
his son at his old post.
> “ Now then,” said he, “my star-gazing hoy,
are you quite sure that none of them have run
away since last night?
lam not sure of that, father; for ever since
you proved that the Fixed stars were not fixed,
I think I might some day find a bright friend
gone on a visit to another universe somewhere;
perhaps, getting into such agreeable society as
to have no wish to come back again to our
visible universe ; or, maybe, to pop back again
in his place.
It so happens, James, that what you have
imagined, really takes place. Some stars do
really disappear, to return, or not; and others.


wholly strangers to us, come within obser-
vation.
That is the queerest thing you have told
me yet. What droll fellows the stars are, after
all! How they do wriggle about, polkaing
here, doubling there, and fielding about like
hoys at cricket. I shall never be suprised
at any funny trick you ascribe to them.
To begin with the Variable stars, of which
there are known about one hundred. There
is Mira, which is invisible five months in the
year. It goes and comes again.
Where could it have got to ?
Some think it revolving round a dark object;
and, of course, becoming invisible when on
the other side from us. One passes through
three magnitudes in one month.
But I must give you the history of such a
curious star in the Whale. For two weeks
you might see it a noble star of the second
magnitude. It, gradually dims, till it goes
fairly out of sight in three months. For five
weeks you see nothing of it. It then reap-
pears. Altogether it seems to have a revolu-
tion of 329 days; and is, therefore, one of the
Periodical stars.
I should call it a variable periodical.
There is another in Cepheus, which grows
to its full light in thirty-eight hours only.
There is one in the Lyre taking ninety-one
hours. Some fancy that the dark appearance
may be owing to huge spots on the suns coming
into view as the suns turn round. But there
is still another sort of star—the Temporary.


Do they come and have a look at us in
their birth, and then disappear never to
return ?
I will tell you the history of one. In 1572
an astronomer saw it shining in the daytime.
He could not find it in his star catalogue at
home. Day after day it grew brighter and
brighter, till it blazed far more than either
Sirius or Jupiter, and could be plainly seen
in the noontide sun. It then grew dim gra-
dually, and in two years went away altogether,
without returning since.
That is temporary, and no mistake. But
still I guess they will find him turning up
some day and becoming a regular Periodical.
There is a wonderful star, Argus, in Argo.
Two hundred years ago it was of the fourth
magnitude only. In 1834, Sir John Herschel,
when at the Cape of Good Hope, found it a
second magnitude. The light was three times
stronger at the end of 1837. Next month it
was brighter than any star here but Sirius.
It faded awhile, and then increased, till, in
1844, it was equal to Sirius itself.
Have they looked over the old catalogues of
stars, made, as you told me, two thousand
years ago, just to see what ones have dropped
out of sight, father?
Yes, and several have disappeared which
were on that list.”


MILKY WAY.
The stars were out in their very best
humour, looking so clear and merry in their
twinkling; while the Milky Way stole out to
view in all its maiden, lily beauty. Can we
wonder, then, that our young voyager sang
out —
“ 0 what a splendid starlight night! There
seems to be ever so many more stars than
usual. Gan any one count them all ?
Yes; those you now see are about 9000.
But the telescope shows us far more. There
are 50,000 regularly catalogued. A magnifying
power of 180 would give 90,000,000. A small
patch of the Milky Way has revealed millions
of stars.
Milky Way, father ! O that is that serpent-
like twisting of white stuff across the heavens.
But Avhy should it look so white and all other
parts so black?
Because it is there that most of the stars
lie, and give out the brightest light.
But I don’t see that the milk is all stars.
Take up the telescope and look at that white
patch near that red star.
What a pretty sight! Why, a lot of the
milk has turned into stars already. lam sure
there must he a tremendous lot to be seen
through the telescope of an astronomer.
Do you remember the Milky Way on the
northern side of the equator ?
Yes, father, and I think it a prettier looking


white snake in the sky than this one up here,
for it had more spangling stars about it.
I must say that the northern constellations
are more brilliant than those of the south.
And what a great bit of the south side has
hardly any stars at all. Just look, father, there
to the westward, and there to the eastward.
They both look as if lighted up with a few
children’s toy-candles, compared to the dazzling
light of the north, and right overhead toward
the south.
The Milky Way is narrowest near the South-
ern Cross, and widens both ways after. Near
the Scorpion’s tail it is very broad—about
twenty degrees, while at the Cross it is about
four degrees. There is a curious opening in it
near Sirius, like a long, narrow, dark lake
among the mountains of snow.
And I can see one star at the end, like a
ship in full sail upon the lake.
The Milky Way runs up in threads near the
Scorpion. From the Swan down to the South-
ern Cross it is in two bright lines, enclosing a
long dark space.
But look at the two pretty bridges over the
black waters, connecting the two shining walks
at the sides.
You remember, then, that the Milky Way,
seen in the north and south, is a great ring of
different breadths going round the heavens, and
passing at some little distance from both poles.
„It is like the Egyptian story you told me,
father, of the people worshipping a serpent
with his tail in his mouth. How singular that


this milk-stream should he poured right round
the heavens in a huge broad circle!
The Galaxy, or Milky Way, is seen to great
advantage near th§ Cross.
It is about the milkiest in that quarter.
And I can make a good guess now about the
two Magellanic clouds, as the captain called
them—these two clouds of light not far from
the Cross. Why, they are only places where
the shining stuff is thickest.
You would, then, really believe there might
be lots of stars in those clouds.
Yes ; but what are the two black clouds?
Look at them attentively, and tell me what
you think of them ?
There is no milk there, anyhow. I suppose
they look black by contrast with the bright
clouds near. How cold and dreary they seem!
And yet now I can make out a few stars
scattered about, like ships on a big sea at a
great distance from one another.
The early navigators southward used to call
them the Coal Sacks, because so black.
Why, the Southern Cross seems to rise
from that pear-shaped Coal Sack, and all at
once to get crowned with a blaze of light.
True, my dear boy. The Cross of our faith
has often brought man from the darkness of
doubt and misery into the glorious light of
freedom and hope.
Thank you, kind father, for saying that. Ido
trust I may always have the cross shining on
my way through life.”


THE NEBULAE.
How wondrous a sight did James think the
Milky Way! Evening after evening would he
stare at the weird-looking object. Moonlight
eclipsed it, as sunlight the stars. The atmo-
sphere through which we contemplate the
heavens at times obscui’es their glory. That
dreamy radiance is easily concealed from view.
The hold planet looks down upon us with an
unblinking eye. The fixed stars peep more
coyly, with an uncertain lustre. The Milky
Way, yet more retiring, seldom deigns to do
more than glance timidly at us here. With
our magnificent climate in Australia, we are
favoured beyond most countries with its soft,
peculiar light.
“What is a Nebula, father? said James.
A white, cloudy patch in the heavens. There
are about five thousands of them scattered
about space.
You said the Milky Way was made up of
stars and Nebute, and that many patches of
white, when looked at with a good telescope,
turn out to he only lots of stars.
Yes. These are the Resolvable Nebulse.
But there are Irresolvable, —that is, some of
them still look cloudy with our best telescopes.
Can you find me a Nebula in Orion?
What must I look for?
A small, distinct, white patch of light.
No; I don’t see it.


Look again. Do you see the Belt, with a
bright star over it, and one about the same
distance below it?
I see all that clear enough, but not your
Nebula.
Look, boy, steadily and closely between the
Belt, and that top bright star Rigel, where on
the Atlas is pictured the sword-handle of the
great hunter.
I don’t feel very sure, but I fancy I can
distinguish something that ought to be it.
Many folks, my boy, can see what they are
told to expect. Well, that white irregular
patch of light has had telescopes looking at
it a good while, without anything being seen
beyond a dreamy-looking cloudy matter.
I’ll be bound Lord Rosse solved the riddle.
He did not for some time. He was able at
last to think he could see stars; then b} T more
patient watching he resolved the Nebula into
sandheaps of stars—millions upon millions.
What! millions upon millions -where other
telescopes could not distinguish one star.
What shape is Orion’s Nebula?
It is rather patchy, with innumerable
streamers of light, as if wind were blowing
the gauze stuff about in all directions. You
might fancy in it the jaws and head of a
monster, with an elephant’s proboscis.
What a nice little nose that must be
One part rises like a conical cloud in the
midst of the black sky. In the part which
had appeared mottled Rosse found a blaze of
stars.


Can all the Nebulae be observed by the
naked eye?
No, my lad, very few.
But after all they are only lots of stars got
crowded together like, because they are so far
from us.
Yet there are Nebulfe not to be resolved
into stars even by Eosse’s six feet mirror. Just
turn round to the Southern Cross. You see
the two bright Pointers to the Cross, a part of
the Centaur. Look to the other side of
the Cross, Avhere there is a collection of stars
scattered about. That is the Argo or ship.
Ah! I can see a sort of light there. Is that
the Argo Nebula?
Yes, and a very large one it is. Thousands
of stars can be observed in it by the telescope;
but beyond these is still the same filmy light,
as irresolvable as ever.
There must be a lot of Nebulae by the Cross,
judging by the blaze of light.
There is a very fine one there, of a blue
colour. One near Spica, of the Virgin, is quite
round, and of enormous size. But there is a
very odd Crab Nebula between Orion and the
Bull’s eye. It branches out like the claws of
a crab.
What an enormous Crab 1
We have a Dumb-bell Nebula near the Lyre.
Oh ! who could swing that about ? Pray
tell me some more about these queer crea-
tures, father.
Many in the south are planetary Nebulae, as
they are in the midst of a cluster of stars.


They are always of a pale blue colour. Some
are double ones. About a dozen Nebulae are
annular, or ring-shaped. Some are double or
treble ringed. Others have rings within rings,
and star-like eyes in the darkness. A few have
a long, parsnip form. There are solid Nebulae,
and hollow ones. One near Castor was found
by Kosse to be arched like eyebrows above
and below, with a curious, crab-like form in
the middle.
I wonder what it would look like should a
better telescope reach it!
Wonder, indeed! Some Nebulae seen by
Herschel get quite another shape with Kosse.
The six-feet mirror give's another look to that
by the three-feet one.
Then I can scarcely believe the present
shapes, as a better instrument ma} r resolve the
thing into another creature altogether. But
is there any other sort beside the globular and
annular?
Yes; a good many are spiral, or corkscrew
form. »
Something like a shaving that a plane fetches
off a plank, father.
But some of your celestial shavings have a
wild look. Clever men have fancied that the
star-dust is rolling up that w r ay by a sort of
gravitation into a regular form.
What of the two clouds in the heavens oppo-
site to the Southern Cross, down in the south?
They look uncommonly like monster Nebulae.
And monsters indeed they are. In the
larger one of them three hundred Nebulae and


globular clusters of stars have been distin-
guished, and fifty in the smaller one.
Then there is room enough in the Cloud for
a whole universe?
Yes, when we find the larger Magellanic
Cloud, or Nubecula Major, as it is called, taking
up many times the space occupied by the sun
in the sky. The Nubecula Minor, or Little
cloud, is about one-fourth the size of the larger.
What do you mean by Nubecula?
A little cloud. They are called the Magel-
lanic clouds because first noticed in the voyages
of Magellan the Portuguese, three hundred
years ago.
What a space they must take up in reality!
Especially if, as astronomers believe, the
clusters of stars and patches of nebulous
matter in the two clouds there are as far off
from each other as from this earth.
What is known about the Coal-Sacks ?
The larger Coal-Sack, or black empty space
not far from the two clouds, is of a pear shape,
and occupies a space of eight degrees long by
five broad. Its darkness is only comparative,
as two hundred stars have been noticed thefein
by a good telescope.
Are the Nebulse of the Clouds peculiar?
One in the centre is very large, and has an
odd dark space in its middle. It is also sur-
rounded by a circle of ten other Nebulse.
Like bright guards around a king.
Another consists of four starry centres, or
nuclei, which are curiously united by a very
faint nebulous matter.


Do, father, tell me more of these Nebulse.
Then I will talk about some singular fila-
ments, or threads of light, seen around the
nebute, which have much puzzled astrono-
mers, Those filaments about the Nebulae of
Orion and Argo are wonderfully strange.
They are the arms, I suppose, pointing into
the dark space near, as much as to say,—‘You
know nothing about us, or of what we can see
around us, looking so black to you, and so
bright to us.’
Not a bad idea, boy. When Sir John
Herschel had a look at our southern hemi-
sphere, he observed beyond the Nebulae a few
scattered, faint bits of light in the dark region,
too fine for him to turn into Nebulae by his
glass, and looking like some more distant
light blushing through the darkness.
They are like telegraphic messages, father.
About forty ol these strange glimmerings of
future universes yet to be revealed were seen
by Sir John.
Well, dear father, you can’t go further than
that. If it take 60,000 years for some of the
stars to send us their light, just to say
‘How do you do?’ how long would it take
for these faint, modest blushes of the distant
sky?
How great, then, is God, my son, and how
grateful should we be for His notice! Let us
so please Him here, that after death our souls
may fly to that heaven of joy He has pre-
pared, wherever in the vast universes of His it
may be.”


THE SUN AND PLANETS.
The planet Venus had been shining bril-
liantly evening after evening, “ Why, father,”
said the boy, “ does Venus shift her place so
rapidly among the stars ?
Because she has to travel round the sun, as
the world and other planets do.
And is the .world really a planet, looking
like a star to the people of Venus ?
Yes; and not visible at all to those of the
distant planets, which are all so much nearer
to us than the nearest of the fixed stars. Some
of the planets you could not see without the
telescope, and you see none of the asteroids.
What are they?
Little planets, over eighty in number, per-
haps the shattered parts of an exploded
planet, travelling along the old road, and
keeping a circle between Mars and Jupiter.
Then they ax-e not like the comets, which
run everywhere, getting in everybody’s way?
You are slandering the comets. These
shadowy bodies, with tails of light, travel in
longer ovals or ellipses than the planets. We
see them when they turn round the sun,
which is near one end of their orbit, but they
disappear afterwards in the great distance of
their curve.
Well, I can see some use in the sun to us,
but very little in the planets and other stars,
and none in the comets.
You must not selfishly judge of the good of
things by the use you can make of them. The


Distance.
Time.
Diameter.
Miles.
Miles.
Mercury.
. 37,000,000
... 2 months
... 3100
Venus...
69,000,000
... n „
... 7900
Earth....
93,000,000
... 1 year
... 7920
Mars....
146,000,000
... 2 years
... 4000
Jupiter...
494,000,000
... 12 „
... 92,000
Saturn...
906,000,000
... 30 „
... 75,000
Herschel 1820,000.000
... 80 „
... 36,000
Neptune 2850,000,000
... 164 „
... 33,600
extensive granite x’anges were not made merely
for man’s building materials, nor the stars for
a gaze through a telescope. As the world
existed many millions of years without man,
so have the stars. In another world we may
know more of the why and because of God’s
creation.
May not the planets and other stars be
inhabited by folks like ourselves?
Not quite, my son, replied Mr. Marple,
though God can make intelligent beings to
praise Him, who would be adapted to any
atmosphere or condition of the stars.”
In the evening the captain lent James a
book, from which he copied the following table
of the Eight Planets—their distance from the
sun, their times of revolution round the sun,
and their size :
70
ASTRONOMY FOR


REVIEWS OF MR. BONWICK’S COLONIAL WORKS,
ROBERTSON, PUBLISHER.
Geography of Australia and New Zealand.
3rd Edition.
“Mr. Bonwick is entitled to great credit for this attempt to create
an Australian school literature, and as his book is used by the
educational boards of Melbourne, a better testimonial to its value is
afforded than any general expression of approbation by the press
could yield.”—Sydney Morning Herald.
“Mr. Bonwick has been for many years resident in these colonies;
he has access to the best sources of information; he has been inde-
fatigable in his efforts to produce a book which might be a standard
one on the subject he treats; and he has succeeded.” —Melbourne
Argus.
“It is the work of a man thoroughly familiar with his subject, a
colonist of fourteen years’ standing, a traveller, and a practical
teacher. The book does not contain a superfluous word; it is what
a book for schools should be, —compact and simple.”— London
Atheneeum, October, 1856.
“From what we know of Mr. Bonwick’s antecedents, he is the
person best adapted to prepare such a work. A man of education,
liberal and enlightened views, a resident of many years’ standing in
these southern lands, and a person possessed of much experience in
tuition, must have been well adapted for the task he has executed.”—
Sydney Freeman’s Journal.
Discovery and Settlement of Port Phillip.
“ Future historians will turn to it as a repertory of valuable facts,
lucidly, systematically, and chronologically stated; for the most part
well authenticated, and all of them of the deepest interest, because
bearing upon the infancy and rapidly maturing youth of a country
whose splendid destinies have yet to be revealed, and whose future
greatness may transcend both our hopes and our belief.” —Melbourne
Argus , 1856.
“My chief object being to depict ’Victoria, not as she was, but.as
she is now, I shall not trouble the reader with long narrations of
early history. These have been earnestly and copiously given by the
industry of Mr. Bonwick in his recent publications.”—Mr. West-
garth’s “ Victoria.”
The Wild White Man and the Blacks of Victoria.
Two Shillings.
“Mr. James Bonwick, late Inspector of Schools in Victoria, and
whose name will be familiar to very many of our readers, has just
published a second edition of his very interesting book, ‘The Wild
White Man and the Blacks of Victoria.” Mr. Bonwick is too highly
respected in this colony to need further aid from us now than the
statement that he has issued this new edition, and that the pub-
lishers are Messrs. Fergusson and Moore, Flinders lane east.”—
Melbourne Argus, 6th November, 1863.


“■The style is always terse and pointed, and it has uniformly the
most resistless charm of playful ease and the utmost simplicity.
Australian scenery is painted with the pencil of an enthusiast, and
the imaginative portions of the work are treated with rare descrip-
tive power.”— Age.
“ Mr. Bonwick is thoroughly in earnest, and tells his story with an
air of generous enthusiasm, which alone invests what he has to say
with an uncommon amount of interest "—Ballmrat Star, Oct. 30.
Astronomy for Young Australians.
“ This is Written in a thoroughly popular style, and has received
the benefit of Mr. Ellery’s revision. This little work will doubtless
enjoy, as its merits deserve, a large sale.”— Argun.
“ We* have met with no work which is so suitable for teaching
Astronomy to our Australian youth as the one before us.”— Chronicle.
“The book is written in a most captivating style. It makes the
story of our brilliant southern skies almost as interesting as a fai 17
tale. We hope this very meritorious book will be at once introduced
into all our common schools, as it well deserves to be, since it supplies
a want—a felt want.” —Weekly Review.
Grammar fox Australian Youth.
* “The Grammar is a superior book.”—Adelaide Examiner.
The Bushrangers; illustrating Early Bays
of Van Diemen’s E.and.
“It exhibits a correct position of the state of society in earlier
days.”—Hobart Town Colonial Times.
Western Victoria: its Geography, Geology, and
Social Conditions.
“ He has something to tell us; does it in easy, graceful, purpose-
like style that is charming to us: A man who knows his work and
does it.” —Christian Times.
“ A most charming, readable book.” —Portland Guardian.
ALSO PUBLISHED,
Geography for Young Australians. 4th edition.
Sixpence. Ninepence Cloth.
TWENTIETH THOUSAND !
Botany for Young Australians.
Early Days of Melbourne.
Western Victoria; an Educational Tour.
Early Days of England.
Bible Stories for Young Australians.
&0. (tc. &0.




