

ASTRONOMICAL AND METEOROLOGICAL
WORKERS IN NEW SOUTH WALES, 1778 to 1860.
BY
H. C. RUSSELL, F.R.S.. Government Astronomer
» V




“ Proceedings of Australasian Association for the Advance-
ment of Science ,” Sydney , 1888, p. 45.]
the midst of other pressing duties, to collect into a concise form
the history of what has been done in New South Wales for
Astronomy and Meteorology. As it is the first attempt to do so,
it is hardly necessary to say that it has involved a considerable
amount of trouble, and that many points are not yet fully made
out, but a search, specially amongst astronomical publications,
has cleared up many points of interest which at one time seemed
buried in oblivion. I have also had, through the courtesy of the
Principal Under-Secretary and others, access to official records
which otherwise would not have been available.
Lieutenant Dawes. •
In 1786, Nevil Maskelyne, Astronomer Royal, in a paper, read
before the Royal Society, points out that Halley’s celebrated
comet of 1682 would re-appear in 1788, and be first visible in the
southern skies, and hence it was that a young and energetic
Astronomer found himself with all the incongruous surroundings
in the first fleet of ships bound to Australia. No time was to be
lost in setting up the Observatory, for although the comet was
not expected until September, 1788, it might be before its pre-
This Paper has not received the final corrections of
the Author, owing to a mistake for which he is not
responsible.




■y rf
cu
A \
\From “ Proceedings of Australasian Association for the Advance-
ment of Science ,” Sydney , 1888, p. 45.]
ASTRONOMICAL and METEOROLOGICAL WORKERS
IN NEW SOUTH WALES, 1778 to 1860.
By H. C. Russell, F.R.S., Government Astronomer.
The following pages contain the result of an attempt, made in
the midst of other pressing duties, to collect into a concise form
the history of what has been done in New South Wales for
Astronomy and Meteorology. As it is the first attempt to do so,
it is hardly necessary to say that it has involved a considerable
amount of trouble, and that many points are not yet fully made
out, but a search, specially amongst astronomical publications,
has’cleared up many points of interest which at one time seemed
buried in oblivion. I have also had, through the courtesy of the
Principal Under-Secretary and others, access to official records
which otherwise would not have been available.
Lieutenant Dawes. •
In 1786, Nevil Maskelyne, Astronomer Royal, in a paper, read
before the Royal Society, points out that Halley s celebrated
comet of 1682 would re-appear in 1788, and be first visible in the
southern skies, and hence it was that a young and energetic
Astronomer found himself with all the incongruous surroundings
in the first fleet of ships bound to Australia. No time was to be
lost in setting up the Observatory, for although the comet was
not expected until September, 1788, it might be before its pre-
O f-l 52
V <n-1- n.


dieted time. The only records of his work that I can find are
the following, which shews that he determined the latitude and
longitude of the Observatory, but nothing is said to lead one to
suppose that he observed the comet: —
Colonel Collins in “An Account of the English Colony in
New South Wales” (Vol. I, 1798, p. 15, Feby. 1788), says:—
“ Among the buildings that were undertaken shortly after our
arrival must be mentioned an Observatory, which was marked
out on the western point of the cove, to receive the astronomical
instruments which had been sent out by the Board of Longitude,
for the purpose of observing the comet which was expected to be
seen about the end of this year. The construction of this building
was placed under the direction of Lieut. Dawes, of the marines,
who, having made this branch of science his peculiar study, was
appointed by the Board of Longitude to make astronomical
observations in this country.
“ The latitude of the observatory was 33° 52’ 30" S.
“The longitude, from Greenwich, 151° 19' 30" E
In August, 1788 (loc. cit. p. 37), an observatory, on the west
point of the cove, is mentioned as being in progress this month.
Collins adds :
“ ‘ The observatory, which was erected on our first landing
( loc. cit. p. 75, July, 1789), being found small and inconvenient, as
well for the purpose of observing as for the residence of Lieutenant
Dawes and the reception of the astronomical instruments, the
stone-cutters began preparing stone to construct another, the
materials for which were found in abundance upon the spot, the
west point of the cove’ (Bunkers Hill.)
“In October, 1879 (loc. cit. p. 83), the observatory is said to
be in same place as the magazine ; and (loc. cit. p. 189, November,
1791); “A corporal’s guard was also mounted daily in the
building which had been used as an observatory by Lieutenant
Dawes.” He must, therefore, have gone before this.
Captain Flinders.
The astronomical work of Capt. Flinders, Commander of H.M.S.
** Investigator,” during her exploring voyage to Australia, was
important. On the 19th January, 1801, Matthew Flinders was
appointed Lieutenant in Command of H.M.S. “Investigator”
(heretofore known as the “ Xenophon”) for her exploring voyage
to Australia. Mr. John Crossley was appointed astronomer, but
owing to ill-health was obliged to leave the ship at the Cape of
Good Hope, and his duty was assumed by Flinders in addition to
his other duties, and probably a better observer could not have
been found. For all the principal places on the south coast of
Australia he determined the longitude by direct lunar observa-
tions, and without giving details, which may be found in the
“Voyage to Terra Australis” (Vol. 1., 1814, App. p. 259), it


may be stated that he made the longitude of Dawes’ Point
(called Cattle Point) lOh. 4m. 47’35. east of Greenwich \ the
recent value found by cable is lOh. 4m. 49 - 55., a wonderfully
accurate result considering the instruments of those days ! He
mentions that the Spanish Admiral D’Espenosa found the
longitude of the same place to be lOh. 4m. 51s. These are
remarkable results, and well worth recording as the earliest
careful attempts to find the longitude of Sydney; there was far
less uncertainty about it than Flinders himself thought, but a
recognition of the care and ability which he brought to bear upon
his work is one of the greatest honours which we can pay to his
memory. He made the latitude 33° 51 ’ 45-6 ", but there is not
now, unfortunately, at least so far as I can learn, any clue to the
exact part of Cattle Point on which he set up his instruments •
the latitude of the present Observatory is 33° 51 ’ 41 // , and that of
the extreme point (Dawes’ Point) is 33° 5P 21", so that he was
very little out.
While at Sydney he also determined the magnetic variation
and made it 8° 5P east, a result quite as remarkable for its
accuracy as the others.
Although, not bearing directly upon astronomy or meteorology
in Australia, it is important to note that during his work on the
Australian coast Flinders discovered the cause of the local
attraction of the ship on the compass, and the account of it is best
given in his own words ( loc. cit. p. 1, Preface) :“A variety of obser-
vations with the compass had shewn the magnetic needle to differ
from itself, sometimes as much as 6° or even 7° in or very near
the same place, and the differences seemed to be subject to
regular laws but it was so extraordinary in the present state of
navigation that they should not have been before discoverd, and
a mode of preventing or correcting them ascertained, that my
deductions and almost the facts were distrusted; and in the
first construction of the charts I had feared to deviate mucli
from the usual practice. Applications was now made to the
Admiralty for experiments to be tried with the compass on
board different ships; and the results in five cases being conform-
able to one of the three laws before deduced, which alone
was susceptible of proof in England, the whole were adopted
without reserve, and the variations and bearings throughout the
voyage underwent a systematic correction,” Such is the simple
story of the discovery of one of the most important facts con-
nected with the use of the compass at sea that has ever been
made. It is usual in books upon magnetism to say that the fact
of the ship’s attraction on the compass was first observed by Mr.
Males, the Astronomer of Captain Cook, when he was sailing
along the coast of New Holland ; but if that be true it is strange
the Admirality knew nothing about it, and that in the Navy
generally it was an unknown fact; certain it is, that Flinders was


the first to see and trace the fact, and work out the laws which
govern it. Flinders himself shews ( loc . cit., Vol. 11., App. p. 512)
that Mr. Males had observed the fact that magnetic bearings on
ship board were unreliable, but he attributed it to faults in the
compasses and imperfections in construction, and it is quite
evident that he did not see the real cause, viz. : the ship’s
magnetism, which Flinders did and worked at it until he found
the law of change, viz. : that it was in proportion to the lines of
the angles of deviation, due to the ship’s position and could thus
correct every observation. Flinders communicated his discovery
in a paper read before the Royal Society, (Phil. Trans., 1805,
p. 186.)
Barlow very soon after proposed that an iron plate should be
put below the compass in wooden ships. Airy, the Astronomer
Royal, proposed a steel magnet below the compass, but neither
suggestion was of much use, and the discussion going on upon the
subject led to the Rev. Dr. Scoresby’s voyage to Australia, with
the object of working out a true theory of correction, with the
result that he proposed placing it aloft out of the reach of the
ship’s attraction, a method still in general use. And finally to Sir
William Thompson’s method of correcting the ship’s magnetism
by a series of magnets placed below the compass.
Admiral Phillip Parker King.
Captain P. P. King, the son of Governor King, was one of the
earliest workers in the field of science in Australia.
In the year 1817 the British Government resolved to send him,
then a lieutenant, to complete the surveys of the coasts of Hew
South Wales. He arrived in Port Jackson in September, 1817,
with Messrs. Bedwell and Roe as his assistants, and in Sydney
his party was joined by Allan Cunningham, “the King’s
Botanist ” in the Colony.
In these voyages, which extended over four years, December,
1817, to April, 1822, during which he received promotion,
Captain King, in addition to his maritime discoveries and to the
study of natural history in general, gave much attention to the
physical conditions and climate of the various parts of the coast
which he visited, and also to the customs and language of the
aboriginal inhabitants.
He also carefully determined the longitude of a number of
important positions in the survey.
In recognition of his ability and services the Royal Society
elected him as one of its Fellows, and he was also elected as a
Member of the Linnean and Royal Asiatic Societies.
The result of his survey was published in two volumes, entitled
“ A Karrative of a Survey of the Intertropical and Western
Coasts of Australia.” (2 Vols. Bvo., London, 1827.)
Charts of the coast henceforward designated by him and others


at the suggestion of Captain Flinders “Australia,” were compiled
and published under the authority of the Hydrographer to the
Admiralty.
In preparing his narrative for the press he was ably assisted by
Dr. J. E. Gray of the British Museum in vertebrata and mollusca,
by Mr. Vigors in respect to some of his birds, and Mr. William
Sharpe McLeay in his collection of insects; also by Mr. Robert
Brown, the eminent botanist of Flinders’ voyage in the
“Investigator,” and Dr. W. H. Fitton, in geology. These
distinguished men classified and described the numerous specimens
of natural history which he had taken to England, many of which
were new to science.
From 1826 to 1830 inclusive he conducted a survey of the
southern coasts of South America, having under his command
two ships, the “ Adventure ” and “ Beagle.” In conjunction with
Captain (afterwards Admiral) Fitzroy he published a narrative of
the voyage, and in after years, at his own private printing press,
produced four pamphlets apparently for private distribution, a
copy of each of which is in the possession of' his son, the
Venerable Archdeacon King, of Sydney.
No. 1. Treats of the specific gravity of sea water in different
parts of the North and South Atlantic Oceans, and in
the South Pacific near the western coast of South America ;
nearly two hundred determinations are given and fully
discussed. (14 pages.)
No. 2. Contains selections from a Meteorological Journal kept
on board H.M. ship “Adventure” during the voyage to
the southern coasts of South America. Observations give
the temperature of the air at various places and are fully
discussed. (42 pages.)
No. 3. Refers to longitudes and gives the observed transits of
the moon and moon culminating stars over the meridian
of Tahlee, Port Stephens, N.S.W., 1843 to 1849, and the
resulting longitudes from them. Also observations of
eclipses of the sun and occultations of the fixed stars by
the moon at the same place. (14 pages.) Longitude
thence lOh. Bm. 11s.
No. 4. Gives a description of instruments in the observatory
and the observations for determining the latitude of
Tahlee, Port Stephens, 1841 to 1848. Observations made
with an altazimuth instrument. Nearly three hundred
separate star observations for latitude are given and the
resulting latitude, 32° 40' 17".74. Also a list of about
one thousand places for which latitude and longitude, and
at most of them magnetic variation and time of high
water are also given. (25 pages.)
The determination of the longitude of marine positions has
B


ever been an anxiety and a trouble to naval surveyors, and to
Admiral King not less than to others. In so remote a position
as the southern extremity of South America it was obviously of
importance that such a turning point as Cape Horn should be
acurately placed in this respect. And with this in view he
devoted much attention to astronomical observations, setting up
whenever his ship was likely to be detained, an observatory in
which he had his own private transit instrument, and in addition
to his purely professional duties he devoted himself to every
scientific pursuit within the range of his stock of instruments,
and opportunities for collecting specimens of natural history.
The narative of his voyage shews also the interest he took in the
intercourse he had with the Patagonian and Fuegian natives.
Differences of longitude by chronometric measurements—and
lunar observations, magnetic intensity by means of a small
apparatus given to him by Professor Hansteen, the temperature of
the sea ancl its specific gravity in different latitudes, observations
of the “ dewpoint” with Daniell’s Hygrometer and the prevalence
of winds and ocean currents were his continual study.
In continuation of Capt. King’s survey, Capt. Robert Fitzroy
re-commissioned the “Beagle” in 1831, and proceeded to South
America. He had supplied himself partly from the Admiralty,
but also on his own account with twenty chronometers, eleven of
which kept fairly accurate rates during the voyage, which lasted
five years. With these he carried a connected chain of chrono-
metric measurements of differences of longitude from station to
station round the globe. The result is given in the appendix to
the “Narrative of the Surveying Voyages of H.M.S. “Adventure”
and “Beagle,” (Bvo., London, 1839.) On completing his obser-
vations and calculations, Captain Fitzroy found that the aggregate
of all the differences amounted to thirty-three seconds of time in
excess of the true sum of exactly twenty-four hours, or an error
of 8} miles of longitude.
This error, neither he nor Captain King, who took much interest
in the work, could account for, but it is now ascribed to what is
known as the “personal error” of an observer. Sir John
Herschell, who was at the Cape of Good Hope when Captain
Fitzroy touched there, told him he need not expect to bring any
result within some minutes of time of the twenty four hours.
This chain of measurements corroborated Captain King’s
longitudes determined in the previous expedition.
On Captain King’s return to Australia, he retired from active
service in the navy, and amongst other works of utility, applied
himself to the advocacy of the use of the “ Inner Passage ” to and
through Torres Straits. To the Captain of every ship bound from
Port Jackson in that direction he gave the fullest information of
the track he had himself proved to be safe, and which is laid
down in modern charts as Captain King’s Track. Many followed


it, and sent back to him letters of approval and thankfulness,
whilst others took their own way outside the Barrier reef, ancl
several are known to have been wrecked upon it.
For the remainder of his life his devotion to the science of
Meteorology continued unaltered. During his residence at
Dunhered from 1832 to 1839, and at Talilee, Port Stephens, to
1848, he kept his observatory in full work with the transit
and other instruments he had had with him on his voyage,
and kept regular registers of the barometer, shade thermometers,
the wet and dry bulbs, and much time was given to the amplitude
of the atmospheric tide, or diurnal variation of air pressure in
conjunction with similar observations made by Mr. Dunlop at
the Parramatta Observatory—who from sixteen days’ hourly*
observations made the highest point of the barometer at 9-24 a.m.,
and the lowest at 3T7 p.m., but who said that the night tide was
irregular.
The first five years work at Tahlee was published in the
Tasmanian Journal, Ko. 6, a copy of which is in the Sydney
Observatory—with the remainder of the observation in MSS.—
where they have been deposited for reference by his son, the
Hon. P. G. King, of Sydney.
During Sir Thomas Mitchell’s explorations in the interior in
1835-6, Captain King, by arrangement with him, kept a careful
record of his more than usually frequent barometer readings ; so
that it should be possible to find a corresponding value of the
pressure for any time or place at which Sir Thomas might have
read off his barometer in the interior; the two barometers,
separated by some hundreds of miles, were wonderfully accordant
in their movements.
On one occasion when Captain King was working up the
results for the purpose of proving the elevation of Sir Thomas’
positions on a particular observation, made his camp 40 feet higher
than it ought to have been by the preceding and following
observations, what had otherwise shewn in a remarkable way the
gradual slope of the country, but on reference to his diary Sir
Thomas found that fearing a flood, he had pitched his camp on
that occasion on an elevation above the river bank which he was
following up.
Amongst Captain King’s papers are records of the determination
of latitudes and longitudes of Fort Macquarie by other observers :
Of Latitudes—
Captain Flinders in 1795 and 1803, gives 33°5F 46-6"
De Freycinet in 1802 ... ... ... 33 51 21
Malaspina, Point Bennilong or Fort { Q „
Macquarie, 1793 ... ... j
T*? Se observatlons were taken hourly but only for eighteen out of the twenty-four, so
that Mr. Dunlop was not in a position to say what the night tide was. The original obser-
vations are in one of his books now in the Sydney Observatory.


Sir Thomas Brisbane, 1822 ... ... 33°51 / 30"
Captain King, 1817 ... ... ... 33 51 18
Mean Latitude of Fort Macquarie— 33 51 28
Of Longitudes—
Captain Cook in 1770 ... ... ... 151 11 32
Hunter, 1788 ... ... ... ... ~ 19 43
Lieut. Dawes ... ... ... ... „ 18 50
„ Bradley ... ... ... ... „ 20 38
1793 ... ... ... ... „ 17 53
Broughton and Crossby ... ... ... ~ 9 3
Captain Flinders, 1795-6 ... ... ... „ 17 12
„ 1802 „ 11 49
De Freycinet, 1802 ... ... ... „ 832
M. D. Espinosa, 1793 ... ... ... ~ 12 45
Sir Thomas Brisbane ... ... ... „ 15 32
Rumker, 1822 ... ... ... ... ~ 17 30
Captain King, 1817 ... ... ... ~ 17 29
Mean of all— 151 15 16
Captain P. P. King’s paper on the Maritime Geography of
Australia which is given in Baron Field’s “Geographical Memoirs,
was read 2nd October, 1822, before the Philosophical Society
of Australia. It gives a short note of Flinders’ and Oxley’s
discoveries, and then a narrative of his own in continuation of
the foregoing. He mentions, (p. 285), that the spring tides rise
thirty feet at Prince Regent’s River, and sometimes ran at seven
knots. He also mentions the general productions of intertropical
Australia and the natives of New Holland.
In the “Narrative of a Survey of the Intertropical and Western
Coasts of Australia,” (Vol. 1, p. 349), Capt. King mentions that
the southerly current on the coast had set the vessel one hundred
and fifty miles south during the storm, and for twenty-four hours
at the rate of three miles per hour. He also gives details of
winds, weather and currents on the coast of Australia, variation
and dip of the magnetic needle of nine places on shore, and at
fourteen places at sea; with the geographical positions of a
number of points in his survey, (p. 404.)
In the Royal Astronomical Society’s Notices there are eight
papers by Captain P. P. King. Four refer to observations of
comets, amongst others, the Great Comet of 1843 ; one to an
occultation of Jupiter and his Satellites; another to a lunar
eclipse ; another to a transit of Mercury ; and the last to a
solar eclipse.
When the present Sydney Observatory was talked about,
Admiral King was the adviser of the Government as to where it
should be placed. (See Votes and Proceedings, N.S. Wales, 1852.)
* Owing to some mistake Collins gives this 151° IS' 8


For nearly all the facts in this account of Admiral King’s work in
Australia I am indebted to the Honorable P. G. King, M.L.C.
Sir Thomas Macdougall Brisbane.
We come now to Sir Thomas Brisbane, a man whose enthusiasm
for science, and especially for Astronomy, knew no bounds. In
the midst of harassing marches in the great Continental war,
with the enemies’ bullets always whistling about him, his sextant
was always in his baggage, and came into active service directly
its owner was off duty. His appointment as Governor of New South
Wales marks an era in the history of Australian Science, and his
princely munificence in the erection of the Parramatta Observa-
tory and cost of maintaining it for four years, will never be
forgotten. Sir Thomas Brisbane entered the army in 1790,
fought in the first battle of the war, and in 1794 had to sleep
six nights in the snow with nothing but his cloak and the
canopy of heaven over him. Each morning he found himself
frozen to the ground, and during one of these nights 900 soldiers
were frozen to death around him. He fought in fourteen general
actions, twenty-three great affairs, and assisted at eight sieges.
He crossed the equator twelve times, yet throughout this busy
active life he always found time to cultivate his favorite study,
Astronomy, and when it was proposed to send him to govern the
far-off Colony of Australia, Lord Bathurst informed the Duke of
Wellington that he “ wanted a man to govern, not the heavens,
but the earth.” Sir Thomas appealed to the Duke to say whether
science had ever stood in the way of his duty as a soldier.
“ Certainly not,” said the Duke, “ I shall say that you were never
in one instance absent or late in the morning, noon, or night,
and that in addition you keep the time for the army.”
It is not surprising that a man of such antecedents, persevering
and methodical in his habits, and having a passion for astronomical
pursuits, should catch the feeling of the day, which asked for two
astronomical observatories to explore the wonders of the southern
sky, and when he found the Government would not give the
money, put his hand into his own purse and found all that was
required. Arrived at Parramatta, the instruments were unpacked
and used within a few days to observe the solstice in December,
1821, before there was an observatory to cover them; and that
he might devote every spare moment to the work he built the
Observatory alongside his residence, and there is abundant
evidence to prove that at first, and before his official position
brought so many worries, Sir Thomas was one of the most active
of the three observers.
It was in recognition of his princely patronage of Astronomy,
and for the abundance of observations that came pouring in from
Parramatta, that in 1828 the Royal Astronomical Society awarded
him the Gold Medal for the Parramatta Catalogue of Stars and


General Observations, amongst which were observations of the
length of the seconds pendulum in 1823, printed by the Royal
Society in their Transactions. Sir John Herschel, at that time
President of the Astronomical Society, said, in presenting the
medal :—“ We give this medal, accompanied with the strongest
expressions of our admiration for your patriotic and princely
support given to Astronomy in regions so remote. It will be to
you a source of honest pride as long as you live to reflect that the
most brilliant trait of Australian history marks the era of your
government, and that your name will be identified with the futuie
glories of that colony in ages yet to come, as the founder of hex
science. It is a distination worthy of a British Governor. Our
first triumphs in those fair climes have been the peaceful ones of
science, and the treasui’es they have transmitted to us aie
imperishable records of useful knowledge, speedily to be returned
with interest, to the improvement of their condition and their
elevation in the scale of nations.”
Having formed the resolution to establish an observatory in
New South Wales, Sir Thomas made a collection of astronomical
books and instruments, and engaged two gentlemen, Mr. Charles
Rumker, who had already attained a position as a good astronomer
and mathematician, and Mr. James Dunlop, whose great natxiral
ability, and especially his fondness for and success in mechanical
appliances and instruments, had pointed him out as a most suitable
man for second assistant in the Observatory in an out of the way
place like Parramatta, where ixothing towards the repair of the
instruments could be done outside the Observatory. They arrived
in the colony in November, 1821. A site was immediately chosen
fox’ the Observatoi’y close to Government House, Parramatta,
only about one hundred yards from the back door. Men were at
once set to work, and by the end of Api'il, the building was
completed, and the instruments erected.
The building* was not loaded with architectural ornaments,
the walls being quite plain, 11 feet high, and 28 feet on eaclx
side; the roof was flat, but at each end, north and south, small
domes, 11 feet 6 inches in diameter, projected above the flat roof,
The east and west walls were entirely without windows, but on the
north and south sides there were five windows in each, three being
in a circular projection of the wall, which formed half the base of the
dome, the other half, inside the building, being supported in eacli
case by four pillars; transit openings were made through the roof
on each side of the domes, and carried through the wall to one
of the windows, which could be opened, if required, to allow ot
seeing objects on the horizon. The transit instrument was placed
under the western opening, and the mural circle under the eastern
one. The 46-inch long achromatic telescope under the south
* A plan shewing details of the building will be found as a frontispiece to the Parramatta
Catalogue of Stars.


dome, and the repeating circle under the north dome ; one dividing
wall extended from the entrance, and only door, on the east side,
across the building to the west side, so dividing it into two
rooms, but as both transit and mural circle were on the south
side of this wall, it had an opening in it from roof to floor for
each instrument; there was no fireplace, nor any sign that the
building was meant for habitation, indeed the instruments were so
distributed as to make that almost impossible; later, i.e., in 1832,
a residence was built on the west side. When the new transit
circle was put up, it was placed on the eastern side of the old
building.
The instruments (see Appendices B and G) mentioned in the
introduction to the Parramatta Catalogue, as belonging to the
Observatory, were, a 5£ feet Transit Instrument, by Trough ton ;
a 2-foot Mural Circle, having a telescope of the same length, by the
same maker; a 16-inch Repeating Circle, by Reichenbach; a 46-inch
Achromatic Telescope, with equatorial motion and wire micrometer,
by Banks ; a Clock by Hardy, shewing sidereal time, tind another by
Brequet shewing mean time. All these instruments were placed on
solid piers of masonry. These are all that are mentioned in the
Parramatta Catalogue. But Rumker, (Memoirs, Royal Astrono-
mical Society, Vol. 111, p. 277),says:—“ The pendulum apparatus
was made by Fortin of Paris, and brought to the colony by
Sir Thomas Brisbane. It consisted of a platinum ball , the cap
for the ball (which was attached to it by excluding the air with
a little grease); the knife edge suspension with the wire; the
steel rod, the supporting plane; the horizontal plane, capable of
being elevated and depressed, but there was no standard of
length with it ”; he then gives a figure of it. And in his
astronomical observations (Phil. Trans. 1829, Part 111., preface),
he, in addition to the instruments already recorded, mentions two
instruments for observing the dip and variation of the magnetic
needle.”
Appendices B and G give the complete list of Sir Thomas’
fit-out for the Observatory ; and of them I have now in the
Observatory in a more or less complete state the following:—
The Transit Instrument,
Mural Circle,
Repeating Circle,
Equatorial,
apparatus,
Hardy clock,
Brequet clock,
Magnetic dip instrument and the books,
but the magnetic variation instrument I have never seen. It is
* It is worth mentioning that in the Philosophical Transactions, 1823, Captain Kater
says “ This Pendulum belongs to the Board of Longitude ;he is speaking of the one Sir
Thomas took to Parramatta, and which he sold to the New South Wales Government
for £B5. (See Appendix, date 10 Sept,, 1827.)


probable that it was lost while the things were in the ordnance
store; the only thing connected with it is a mahogany box with
tube for suspension filaments, glass window for observing magnet,
etc., with a small copper tube telescope, evidently intended to
carry a magnet, but the Dolland’s Magnetic Transit with telescope
for observing sun, and microscope for reading circle (Phil. Trans.,
1829, Part 111., pp. 1 and 2), I have never seen.
In the Introduction to the Parramatta Catalogue (p. 5) it is
stated that “ the Observatory was built and furnished with books
and instruments, and conducted during Sir Thomas Brisbane’s
governmeut solely at his expense. On his departure from the
colony in the end of 1825, he transferred the whole to the
Colonial Government, who repaid the original cost of the instru-
ments,* and in 1826 appointed Mr. Rumker, Astronomer, at a
salary of £3OO per annum. He retired in 1829 and returned to
Europe. Mr. Rumker’s letter of appointment is dated 16 July,
1829, about three years after he actually began the work.
Sir G. B. Airy, (Second Report Brit. Assoc. Adv. Science,
1832, p. 130) says on Observatories:—Sir Thomas Brisbane on
leaving Parramatta “ presented the instruments, etc., to the
British Government, on condition that the Observatory should
be maintained in an efficient state. The condition was accepted
and an observer (Mr. Dunlop) is now , 1832, maintained by the
British Government at this distant station.”
It is evident from Governor Darling’s letter, (Appendix B)
that Sir George Airy was not fully informed; the Govern-
ment accepted the instruments, but paid a long price for them,
and from the fact that they appointed Rumker, and requested
him to undertake the measurement of an arc of the meridian it is
evident that they meant to turn the Observatory to some good
use, an intention which seems to have been abandoned when Dr.
Rumker resigned.
Another very important work carried out by Sir Thomas
Brisbane, was the formation of the Philosophical Society of
Australia. The only full account of it which I have met with is
by the Rev. W. B. Clarke, (Trans. R. Soc. N.S. Wales, 1867.)
“In the year 1821 a Company of gentlemen, consisting of
Alexander Berry, Esq.,
Henry Grattan Douglas, Esq.. M.D.,
Barron Field, Esq., Judge of the Supreme Court,
Major Goulburn, Colonial Secretary,
Patrick Hill, Esq., Colonial Surgeon,
Captain Irwin, XI Bengal N.I,
Captain P. P. King, R.N.,
John Oxley, Esq., Surveyor-General.
Charles Stargard Rumker, Esq., Astronomer; and
Ed ward Wolstonecraft. Esq..
formed themselves into the Philosophical Society of Australasia, under the
presidency of His Excellency Sir Thomas Brisbane, K.C.8., F.R.S.L. & E.
***** This early union appears to have
* See Appendix A. The price paid was £1614 13s.


partaken rather of the character of a Mutual Friendly Association, than of
that of a more formal body. It was, in other words, a Scientific Club. At
that time there were no public libraries and scarcely a bookseller’s shop in
the Colony ; but the members possessed books of their own ; these were
catalogued and lent by one to another, so that the use of them was
reciprocal. The business of the Society was transacted at the dwelling-
houses of the members in succession, where memoirs, prepared on an
alternative of a fine of ten pounds sterling, were read and discussed, the
only refreshment allowed being a cup of coffee and a biscuit, an arrangement
still in vogue, I believe, in England, and which was followed here in later
times at the meetings of our Society in 1855-56.
I have not been able to discover more than four of the papers read by
members, and these were preserved as a portion only of the Society’s
Transactions, and edited b/ Judge Field in his “ Geographical Memoirs of
New South Wales by various hands.” published by John Murray, of
Albemarle Street, in the year 1825. These papers were the following :
1. “ On the Aborigines of New Holland and Van Dieman’s Land,” by
Barron Field, Esq., read 2nd January, 1822.
2. “ On the Geology of part of the Coa3t of New South Wales,” (from
the River Hunter to the Clyde), read in the same year by
Alexander Berry, Esq.
3. “ On the Astronomy of the Southern Hemisphere,” by Dr. Rumker,
read on the 13th March, 1822 ; and
4. “On the Maritime Geography of Australia,” by Captain Philip
Parker King, R.N., read 2nd October, 1822.
In Mr. Field’s book there are also papers by Mr. Oxley, and meteorological
notices by Major Goulburn and Sir Thomas Brisbane. We have evidence,
therefore, that at least seven of the twelve were working members.
Mr. Allan Cunningham, the Botanist, (whose death I recollect at the
Botanical Gardens shortly after my arrival in 1839), also contributed
two papers, the one describing his traverse from Bathurst to Liverpool
Plains in 1823; the other “ On the Botany of the Blue Mountains,” as
observed in November and December, 1822.
As these last papers do not appear to have been read before the Society,
it is probable that Mr. Cunningham was not a member of it. But, without
doubt, the actual members did good service to the Colony. Of only one of
these memoirs do I venture to form an opinion, and that is one w T hich I
expressed in 1860 in my book on the Southern Gold Fields, in the following
words: —“ In the year 1822 my respected friend, Alexander Berry, Esq.,
read a very interesting paper on the geology of the Clyde River before the
Philosophical Society of Australasia. At that early period Mr. Berry had
successfully made out all the prominent features of the district, as well as
along the coast, and has pointed out the vertical strata of schist, the quartz,
the trap, and the sandstone, with their oi’der of succession. It gives me
great satisfaction to mention this,' (p. 45.) * *
The Philosophical Society, which thus commenced with flattering
promises of future usefulness, was destined to only a brief period of service.
A question arose between the Government and some of the members which
led to estrangement. The friendly meetings became fewer, and the fictitious*
variable value assigned to the dollar (the coin then current) was the cause
of breaking up the little band who cultivated science for the love of it.
Judge Field thus speaks of that mishap, in connection with the seven
memoirs before mentioned ; —“Such of them (i.e. , of the several documents
in his book) as are parts of the Transactions of the Philosophical Society of
Australasia are printed by permission of their respective authors ; for I am
sorry to add, that the infant Society soon expired in the baneful atmosphere
of distracted politics which unhappily clouded the short administration of
its President, the present (i.e. the then) Governor of New South Wales.”
* Official History of New South Wales says Sir Thomas Brisbane had established
a currency which had the eflect of raising the pound sterling 25 per cent- (p. 36.)


During his life after leaving Sydney, Sir Thomas Brisbane
founded two other observatories, one at Makerstown and the
other at Brisbane, in Scotland. Sir Thomas died in February,
1860. (Royal Astronomical Society’s Notices, Yol. XX., p. 118.)
He contributed some papers about Parramatta work to the
Royal Society of Edinburgh, 1821 to 1824, but I have not a
complete file of the Transactions* for reference; he also contri-
buted to the Royal Astronomical Society thirteen papers.
Sir Thomas Brisbane’s first knowledge of Astronomy had been
gained at sea. Struck with the importance of knowing how to
na'v igate a ship, he went to work with the energy that marked
all his actions, and soon mastered the situation and become a
first-class observer with the sextant, but I cannot find that he
had afiy experience in fixed observatories until he got to
Parramatta, and therefore, very little, if any, knowledge of large
and fixed instruments, hence I think the whole difficulty with
the observations at Parramatta ; he bought large but essentially
faulty instruments! without knowing it, and found this out
when it was too late to remedy the evil.
The published work of the Parramatta Observatory under Sir
T. Brisbane, is represented by the Parramatta Catalogue of Stars,
and some papers upon latitude, longitude, comets, &c., published
in the Royal Astronomical Society Notices, the Philosophical
transactions of the Royal Society, and the Transactions of the
Royal Society of Edinburgh, and some meteorological observations
for one whole year and part of a second.
The Catalogues of Nebulae and Double Stars by Dunlop were
his private work and not made at the Observatory, but at the
house in Parramatta, and the work published by Rumker in
the Philosophical Transactions 1829, part 111, was done at the
Parramatta Observatory after Sir Thomas Brisbane left the
colony. All the books in which this work was recorded have
disappeared, but in the Royal Astronomical Society library at
Burlington House is preserved the MS. of the Parramatta
Catalogue.
At this time the Government seems to have hesitated about
keeping up the Parramatta Observatory, and the Royal Astrono-
mical Society urged the matter as follows :
[Extract from the Minutes of the Royal Astronomical Society , Nov. 11, 1828.]
Present Mr. Herschell, President; Mr. Baily, Mr. South, Mr.
Strathford, Captain Beaufort, Mr. Gomperty, Mr. Riddle, Mr. Sheepshanks’.
, *JoL IX. contains two, first a memoir on tire repeating: Reflecting Circle, and secndlv a
Method of determining the Latitude by a Sextant or Circle, with simplicity and accuracy
from circum-meridian observations taken near noon.
, Vol. X. contains one paper on Astronomical Observations made at Parramatta and Sydney
by Sir Thomas Brisbane and Mr Rumker, which was read Nov 3, 1823 This paper contains
LUeptm Elements of the Comet in September, 1822, by Rumker; Observations of Transit
of Mercury, Noy. 3 1882; Observations of Winter Solstice, 1822, by Sir Thomas Brisbane
and Observations of Encke’s Comet, June 2 to 23, 1822.
t I speak from personal examination of these instruments since they have been in the
Sydney Observatory,


Resolved unanimously —That this Council are decidedly of opinion that
the continuation of the Observatory at Parramatta as a national institution,
in addition to that already existing at the Cape of Good Hope, would be of
the highest importance to astronomy, and they ground this opinion on the
following reasons, in which it will be observed that they do not contemplate
a removal of the Cape Observatory, as precluded by its very advantageous
situation on the same meridian with the principal Observatories of Europe,
and from the great expense already incurred and powerful instruments
erected in that establishment.
First—The great difference of geographical situation, in longitude and of
climate, of the Cape and Parramatta, which renders it practicable to obtain
numerous observations at each not susceptible of being made at the other,
either from cloudy weather or from the circumstances that the phenomena
take place below the horizon of either Observatory, or may actually happen
at the one and not at the other.
Secondly—The effective verifying check and corroboration, and the great
increase of diligence and accuracy to be expected from the emulation of
rival observers.
Thirdly—The remarkable and also highly advantageous geographical
situation of Parramatta, it being almost exactly at the antipodes of
Greenwich, and the peculiar excellence of its climate.
Fourthly—The very imperfect state of Southern Astronomy, and
the wide field of research which has been laid open by the observation, of
new stars and nebulae already made, which the Council consider as affording
ample employment for two of the most active observatories without
interfering with each other.
JLastly—The indispensable importance of a long-continued and exact
senes of observations at a fixed station on some part of the immense
Australian continent, for the purposes of a geographical and hydrographical
survey of its interior and of its coasts, when the circumstances and extent
of the Colony shall render such operations necessary, and which ought to
be commenced as early as possible in order to give time.
And the Council cannot but regard their opinion of the future importance
of an Observatory at Parramatta as strongly sustained, whether by the
re-discovery of Enche’s Comet when not visible in Europe, or by the
important mass of observations already forwarded from it to this country
by Sir Thomas Brisbane.
Dr. Charles Stargard Rumker.
Rumker, whom Sir Thomas Brisbane selected as first assistant,
was at that time a man of acknowledged ability as an Astronomer,
and Mathemetician, but I find no record of his previous history,
excepting some Astronomical papers in Baron de Zach’s corres-
pondence. He accepted the position in Sir Thomas s private
Observatory, and it is evident that he was well received and
taken into a confidential position at once.
It is, perhaps, worth mentioning that in all the papers he com-
municated to the Royal Astronomical Society, in his long life,
and they numbered eighty-eight, he is called Mr. Charles Rumker,
and in his work in the Philosophical Transactions, 1829, he calls
himself Charles Rumker. But he read one paper before the
Philosophical Society of Australia, in 1822, and he is then
(Judge Field’s Memoirs) called Dr. Charles Stargard Rumker.


In the grant of land given to him here, he is called Charles Luis
Rumker. The Royal Astronomical Society gave him a Silver
Medal for his work on Encke’s Comet, and in presenting it the
President said, I have peculiar satisfaction in presenting to Dr.
P. Karl Rumker, the Superintendent of the Parramatta Obser-
vatory. And when he was appointed Astronomer at Parramatta
m 1827, by the Colonial Government, he is called Charles Luis
Rumker, the same in his grant of land. There cannot in any of
these cases be any question as to his identity.
In proof of the early confidence, it may be mentioned that in
the Philosophical Transactions for 1823, (p. 308), Sir Thomas
published his observations made with the pendulum apparatus he
took to Parramatta, he swung it frequently before he left London,
and in all cases it was Rumker who was called in to work with
him, but we hear nothing then of Dunlop. At Parramatta, four
months after the observatory work began, Sir Thomas again got to
work at the pendulum, but called Dunlop and not Rumker,
and in these observations, which were published with those made
m London, Captain Henry Kater, who read the paper, says :
one series was made at Parramatta, by Mr. Dunlop, a gentleman
of whose zeal and scientific abilities Sir Thomas Brisbane expresses
himself in the highest terms.
Of Rumker, so late as 17th January, 1823, Sir Thomas in a
paper to the Royal Society of Edinburgh (Vol. x, p. 112), says
these results are exclusively by Mr. Rumker to whom it “is im-
possible for me to give adequate praise, either for zeal, assiduity
or intelligence.” J
In the Introduction to the Parramatta Catalogue it is stated
that Rumker made the meridian observations, and from those
published by him in the Philosophical Transactions in 1829, it
appears that he also made special observations for latitude and
longitude, the dates given in these observations shew that he
continued observing there in the ordinary way until June 15, 1823,
and it is stated in the Introduction to the Parramatta Catalogue
that he left the Observatory on June 16, 1823. There is a gap
then of thirteen months in his observations, and nothing to shew
what he was doing, but page iv. of the Parramatta Catalogue says
he remained in the colony ; and his observations, I find bemn
again at “ Stargard ” on July 15th, 1824. (Philosophical Transac-
tions, 1823, Part 111., p. 63.) It appears from the latitude and
longitude of this place, which he gives, that it was about 40 miles
north, and 20 miles west from Parramatta, and in the Royal
Astronomical Society’s Memoirs (Vol. 11. p. 284), he says
“‘Stargard ’ is the name I have given to my farm.” It is evident,
therefore, that havingfallen out with Sir Thomas Brisbane, heretirecl
to his farm and remained there until the latter left the Colony
making obsverations until December 20, 1825. On the 10th May’
1826, his observations begin again in the Parramatta Observatory


It appears on the title page of his observations in the Philoso-
phical Transactions for 1829, that the printing was -paid for by
His Majesty’s Colonial Department. This work consists of a
vast number of observations to determine the latitude; a few
to determine the longitude; a number of comet observations,
and others to determine latitude by the sun’s solstice; observa-
tions of the moon and planets, etc.
Every care has evidently been bestowed upon these observa-
tions, and their subsequent reduction, and it was no fault of Mr.
Rumker’s that the observations are affected by incurable errors
depending upon the imperfect instruments with which he was
obliged to work. Of these Mr. Rumker was fully conscious, and
by every means in his power tried to eliminate them, but’they
were of such a nature that all his efforts necessarily failed to
produce the desired results.
I find by reference to official letters that Mr. Rumker’s promise
of appointment is dated 21st December, 1827 (see Appendix C);
but his observations began in Pararmatta in May 1826, he
must, therefore, have been appointed by the Governor, subject to
confirmation by the Home Government. (See Appendix D,
letter of July 16, 1829, his actual appointment.)
Rumker, (Philosophical Transactions, 1829, part III., pp. 29
and 151), says :—
The longitude of Parramatta as a mean of all is
Parramatta ... 10h. 4m. 6.25s.
*Port Jackson—by Brisbane observing
at Government House, August
16, 1822 10 5 17.89
and it is worth noting that Sir Thomas Brisbane gave up his.
appointment on December Ist, 1825, and that Dunlop remained in
Parramatta Observatory until March 2nd, 1826. From May
10th, 1826, Rumker was a most active observer for latitude,
longitude, pendulum and other observations, until December 26th’
1828, which is the date of his last observation. The results are
published in the Philosophical Transactions, 1829, Part 111, and
occupy one hundred and fifty-five pages, and in the Royal Astro-
nomical Society’s Memoirs (Vol. 111., pp. 100 and 277),
occupying thirty-four pages.
The Royal Astronomical Society’s Notices also contain notes of
papers by him, written while he was in Australia, as follows:
Vol. 1, page 75, On the length of Pendulums.
» ~ ~ 78, Results of observations at Parramatta.
~ „ ~ 98, December solstice.
~ „ „ 125, Solstice and equinox in 1827, and others.
„ „ ~ 183, Observations on a passage from N.S.W. also to England.
*By the Map referred to in next note the longitude of Government House Observatory is
given as 151° 15' 20'' or lOh. 5m. 1.33s. which does not agree with any of those sriven
above. See also Capt. King’s results already given.


Difference between Parramatta and
Sydney, by chronometers, Capt.
P. P. King Oh. om. 51.935.
Mean of several observed differences ; 50.88
this added to Parramatta longi-
tude makes longitude, Sydney... 10 4 57.13
fGovernment House, Sydney, by Admiral
Bligh 10 5 10.5
Government House, Sydney, by Capt.
King 10 5 8.2
Rumker, (Royal Astronomical Society Proceedings, Vol VI.,
P- 213), gives a final correction for the longitude of Parramatta
as the result of a second calculation from his moon observations
there, and makes it lOh. 4m. 75.217. Date, April, 1845.
Some unimportant letters were sent by him from Parramatta and
published in Baron de Zach’s Correspondence, and he read one
paper before the Philosophical Society of Australia on March 13,
1822, on “ The Astronomy of the Southern Hemisphere,” which
is published in Baron Field’s “Geographical Memoirs of New South
V ales,” but it is of no value to science, as it simply points out
the advantage of the geographical position of Parramatta for
observations, a fact which did not need a paper before the Society
to make it obvious.
In searching for other information in the Survey Office Mr. W.
D. Campbell, C.E., found under date May 1828 correspondence
between the Surveyor-General and the Colonial Secretary in
reference to an additional grant of land given by Sir Thomas
Brisbane to Mr. C. Rumker.
Rumker left the colony in the encl of 1828 or beginning of
1829, and became Superintendent of the Nautical School of
Hamburgh and Director of the Hamburgh Observatory, and on
the 10th February, 1854, the Royal Astronomical Society
conferred on him their Gold Medal for his extensive observations
chiefly of comets, and a catalogue of twelve thousand stars.
Royal Astronomical Society’s Notices, Vol. XIV., p. 43.) He
died February, 1863. (Royal Astronomical Society’s Notices,
Vol. XXIII., p. 127.)
There is one point in connection with Rumker, at Parramatta,
of which it is difficult now to give the true version, and it cannot
well, be passed over, seeing that it changed the whole course of
Astronomy in this colony. I allude to the sudden termination of
his connection with the Parramatta Observatory. Report here
fßy the Map of Sydney made in 1522 which is now in the Parliamentary Library it
appears that old Government House stood on the north side of Bridge street and west
side of Phillip street, but it faced north-west, and one corner came nearly across what is
now Bridge street. The two old pine trees that stood in the street until about 18S0 then
stood over Government House gate. On that Map, No. 70, is the Governor’s Observatory,
and it stood as nearly as possible at the point which is now, 1888, the noith-west corner
of the intersection of Bridge and Phillip streets.


said it was wholly due to some sudden incompatibility of temper,
and many years afterwards when Sir George Airy, as President
of the Royal Astronomical Society was presenting to Mr.
Rumker, the Gold Medal, said “ some misapprehension on one
side or the other as to the precise terms of his engagement
brought the connection with Sir Thomas Brisbane to a close ! I
am totally unable to say with accuracy what was the point
under discussion or the merits of the two views of it.” It is
however, quite evident that Rumker did not return until Sir
Thomas had left, and that in all his subsequent writings about
Parramatta, he entirely ignores the fact that Sir Thomas Brisbane
was the founder of the Observatory, and for a time his chief.
Again, it appears from correspondence in the Survey Office,
found by Mr. W. D. Campbell, C.E., and given to me that on
“January Bth, 1828, Rumker made a requisition for the rods
and cylinders for the trigonometrical survey in connection with
an arc of the meridian, which he had undertaken to measure,”
and, as we have already seen, he gave up the observations at
Parramatta in December, the same year. As the apparatus
could not have been obtained from England under one or two
years, and it would have taken a number of years to measure
the arc, it is evident that there was a sudden change of purpose
between 1828 and 1830, by Mr. Rumker, and that he threw up
his appointment while in Europe, where he seems to have gone in
December, 1828, or the beginning of 1829.
By a letter which I found in the Colonial Secretary’s Office,
date Ist September, 1830, it appears that JVlr, Rumker was in
England and preparing to return to the colony, (Appendix E.)
It seems, therefore, probable that he had been granted leave of
absence to go to England and superintend the purchase of
instruments for the survey, and that while there he suddenly
changed his mind and threw up his appointment.
James Dunlop.
We are tolcl in the introduction to the Parramatta Catalogue
“that James Dunlop was one of two gentlemen selected by Sir
Thomas Brisbane to act as Astronomers in his Observatory,” and
there is nothing said beyond this as to their relative rank ; but
from the fact that before starting Mr. Rumker was selected to
take part with Sir Thomas in very important work, it seems
probable that Rumker was first assistant and Dunlop second.
From the time of his arrival in Sydney, Dunlop seems to have
worked with a zeal and perseverance that not only justifies his
selection, but made Sir Thomas speak more highly of him than
he did of Mr. Rumker, and set him to do specially difficult
work, such as the observations of length of pendulum, &c. With
Rumker, he observed regularly for the formation of the Catalogue.
Both instruments, the transit and mural circle, were used for


each star, the one for its right ascension and the other for its
declination; and it is probable that one worked at each instrument,
but it was soon found that the transit was very defective and gave
such unsatisfactory results that it was worse than useless. We are
not told when its use was given up; but we are informed (Introd.
Parramatta Catalogue, p. 7), that during the greater part of the
time embraced by the Parramatta observations, Mr. Dunlop was
the only observer*; and, with a view to complete the observations
for the formation of an extensive Catalogue he abandoned the
Transit instrument, and fixing the Mural Circle as nearly in the
plane of the meridian as he could, he commenced observing every
star that circumstances permitted, as it passed the central wire
registering the time of transit, and reading off as many
microscopes as the interval, before another object came to the
wire, would allow.
In the period of about two years and a-quarter he observed in
this manner above 7,000 stars, and made nearly 40,000 observa-
tions, besides an extensive series of observations upon double
stars and nebulae, an amount of labour which, perhaps, has never
been performed before by any one within the same time. This
change of instrument was made during the time Sir Thomas was
there, and must have been with his consent, and it is very much
to be regretted that it ever was made, as it would seem for the
purpose of observing a great number of stars; because the
Catalogue is practically useless, and its weakest point is the right
ascension of the stars, and bad as the old transit instrument was,
I know from working with it that it was capable of giving very
much more accurate right ascension results than the mural circle,
which has a short axis, and such a form of construction as to render
accurate work in the meridian impossible; and there can, I
think, be no doubt that the time mentioned, two and a-quarter
years, is wrong, for the following reasons: —Rumker left the
Observatory 16th June, 1823, and Dunlop on March 2nd, 1826
(Introd. Parramatta Catalogue), an interval of two years and eight
months, and he says in a letter to Sir Thomas Brisbane (Royal
Astronomical Society’s Memoirs, V’&l. 111., p. 257), that he stayed
behind to follow out his favorite study, i.e., double stars and
nebulse, the meridian work in the Observatory having prevented
him from doing so. He does not say how long he spent over
this work, but it is evident from an extract which follows that
he arrived in England in time to reduce most of these observations
there, and have them ready to be presented to the Royal Society
on 20th December, 1827. They did not require much reduction ;
probably a month would be time enough. Allow four months for
* I cannot find anything to shew how much work had been done towards the Catalogue
when Rumker left the Observatory. Except that in January 1823, Bir T. Brisbane writing-
of Rumker, says, nearly ten thousand stars have been observed (i e. in eight months),
perhaps it should read, observations have been made for the finished catalogue has not one
thousand stars in it, and most of that work was done by Dunlop.


the passage to England, and it would appear that he left Parra-
matta about the end of June, 1827, which would have given him
sixteen months for nebulae and double stars, and two years and
eight months for meridian work, or, in all, four years, not two
and a-quarter years as stated.
A catalogue of six hundred and twenty-one nebulae and
clusters of stars observed at Parramatta by James Dunlop was
presented to the Royal Society in 1828, by Sir John Herschel,
and read on December 20th, 1827. In a letter with this Mr!
Dunlop says The following nebula? and clusters of stars in
the Southern Hemisphere were observed by me at my house in
Parramatta, situated 6" of a degree south and about 1.78" of
time east of the Brisbane Observatory. The reductions and
arrangement have been principally made since my return to
Europe.
Dunlop further says : “ ‘ The places of the small stars in the
nebulae, major and minor, and also those accompanying Eta
Robur Caroli {Eta argus), I ascertained by the mural circle in
ie year 1810, at which time I was preparing to commence a
general survey of the Southern Hemisphere.” The nebulae are
arranged m order of polar distance for the Epoch 1827, and in a
paper read before the Royal Astronomical Society (p. 258) on
May Bth, 1828 he says in a letter to Sir Thomas Brisbane: —“ You
are aware that during your administration of the Government of
th ® Colony of New South Wales, my time and attention were
wholly devoted m your employ to the Parramatta Observatory, in
the miscellaneous observations which occurred, and principally
collecting materials towards the formation of a catalogue of
stars; and your departure from the Colony prevented me from
pursuing that branch further. Finding myself in possession of
telescopes* (a nme-inch reflector, nine-feet focus) which I considered
capable of adding considerably to our knowledge of the nebula?
and double stars in that portion of the heavens, I resolved to
remain behind to prosecute my favorite pursuits in collecting
materials towards the formation of a catalogue of nebula?, &c
In the case of stars marked with an asterisk their positions
declinations, &c., are the result of micrometrical measurements
with the forty-six inchf achromatic telescope, mounted on the
equatorial stand, which you left with me. The micrometers
were constructed by myself, consisting of a parallel line
micrometer, the screws of which I bestowed great pains upon
and which I consider very excellent and uniform.”
It is evident from these extracts that Dunlop’s survey of the
heavens was projected before Sir Thomas left or resigned his
authority on December Ist, 1825, and that he lent Dunlop the
*lle uses the plural, but I have only found the dimensions of one reflecting telescope.
t Now in Sydney Observatory
C


forty-six-inch Equatorial from the Parramatta Observatory which
belonged to the set of instruments which he brought out.
The estimate in which Dunlop was held in England at this
time is evident from the fact that the Royal Astronomical Society
gave him its highest honour, a Gold Medal, in presenting which,
on the Bth February, 1828, Sir John Herschel said: “I
have now, gentlemen, to call your attention to the awaid
of another gold medal, this time to Mr. Dunlop, Sir Thomas
Brisbane’s assistant, who went out with him in 1821, and
who has since the middle of 1823, when his companion, Mr.
Rumker, left the Observatory, remained in sole charge of
the instruments, and up to the departure of Sir Thomas
from the colony, continued an uninterrupted series of obser-
vations with a care and diligence seldom equalled and never
surpassed. The records of this Society bear sufficient testimony
to the merits of Mr. Rumker, and to our sense of them. But in
Mr. Dunlop were combined qualities, rendering him, above all
others, the very individual fitted for the duties imposed on him—
zealous, active, leady—but above all (and the combination is not
an ordinary one) industrious and methodical. In the vast mass
of observations made and registered by him all is equable and
smooth as if the observations had been made at a sitting. No
long intervals of inactivity ) nothing hurried or sketchy, but the
same painstaking laborious filling in pervading the whole and
shewing that the observers whole heart was in his work.
“ These considerations alone would have rendered it impossible
to your Council to disunite in any expression, or mark of their
approbation, individuals who have thus, each in his spheie, gone
hand in hand together towards the perfection of Southern
Astronomy, even had the labours of Mr. Dunlop been confined
to the ordinary business of an Observatory, or to the observation
of fixed instruments. But this is very far from having been the
case. The nebulous, as well as the sidereal heavens have occupied
his attention, and in the prosecution of this most difficult and
delicate branch of astronomy, he has availed himself entiiely of
his own resources in the most literal sense. The instiument
which he used being not only his own, but the work of his own
hands* ; and the observations being performed by him after the
departure of Sir Thomas Brisbane from the colony, at a personal
sacrifice of his private interests, and in the face of difficulties
which would have deterred anyone not animated with a real and
disinterested love of science, from their prosecution. The results
of these observations have been the description and determination
of upwards of 600 nebula: and clusters of stars, and 253 double
stars.”
* A reflecting telescope, 9 inches in diameter, and 9 feet focus, mounted as a transit
instrument, at his private house in Parramatta. I have tried repeatedly to trace this
instrument, but it was never seen at his house at Brisbane Water, and I do not find any
reference to it during his second stay at Parramatta, 1832 to 1847 ; and it seems probable
that it was left behind in Scotland, perhaps with Sir Thomas Brisbane.


Mr. Dunlop got two other gold medals, which are now in the
possession of his relations in this colony. I have seen all of
these. Mr. James Kay, of the Colonial Architects Department,
who married Mr. Dunlop’s niece, has the medal presented by the
Royal Astronomical Society, which has on one side a head with
the words “ Royal Astronomical Society of London, instituted
MDCCCXX, Nubem pellente mathese,” and on the other side
Lord Ross’ telescope, with the words “ Quicquid nitet notandum,
James Dunlop, 1828;” and Mr. Robert Dunlop, of Sydney, nephew
of the astronomer, has the one presented by the Royal Institute
of France. This has on it the words “ Institute Royal de France,”
and on the other side “ Prix UAstronomie, M Dunlop Astronome.’
“A La Nouvelle Hollande, 1835.” The third medal was from
the King of Denmark, and is now in the possession of Dr.
Service, of Sydney. This has on one side a head surrounded by
the words “ Fredericus VI. Rex Danice” and on the other
“ Non frustra signorum obitus speculcimur et ortus.” In the center
a female figure, pointing to a globe held in her le£t hand, and
below the words “ Gometa visus, Sept., 1833,” and engraved on (
the edge “ Dunlop.” Mr. Dunlop’s letters were lost or destroyed
before he died, and there are no recorded particulars relative to
the two foreign medals.
Once in England Dunlop went back to his old chief, and
became his assistant in the Observatory which he had established
at Makerstown, and from time to time we find references to his
work there. In the Royal Astronomical Society’s Notices, (Vol.
1, p. 120) is a paper containing the places of Encke’s Comet as
reduced from thirty observations made by Mr. Dunlop, between
October 26 and December 25, 1828, at Sir Thomas Brisbane’s
Observatory, at Makerstown, Roxburghshire.
Again a letter from Sir T. Brisbane contained nineteen occupa-
tions of stars observed at Makerstown, during 1829 and 1830,
chiefly by Mr. Dunlop. ( Loc. cit. Vol. 1, p. 196.) And another
letter from Sir Thomas Brisbane, containing observations of the
moon and moon culminating stars, in which he says these obser-
vations were almost entirelymade by Mr. Dunlop, in 1829 and 1830.
(Loc. cit. Vol. 11., p. 30. Dunlop evidently worked up the whole
of these observations before he left Makerstown, and the result
was communicated to the Royal Astronomical Society, April 8,
1831. He must have left England almost immediately after this,
for the official record here shows that he was appointed Super-
intendent of the Parramatta Observatory, on November 11, 1831.
From this time forward no record of his work is to be found in
the Royal Astronomical Society’s Memoirs or Notices, and the
only records I can find is contained in eight books of MS.
observations which came with the instruments and are now in
Sydney Observatory. In the first book the record begins in
January 1832, and in that year there are upwards of two


thousand star observations, in 1833 about the same, and this
book ends May 26, up to which time the observations were
carried on at the same rate. The next book takes the record on
to July 1835, and it is recorded that on April 28,1835, he began
to use the then new Transit Circle ; observing the same star with
it and with the Mural Circle; with a view of finding the errors
of the Mural Circle After July, 1835, there is a gap, perhaps a
book missing (Dunlop, Appendix J. says there were five), until
March 1838, when the record again runs on up to January 1839,
which is the latest Astronomical observation. Another volume
contains a few Comet observations, some hourly meteorological
observations taken out of the ordinary course, &c.
There are also four smaller books containing astronomical
observations with the Transit Instrument from August 1832 to
April 1838, with some gaps. There are frequent references to
the weather, but no regular meteorological observations. (See
Appendix J, where the books are mentioned.)
None of the observations have been reduced. It is evident
that from the end of 1831 onwards for some years, a record of
the rainfall and probably barometer and thermometer was kept,
because searching for other information recently, Mr. W. D.
Campbell, C.E., found in “Votes and Proceedings, N.S. Wales”
1837, a report on the water supply of Sydney, by Busby’s Bore,
and with it a return of the rainfall at Parramatta, from January
Ist, 1832, up to September, 1837. From the Astronomical books
I have completed this record to the end of 1838, with only a
few breaks. (See Rain and River Report for 1887.)
Several notes were made in the observing books, that the
observer ( i.e ., Mr. Dunlop was laid up with “ protracted sick-
ness ”), and it is evident that his health was gradually failing,
and in a despatch by Sir Charles A. Fitzroy, dated 11th July,
1847, he says, “ Mr. Dunlop is anxious to resign his appointment
on account of the state of his health, which renders him incapable
of attending to his duties.” (See also Appendix J.)
AVhen Sir J. C. Ross was in Sydney on his exploring voyage in
July, 1841, he took his chronometer to the Parramatta Observatory
in order to correct his time, the Observatory being a well
determined point of longitude and supposed to have accurate
time. I cannot find any record of the interview, but I was told
by one who was in Parramatta at the time that Mr. Dunlop,
being out of health, replied to Sir James C. Ross’ request to be
supplied with the correct time in such a way that Sir J ames was
deeply offended, and owing to this, and what he saw of the
unsatisfactory state of the Observatory, he felt it to be his duty
to report the state of matters to the Admiralty, who thereupon
appointed a Commission of Enquiry into the state of the
Parramatta Observatory. The members were Captain P. P. King,
Lieutenant-Colonel Gordon, Commanding Engineer, and the


Ordnance Storekeeper. A contemporary living in Parramatta
when the Commission sat told me that Captain King, to whom
the Commission was entrusted, called at the Observatory and
told Mr. Dnnlop that in two months the Commission would call
upon him with the object of enquiring into the state of the
Observatory. This was carried out, and when Mr. Dunlop was
asked for the records of his observations, he pointed to a series
of bound books on the shelves and said, “ There they are.”
Many of the books were found to have been destroyed by the
white ant, and hence probably some of the early observing books
were destroyed in that way • but it appears from Appendix G
that the written report said that the “ instruments and books
generally are in good condition, but the buildings are in a
delapidated state.” (See Appendices G and J.)
In Votes and Proceedings 1852, 57a., it appears that Dunlop
himself packed the Parramatta instruments carefully into
boxes, and that they were sent to, and stored in the Ordi-
nance Stores, Sydney,; but unfortunately many small pieces,
insignificant in themselves, but important for the instruments,
have been lost for want of that care on the part of
the storekeepers which can only be given by some one who
understands such instruments. It should be mentioned that the
Platinum Ball, which was about two inches in diameter, and
formed the bob of the pendulum, the length of which was
measured at Parramatta, was sold by the Rev. W. Scott, with the
consent of the Government, in 1859, with the view of adding to
the useful instruments in the Observatory.
There can be no doubt of the great natural ability shewn by
Mr. Dunlop at Parramatta, and the amount of work he got through
in those early years is very surprising. It is true that it was
done at high pressure and to meet Sir Thomas Brisbane’s wish,
and there can be no doubt that Mr. Dunlop was fully aware of the
imperfections of the instruments, imperfections which were in
them when purchased and for which he was in no way responsible.
Still, it is very much to be regretted that so many observations
were made ; a smaller number observed with greater care would
have been of far more value than the host of roughly observed
stars found in the Parramatta Catalogue. In forming an estimate
of this work, however, it is hardly fair to judge it by present
standards, then a less degree of accuracy satisfied the majority,
because instruments were less perfect, and it may be said that
the southern heavens were a new field in which most men would
be tempted by quantity rather than quality.
Mr. Dunlop’s career was a remarkable one. Selected by Sir
Thomas Brisbane, and taken from a subordinate position, he was
by him placed in a very responsible one, and praised on every
occasion. He shared with him the honour of the work done at
Parramatta, and took him as his private Astronomer at


Makerstown ; he became, in fact, the honored and trusted fellow
worker of Sir Thomas Brisbane.
The following notice of his retirement appeared :
[Sydney Morning Herald, 9 th Nov., 1847• ]
Mr. Dunlop, the Astronomer Royal of this Colony, has resigned his
appointment. During the many years Mr. Dunlop has held this most
distinguished appointment he has made it a fixed rule of his life to
distribute in acts of charity the salary he received from the Admiralty,
with whom the appointment is vested. He was appointed Corresponding
Member of the Institute Royal de France, received the Gold Medal of the
Royal Astronomical Society of London and other due recognitions of talent.
A public Testimonial Committee is appointed in Parramatta.
In a letter, signed James Dunlop, he says that in May, 1843,
he had looked over the South Head barometer readings and found
the points of the curves later than at Parramatta. Hence it is
evident that in May, 1843, he was keeping a Meteorological
Record. (His letter is with the South Head Observations in Sydney
Observatory.) In Captain King’s “ Hundred Observations,” also,
it is incidentally mentioned that Mr. Dunlop had determined the
diurnal curve of the barometer by sixteen days of hourly readings.
These observations are in one of the remaining books, but the
observations are not for every hour of the twenty-four ; from six
to eight hours are omitted each night.
Mr. Dunlop was born on 31st October, 1793, at Dairy,
Ayrshire; resigned his position at Parramatta, August, 1847 ;
died 23rd September, 1848, and was buried at Kincumber within
thirteen months of his leaving Parramatta.
P. E. de Strzelecki.
In a carefully prepared work by P. E. de Strzelecki, “Physical
Description of New South Wales and Van Dieman’s Land,”
published in London, in 1845, will be found a very valuable con-
tribution to the Meteorology of the period 1838 to 1842 inclusive,
The work, or rather this part of it is largely a compilation from
the official records kept at Sydney and Port Macquarie; from
observations made in Tasmania at Woolnarth and Port Arthur ;
from his own observations made during his stay of five years;
and from the observations of Captain P. P. King, from which
particulary he derives the account of the circulation of winds
round the coast, and he concludes that the monsoon winds which
are supposed to blow round Australia, must necessarily (p. 169)
impart to the remaining central atmospheric fluid certain regular
eddies , similar to those observed in the sea or large rivers.
Further, that this circulation striking on the high chain of
mountains to the west of Tasmania “naturally gives rise to a
subordinate eddy,” which gives the prevailing winds to Tasmania
and Victoria. There is a very interesting chapter on hot winds,
and he points out that Australia and Tasmania are not the only
countries subject to them. The atmospheric pressure, temperature,


rainfall (no details of rain) and evaporation are very fully
discussed. A very full account of his Observations on the
Diaphaneity of the Atmosphere as determined by himself from
observations on the direct effect of the sun on a thermometer
fully exposed or placed under white wool or black wool, is given,
He comes to the conclusion that the intensity of the suns rays is
greater in Tasmania than Australia (p. 212), then some interesting
experiments on radiation of heat are given, and upon dew and
the moisture in the atmosphere, etc. The essay covers 82 pages
out of 462 which make up the book.
Captain J. C. Wickham.
Captain J. C. Wickham kept a meteorological record at
Brisbane, from January Ist, 1843, to the end of 1846, and for
part of the time thermometer readings. These were published
with three years rainfall, 1840-41 and 1842, in the Moreton Bay
Courier for Janurry 23rd, 1847; the quantity of rain for each
month is given. Copies of the Courier, containing these observa-
tions are with Captain P. P. King’s papers no\V in Sydney
Observatory.
Rev. W. B. Clarke, M.A.
It is not my intention to say anything of the life, work of the
late Rev. W. B. Clarke, of that I am not in a position to speak,
and it is moreover in abler hands ; but I cannot pass over the
very important contributions which came from his busy brain
and pen. Meteorology with him was but the amusement for
the leisure moments snatched from his favourite study, and from
the time he landed in the colony in 1839 until 1847 he kept a
careful diary, and very frequently recorded his results in the
public press, and it is quite true to say that the number of these
contributions on this subject no man knows. Even his own
record in the sketch of his life published in the Sydney Mail,
July 13, 1872, he said was very incomplete, and I know that
several important papers are not mentioned. In 1842 upwards
of twenty-one papers on Meteorology were published in the
Sydney Morning Herald.
1844.—0 n Paragreles or Hail Guards.
1848.—0 n the Conditions of June and July, 1846
1850.—Investigations of Hurricanes.
1857.—Influence of Monsoons on the Climate of Sydney.
1857.—Meteorological Observations during an Eclipse.
1864.—0 n Australian Storms.
1877.—Effects of Forests on Climate.
To our own Royal Society he read eighteen papers.
In all there are twenty-nine papers on Meteorology, and I feel
sure there were many more, from what I have heard Mr. Clarke
say, and from references to them, but I have no idea at what


time they were written; they would however probably be found
in the Sydney Morning Herald.
In the Royal Astronomical Society’s Notices I find three
contributions —
I.—Remarks on the Great Comet of 1843.
2.—Observations made at Parramatta during the Solar
Eclipse, February 1, 1851.
3. —Observations made at Sydney during the Solar Eclipse,
March 26, 1857.
But Mr. Clarke was not content to work single-handed, he felt
that a storm must be viewed from more than one point if he
wanted to see it properly, and therefore meteorological observa-
tories were established at his own expense at Castle Hill, near
Parramatta, in February, 1842, and kept up to September, 1844;
at Dooral, near Parramatta, in November, 1841, and kept up to
April, 1846 ; at Campbelltown, in November, 1845, and kept up
to November, 1847 ; also, at Naas Valley, near Queanbeyan, in
November, 1843, and kept up to June, 1847. Returns were
regularly forwarded to Mr. Clarke and are now in the Sydney
Observatory in manuscript, only the rainfalls have been published.
In 1852 also, Mr. Clarke induced the late Mr. Boucher, 8.A., of
Bukelong, Bombala, to keep a meteorological record, and that
record was kept continuously until the time of Mr. Boucher’s
death in 1885. The record of rain prior to 1858 was made
with a raingauge which Mr. Boucher thought not satisfactory
and he would not give a copy of them. The record in the Obser-
vatory given at my request begins in 1858. Mr. Clarke kept his
own record most carefully from the time of his arrival in the
colony in 1839 until 1857 ; at first, at Parramatta, from 1839 to
1847; and subsequently at St. Leonards, North Shore, Sydney. He
took particular interest in the thunderstorms at Parramatta, and
worked out their life history if I may so speak, which he detailed
in a series of valuable letters to the Sydney Morning Herald;
later he turned his attention to the storms on the coast and
studied them most carefully, recognising their cyclonic character
as far back as 1848. In Meteorology as in all that he did, Mr.
Clarke was a most indefatigable worker and painstaking investi-
gator, and it is very much to be regretted that in those days
there was no Scientific Society to receive and publish such work,
and hence it was given to the daily paper, and is therefore not
so accessible as we could wish.
Mr. Clarke was called away from his labours before he had
time to carry out his intention of putting all this work into a
book and making it generally available. All through there is
evidence that every opportunity was seized to compare his
instruments with standards in ships of the Navy commissioned for
surveys and others, and an amount of labour was given to inves-
tigations in reference to the temperature and pressure of the


atmosphere that seems almost incredible to me when I know
that his life’s work was in Geology and Mineralogy, and that
Meteorology was only an amusement in his leisure moments.
Yet every page of it bears evidence of careful study and a wide
acquaintance with the writings of others on the same subject.
Each subject of enquiry presented to his mind was worked out
until he felt he had clearly mastered it. On one occasion,
speaking to me of thunderstorms, he said, “ I have followed them
through every stage of their existence, and now I could make
them.”
Rev. A. Glennie.
The Rev. A. Glennie kept a Meteorological Journal of all rainy
days, floods and heights of floods being given in many cases;
also, thunder and hailstorms at Paterson, Lochinvar, and
Brisbane Water, from January, 1837, to the end of October,
1870, rain measures being taken during the last two years at
Lochinvar —
At Paterson, 1832, to January, 1850.
Brisbane Water, August, 1850, to June, 1863.
Lochinvar, August, 1863, to October, 1870.
Extracts were published in the “ Climate of New South Wales,”
by H. C. Russell, 1877—(Government Printer) ; and a full copy of
the Journal is in the Library of the Observatory.
E. C. Close.
The late E. C. Close, kept a Journal of Floods in the Hunter>
1831 to 1864, from which extracts were published in the “Climate
of New South Wales,” by H. C. Russell, but the journal in full
was not presented to the Observatory and is in the possession of
his son.
Sir William Macarthur.
The late Sir William Macarthur, of Camden Park, kept a
Journal of the Weather for many years, and Rain Measures, from
1860 to 1875. Extracts, including a rain table for the whole
period, will be found in the “ Climate, of New South Wales,” by
H. C. Russell, extending from 1860 to 1875, and a number of
notes in the historical part of the volume ; but the journal is still
at Camden Park.
J. Boucher.
J. Boucher, of Bukelong, Bombala, kept a Meteorological
Register from 1852 to 1885. Copies of the rain measures from
1857 to 1885, given to me, were printed in “Rain Results” for
1885. Copies of his barometer, thermometer, and wind observa-
tions were not given to me.


S. H. Officer.
S. H. Officer, kept a Rainfall and Weather Record at Murray
Downs Station, on the Murray River, from 1864 to 1885. These*
with valuable notes of the seasons, will be found in “ Rain and
River Results” for 1885.
John Wyndham.
John Wyndham, of Dalwood, Hunter River, kept a Rainfall
Record, 1863 to 1885; it will be found in “Rain and River
Results ” for 1885.
William Stanley Jevons.
William Stanley Jevons who held a position in the Royal Mint
at Sydney from 1854 to 1859, took the M.A. degree in 1862,
and was afterwards Professor of Logic, and Mental and Moral
Philosophy, etc., at Owen’s College, Manchester. He wrote while
in Sydney, a most valuable essay “ On some data concerning the
Climate of Australia and New Zealand,” containing fifty-two
pages. It was published in Waugh’s Almanac for 1859, and also
in a pamphlet form. The essay is divided into seven chapters
devoted to the discussion of the following subjects :
No. I.—On the Temperature of the air in Australia.
No. 2.—Rain in Australia.
No. 3.—History of Floods and Droughts in New South
Wales.
No. 4.—Periodicity of Floods and Droughts discussed,
No. s.—Water Courses of Australia.
No. 6.—The Barometer.
No. 7.—Concluding Remarks.
Mr. Jevons said “ my object has been to present in an available
form, such accurate numerical data as are attainable; and
secondly, to group together general information as to the winds,
rains, rivers, floods—the geographical features of the country and
the meteorological circumstances of this part of the globe, so as
to shew what remarkable problems have to be solved ; and what
interesting connections of cause and effect may ultimately be
traced and proved.”
This was the most valuable contribution to the meteorology of
Australia that had been made up to the time of its publication ;
perhaps, the most valuable chapter is that upon the history of
the floods and droughts; but every part of it bears marks of
most careful work in consulting all the available data then
known, and the clear and logical mind of the author. Some of his
conclusions more recent observations and investigations have
shewn to be wrong, but they were entirely in accord with the
facts then available, and he presented the most concise and
accurate account of the climate which had been written.


Mr. Jevons contributed papers to the Philosophical Society of
New South Wales, these were published in the Sydney Magazine
of Science and Art—
1. —On a New Sun Guage, July Bth, 1857.
2. On Clouds their various forms and producing causes,
December 9th, 1857.
He also contributed to the same paper (Mol. II„ pp. 161 and
173). Meteorological Observations in Australia, being a continua-
tion of those published in Waugh’s Almanac for 1859 ; also a
paper on the Geological Origin of Australia, (Mol. 11., p. 89), and
Earthquakes in Hew South Wales (Mol. 11., p. 93); also
Meteorological Observations three miles west of Sydney, at Peter-
sham, eighty-five feet above the sea from July 1855 to February
1857 ; and then at Double Bay two miles east of Sydney, eleven
feet above sea till June, 1858 ; readings at 9 a.m. and 9 p.m.,
published weekly from August 1856, in the Empire Newspaper
and Monthly in the Sydney Magazine of Science and Art from
May 1857 to June 1858 ; also several letters on scientific subjects
to the daily press. Mr. Jevons was only nineteen years of age
when he came to the colony, and twenty-four when he left. His
observations fill up a gap in the official meteorological record
between the closing of the South Head Observations and the
commencement of observations at Sydney Observatory.
ESTABLISHMENT OP METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATORIES.
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Sydney, 10th March, 1840.
Sir,—l am directed by His Excellency the Governor to transmit to you
the copy of a circular despatch, dated 29th November, 1838, from Lord
Glenelg, relating to the “ Collection of Facts respecting. Storms,” and to
acquaint you that persons who have been under the instruction of the
Astronomer at Parramatta have been appointed to register observations at
Port Phillip and at Port Macquarie respectively, with an allowance of
Is. 6d. per day each, in lieu of clothes and rations.
I am further directed to inform you that as these men are convicts taken
from the class of specials who not being assignable are always maintained
at the expense of tho Government, the charge above mentioned will
properly be defrayed out of convict funds.
I have, Sir, &c.,
E. D. THOMSON.
The Deputy Commissary-General.
Meteorological Observatories were accordingly established at
South Head, Sydney, Port Macquarie, and Port Phillip ( i.e .,
Melbourne), and observations began in April, 1840.
In each case educated men amongst the convicts were
selected as observers, and it appears from a despatch from the
Secretary of State that the Home Government refused to find
salaries for these Observers or to maintain them in any way after
their term of service was over, hence the observations ceased at


all these places with the exception of Sydney, where the
observer was kept on-until 1855, when for some reason not
stated he suddenly left the colony. It seems probable that he had
grown lax in his duty and that the advent of an energetic Governor,
Sir William Denison, made it, in his opinion, undesirable that he
should remain at his post any longer, particularly as the Governor
was known to take a deep interest in astronomy and meteorlogy.
[Votes and Proceedings, N.S.W., 1848.]
In 1851, however, Captain King wrote; “I have reason to
believe that the South Head Observer, Mr. Peacock, would be a
proper person to make the observations. I think he is punctual
and correct, on which everything that makes such records valuable
depends,”
The Government, however, would not continue to pay observers,
as appears by the following letter :
Copy of Despatch from the Right Honorable the Secretary of State to His
Excellency Sir C. A. Fitzroy.
No. 162 Downing Street,
o t u . 3rd June, 1847.
xt , VG m° acknow ledge the receipt of your predecessor’s Despatch
JNo. 144, of the 7th July, 1846, containing the explanation he had been called
upon to give in respect of the expense, and other circumstances relating to
the question of the maintenance of the offices of Astronomer at Parramatta
and of the Meteorological Recorders at Port Macquarie, Melbourne and
South Head.
I have also received your Despatch of the 30th October last, No. 45
having exclusive reference to the three last mentioned appointments, and
especially as regards the sources from which the charge of the salaries of
the Recorders, when the convicts who now perform that duty shall become
free.
I referred copies of both these Despatches to the Boards of Treasury and
of the Admiralty, and the result of the correspondence which has since
taken place, on the subject has been to show that the advantages, in a
scientific point of view, arising from the Observatory at Parramatta are not
such as to justify its being continued at the cost of the British Treasury.
It will therefore be your duty to acquaint Mr. Dunlop that his services
as Superintendent, will not be required after the 31st March, 1848, up to
which period only provision will be made for his salary in the estimates for
expenditure connected with the Convict Establishment in New South
Wales.
With respect to the three offices of Meteorological Recorders already
noticed, Her Majesty’s Government consent to the present rate of allowance
(i.e.. Is. 6d. per day) being paid to them only so long as the parties employed
in the service are convicts, and who must otherwise be maintained at the
expense of the Home Government.
1 have, &c.,
n o- r, « (Signed) GREY.
Governor Sir C. A. Fitzroy, &c., &c.
A-55.
The observations were accordingly discontinued in Melbourne in
1850, at Port Macquarie in 1850, and in Sydney in 1855. The
manuscript returns are in the Sydney Observatory ; but part were
published in the current numbers of the Government Gazette.


In passing thus briefly over the work done by so many pioneers
in Astronomy and Meteorology in this colony, I have endeavoured
to shew what has been done and w'here it is to be found. It will
be evident to you there is more to be written yet, but many of
the facts have been difficult to get and others have so far eluded
my efforts to find them.
It is quite evident that Sir Thomas Brisbane, when he came to
the Colony, contemplated the measurement of an arc of the
meridian as part of his scheme, and that he brought with him
suitable astronomical instruments and the special apparatus for
determining the length of the seconds pendulum, and the
following letter shows that he was using his influence to induce
the Government to undertake the work, or rather, provide the
money.
In Labilliere’s History of Victoria, (Yol. 1., pp. 1-185), is a
letter from Sir Robert Peel, 20th October, 1823, in which he
says:—
Sir H. Davy and his colleagues at the Board of Longitude have entire
confidence in the scientific persons whom Sir T. Brisbane has ou the spot,
particularly Mr. Rumker, and gives the following letter :
My Lord— The Right Honorable His Majesty’s Secretary of State for the
Home Department having done me the honor to inform me that your
Lordship was favorably disposed to an undertaking which the Council of
the Royal Society consider as important in the interests of Science, viz.,
the measurement of an arc of the Meridian in New South Wales, I take
the liberty, at their request, of transmitting this to your Lordship. Several
arcs have been measured in the Northern Hemisphere, but only one, and
that at a time when instruments were very imperfect, in the Southern.
The present moment appears peculiarly favorable for such a work to the
Council, as there are persons at Parramatta who are able Astronomers, and
who are in possession of the necessary instruments, with the exception of a
Zenith Sector. The measurement of an arc in New South Wales would
not only be of importance to Astronomy in affording data for determining
correctly the figure of the earth—a matter of great interest to navigation—
but would likewise be useful in laying the foundation for a correct survey
of our Colonies in that great and unexplored country. Your Lordship’s
liberal and enlightened mind will. I am sure, require no apology for this
communication which, as President of the Royal Society, the interests of
Science call upon me to make.
I have the honor to be, my Lord,
With the greatest respect,
Your Lordship’s obedient humble servant,
HUMPHREY DAVY,
President of the Royal Society.
The unfortunate interruption of Sir Thomas’ design by the
action of Mr. Rumker made this impossible, and when Rumker
was appointed by the Government it was evidently understood,
although not conveyed to him in his letter of appointment, that
he should measure an arc of the meridian. Mr. W. D. Campbell
in searching for other things connected with the surveys of the
Colony, found amongst the MS. Correspondence, Surveyor-General
to Colonial Secretary, (Yol. 1., p. 507, Bth January, 1828) —“The
requisition for the rods and cylinders for the Trigonometrical


Survey was made by Mr. Rumker, the survey being in con-
junction with the measurement of an arc of the meridian, which
Mr. Rumker had undertaken to execute.”
And the pendulum apparatus which was used by Rumker at
Parramatta, and with which he made the length of the Seconds
Pendulum there to be 39.0891435 inches, was evidently brought
out to be used in connection with the measurement of an arc of
the meridian.
With the instruments that came from the Parramatta Obser-
vatory to Sydney, when it was dismantled, was a zenith sector
which appears never to have been used, but is a large one
and evidently intended for accurate work. A transit circle also
came in the same way, and it would appear that this instrument
was very little, if at all, used, and there was no room for it in the
original building, hence it was set up on the outside of it. It was
a good instrument, and, with some repairs, did duty in Sydney
Observatory from 1859 to 1876, and it is still there, but not in
use.
The transit circle in its day, 1830, was justly considered a
first-class instrument, and must have been intended for accurate
determination of star positions for the measurement of the arc of
the meridian.
[APPENDIX A.]
31st August, 1827.
To Governor Darling.
I have the honor to inform you that I have this day paid to Messrs.
Macdonald and Campbell, agents of Sir Thomas Brisbane, the sum of one
thousand six hundred and fourteen pounds, thirteen shillings, for the
purchase of certain Astronomical instruments and books left in the
Observatory at Parramatta, and referred to in Mr. Macleay’s letter to me
on 27th September last.
(Signed) EDWARD BARNARD.
[APPENDIX B.]
Government House,
10th September, 1827.
The Right Honourable the Secretary of State for the Colonies, has com-
municated in a despatch, No. 98, dated Ist March, 1826. that His Majesty’s
Government with the view of promoting the interests of science in this
part of the globe, has consented to the purchase from Sir T Brisbane, of
certain astronomical instruments, specified in the enclosed list which in
compliance with the Address of the Council had been left by him in the
Colony, for the sum as valued by him of £1,614 13s.
He has directed that the necessary remittance of this amount should be
made to the Colonial Agent to enable him to reimburse Sir Thomas
Brisbane for the instruments in question. Let the necessary communica-
tion be made to the Auditor and Treasurer as to the remittance of this
amonnt in order that it may be duly provided for by the first opportunity,
and let Mr. Rumker be called upon for a list of the articles left by Sir
Thomas Brisbane in the Observatory under his charge, that it may be
compared with the specifications herewith.
(Signed) R. A. DARLING.
To Colonial Secretary.


Minute, No. 58.
List of Instruments (with Letter from Government Astronomer.)
Four Astronomical Clocks, best description ... £490 0 0
Mural Circle, by Troughton 200 0 0
Transit Instrument, 5| feet, ditto ... ... 105 0 0
60 0 0
Repeating Circle, 16-inch, Reiehenbach ... 130 0 0
Equatorial Telescope, &c. (by Banks) 60 0 0
French ditto ... ... ... ... ... 42 0 0
Declination Instruments, complete, by Holland 30 0 0
Inclination ditto, Gambey, Paris 42 0 0
Borda’s Pendulum, complete for determining
the figure of the Earth ... 85 0 0
? Mountain Barometers, by Troughton ... 11 0 0
Magnetic Transit, by Josker, Paris 15 0 0
Observatory Barometer and Four Thermometers 10 0 0
Kater’s Azimuth Compass 10 0 0
Pair 18-inch Globes, Loudon 19 0 0
353 13 0
Levelling Telescope, complete ... 12 0 0
Astronomical Books, &c. ... ... ~. 353 13 0
£1,614 13 0
[APPENDIX C.]
Minute, No. 98.
Government House,
21st December, 1827.
Let Mr. Rumker be informed that he will be immediately notified as
Government Astronomer of this Colony, and that he will be allowed a
salary of £3OO a year from the time of his taking charge of the Observatory,
until His Majesty’s Government shall fix the salary to which he may be
considered entitled.
(Signed) R. A. DARLING.
[APPENDIX D.]
Government House,
16th July, 1829.
Let it be notified that the Secretary of State has been pleased to confirm
the appointment of Mr. Rumker, as Government Astronomer, with a
salary at the rate of £3OO a year; and also sanctions the expense which
may be incurred in providing Mr. Rumker with accommodation at the
Observatory.
(Signed) R. A. DARLING.
Rumker’s last work at Parramatta was in December, 1828,
and it would appear that he then left the Colony to go to
England and get instruments for the Trigonometrical Survey.
[APPENDIX E.]
Minute, 130.
Ist September, 1830.
The Secretary of State having signified his desire (Mr. Twiss’ letter, 21st
December, 1827), that accommodation for the Colonial Astronomer, pro-
posed to be added to the Observatory, should be expedited as Mr. Rumker
was preparing to return and resume the duties of his situation. Let the
Director of Public Works Captain Dumaresque and Forbes be requested to
proceed to Parramatta and examine the Observatory, so as to ascertain
whether the building is sufficiently good to have the proposed additions
made to it. If not, let them examine whether there is any more eligible
site in the neighbourhood for establishing the Observatory.
(Signed) R. A. DARLING.


It will be observed that so late as September Ist, 1830, Rumker
was preparing to return.
[APPENDIX F.]
Government House,
22nd April, 1831.
Let it be notified that the Secretary of State has been pleased to appoint
Mr. James Dunlop, Superintendent of the Government Observatory at
Parramatta, with a salary of £3OO. Mr. Dunlop will be allowed one-half
salary from the date of his embarkation.
(Signed) R. A. DARLING.
[APPENDIX G.j
28th June, 1847.
Board reporting on state of Observatory Establishment at Parramatta.
Sydney, June 26th, 1847.
—r T~r" Sib, — Referring to your letter of the 14th April, the
toJbM*. receipt of which we have the honour to acknowledge,
Secretary of appointing us Members of a Commission for the purpose of
State by examining the Inventory of all the Instruments, Books,
Despatch, & c , b e i on gmg to the Observatory in this Colony.
No _ 2. We have the honour to report to you for the information
' 1847 of His Excellency the Governor that on the 21st of the month
we repaired to the Observatory, Parramatta, and there
Duplicate examined the Instruments and Books in the charge of Mr.
copies of this J am es Dunlop, the Astronomer; a report of which we have
Report ofthe the honour to enclose.
Commission 8. We regret to state that the building is m a very
will be delapidated state of repair, and the Instruments are likely,
required for un j ess they are immediately protected from the weather, to be
transmission • . ■»
to the Secre- very much injured.
tary of State, 4. The floor and partitions of the building seem to be
Mr, Dunlop entirely destroyed by the white ant, and the building itself is
cal°led upon to 80 dilapidated as to require to be rebuilt.
furnish the 5. Under these circumstances we would beg to recommend
Keport that the building be covered in such a way as may be
him^the™ 111 considered best to secure the Instruments from further injury,
Secretary of where they may remain until another Observatory be built,
State’s the sight of which should, we respectfully suggest, be better
Despatch, j e ft f or selection by the Astronomer who may be appointed to
17th Ju y. succeed Mr. Dunlop, who is desirous of being relieved,
Mr, Dunlop, inasmuch as his health entirely incapacitates him from the
24 July, 1847. fatigue of observing.
One copy here- The clock and smaller instruments might for greater
with, 24 July, security be packed up and enclosed in cases but the
Another copy instruments which are fixed had better be secured in their
required 13 present positions, whereby there would be less risk of their
by the 23rd. receiving injury.
December 20, We have the honor to be, Sir,
returned to be Your most obedient humble servants,
put away, 21, PHILLIP P. KING,
Captain R.N.,
J. A. GORDON,
RICH. ROGERS,
Ordnance Storekeeper.
The Hon. the Colonial Secretary.
47/5007.
Report of a Commission appointed by the order of His Excellency the


Governor, dated 14th April, 1847, for the purpose of examining the
Inventory of Instruments and Books, &c., belonging to the Observatory
at Parramatta.
INSTRUMENTS.
Forwarded An Astronomical Clock, by Brequet, with two square
to H. M. pendulums ; reported to be in good order but not kept
Secretary of going.
state by An Astronomical Clock, by Hardy, in good order, going at
Despatch. gidereal Time .
No. An Astronomical Clock, by Barraud, in good order, but not
1847 going
Copy required An Astronomical Clock, by Gremalde, recently cleaned and
Despatch IC l3th in good order, stated by Mr. Dunlop to be in the Hall of
August, by Government House, where it has been seen by Captain King,
the 23rd. A Mural Circle, by Troughton, with four eye pieces. The
Returned to instrument is stated to be in good order but requires cleaning,
be put away. rp h(J p^ ar to which it is fixed has given way.
A five and a half feet Transit, by Troughton, complete with
Ys and hanging level. This Instrument was taken from its
place to make room for the Meridian Circle, it is in good
order and ready for use.
A sixteen inch Bepeating Circle, by Reichenbach, the
Verniers have been removed from the Instrument, but are
ready to be fitted. The pillar has given way.
An Equatorial Stand, and forty-six inch Achromatic
Telescope, by Banks. Both require cleaning but otherwise
are ready for use. There is also a Micrometer Eye-piece in a
separate case.
A Parallactic Instrument, by Cainbrier and Le Noir. Much
damaged and unfit for use.
A Magnetic Transit, by Dolland, apparently fit for use.
A Dipping Needle, by Gambey, apparently fit for use.
Borda’s Apparatus, for measuring the length of a
Pendulum —damaged.
A Platina iSphere, with knife-edges.
A Diurnal Variation Instrument.
A Mountain Barometer, by Troughton. in good order.
A Mountain Barometer, now at the South Head of Port
Jackson.
A Barometer, by Banks, in order, but not in use.
A Rater’s Azimuth Compass, in good order.
A pair of eighteen inch Globes, date 1791, much injured.
An Eirometer, by Jones, in order.
An Hygrometer, by Saussiere, damaged.
A Zenith Sector, in two cases, apparently having never
been used, and considered to be in good order.
A Night Glass —useless.
Several Thermometers, broken and useless.
A Telescope, by Berge, one of the glasses in the Eye-piece
broken.
A Sextant, by Jones, in order.
An Artificial Horizon, by Jones.
A Microscope, by Banks.
A Meridian Circle, forty-two inches diameter, by Jones, the
Telescope having an aperture of three and three-quarter inches.
This Instrumant is set up where the five and a half feet
Transit was fixed. The level is broken, and the Index Circle
very badly graduated, the setting vernier is fixed very


BOOKS.
One Navigation, by Dulague.
One Bonnycastle’s Astronomy.
One Diviseurs des Nombres par Siddonne.
One Simpson’s Conic Sections.
One Instruction sur les poides et les
One Arithmetic de Mauduit.
One Barlow’s Theory of Numbers.
One Etude de Ciel par Mallet.
One Dowling’s Key to Hutton’s Course of Mathematics.
Two Annales de Chimie.
Six Dictionnaire de Physique.
One Plates to do.
One Mackay’s Mathematical Tables.
One Treatise on Fluxions, by Vince.
Leslie’s Philosophy of Arithmetic.
Three Salande’s Astronomy.
One Salande’s Navigation.
One Tables du Soleil par Delambre.
Three Delambre’s Astronomy.
Three Base du Metrique.
Two Lefons Mecanique par Prony.
One Delambre’s Histoire de l’Astronomie.
One Wollaston’s Fasciculus.
Two Long’s Astronomy.
One Memoire sur l’Astronomie pratique.
One (Fifth Vol.) Mecanique Celeste.
Two Euler’s Algebra.
Three Shubert’s Astronomy.
One Algebra by Le Cloud.
Two Ferguson’s Astronomy.
Two Traits de Geodesic par Puissant.
inconveniently for directing the Telescope to the object, and
is not graduated ; not even with a Zero Line. Mr. Dunlop
complains generally of the Instrument, as being so very
unsatisfactory in its fittings and the graduation of the Circle
itself as to be quite useless.
Connected with the Meridian Circle is a thirty inch Transit,
the Ys being fixed on stone pillars to serve as a Collimator.
A Pocket Chronometer, by Dallas, requiring slight repairs.
A Box Chronometer, by Dent, No. 220, in good order.
A Levelling Telescope, Rod and Chain, Staves, &c.,
complete, in good order and ready for use.
The Instruments above enumerated have been individually
seen by us ; but the Mural Circle and the Sidereal Clock
only are in use. Generally the Instruments require to be
cleaned, and the stone pillars which have been erected on a
bad foundation have sunk so much as to he out of the
perpendicular.
The Building is in a very delapidated state, the partition
walls having settled ; the floor and partitions perfectly rotten
from the effect of the white ant; and the roof admitting rain
in most parts, the canvas coverings of the domes are quite
rotten and torn, and affords no protection to the Instruments ;
in fact, they are all but entirely exposed to the weather, and
will soon be destroyed unless steps are taken to protect them,
until another building be erected.


One Traite de Geodesie par Puissant
Two Woodhouse’s Astronomy.
One Woodhouse’s Astronomy, duplicate.
Three Biot’s Astronomy.
One Biot’s Trigonometry.
Two Nicholson’s Philosophy.
One Ozanam’s Trigonometry.
One Le9ons de Geometrie.
One Traite des Pierres.
One Astronomy de La Caille.
Four Recreations MathAmatiques.
One Aritmetique de Bezout.
One Introduction to Callett's Logarithms.
One Ferguson’s Exercises.
Two La Place, Systeme du Monde, translated by Pond.
One Francceur’s Uranographie.
Three Hutton’s Course of Mathematics.
One Traite d’Optique par La Caille.
One Leslie’s Elements of Geometry.
One Tables de Logarithmes portateres,
One Keith’s Ti’igonoinetry.
One Gnonomonique El&nentaire.
One De Zach’s Tables de la Lune.
One Ewing’s Astronomy.
One Brent’s Astronomy.
One Biot’s Tables Baromdtriques.
Four Playfair’s Works.
One OEvres de Clermont.
Two Numbers of 13th Book of Mecanique Celeste.
One Piazzi’s Observations for 1814.
Two Voyages aux Terres Australes par Freycinet
Two Flinders’ Voyages (no charts.)
One Dupuis’ Cours de Geometrie.
La Place Mecanique Celeste.
One Fauchen’s M4t6orologie.
One Brooks’ Guide to the Stars.
Two Annales de Travaux.
Two La Croix, Traits de Calcul differentiel.
Eleven De Zach’s Correspondence Astronomique.
Four Philosophical Magazine.
Five Arts and Sciences.
One Cagnoli Trigonometric.
Thirty-seven Philosophical Transactions.
Two Philosophical Transactions (Edinburgh.)
One (Third) Mudy’s Trigonometrical Survey.
One De Zach Catalogue.
One Piazzi’s Catalogue.
One Callett’s Logarithms.
One Bode’s Uranographie (maps)
One La Croix Geometrie et A lgebre.
Two Hutton’s Mathematical Dictionary.
One Jones’ Geometry.
One Journal de Physique.
One Taylor’s Logarithms.
Seven Bessel’s Observations.
One Catalogue of Stars not inserted in the British Catalogue.
One Hutton’s Powers and Products of Numbers.
One Maskelyne’s Tables of Aberration and Notation.
One Taylor’s Sexagesimal Table.
One Mendoza Rios’ Navigation Tables.


One Barlow’s Mathematical Dictionary.
One Hutton’s Logarithms.
One Bode’s Jahrbuch.
One La Caille’s Astronomy, by Robertson.
One hundred and four Connaissance des Temps.
One Hutton’s Mensuration.
Two De Zach’s Tables of Aberration and Notation.
One Collection of Astronomical Tables.
One Astronomie des Marins.
Three Beaux Arts.
Works received recently by Mr. Dunlop.
Six Greenwich Observations.
One Greenwich Reductions.
Three Greenwich Appendix.
Twelve Parts Cambridge Observations.
One Account of John Flamsteed, and Supplement.
One Beaufoy’s Nautical Experiments.
Five Edinburgh Observations.
Three Numbers Cape of Good Hope Observations.
One Number Cape of Good Hope Observations, in sheets.
One Number Cape of Good Hope Observations, in boards.
Four Numbers Madras Observations.
One Groombridge’s Catalogue of Circumpolar Stars.
Nine Numbers Philosophical Transactions.
Six Numbers Observations Magn6tiques Met^orologiques.
Four Dorpat Observations.
One Parramatta Catalogue.
One Halley’s Comet.
Eight Astronomical Society.
Two Parts Theory of the Moon.
Fourteen British Association Reports.
Five Radcliff’s Observations.
A Collection of old Nautical Almanacs, Distances of the Moon from
the Planets, and several pamphlets and old books, more or less
injured from damp, and of no value.
Five Volumes of Observations made by Mr. Dunlop, partly reduced.
PHILLIP P. KING,
Captain R.N.,
J. A. GORDON,
RICH. ROGERS,
Ordnance Storekeeper.
Parramatta, 21st June, 1847.
[APPENDIX H.]
Copy of a Despatch by Governor Fitzroy, (78.)
11th July, 1847.
My Lord, — With reference to your Despatch, on the Observatory at
Parramatta, and to the instructions therein contained, I have now the
honor to inform your Lordship that I lost no time in calling upon Mr.
Dunlop, the Superintendent of the Establishment, to furnish me as soon as
possible with the report required by your Lordship for the current year,
This report has not yet been forwarded to me, but it shall be transmitted
to your Lordship by the earliest opportunity after I receive it.
In further obedience to your Lordship’s instructions, I appointed a
commission, consisting of Captain King, E.N., Lieutenant-Colonel Gordon,
Commanding Engineer, and the Ordnance storekeeper ; and I have the
honor to forward the Inventory made under their inspection of the
Instruments and Books belonging to the Observatory.


Your Lordship will perceive that the Commission report that the
Instruments and Books generally are in good condition, hut that the buildings
from want of timely repairs, are in a very delapidated state ; and on this
point (as the Observatory is within one hundred yards of the Government
House at Parramatta, and immediately under my own eye) Lean state that
I am clearly of opinion that no repairs which could now be executed—short
of entirely rebuilding the premises—would put them in a habitable or
efficient state.
Your Lordship will further observe that Mr. Dunlop is anxious to resign
his appointment on account of the state of his health, which renders him
incapable of attending to his duties. And as, since receiving the report of
the Commission, I have been informed by Lieutenant-Colonel Gordon that
the building cannot be even temporarily repaired without considerable
expense, I have, in order to preserve the Instruments, etc., from further
injury, directed that they should be packed up in boxes and placed in charge
of the Ordnance Storekeeper, until your Lordship’s further wishes are made
known to me.
I have, etc ,
(Signed) CHARLES A. FITZROY.
To Earl Grey.
[APPENDIX I.]
13th-August, 1847.
Reported Since the Report of the Board was sent in I have seen
to H. M, Colonel Gordon, who said that Captain King concurred with
Secretary of him in thinking that instead of incurring the expense of
State by covering in any portion of the Observatory for the preserva-
p i4i ’ tion of the instruments, it would be better to have them put
No, up in boxes and placed in the Ordnance Stores.—4th August.
A,J. F.
7/500.
‘ [APPENDIX J.]
Observatory, Parramatta,
18th August, 1847.
To the Board of Visitors of the Parramatta Observatory :
r~r~ Gentlemen. —The observations were commenced by me
to elm! about the middle of January, 1832, with a five-and-a-half (s£)
Secretary of feet transit and a two (2) feet mural circle by Troughton, and
State by continued until the transit was replaced by Jones’ three-and-
Uespa_c_ , a _h a if (3j) feet transit circle in the middle of the year 1835,
No. —after which the mural circle was principally used, the circle
1847 by Jones being very difficult for one person to work.
The observations consist of right ascensions and polar
distances with moon, culminating stars, comets, &c. The
reductions of a portion of the observations between 1832 and
1835 have been proceeded with, but, having no assistant or
clerk, they have not proceeded so far as I could wish.
The buildings of this Observatory are in a very bad state
of repair. The white ant has been most destructive, and, as
the surrounding ground is full of them, it would be fruitless
to attempt a repair, which could not last above two or three
years at most. The building was originally of a very inferior
description, being only intended as a private establishment
and not calculated to last beyond a few years. (The building
was commenced in December, 1821, and the instruments
were fixed and the observations commenced about the 11th of
March, 1822.)
The subsoil is alumina schistose, into which the stone piers


are sunk several feet, and from the access of air and water
the alumina is gradually dissolving and the pillars sinking,
and some of them unsteady.
The Library is in much the same state as it was when I
took charge of it in 1832.
The manuscript observations are contained in five volumes
and six or seven smaller volumes.
The instruments and clocks are in good working order.
The spirit level of the transit circle, by Jones, burst by
exposure to the sun a few months after it was set up, the tube
being filled with sulphuric ether, which boils at a very low
temperature, far below the powerful influence of the solar
rays.
This circle would have been a more powerful instrument
had it read off with four microscopes instead of three. The
errors arising from eccentricity (if any) would thereby in a
great measure have been neutralized, which cannot be the
case with three microscopes. Altogether it is an unhandy
instrument.
As the building cannot long protect the instruments in
safety, I would recommend their removal to one of Her
Majesty’s Stores in the Military Barracks.
The site of the present building is what I could not
recommend for the erection of a more complete and useful
establishment, not only on account of the poisoned state of
the ground by the white ant, but its local situation, and also
its distance from Sydney, the sea-port.
I think a very desirable and convenient site may be
obtained on the high grounds on the North Shore in the
vicinity of Sydney, out of the smoke of the city and in view
of the harbour and shipping, which would give to the masters
of vessels the desirable opportunity of obtaining their time,
and ascertaining the rate of their chronometers by signal or
ball as practised at Greenwich and other places.
For myself.. I have now weathered it nearly three-score
years, and I find the last quarter of a century spent in this
country has considerably blunted my energies of body and
mind. With your recommendation to His Excellency the
Governor, it is my wish to try a change of scene and
occupation with what little health and strength remains, to
endeavour to weather it a few years longer.
I have the honor to be, Gentlemen,
Your very humble servant,
JAMES DUNLOP.
[APPENDIX K.]
Respecting Removal of Books and Instruments from Parramatta.
Sydney, 23rd August, 1847.
M. 7785, Sir,—
l. In reference to the accompanying letter from Mr,
Forwarded Dunlop, the Astronomer at Parramatta, we beg to request the
to H. M, authority of His Excellency the Governor for the instruments
'state'by 0 an( l books belonging to the Parramatta Observatory being
Despatch, packed in cases and deposited in either the Royal Engineer
Office or Ordnance Store in Sydney.
N °’ 1847 2. Captain King, R.N., the senior Commissioner for visiting
the Observatory, previously to his leaving Sydney acquiesced
in the propriety of this measure as the best that could be


adopted for the safety of the instruments and books pending
the construction of a new Observatory.
3. It is proposed, subject to the approval of His Excellency,
to charge to the Engineer Estimate for Convict Services the
expense to be incurred in providing the packing cases and in
the removal of the instruments and books.
We have the honor to be, Sir,
Your most obedient humble servants,
J. A. GORDON,
Lt.-Col. Com. Roy. Eng.
RICH. ROGERS,
Ordnance Storekeeper.
The Honorable
The Colonial Secretary. &c., &c.
ommissioners infd. 4 Sept, 1847.
Let the instruments and books be packed and removed according to the recommendations
of the Commissioners. Ido not exactly understand the nature of Mr, Dunlop’s application
in the last paragraph of his letter, whether it is for leave of absence or for permission to
resign his situation altogether.
26 Aug, E. D, T,
The ambiguity will perhaps be explained by a reference to the sth paragraph of the
report enclosed, marked (See Appendix G.) _ _ 28th,
The paragraph referred to reports Mr, Dunlop’s wish to resign. Let his resignation be
accepted accordingly.
30 Aug. E, D, T.
[APPENDIX L.]
Downing Street,
14th April, 1848.
Sir, — I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your Despatch,
No. 141, of the 11th of July last, with its enclosures, communicating the
result of an enquiring which you had directed to be made by some of the
officers of your Government, into the state of the instruments and books,
&c., belonging to the Observatory at Parramatta in the charge of Mr. J.
Dunlop, the Astronomer ; and also reporting upon the state of the building
itself.
In another Despatch, dated 30th August last, No. 176, you announce the
resignation of that gentleman of his appointment, and that you had given
the necessary authority for packing and depositing the above-mentioned
books and instruments in the Ordnance Stores at Sydney. I approve of
your having authorised the charging to the Engineer Branch of the Convict
Service the expense which has been incurred in this service, and with
further reference to the suggestion contained in Mr. Dunlop’s letter which
you have forwarded, of the 18th August, 1847, you are authorised to make
over the transit instrument to the possession of the Colonial Government,
provided they should be willing to make arrangements for the construction
and maintenance of a time ball establishment. As regards the other
instruments, with the clocks and chronometers, no time should be lost
in disposing of them to the best advantage, in the Colony, as they are
likely soon to become deteriorated if left in the Ordnance Stores in Sydney.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) GREY.
Governor Sir Charles Fitzroy, &c., &c.
[APPENDIX M.]
48/11736.
The Commanding Royal Engineer to the Honorable the Colonial Secretary,
respecting the sale of instruments belonging to the Parramatta
Observatory.
Royal Engineer’s Office,
Sydney, 31st October, 1848.
Under the re- SiR, —Adverting to your letter of the 11th ultimo, con
not t bead U * d veying to me the orders of His Excellency the Governor to


visable to take the proper steps for selling to the best advantage the
attempt to sell instruments, &c , belonging to the Parramatta Observatory, I
ments'in the have the honor to submit for the consideration and further
Colony with- orders of His Excellency the following observations :
out further After the most careful enquiry I am led to believe that it
fron™Home w 7 ould not be expedient to sell on tbe spot the large
Let a Despatch instruments of the Observatory. I have consulted Captain
be prepared King on the subject, and he agrees with me in opinion that
enclosing a there would be no competition for the purchase of these large
communica- instruments should they be offered for sale in the Colony,
tion with The following are the instruments which it is considered
reference to could not be disposed of on the spot, and Captain King and
No m y think it would be expedient to cause them to be
68, of the’l4th returned to England :
April last. Ist. The 42-inch meridian circle, by Jones ; the vernier not
T > graduated, and the instrument in other respects requiring to
ov ’ be put into the hands of a skilful instrument maker to render
Dft. of it serviceable. The late Mr. Dunlop never used it
Despatch, The 30 inch transit belonging to this circle Captain King
48/12623* thinks would be quite sufficient for the purposes of a time
ball.
Commanding The 5-feet transit being unnecessarily large for this purpose,
io*” he thinks it would be advisable to return it to England, and
1 ov ’ ‘ keep the 30 inch instrument in the Colony.
—— .. ~ 2nd. The mural circle by Trough ton.
toHM 6 ' 3rd. The 16-inch repeating circle by Reichenbach.
Secretary of oth. The zenith sector, in two cases, which appear to have
State by never been unpacked.
No S 2s() Cl of I have the honor to be. Sir,
23 Nov 1848 Your most obedient humble servant,
J. A. GORDON,
Lt.-Col. Com. Roy. Eng.
The Honorable
The Colonial Secretary, &c , &c
[APPENDIX N ]
[Copy of a Letter from Captain Phillip P. King, 11. K., to the Honorable
the Colonial Secretary.]
Port Stephens,
December 21st, 1848.
Sir, —It is some years since the question of the boundary between the
provinces of South Australia and Australia Felix, or Port Phillip, was
mooted and when, as you will doubtless remember, Mr. Assistant Surveyor
Tyers was directed by His late Excellency Sir George Gipps to ascertain
the exact position of the boundary line, that officer accordingly made a
very detailed and, as it appeared to me, a very careful triangulation of the
country between Melbourne and the Glenelg river, by which by astronomical
observation, and by chronometric measurement he fixed the eastern point
of the entrance of the “Glenelg” in longitude 141° 1' 23", or 1' 23"
within the province of Port Phillip.
Mr. Tyers' calculations were examined by Captain Owen Stanley, E. N.,
who, it appears, re-calculated the trigonometrical and chronometric
measurements, and found the longitude to be 16”.2 to the eastward of Mr.
Tyers. They were, however, questioned by that eminent geographer, Mr.
Arrowsmith, who, in a map published under the authority of the South
Australian Company, had placed the mouth of the Glenelg some eight or
nine miles within the province of South Australia.


Being at that time a question of great interest, I took pains to satisfy
myself upon the subject, and I found, from the observations of sixteen
different observers, from Captain Cook to the expedition of Sir James Ross
to the antartic seas, (using 10° 10' 30" as the difference of longitude
between Sydney, Fort Macquarie, and Melbourne) that only two place the
river Glenelg to the westward of the 141st degree of longitude.
By the observations of Sir Thomas Brisbane and of Mr. Rumker (now
Director of the Observatory at Hamburg), Parramatta, was considered to
be in longitude lOh. 4m. 65..25 or 151° 1 ' 33".7 east, from which Mr. Tyers
deduces that of the Glenelg to be 141° 1 1 34" ; but Mr. Rumker after re-
calculating his observations, gives a more easterly position to Parramatta,
viz., by 14 / '.52, so placing the disputed point 1 ' 48".5 within the boundary
of Port Phillip.
But there is good reason to believe that Parramatta is yet more easterly,
at least 17" or in 151" 2 / 18" east, and if so, the mouth of the Glenelg will
be in 141® 2' 18".3 east. This is yet to be determined.
I have taken the liberty of troubling you with this matter to shew the
importance of the re-establishment of the Observatory, if it be only to
decide a question which, at some future time, may give rise to very dis-
agreeable disputes. I could advance much stronger arguments for its
re-establishment had it not already been decided that science did not
require it, but I think that its usefulness, for the purpose I hqye described,
would be very great.
The instruments and books are, as I understand, to be sold by public
auction ; if so, they will fetch but a mere trifle. The erection of an Obser-
vatory may at present not be desirable, for various reasons, but at some
future time such an event might be necessary, and then it would be a cause
of great regret that such valuable instruments, as some are, should have
been lost.
I have therefore, the honor to request, that you will convey to His
Excellency the Governor the following proposition.
“ That His Excellency would delay the sale of the following list of
Instruments until it be ascertained whether they may not be kept in store
until an Observatory be established, or until they may be more advantage-
ously disposed of, viz. :
One Astx’onomical Clock, by Hardy.
Do. do. do. by Barraud. •
Do. do. do. by Grimaldi.
Mural Circle, 5J inch Transit.
16 inch Repeating Circle.
Equatorial Stand and 46 inch Telescope by Banks.
Mountain Barometer, by Troughton.
30 inch portable Transit for Collimator.
Among the books there are several of value to an Observatory that would
fetch little more than as waste paper if brought to the hammer.
There are other Instruments in the list of those that belonged to the
Observatory, but not desirable to retain, although they would scarcely
realize here the value of their weight in metal.
I have, etc.,
(Signed) PHILLIP P. KING, Capt., R.N.
[APPENDIX o.]
No. 17.
[Copy of a Despatch from the Right Honorable Earl Grey to Governor Sir
Charles A. Fitzroy.]
Downing Street,
14th December, 1849.
Sir, —I have received your Despatch, No. 57, of the 26th April last,
relative to the disposal of certain instruments belonging to the late
Observatory at Parramatta.


I referred that Despatch for the consideration of the Lords Commissioners
of the Treasury, and I transmit for your information a copy of a letter in
reply from the Secretary to that Board, with its enclosures.
You will perceive that the Lords Commissioners agree to the transfer of
those instruments to the Colony, and I trust that there will be no difficulty
in acting on the suggestions of the Astronomer Royal, and the Hydro-
grapher to the Admiralty, for the establishment by the Colonial Government
and the maintenance of a Time Observatory near Sydney for the purpose
of giving time to ships frequenting that port.
I have, etc.,
n «. , . rv (Signed) GREY.
Governor Sir Charles A. Fitzroy, etc., etc.
The Hydrographer said I am of opinion that it would be a
great boon to vessels if the transit instrument were to be
employed at Sydney in regulating their chronometers, and in
dropping a daily time ball; and the Astronomer Royal (9th
November, 1852), said it appears to me that it would be perfectly
proper to retain the principal instruments in Sydney for the
purpose of giving time to ships, and although some of the instru-
ments at Parramatta would not be strictly required for an
observatory for time signals, yet I would attach the whole of
them to it.
[APPENDIX P.l
No. 21.
[Copy of a Letter from the Colonial Secretary to the Commanding Royal
Engineer .]
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Sydney, 19th October. 1850.
Sir,— Referring to my letter of the 21st December, 1849, relative to the
Astronomical instruments belonging to the late Observatory at Parramatta,
now in the Ordnance Stores, I am directed by His Excellency the Governor
to inform you that the reply of the Home Government having been
received with respect to the disposal of the instruments, they will be taken
over by the Colony, with a view to the establishment of a time ball.
I have been in correspondence on this subject with Captain P. P.
King, R. N., to whose care the instruments named in the annexed list
are to be committed, and I have accordingly referred that gentleman to you
in order that they may be handed over to him. Captain King proposes,
whilst selecting those instruments, to examine and report on the state of
the other instruments, as packed, which are to remain in the Ordnance
Stores at present. I have, &c.,
„ (Signed) E. DEAS THOMSON.
I he Commanding Royal Engineer.
A long correspondence (see Votes and Proceedings, N.S. Wales,
1855) thenfollowed as to the position of the Observatory, extending
over the years 1851, 1852, 1853 and 1854.
Upon the arrival of Sir William Denison as Governor, in 1853,
he immediately took steps to get the Observatory established, and
the following papers show that he did so to some purpose.
[APPENDIX Q.]
31st March, 1853.
I heard with some regret a few years since that the Observatory at
Parramatta had been broken up. I am aware that this was in great


measure due to the misconduct of the person then acting as Astronomer, in
consequence of which some doubt was thrown upon the correctness of his
observations, and consequently on the value of the results deduced from
them. This was perhaps a sufficient reason for the withdrawal by the
Home Government of the allowance granted to an observer in these
latitudes. But there are many circumstances which would, in my opinion,
make it very advisable to re-establish the Observatory, not on the old site,
but upon one in the immediate vicinity of Sydney, In the first place,
provision has already been made for the erection of a building to contain
the machinery of a time ball and for the purchase of the machinery, but
the time ball will, in point of fact, be worse than useless unless there are
means for determining the time correctly—that is, unless there are proper
clocks and proper instruments for determining the time; and these
instruments are in the hands of an observer responsible to the Government
for their proper application. I say that a time ball would be worse than
useless without these ; for as the time ball is established for the purpose of
enabling captains of vessels to rate their chronometers properly, any error
in the time given by the ball has the effect of deceiving the captain as to
the quality of his chronometer, and as to the daily rate at which it either
loses or gains ; and a very trifling error in the rate, accumulating daily,
will in the course of a month amount to a serious error in time, and a still
more serious one in longitude.
In the second place, I am anxious for the establishment of an observatory
in the immediate vicinity of Sydney, as affording to all persons, and
especially to those educated at the University, a practical example of the
application of science to the determination of matters altogether beyond
the scope of our ordinary or uneducated reason. The student sees in the
results deduced from the observation the application of those truths or
principles which have been put before him at school in an abstract form
and he begins to comprehend that what he has hitherto been engaged in is
to, be looked upon in the light of an apprenticeship, during which he has
learned to handle the tools which he will from henceforward have to apply
to the purposes of life.
In the third place, I am desirous to establish an observatory for the
purpose of connecting it with the trigonometrical survey of the country,
and thus, by means of the perfect and absolute determination of the
position on the earth’s surface of one point, to be enabled to lay down with
perfect accuracy the whole of the remainder of the country, not merely with
relation to that spot, but with relation to the remainder of the earth’s surface.
In the fourth place, I am anxious for the establishment of an observatory
as a means of connecting this Colony with the Scientific Societies of Europe
and America. I have no doubt but that from my acquaintance with the
Astronomer Royal I shall be able to obtain from him a recommendation of
a person thoroughly qualified to take charge of the Observatory, and we
can then procure assistants from the youth of the Colony, some of whom
will be trained up to take the place hereafter of the Astronomer at first
supplied from England. The instruments in our possession already are of
great value, and I believe only require to be properly adjusted to allow of
their employment at once. Provision should be made for a building to
contain them, for such repairs as may be found necessary to the instruments
themselves, for a house for the Astronomer in the immediate vicinity of the
Observatory, and such additional accommodation for computers, &c., as
may probably be required.
It would also be desirable to provide for the purchase of a dozen sets of
meteorological instruments, for the purpose of establishing at different
points throughout the extensive area of the Colony such observations as to
temperature, moisture, direction of wind, and generally of such atmospheric
phenomena as may afford data from which we may be enabled at some
future period to deduce the laws upon w r hich these phenomena depend or
by which they are regulated.
31st March, 1855. \y. DENISON.


APPENDIX R.
[■Proceedings of the Executive Council on the 4th April, 1855, with respect h
the re-establishment of an Observatory in this colony.]
Extract from Minute No. 55112. Confirmed 17th April, 1855.
2. The Council express their entire concurrence in His Excellency’s
views, and they advise that the Legislative Council be invited to make the
necessary provision for a building in or near Sydney to contain the valuable
instruments already in the possession of the Government—for such repairs
to these instruments as may be requisite—for a residence for the Astronomer
in the immediate vicinity of the Observatory,—and for such additional
accommodation for computors, etc., as may probably be required.
3. It may also be desirable to provide for the purchase of a dozen sets of
Meteorological instruments for the purpose of recording at different points
throughout the extensive area of the colony, observations as to temperature
moisture, direction of wind and atmospheric phenomena.
MICHL. FITZPATRICK,
Clerk of the Council.
APPENDIX S.
[Specifications for Observatory by Sir William Denison, written 7th April.]
Weaver to The buildings for which the Colonial Architect will have to
on the subject est ' ma te in addition to the mere foundations for the Time
and desired to Ball will be as follows : Ist. —A building about 36 feet long
report as aoon by 15 feet wide divided into two rooms, one 24 feet long and
as possible, the other 12 feet, with two gable ends having two openings in
Col. Architect t * ie ro °f of the main room, which openings will be prolonged
and Auditor- through the walls to within 3 feet of the ground.
e “ era '' The object of these openings is to allow an observer to
“ pn ’ 00 ' direct his telescope to any portion of the meridional circle
On 1 May, which may be required. The opening must have proper
re-submitted, shutters working with pulley and counter weights so as to
Notfanswered move eas ‘bh but yet close enough to keep out the weather
4 May, ’ completely.
Not received, The floor must be of wood raised some distance from the
15 May, ground and so framed round the pillars which carry the
instruments as to leave them quite clear and independent.
The pillars which carry the instruments should be of single
blocks of sound stone —the foundation for which should be
carried up from the solid rock, the foundation being kept
quite clear from the sides of the pit in which it is placed.
If it be necessary to quarry for this foundation, that is if
the rock comes near the surface, the pit should be taken down
five or six feet.
2nd.—A circular building about fifteen feet in diameter
with a roof revolving upon balls or rollers, with a shutter
opening like those of the last described roof, but without any
openings in the walls. This building is for extra meridional
observations. A single pillar will be required in this building,
the walls may be raised to the same height as those of the
other building, but the floor should not be more than 6 ft. or
(j ft. 6 in. below the wall plates. The building should be placed
so as to have a clear view all round to within 15° of the horizon.
3rd.—Dwelling house for the Astronomer, consisting of
four rooms with detached kitchen and offices.
4th.—Fence to enclose a good space of ground round the
Observatory.


sth.—Buildings for meteorological observations at twelve
different points of tbe colony—these will average about £5O
each, they are mere wooden buildings to shelter the instru-
ments and will be placed in the vicinity of the house of the
observer. In every part these observations can be carried on.
Provision must be made for salary of Astronomer at rate of
£5OO ; for a clerk or computer, say a second-class clerk ; for
stationery, fuel, &c (a moderate allowance.)
W. D.—7th April, 1855
[APPENDIX T.]
Colonial Architect’s Office,
Sydney, 4th June. 1855.
Sir, —In attention to your letter of the Bth of May last, No. 242,
respecting the establishment of an Observatory, procuring meteorological
instruments, &c.
1. I do myself the honor to state that I have obtained several estimates
of the prices of new instruments, and find from them that such a set as will
be necessary will cost £2O. I have accordingly included in my estimate for
1856, £240, for the purpose of providing twelve sets.
2. With reference to the repair of the instruments already in possession
of the Government, I have seen Captain King, who informs me that they
were examined and repaired under his own directions a short time since,
and that he does not think any further repairs will be required to them
until the instruments are set up in their places in the Observatory, when
whatever may be necessary can be better effected.
I have the honor to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
WM. WEAVER, Col. Arct.
[APPENDIX U.]
Time Ball Buildings.
Department or Land and Public Works,
Sydney, 12th November, 1856.
Sir, —With reference to my letter of the 7th instant, I am now directed
to inform you that from a report which has been received from the Auditor-
General it appears that the sum of £6OO was voted by the Legislative
Council in the year 1852 for the erection of a building at Fort Phillip for
a time ball, and for quarters for the Meteorological Recorder, and that out of
this sum, £423 10s. 2d. has been expended by the Colonial Agent-General
in the purchase and transmission of a time ball, leaving a balance
unexpended of £176 9s. lOd. to be added to the £7,000 voted in 1855 as a
further sum for the erection of the buildings in question.
I have the honor to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
MICH. FITZPATRICK.
The Colonial Architect.
With this money the present building was put up, and
observations began in the middle of 1858.










