

f THE
CORNHILL MAGAZINE.
Published Monthly, price Is. net. Annual Subscription, postage free, 13s. 6d.
to Canada and Newfoundland ; I4s. to any other address in the Postal Union.
FEBRUARY 1917.
CONTENTS. PIGE
Reginald John Smith. By A. C. Benson . . . 129
Unconquered : An Episode of 1914. Chaps. IV-VI.
By Maud Diver 138
The Pink-Tailed Tank. By Boyd Cable . . . 163
‘ Where the Snipe Drums.’ By H. H. P. . . . 170
The Relief. By Major F. C. T. Ewald, D.S.O. . 18 L
Youth in the War. By E. S. P. Haynes . . . 190
The Flying Leave. By Miss E. L. White . . 194
At a Y.M.C.A. Hut Somewhere in France. JR'
, \ Ella C. Sykes 204
Lieutenant Caesar. By Bennet Copplestone . . 215
Letters of * Chinese Gordon.’ By Horace
Hutchinson 229
< Beating Back from Germany.’ Recorded by
Lewis R. Freeman 239
NOTICE TO CORRESPONDENTS.
Communications to the Editor should be addressed to the care of Messrs.
Bmith, Elder, & Co., 15 Waterloo Place, S.W.
All Contributions are attentively considered, and unaccepted MSS. are returned
when accompanied by a stamped addressed envelope; but the Editor cannot
hold himself responsible for any accidental loss. MSS. cannot be delivered on
personal application. Articles of a political nature are not accepted.
Every Contribution should be type-written on one side of each leaf only, and
should bear the Name and Address of the Sender; a preliminary letter is not
desired.
LONDON:
SMITH, ELDER, & CO., 15 WATERLOO PLACE, S.W.
PARIS: O AUG NANI & CO.
NSW TORS: INTERNATIONAL NEWS CO VTA NY. MELBOURNE; MELVILLE & MULLEN, PROPTY.
SYDNEY and BRISBANE: EDWARDS, DUNLOP A CO., Limited.
ADELAIDE: RIGBY, LTD. TAiMANIA: WALCB A SONS.
TORONTO; TORONTO NEWS COMPANY. MONTREAL: MONTREAL NEWS COMPANY.
T


*To CURE —is the Voice of the Past.
To PREVENT —is the Divine Whisper of the Present
INDOOR WORKERS
When brain work, nerve strain, and
lack of exercise make you feel languid
—tired —* blue ’ —a little
END’S ‘FRUIT SALT’
in a glass of cold water will clear
your head and tone your nerves.
This world-famous natural aperient for over 40 years
has been the standard remedy for constipation, biliousness,
impure blood, and indigestion.
A Judicious Rule. — 1 Ist, Restrain your appetite, and
get always up from the table with a desire to eat more. 2nd,
Do not touch anything that dots not agree with your
stomach, be it most agreeable to the palate.' These
rules have been adopted in principle by all dieticians of
eminence, and we recommend their use.
A LITTLE at the RIGHT TIME is better than Much
and Running Over at the Wrong,
END’S ‘ FBUIT SALT' IS SOLD BY CHEMISTS AMD STORES THROUGHOUT THE WORLD.
on*y a, b!J J- C. ENO, Ltd., ‘Fruit Salt’ Works, London, S.E.
FRIENDS OF ARMENIA
(Founded 1897.)
47 VICTORIA STREET, WESTMINSTER, LONDON, S.W.
Hours— lo-5; Saturdays, 10-1. Tel.: Yic, 1198.
President: LADY FREDERICK CAVENDISH,
Chairman and Hon. Treasurer : B. W. BROOKS, Esq. Hon. Sec. : Mrs. MARY HICKSON.
Office Sec. : Miss B. HICKSON.
THE FOLLOWING TELEGRAM JUST RECEIVED BY THE SECRETARY FROM TIFIIS.
‘ Personal investigation proves acute distress among
refugees. Suffering of widows and children intense, thou-
sands of orphans require immediate help. War allowances
reduced to half. Cases known of death by starvation.
Clothing twenty thousand new refugees, giving employment to
two thousand women. Funds urgently needed for orphans.'
We ask all those readers who are living in happy sheltered homes
this winter to give a thought to the sorrows of this tortured race,
and to send a contribution, however small, to brighten the life and put
fresh hope into one at least of these refugees, who have lost their all.
Gifts will be most gratefu’Jy rec ived ani promptly acknowledged. They should be sent to the Hon. Treasurer ’
E. Wright Brooks, Esq , Friends of Armenia, 47 Victoria Street, Westminster, London, SW. Cheques and
Postal Orders should be crossed ‘London County and Westminster Bank,’ and Treasury Notes registered.


The words suddenly recalled Falconer to a sense of his own
crisis. His train would soon be due at the Junction. Ten minutes’
delay would nibble away a fatal deficit in his margin of time.
As he caught his breath in the anger of baffled purpose, hope
revived once more. There was no reason to despair. The girl
would go. Many a barely noticed hint and rumour recurred,
all pointing to the inevitable conclusion. From Charteris’s recent
words, it was evident that she had already made up her mind.
Her present misgiving was but the automatic recoil, r <;
Quivering with impatience, he stood, waiting for her to move.
The minutes slowly ticked away, yet no second blot obscured
the sky.
The door stood open in vain.
Every nerve in Falconer’s frame chafed at the torture of delay.
He writhed with the agony of some small wood-creature snared
within sight of its hole. Would she never stir ? His whole fate
was interdependent with hers, yet she remained passive, squandering
the last precious minutes in inert caprice.
With the whole force of his nature, he prayed that she would
g°-
The answer to his appeal came with startling celerity. Throwing
back her head with a movement of resolution, Yvonne sprang to
her feet. No hesitation was in her step as she passed towards
the door.
It was his own savage throb of joy that awoke the submerged
soul of Captain John Falconer. . . .
In the cumulative horror of that moment of realisation, he
watched Yvonne.
Her hand was on the latch. For a space, she paused. Then
—she closed the door. Upstairs she sped, the key tightly clasped
in her hand, leaving Falconer standing once more inside the
locked door.
E. L. White.


AT A Y.M.C.A. HUT SOMEWHERE IN FRANCE.
ELLA a SYKES.
* Well, I really think you might do more useful work than helping
to run a bun-shop for soldiers —turning taps for Tommies’ teas ! ’
Thus spoke a relative when I announced that I had ‘ signed on’
to do canteen work for three months at the Y.M.C.A. Tartan Hut.
I had many answers to his remark later on, but this one from
an Australian will suffice here : £ You ladies make the Hut a bit
of home. You keep us out of the canteens, for after the way
you serve us we can’t stand having a man chuck the food at us.
The Tartan Hut, the scene of my labours, consisted of a couple
of long wooden buildings in the form of an L, one of them being
filled with chairs and having a wide platform on which was a piano.
This hall was used for services and concerts, the other Hut —fitted
with a long counter at one end—being, as it were, the shop of the
establishment. Half-way down the room was the cash-desk, where
money was changed and penny tickets served out English, French,
Egyptian, and Indian coins having to be dealt with and on the
opposite side of the hall a tobacco-stall was placed later, taking
off a great deal of pressure from the top counter.
I took to the work of saleswoman con amore, and was par-
ticularly fortunate in my fellow workers, with whom I lodged in a
charming villa in the Forest until we all moved into a fantastic
little house by the sea.
Our duties were as follows: We were motored to our work
at a little past ten in the morning, and,' until the counter opened,
spent our time in making hundreds of sandwiches from ham and
potted meat, or buttering legions of rolls and slices of bread—two
hundred up to two hundred and fifty of the long French loaves
being sometimes consumed in one day. One of us would set out
the cakes upon the Counter, fill up the lockers underneath from
the store-room, and place specimens of what we sold on view on
shelves. The Y.M.C.A. stocked about a hundred different articles,
from tinned fish and fruits to boot-laces, pencils, and writing-
tablets, and we had to know the price of each thing and be able
to lay our hands upon it automatically.
At half-past one the Hut was closed and we motored home to a


2 p.m. dinner, leaving about 4 p.m. to resume work till 8.30, a
somewhat late supper winding up the day.
It was my privilege to arrive just as the Tartan was having a
c boom ’ and beating the record of any other Hut in France as
regards its receipts, the climax being reached when 2800 francs were
taken in one day, and all in penny tickets. At that time we num-
bered only three women-workers with a few volunteers, and the
hut was densely packed from end to end with a mass of men
who fought and struggled good-humouredly with one another in
their efforts to reach the counter.
It was not entirely easy for the workers to maintain their
‘ keep smiling ’ attitude, as the calls on us were unceasing, the
afternoon passing without a single lull, and the crush gathering
in intensity as closing-time drew near. We had to tear up the
tickets —later on. tills were instituted into which we could thrust
them whole —and until a separate tobacco-stall was set up, we never
ceased racing from end to end of the counter in order to supply
the multifarious wants of the tightly packed soldiers, who, when
they were served, would throw themselves backward into the
seething mass behind them and somehow fight their way out of
the press.
Few of the men would give their whole order at once. For
example, a Scotchman would hold up a ticket and demand a brad,
and as soon as the worker had got the slice of bread-and-butter
and handed it to her customer, a second ticket would be produced
jwith the remark, ‘ Anither/ and the performance had to be repeated.
A third ticket would be handed out for ‘ spice brad 5 (currant cake),
'and others for woodbines (known as fags or coffin-nails), tobacco,
matches, soap, and so on. One had to try to grasp the slight
.difference in the word ‘ caunel ’(a candle) and caumel (a packet
|of caramels) : one day I was asked for * nugget/ and promptly
landing a tin of boot-polish I was covered with confusion when I
,found that ‘ nougat 5 was desired, and on another occasion, when
jl did not know that ‘ bawbin 1 meant a reel of cotton, my customer
said reprovingly, ‘ I spoke to ye in plain English !
r The men were particularly fond of custard slices, which they
Jcalled among themselves by the unattractive name of ‘ dead hands/
.also vanilla sandwiches dubbed ‘ religieuses ■ by the French pastry-
-cook, and what she called English cakes were known by the men
sas Dorothy buns or ‘ busters.’ In a case of ‘ dolly cakes ’ sent
from Dublin, we found a letter written by a girl-packer in which


she boldly offered herself in marriage to the soldier who came
across her missive, but prudently added a postscript to the
effect that if the man were married she hoped that he would
hand on her proposal to a bachelor comrade!
One cold April day there was a snowstorm, and in the midst
of it Australians and New Zealanders, the heroes of Gallipoli,
invaded our Hut, made themselves at home straightway and became
great friends with the Scotch, with whom they seemed to have a
natural affinity. We women took to them at once, one reason
being that they had come thousands of miles to fight for the
Empire and appealed to our sympathy, for many had had no
letters for months and were desperately home-sick.
As a rule they were splendid-looking men, lean and sinewy,
with clear-cut features, frank eyes, and beautiful teeth, with the
walk of those accustomed to live in the air and in the open spaces
of the earth, and they numbered many a son of Anak in their ranks.
The ‘ Hut ’ manners of the new-comers were beyond reproach.
We were always addressed as ‘ Madame ’ or ‘ Lady/ and rewarded
with a salute and a beaming smile if we did any little extra thing
for our customers. ‘ You are the first lady we’ve spoken to since
we left Australia ’ (or New Zealand, as the case might be) £ and
you’ve no idea what a treat it is/ was said to all of us several times.
Certainly this charm of manner was in strong contrast to that
of many a £ Tommy ’ or ‘ Jock ’ who gave their orders curtly and
imperatively, with never a ‘ please ’ or ‘ thank you/ Of this
apparent rudeness one of their own officers wrote as follows :
‘ Their consistent abstinence from all the minor graces and
politenesses is more than real abstinence, because based on real
hatred and fear of anything of the kind. . . /
Be this as it may, I can vouch for my fellow-workers and myself
that we never had a rude word or look while in the Hut, nor did a
single man ever swear in our hearing.
The Anzacs soon confided in the Y.M.C.A. ladies to a flattering
extent. Eor example, I was asked to take charge of one man’s
money, was entrusted with a treasure for another’s wife, and was
requested to find the address in England of the long-lost uncle
of a strapping youth. This latter task, which appeared fraught
with some difficulty, was satisfactorily accomplished owing to the
energy of a friend of mine, and the nephew was delighted when
his relative wrote, warmly inviting him to his home.
We did a good deal of shopping for the men who frequented


the Tartan. They brought their watches to be mended in an
unceasing stream ; some had lost their identification discs and
wanted new ones to be engraved ; a man from the Public Schools
Corps requested me to get a manual for the training of officers;
another needed a French novel, as he hoped for promotion if he
could improve himself in the language, and an intelligent Scotch
sergeant required French lessons to be arranged for him. He had
seen a notice, ‘ Lessons of French/ pasted up in the window of a
house in the town, and applied to the Y.M.C.A. worker to inquire
for him as to times and prices.
We supplied brown paper, string, needles, cottons, pins, labels,
and so on gratis, and had iodine and bandages at hand, dressing
many a cut or small wound, and in all probability often saving our
careless patients from the septic poisoning so prevalent in the
camp.
The flowers of the season that we kept on the counter were
a source of pleasure to many. ‘ It’s such a relief to see these after
the khaki,’one of them said, and sometimes our friends would pick
off a flower or leaf to enclose in their letters. The lilac reminded
British and Anzac alike of home, and it went to my heart to see
the longing in their eyes as they touched the petals.
One day an Australian showed me a big bundle of letters, ' This
is my first mail for six months,’ he explained, ‘ and it makes me
feel real bad. You go along from day to day and don’t think much
about things, but when a mail comes you understand how far away
you are from home and you want your own folk dreadfully. Lots
of our fellows just shut themselves up in their tents when they get
their letters, and won’t come out.’
The Anzacs had come direct from the heat of Egypt, and felt
the cold and wet very much, the great majority succumbing to
a virulent kind of influenza which made the Hut resound to a perfect
hurricane of coughing. We sold hundreds of packets of eucalyptus
jujubes— ‘ lollies ’ the men called them—but things did not improve
until a spell of warm weather arrived. We workers were all afflicted
with the same complaint, and our drives in open cars to and from
the Tartan only aggravated our colds and sore throats.
The new arrivals spoke strongly in praise of the Hut —in fact
many assured us that they could not have stood the confinement
in camp without it. ‘lf only we could have had this in Gallipoli! ’
one man exclaimed, and another remarked that they got good
value for their money and were never pressed to buy as in ordinary


shops. ‘ This is the first time we’ve come here, but you’ll see us
often again—you make the place so home-like somehow,’ was one
remark, and the fact that we women had come over from England
to do our bit was the subject of much flattering comment from our
customers, who never took us as a matter of course. ‘lf you ladies
knew what the whole camp thinks of you it would hurt you,’ was
said to me on one occasion ; and on another, * You always serve
us as if you liked doing it. How do you find us ? Some of us are
rather a wild lot. I said what we of the Tartan thought of our
customers, and he replied, 4 Oh, all of us show you our best side of
course, but I’m glad you think well of Australia.’
Again and again we were adjured not to work too hard, the
speaker of the moment being sure that we were overtiring ourselves,
and as we drove to and fro we were greeted by many a friend, men
saluting us from the ranks in defiance of military discipline.
To one Australian who was talking to me of his home and
family, I said *lt must have been a great wrench to have left
them ; and the answer came, * Yes, it was, but I should never have
been satisfied all the rest of my life if I hadn’t come,’ and that was
the spirit animating one and all. Boys of sixteen who had enlisted,
pretending that they were older, were wild to go to the Front, and
the Gallipoli heroes, whom one would have supposed to have had
enough of warfare, were chafing at their detention in the Base
Camp. The Canadians have made such a name for themselves
that we want to have a look in on the West and see whether we
can’t do something,’ was a common remark.
Of course everyone took the deepest interest in the history
that made itself from day to day, but we had also local excite-
ments, one of which was the capture of a spy.
A man in the New Zealand uniform had accosted two
Australians who were the worse for drink and had accompanied
them to their tent, questioning them as to what troops were quar-
tered in the camp. Fortunately a corporal noticed that the guest’s
putties were of the pattern worn by our Tommies, and arrested him
on the spot. The spy affirmed that he was French, but when
accosted by natives it was found that he could hardly speak their
language.
The keen-eyed corporal was given two stripes, fifty pounds, and
a fortnight in England, this last being looked upon by his comrades
as the ne plus ultra. Men often said that they hoped they might
be wounded badly enough to go to Blighty, the longing to see


what one and all looked upon as the Motherland being very strong.
‘ What did you think of England ? * I said to one who had just
returned from a fortnight’s visit. ‘lt was all I had thought and
a great deal more,’ he replied, and his whole face lit up.
Zeppelins visited the camp one night, dropping a few bombs
that fortunately did no harm, and next day the men told us that
a Taube had scattered leaflets with the information that'the Germans
intended to destroy the whole camp in three days’ time—a threat
that was never executed.
Every now and again I was asked to take a turn at the
cash desk, when the Y.M.C.A. officials were short-handed,
and thoroughly enjoyed the change of work, especially on
pay-days, when the crowd seemed unending. The men stood in
a long queue, never jostling one another and amused to see me
measuring off the strings of ten-centime tickets with the help of
notches cut on the desk. When five or seven francs’ worth of
tickets were demanded it was like reeling off ribbon at a counter.
The highly paid Anzacs usually proffered twenty-franc notes, and
always asked for their tickets in multiples of ten, but the British
soldier never seemed to grasp the decimal coinage, and would
demand twelve or six tickets out of his five-franc note. New
arrivals offered English coins, and were interested to find that
a shilling was worth 1 franc 45 centimes ; half a crown 3 francs
55 centimes, while 28 francs 55 centimes was the equivalent of a
pound note, though to their chagrin an English sovereign only
realised 27 francs.
Many of the Scotch were very taciturn, and frequently pointed
to the articles they wanted to buy without vouchsafing a word.
I always humoured them, and business was transacted in complete
silence on either side. However, once at the tobacco-stall I forced
a dour-looking sergeant to speak. At the time matches were
extremely scarce, and in order to make them go round we were only
allowed to sell one box to each man. ‘ Jock ’ pushed two tickets
towards me and pointed at the matches. I gave him one box and
returned the second ticket, which he thrust vehemently at me
again, and again I returned it in silence. This was too much for
him, and he burst into speech : ‘ Twa matches.’ ‘ Oh, you aren't
dumb after all,’ and his stern face broke into a broad grin while
I explained why his demand could not be granted.
During May Her Highness Princess Victoria of Schleswig-
Holstein, who I understand originated the idea of getting women
VOL. XLII.—NO. 248, N.S. 14


to work in the Y.M.C.A. Huts, came to inspect the Tartan. The
Anzacs were particularly interested in the visit of ‘ the first cousin
of our King,’ one of them saying that he had always been a Socialist,
but a week in England had changed his point of view. One day
he saw Queen Alexandra drive past, and something impelled him
to wave his slouched hat and cheer wildly with the crowd. ‘ After
that,’ he remarked, ‘ I saw that there was a lot about Royalty
that I hadn't understood before/
At intervals the Hut was visited by concert parties organised
by a talented actress, the artists being received with such storms
of enthusiasm that they said it would be hard to perform to any
ordinary audience after the soldiers. The men also had their
own sing-songs, the Australians producing a mesmeriser who sent
us all into fits of uncontrollable laughter by the comic situations
into which he put the men whom he had hypnotised.
And making friends with the soldiers, preaching and lecturing
constantly, was a certain Padre who had the gift of appealing to
the best in every man. It did us all good to see the humorous
face in which were set the eyes of the dreamer and idealist, and his
sermons must have been an inspiration to those who lived from
day to day in expectation of facing death. His lectures were always
addressed to packed audiences, and never did his forceful personality
reveal itself more clearly than in one entitled ‘ The Position of
Belgium/ It was a complicated bit of history, and extracts from
treaties and suchlike somewhat dry matters were woven into it,
but the lecturer’s intense interest in his subject communicated
itself to the whole assembly, and one did not wonder at the verdict
of the . camp, ‘ We’d rather hear Captain M any day than go
to a variety show ! ’
The Library was a great resource for the men, as the wet and
stormy weather kept them so much indoors. But though the
Anzacs carefully recorded their names and the title of the book
they took out they were, alas, not nearly so punctilious in the matter
of returning the volumes. Certainly some grateful spirits not
only brought back missing books —in too many cases found on
rubbish heaps—but presented the Library with others, yet on the
whole the arrivals from the Antipodes swept the shelves clear,
as if they had been crops visited by a swarm of locusts.
Most of the men liked novels, but some were keen on serious
reading, and one youth remarked as he showed me a book of


poems, ‘ I read one of these every morning and it hangs about me
all day.’
A constant visitor was a British journalist who had come
from South America to join in the Great Adventure, and much
wanted to write some account of his recent experiences. But he
complained that his impressions got blurred, as one-thing followed
on another as quickly as the pictures in a cinema show. He found
it doubly difficult, as he had been living in a land of Manana, where
events happened slowly, and he could digest them at his leisure
while sitting on his verandah.
An omnivorous reader was an elderly Irishman who was working
on the Rand when the War broke out, and joined Botha’s forces,
being present at the victorious entry into Windhoek. Not content
with this, he took ship to Australia and, donning the slouch hat,
came from the Land of the Southern Cross to fight the Empire’s
battles in France. In contrast to him were men who owned
frankly that they had never read before and wanted something
short—•* a long story is so tiring.’
A thick-set man with a beaming smile browsed on the contents
of the shelves marked * Serious Reading,’ and we noticed that he
hardly spent anything on himself, unlike the usual run of Anzacs,
who thought nothing of buying twenty cakes. Remarking on
this to our Hut Leader, he said that my acquaintance had already
given three donations to the work of the Y.M.C.A., confirming
what I had already suspected, that he denied himself in order to
help others.
The Hut was provided with newspapers, and ‘ Blighty ’ —a
collection of the best pictures and anecdotes from the comic papers
—was given free, and greatly appreciated. The Anzacs were eager
to go to the real £ Blighty,’ but had to give an address in England,
to which place their tickets would be made out. However, men
from the Antipodes were not to be kept back by such a trifle, and
one explained to me that those who possessed no friends across
the Channel would ‘ fake ’ addresses.
As a rule Australians and New Zealanders hated the confinement
of camp, and were for ever grumbling at the discipline to which
they were subjected. ‘ They’ll break our hearts if they give us
too much of the Bull Ring ’ (their name for the training-ground)
was a constant complaint, and the British officer was a standing
puzzle to many, ‘He thinks himself a better class than his men.


Now our officers are just the same as we are, and a private often
“ treats ” his officer, and if they’re a good sort we’ll follow them
and do all they want. We can be led, but not bullied. None of us
would stand all the discipline that your men have to put up with.
Oh, how we pity your Tommies ! ’
Punishment for lack of discipline was bitterly resented, and
I was told how things were under the Southern Cross, where a
man ‘ downs tools ’ just as he pleases, with no sort of notice to his
employers. In spite of this, one and all were unanimous in praise
of General Birdwood, ‘ a white man through and through,’ as he
was usually described.
With us they were on terms of a pleasant equality, having no
idea of the class distinctions that made the Tommies look upon us
as f gentry.’
Two or three weeks after the slouch hat and the broad-brimmed
round felt had invaded our Hut, an epidemic of mumps and measles
broke out among the Anzacs, and accordingly the Tartan was
declared to be out of bounds to all the British troops. Until this
order was repealed we had about half our usual customers, and in
consequence were able to individualise the men from the Antipodes,
and make friends in a way that was impossible when business was
in full swing. Those who were ill were supposed to be confined
in an Isolation Camp, but one day as I entered the Library an
Australian remarked to me cheerfully, ‘ This place is a boon. I
really don’t know how we could get on in the Isolation Camp
without these books ! ’
At intervals detachments of our friends were sent to the
Front, and it was hard to say good-bye to those who might
never return. A handshake and good wishes, uttered often
with a lump in my throat, were always received with grateful
thanks. My heart went out in particular to the boys whose
mothers were thousands of miles away, many of them living far
from news on lonely farms and outlying stations. The faces of
some of their sons rise before me. One who was only just seventeen
had lost two brothers at Gallipoli and was very home-sick. At the
end of our talk he pressed his badge into my hand as a keepsake, and
I cherish it along with the pink satin heart given me by another boy
who insisted that the little I had done for him when ill had saved
him from being left behind while his comrades went off. Then
there was the ‘ Imp,’ curly-headed, with bold black eyes and the
physique of a prize-fighter. He was full of mischief and the ‘ joie


de vivre 5 when I knew him first, but he returned to the Hut after
a spell at the Front considerably sobered down. At my greeting
his face puckered up and he exclaimed just like a spoilt child,
‘ Eve had enough of the whole thing. I don’t want to go back
and make the daisies burst up. I want my home,’ and the cry
came from his very heart.
‘ Of course you do, but you have to see this through first,
seemed somehow to cheer him up. ‘ That’s so,’ he muttered,
nodding his head approvingly, and the light returned to his eyes
and the swagger to his walk.
Sometimes as I watched the men, so full of spirits as a rule,
1 fiercely resented the thought that shell and bullet would lay
many of them low, and far worse, that many would return to their
homes broken and maimed. As an Australian remarked one day,
‘ None of us understood what war meant until the first shipload
of our wounded arrived. When our folks saw the blinded men they
began to realise things a bit.’
Even in the Tartan there were several victims of shell-shock,
some being mere boys with a terrified look in their eyes. One of
my friends, a fine-looking man, could not understand that after
nineteen months of warfare, without a scratch, all his nerves should
give way because some earth from a bursting shell struck his face.
But the Medical Board had declared him unfit for further service,
and he came to bid me good-bye. ‘ I haven’t a single bad mark
against my name,’ he said. ‘ Before I left home I promised my
sister that I’d behave, and I’ve kept my word, though it’s been
hard not to drink sometimes when I’ve been with the boys.’ I
trust that the sea-voyage and his temperate habits will restore him
to health, for I always regretted that these splendid men viewed
drunkenness with too lenient an eye. As one oi them remarked
to me, ‘We don’t look upon it in the way you do—it isn’t anything
to keep a man awake at night about.’
Three happy months slipped by, and I could hardly believe
that the time had come for me to go home. The Hut was a part
of my life, and little seemed to matter save the welfare of the men
and the progress of the war. Shall I ever meet any of them again,
I wonder ?
What has become of the white-haired man, erect and sinewy,
who had been one of the earliest leaders in the campaign that ended
in the complete triumph of the Labour party in Australia ? He
had known Hughes when the eloquent Prime Minister was poor


and obscure, and he took much trouble in explaining to me the
state of politics in the Antipodes.
Then there were John and Alf, our cheery and willing boy-
orderlies from Birmingham, who had enlisted at the tender age of
sixteen. ‘We couldn’t stand the posters, and as lots of grown-up
men wouldn’t do their “ bit ”we just had to enlist.’ Thus John
explained one day, and added that when his widowed mother,
whose only child he was, heard the news, she took to her bed for
a fortnight. I was glad to hear that he and all the other boys
under eighteen were to be restored to their homes, for the grim
realities of life ‘ up the Line ’ are a terrible strain to such young
lads, full of pluck as all of them were.
Another of our orderlies, British born, had had a chequered
career. He had worked as a cow-boy in the States, and had got
a lucrative billet in Mexico, when he was captured by Villa’s forces
and cast into prison. e They only gave me food when they felt
like it ’ was his comment on his imprisonment, and finally he was
brought down to the coast in chains. On the outbreak of War he
took ship to Tasmania and enlisted under the Australian flag, going
through the Gallipoli campaign unscathed.
These are but a few glimpses of a great and gallant company,
men who at the call of Duty went to meet Death with ‘ proud
unreluctant feet,’ one and all offering up their lives without
compulsion in the sacred cause of Justice and Freedom.
