

At Home and
at the Front
Issued by the National Committee (Army and
Navy Department) of the Young Men's
Christian Association of Australia




AT HOME AND AT
THE FRONT
A STORY OF
Y.M.C.A. ARMY WORK
Issued by the National Committee (Army and Navy Department)
of the Young Men’s Christian Association of Australasia
Elizabeth House, Elizabeth Street, Melbour


THE NATIONAL COMMITTEE
YOUNG MEN’S CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATION
OF AUSTRALASIA
Army and Navy Department
patrons:
His Excellency the Governor-General The Right Hon.
Sir R. Munro-Ferguson, P.C., G.C.M.G.
The Minister for Defence, Senator The Hon. G. F.
Pearce.
Dictorian Citisens’ Committee:
Chairman: Hon. Frank
G. C. Arnold, Esq,
A. S. Austin, Esq.
Clive Baillieu, Esq.
J. Newman Barker, Esq.
R. O. Blackwood, Esq.
F. T. Bridges, Esq.
C. F. Crosby, Esq.
J. Clayton, Esq.
M. Con."an, Esq.
M. C. Coates, Esq.
A. W. Clarke, Esq.
David Elder, Esq.
J. A. M. Elder, Esq.
Alex. Eggleston, Esq.
R. Hallenstein, Esq.
H. P. Hemty, Esq.
Dr. J. W. Dunbar Hooper
Gen. F. G. Hughes, C.B.
W. Howat, Esq.
L. Jenner, Esq.
J. C. Journeaux, Esq.
E. Jowett, Esq.
G. Clarke, M.L.C.
Ernest E. Keep, Esq.
R. W. Knox, Esq,
Geo. Kettlewell, Esq.
Joseph Levi, Esq.
Clements Langford, Esq.
J. H. Haddock, Esq.
A. A. Mendoza, Esq.
F. D. Michaelis, Esq.
H. V. McKay, Esq.
J. F. W. Payne, Esq.
W. J. Roberts, Esq.
J. H. Riley, Esq.
A. H. Sargood, Esq.
W. G. L. Spowers, Esq.
G. Swinburne, Esq.
Geoffrey Syme, Esq.
A. Tolhurst, Esq.
E. Trenchard, Esq.
Dr. R. E. Weigall.
Dr. W. Atkinson Wood.
H. E. Wootton, Esq.
A. Whybrow, Esq.
Ibon. National {Treasurer:
A. H. Sargood, Esq., 238 Flinders-st., Melbourne.
Ibon. national Secretary:
T. Thomas, Esq., “ Elizabeth House,” Elizabeth-st.,
Melbourne.
national Secretary:
j. Henry Lang, Esq., “ Elizabeth House,” Elizabeth-st.,
Melbourne.


AT HOME AND AT
THE FRONT
A STORY OF Y.M.C.A. FIELD SERVICE
FOREWORD.
A Living, Not a Soul-less, Ideal.
In the pages that follow an attempt is made to
give the people of Australia at least a reasonable
word picture of the “ ideal service ” aimed at by
a great Association, and also some idea of the real
service rendered to the officers and men of our
Australian Army. A recent writer heads his
article on the present “world crisis” by saying,
“ Thank God for the war,” and adds, “ it is the
mercy of heaven that Germany struck before Bri-
tain’s soul was dead.” Throughout the grey, sad
days and months of struggle, disaster and dis-
organisation, men’s minds must have been slowly
and surely realising that the British Empire was
steadily drifting away from .the splendid heritage
of clean achievement towards a soul-less ideal of
“ self.” Of London, the heart of the Empire, a
distinguished critic has recently written: “ The city
was, just prior to the war, the centre of tango-
teas and misery, night clubs and starvation, sloth
and sullen work.” Thank God! the cleansing tide
of adversity is bringing about a transformation of
our national outlook that must, in the end, bring to
our people a purer practical life and a simpler faith
Issued by the National Committee of the Young
:: Men’s Christian Association of Australasia ::


ever reaching forth to a God-given ideal of clean
work, clean speech, and clean thought throughout
all the days and years to come. The Y.M.C.A. is
but following the “gleam,” and is putting out
every effort to send the “ call along.
Join the Fighting Lines,
The call is clear! Come on, Australians! Step
up or step out! Get in or go under! Are
to tread the road of “ clean self-saciifice and
fight for all the Y.M.C.A. stands for? The ques-
tion is up against you, and you —and you alone ■
can settle it. To-day the British fighting line is
lengthened the wide world round, but were every
Britisher right in that line, each in his place,
standing shoulder to shoulder, doing his little bit,
whether in the battle line or not; were each train-
ing himself and the “ other fellow ” in clean and
Christian usefulness, then, and then only, will
come the heartening up of the nation, and the
sure and sane achievement of tne hard won vic-
tory that will be a saving grace to all the nations.
The Work at Home and Abroad.
This has been done under the full view of our
people, and after allowing for all faults, must, of
course, be left to them for their final judgment.
It will, however, be found in the following pages
that the “ field service ” work abroad is the more
emphasised, and in this respect the Y.M.C.A.,
in the “ field,” through its devoted represen-
tatives, makes no claim to infallibility in social
and religious organisation, but it does demand re-
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


A Typical Y.M.C.A. Hut
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


cognition of this fact, that, with all faults and mis-
takes given in and allowed for, it is the one
organisation that attempts to give, and does give,
a touch of home life a measure of social enjoy-
ment, and a practical touch of Christian influence
at the back of the “ fighting line.”
What the “Red Cross Societies,” with their thou-
sands upon thousands of loving helpers, are to the
wounded soldiers, the Y.M.C.A. Field Service aims
to be to the “ strong men ” through their discipline
and training, and throughout the weary and awful
work at the Front. Knowing this, and reading
the pages that follow, it may perhaps come as
an “ inspiration ” to Australian men, the Common-
wealth over, who are too young, too*old, or other-
wise debarred from “ active service,” that they,
too, like our Australian Red Cross women, could
form a vast army of “ Field Service ” workers,
which would mean that the National Y.M.C.A.
Executive would have to overflowing the financial
assistance in money and gifts in kind, which would
enable them to despatch more and more “ Field
Service ” workers properly equipped to the front,
thus enabling' our lads in khaki to be really and
efficiently helped by the keen and sympathetic
“ Handy Men ” of the Social Service for our sol-
diers.
What this would mean in the way of comfort
and hope to the sorrowing and anxious hearts of
our Australian mothers, fathers, wives and sisters,
only He who realises and knows the secrets of all
human hearts will ever know, but ; the “ Field
despatches ” from end to end bristle wjrh the same
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


“ ideal,” the same appeal to Australian people for
a mighty awakening of practical interest in the
“ Service ” which touches the Camp and fighting
line of our brave Australian soldier lads, in a
homely, happy, Christian way, and throughout all
the grimness, the ghastliness, and murk of the
battle work tends to keep the “ boys ” themselves
the clean thinkers, clean livers and clean fighters
we all wish them to be.
A Group, with the Bishop of Carpentaria on the right
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


Y.M.C.A. and Red Cross
THE JUDGMENT OF A
STATESMAN
“Looking at it as a whole as I have
done during the year, both as a member
of the Association, and as the High
Commissioner of this country, I have
been profoundly impressed with the
magnitude of the work, and above all,
with its success. I have heard, on all
sides, appreciation of this work expressed
by the Generals and Commanders of
our Forces, and I am not going too far
in saying that the Y.MLC.A. play quite as
important a part in the War, by promoting
the health and well-being of the Troops,
and thereby keeping them out of Hospital,
as our Medical services and Red Cross
do by looking after the men when they
get there.”
Sir HENRY McMAHON, G.C.V.O., K.C.I.E.,
High Commissioner for E-gypt


NATIONAL STATEMENT.
The Young Men’s Christian Association. _in
recent years, has been a vital organisation touching
the life, not only of Europe and America, but reach-
ing out its vital service to the youth of India, Korea,
Japan, and China. Lord Derby’s tribute to the
work of the organisation in the trite sentence,
“ The Y.M.C.A. in peace is invaluable, in war in-
dispensable,” gives the right perspective, how-
ever, for it wds not until the war clouds lowered
and the nations were hastening their preparations
with feverish anxiety that the Y.M.C.A. unosten-
tatiously but expeditiously perfected its plan of cam-
paign for extending its operations in a great com-
munity and national work on behalf of the troons
in training camps, at advanced bases, and at the
front.
Two years before war was declared the Associa-
tion approached the War Office at Home, and asked
for information and direction as to how it could
best serve the nation in the event of an European
war. When the declaration came, therefore, the
Association was ready for service, and in ten days
the English National Committee had established
250 centres. The work grew apace, until there is
now throughout the Empire a staff of over 1000
secretaries working with the troops. The magni-
tude of the work is indicated in the fact that the
English National Committee spent half a million
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


sterling, all raised by public subscription, in the
first year of the war, and now spend £loooj per
week in providing writing paper and facilities for
the troops. The Y.M-C.A. is in every theatre of
war, serving British, Canadian, New Zealand, Aus-
Dug Out above Brighton Beach, at Anzac
tralian, Indian, South African, and West Indian
troops. It has centres for sailors’ and dockers bat-
talions and munition workers as also hostels in
Northern France for relatives of soldiers wounded
to the death. Its Enquiry Bureau, for assisting
relatives to trace their friends, has brought comfort
to thousands of homes. In enemy countries it has
a staff of 70 secretaries at work among the allied
prisoners of war. This privilege of serving our
prisoners of war was obtained only after weeks of
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


international negotiations, and was finally arranged
by securing secretaries from a neutral country
(America) to carry on this work. Its work in mili-
tary camps is for every soldier, and its facilities
and privileges are available to all.
In Australia the Y.M.C.A. has rendered service
in practically every military camp. More than
£50,000 has been spent in service and equipment
in the various States. Each transport of any size
leaving Australia carries a Y.M.C.A. secretary
Sixty-two secretaries have been sent to the front.
The highest military authorities abroad endorse
.the work of the Y.M.C.A. with our troops, and urge
its extension. Money is needed for buildings and
other requisites to divert the minds of our troops
from the scenes of horror and suffering with which
they are surrounded, and fill the weary hours with
occupation.
The Y.M.C-A. is the one organisation rendering
this service in all theatres of war with the troops
at the front. All chaplains use the Y.M.C.A. All
creeds are fused in this practical Christian work,
yet the Australian troops are inadequately served.
The Army and Navy Department of the National
Committee of the Y.M.C.A. of Australia has af-
firmed the principle that Australia should send
Y.M.C.A. men and money in proportion to the num-
ber of troops ..sent from this country. Over 200,000
men have been sent from Australia to serve in the
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


great war, and these will be increased to 300,000.
One hundred secretaries should be sent, with suffi-
cient equipment. The cost of each secretary, salary
The Rest Room
and personal expenses, is about £2OO per man per
annum. There is scarcely a home in Australia that
is not interested in someone at the front, and whose
inmates would gladly provide the needed service if
they could. The Y.M.C.A. offers to do it through
facilities provided. Millions of letters to homes in
Australia have been writen in Y.M.C.A. tents, on
paper supplied freely. Tens of thousands of men
have their spare time filled with wholesome, help-
ful entertainment and social privileges in Christian
surroundings.
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


The response of the people of Australia to the
national appeal for funds has encouraged the
National Committee to assume the full responsi-
bility for Australian troops in every theatre of war.
The recent movement of Australian troops to
France and elsewhere means a greatly increased
budget, and it is necessary that the sum of
£lOO,OOO be secured this year if all needs and re-
quests are to be met.
Contributions may be sent to the Secretary of
the local Y.M.C.A., or direct to the Honorary
Treasurer for Australia, Mr. A. H. Sargood, 238
Flinders Street.
J. HENRY LANG,
National Secretary.
Conference of Australian Y.M.C.A. Secretaries and Workers
Zeitoun, Egypt
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


NATIONAL FACTS FROM Y.M.C.A.
“FIELD SERVICE DESPATCHES.”
The National Council of Great Britain reports
“ a home away from home ” for our soldiers in one
hundred “ field service centres ” in France; in more
than one thousand centres in Malta, Salonika,
Egypt, India, and the British Empire.
Y.M.C.A. Tents, Thursday Island Military Camp
Six hundred pounds sterling- per day is needed to
maintain the present work among the soldiers, to
which the Y.M.C.A. of Great Britain is committed.
Half a million pounds has already been subscribed
to reach this need.
Free stationery to the amount of twelve million
pieces per month is an absolute necessity, and has
been regularly supplied to the men.
Half a million pounds sterling has been spent
by the National Committee of Great Britain
on Y.M.C.A. huts, tents and buildings, and more
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


money for a large extension of this work is
urgently required.
Far-reaching as is this “social service” to the
troops in training or at the “ front,” with all its
varied needs and activities, the Young Men’s
Christian Associations throughout the Empire
emphasise the fact that no money subscribed for
war work has been used for any other purpose.
An Anglican clergyman, who has been rendering
effective volunteer “ field service ” work for the
Y.M.C.A. in France, writes:—
“ A member of your Council laughingly said to
me the other day that I had become a Y.M.C.A.
man. Well, perhaps that is true. Like everyone
who has seen their work in France, I am a con-
vert to it. The initiative displayed by the National
Council of the Y.M.C.A., the way in which they
have seen and grasped their great opportunity, the
faith which has inspired them in their vast under-
taking, and the scale on which their work is being
carried out, are the great facts which must be
taken account of and appraised. I am thankful to
have had an opportunity of sharing in it, and I be-
lieve that for me, as for many other clergymen, it
provides the most useful sphere of ‘ national ser-
vice ’ open to us at this time.”
The National Committee of the Y.M.C.A. in Aus-
tralia issues the rallying call—
We must do more for our boys at the front, and
we must do it at once!
Before the present year ends it is expected that
£IOO,OOO will be required to. meet the needs of the
Australian army, and to give our Australian lads
a touch of “ home ” near the fighting line.
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT


WHAT HAS BEEN DONE AT HOME!
Hobart, Tasmania.
Suitable buildings have been erected and main-
tained at the military camps. The Y.M.C.A. build-
ings in Hobart have been placed at the disposal
of men on leave from the camps.
Up to date of report, fifteen, months’ work had
been done, involving a cost of £3,500, giving ser-
vice to 12,000 men, covering over 200,000 atten-
dances at the Association buildings. Considerably
over 100 concerts and social gatherings were car-
ried out, with a total attendance of 23,000; 120 re-
ligious meetings were held, at which the attend-
ances were about 12,000; and 90,000 letters were
written by the soldiers at the home of the Red Tri-
angle.
Besides erecting five buildings in two camps
served by five secretaries, two Soldiers’ Clubs have
been successfully inaugurated —one at Launceston.
Adelaide, South Australia.
Eleven camps have come within the scope of the
Y.M.C.A. Army Department, and have_ been sup-
plied with a concert hall, marquees, stadiums, mov-
ing pictures’ outfits, and the necessary furnishings,
at a cost to date of report of £ll,OOO.
Twenty thousand troops have passed through the
camps, and for them have been provided religious
services and Bible teaching, lectures, social gat
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


erings, athletic contests, and all the usual acces-
sories for the comfort of the men. Five thousand
five hundred Testaments have been distributed. Ten
secretaries have been engaged in the local work,
which has been continued from day to day. The
Lady Galway Club House, erected at Henley
Beach and furnished at a cost of £1,700 for the
use of Returned Soldiers, is greatly appreciated.
Y.M.C.A. give Bluejackets early Morning Tea
Sydney, New South Wales.
A fine group of Y.M.C.A. secretaries are daily
carrying out the field service work in twenty-two
military camps, the work and equipment having
cost £B,OOO. About 2,500 social and 1,000 re-
ligious gatherings have been held; while in the
Soldiers’ Inquiry Bureau ” over 760 inquiries
have been satisfactorily handled for the men and
their friends.
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


Ballarat, Victoria.
Here there is only one military camp, which was
at first supplied with two marquees and equipment
under the control of a Y.M.C.A. secretary, who de-
votes the whole of his time to the work. A hand-
some hut-building now takes the place of mar-
quee. The cost has been over £I,OOO to date, and
since the inception of the work in this camp some
thousands of men have passed through. Concerts
provided by the Ballarat Citizens 5 Committee are
held in the Y.M.C.A. buildings; Testaments are
supplied to the men; the tents are made available
to all the chaplains; and the Y.M.C.A. co-operates
with the “ Citizens 5 Camp Comforts Committee 55 in
supplying the troops with all suitable accessories
according to their needs. The men can get hot
baths in the buildings, as many as 600 such baths
having been supplied during one week last winter.
Melbourne, Victoria.
In Victoria eighteen military centres are being
served, including two club houses and two hospi-
tals, sixteen of which are handled from the Mel-
bourne Association, while the camps at Ballarat
and Bendigo are worked from the local associations
in those towns. Total expenditure to date, £20,900.
Permanent buildings have been constructed at
Broadmeadows, Seymour, Royal Park, Domain and
St. Kilda Lounge; while spacious marquees for the
convenience of soldiers are in position at Campbell-
field, Castlemaine, Maribyrnong, Port Melbourne,
Williamstown, and elsewhere. Excellent work is
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


also being done at the Base Hospital, St. Kilda-road,
and the Caulfield Hospital; there being a resident
Y.M.C.A. officer at the latter place. Over 4,000,000
sheets of note-paper and envelopes have been sup-
plied, while in most camps a canteen for the sale
of pies, cake and coffee has proved an untold boon.
An Interior, Y.M.C.A. Hut
Concerts are regularly given at all the camps,
and on Sundays and on week evenings, by arrange-
ment, religious services are held.
At Langwarrin a fine work is being done
by the Y.M.C.A. officers. A new building is now
being erected by the Red Cross and Local Citizens'
Committee. Provision is made for a Y.M.C.A.
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


reading, writing and games room, and the whole is
being placed in the charge of the Y.M.C.A.
The St. Kilda Lounge has proved a wonderful
boon for soldiers, particularly to Interstate and
visiting soldiers. Refreshments are provided free;
concerts and religious services are held. The
Lounge is the last word in comfort and conveni-
ence. Over 25,000 soldiers have been accommo-
dated since the opening in December.
A Soldiers’ Club House, erected at a cost of
over £2,000, has just been completed.
At Geelong the Y.M.C.A. is co-operating with
the National Defence Association, and work of a
permanent nature has been inaugurated.
As so many Interstate soldiers are trained in Vic-
toria, in such special corps as Pioneers, Signallers,
Engineers, Siege Train, Howitzer Brigade, etc.,
provision has been made for making these Inter-
state men at home, and numerous citizens have, at
the instance of the Y.M.C.A., opened their homes.
Thus a Week-end Home Department has sprung
into existence, and it is most highly esteemed. In
fact, it is one of the most valuable pieces of work
the Association has in hand, as this touch of home
life, to those who are absolutely friendless, is in-
valuable.
An Enquiry Department is open at Mel-
bourne Headquarters, to link up with the very effi-
cient Enquiry Bureau in Cairo. This has brought
much relief for anxious hearts.
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


Hamilton.
A strong Field Service Committee was formed
by this Association in December, 1915, and much
useful work has Teen accomplished.
First Australian Secretaries at the Front
(J. J. Virgo in centre)
Appeals for literature, stationery, games, etc.,
have been made, and already twenty large cases
have been packed and despatched to the troops,
and more are being prepared to be sent on.
The former General Secretary of this Associa-
tion, Mr. H. T. Eadon, who volunteered for active
service, was appointed to take charge of the
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


Y.M.C.A. equipment on the transport “ Afric,” and
this Association collected and supplied the entire
store of literature for that transport.
An appeal has also been opened on behalf of the
National Field Service Fund, and to date a sum of
£630 has been subscribed and forwarded through
the Hamilton Association.
Since the establishment of a final recruiting depot
in Hamilton, the Association have at all times placed
the rooms at the disposal of recruits and members
of the Australian Forces, and the men have largely
availed themselves of the privileges offered to them.
Brisbane, Queensland.
Nine military camps are supplied with marquees,
or buildings, all suitably furnished, at a cost to date
of £IO,OOO. Ten secretaries control and carry out
the work, and 70,000 men have passed through the
camps. When the report was framed some 600
social gatherings had been carried out, and 1,000
religious services held. Testaments have been dis-
tributed in large numbers. One soldier influenced
300 of his mates to take the “ Kitchener Pledge.”
Thousands of men have availed themselves of the
privileges of the central Y.M.C.A. buildings in the
city, and the soldiers themselves have voluntarily
given the sum of £670 towards the “ Field Service
Fund,” as an appreciation of the work done for
them by the Association. A special room is pro-
vided for the Bluejackets at their headquarters.
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


Perth, Western Australia.
At the outbreak of the war the Perth Y.M.C.A.
was quickly in the field with its own and borrowed
equipment. During - the first summer the work was
done in tents and marquees, but these were found
quite inadequate to stand the stress of winter
The losses in destruction of tents, etc.,,
from wind and rain led the Association to consider
the question of more permanent structures in the
camp. This eventually resulted in the erection,,
furnishing and equipping at Blackboy Hill Military
Camp of the finest Y.M.C.A. hut to be found in any
camp in the Commonwealth, possibly in the world.
The building is built of wood and iron, erected
by the voluntary labour of hundreds of willing
workers. The size of the building is 270 feet by
60 feet wide, and contains a post-office 30 feet by
20 feet (with a branch of the Commonwealth
Bank) ; then a church-room, open to use of all de-
nominations; large concert hall; billiard room;:
writing rooms; gymnasium; bufifet; kitchen: and
many smaller rooms, the whole being well equipped
and lighted by electricity.
The complete story of the voluntary gifts and
efforts that resulted in this magnificent home for
“ field service ” work constitutes one of the many
romances of the work of the Association, and forms
a grand practical result of united zeal and unselfish
work, of which the people of Western Australia
can well be proud. Finally, it may be stated that
in all the camps in the State the “ field service ”
work is proving its ever-increasing value to the
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


ALEXANDRA CENTRAL GARDEN COURT. Opening Ceremony: Mr. W. Jessop speaking




We" veJ h fb Ug A the . cost of ov er £lOO per week
JustC"St? a a tS e s n :’, d Te r t s he c C .t:
AUSTRALIAN TESTIMONIES OF Y.M.C.A
WORK.
at A Sr Nado.X e 6fficV P reSrd^ e ft daily
bT£p£s exZpieS:l f °"° Wing
dencc"'of'ihe very spTendid—'’not'’ f‘ ‘'“‘S'"? vi . sibl = evi-
your organisation is performing - t0 Say —work
of conflict in thfs horrible wa? M Ve - ry part of the z °ne
letter from my only son Lh? Having just received a
sheet of your officii no comm fnced his letter on a
necessity be the proverbfal Pe ‘ r ’ V| IK , thou ? h Jt must of
always find my contribution S n l lte ’’ will
whenever applied for in anv a !! Cr U [ y a ? d readll V there
as there is a ‘ shot in the locker I”* that 15 made 80 lonß
letter
did work you are dofn tT than ever the
country.” R for the V°un S - men of the
A non-commissioned officer wri tp q•_ u i
the° Y rJF * r
and have a varn A RiKl m bought 1 would come
««i^h“ d „p a po”t°of
A T HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


you to do a little job for me for a long time, but it has
always slipped my memory when writing. I want you to
draw a cheque from my account and send it along to the
Y.M.C.A. Wherever I have been, they have always been
very decent —on the transport, at Mena, at Malta and
Alexandria, and now they are running a canteen here.”
“ May you before long receive your £IOO,OOO, for your
work is a great and glorious one. Many letters have I
received with the familiar Y.M.C.A. sign on the paper,,
and I know that without the Y.M.C.A. the lives of our
Y.M.C.A, Tent at Anzac
brave boys would be harder. May God abundantly bless
your work is my sincere wish.”
“ Our Society is a very small one, but we gladly donate
this amount to so desirable a Society as yours. I can
personally testify from my son’s letters from Egypt of
the good work done there.”
An A.N.A. Lodge writes: —“While congratulating you
on the good work your Association has done in the past,
we wish to offer you every encouragement to try and go.
one better in the future.”
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


A sister writes:—“We highly appreciate the work done
at home here, but think the work of your Association
does abroad is just magnificent. My own brothers from
the very start at Broadmeadows have frequently ex-
pressed their gratitude to the Y.M.C.A. Therefore, good
luck to you.”
A steamship company writes:—“We now beg to en-
close our cheque and to convey our directors’ best wishes
for the success of the work your Association is doing
amongst the troops.”
“ Recognising, as we do, the splendid and practical
work which the Y.M.C.A. performs for our soldiers, we
have much pleasure in handing you herewith a cheque.”—
Manufacturing chemists.
“As a father, I greatly appreciate your work. My son,
who availed himself of the advantages, has been killed in
battle, and I feel it fitting that the benefits of your efforts
should be recognised.”
“We highly appreciate the valuable work you are doing
amongst the soldiers at the front. Wishing the Society
every success in their noble work.” —From a milling firm.
“ I trust that the great work your institution has under-
taken shall never languish for lack of funds.”
“ You are doing a great work, and I pray God will still
more abundantly bless your efforts.”
THE LONDON “MAIL’S” OPINION OF THE
Y.M.C.A.
“ Those four letters, Y.M.C.A,, should be written in
gold to-day. Wherever one turns the praises of the
Young Men’s Christian Association are sung alike by
officers and men of the British Army, training at home
or fighting all along our far-flung battle line. The
Y.M.C.A. has done incalculable good in the most unosten-
tatious and practical way, looking after the creature com-
forts of the soldiers. Their work is carried on without
any (objectionable sermonising or tract distribution. This
is wise. Besides, if the moral and spiritual welfare of
the soldiers were aimed at there is no better way of
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


Interior Y.M.C.A. No. 2 Hut, Mudros, Lemnos Island, (For exterior see page 33.)


achieving that result than by enlisting their gratitude. If
any sceptic wishes to cast a sneer or a stone at the
Y.M.C.A., he had better not do so in the presence of a
Tommy, especially a colonial.”
A GLIMPSE OF THE WORK IN
MESOPOTAMIA.
Speaking at a Garden Party given in the Govern-
ment House Gardens in Calcutta lately, Colonel
Wauchope, of the Black Watch, said
“You have heard of the work being done in France.
I, too, have seen something of it both in France and in
the camps in Scotland.
“ A year ago, when wounded, I was in a camp of 2,000
men in the North of Scotland. In that camp there was
no meeting-place for the men, no sign of outward com-
fort and cheerfulness other than what one found in the
one large hut of the Y.M.C.A.
“ Darkness set in at four in the afternoon, and from
that hour till lights every night the hut was packed
to overflowing; and in it was every sign of cheerfulness
and contentment, especially on the faces of the men. But
the work of this nature of the Y.M.C.A. is known every-
where in the army. It is a common-place.
Though I have been but a week in Mesopotamia, I
will try and recall one scene from that country that
comes to my mind. The scene is on the Tigris. There
are three boats on the river; they are large boats, and
they are filled to overflowing with wounded soldiers.
“ There are Highlanders from Scotland and High-
landers from the Himalayas; there are Christians, Hin-
doos, and Muhammadans. But all have this in common,
that they are wounded, and on those three boats there is
space for great suffering, yet room for little comfort.
“ But when the three boats reached Amara, there came
on board two men from the Y.M.C.A. depot. These two
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


men worked in conjunction with the army doctor. I can-
not tell you of the change they wrought among those 300
wounded soldiers —of the food they distributed, the shel-
ters they contrived against the rain (for all the three
boats were exposed to wind and rain), the quilts and
mattresses they laid under the wounded on the decks that
Y.M.C.A. Mat Hut in Egypt
were swimming in water. You have not the time to
listen, nor I the skill to tell, of the change wrought on
board those three boats by these two men, but I can tell
you this, that whoever gives in money or in kind towards
the Y.M.C.A. in Mesopotamia (and there is much need
of extension and development of the Y.M.C.A. work
there), may give in the sure knowledge he is doing
something to lessen, the sufferings of the soldiers who are
fighting there now, and who will be fighting throughout
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


this next hot weather, under” conditions of hardship and
difficulty without parallel in my experience in any other
theatre of war.
I had finished. But I would add one word more.
There are some who believe soldiers in war time shun a
society that is avowedly Christian. That is a false im-
pression. I will read you one sentence from a letter I
received not an hour ago from Mesopotamia. It was
written by the officer then commanding the Black Watch,
when he had been fighting continuously for 48 hours.
Fighting within 300 yards of the Turkish trenches, he
wrote it when three-quarters of his regiment had been
killed and wounded. The letter gives me a description of
the_ fighting. The sentence I quote is, ‘lf thy faith is
look onward, for thine eyes shall see thy heart’s
desire.’ The officer who wrote that has since been killed,
leading a charge into the enemy trenches. But he was
loved and trusted as only the best and bravest are loved
and trusted.
“And the sentence I have read appeals to all fighting
soldiers, and might well be made the motto for the
Y.M.C.A.”
WITH THE MEN IN THE TRENCHES.
Mr. Oliver H. McCowen, Executive Secretary of the
Y.M.C.A. in France, writes by the last mail:—“We
motored out of Calais on Sunday morning with a squad
of six new workers for the front. A run of forty miles
brought us to the headquarters of the 2nd Army, where
passes were issued to our men for the area in which they
were to work. Thence our road led still eastward, until
a small town just by the frontier of Belgium was reached,
and here we planted two of our men in an old barn, close
to a certain supply column, who welcomed the advent of
the men. Coming to the frontier, the sentry passed us
through with a wave of the hand—th,e red triangle
(Y.M.C.A. sign) is as good as a carefully-stamped permit
—and in a few minutes found ourselves in a town which
has been a favourite target of the enemy for some time.
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


Exterior Y.M.C.A. No. 2 Hut, Mudros, Lemnos Island. (For interior see page 29.)
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


We are opening two centres here—one in an old dancing-
hall, which, the town mayor explained, had the great ad-
vantage of a back way to a field, in case the place was
shelled—a new recommendation for Y.M.C.A. quarters!—
and the other in a deserted hotel beside an almost de-
serted railway station, on the main road to a town a few
miles away which is a mere pile of bricks and mortar.
Both will be the brightest spots in this depressing town
during the coming winter days for our men back from
the trenches. We went north a few miles, and called on
the authorities of a certain corps defending a very cele-
brated British outpost. The General led us to a great
map on the wall, covered with certain significant little
flags, and asked, ‘ Are you prepared to work for my men
in this shell-swept area?’ And, of course, our reply was,
‘We covet the opportunity.’ I know there will be com-
petition for these places by men who realise fully what
work here may mean!
“ Evening had come by the time we reached some of
our centres farther south. The service was beginning as
we entered our large marquee. The place was full; the
busy scramble at the counter had ceased, and the men, who
had been up to the knees, and in some cases to the waist,
in mud in the trenches early that morning were sing-
ing—
“Oh! Saviour Christ, Thou, too, art Man;
Thou hast been troubled, tempted, tried.”
“ I don’t mind telling you that I have rarely been more
touched by anything, and as I stole away, I pictured to
myself One passing through that great crowd, healing,
helping, uplifting our brave brothers.
“The day was not over yet. We travelled some two
miles of very bad road to another of our tents, planted in
a sea of mud. No lights were visible from the road, and
everything seemed strangely silent. I began to wonder if
all the men had gone, and crept up to see, but the place
was full, and one of the workers was reading the fifty-
third chapter of Isaiah: ‘He was oppressed and afflicted,
yet He opened not His mouth,’ and so on; and the men
who had given themselves in the supreme' sacrifice for
others realised a strange sense of fellowship with One
Who had trod that path before them.”
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


THE SOLDIERS’ NEED.
A report submitted to a meeting of the A.M.C.A.
Army and Navy Committee in Egypt states: —
“No one knows better than the Secretary out in the
camps that the writing paper, food, and social amuse-
ment provided cannot supply all the needs of the men.
The needs that lie deepest are in. men’s hearts and
minds, and these are the needs that we must satisfy.
This was felt by the leaders of the Association in Eng-
land, and they instituted a campaign. We do not know
what has been done there, but we do know what
has been accomplished here in Egypt. We have held
campaign meetings in our thirty-five centres in order to
give the men the Message of Hope and Cheer, the Mes-
sage of a fight for character which is., after all, the best
way to bring victory to Christ and to give the men an
opportunity of making a stand for better things. Larger
numbers of men have gathered for these meetings than
for any concert party, or anything else we have arranged
for them. We have had splendid co-operation from the
chaplains, the missionaries and others. Two thousand
men have come out stating that they wanted to live a
better and cleaner life. Thousands of men have signed
our War Roll, which is simply a declaration of allegi-
ance to Jesus Christ. I wish you could have been with
one of our speakers at Tel-el-Keber, away out in the
desert, where he was met by a man who said: ‘I am an
illegitimate son and nobody cares for me.’ He was
weeping like a child, but what a difference the Message
of Hope and Love has made to him. So it has gone on.
After all, the greatest need of these men is something
that is deep, something that will help them in their fight
for character, in their individual lives, and in the life of
the nation.
“Just one more picture! It is twilight in the Esbekia
Gardens, in the heart of Cairo, two minutes’ walk from
the devious dirty lanes of the Wassa or Red-light district:
Fifteen hundred men, wrapped in profound silence, r fill
every available seat in the open-air theatre and skating
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


rink, their eyes intent upon four figures on the stage.
Two of these are secretaries of the Y.M.C.A. dressed in
khaki, and two are nurses in grey dresses and scarlet
shoulder capes. Through the air floats the sweet melody
of ‘ Lead, Kindly Light, amid the encircling gloom, lead
thou me on!’ The rumour has spread that within three
days many of the boys will be off to ‘ somewhere on the
front,’ and a thrill of reverence and awe surges through
the very being of many a man, and eyes are dim, as
each joins in the refrain, ‘Lead thou me on.’”
AT ANZAC.
(Extract from Secretary’s Report).
The Y.M.C.A. at Anzac was housed in a sand-
bag shack, covered with corrugated iron, which
leaked abominably. It was built right up against
a knoll, which saved us from shells more than once.
While on our left rose the towering red cliff known
to all as “ Walker’s Ridge.” It was a fairly safe
spot on the whole, if that adjective could be applied
to any part of the Anzac Zone. The life was a
happy one, and the day’s work seldom varied, the
even tenor of our way being disturbed only when
the Turks were giving our gully a more severe
bombardment than usual. Each day “at home ”
hours were from 9 to 11.30 a.m., and from 1 p.m.
to midnight. My callers came with all sorts of re-
quests, mainly for writing paper and pencils, but
these keen-faced Australians never failed, not daily
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


but hourly, to ask with a touch of anxiety in their
voices; “ Think you’ll have any cakes in to-day,
cobber?” We would scan the horizon for the traw-
ler, and I would, tell them I always expected some-
Y.M.C.A. Mat Hut, for Convalescents, Kasr-il-Aini
thing but they must wait and see. Wait! Yes
they would wait, and their patience was pathetic.
By 10 o’clock three or four hundred men would be
waiting at the hut for the trawler. I can see them
now, unshaven and unkempt. You see there was
not much value put on personal appearance out
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


there, in the face of the stern and trying work
the men had to face. Whenever the trawler was
sighted a yell went up and the real business started.
When the goods reached the pier a waiting party
heaved the baskets of cakes and the bags of nuts
and fruit on to the pier end, where a motor lorry
was waiting to take them up to the shack. Inside
I had always a willing band of helpers, but the rule
was no one could get more than 2s. worth at one
time. Various dodges were tried to get more than
the allowance, with some success, but there was
no ill-feeling behind it. In two hours the little
stock was exhausted and then followed a solid time
of explanation to the disappointed lads who had
come along too late. In the evening there used to
gather a small company round the charcoal fire,
and I am sure that anyone passing down the gully
about 8 o’clock would have thought that a fight
was in progress, for our debates made up in sound
what they lacked in skill. These were happy even-
ings, and the regret was ever present that the build-
ing was not bigger. In this fashion we lived, and
were content until the evacuation days drew nigh.
Friends were made in whose memories these Anzac
days will remain fragrant until the end of Time,
and, allowing for all faults, such Y.M.C.A. help was
given as the ever-present disabilities would allow.
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


Y.M.C.A. CANTEEN.
In the “Egyptian Mail,” received by the last English
mail, the following article, appreciative of the YMCA
work, appears:— ' ' • •
The Y.M.C.A. canteen at the Ezbekia Gardens is run
entirely by women, and the women come from England
ocotland, Australia, and New Zealand. The “ Blue
Eadies are the, six New Zealand volunteer sisters, and
the one in khaki is their Secretary, and incidentally acts
as recording angel for the energetic Y.M.C.A. Secretary
Mr. James Hay. As some 20,000 franked letters pass
through the \ .M.C.A. post office, this gentleman’s thumb-
print is quite well known to the authorities, and his smil-
ing face can be seen at the Ezbekia Gardens by anybody
who likes to go and look for it. A representative of the
' Egyptian Mad” called there yesterday afternoon, and
asked Mr. Hay what were the most interesting features
about the gardens. “First the ladies, second the sugar
cakes, and third the visitors’ book,” replied Truthful
Jarnes. Our representative decided that the last should
be first, a tribute .to the bashfulness characteristic of jour-
nalists, and thereupon dipped deeply into the pages of a
large folio volume. It proved an intensely interesting
study. Here are some of the more or less wise remarks
of the gallant heroes who frequent the Y.M.C.A. Club
“Very nice, very good, very clean, a la Arab,” writes one
colonial who seems to have picked up “ native ” French
quickly. “ A home from Home, Sweet Home,” sighs a
sentimental bloke. “Dashed nice girls, these New Zea-
landers, especially the one at the cigarette counter,” says
a gallant young spark. “ There’s many a disaster in an
Egyptian piastre,” writes a would-be poet, and thereby
hangs a tale of sugar-cakes eaten not wisely but too well.
“ An oasis in the desert of Cairo,” is another comment
with a happy touch of local colour. “ Better tucker at
cheaper prices than anywhere else,” “ A real home from
home,” “God bless the ladies,” “The best place for re-
freshments in Cairo,” “The only decent place in Egypt,”
are further comments. “ 0.K.,” “Al,” “Tiptop,” are
others from gentlemen who evidently agree with the late
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


lamented Lord Bacon (or was it Shakespeare?) that
“ brevity is the soul of wit.”
When one knows that the Soldiers’ Club run by the
Y.M.C.A. at the .Ezbekia Gardens is open every day from
9.30 a.m. to 9.30 p.m., and is free to all, with its canteen,
writing rooms, newspaper tables, postal facilities, skating
rink, etc., etc., one ceases to wonder at the note of en-
thusiastic praise continually sounded by the many thou-
sands of soldiers who have recorded their names in the
Visitors’ Book.
A Y.M.C.A. CHRISTMAS IN CAMP.
In one case at least, probably in others also, the day
was made the occasion of a happy interchange of tokens.
The leader sent the men a special card of greeting, bear-
ing the following lines by Miss Margaret Sernton:—
For Honour and for Her.
Somewhere a woman, in her firm, sweet way,
Faces the future bravely for your sake;
Toils on from dawn till dark, from day to day,
Fights back her tears, nor heeds the bitter ache;
She loves you, trusts you, breathes in prayer your name;
Soil not her faith in you, by sin or shame.
Somewhere a woman —mother, sweetheart, wife,
Waits betwixt hopes and fears, for your return.
Her kiss, her words, will haunt you in the strife.
When death itself confronts you, grim and stern;
But let her image all your reverence claim.
While base temptations scorch you with their flame.
Somewhere a woman watches, thrill’d with pride,
Shrined in her heart, you share a place with none;
She toils, she waits, she prays, till side by side
You stand together when the battle’s done;
O keep for her dear sake a stainless name,
Bring back to her a manhood free from shame!
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


On Christmas Eve the men presented to each of the
ladies working at the camp a very pretty enamelled
A.V.C. badge, accompanied by a little printed card bear-
ing the words; “A tiny acknowledgment of willing ser-
vice rendered at the Y.M.C.A. camp, with Christmas
greetings, from the men of the A.V.C.
Y.M.C.A., Zeitoun
The Sergeant’s Story.
“Well, lads!” said “Sergeant Jack,” “What’s
all this about the Y.M.C.A. Field Service? Only
this, chaps, that the motto of this service is to teach
you the value of ‘ team work ’ for yourselves, your
mates, your battalion, your brigade, and your
country. Link by link the Y.M.C.A. man would
bind you careless, happy-go-lucky, irresponsible
Australians into a team of f good pals,’ clean livers
and clean fighters. The Field Service man wants
to see the Australian Army realise that the ‘ Salt of
Life ’ in the world’s great crisis is ‘ clean service ’ in
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


the same way as the trained athlete makes the clean
hit or the clean kick that wins the hard fought
game. Before Corporal Tom gets going again with
the despatches, there is just one thing to put into
your pipes and smoke over, and that is that the
Y.M.C.A. Field Service can look the whole world
in the face, for it gives every man, with a big
emphasis on the every, a clean inspiration for active
service for the Empire.
What’s that, Bill ? I talk less on the parade
ground! That’s so! so fire away, Corporal, with
the reading.”
This report of my trip to the Dardanelles should have
been sent to you before. Finding so many wounded
men wanting help on the hospital ships, I got trans-
ferred to one of these ships, leaving my colleagues
hard at work in the hospitals at Alexandria. Here
is an extract from my diary of this short trip:—Ho
provision for Church Parade on Sunday, but I de-
cided to hold an informal service in the evening.
Got a player for the harmonium, and the “ Active
Service Despatches ” came in handy as hymn books.
These I asked the men to retain as their own, which
they were glad to do. Shortly before starting the
service,' Chaplain Gillison came aboard on business.
He was worn and tired with much work among the
wounded, and in burying the dead “ up the Gully,”
but he more than kindly agreed to preach. After a
prayer that touched every man’s heart, he spoke from
Christ’s words, “ He that saveth his life shall lose it,
but he that loseth his life for my sake shall save it.”
It had struck him, he said, that it should be an easy
thing for a man who had stood the test and trial of
Gallipoli to follow the Master, and, if needs be,
suffer for doing so. A man in this war had no
mother, father, brethren, or friends. He counts them
all nothing for his country. This is just what Christ
asks of a man. He has done the same thing for us.
Our men went through the fight not knowing
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


whether they would pull through or not. Christ
went through certain that He was “ going down,”
yet He did it willingly. For us this meant Salvation.
Surely, going through the ordeal of Gallipoli, a man
could respond to this great claim of Christ, and pay
all the price it might require.” “ I don’t think, of the
Ezbekia Gardens, Cairo
150 men present, there was one unmoved. There
was something particularly appealing and winsome
in the tired Chaplain’s appeal—the appeal of a real
man to men. He went off to take dinner at the con-
clusion, but I kept the men singing on. We did not
leave many of the numbers unsung.”
“ I wasn’t there,” said the Sergeant, “ but to an
Anzac man it ain’t hard to make the picture. Out
there you get to think of these things, lads! You
can’t get away from them! And that reminds me
of old ‘Jim Steadfast.’ Wouldn’t wonder if he
wasn’t in that same hospital ship. Jim was a ‘ hard
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


case,’ as you say. Like his name, what he did he
stuck to. If it was work, he worked, and if it was
a ‘ spree ’ it was a mighty big one. The work was
good, but the ‘ sprees ’ began to tell the tale, and
we old pals of his never looked to see him in the
fighting line. You can guess how I jumped one
day up in the ‘ dug outs ’ near the enemy’s
trenches, when a clean skinned Corporal just in
with the reinforcements for the regiments hailed
me with ‘ Well, Sergeant Jack, you ain’t turned
down an old mate, have you?’ And here was a
different ‘ Jim ’ to what we had left behind. Clean
cut, clear eyed, with a soldierly set-up, here was
the ‘ Jim ’ of the old days when we were young, not
the ‘ drink ’ downed ‘ weary Willie ’ we had left
behind. My word, he got a great ‘ chevoo ’ from
the boys. ‘ Steadfast,’ you old ‘ Stick it through,
the battalion’s made when it’s got you,’ sang an old
pal, and Jim’s eyes gleamed as he casually re-
marked, ‘ Glad you know me, mates. I’ve been
wanting a bit of an ‘ introduc.’ to myself for quite
a time.’
“ That night I ran Jim into a corner and dug his
story out. Want to know where the old ‘Jim’
came back from, Jack, eh? Hardly know myself,
but one day when I was down, right down, deeper
than any of you old mates of mine will ever know,
some chap said something about Sergeant Jack,
and all fellows being in camp in Egypt, and
then they got to arguing about yours being the
best regiment in all the Australian Army, real
fighting stuff and sober, clean, stuff at that. So I
just got out and sneaked away to think. Why am
I out of it? Me who worked with them, chummed
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


with them, aye, and loved them, if they only knew;
me so low down now that I was not fit to fight with
them! But, ‘ Jack,’ I still had a bit of the old
‘ Steadfast ’ business you used to chaff me about,
and I took a ‘ cling ’ to the sides of the precipice
I was slipping down and dug my nails and feet in
and began a long, long crawl back to decency.
Hard! well old chum don’t talk of it, but I got the
‘ shakes,’ subdued enough to pass the doctor and
was drafted into Camp. My word, I was up against
it then, and nearly ‘ side stepped ’ things many and
many a time, but a grit of the teeth and a clinch of
the jaw, and * I’ll get alongside of my old pals or
die for it,’ set me up time and again. Mind you,
Jack, I had many and many a squeak of being dis-
charged clean out of Camp, but I think some one
saw that I was trying to ‘grip,’ and little by little
the ‘ grip ’ held, and here I am. But Jack, old pal,
the worst time of all was when they were picking
the boys for the reinforcements for your company.
I had sent in my name, but fellow after fellow was
pulled out ahead of me, until my heart got down in
my boots, and I only shuffled in the last man to
fill the last ‘ file.’ I think I’d have gone down for
ever had I missed —thank God- I didn’t. Things
weren’t any too easy even then, the darned dirty
habits of years took a lot of cleaning up, but by
the time we reached the land of the Pyramids my
head was just above water, and I was kicking free.
The ‘ padre ’ on the boat, too, had put a nail or
two in, though I didn’t know it, and there was a
cheery Y.M.C.A. man always handy. Never seemed
to worry us chaps, but mighty spry and mighty
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


kelpful dodging - around making the ‘ old ship ’
awful home-like with his ‘ sing songs,’ ‘ games,’ and
such like. When we got ashore in Egypt I reck-
oned old ‘ Jim Steadfast ’ had got a pull of things
like we had in the old, old days, Jack. Shows what
‘ babies ’ we grown men are, for the old pull—-the
long pull—the strong pull, and the devilish ebb of
the ‘ city hells ’ caught us all in the lights and
shades of Cairo town, and many a good man went
down. . I hunted and hunted for you boys in every
Camp, hanging on to myself with a muttered, ‘ I
got to reach them boys,’ and was nearly down with
despair when orders came to pack up for active
service, and the ‘ padre ’ called us all together in
the Y.M.C.A. tent for a parting word. I can’t talk
of what he told us, Jack, but we saw that evening
as we never saw before what a ‘ white man ’ ought
to be, and where we ought to be. I ain’t proud of
what the ‘ gleam ’ showed me, but I saw the track,
yes, lad, I saw the ‘ track.’ I got my bearings, and
I think I’m bushman enough to follow the ‘ gleam ’
and do a soldier’s work as a soldier should.’
“ Good business, Jim,” said I, “ but you usen’t to
have much opinion of the Y.M.C.A. in the old days;
what about it now?”
“ Serve me right, Sergeant—you remember when
we were boys, and had done something particularly
outrageous, we used to say, ‘ It ain’t a bit of use
for you to run. I’ll tell your mother what you
done.’ Well, you can tell, and you know what
hundreds of us careless beggars have done and said
before we came up against this ‘ Empire ’ proposi-
tion, and even now most of us are cross grained
enough to say very little of what we owe to the
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


‘ padres ’ and the ‘ Field Service ’ men, but we
know, and you know what a big place they have in
the hearts of the Army. I think, I always think,
that the men who stick to us soldiers, many of us,
‘ the unhappy blokes who have missed the ‘ bus ’ of
life, the men who stick to us through thick and
thin, are like the men the ‘ Bulletin 5 chap wrote of
as—
Living and loving, wandering on their way,
Reaping the ’arvest of a kind deed done.
First Y.M.C.A. Tent on Gallipoli
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.


The following is typical of numerous letters
received from men of the A.I.F. A private writes—
“ Everywhere we move the Y.M.C.A. follows us, if not
already established, and only to-day they are opening up
in the camp we are in. When we arrive at a new camp
(which has been pretty often lately), the first question
asked by everyone is, -Is there a Y.M. here? And, should
the answer be no, it is received with a ‘ hard luck ’ and
crest-fallen look. This organisation is magnificent, and
goodness only knows what we should do without them.
Their privileges are enjoyed by the good, bad, and in-
different, and of whatever creed; they all flock to its
reading and writing rooms, concerts, and last, but not
least, its bright praise services. At most of the tents, or
huts, they have a canteen, which is also well patronised,
the prices often being about half those charged at the
camp canteens run by Egyptians or Greeks. This is a
big consideration, when they want twice the Sydney price
for everything. Since we have been in this camp we have
been without a Y.M. tent, although one opens at 4 to-day,
and I have known chaps to walk six miles t® the next
camp to write a few letters or spend a few piastres, and
then walk back again. No one should begrudge any
donation given to the Field Service Fund, and I can
recommend to anyone with spare cash to put it into the
organisation, which is doing more for us than anything
else, and which is appreciated the most.”
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by Peacock Bros. Pty. Ltd.
Queen Street, Melbourne
AT HOME AND AT THE FRONT.
