



\






V- * ■ By
Author
Yellow Si lvei
\ M f
n £
W
A _ f
Holland's tank


N.S.W. BOOKSTALL CO. LTD., 476 George Street, Sydney.
SYDNEY—Descriptive & Illustrative
Including Country Scenes
in New South Wales.
100 Exquisite Photographs of the Queen City of the
South and of Beauty Spots in the Mother State of the
Commonwealth.
An Ideal Volume to send to friends abroad
and in other States.
Price 65.; Post free 6s. 6d,
PANORAMIC SYDNEY.
The Finest Collection of Sydney Panoramas ever
published.
Twenty-three of the best views of City and Environs
(21 in. x 6in.), printed on superior art paper.
Price 25.; Post free 2s. 2d.
A GUIDE TO SYDNEY.
A Comprehensive Guide for the Visitor and a handy
Volume of reference no citizen should be without.
Where to go. How to get there. Full particulars, illus-
trations, maps, etc.
Price Is. 6d. all Bookstalls; Post free Is. Bd.
PUBLISHED BY
N.S.W. BOOKSTALL CO. LTD., 476 George Street, Sydney.


Jr
£r
» V _-V
AT HOLLAND'S TANK


<JA
Presently a head and shoulders appeared, and then a man leapt
on to the solid earth.
(See page 163)


At Holland s Tank
EDWARD MERVON
Illustrations by Percy Lindsay
All Rights Reserved
N.S.W. BOOKSTALL CO. LTD.,
SYDNEY.
1922


Or AOg
o 20 SEPI922
Of P^U^'
Copyrighted by The N.S.W. Bookstall Co. Ltd., 476 George Street,
Sydney, Australia.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
John Sands Ltd., Sydney.


48211
CONTENTS.
Chapter
1 7
II 17
HI 26
IY 41
V 49
VI 64
VII 77
VIII 83
IX , 92
X 99
XI 114
xn 123
xm iso
XIV 140
XV 150
XVI 157
XVII 164
xvni .. 172
XIX 184


ILLUSTRATIONS.
J j Page
Presently a head and shoulders appeared, and then a man
leapt on to the solid earth Frontispiece
The stranger dismounted, threw the bridle over the horse’s
head so that it trailed on the ground, and approached 14
Joe ran to the tree, feeling that some tragedy was to
be unfolded before him 18
Miss Forsyth regarded them a little severely . . . . 62
‘‘ To bring people to so-called justice, whether they
deserve it or not!” replied Miss Forsyth warmly 96
! •
A form leapt the enclosed fence, and made straight for
them 170
“I’m tired,” he muttered. ‘‘Dead beat; I’ll turn in
now and be fresh for the morning” 182


Chapter I.
THE waggon swaying and creaking behind its five
straining horses sank into the dip that formed a
narrow gully and surmounted the slight rise that
brought the great sand plain into view. The huge,
cumbersome thing groaned as it dipped, while the
horses, with an energy born of experience, rushed
into their collars for the uphill tussle which they
knew was due. For the moment there was a scraping
of slipping hooves, a reaching of equine backs, and
a dilating of equine nostrils. The rise was only a
few yards in length, and the waggon on reaching the
top rolled like a ship at sea and then adjusted itself
to the road surface. The horses eased off into a
steady pull with ears forward, searching, no doubt,
for the camping place which they knew was not far
away.
Joe Thompson stood on the foot boards behind the
offside shafter smoking and leaning against the load,
his hands in his pockets. He had not altered
this attitude while going through the dip, for there
was perfect understanding between Joe and his
team. He worked his horses on the principle that
good servants needed no kicking. If any one of them
needed a great deal of urging, it went into the sale
yard and found another master. There was no neces-
sity to hold the reins. The track ran in three parallel
pads, the outside ones for the wheels and outside
leaders, and the middle one for the middle leader.
So long as the leaders kept to the pads the waggon
would remain on the track, and as the pads were


much more comfortable to walk in than the
unbeaten portions between, the clumsy vehicle
needed no guiding. Only the shatters objected be-
cause they were forced to walk between the pads,
but as they were two against three they had to sub-
mit. The pads were made years before, when it was
the fashion to equip the waggons with six horses
single file. Then the wheels made the outside im-
pressions and the horses the middle path.
The great sand plain seemed to stretch to infinity.
It rose slightly on either side until it met the sky;
but ahead was a dark line which to the initiated
meant timbered country and probably water. On
that dark line Joe directed his gaze. He was calcu-
lating the distance and the time it would take to
cover it. He glanced at the declining sun and then
at the team. The latter action meant that he had
made up his mind about things. If you had put the
question to him he would have replied shortly-—-
“Sundown”—meaning that he estimated the arrival
on camp at that time. Bushmen find the sun a much
more reliable timepiece than a clock, and can tell the
time by it with wonderful accuracy.
The sand plain was a dreary place. It was covered
with hungry-lookjilng herbage that wouldn’t have
cairied a sheep to 20 acres. Scattex*ed about it were
“blackboys, ” or grass trees, which also looked hun-
gry. Apparently only one tree grew on its vast ex-
panse, and that one was dwarfed and twisted. Joe
would have told you it was a Christmas tree; whereat
you probably would have laughed; but had you seen
it at another time of the year you would have mar-
velled at the glorious bloom upon it. That ugly little
tree would have presented a blaze of deep orange.


so vivid in the background of dull green that you
would have marvelled at Nature’s amazing prodig-
ality of rich effect.
Joe had his coat off. His sleeves were rolled up
and they revealed a massive forearm, brown and hairy
and ogreish. His dress consisted of a flannel singlet
under a cotton shirt, a pair of dungaree trousers, a
wide-brimmed dilapidated felt hat, a couple of yel-
low-brown socks, and a pair of blucher boots. The
shirt was well open at the neck, which was tanned a
deep brown, like his arms and face, and his trousers
behaved themselves because of a thick leather belt.
Solid is the adjective which best suited Joe Thomp-
son as he was then. In all his six feet there was
nothing puny or womanish —nothing undeveloped.
His shoulders were broad and massive, his hips slen-
der, his hands and feet not unduly large, but power-
ful. He moved slowly, as is the custom with big
men, but he was not incapable of bestirring himself
if the occasion demanded celenity. His big forearm
was eloquent of his muscular strength, but apart
from physical considerations, Joe was in + eresting
also. His hair grew thick and bushy on an average
forehead. His nose was well cut, although not finely
so, and his chin was firm without being aggressive.
It might have been a hard face but for the eyes,
which were brown and kindly. His face expressed
him just as he was—a quiet, capable man with mo-
ments of indecision and some sympathy.
Joe was right in h!is estimate. As the sun was dis-
appearing, the waggon lurched into a timbered belt,
went up a rise and down the other side into a jam-
tree gully. Just before the gully crossing, Joe called
out “Whey!” and the team came to a halt. He


then clambered to the top of the load and threw
down some bags of chaff, five nosebags, a swag, and
a bucket with a rope attached. Out of the swag he
took five pairs of hobbles and attached them to the
forelegs of his horses. After removing the harness,
he took the bucket and went a few yards up the
gully to what appeared to be a hole in the ground.
This was marked on the map as Holland's Tank, so
called because it was on the route, opened up by a
man named Holland, between Albany and Coolgar-
die. The route was unused then, because the railway
had entered into competition with the teamsters,
with disastrous results to the latter. But the water-
ing-places remained and proved a boon to the settlers
who came later.
Holland’s Tank was a deep square hole timbered
at the sides to prevent the earth falling in, and half
filled with brownish-looking water. At the edge was
a rough trough made out of a section of a hollow log,
and plugged at each end with clay. Joe lowered the
bucket many times and filled the trough. The thirsty
horses drank their fill. When they had finished, Joe
wiped the perspiration from his forehead, for water
drawing was no joke.
“Don’t tell me y’ finished,” he said, ironically,
eying his patient slaves with humorous wonder.
Jumbo, the big black stolid offside shafter, blinked
at the remark, and the five turned as if by common
consent and shuffled off in their hobbles to where the
nosebags were lying.
“Have one with me, Mr. Thompson,” said Joe out
aloud, dropping the bucket once more. “Thank you,
I don’t mind if I do.” He raised the full bucket to
his lips as if it weighed no more than a cup, and


took a long drink. Then he went over to the waggon
and fixed the nosebags on the horses.
It was a pleasant spot to camp in. The gnlly was
timbered with jam-trees and york-gums, and al-
though spring was well advanced, the grass was still
green. Joe produced a handful of dried blackboy
butt from the waggon and lit a fire with it. Close
to the fire he placed a short section of log, against
which he leant a long piece of sapling, the end of
which hung over the fire. At the end he placed a
billycan full of water, and while it was boiling, took
a lidded box from the top of the waggon. Presently
he made the tea and sat down to a meal of tinned
meat, soda bread and jam which he took out of the
box. Having finished, he put the remaining eatables
back in the box and lit his pipe.
The Western Australian bush is at its best at sun-
down. A peaceful hush is over everything. The
chirping of the cicadas has died down to a drone,
and the chattering of birds has ceased except for an
occasional protest from one who has not managed
to acquire the right degree of comfort, and the deep
throbbing chime of the bell bird who is always the
last to go to bed. Joe sat leaning against a wheel of
the waggon smoking and listening. The sounds were
familiar enough to him, but he liked them none the
less. There was something comforting in them,
something that secretly stirred his soul and awak-
ened great thoughts. The day’s work was done.
There was to be rest until morning, and it is natural
for a strong man to build high hopes when his
muscles are relaxed. Joe always thought much of
the future in the half light of evening. Then he was
the architect who planned a noble structure; but in


the daytime he was the patient builder setting stone
upon stone, and drawing each day nearer to the
great ideal. Wonderful things are these mirages of
our brains, which shimmer and dance on the honizou
and draw us on and on until we die still seeking them.
It was almost dark when Joe heard the sound of a
horse galloping. He sat up suddenly and listened,
because horsemen were rare in the vicinity of Hol-
land’s Tank. The hooves were coming along the
track from further out whence Joe himself had come
that day with his load of sandal-wood. Nobody
lived out there. The march of settlement had halted
many miles further west. Between him and the
South Australian border lay nothing but the bush as
God had made it —a dreary waste of sand plain and
scrub, unwatered and repelling. No man went out
there —not even the kangarooers and ’possumers.
The galloping turned into a trot as the horseman
entered the timber, and presently Joe caught a
glimpse of him through the trees. The stranger
reined up suddenly as he saw the camp tire, but caihe
on again when he observed the waggon. Joe did not
move, although he felt curious. The place was a
Government reserve, free and open to all, and Joe
had a habit of minding his own business.
The newcomer pulled up alongside the waggon
and glanced about him quickly. He did not see Joe
at first. He was a tall spare man -with a full unkempt
beard and bright eyes. His glances in search of the
owner of the waggon were suspicious, and there was
a suggestion of shiftiness about him. The horse was
an undersized brumby which showed signs of having
been ridden hard and was close to being knocked-
up. It stood with its drooping head almost touching


the ground and its sides heaving. On observing Joe,
the stranger dismounted, threw the bridle over the
horse’s head so that it trailed on the ground, and
approached.
In the lonely places men are always glad to meet
men. Joe felt pleased at the thought that he would
have a companion, but he did not say so or indicate
his pleasure. Reserved people such as he give
nothing away at the start, but there may be no
bounds to their generosity later on. Joe got up ard
nodded.
“There’s a bit of chaff up there,” he said. “Looks
done up, he does.”
“Thanks, Mister. We’re both just about all in,”
said the stranger.
That was all their greeting. There was no “How
d’ you do,” or “So glad to see you,” or anything
like that. Joe’s methods were direct. He saw a
tired horse in need of a feed, and he offered it.
Quickly he improvised a nosebag from an empty sack,
leaving the stranger to fill it, he drew more water
and led the tired beast to it.
“Got any hobbles?” he called out. The stranger
brought them over, and the jaded animal was soon
crunching the sweet chaff in contentment. Joe filled
the billycan again, put it over the fire and produced
the lidded box. The stranger watched him with
appreciative interest. Joe did not ask if the man had
had any tea, because he knew quite well he had not.
It was a simple problem in deduction solved by
observation. The man had a swag strapped to the
front of his saddle, and a water-bag hanging empty
at the side; but there was no billycan and no tucker
bag, and, anyway, no man strikes camp after tea.


The stranger dismounted, tlire-n- the bridle over the horse’s head
so that it trailed on the ground, and approached.


While the billy was heating up the man suddenly
seized the bucket and drank a tremendous draught.
Joe watched him from the corner of his eye. Just as
suddenly the stranger dropped the bucket and sat
down. \
“Knocked up/’ he muttered, with a feeble attempt
at a smile. Joe nodded and opened a tin of meat.
This he handed to the stranger with a knife and the
remains of the soda bread. The man ate ravenously.
When he had finished, Joe offered a plug of tobacco.
The man grinned.
“Glad I struck you,” he said, as he sliced the to-
bacco with his knife. Joe said nothing. He only
spoke when speech was necessary or a pleasure to
himself.
Joe piled more wood on the fire and the two men
smoked solemly. When the first pleasure of the to-
bacco had worn off the stranger asked: “Where
I?”
“GovTnent reserve, Bilyering,” said Joe.
“Anywhere near th’ railway?”
“Katanning’s about fifty mile west.”
“That’ll do me, mate. I can make there to-
morrow, can’t I?”
“Yes. Follow this track to the rabbit-proof fence
and run north up the fence to the first gate. There’s
a track right in from there.”
The stranger volunteered no information about
himself, and Joe, with that innate courtesy which is
the characteristic of all bushmen, forbore to ask
questions. But he observed him all the while and
indulged in a good deal of curiosity. He was puzzled
at the man’s appearance. The stranger was evi-
dently no kangarooer, and it was palpable he did not


know the district. He must have come far, and yet
his equipment was not that of a traveller of long
distances. The goldfields were a couple of hundred
miles away, and the stretch between Holland’s Tank
and there was uninhabited. If he had come from
the fields he would have brought a pack horse with
him. Joe noticed that • the stranger’s movements
were quick and nervous. He frequently glanced over
his shoulder. He had taken the swag from his saddle
and placed it beside him. Once or twice he thought
he heard sounds.
“Listen!” he exclaimed suddenly. Joe listened.
There was a crackling of twigs where the horses were
moving about, and now and again a ’possum scam-
pered up a tree.
“Thought I heard a horse galloping,” muttered
the stranger.
“There’s nobody living in these parts,” said Joe.
“What’s brought you out here?”
“Gettin’ a load of sandalwood,” replied Joe.
There was a pile left out further by some of the old
carters. Dave Wilson, the half-caste, told me about
it. Just got time to take it !in before hay cutting.”
The stranger grunted, and presently Joe made a
move to turn in.
“Listen!” said the stranger again. His face
showed very white in the firelight.
“Kangaroo jumpin’ about,” said Joe, laconically.
“There’s plenty of ’em about.”
It was a warm nlight. Joe spread his rugs along-
side the waggon and dug a hole in the ground for
his hip to rest in. The stranger said he would doss
by the fire. The last thing Joe remembered before
going to sleep was that the man was building up the
fire with great logs.


Chapter II
JOE woke suddenly in the night fully conscious that
he had heard a shot. He got up on his elbow and
listened, but everything seemed quiet. The fire had
burned low. Not far away he could hear the clinking
of hobbles as the horses grazed about. He was just
dozing off again when he heard another shot. It
seemed to come from the direction of the sand plain.
Joe put on his boots quickly and went off through
the timber. As he passed the fire he noticed the
stranger was not there. He plunged through the
scrub, stopping now and again to listen. Everything
was quiet. Having reached the edge of the sand
plain, he skirted it for a while, but found nothing.
Later he gave up the search and went back to camp.
>-
c:
<
C 3
£
u
■c -
r -
■t'
■> m
—I
K
B-
£
The stranger had not returned. He had dis-
appeared, and with him his swag. Joe was not a
great deal perturbed, although he was mystified. The
fact that shooting had been going on did not intimi-
date him in any way. It was possible the stranger
had slept a little, caught his horse and started off
in the darkness, because there was a long journey
in front of him. On the way he might have taken a
shot at a ’possum or a kangaroo, although he was
hardly likely to waste ammunition over a ’possum,
and kangaroos were no tamer at night. Anyway it
was the stranger’s business. Joe turned in again and
went to sleep.
He was up at daylight. First he fed and watered
his horses, and then built up the fire. The stranger


r WWuffi/JS^Cf ’ /f>V 1 / v • >iH*•-•. f* 1
. J. ■'.’" i:.',--i:-" : ' ' ■■'■ '' ' ■■■'
V- w ' -. ■ ; r ~- .- *.. . ■ ~ 7
Jo© ran to the tree, feeling that some tragedy was to be
xmfolded before him.


was still absent, but be bad left bis borse behind.
This was puzzling enough, but when Joe was picking
up bis rugs, be noticed the man's swag lying under
the waggon. Joe scratched bis bead and forgot about
breakfast. There was something very unusual about
the whole affair that needed immediate investigation..
He almost ran to the spot where he thought the
second shot had come from. There was nothing to
be seen. He tramped about for a while with no
result, until he heard an unfamiliar noise above him.
Looking up he saw a large black crow flying from
over the sand plain and crowing monotonously.
A crow in that portion of Western Australia is not
a common sight. The bird is rare, but it has a most
uncanny intuition. Joe knew its habits and watched.
The bird alighted on the dry branch of a big white
gum. Joe marked the tree and ran to it, feeling that
some tragedy was to be unfolded before him. His
instinct was right: lying under the tree was the dead
body of the man he had fed the night before. Beside
it lay a rifle. Joe picked this up mechanically and
worked the ejector. To his surprise an undischarged
cartridge jumped out. He put it back and scratched
his head. Suicide had been in his mind as the cause
of the stranger’s death, and yet the rifle had not been
fired.
One look at the stranger was sufficient to show that
he was beyond help. The shot had been received full
in the face and at very close quarters. The features
were unrecognisable, but there were points of identi-
fication that were irrefutable in Joe’s mind. As a
matter of fact the question of identity was never in
doubt with him. Joe carefully placed his big blue
handkerchief over the man’s face and looked about.


The ground just there was hard and baked, and the
boots of a man would make little impression on it.
He stopped suddenly in his search and made an ex-
clamation. Stooping at a spot about five yards away
from the body he picked up a discharged cartridge
shell of the same calibre as those in the rifle. Instinc-
tively Joe dug a stick in the spot to mark it. Then
he sat down to think.
Joe was no detective, nor was he versed in crime
of any kind. He wns a simple-minded man who knew
his own business thoroughly and did not bother about
that of other people. His reasoning was simple.
Where there was a corpse a funeral must follow', and
in those parts a man must be buried at once. Having
arrived at this conclusion he ran to his waggon, pro-
duced a spade and hurried back. Selecting a spot
where the ground seemed soft, he dug a shallow grave.
In case there might be something in the man ’s pockets
which would identify him, Joe searched his clothing,
but beyond a pipe, a knife and a few pieces of string
and wire, found nothing. He laid the body gently
in the grave, cut a few boughs to make the first
covering, and then leaned on the spade and regarded
his work thoughtfully.
“I dunno who you was, or lioav you come to die,’"
he said aloud, “but you was a man, an’ somethin’
ought to be said.” He paused and looked about him,
as if searching for the words. “There’s somethin’
about ‘dust to dust’,” he muttered, “an’ there’s a bit
about ‘resurrection,’ but it’s gone from me mind. I
never w r as much on funerals.”
The morning sun was peeping above the great sand
plain wdiere it met the sky. The light poured down
the slight rise like the flooding of a wide river,


rippling joyously over the obstructions and dancing
along to its uttermost limits. Up in the tree-tops
there was a tremendous chattering of parrakeets, and
from a nearby jam tree came the pure, deep-throated
melody of a little thrush. The sunlight flowed about
the trunks of the big white gums, giving them a
golden tint and bringing out their pale, delicate
colouring. It caught the heap of yellow clay at the
edge of the newly-made grave and turned it to gold.
“I don't know nothin’ about you,” said Joe. “You
didn’t tell me nothin’ an’ I didn’t ask. It wasn't
my business; but there’s somethin’ crook somewhere.
You come from further out with no pack an’ no
tucker, an’ you’re about dead-beat when you get here.
You ain’t had a drink for a day at least, or a feed
either. Instead of goiu’ to sleep you go prowlin’
about with a rifle an’ get shot. You didn’t shoot
yourself, unless you chucked out the empty cartridge
after you done it, an’ loaded up agen. An’ there
wasn’t nobody else about to shoot you except me, an'
I never done it unless I was walkin’ in me sleep.
An ’ I wasn’t walkiu ’in me sleep because I was dossin ’
when I heal'd the firin’. It’s a mystery, that’s what
it is.”
Joe shovelled in some dirt thoughtfully and then
leaned on the spaae again. “ ‘Dust to dust’ —that’s
what it is. I suppose Gawd wanted you dead or He
wouldn’t have let you die. It’s hard luck on a man.
If you’d only stayed by the fire an’ went to sleep
you’d have b6en alive now. Still that ain’t my
business. ”
He filled up the. grave quickly and went back to
his camp. There he caught one of his horses, har-
nessed it. and, picking up a chain, led the animal


through the timber towards the burying place. When
close to it Joe halted, and with his axe stripped the
branches from a fallen tree and fastened the chain
about the end of the trunk. Then he hitched the
horse to the chain and led the animal to the grave,
dragging the log behind it. After some manoeuvre-
ing he worked the log lengthways on to the grave
and took the chain oft'.
“That’ll keep the dingoes away from you, mate,’’
he said. “It’s a bit heavy, but you won’t notice it,
an’ it’ll mark the spot. Now, I must be getting
along. ’ ’
He lingered for a moment feeling that perhaps he
might have conducted the burial in a better fashion.
“Wish I could remember a few words of what the
parsons say, ’’ he muttered. ‘‘ A man ain’t a dog. ’ ’
“P'raps I could say a prayer,” he said, glancing
sheepishly at the horse which blinked at him vacantly.
“I ain’t much good on me knees.” He thought for
a minute and then said quietly: “Gawd, look after
this bloke when he turns up at your end, an’ don’t
be too rough on him. I expect he had a hard life.
He wasn’t exactly a mate of mine, but if a w r ord
from me will do him any good, I’ll be glad to give it.
I don’t believe in bein’ hard on people meself, for
Christ’s sake. Amen.”
Joe turned away abruptly and walked off, leading
the horse. A little way off he turned and waved his
hand.
So long, mate, ’ ’ he muttered, and then he dis-
appeared through the trees.
Arrived at his camp, Joe pitched the stranger’s
swag on top of the load and was about to yoke up
his horses, when he suddenly stood transfixed with


amazement. Standing with its head hanging over the
empty water trough was a strange horse, saddled and
bridled. The animal had a jaded appearance and
was covered with dried sweat. Its flanks were piti-
fully hollow. There was a swag strapped to the
saddle bow, and a full tucker bag hanging from the
side. With an exclamation, Joe went over to it. The
horse was quiet and allowed him to catch it. One
glance was sufficient to show it was desperately thirsty.
Stifling his amazement for the moment Joe drew bucket
after bucket of water for it until its thirst was slaked.
Then he sat down on the edge of the trough and
scratched his head. The horse began to pluck raven-
ously at the grass.
“Bliine!” ejaculated Joe breathlessly. Then
noticing the animal’s hunger he got up, filled a nose-
bag with chaff and put it over the horse’s head. He
sat down once more and said ‘ “ Bli ’me!
Those who know Holland’s route and the country
surrounding it will understand Joe’s amazement. The
spot at which he was camped was a great many miles
from anywhere. The route had long since been
abandoned. The last wave of settlement lay twenty
miles to the west, and no laudseekers came out this
way, because the country was in the main poor, and
was much too far from the railway line. A horse
and rider would not have surprised him, because men
turn up in odd places, but a riderless steed was what
Joe described as the “dead limit.”
At first Joe imagined that the rider must be some-
where about. He sent several ringing cooees through
the bush, but they brought no response. Later he
followed the track out west, for some distance, but
could find no distinct trace of the horse having come


that way. His own team had made many tracks, and
although he could pick out some smaller hoof marks,
he supposed these to belong to the stranger’s horse.
There was no definite indication that two light horses
had passed that way.
Joe returned to camp and sat down moodily. The
whole thing was beginning to get on his nerves. He
had hoped to arrive at his own place about mid-day,
but half the day had already gone and he had not
started. He did not know what to do with the strange
horse. If the rider was in the vicinity he would natu-
rally need it, but no rider abandoned his steed as this
one had been abandoned. Finally he decided to boil
a billy, feed himself and his horses and make for
home, taking the strange animal with him. He could
not leave it to die of thirst, for there would be nobodv
' %/
to draw water for it when he had gone.
The abandoned steed mixed itself up in Joe’s mind
with the tragedy of the previous night. He felt now
that somebody had arrived on the horse during the
night, and must have departed on foot. The some-
body must have been responsible for the shooting of
the stranger. But why*? Joe gave the problem up,
hitched the strange horse and the dead man’s steed
to the back of the waggon, yoked up his own horses,
and was soon standing on the foot-boards behind his
straining team.
The remainder of the journey was uneventful. The
waggon reached the rabbit-proof fence, followed it
for a while, and then turned in at a gate. The way
now lay through timbered country on which the grass
grew thickly. After winding along manj 7 gullies and
surmounting long inclines, Joe arrived at his boundary
fence and passed through the gate. A mile further


on, he pulled up at the back of a small hut and between
it and some rough outbuildings. As he did so a short,
uuggety individual emerged from a paddock of ring-
barked timber and waved his hand. Joe waved back
and began to unyoke.
“Thought you was never coinin’. Joe,” said the
man.
“I’m late, all right, ’’ said Joe.
“An’ brought back a new moke, I see.’
Joe cleared his throat and then gaped. There was
one animal only tied to the back of the waggon. The
saddled horse had disappeared!
“What’s up, Joe?” asked Jimmy.
“Nothin’,” replied Joe. “A bloke out kangarooin'
asked me to bring him in. Water's getting scarce.”
“Bit of a runt, ain’t he?” commented Jimmy.
“Must er pulled back an’ broke the bridle,” said
Joe to himself. “Funny I never noticed it when I
shut the gate.”
Jimmy gave a hand with the team, which was soon
unyoked and fed. The load was left until the morn-
ing. and the two men went into the hut to prepare
tea.


Chapter 111.
JOE THOMPSON described himself as a farmer, but
he was more than that. He belonged to the small
armv of pioneers who, drifting to the uttermost limits
of civilisation and beyond, hew for themselves homes
out of the wilderness and pave the way for human
expansion. It takes a man with a big heart to go
pioneering, and Australia has reason to be proud of
men like Joe. They bear their hardships without
complaint, and risk the best years of their lives in
subjugating the wilderness. Pioneering is no soft job,
and whereas many attain success at it, just as many
fail, and such failings are embittering. The wilder-
ness has broken the hearts of numberless good men.
Joe had selected his land some thirty miles east
of the railway town of Katanning. The son of a
boundary-rider in Central Australia, he had grown
up in the loneliness of the open spaces, and naturally
drifted into station-work. His father had been a good
fellow of good middle-class stock, and clever enough
in his way, but without the capacity to overcome his
one failing, namely drink. He had had excellent
prospects in the city, but had lost them and drifted,
as many good but weak men do, to the bush, where
he remained for the rest of his life, working hard
and knocking down his cheque once a year at the
nearest bush shanty. He died in delirium tremens
when Joe was about nineteen. Joe’s mother was a
station housekeeper, as strong-minded as her husband


was weak. The qualities of the two were nicely
blended in who possessed the canny spirit of
his mother and the generous heart of the father. Joe
did not drink. He had too many unpleasant recollec-
tions of its effects.
Joe saved his money until he had a tidy sum, and
then went west looking for land. He had picked his
holding because of the quality of the soil. There had
been many areas closer to the railway line that he
might have acquired, but the land was not so good.
Joe could fiot afford to fail. After three years he
had cleared a couple of hundred acres and sown them
with wheat. In addition he had fenced his boundaries
with dog-proof fencing, sunk a couple of dams, and
enclosed a horse paddock. The stables and two-roomed
hut had been put up at odd times with the aid of
Jimmy.
Having disposed of the team, the two men entered
the hut. It was now almost dark. Jimmy lit a fire
and put a billy on while Joe laid the table. The hut
was built of white gum slabs and roofed with straw.
There was no plaster on the inside. No pictures
adorned the walls, and there were no ornaments of
any kind. This was a bachelor establishment for
purposes of utility only. The first room was used
for meals. The big fireplace was at the end. 'lt con-
tained a number of hooks nlade of wire and suspended
from a bar of iron in the chimney. The hooks were
to accommodate billycans in which all the cooking
was done. There were a number of circular twists
in the ■wires, which enabled the cans to be hung at
any distance from the fire. They were handy when
the cooking was finished too early, for the billycans
could be elevated to a distance which enabled the


contents to be kept hot without being over-cooked.
At the side of the fireplace stood a camp oven, which
was used for baking bread or roasting meat. There
was a safe close handy, the legs of which stood in
meat tins filled with water to keep the ants away.
To the right of the fireplace stood a large galvanised
iron tub containing a washing-board. A deal table
stood in the centre of the room, and there were a few
three-legged stools standing about. The room was
surprisingly neat. The jarrah floor was well swept.
The only suggestion of chaos Avas in a corner near
the fireplace, where there stood a bag of flour and
one or two empty sacks.
The other room contained a couple of bunks lined
up against the walls, a small table and a couple of
dilapidated portmanteaus. It, too, was noticeably
tidy. On one of the Avails Avas nailed a large almanac
Avith a gaudy centre picture, the gift of the store-
keeper AA’hom Joe patronised,
The tablecloth consisted of a couple of neAvspapers.
The plates and cups were of enamel, and the knives
had metal handles. The cups were large and would
contain a pint.of tea. The jam stood on the table in its
original tin, and the “tinned dog,” or tinned meat,
AA'as served like Arise. The sugar and salt were con-
tained in jam tins, and there A\*as a pepper pot made
by punching tiny holes in the lid of a small tin.
Jimmy made the tea and the two sat down. They
ate for some time in silence. Jimmy had nothing to
say and Joe AA’as turning things over in his mind and
Avondering hoiv much he would tell Jimmy, or AA’hether
he Avould tell him anything at all. Jimmy worked
for Joe for twenty-fiA r e shillings a week and his keep,
but there Avere no social distinctions between them.


The}' were good mates. Jimmy was a bright little
man who saw the funny side of most thing’s and
talked a good deal. Joe was a good listener. His
sense of humour was there, but it was quiet. Humour
is essential to those who go pioneering. It keeps some
men from going mad or getting drunk.
Jimmy helped himself to a liberal supply of jam
and began to spread it. Presently he put down his
knife, and, with k chuckle, extracted a long hair from
his plate.
“That there golden-haired gal again,” he exclaimed.
‘ ‘ She' must be goin ’ bald. ’ ’
Joe smiled. This was one of Jimmy’s jokes. The
jam came from a South Australian factory, and
Jimmy was eternally prospecting it for golden strands.
“I think I’ll write to her,” said Jimmy, ““and arst
her to wear a cap when she’s workin ’. Ro-mantic that
would be, wouldn’t it ? Might lead to a correspondence
and a weddin’.”
Jimmy’s head was full of romance. His one weak-
ness was the purchase of penny literature of the
sensational type. Being a peaceful person and a
bachelor, he loved a stirring tale of murder, love and
mystery, wherein the villain got his deserts in the
last chapter.
“You’d have golden hair in everything, then,” sug-
gested Joe.
“It’d be grey before long, I reckon, if she had to
live with me,” was Jimmy’s reply. Jimmy was ex-
cessively modest concerning his own attractions and
accomplishments, but it was the compliment-fishing
kind of modesty. He was easily the best axeman in
district, but he was constantly saying, “I can’t use
an axe.” Yet he felt more than proud when the


person addressed scornfully rejected the estimate and
pointed to some of Jimmy’s achievements.
The two men washed np and put the eatables away.
Jimmy sought his bunk in company with the latest
penny horror and spelt the thrilling words out in a
subdued whisper, while his eyes nearly jumped out
of his head. Joe sat on his bunk with his liead in
his hands and smoked.
Presently he said: “What’s the book like, Jimmy?”
“Boshter,” said Jimmy, without moving his eyes
from the printed page.
“I was readin’ a good one the other day,” said
Joe, trying to be offhand without much success.
“Sounded like a place out here. There was a bloke
out kangarooin’, an’ one night a strange chap turns
up from outback. He camped with the kangarooin’
bloke. In the middle of the night this cove wakes
up an’ hears a shot.”
Jimmy his book and looked interested.
“Gripes! That sounds good,” he said.
“The cove wasn’t quite sure about the shot,” went
on Joe, “an’ was just goin’ to sleep agen, when he
heard another shot. In the mornin’ he found the
strange cove lyin’ dead in the scrub, shot in the face.
He had a rifle alongside him with a live cartridge
in the barrel. It was a place like where I went for
the sandalwood —nobody livin’ about there or any-
thin’. The cove buried him all right, but he didn’t
know what to do after. Y’ see he was the only other
bloke out there, an’ you never know what people will
make out of a thing like that.”
“Looks suspicious, don’t it?” said Jimmy.
“It don’t look as if the cove committed suicide,”
said Joe. “He wouldn’t be able to jerk out the empty


shell and jerk in another one after he was shot, an
there was an empty shell lyin’ near him.”
“What was he, Joe?”
“Just an ordinary bloke, like you an’ me, Jimmy.”
“lie orter bin a dook or somethin’, said Jimmy
gravely. “They’re generally like that.”
“He might have been,” said Joe. “It was never
discovered. ’ ’
“Must er bin in th’ last chapter an’ you missed it.
What was the end ? ’'
“There wasn’t no end. The story went on about
how the bloke didn’t know whether to tell or not.
What do you think would happen if the bloke told ?
Jimmy screwed up his forehead and looked wise.
“It depends,” he said wisely. “If there was a bad
bloke about that wanted his gal, I’d say keep mum,
but if it was plain sailin’, I don’t know. P’raps some
others come in later on.”
“There wasn’t no others,” said Joe.
“Then th’ bloke couldn’t have been murdered.”
“You think it was suicide?” asked Joe anxiously.
“If there was no other bloke, it muster bin.”
“But there was one other, Jimmy.”
“But he never done it, you say.”
“No, he never done it; but would the others believe
him ? ’ ’
“He mighter bin the second heir,” mused Jimmy,
“an’ done the other cove in to get the inheritance.”
“They didn’t know each other.”
“But it might turn out that he was the second heir
an’ didn’t know it. They’d say he done him in then.
Can’t you remember how it ended?”
“It ain’t ended yet, Jimmy. I—l think there’s
another sequel or somethin’ to come out.”


“Oh, well, them two are sure to be connected in
some way.”
“Do you think the cove oughter tell?” asked Joe.
“Depends on th' sequel. You'll find there’s other
blokes an’ a gal mixed up in it.”
“I don’t see how there could have been another
bloke,” said Joe, doggedly.
“You see, there’ll be another bloke an’ a gal mixed
up in it,” said Jimmy, conclusively. “Better let me
have the first book to read, Joe.”
“I ain’t got it with me, Jimmy.”
“Well, let’s have a look at the second part. There
must be others in it.”
Joe said no more. His experience had got on his
nerves. He had a good conscience, but he hated any
fuss or bother. He felt he ought to make a clean
breast of the affair to the local authorities, but he
did not want to be mixed up in it, and there was
always the danger of suspicion pointing in his direc-
tion. It was indicative of his excessive modesty that
he should think this way. Not one person he knew
would have ever dreamed of suspecting him of any-
thing underhand, and his honest countenance would
have been his best witness in a court of law.
Joe did not sleep that night. He tossed and turned
in his bunk and dozed fitfullv. Jimmv, on the con-
«- •/ 7
trary, slept like a top of the humming variety. He
snored so much and so loudly that Joe got up, dressed
and went out into the moonlight to think. He walked
about for a long time with his head bent, trying to
determine on a course of action. He circled his patch
of cultivated land at the southern end of the house,
passed by the stables, and entered the ringbarked
horse paddock to the north. He paid little heed to


his surroundings or to the soft brilliance of the night.
The dry twigs crackled under his feet. Little possums
on their way from a feast of tender shoots, which had
grown out of the tree butts below the ringbarking,
scampered for safety as he approached. They
scrambled up the dead trees and anxiously watched
this big blundering man go by. Once a big red
kangaroo which had wandered into the paddock started
up and bounded away in a panic. Joe heard it crash
into the wire fence, and go thumping off in another
direction.
Suddenly Joe felt very weary. He sat down on a
fallen York gum and filled his pipe. There was comfort
in the fragrant weed. It soothed his nerves and made
him reflect rather than worry. Life, he thought, was
a rum affair, full of perplexities. This notion pleased
him and he drifted into remembrance of his earlier
years. Presently he dozed. He woke with a start
later to find the air grown chilly. Picking up his
pipe, which had fallen from his mouth, he strode off
briskly in an easterly direction, his idea being to pick
up the track to the hut. As he stepped on to the
track he almost collided with a figure which was
hurrying away northwards. The man stepped back
muttering something, and quick as lightning turned
and ran through the timber. Joe stood watching him
with eyes grown large with astonishment. For one
instant the moon had shone full on the intruder’s
face. In the moonlight his features had not been
very distinct, but Joe thought he recognised them.
It seemed to him to be the face of the man he had
buried that morning. His hands shook, and he felt
a queer sensation about the knees.
Joe was not unusually superstitious, but he thought


be had seen a real ghost. He could hear the foot-
steps of the man as he scurried through the timber.
His own heart-beats were uncomfortably audible, and
his brain seemed to have frozen up. Presently the
man’s movements were lost in the eternal teeming
of the night, and Joe pulled himself togethei. He
had no desire to follow the apparition, so he walked
quickly home. Presently he felt that he must have
been mistaken, and by the time he arrived at the
hut, he felt sure the state of his mind must have
played a trick on him. Jimmy was still snoring hard.
As it was almost morning Joe lit the lamp, got into
his rugs and tried to read.
Joe and Jimmy took turns in getting breakfast.
This was Joe’s week, and as soon as dawn appeared,
he slipped out of his rugs and lit the fire with the
aid of some dried blackboy. As he was laying the
newspaper tablecloth, a scrap of paper poking
through the crack at the bottom of the door caught
his eye. He picked it up. There was writing on it
in a large, ungainly fist, evidently made by a piece
of charcoal. Joe spelt out the following with diffi-
culty :
Dear Mate,
Open the swag- and sell wot is in it. Take the money
to Miss Forsyth, at Ritchley school, Sampson Street, Perth
She will know T and keep mum and arsk no questions It am t
crook, mate, and don’t fall.—From one who Is w’atchln .
P.S. You can keep the moke for your trubble, but don’t
forget.
Joe rubbed the back of his head with the stem of
his pipe and sat down. He began to wonder if he was
ooing mad, or whether it was all a bad dream. After
the first surprise he connected the letter with the man
he had encountered the night before. Who was that
man, and what did he know, and how was he aware
of the fact that Joe had another man’s swag in his


possession ? This must be the other fellow —the
murderer, perhaps, and the man who owned the
strange horse, Joe went hot and then cold. The thing
was getting too much for him. He felt he must un-
burden himself, but to whom ? In a flash he thought
of Barclay, the friend of all men; Barclay, the sheep
farmer, the man to whom the district looked as its
adviser; Barclay the hospitable man and the very
good friend of Joe Thompson; and lastly, Barclay,
the Justice of the Peace. He would go to Barclay
and get the horrible thing oft’ his mind.
Having made the decision. Joe felt better. He made
the tea and roused up Jimmy, who tumbled out of
bed with a grin and was soon lathering his neck and
face over a bowl of water. Jimmy sat down to break-
fast- with a face glowing with cleanliness and ate
tremendously. Joe swallowed his food with difficulty.
“I’m goin’ up to Barclay's this mornin’,” said
Joe as the two washed up. ‘‘l mightn’t be back to
dinner. Better keep goin' with the ringbarkin ’ to-
day, Jimmy.”
“Righto.” said Jimmy enthusiastically. No amount
of hard work ever seemed to disagree with his happy
disposition. Joe turned the grindstone for him while
he sharpened his axe, and as soon as Jimmy had dis-
appeared through the ringbarked timber, he brought
down the dead man’s swag, carried it into the hut.
closed all the doors tight, and with nervous fingers
undid the bundle. It was the common type of swag-
consisting of a couple of mgs, an old pair of blu-
cher boots, a box of matches, sundry odds and ends
of wire and string, and a photograph of a baby.
Joe found these under the first fold of the rugs.
Having carefully removed them, he unrolled the


swag to its limit, and found tucked away in the
heart of it a couple of fine canvas bags and a clinical
thermometer. The bags were filled with something
and. tied at the neck. Joe picked one of them up.
It was extraordinarily heavy. Another man would
have cut the string tied about the neck of the bag,
but Joe undid it carefully. String was string, a very
useful commodity, and at times a very scarce one.
After wrestling with the knot, he opened the top of
the bag and looked in. It needed no expert to de-
termine that the contents 'consisted of small yellow
nuggets and a quantity of gold dust. Joe did the
bag up carefully and inspected the other. It, too,
contained gold. He weighed each of them carefully
in his hand and estimated the weight of the two
between 35 and 40 lb. He recalled then the fact that
the swag had seemed unusually heavy.
Joe did the swag up again, carefully replacing
everything but the two bags. These he took into the
bedroom and deposited on a ledge in the chimney.
The swag he put under his bed. Then he pulled from
his pocket the scrap of paper he had found under
Jhe door, and re-read it several times. He was satis-
fied completely now that the man he had buried had
been murdered, and that the letter had been written
by the murderer. He remembered that the stranger
had been a bit “jumpy” and had fancied he had
heard a horse galloping. Evidently he had expected
to be followed. The gold must have been stolen,
and the murderer was the rightful owner. Ap-
parently the man was afraid of being caught, and
wanted Joe to put his gold in safe keeping. He
wished the man had told him more.
Joe caught a horse and cantered off to Barclay’s.


The desire to unburden himself was stronger than
ever. He wanted to get the whole thing off his
hands and be done with it. There was something
unsavory about it. and he hated mystery. Tlis way
lay northwards through his own holding. Outside
bis boundary was a track, on the other side of which
was Barclay’s boundary fence. Barclay owned
several thousands of acres, all riugbarked and well
watered and stocked with sheep. He had been the
original pioneer of the district, and the story of his
first struggles would fill a couple of volumes. Now
he was what was termed “well in.” His wife—a
quiet, patient, loving woman—had shared his hard-
ships. They had three sons and a daughter. The
eldest son, a well-set-up lad of eighteen, had left
school and was helping to run the place which would
one day be his. The other two sons were at college
in Adelaide, and the daughter was at a boarding
school in Perth.
Joe cantered through the riugbarked acres, passed
through several gates, and eventually came in sight
of Barclay s homestead. He found Barclay down in
the smithy sharpening a couple of crowbars. There
was no need for Sam Barclay to work now, but he
was one who could not be idle. He was a tall, lean,
wiry man between forty and fifty, though he looked
much younger. There were few lines about his face,
and his hair and beard revealed no greyness. He
nodded briefly to Joe, pulled a bar out of the roaring
forge, battered the end of it with a heavy hammer,
and plunged it into a drum of water. Withdrawing
it, he placed the end on the anvil and scraped at it
with a small file. At first the process appeared to be
futile, but presently a light yellow colour crept into


the hot end. A second or two later this changed to
purple, whereat Barclay dipped the end once more
in the water and let it remain there.
“Funny thing how steel tempers,” said Barclay,
filling an empty jam tin with water and sprinkling
the fire to put it out.
Joe nodded. He was wondering how he was going
to begin his tale.
“Well, Joe, how's the crop looking?”
“Coming on fine, Mr. Barclay. Looks like twenty
bushels.”
“You’re an object lesson, Joe. No other man
around has ever got more than sixteen.”
“It’s the land,” said Joe, modestly.
“Come up and see if we can get some tea,” said
Barclay, picking up his coat. “We don’t see you
often these days, Joe.”
“I wanted to see you particularly to-day, Mr. Bar-
clay,” said Joe. “I want some advice.”
“At your service, Joe. We’ll fix it up Over the cup
that cheers.”
Barclay’s house was built of mud bricks. There
were seven rooms, and the interior was nicely fin-
ished off for a bush dwelling. City people would
have called it rough, but in those parts it was con-
sidered almost a palace, and so it was in comparison
with the other dwellings. Barclay led the way into
a big dining room, put Joe into a chair, and went off
to “hunt up the missus.” Presently he returned
with a tray on which were two steaming cups of tea
and several large slices of cake.
Over the tea Joe told his story. In the first stages
Barclay listened with quiet interest; but when Joe
reached the shooting part and told about the finding


of the man’s body and the undischarged rifle, he
almost sprang out of his chair in amazement.
“You’re sure about that, Joe?”
“Dead sure, Mr. Barclay.”
“It’s murder, my boy.”
“I reckon that, too, Mr. Barclay.”
“A matter for immediate investigation. I’ll send
Bob in at once for Beazley. There’ll be need for a
tracker, too.”
Barclay went to the door and called, “Hi, Bob!”
There was a faint reply, and presently a quick step
on the verandah, and Barclay junior came into the
room.
“Hullo, Joe! You are a stranger,” said Bob, shak-
ing hands. “I was down your way the other day,
but couldn’t find a soul.”
“Like a trip to town, Bob?” asked Barclay.
•/
Ihe son was a sturdy youth, over middle height,
who looked older than his age. He stood on his feet
like a trained athlete, and such he was. At school
in Adelaide he had carried off no prizes for learning,
but there was no more popular lad in the school. He
had won many foot races, had captained the cricket
and football teams, and held the school record for
high-jumping. He brought home with him a number
of cups and medals, and the goodwill of master and
P u Pil; gained because of his physical prowess, his
honesty and kindliness.
“Always ready for that, Dad,” he said.
Well, get Tommy and Julia in the light buggv
and start as soon as you can. I want you to take a
note to Beazley. It’s very important.”
Bob disappeared, and Barclay turned to Joe.
“Beazley will be out to-night. I shall want you up


here in the morning, Joe, to take ns ont and show us
everything. ’ ’
Joe wanted to tell about the strange horse turning-
up, but Barclay began to ply him with questions.
When he went away he had said nothing about the
stranger’s swag or the strange note he had received
that morning.


Chapter IV
IF you take the traek that nxns between the boun-
dary fences of Sam Barclay and Joe Thompson,
follow it until you come to what is termed the old
Katanning road, and then take the first turn to your
left, you will come before long to a brick building
standing in a small enclosure. You will guess im-
mediately that this is either a chapel or a school, and
you will be right. At the time of which lam writing,
the hall, as it was termed, had not long been built.
It served many useful purposes, the chief among
them be!ing that of a school. For such a new and
scattered district, the number of children was extra-
ordinary, and once the hall was up, a benevolent
Government had supplied a teacher so that the coming
generation might not grow up in ignorance.
Leading away from the hall was a newly beaten
path over which Miss Bradley, the teacher, walked
each day to and from her home. She lived in the
establishment of old Jack "Walker, which could be
seen through the timber about a hundred vards awav
from the hall. Old Jack Walker’s family consisted
of himself and wife, three unmarried daughters, and
a married son and his wife and three children. Old
Jack and young Jack were partnex-s in the farm. At
present they all lived together, but the idea was
some day to build a house in another portion of the
holding for young Jack and his family. The house
consisted of five rooms, built of she-oak and dab, and


a large galvanised iron room which served as a
dining room and kitchen. Miss Bradley was fairly
comfortably housed in a small room in the front of
the house proper. She ate with the family, and was
generally treated with great respect.
Bonnie Bradley she had been in earlier years, but
few called her Bonnie now. She had developed, as
do many women who have to work for their livuhg,
into something not unfeminine or altogether un-
attractive, but rather into a machine-like being
known chiefly for her machine-like duties. As Miss
Bradley was inclined to be retiring and minded her
own business, few people ever got beyond the school
inarm in her. Those who did were generally sur-
prised to discover a very human woman, much better
read than her occupation demanded, and possessed
of a sane philosophy, charming for its directness and
simplicity. She dressed plainly but not unattrac-
tively. Her features were good, but she pushed her-
self in nowhere and preferred to linger on the edge
•if the crowd and observe.
It was a Monday afternoon. The children had
scampered out of the hall and gone their ways, some
on foot, others.double-banked on the backs of quiet,
sturdy draught horses, and some in a crazy vehicle
of some kind. Many of them had long distances to
go, but the}’ knew thelfr way, and even if they had
departed from it would have found their way home.
The children of the wilderness knew their surround-
ings. The bush had no terrors for them, for they
knew it as intimately as their own dwellings. Miss
Bradley put away some books, swept out the hall and
left for home. At the gate she could see a saddled
horse standing, and beside it a figure which she recog-


nised instantly. Joe Thompson raised his hat awk-
wardly as she came up, whereat Miss Bradley smiled.
It was a rare, comprehending smile, with nothing of
the school marm in it.
Joe held out a book as awkwardly as he had raiised
his hat. He had no pretty manners.
“Finished it, Mr. Thompson?”
Joe nodded on the principle that if a sign will con-
vey, there is no need for a word. The book was
Dombey and Son. Joe had read it through twice,
but he did not say so.
“There’s somethin’ in it—” he began, and then
stopped.
“There is a great deal in it,” said Miss Bradley,
trying to help him out. “I hope you liked lit.”
“Yes,” said Joe, dully. He had prepared quite a
nice little eulogy for Miss Bradley’s ears, but her
presence drove it out of his head. He looked any-
where but at her. She noticed this and watched him
all the time with a little smile that showed how well
she understood him.
“I don’t like people dyin’ in books,” he said.
“Poor little Paul,” she said softly; “but don’t you
think it helps the rest. Would the book have been
so good without him?”
“I’m going to Perth,” said Joe abruptly, chang-
ing the subject.
“Lucky you,” she responded brightly. “When?”
“To-morrow. I thought, perhaps, I could do
somethin’ for you up there.”
“Thank you, Mr. Thompson. Let me see. Could
you bring me down a few books? There won’t be
many, and I’ve really quite run out of readfing
matter. ’ ’


A touch of red crept into Joe’s tanned cheeks.
He was desperately shy with women, and he had had
the fear that his offer might have offended her in
some way. The almost eager way in which she ac-
cepted it gave him a vast amount of pleasure.
“I can bring all you want, Miss Bradley. A case
full wouldn’t be too many.”
“I can’t afford to buy as many as that,” she said
with a smile. ‘ ‘ Come up to the house and I will give
you a list. You’re sure you don’t mind?”
“I want to do somethin’ for you,” he said, with
more confidence. “You’ve done a lot for me, you
know, lendin’ me books.”
Oh, I like to lend books to people who will ap-
preciate them.”
They walked slowly up to the architectural jumble
that was old Jack Walker’s house. Joe waited out-
side while Miss Bradley made out her list. He
watched her vaguely as she went inside and let his
thoughts wander to the day on which he had first
met her. It had been at a local “shivoo” at the hall.
There had been sports in the afternoon and a concert
in the evening, with a grand feast in between. Joe
had observed the schoolmistress struggling with a
tub of crockery, and had taken it from her as if it
had been a feather, and placed it where she had
wanted it. Having done so he had raised his hat
and departed without saying a word. His quiet
strength had struck a responsive chord in the school-
mistress, and she had later on sought him out and
thanked him. Nothing much in all that, one might
say, but it meant a great deal to Joe. Since then
they had met at odd times and struck up a friend-
ship through the medium of books.


“There,” said Miss Bradley, putting a slip of
paper into Joe’s hand. “Six of them altogether, and
there’s the money to pay for them.”
Joe took the money and fingered it awkwardly.
“I was thinkin’ I’d like to make you a present of
them,” he said shyly.
The schoolmistress flushed and drew back a little.
“Oh, I couldn’t think of it,” she said quickly.
' •
' •
Joe went very red. He saw he had made a mistake
in a point of etiquette and felt remorseful. Miss
Bradley saw his confusion and tried to put him at
his ease.
“You see, I couldn’t after k had asked you to get
them,” she said naively.
“I’m sorry,” he muttered.
“Oh, don’t be sorry. It was very generous of you,
and I appreciate the thought very much. Are you
staying long in Perth?”
“A day, I s’pose.”
“Only as long as that.”
“I’m goin’ on business,” said Joe, “or I wouldn’t
be goin’ at all. Me an’ the city don’t get on some-
how. ’ ’
“No,” she said slowly, “of course you wouldn’t.”
“Dunno what it is,” pursued Joe, “but as soon as
I get there I want to get in the train an’ come back.
I ain’t familiar with it, I s’pose.”
“I suppose that must be it,” she commented
gravely.
There was a pause. Joe was evidently struggling
with some thought which he found difficult to ex-
press. The schoolmistress said nothing, being con-
tent to wait for what he had to say. Presently Joe
said, clumsily;


“If I was to buy a book of me own choosin’ for
you, would you have it?”
“Of course,” she replied. “I would appreciate a
gift like that very much.”
Joe seemed relieved. “I ain’t much on manners,”
he said, “an’ I always feel I’m puttin’ me foot in it
when I tackle things like that. What would you
like?”
“I prefer to leave the choice to you,” she said.
Joe scratched his head. “You mightn’t like what
I get.”
“I shall be sure to like it,” was the reply.
There was another pause. Joe let his eye rove
about the timber in search of an idea. Miss Bradley
watched him. She had previously confessed to her-
self that she had an unusual interest in Joe. She
had not met him many times, but she felt she knew
him very well. In a community which directed all
its energies to tilling the soil, it was refreshing to
find one man whose tastes were not altogether agri-
cultural, and whose personality was worth observ-
ing. She had to admit that life in the bush would be
much less pleasant without the society of Joe Thomp-
son. Joe owned to himself that he liked Miss Brad-
ley and enjoyed her conversation. He liked her
company so much that he was glad of any excuse
that would take him to old Jack Walker’s.
"Oh, well,” said Joe. “I must be gettin’. Jim-
my’s takin’ the waggon in to-morrow an’ I’m goin’
as a passenger. I ’ll be back soon. ’ ’
She gave him her hand and he gripped it hard, as
bushmen do. She did not flinch although his grasp
hurt. She recognised the warmth behind it.


“You’re sure you don’t mind about the books?
she asked.
“I’d bring you fifty times as much,' he said,
meeting her eyes for a second. ‘‘l’m always ready
to do anythin’ for you.’
“Thank you, Mr. Thompson. You’re a good
friend.” . ,
Joe rode away with those words singing in his head.
He reflected gravely that he was not in the least in
love with the schoolmistress, which was a good thing,
because a woman like that would never be inclined
to marry a rough and ready chap such as he, but he
admitted she had a way with her that made him
want to tell her things—private things he had never
told anyone before. He was glad to find someone
like that, and he made up his mind to bring her more
than one book on his return.
Some days had elapsed since Joe, Barclay, and
Sergeant Beazley had gone out to Holland’s lank
to investigate the mystery of the stranger’s death.
They had camped out there and been joined a day
later by a city detective and a black tracker. Joe
had been plied with numerous questions and signed
a long statement setting out all he knew about the
tragedy. The police had remained to investigate,
and Barclay and Joe had returned. There was one
thing, however, that Joe had not told, and that was
what he had found in the stranger’s swag and the
mysterious note he had received. He had thought
this part of the affair out, and had decided to carry
out the wishes of the writer before saying anything.
He did not see how these matters could affect the
prime, apd t])ere tO f° be SoTTlp tl!iflg


underhand in making public what appeared to be a
purely private affair. There was a good deal of
■ sentimentalism in Joe, and he considered that even
a murderer might have sentimental ties. He had
made up his mind that the gold belonged rightfully
to the murderer and had been stolen by the dead
man. If, he argued, he found the disposition of the
gold a purely sentimental matter, he ought to keep
it quiet, but he was going to find out for himself
first. Joe felt, somehow, that he was carrying out
the wishes of a dead or dying man, an attitude no
doubt inspired by the fact that murderers were
hanged when they were caught, and sooner or later
the police got them.


Chapter V.
IT was a delightful warm morning of early summer
when Joe reached Perth and set out to find the
scholastic establishment of Miss Forsyth. H« had
made careful inquiries as to the whereabouts of
Sampson Street, and had gone to the extent of pur-
chasing a plan of the city to guide him. He scorned
the trams because of his uncertainty as to where they
would take him, and walked slowly, now and again
consulting the plan and trying to determine what
he would say when confronted by the lady principal.
The distance was not great, and presently Joe found
himself standing before a high gate which led into
spacious grounds containing a large two-storeyed
building. The gate bore the single word “Ritchley”
in gold letters. There was no mistaking the place,
so Joe, with something between a sigh and a grunt,
lifted the latch of the side gate and walked in. There
must have been an acre of land surrounded by a high
fence, and laid out in tennis courts, lawns, and shrub-
bery. Originally the place had been a family man-
sion. Joe took off his hat very politely to the maid
who opened the door to him, and respectfully asked
to see Miss Forsyth.
Long association with the process of instilling
caste into feminine minds had had its effect on the
maid. She regarded Joe superciliously, and asked
haughtily, “What name, please?”
The rigid formality nearly threw Joe off his bal-


ance, and he just saved himself from scratching his
head and saying, “Joe Thompson, Miss." However,
he managed to take a pull at himself, and replied
quietly but firmly, “Mr. Thompson, from Katann-
ing.”
“Will you come in, please?” was the haughty re-
quest. Joe followed into a stylishly furnished draw-
ing room, evidently kept for the purpose of accom-
modating callers and parents. Joe cast a quick eye
over the chairs and decided to stand. Some of them
did not appear to be up to his weight, and the others
were uninviting, and as formal and stiff as the atmos-
phere of the establishment. He was wandering about
when Miss Forsyth rustled into the room.
Joe turned, and awkwardly droppecf his hat. He
stooped in his embarrassment, and rising quickly,
bumped his head against the mantelpiece and set all
the ornaments rocking. Joe grinned sheepishly, and
rubbed the sore spot.
“Oh, dear!” exclaimed Miss Forsyth, with an an-
xious look at her quivering ornaments. "I hope you
have not hurt yourself. ’ ’
“Oh, it’s nothin’, ma’am, thank you,” said Joe.
“Won’t you sit down?” asked Miss Forsyth.
Joe felt it was necessary to comply with the re-
quest. He selected a chair that seemed up to his
weight, and sat down gingerly, bearing as much
weight as he could on his feet.
“You came to see me,” suggested Miss Forsyth.
Joe suddenly recollected that he had a mission.
He got on his feet again, dived his hand into his
breeches pocket, and produced a wad of bank notes.
These he offered to Miss Forsyth with the remark,
f ‘J was asked to give this fo you,” t


The muscles in Miss Forsyth’s face quivered. “By
whom?” she asked.
Joe scratched his head. “I dunno,” he said.
Oh, but you must surely know who gave them to
you, Mr.—er—Thompson.”
“I dunno,” said Joe once more. “S’help me,
ma’am, I don’t.”
“This is very extraordinary,” said Miss Forsyth.
She was a thin, aristocratic-looking lady of about
fifty, with greying hair and a wax-like face strangely
free from wrinkles. She was elegantly garbed in a
black silk dress.
“Do you know what it is for, Mr. Thompson?”
“I expected you to know that.”
“I may have an idea,” said Miss Forsyth, with a
tightening motion of her lips, “but I want you to
tell me that and a great deal more.”
“S’help me, Miss, I’m in the dark,” said Joe.
“It came into my hands in a funny way, me not
knowin’ who it belonged to.”
“Then how did you know you were to bring it to
me, Mr. Thompson?”
Joe put up his hand to scratch the back of his head,
thought better of it, and directed the hand to his
trousers pocket, wherefrom he produced a soiled
scrap of paper. This he unfolded and handed to Miss
Forsyth.
Pushed under me door one mornin’ early ” he
said.
Miss Forsyth read the faded charcoal characters,
and then looked at Joe intently. She seemed to be
slimming him up. Joe caught her eye, blushed, and
looked away.


“What was in the swag that had to be sold?” she
asked.
“Gold, miss—er —ma’am,” said Joe, nervously,
feeling that Miss Forsyth’s cold blue eye was on him
still.
“And how did it fall into your hands, Mr. Thomp-
son?”
“Bloke left it under me waggon one night when I
was camped at Holland’s Tank with a load of sandal-
wood.”
“Then you must know to whom it belonged.”
“I didn’t know the bloke, miss, an’ I don’t know
him now.”
“Why did he leave his swag with you, then?”
Joe wiped the perspiration from his forehead, and
blew his nose violently. “You see, miss, I found him
dead next momin’.”
“Oh!” gasped Miss Forsyth.
“So I put his things up on me waggon an’ took ’em
home, an’ the next thing is I get this note.”
“Oh!” said Miss Forsyth again.
“So you see I don’t know nothin’, miss.”
“I see, Mr. Thompson.” And then there was a
pause during which Joe fiddled uncomfortably with
his hat and wished he was home.
“Then you have no idea who left the note?”
Joe shook his head.
“Yet you felt called upon to carry out the writer’s
wishes ? ’ ’
“Well, you see, miss, it looked as if the bloke
couldn’t do it himself, an’ I wasn’t doin’ anythin’
much just then —the crop not bein’ ready to cut —
so I thought I’d come along an’ see what was what.”
“Would you mind waiting a minute,” said Miss


Forsyth. ‘‘l should like to show you something.”
She rustled out of the room and presently returned
carrying an envelope in her hand.
“I received this some days ago,” she said. “Read
it.”
The letter, which was in the same crude hand as
the note received by Joe, read as follows:
Dear Miss,
A Woke will bring you money to'pay for tbe girl’s
schoolin’. It will be enuf an’ leave some over for when she
gets marrid. I am sorry you was kept waiting, but the cove
who useter.send it snuffed, and the bottom fell out of the
claim and the syndiklt had to shift. You know the girl I mean
—Harriet Taylor—and oblige.
J.E.
Joe handed the letter back and looked at Miss
Forsyth. “It’s a mystery all right,” he said.
“Mr. Thompson,” said Miss Forsyth, “I am sure
you are trustworthy, and I want you to tell me every-
thing you know of this affair right from the begin-
ning. You will be helping me considerably in a most
difficult task if you do.”
Miss Forsyth had a very pleasant way with her.
His uneasiness had been fast disappearing, and at
this last compliment it vanished altogether. For the
first time Joe allowed all his weight to rest on the
chair. He stopped fiddling with his hat, cocked one
leg over the other, and told Miss Forsyth his story,
omitting no detail. Miss Forsyth frowned at the
gruesome parts, and smiled sometimes at the in-
consequent details.
Thank you, Mr. Thompson,” she said when he
had finished. “Now lam going to be equally frank
with you. We may be able to help each other. I
have among my pupils a girl named Harriet Taylor.
She came to me at the age of eight and has been here
ten years. She was recommended by a Mr. Farrar,
a solicitor of Kalgoorlie, who always paid her fees.


He intimated that her parents were dead, and that
her father had been a doctor. The child had been
brought np by her father's sister who died. As
there was nobody else to take charge of Harriet,
she was sent here. I was glad to have her, and have
grown very fond of her. I only saw Mr. Farrar once.
He then told me that he was only acting as agent in
the matter, and that those who were providing for
little Harriet preferred to remain unknown. At in-
tervals I used to receive letters in the same writing
as those which you and I had recently, enclosing a
sum of money with directions to spend it on Harriet.
The letters were always brief and unsigned. I
bought her clothes with some of the money, and the
rest I put in the bank for her. She has now quite a
large sum to her credit. About two years ago the
remittances from Mr. Farrar ceased. I, of course,
did not allow this to make any difference. Harriet
had grown up with me apd has endeared herself to
me very much. She will always have a home here,
but for her sake I would like to have all this mystery
cleared up.”
Joe ventured the opinion that it was all very
“rum.”
“Of course, I cannot take this money,” said Miss
Forsyth.
Joe scratched his head and said he thought per-
haps she couldn’t.
“There has been a murder committed over it, Mr.
Thompson. ’ ’
“I reckon,” said Joe, “the money was stole by the
cove that was done in.”
“Perhaps it was. The other man must certainly
have known about it.”


“An went chasin’ after the thief, miss.
“What docs the detective think about it, Mr.
Thompson ?”
“Well,” said Joe, scratching his head once more,
“he don’t know nothin' about it.”
“You didn’t tell him?”.asked Miss Forsyth, look-
ing shocked.
“Well, you see, miss, he didn’t arst me, an’ I was
a bit jumbled at the time, lie arst so many questions
an’ wouldn't let me pitch the tale on me own. An'
then I’d got the note, an’ the bloke said it wasn’t
crook, an’ I thought it was a little private matter
connected with his people that he might want kept
dark. A murder ain’t a nice thing in a family.”
“I see,” said Miss Forsyth. “Sentimental reasons,
Mr. Thompson.”
“ Well,” said Joe, “if the money was his, it wasn’t
much for me to come up here an ’ see how the laud
lay. It was better than the police doin’ it, an’ with
me they’d never have known about the murderin’.”
“Your sentiments do you credit, Mr. Thompson,”
said Miss Forsyth, smiling. “Personally I am very
glad you came, but I think if I were you I would
keep nothing back from the police. I could not take
the money, and the girl will not suffer in any way.”
“I’ll ted ’em now,” said Joe. “I’ll get the gold
back from the bloke that changed it, an’ shove it in
the swag agen, an’ let them find it for themselves.”
“You are a farmer, Mr. Thompson?”
“I got a bit o’ land," said Joe modestly.
"From Katauning ( 1 think Mary said?”
“That’s it, miss.”
Then you 11 know Mr, Barclay. His daughter is
one of my boarders.”


“Oh. yes. I know Sam Barclay, miss A white man
he is.’’
“Perhaps you would like to see Nellie for a few
minutes. I am sure she would be glad to see anyone
from her part of the world.
Joe looked nervous. “P’raps, miss, it would be
better if nobody knew I had been here,” he said un-
comfortably.
“Perhaps you are right, Mr. Thompson."
Joe got up, and Miss Forsyth walked with him to
the front door.
“Good-bye, Mr. Thompson,” she said, giving him
a wax-like hand. “If you ever hear anything that
will clear up the mystery I hope you will let me
know.”
Joe crushed the wax fingers of the lady principal,
muttered something incoherent, raised his hat, and
went quickly down the front steps and along the
gravelled drive. He had nearly reached the front
gate when he heard flying footsteps racing after him.
He turned quickly and nearly received in his arms
a young lady of prepossessing appearance, who pulled
up in front of him, gasping from the sudden exertion.
Her cheeks had a fine flush on them, but her eyes
looked as if she had been crying.
“Oh!” she gasped, “she said she would let me see
you when you came. ’ ’ ,
“Who did?” asked the bewildered Joe.
“Foreie,” gasped the girl. “I made her promise,
and then she forgot. You did come about me, didn’t
you ? ’ ’
“Well,” said Joe, “I dunno.”
“I’m Harrie Taylor. It was me, wasn’t it?”
“Yes,” admitted Joe, “it was you alright.”


‘‘ She’s a mean old thing, and I ’ll tell her so. Now,
I want you to tell me lots of things.”
Somehow Joe felt quite at home with this young-
lady. There was no frill about her. Her speech was
as natural and spontaneous as the piping of a bird.
“How did you know I was cornin’ about you?” he
asked.
The girl looked long into the brown eyes as if
searching for something. Joe, quite unembarrassed,
returned the gaze. He saw a pair of deep violet eyes
fringed with generous curling lashes, a little,
straight, delicately-cut nose, a ripe humorous mouth,
and a well-defined chin. He noticed, too, that she
was straight and athletic-looking, and tall for her
age. Her hair hung in two long, thick plaits,- and
waved charmingly over a broad white forehead.
Somehow, Joe had to smile. He did so, not because
there was anything to laugh at, but for the reason
that the picture before him was wholly pleasing.
The corners of the girl’s mouth twitched, drooped,
and broke into a smile which disclosed a bed of
pearls. She put out her hand with the confidence
of one who has found a protector, and Joe grasped
it warmly.
“You see,” said the girl, “Forcie told me some
days ago that someone was coming to see her about
me —someone who would tell me about my own
people—and she said if I was very good she would
call me in when they arrived. When Mary told us
a strange man had come to call on Forcie, I knew it
must be about me, so I slipped out when Miss Pear-
son wasn’t looking, and waited, expecting to be
called. Then I heard Forcie letting you out, so I
slipped out the back way and ran after you.”


“Well,” said Joe, “yon caught me all right.”
“Now I want you to tell me everything. There’s
such a lot to know. Who are you, and where do you
come from, and what relation are you to me, and
were you the man who used to send me money? I’m
dying to know.”
Joe looked bewildered, and the girl laughed.
“Such a lot of questions all at once,” she said. “Now
I’ll ask them separately. First of all, name, please?”
Her mood was infectious, and Joe grinned. “Joe
Thompson, miss,” he said.
“Oh, I love Joe for a name; but you mustn’t call
me miss. My name is Harrie. Now, where do you
come from?”
“Katanning, miss—l mean Katanning.”
“You mean Katanning, Harrie.”
“Well, yes, I s’pose I did mean that,” said Joe,
who was rather appalled at calling a young lady by
her Christian name.
“How old are you, Joe?”
Joe grinned with delight at the intimacy of the
question. “Must be about thirty,” he confessed.
“Gettin’ on, ain’t I, miss—l—er—oh!”
Joe fairly gaped, and the girl laughed unreser-
vedly. “You’ve got to say it this time,” she said.
“Now, say it.”
“Say what?” asked Joe, temporising.
“My name, silly.”
“Harriet Taylor, ain’t it?”
“So it is, but you know that’s not what I mean.
And don’t say ‘ain’t,’ Joe, it’s vulgar, and I’m sure
you’re not vulgar.”
“I ain’t—l mean I amn’t much on manners, miss,”


said Joe, who suddenly felt desperately hurt. “I’m
only a workin’ bloke with a bit o’ land.’’
Harrie saw the hurt she had inflicted and almost
cried with vexation. “Oh, I’m so sorry,” she said. “I
'
didn’t really mean to hurt you. You won’t hate me
for it, will you?”
“I couldn’t hate you,” said Joe, “but I think
you’re makin’ a mistake. I’m no relation to you, an’
I only heard of you just now from Miss Forsyth. I
can’t tell you much because I know nothin’ meself. ’
“But,” said the girl, bewildered, “you said you
came about me.”
“Yes, but I didn’t know I was cornin’ about you
until I got here. A bloke gave me somethin’ to give
to Miss Forsyth. It was for you: but I didn’t know
that until she told me. I dunno who the bloke was,
either.”
The girl’s eyes filled. “Then you can’t tell me
anything?” she said.
Joe shook his head. “I’m all in the dark meself.”
“Did it come from the man who used to send
things?”
“I s’pose it did.”
“Then you must have seen him.”
“No, miss. He just left a note askin’ me to bring
the stuff along.”
“Oh! and I thought 1 was going to know every-
thing.”
Her disappointment moved Joe a great deal. The
bright, sunny nature had been completely damped.
He felt as if it was all his own fault. “I’m awful
sony, miss,” he said.
“There you are again!” she said between smiles
and tears.


“You're not,” she cried. “I’m terribly disap-
pointed. but it’s not your fault.”
“It’s a mystery,” said Joe. “That’s what it is.”
“But you are something to do with me,” she said,
persuading herself, “or you wouldn’t be here, and
anyway, I’m going to- adopt you. I’ve only got
Forcie, and she’s a woman. "Will you let me adopt
you?”
“It ain’t much in my line,” said Joe, dubiously.
“There, now, you’re getting horrid!” she said,
pouting.
“I’m just a workin’ bloke,” muttered Joe.
“Is that anything to be ashamed of?”
“Dunno,” said Joe. “I ain’t much on manners
and things.”
‘‘ I don’t care if you do say ‘ ain't. ’ There’s some-
thing I like about you very much. Now will you let
me adopt you?”
“Or’right,” said Joe. “What am Ito be?”
“I think you’d better be my guardian,” she said.
“You're old enough, and you aren’t any relation,
and you came here about me. Oh, I wish I knew a lot
of things.”
“What about your father?”
“I don’t remember him. Aunt Lucy is the only
one I remember. She had a little shop in Kalgoorlie.
I don ’t remember much about her either. I was only
eight when they brought me here. If 1 haven’t got
a father or an uncle, I should have a guardian or
some man to take an interest in me. All the other
girls have. It’s sickening only having a woman.
Forcie s very kind and I love her, but it nearly makes
me cry when the other girls speak of their fathers


and brothers and uncles. I think you’d better be my
cousin, and then I could call you Joe.”
Joe’s big heart was touched. ‘‘That’ll do fine,” he
said. “Come to think of it I ain’t —I mean I haven’t
any relations meself. It’ll suit me down to the
ground. ’ ’
“And you’ll send me nice things, All
the girls have things sent to them by their fathers
and brothers.”
Sunshine had come back to her heart. Some of the
rays enveloped Joe and made him feel glad. “You
bet,” he said. “What would you like?”
“Oh, heaps of things. Some nice books, and some
chocolates sometimes, and anything you think I’d
like. It ’ll be lovely to be able to show them to the
other girls, and I’ll tell them beautiful stories about
my great, big, kind cousin.”
“That’ll be all right,” said Joe. “I’ll fix it all
right.”
“And then some holidays you can ask me to stay
at your place.”
“Well, you see, it ain’t much of a place,” said Joe.
“There’s only two rooms for me an’ Jimmy.”
“Who’s Jimmy?” I
“Chap that works for me.”
“A friend, too?”
“Yes, a real good mate. A decent, clean-livin’
bloke.”
“I'm sure I'd love Jimmy. WTien do you think 1
could come, Joe?”
3
“Dunno. You see we’re bachelors, Jimmy and me
—do the cookin’ an’ washin’ ourselves.”
“I could keep house for you, couldn’t I?”


Miss Forsyth regarded them a little severely.


“Perhaps you could,” said Joe, who had a hun-
dred objections to this suggestion, but hated to damp
her joy.
“Wouldn’t it be lovely?” she said, happily.
“Wouldn’t what be lovely?” asked a feminine
voice behind them.
Both turned suddenly at the sound, and found
Miss Forsyth regarding them a little severely, but
with a suspicion of humorous tolerance lurking about
her thin lips.
>-
«£
cc
w
Hj
tz
bi
• -
« .
Lj
cr
Dl
P
—j
o
E
E
D
U


Chapter VI
THE appearance of Miss Forsyth put Joe in a panic.
The girl went crimson, but turned appealingly to the
lady principal, and said;
“Oh, Forcie, you promised I should see him, and
then you—let him go! I had to run after him, I was
so disappointed.”
‘ ‘ I think the understanding was that you should see
anybody who was a relation or connected with you
in some way. Mr. Thompson is neither one nor the
other,” said Miss Forsyth, with some slight reprqpf
in her tones. “I think you could have trusted me,
Harriet. ’ ’
“But, Forcie, I did so want to see him, and you
didn’t tell me.”
“Well, well, I expect there’s no harm done,” said
Miss Forsyth, relenting somewhat. “I hope this
rather bold young lady has not confused you with
too many questions, Mr. Thompson?”
“Not a bit, miss,” said Joe.
“We got on beautifully, didn’t we?” said Harrie.
“Tip-top,” said Joe.
“And I’ve adopted him, Forcie. I can have him
for a cousin, can’t I?”
Miss Forsyth’s eyebrows went up a trifle. “You’ve
certainly lost no time,” she said, a little severely.
“I can, can’t I, Forcie? All the other girls have
fathers and uncles and cousins, and I have none.
They needn’t know he isn’t really a cousin.”


“I didn’t think you would be so forward,” said
Miss Forsyth, reprovingly. “I’m a little shocked,
Harriet.”
“Oh, but, Porcie, I didn’t mean any harm. We
get on so well together, don’t we, Joe?”
“We do that,” said Joe, with some feeling.
Miss Forsyth seemed amazed. “Good gracious!”
she exclaimed. “Here you are calling him by his
Christian name already! Harriet, I’m ashamed of
you for being so bold!”
“But, Forcie, you see, I thought at first he was a
relation, and it seemed quite natural. And now he’s
going to be a relation, anyway. You’ve just got to
say yes. ’ ’
The tightly compressed lips of the lady principal
quivered for an instant. She looked first at the plead-
ing girl, and then at Joe. She saw a big, kindly man,
a little rough-looking, but unmistakably decent. His
quiet courtesy, although couched in language a little
strange to her, had impressed her considerably. Miss
Forsyth flattered herself that she knew a gentleman
when she saw one. It was the gentleman in Joe that
hit most people, and Miss Forsyth had not failed
to observe it, but she could hardly reconcile him with
his speech, which was undoubtedly a little uncouth.
She wavered. The girl noticed the signs of relent-
ing and followed up her advantage. “He’s going to
send me things sometimes, and write letters to me,
and take me to the theatre when he’s in town,” she
said.
Miss Forsyth relented. Her heart, unfilled by
husband or child, was very tender to this lonely girl,
and she could refuse her nothing. “Well,” she said,
a little grimly, “have it your own way, my dear. I


wouldn’t hear of such a thing with any of the other
girls, but I look on you as my own. I can under-
stand your feelings, but I’m sure Mr. Thompson won’t
want to be bothered with all this fantastic nonsense.’’
“Oh, but he will,” cried Harrie, hugging Miss
Forsyth enthusiastically. “You’re an old dear, Forcie,
and I love you a tremendous lot. ’ ’
“There, there!” said Miss Forsyth gently, disen-
gaging herself. “You mustn't do these things in
public.”
“I don’t care where I do them, Forcie, dear. And
now, Joe wants to take me to the theatre to-night,
and I know you won’t refuse him.”
“Suppose you run back to Miss Pearson, and let
me have a little talk to Mr. Thompson,” said Miss
Forsyth. “You’ll get into trouble, you know, for
running away from school.”
Harrie made a little face. “I want to talk to Joe,
too,” she said.
“You can see him later. Now off with you.”
Harrie hesitated, and, then seeing Miss Forsyth was
adamant, turned away with a wave of her hand to
Joe, and walked up the drive.
“Don’t forget you promised to take me to the
theatre,” she called out as she disappeared round the
curve, with a wave of her hand.
“Now, Mr. Thompson,” said Miss Forsyth, grimly.
Joe felt like a small boy who has been caught
stealing apples. He was brave when Harrie was there,
but in her absence his reason for a bold front was
gone. He pulled at the flap of his coat absently and
felt generally bewildered.
“What have you to say for yourself?” asked Miss
Forsyth, in her severest manner.


Joe gulped and prayed for an earthquake.
“Dunno,” he muttered.
“I’m ashamed of you, Mr. Thompson, trying to
delude an innocent girl like that.”
“Oh. I say, miss,” he expostulated.
“I didn't think it of you, Mr. Thompson,” went
on his tormentor.
Joe’s conscience pricked him. Although he hadn’t
done anything wrong, he felt as if he had committed
an unpardonable sin, and could say nothing in his
own defence.
“I’m awaiting your explanation.” said Miss
Forsyth, grimly. Inwardly she was smiling hugely
at the discomfiture of this big simpleton, but she had
her reasons for testing him in the tire of her assumed
wrath.
“Well, you see ” he began, but broke off,
shaking his head.
“Yes,” said Miss Forsyth, encouragingly.
“I ain't no good at explainin’,” he muttered. “It
wasn’t her fault, anyway. I’m sorry I caused all
the trouble, miss, but I’ll be catching the next train
for home. You won tbe bothered with me any more.”
Joe completely recognised Miss Forsyth’s prior claim
on Harrie, and considered this the best way to settle
the whole trouble once and for all. He raised his hat
and turned to go.
“Oh, Mr. Thompson," called Miss Forsyth, in very
different tones to those she had been using. “Did
you ever have morning tea with a lady!” she asked,
as Joe turned to receive what he thought would be
further castigation for his misdemeanors.
“Xo, he replied, in complete bewilderment at her
change of manner.


“Then I think you ought to try it. It is a bad
habit of mine to drink tea in the morning, and it
should be ready now. Come along back to the house,
and pull yourself together. You’re a great coward
for all your size, and if I were Harriet, I should adopt
someone much braver.” Hiss Forsyth spoke a little
grimly, but there was no mistaking her kindly
intention.
Joe felt easy once more. He recognised that the
lady principal had only been tormenting him. He
smiled and said: “My word! You laid the whip on
me all right.”
“Don’t you think you deserved it, Mr. Thompson 1
“S’pose I did,” he confessed. “I’m not a lady’s
man, Miss Forsyth> Don’t seem to get the hang of
them, somehow.”
“You’re none the worse for that,’ said Miss
Forsyth.
“Dunno, miss. It helps a chap along.”
“You’re better as you are, Mr. Thompson. I
couldn’t think of allowing you to assume relation-
ship with Harrie if you were a lady’s man.”
They had been walking towards the house all the
time. Miss Forsyth led the way indoors, but this
time Joe was conducted to another and much cosier
room. This was evidently Miss Forsyth’s sitting-
room. It contained some deep armchairs, and there
were several original water-colour paintings of un-
doubted talent hanging about the walls. Joe was
accommodated with a comfortable armchair, and the
lady principal pressed a bell button. On the appear-
ance of the aristocratic Mary, she ordered tea.
“I suppose you bushraen drink a lot of tea,’ she
said, sociably.


“Any amount,” said Joe, who seemed now to have
got over his nervousness, and was able to talk more
like a rational being than a clod. He fingered the
dainty teacup awkwardly and had it replenished three
times.
“Now, Mr. Thompson, you mustn’t mind if I ask
you to tell me something about yourself.”
“Not a bit, miss,” he replied, and he immediately
began a history of himself. Miss Forsyth helped him
along by asking many searching questions.
When he had finished his tale, she said: “Now, Mr.
Thompson, you have been very frank, and I will be
the same with you. Of course, this craze of Harriet’s
is very unusual, and may be forgotten very quickly.
I can quite understand how a lonely girl feels in
the matter of relations, especially the lack of those
of the male kind. She thought to-day she was going
to see someone belonging to her, and may have been
carried away by the idea. I take it this romantic
suggestion came from her.”
“Well—yes,” admitted Joe.
“Without any regard for what you might think
in the matter.”
“I was very sorry she was disappointed, miss,” said
Joe.
And were kind enough to fall in with her wishes. ’ ’
“I’ve got no relations meself.”
“Then, of course, you could sympathise with her.
However, what I want to say is this. Yon don’t seem
to have been consulted at all, and may have no desire
to bother yourself with a romantic school girl?”
Joe blushed. His own romantic heart had been
completely captivated by the girl. He thought her


the most beautiful and enchanting creature he had
ever seen.
“Well, miss.” he stammered, “I don't want to butt
in where I’m not wanted.”
Miss Forsyth nodded approvingly.
“But this thing’s a regular mix up. We’re all in
it. It’s a mystery, that’s what it is, and it sort of
Miss Forsyth nodded again. “Brings us together,”
she suggested.
“Yes,” said Joe. “And I might be able to help
to put things right.”
“So you might, Mr. Thompson.”
“And I’d like to give her pleasure, miss.”
“H’m,” said Miss Forsyth, regarding the em-
barrassed Joe with some suspicion. “Are you
married. Mr. Thompson?”
“Lord, no!” gasped Joe.
“This fad of Harriet’s would, of course, have to
be subject to restrictions,” said Miss Forsyth, eyeing
him keenly.
“Oh, of course, miss.”
“You mustn’t fall in love with her, Mr. Thompson.”
Joe’s heart gave a jump, and he went cold all over.
“Of course not, miss. I know me station.”
“It’s not that altogether,” said Miss Forsyth;
“there are other things to be considered.”
“I won’t be cornin’ to town agen, miss—that is.
not for a long time. ’ ’
Miss Forsyth smiled approval. “Of course, if you
come again we shall be delighted to see you, Mr.
Thompson.”
“Thank you, miss.
“But your dealings with Harriet would be chiefly
in the nature of correspondence.”


“That’s it, miss, and I’m not much on writin’.”
“You’re hardly worth having for a relation at all,
Mr. Thompson,” she said, smiling.
“No use at all, miss.”
“Well, under the circumstances, if you are agree-
able and Harriet wishes it, I have no objection to a
relationship. It is very kind of you, Mr. Thompson,
to bother about a school girl; but you quite under-
stand that it must be a relationship of a distant
character.” There was a world of meaning in Miss
Forsyth’s words, which Joe understood.
%r - y
“Yes, miss.”
“Harriet said something about your taking her to
the theatre.”
Joe nodded.
“I think I am safe in assuming that that suggestion
came from her also.”
Joe went red. but said nothing.
“I should have no objection, Mr. Thompson, pro-
vided she was properly chaperoned.”
“I’d be glad if you’d come along too, miss,” said
Joe.
It was Miss Forsyth’s turn to blush. “Oh. I didn’t
mean ” she began.
“I'd like her to enjoy herself, miss. It would be
a pleasure to me to take you both. I’m not a lady’s
man, but you’re different to most ladies.”
"‘ 1 hank you, Mr. Thompson. It would be a great
pleasure to me if you insist on it.”
"I do insist,” said Joe, firmly. He was absolutely
amazed at the way he said this and the effect he
produced. “I’m goin’ back to-morrow, and there
won’t be another chance.”
Then we 11 come, with pleasure. And now, per-


haps, Harriet would like to see you before you go.”
Miss Forsyth went out of the room and presently re-
appeared with Harrie.
“Mr. Thomposn is taking us to the theatre to-night,”
said Miss Forsyth, “so you’ll see him again before
he leaves.”
“But he’s not going away so soon as that,” said
Harrie.
“Train goes in the early mornin’,” said Joe, “and
I've got me hay cuttin’ to do.”
“But you’ll come back again afterwards?”
Joe shook his head. “There's a lot of work to do
on the place, and me and the city don’t seem to hit
it. This time next year I might be up, but not
before.”
“Then you’ll have to write to me,” said the girl.
“I’ll do that,” said Joe.
“And tell me all about your life, and what you do,
and the people you meet and mix with. And you
must put up a nice house so that Forcie and I can
come to stay with you.”
“I'll be buildin’ a house some day,” said Joe, “but
there’s lots of other things to do first.”
“You’d better call for us about half-past-seven,”
said Miss Forsyth.
“With a cab,” suggested Joe, nervously. He
hadn't the faintest notion of what was expected
of him, seeing that he had never taken a lady to
the theatre before.
“A cab would be lovely,” said Harrie: “and you’d
better reserve three seats.”
“How do you do that?” he asked.
Mss Forsyth explained the process to him, after
which Joe got up and said he would go.


“Good-bye, for the present,” said the lady prin-
cipal, offering her hand. “It’s been a pleasure to
meet you, Mr. Thompson. Harrie will see you to the
gate, ITn sure.”
The girl flashed a grateful look at Miss Forsyth, and
guided Joe out of the establishment.
“Joe,” said the girl as they stepped on to the
gravel drive. “I think you’re a perfect dear.”
Joe smiled and blushed. He thought being adopted
by a nice girl the finest thing he had ever experienced.
He felt he would do anything that this girl asked
him.
“I wish you weren’t going so soon, Joe.”
“Can’t be helped,” said Joe.
“Then I wish it could. Can’t you let the old hay
cut itself?”
Joe chuckled at the feminine point of view. “I’d
have no feed for the horses then.”
‘ ‘ But they eat grass, don’t they ?’ ’
“Yes, but they can’t work on'it.”
“Then buy some hay for them.”
“Can’t afford to do that, miss.”
“Joe,” said Harrie, severely, “if you ever call me
miss again, I’ll throw you over and get another
cousin. ’ ’
“It just comes out,” said Joe.
“Then it mustn’t come out. My name is Harrie.”
“All right—Harrie,” said Joe.
“That’s better. You know, Joe, I liked you so
much when I first saw you. I wonder why that
was?”
“I wonder,” said Joe.
“You looked so nice and solid and—and—safe.”
“You thought I was a relation, I suppose.”


“Yes, I did, but it wasn’t that made me like you.
It’s something about yourself. It must be there or
Forcie would never have taken to you. Forcie’s ter-
ribly proper sometimes, and I don’t think she likes
men. What did you do to win her over?”
“Dunno,” said Joe. “She put the whip on me
after you went, and then turned round and was very
nice.”
“You don’t know how I’ve longed for someone
belonging to me,” said the girl. “It’s terrible be-
longing to nobody.”
“Must be,” assented Joe.
“But, now I’ll be able to write to you and tell you
lots of thing-s I can’t tell Forcie. We really are
related in a way, Joe. You’ve come from somebody
who must belong to me, and that seems to make it
just right.” i
“We’ll be good pals, Harrie.” Joe had quite got
over his feeling of strangeness. Nobody having any-
thing to do with this sunny-natured girl could be
awkward with her for long.
“I like the way you put it,” said Harrie. “We’ll
be splendid pals.”
“I’m not much on letter-writin” said Joe
‘ ‘ Then you must get over that. I’m sure you could
write beautiful letters if you tried.”
“Never had anyone to write to, Harrie.”
“Well, you’ve got someone now. Write as soon as
you get back and tell me everything you can think
of. What will your address be?”
“Joe Thompson, Katanning, will find me.”
“That’s easy to remember. My address is ”


“Ritchley, Sampson Street, Perth,” put in Joe
“You won’t forget it, Joe?”
“Never forget that, Harrie.”
“That sounded nearly like a compliment, Joe. I
do hope you’re going to like me.”
“No fear of me not likin’ you,” said Joe, feeling
awkward again.
“Isn’t it funny,” pursued the girl. “This morn-
ing I had never seen you, and now we’re quite old
friends. I’m so glad you came, Joe.”
“So am I.”
‘ ‘ And you won’t go finding other cousins, will you ?
I won’t have you belonging to anyone else. ’ ’
“I don’t want anyone else, Harrie.”
“You’re a dear, Joe. Stand off there and let me
have a good look at you.”
They were standing at the Ritchley gate. Joe
stepped back a pace or two, and the girl looked at
him searchingly. “You’re a very good-looking man,
Joe,” she said, after a little pause. “ You’re big and
strong, and you’ve got the kindest eyes in the world.
I think you ought to have been a soldier. You’d look
splendid in uniform. I’m glad I’ve got a handsome
cousin. Do you think I am nice-looking, too?”
The question was asked in all innocence. Harrie
was evidently quite unconscious of her beauty. She
could not have been so unspoiled otherwise.
“I think ” said Joe.
“Well?”
“I think you’re lovely,” he blurted out.
“Oh, Joe, do you really mean that?”
“Reckon I do,” said Joe.
“I’d love to be beautiful, and I’m so glad you
think I am; but you haven’t seen Muriel Palmer or


Nettie Fi’eeman. They’re far better-looking than I
am.”
“They couldn’t be,” said Joe. “There’s nobody
could be prettier than you.”
It was pleasant to stand there and listen to the
chatter of this charming girl. Both lost all sense of
time until the clanging of a gong brought them back
to earth.
“There's dinner!” exclaimed Harrie. “I must fly.
You won’t forget to-night, Joe.”
“No fear,” said Joe.
“Are you going to wear evening dress?”
“No,” said Joe, who felt the uncomfortable feeling
coming over him again.
“It doesn’t matter a bit if you left your dress
clothes behind.”
“All right,” said Joe, feeling immensely relieved.
He had never had a dress suit in his life.
“1 like Bailey’s chocolates the best, Joe.”
“All right, Harrie. ”
‘ ‘ Good-bye, Joe, ” lingeringly.
“Good-bye, Harrie.”
He watched her speeding up the drive.


Chapter VII.
JOE walked away from Ritehley feeling like the
hero of u modern romance. The events the
morning had gone to his head like strong liquor,
and he seemed to tread on air. Sober thought was
out of the question. For a few moments he had
been dwelling in regions which previously he had
only visited in dreams and through the medium ot
books. The reality was far more wonderful than
the idea. In one short morning he had acquired as
a relative the loveliest girl ever born. Not only
was she lovely, but she actually liked him Joe
Thompson, the rough and ready farmer who had no
social status, and who worked with his hands. It
all seemed like a fairy tale. He kept wondering
if it could really be true, and then chuckled to him-
self at the thought that it had happened. Miss
Forsyth had no place in his thoughts. They
were all of that lovely creature who had claimed
him as her own. He yielded up to her all the
romance in his big soft heart. He gave her an
adoration that few men are capable of. He would
have died for her willingly. All that he had should
be hers.- She had captivated him body and soul.
and he was a willing prisoner. Never would he
want to be free again. He worshipped her as never
man worshipped before.


In his infatuation Joe forgot his lunch. He
wandered about without regard for direction, until
he suddenly discovered at about four o’clock that
he was hungry. Then he remembered he had to
reserve seats at the theatre and buy Miss Bradley’s
books. Having satisfied the inner man, he went
about his commissions. First he arranged about the
seats and then wandered into a book shop. He
executed the school-mistress’s instructions and
bought her two daintily bound volumes of Tennyson
and Keats. From the book shop ihe went to a
tobacconist’s, where he bought Jimmy a pipe. He
also purchased a big box of chocolates of the right
brand, and then returned to the Bush Shanty for
dinner.
Going out to Ritchley in the cab Joe experienced
some tremors. He had never ridden in a cab before,
nor had he ever escorted two ladies to a theatre. Joe
was extremely sensitive to ridicule, a trait which
made him often appear more awkward than he really
was. But his innate gentility never allowed him to
err greatly.
Miss Forsyth appeared in a black silk evening
frock and a gauzy, tinselly scarf about her shoulders.
Harne had a pale blue opera cloak edged with
white fur, and a simple blue ribbon in her hair
which hung freely in delicious ripples. There was
a fine flush on her cheeks. Joe almost gaped at the
sight of her. Never had he seen anything or anyone
half as beautiful.
'My word!” was all he said, but the expression
conveyed volumes.
Although Joe had never been taught a single
social obligation in his life, he assisted the two ladies


into the cab as if he had been doing it all his life.
There was no flourish about his action and no awk-
wardness. He saw there was a job that wanted
doing and he did it. In the same way he helped
them out again when they arrived at the theatre.
His assistance was necessary to Miss Forsyth, for
the steps of the cab were high. Harrie could have
sprung from the cab with ease, but she accepted
Joe’s help because she liked the assistance of his
steady, strong arm, and the sense of possession and
protection that it conveyed.
They had the best seats obtainable. Miss Forsyth
murmured approval as she sat down. She had been
haunted by a fear that something would be wrong,
but she had to confess afterwards that there was
not one aspect of the whole evening that was not
right. As for Harrie she accepted everything with-
out cpiestion, and would have been content to sit
anywhere.
“I really never enjoyed myself so much before,’
said Miss Forsyth, as Joe helped her out of the cab
on their return to Hitchley.
“I loved the music and the dancing and every-
thing,” said Harrie. “I could go every night for
weeks.”
“Yes,” said Joe, “it was tip-top.”
Miss Forsyth insisted that Joe should come inside
and have some supper, so he sent the cab away,
saying he would walk home. They went into Miss
Forsyth’s sitting-room, and the lady principal with
her own hands lit a small spirit stove and boiled a
kettle. Harrie cut some cake and sandwiches, and
Joe was allowed to smoke his pipe, a very rare
concession for Miss Forsyth to make. She, however,


had caught some of the holiday spirit of Harrie, and
forgot for the moment she was well within the
boundaries of middle age. What a blessing are
these young people who can make us forget we
are growing old.
And, after the supper, both escorted Joe to the
front door, and felt regretful that they had to
part with him for so long.
“I don't know what it is about you, Mr.
Thompson,” said Miss Forsyth, “but you’ve made
me break nearly every rule of this establishment.
If someone had told me this morning that I would
be allowing a girl of mine to adopt a strange man
as a relation, and that I and that girl would be
going to the theatre with him in the evening, and
having supper in this room afterwards, I would
have said that person was mad. Yet here we are,
and the whole thing has happened. Eeally it is
most extraordinary.”
<< £ . The v:hole thin g’ s extraordinary,” said Joe.
It s like those things that happened in a book of
mine called the ‘Arabian Nights.’ I’m only a plain
workin man, but to-day I've been more like a
prince.”
“There’s something more than a plain working
man in you, Mr. Thompson,” said Miss Forsyth.
“You can’t cheat me like that. Now we must say
good-bye. It’s dreadfully late.”
Joe shook hands with the lady principal. “Any-
thin’ I can do ever, Miss Forsyth,” he said, “I’ll
be glad to do. You ve given me somethin’ to-day
I won’t forget it in a hurry.”
“Good-bye, Joe,” said Harrie. “Don’t forget
to write as soon as you get home. ” ■ .....
“I won’t forget,” said Joe.


“And thank you so much for this lovely day.”
“We’ll have a better one when I come back.”
“Good-bye, Joe. The chocolates were beautiful.”
He grasped both their hands and went down the
steps. They watched him swinging down the drive
and then Miss Forsyth closed the door gently.
“Oh, Forcie!” exclaimed the girl. “Isn’t he a
nice man?”
“He is,” replied Forcie, “the most genuine man
I have met for a long time. It is a pity his speech
is a little rough.”
“He’ll get out of that,” said the girl. “Didn’t
you notice he doesn’t say ‘ain’t’ any more?”
“I did notice that, Harrie.”
“I told him about it. He was terribly hurt, but
so nice over it.”
“You shouldn’t have done that, Harrie, dear.”
“But I had to, Forcie. I suppose they get into
ways like that in the bush without knowing it. You
remember Maggie Pemberton’s father when he was
here that time, talked about ‘that there’ book, but
he was a dear all the same.”
“I hope I haven’t done wrong in letting you
know him,” said the lady principal nervously.
“Of course, you haven’t, Forcie.”
“Anyway he knows Nellie Barclay’s father, so
he’s not altogether unknown to us.”
‘'l ll ask Nellie about about him to-morrow,” said
Harrie.
You had better not say he was here,” said Forcie.
I rather think he does not want anyone to know
he called here.”
“I won’t say a word about that, Forcie.”


“And now off to bed, Harrie, darling. I’m glad
you’ve had a happy day.”
The girl put her two soft young arms about the
neck of the older woman and kissed her again and
again. “You’re the dearest thing in the world,”
she said, “and I love you a terrible lot, Forcie.”
“You’ll love someone else better some day,” said
Forcie.
“Never, never, never! You’ve been everything
to me. Plenty of people would never have bothered
with a waif like me. Oh, dear! I do wish I knew
just who I am, and who my people were.”
“You’ll know some day, dearie.”
“Perhaps Joe will find out. Do you know I feel
he was sent to tell me that everything will be all
right and that he will bring my people to me some
day—that is, if I have any. Aunt Lucy never told
me anything.”
“It will all come right some day, Harrie. Now
you really must go to bed. It is after midnight.”


Chapter VIII.
WHEN Joe stepped from the train at Katanning he
was met by Sergeant Beazley, Detective Shannon and
Mr. Barclay. The detective gave him a curt nod,
Beazley was inclined to be effusive, but Barclay looked
troubled.
“Before you do anything else, Joe, you’d better
come across to the pub with us and hear the news,’’
said Beazley.
“Come up to my room,” said Barclay, as they
entered the hotel. “It will be private there.”
The four sat down in Barclay’s room. Somehow,
Joe felt uncomfortable. Barclay was so solemn, and
Beazley was so forced. He felt they must have made
some great discovery.
“We finished up out there,” said Beazley. “Un-
fortunately there must have been a very heavy shower
of rain soon after you left Holland’s Tank, because
the tracker could barely find an impression on the
track or at the spot where you found the body,
although there were signs of a struggle there. We
couldn’t find any tracks leading away from the spot,
except those made by your horse, and one or two
deep impressions made by your boots in the sand.
We followed Holland’s route for a long way, but the
rain seemed to have been general. There was no
difficulty in tracing the place where your waggon
left the track to pick up the load. Beyond that there


were some faint indications of a horseman having
travelled this way recently, but the tracker swore
that they belonged to one horse only. Shannon had
a theory that two men, one of them a pursuer, came
that way. I think you held the same view, Joe. They
could hardly have come from anywhere else, for there
is only the one track. The tracker took a great deal
of trouble, but failed to find a single indication of
another horse. This was rather baffling.”
‘ ‘ There must have been two, ’ ’ said Joe. “ A strange
horse, saddled and bridled, turned up next morning.”
“And broke away from behind your waggon when
you were bringing it in,” said the detective, sharply.
“That’s it,” said Joe.
“You didn’t notice its brand, I suppose,” said the
detective.
“Looked like AB on the near shoulder.’
“Do you know the brand?”
“No.”
“What was the horse like?”
“Well,” said Joe, rubbing the back of his head,
“it was a bit of a chestnut runt about fifteen hands,
straight shouldered, goose rumped, ewe necked and
slab-sided. It had an ugly head, but a good eye.
Quiet moke it was.”
“Would you know it again?”
“Beckon I would.”
Beaxley looked at the detective triumphantly. Bar-
clay drew a deep breath and smiled quietly.
“Look here, Mr. Thompson,” said the detective,
abrupty. “I think you know more about this affair
than you try to make out. There was only one horse-
man who travelled down the route. I’m satisfied
about that. You say you had two strange horses on


your hands nest morning, yet you can only produce
one. If there was another horseman mixed up in it,
he must have come from this side. Did you see or
hear of anybody being out in that direction?”
“No.”
“Would you be likely to see such a person on your
trip ? ’ ’
“Well, you see, Holland’s Tank’s the only per-
manent water out that way, although there’s other
soaks. If the bloke kept to the track I must have
seen him—that is, if he came from this side.”
“And you saw nobody?”
“No.”
“Did you hear sounds like a man running after
the shots were fired?”
“No.”
“If a man had run away then, do you think you
would have heard him?”
“I s’pose I would have. It was a quiet night.”
‘ ‘ Then how do you explain the fact that you heard
nothing?”
‘ ‘ Dunno, ’ ’ said Joe. “ The bloke mightn’t have run
just then.”
“Tell me this, then, Mr. Thompson,” said the
detective, shaking his forefinger at Joe. “Why did
you tell me nothing about the swag this man was
carrying ? ’ ’
“You didn’t ask me about it, for one thing,” said
Joe, “and you asked so many questions that I got a
bit fuddled an’ forgot to mention it. Afterwards,
when I remember it, I didn’t think it would help.”
“Oh, you didn’t think it would help!” said the
detective, scornfully, after the manner of a successful


criminal lawyer, whom he admired greatly and
copied.
“No, I didn’t,” said Joe.
“Then you will no doubt be surprised to hear that
it is the one thing that is going to help very materially.
Why did you go to Perth, Mr. Thompson ?” I
Joe kept his head, although he saw trouble in front
of him. “Private business,” he replied.
“What was the nature of it?”
Joe cleared his throat and looked at Barclay. The
latter appeared to be in a state of suspense. Beazley
was staring at him with his mouth open.
“It was private,” said Joe, stubbornly.
“Tell him, Joe,” said Barclay, desperately. “I
can assure you your confidence will be respected.”
Joe thought of Harrie and Miss Forsyth, and
determined that they would not be dragged into this
affair by him. He saw now what a mistake he had
made in not mentioning the swag and leaving every-
thing to the police.
“I don’t want to say anythin’ about it,” he said,
doggedly.
“Ha!” exclaimed the detective. “You see I was
right, Beazley. I thought his story was a bit too
thin.”
“Tell, him, Joe, for God’s sake!” muttered Barclay.
Joe shook his head.
“Arrest him, Beazley,” snapped the detective.
“I’ve got to do me duty, Joe,” groaned Beazley.
“That’s all right, Tom,” said Joe.
“I’ve got to warn you anything you say will be
used in evidence against you,” said Beazley.
“All right, Tom.”


“Handcuffs,” snapped the detective, “and don't
make a fool of yourself, Beazley.”
“Not that,” said Barclay, sharply. “They won’t
need to handcuff you, Joe, will they?
“Lord, no, Mr. Barclay. I’m not going to run
away. ’ ’
“Search him, then.”
“Better turn your pockets out, Joe,” whispered
Barclay. “Great God, I'm sorry for this!”
“That’s all right, Mr. Barclay,” said Joe. “I
didn’t kill 'the chap.
‘‘l know you didn’t,” groaned Barclay. “I’d stake
everything I’ve got on you.”
Joe turned out all his pockets, which contained
nothing more than his pipe, some tobacco, matches,
a little money and a few pieces of string.
“Try his bag,” snapped the detective.
He opened the bag quickly and emptied the con-
tents on the floor. He fossicked about among Joe’s
clothes for some minutes and then held something
aloft with a cry of triumph. It was a bundle of
bank-notes, the same which Miss Forsyth had refused.
“Where did you get this?” he asked.
“Well,” said Joe, slowly, “you see the bloke left
a swag, as you were saying. I took it home w r ith me
and next morning I find a note under me door askin’
me to take what was in it to an address in Perth.
The note said the stuff was honestly come by and
belonged to the cove who was writin’. Well, you
see, the bloke must have been mixed up in the business
out at the tank and was in trouble. I reckoned it
was money for his relations or somethin’. I took
his word it was his, because if he’d been stealin’ it
from the other chap, he could have come and taken


it from me when I was out next day. So I thought
I’d fix it up for him quietly and say nothin’.”
“What was in the bag?” asked Shannon.
“Two bags of gold, mister.”
“What did you do with them?”
“Took them to Perth and changed them.”
“Where?”’
“Goldfields Bank.”
* * What did the note say ? ’ ’
“It asked me to take the money to an address.
“Have you the note with you?”
“No,” replied Joe, suddenly remembering that
Miss Forsyth had not given it back to him.
“Where is it?”
“I must have lost it, said Joe, going very red at
having to tell the lie.
“Oh, you must have lost it!” scoffed the detective.
‘Yery convenient that.”
“If he says so, it’s true,” said Barclay, sharply.
Mr. Shannon smiled the smile of superior know-
ledge. “You haven’t had anything to do with these
chaps, Mr. Barclay,” he said, patronisingly.
“I’ve had to do with men like Joe Thompson,”
retorted Barclay, irritably, “and I’ve always found
they are to be believed.”
“Well, you struck a crook ’un this time. If you
haven t got the note, young feller, perhaps you can
tell us the address you were asked to take the money
to. Forgotten that too, have you?”
“No,” said Joe, quietly. “I haven’t forgotten it.”
“Then what was it?”
‘‘ I can’t tell you. ’ ’
“Ton mean you won’t.”
“That’s it,” said Joe..


“Tell him, Joe,” urged Barclay. “It can’t hurt
you.” .
“Oh, it can’t hurt me,” said Joe, significantly.
“I know that. He can’t hurt me, anyway, but I
won’t tell.”
“Why not, Joe?”
“Just can’t, Mr. Barclay.”
“That’s enough,” said the detective, brusquely.
“Put him inside, Beazley. The thing’s plain enough
now. ’ ’
“You’ll have to come along with me, Joe,” said
Beazley, regretfully.
“That’s all right, Tom,
“Wait!” said Barclay. “I’m prepared to furnish
any bail.”
“ You can’t bail a murderer out,” said the detec-
tive, smiling at the ignorance of a Justice of the
Peace.
“You mean an innocent man accused of murder,”
said Barclay, quietly.
“Oh, if you like,” said the detective, good-
humouredly. He was feeling very satisfied with him-
self and the outcome of his investigations, and could
afford to be generous.
“Good-bye, for the present, Joe,” said Barclay,
shaking his hand warmly. “You know you can
always command me, and Beazley will give me any
message. I shall remain in town until this thing’s
cleared up.”
“Thanks, Mr. Barclay. I won’t forget. Better
let Jimmy know, I s’pose, and tell him to cut about
five acres at the north corner for hay as soon as the
crop’s ready. He’ll have to get someone to stock for
him.”


“I’ll fix that, Joe. Barnes can go down from my
place.”
“Thank you, Mr. Barclay. You’re a good friend.”
“I wish to God you’d tell him everything, Joe.”
“Can’t be done, Mr. Barclay.”
“Now then, Joe,” said Beazley.
“Better put the handcuffs on him, Beazley,” said
the detective.
“He’ll get no handcuffs from me,” said Beazley,
shortly.
“I’ll come round with you, then.”
“And I, too,” said Barclay.
The four walked round to the police station and
Joe was locked up.
“You see,” said the detective, as they were leaving
the cell, “the thing’s plain enough now. This fellow
rolled up at Thompson’s camp at the Tank, and
Thompson must have found out that he had the gold
in the swag and tried to steal it. He must have been
discovered, and there was a fight, and probably a
chase through the timber in the night. Thompson
must have shot him at very close quarters. He had
plenty of time to prepare his story. The note busi-
ness was not a bad idea, but he fell down on the
address. Of course, there was no note and no ad-
dress. Thompson went to Perth, changed the gold
and came back. That is why he cannot furnish a
genuine address—it simply doesn’t exist. If he
wasn t guilty he would have told us about the swag
long ago. I suspected him right from the jump, and,
of 00111*86, searched his house as soon as possible.”
“You’re wrong,” said Barclay, “absolutely and
ridiculously wrong. And if you knew Joe Thompson
at all, you would recognise how wrong you are.”


“Don’t you believe it,” said the detective, with a
(jyuddent smile. “I’ve had lots of these cases to
clear up, and you’d be surprised at some of the men
I’ve potted —good, respectable citizens who’d never
done a wrong thing in their lives before. They seem
to get a sudden rush of temptation that they can’t
withstand. ’ ’
“Anyway, you’re wrong about Joe," said Barclay,
stubbornly.
“Wish I was as sure of getting to Heaven,’ laughed
the detective.


Chapter IX.
The arrest of Joe Thompson on a charge of murder
created a large amount of interest. Right throughout
the continent the newspapers had given a great deni
of attention to what had been named “The Holland’s
Tank Mystery.” Many theories /had been put
forward as solutions of the mystery, and when the
news of Joe’s arrest appeared in the columns of
every newspaper in Australia next day, there was a
chorus of “I told you so’s” sent up from nearly
every breakfast table in every State. Thousands
declared that “they had always felt that chap had
something to do with it.” A leading Perth news-
paper put it this way:
A sensational turn occurred in the investigation into tho
Tank mystery yesterday when DeSe "hannon
Jose P& Thompson, 30, a farmer, of Katanning on a
fv-tohL. 0 ? I ? ur i enn - 8 ' a Person unknown on the night of ‘’Sth
October last. It will be remembered that Thompson wa«*the
oHrurniihe? 0 H rurni i he ? the that the murder had been
coipinltted, and was apparently the only other man in thp
vicinity at the time. Having returned from his investigations
scene . p l6 murder. Detective Shannon searched the
occupied by Thompson and discovered there k swag
® v }dently had belonged to the murdered man. Thomp-
-on ip Perth at the time, but on his return the detective
mltted on that « losely ,; result that Thompson ad-
mitted that the swag had contained two bags of gold The
man told an extraordinary story that a note had been left
under his door directing him to realise on the gold and take
to a certain address in Perth, but he refused to
Ho o<^L C <f th 6 note or 1116I 116 a ddress it was said to have mentioned.
He was then arrested. The news came as a great surprise to
rodents of Katanning and district, where Thompson is
held in 'cry high esteem. Detective Shannon is now T of the
opinion that no further investigations are necessary The
Inquest on the murdered man will take place on Thursday.
Miss Forsyth over her breakfast read the news
and forgot to finish her meal. She read the story
over and oven again until she realised the full


significance of it, and then decided to take a trip
to Katanning. Discovering that there would not
be a train until the nest day, she packed a port-
manteau. This done she went to a drawer in
her bedroom an extracted therefrom two folded
pieces of paper which she placed carefully in her
handbag. She said nothing to Harrie, except that
she would he away next day. Next morning she
caught the train and late in the afternoon called
at the Katanning police station. Sergeant Beazley
was out on duty, but the detective was there making
up his case.
“TVhat can I do for you, madam?” asked Mr.
Shannon brusquely.
“I have come about the arrest of Mr. Thompson,”
said Miss Forsyth boldly, although her heart was
beating uncomfortably. “My name is Miss Forsyth,
principal of Ritchley Girls’ School, Perth.”
“\Vell?” said the detective impatiently.
“I want to tell you that I know Mr. Thompson,
and can corroborate his story.”
Shannon laid down his pen, and looked at her
critically. “It’s not a bit of use coming to me
with a story like that, unless you can produce
evidence,” he said. He considered Miss Forsyth to
be some mentally defective woman seeking notoriety.
Such people often try to figure in big cases.-
“I have the evidence with me,” said Miss Forsyth
quietly. “Mr. Thompson called on me last Thurs-
day. He told me a great deal of what you already
know. I am the person whose name and address
he refused to divulge. He offered me a sum of
money which I refused. It was the proceeds of the
sale of the gold found in the swag.”


“What proof have yon got of all that?”
“I have a pupil who also saw him, although she
knows nothing of the money.”
“Why did he take the money to you?”
“Because he was asked to do so in a note left
under his door.”
“Yes, yes,” said the detective testily, “but you’re
only repeating his story. Anyone could come and
tell me that. I want proof.”
“I have the note that was left under his door,”
said ZNliss Forsyth.
Mr. Shannon was obviously staggered. “Pooh!”
he muttered. “Anybody could fake that.”
“And I have another note sent me by the same
person telling me that Mr. Thompson would call
on me an give me a sum of money.”
“H’m, ” said the detective examining the notes
critically. “Same writing all right. Who wrote
them ? ’ ’
“I wish I knew. I have a pupil who is main-
tained, or rather has been maintained, by mysterious
remittances accompanied by letters written in this
same hand.”
“Have you got those?’
“I can’t remember whether I kept them or not.”
“Where is this pupil?”
“At my establishment in Perth.”
“Does she know who wrote these letters?”
“She knows less than I do.”
“But you surely must have some idea.”
“None at all. The solicitor who used to pay the
girl’s fees said he was under promise not to divulge
the name of the provide!'. He died some years
ago.”


“What name?”
“Mr. Farrar, Smith Street, Kalgoorlie.”
“And since his death?”
“I have provided for the girl myself, although
there have been one or two small remittances from
this unknown person.”
“H’m !” muttered the detective. He could see his
theories going to pieces, and felt distinctly annoyed
and disappointed.
‘ ‘ I read in the paper yesterday that Mr. Thompson
refused to give my address and could not produce
the note left under his door. It is the sort of dis-
interested thing he would do. You will let him
out now and withdraw the charge, won’t you?”
“Why should I?” asked the detective truculently.
“In common justice,” said Miss Forsyth warmly.
“Justice is dispensed in the courts, madam. He
will have to stand his trial.”
“Even though it is shown that he is innocent?”
“You have not shown me that he is innocent,
madam. You may have corroborated a most ex-
traordinary story”, but you have done nothing to
show me he was not the murderer.”
“But you can’t believe now that he is!”
“Why not, madam? Why not? His actions have
been most suspicious all through. Besides you have
not convinced me that your story will bear the
test of legal cross examination.”
“Do you doubt it?” asked Miss Forsyth, drawing
herself up and looking at the detective with amaze-
ment mingled with horror.
“Oh, I daresay it is true enough,” said the
detective grudgingly, “but it’s almost impossible
to -withdraw a charge of murder.”


“To bring people to so-called justice, whether.they deserve it
or not!” replied Miss Forthy warmly.


“What can I do then?”
“Better see Thompson’s friends.”
“Who are they?”
“There’s Barclay. He’s interesting himself in it.
He’s got some crazy notions like you about this
man.”
“You’re not very polite,” said Miss Forsyth.
“It’s not my business to be polite, madam.”
“Where can I find Mr. Barclay, then?”
“He’s at the pub round the corner.”
“Thank, you very much,” said Miss Forsyth
politely. I Avill see what he can do.”
“I don’t think it will be much,” said the detective,
picking up his pen.
“At least he will be courteous,” said Miss Forsyth,
flushing at her temerity in thus addressing so
formidable a person.
“My business is to bring people to justice, madam,
not to apply soft soap.”
“To bring them to so-called justice whether they
deserve it or not!” replied Miss Forsyth warmly.
“If your man is innocent the court will acquit
him.”
“But he will be subjected to all the terrible
publicity and anxiety of a trial -when there is no
necessity for it.”
“I can’t help that, madam.”
“Then I hope you never have to go through the
same experience yourself, sir.”
The detective grinned. “I hope not, madam.”
Miss Forsyth went ont into the street with a face
crimson with indignation. Fortunately the hotel
people were able to find Barclay for her at once,


and to him she poured out her tale, and showed her
little documents.
“I’m glad—you don’t know how glad,” said
Barclay when she had finished. “This clears him
absolutely.”
“But the detective said it didn’t,” she said, and
she gave him an account of what had passed between
her and Mr. Shannon.
“Oh, Shannon will have to climb down. He
hasn’t got a case really.”
“What must I do now, Mr. Barclay?”
“I think perhaps we had better go along to Suther-
land. He is acting for Joe. He ought to know at
once Miss—Miss—”
“Forsyth. I have the pleasure of (instructing
your daughter, Mr. Barclay.”
“What, Miss Forsyth of Ritehley? Well I’m
blessed! I’m most happy to make your acquain-
tance, Miss Forsyth. It was splendid of you to
come dow r n and clear this matter up. I hope you
have not had a great deal of discomfort?”
“I don’t mind the travelling Mr. Barclay, but I
do object to persons like that detective.”
“Oh, Shannon’s not a bad fellow in his way.
He’s a clever chap and he has a reputation for
running criminals to earth.”
“He actually east doubts on my story.”
Barclay smiled. “Well, you see, Miss Forsyth,
you’ve rather upset his plans. Shannon thought the
job finished, and was looking for another success.
Now he’ll have to begin all over again. You could
hardly expect him to be grateful to you.”


Chapter X
TO a small country town where life flows smoothly
such a thing as an inquest is a tremendous affair.
Consequently when the coronial inquiry into the
death of the strange man who had not been identified
was held, people flocked to the small courthouse,
and many -were turned away. The building was
packed to overflowing. Punctually at ten o’clock
the Coroner, who had arrived the evening before
from Perth, took his seat on the bench. He was a
cheerful looking little man whose gruesome occupa-
tion had had no effect on his good humour. Just
now he appeared dignified and aloof, a state which
was considerably helped by his shiny bald head and
his stiffly-waxed moustache. Seated at a table below
the coroner, and facing him, sat Mr. Sutherland,
the local lawyer who was appearing for Joe, and
Mr. Inspector Bramwell of the police department,
who was to conduct the inquiry for the Crown. Joe
Thompson escorted by Sergeant Beazley sat behind
Mr. Sutherland, and Detective Shannon was at the
rear of the inspector. In the front portion of the
court could be seen Miss Forsyth and Harrie, also
Barclay and Jimmy. By the side of the coroner
sat a shorthand writer who was to take down the
depositions.
Inspector Bramwell opened the inquiry in a long
address setting out the facts of the case. He had
a loud blustering voice which had sent many a


witness into a state of panic. Just now he was
forcible, but there was a gleam in his eye which
seemed to indicate that the witnesses had better
beware, as he would stand no trifling or shilly-
shallying. He recounted Joe’s version of the
tragedy, the investigations made by the detective
and the suspicious doings of Joe Thompson which
had led to lnat person’s arrest. When he had
finished Mr. Sutherland rose and said the defence
was a complete denial of any complicity in the
tragedy on the part of his client, and evidence of an
absolutely convincing nature would be produced.
Mr. Sutherland’s advice to Barclay and Miss
Forsyth had been to await the inquest, which
although not a trial of Joe in a strict sense, would
enable the coroner to commit him for trial or not.
If the coroner did not commit him, then the police
would have to act independently, and he did not
think they would do that in the face of the evidence.
Detective Shannon then went into the witness box
and gave his version. When he had finished Mr.
Sutherland rose and asked him if he remembered
the interview Miss Forsyth had had with him.
“I do,” said Shannon.
“Then tell us what took place at it.”
“Miss Forsyth called and said she had evidence to
clear Thompson. I asked for her proofs. She sub-
mitted these but I did not think they were sufficient
to clear the accused.”
“What were the proofs?”
“The alleged note that the prisoner says was
pushed under his door.”
“Nothing else?”
Shannon scowled. “Another note which she her-


self had received telling her someone would call
upon her.”
“Was that all?”
“So far as I remember, yes.”
“Were not the notes in the same handwriting?”
“I can’t say. They might have been.”
“Did not Miss Forsyth point out that fact to
you ? ’ ’
“She did. but I wasn’t satisfied as to the similarity.
I considered the whole thing to be some cock and
bull story faked up for the occasion.”
“Will you swear the}' were not in the same hand-
writing ? ’ ’
“I couldn’t swear that.”
“Then they might easily have been written by the
same person.”
“They might have been.”
“What is all this about?” asked the coroner
testilv.
“A couple of letters your worship upon which a
good deal hangs. They will be put in later when
another witness gives evidence. That will do, Mr.
Shannon.”
Beazley was the next witness. He corroborated
Shannon’s story.
“You know the accused, don’t you?” asked Mr.
Sutherland.
“I do.”
“What do you know of him?”
“Oh, a good deal, your worship.”
“What sort of a character does he bear in this
locality?”
“A very good one your worship. He is one of the
best liked and most respected men in the district.”


“Not the sort of man to commit a murder,
Beazley?”
“No, your worship. He’s the last man I would
suspect.”
Jimmy having given evidence of the visit of the
police to Joe’s house and the finding of the swag,
Mr. Sutherland rose and said:
“The defence is briefly this, your worship. All
that Thompson told the police concerning what hap-
pened at Holland’s Tank is true. He left there with
the murdered man’s horse tied behind his waggon,
also another horse saddled and bridled which had
turned up mysteriously that morning, and which,
we hold, carried the man who really did the deed.
The latter animal broke away and disappeared
before my client reached home.” Mr. Sutherland
then went on to tell of the delivery of the mysterious
note and Joe’s attitude towards the request it con-
tained, also of his trip to Perth, his visit to Miss
Forsyth, who was expecting him, the comparison of
the two notes, and the mystery attaching thereto.
“These notes will be produced, your worship to-
gether with others in the same hand received some
time before by Miss Forsyth enclosing sums of
money to pay for the education of the girl Harrie
Taylor. Now, Miss Forsyth, if you please.”
Miss Forsjdh went into the witness box nervously.
“Don’t be nervous, Miss Forsyth,” said Sutherland
pleasantly. “Nothing can harm jfou, and remember
you are doing and have done an excellent and com-
mendable thing in coming forward on behalf of my
client. Now, just tell his worship exactly what took
place when the accused visited you.”
Miss Forsyth in a firm but subdued voice told of


Joe’s arrival and his delivery of the money and the
note connected with it.
“You recognised the handwriting, Miss Forsyth?”
“Yes, Mr. Sutherland.”’
“Address his worship, Miss Forsyth, when you
answer my questions. You need not turn in my
direction.”
“Yes, madam. Look at me,” said the coroner,
“and speak up so that the court may hear.”
“I’m very nervous, your worship,” said Miss
Forsvth faintlv.
“No need for that, madam,” said the coroner
cheerfully, and dropping his official manner for the
moment. “Now then, Mr. Sutherland.”
“Whose was the writing you recognised?”
“I cannot say.”
“I thought so,” muttered the inspector harshly.
"But you recognised the writing?”
“Yes, your worship. It was the same as that in
a note I had received a few r days before. It was also
the same as that in many notes I have received over
a period of ten years. The writer never signed his
name.”
“Have you any of those notes with you?”
“They are all here, your worship.”
“I would like your -worship to look at these
documents,” said Mr. Sutherland, handing a small
file to the clerk, who passed them on. “Your wor-
ship will see they are all w r ritten by the same
person.”
The coroner eyed the letters critically. “Tell me
how you came to receive these?” he said abruptly.
Miss Forsyth, with her heart in a flutter at the curt-
ness of such a formidable official, explained how they


had arrived, and told him the history of Harrie.
“You say all these are written by the same
person/' said the coroner, looking the letters over,
“I think there is no doubt about that, sir—your
worship, I mean.”
“HTn!” said his worship. “I see some of these
are dated five years ago.”
“Yes, your worship.”
“Very good. Go on.”
Miss Forsyth’s heart sank. The coroner did not
seem to be impressed one little bit.”
“You are satisfied that they all come from the
same person, Miss Forsyth,” said Mr. Sutherland.
“Oh, quite. There could be no mistaking the
similarity.”
How is it you never discovered who the writer
of the first letters was?” asked the coroner.
“I did not try to discover him, your worship. I
was informed that those who paid Harrie’s fees
desired to remain unknown.”
“You say during the last two or three years since
the death of the Mr. Farrar you speak of, that the
letters and remittances have been rare.”
“Yes, your worship.”
“Rather awkward for you Miss Forsyth, I should
say,’ said the coroner in one of his aberrations
in the direction of naturalness.
“Oh no, your worship. I would not have minded
had I received no money at all.”
“That is very noble of you, Miss Forsyth,” said
Mr. Sutherland.
“Oh, not at all. She is very dear to me.”
“With all respect, your worship,” said the in-
spector, .iumping to his feet, “I submit this is not


evidence. It is entirely extraneous and looks like
an attempt to influence the court by sentiment.”
“I maintain, your worship, it is relevant,” said
Mr. Sutherland. “Xo evidence of any kind bearing
«
on a mystery such as this can be irrelevant.”
“I think it is all right, Mr. Inspector,” said the
coroner. “I can assure you the findings of this
court will not be swayed by any sentiment.”
“Very good, your worship,” roared the inspector.
“That will do for the present, Miss Forsyth,” said
Mr. Sutherland, “unless my friend ”
The inspector did not wait for him to finish, but
bounded to his feet like an angry bull. “How do
you know these letters are in the same hand-
writing ?" he roared. Mr. Inspector really meant to
be kind to Miss Forsyth, but he was no more
capable of subduing his recruiting-sergeant voice
than of flying.
“Because the writing is the same,” said Miss
Forsjdh tremblingly.
“How do you know it is the same?”
“Well,” said Miss Forsyth, feeling generally be-
wildered, “I just know it is the same.”
“Will you swear it is the same, madam. Remem-
ber you are on your oath.”
"Your worship,” said Mr. Sutherland springing
to his feet. “I submit this is an attempt at intimi-
dation.”
“A little more gently, Mr. Inspector,” said -the
coroner. “There is no need to roar at the lady.”
“Will you swear it is the same?” roared Mr, In-
spector one degree less aggressively.
“Yes,” said Miss Forsyth resolutely. “I will.”
“On your oath, madam?”


“Yes, on my oath.”
“Very good! Now did 3mu ever see the accused
Thompson before?”
“No, sir—your worship, I mean.”
“Never held communication with him?”
“No, your worship.”
“Yet you say you expected him when he arrived.”
“That was because the letter said someone would
call. I did not expect Mr. Thompson, because I
never saw him before.” \
“Did this girl, Harriet Taylor, know him before?”
“No, your worship.”
. .“Then how do you account for the fact that when
Harriet Taylor saw the accused at the gaol, she
called him by his Christian name?” asked the in-
spector triumphantly.
“She called him ‘Joe’ from the start, your wor-
ship, under the impression that he was a relative.”
“Do you expect the court to believe that?” roared
the inspector at his full limit, at the time
thumping the table hai’d and upsetting an inkpot.
“Your worship,” said Miss Forsyth all of a flutter,
“I—really ”
“I don’t think that question has anything to do
with the case, Mr. Inspector,” said the coroner
pompously.
“As your worship pleases,” muttered the in-
spector sitting down.
Harrie gave her evidence clearly and with spirit.
She wasn’t afraid of the roaring of the inspector or
of the dignity of the coroner. As a matter of fact
the latter unbent considerably in the atmosphere of


youth and innocence which her presence in the box
created.
The last witness was an expert in hand writing
who swore that all the letters handed in wbre written
by the same hand. Then Joe stepped into the box.
There was a hush all over the court at his appear-
ance. All those assembled knew Joe well, and there
was not one of them who believed him guilty. Joe
told his story slowly in his accustomed manner.
Whatever the state of his mind he hid it well. He
gave his. reasons for carrying out the instructions
contained in the letter clearly, and all the roaring
of Mr. Inspector could not break down one state-
ment.
“Don’t you think you did a very risky thing?’’
asked the coroner curtly.
“Well, I can see now it was risky,” said Joe,
“but it didn’t seem so then. It didn’t seem to have
anythin’ to do with the case an’ I took it the money
was for relatives. It must have belonged to the chap
who wrote, and he didn’t want to take it along him-
self. He could have stolen it if he wanted to next
dav.”
“It was very irregular,” said the coroner.
“I daresay it was,” said Joe, “but I don’t know
anythin’ about courts an’ inquests an’ things. I’m
a plain workin’ man with a bit of land, an’ I’ve got
enough money of me own -without stealin’ any.”
“How much?” asked the coroner.
“Well, there’s a couple of hundred or so in the
bank and a bit sunk in the place. I’ve only got
meself.”
“And you have no idea who it was 1-eft the note
under your door?”


“Well, sir, I did see a bloke early that mornin’.
I couldn’t sleep for thinkin’ of the poor chap that
’ad been done in, an’ Jimmy was snorin’, so I went
out for a walk round the crop an’ through the ring-
barkin’. As I was cornin’ home I nearly run into a
a chap who was streakin’ along the track pretty
hard. He got for his life through the timber as
soon as ho saw me.”
“Did you see him?”
“Yes, I saw his face in the moonlight.”
“Did you recognise the man?”
“Well,” said Joe dubiously, “he looked to me
just like the chap that’d been done in. It gave me a
fright. Thought I’d seen a ghost, you see. I sort of
froze up, an’ then he was gone. Afterwards I found
the note.”
“Why didn’t you tell the police this?” asked Mr.
Inspector.
“Well, you see the police sort of flummoxed me,”
said Joe. “They arst me so many questions that me
head went round an’ I didn’t tell ’em everythin’.
Couldn’t remember it all just then. That chap there
(indicating the detective) kept pullin’ me up when
I was tellin’ an’ got me mixed.”
“Then why didn’t you tell them later?”
“Well, I got the note, an’ I reckoned the bloke
left it, so I thought I’d do what he arst me.”
“Even though he might have been a murderer,”
roared the inspector.
“Well,” said Joe, “I didn’t look at it that way.
It was his people I was thinkin’ of, an’ it mightn’t
have been murder at all. There was two shots, an’
the chap that’s dead might have been tryin’ to pot
the other cove, or he might have committed suicide.


But what I thought was this, that the chap had some
relatives an’ wanted them to have the money, an’
didn’t want them to know anythin’ about the bloke
that was dead, or that he killed him. A murder’s
a nastv thing to have in a familv. ”
“It’s a very extraordinary view to take,” said the
coroner.
“I’m nothin’ on this kind of thing,” pursued Joe.
“I’m not a detective or a policeman like Tom Beaz-
ley. I told ’em all about what took place at the
Tank, an’l’d have told ’em more if they had let me
do it me own way. But they didn’t an’ I never got
it all out until I got back from Perth. I meant to
tell everythin’ as soon as I got that little bit of
business fixed up, but I didn’t want any police goin’
to this chap's people an’ frightenin’ ten years’
growth out of them. "Women don’t like police or to
be mixed up with ’em. an’ I can’t say I like it me-
self.”
There was a titter through the court at this remark.
Even the coroner smiled. There was something so
convincingly honest about this big, blundering man.
“Well, is there else to tell?” asked the
coroner. “Have you really told all you know now.
Think for a minute to make sure.”
“There’s nothin’ else,” said Joe. “It’s all out
now. I never laid a finger on the chap. He came
to me hungry an’ very thirsty. I gave him some-
thin’ to eat an’ drink. If I’d been goin’ to kill him
I wouldn’t have wasted all that tucker, would I?”
“You didn’t know he had the gold, then,” said
the inspector.
“And I didn’t know it until I opened the swag
at me own place.”


“‘I would ask that he be committed, your wor-
ship,” said the inspector. “His story doesn’t hold
water for two minutes. It seems plain to me that
he murdered this man for the gold in his swag. The
leaving of the note appears to be a coincidence, or a
fake. I think your worship will agree with me there
is a case for a jury.”
“What about you, Mr. Sutherland?” asked the
coroner. “Do you wish to address the court before
I give my finding?”
Mr. Sutherland got up and in a concise and mas-
terly way put the case for Joe. He pointed out that
he was a slow-witted man, easily confused by the
detective. He was also a man of some sentiment.
He had taken a foolish course, but quite a feasible
one. He had been perfectly open about everything
when given the chance. He had attempted to hide
nothing, although he had been slow in telling his
story. It was absolutely undoubted that a letter
had been left under his door, and that another in
the same hand had been sent to Miss Forsyth who
had been in the habit of receiving such letters over
a period of ten years. It was also undoubted that
the murderer was the man who had written the
letters. He had evidently followed his man along
Holland’s route, either for the purpose of stealing
the gold or getting back what had been stolen from
him. Having run his man to earth at Holland’s
Tank, he must have come upon him in the night
and fought him for the gold. That would explain
the two shots. It was absolutely useless to try to
incriminate his client in the face of the evidence
submitted. If the police wanted to find the real mur-
derer they should endeavour to trace the writer of


the letters, who was evidently the man seen by his
client on the night after the murder. He urged his
worship to bring in an open verdict.
The coroner leaned back in his chair and picked up
his pencil absently. “One thing,’’ he said, “seems
to be certain and that is an unknown man was killed
out in the bush near Holland’s Tank. He was shot
in the face at close quarters, and he did not die' by
his own hand. Whether he was murdered or shot
in self-defence, I cannot say. There is no evidence
to guide me on this point. Holland’s Tank is a
lonely spot, and the events leading up to a tragedy
there must be most difficult to discover. Had there
not been a man on the spot, the tragedy would
probably never have been discovered. So far as
the man Thompson is concerned I do not think he had
anything to do with the killing, and in this opinion
I am guided by one aspect which seems to have been
overlooked by both sides. If he had been the mur-
derer, would he have mentioned the death of this
man at all? Having killed him and buried him,
would he, supposing him to be a sane man, and I
have no reason to think him otherwise, have gone to
a magistrate, of all people, and told him of the
tragedy? I think not. lam sure not. A man com-
mitting a murder in a lonely spot like that need
have little‘fear of being found out, especially if
the man murdered were unknown to the district as
this man was. The bush is wide, and there are
many lonely men in it who have no ties and whose
disappearance is never noticed. Regarding the mys-
terious letters, I believe they were written by one
man who alone can tell the true history of the
tragedy. They are in themselves sufficient evidence


to acquit Thompson. I find therefore that, on the
28th October, a man unknown was found shot in
the head at Narinyup, or Holland’s Tank, and that
there is not sufficient evidence to show who shot
him. ”
“Then your worship will not commit?” roared
Mr. Inspector.
“Certainly not. I should be causing the country
needless expense if I did. No jury would convict
Thompson on the evidence. I would advise you, Mr.
Inspector, to pursue the inquiry in the direction of
the man who wrote these letters. In regard to the
man Thompson I should like to say that he took a
most extraordinary course, and might have landed
himself in serious trouble. I trust this will be a
lesson to him. It is positively criminal to oneself
to withhold anything from the investigating officers
the Crown.”
“Would your worship order the release of my
client?” asked Mr. Sutherland.
“I don’t know if I am able to do that, Mr. Suther-
land. If the police like to detain him and act inde-
pendently of me I suppose they can do so, but it
is usual to accept the verdict of the coroner What
do you think about it, Mr. Inspector?”
“'We can hardly detain him after your worship’s
finding,” roared Mr. Inspector, “but we will cer-
tainly keep an eye on him.”
“Very well. You can go, Thompson. That will
do, gentlemen,” and the inquest was over.
Joe walked out of the court house feeling be-
wildered. He had been through much mental straiu
although his conscience had been clear all the time.
People pressed about him, and shook his hand and


said how glad they were everything was all right.
When he got a spare moment he lifted his hat and
nibbed the back of his head.
“Kummv thing’s these courts an’ coroners,” he
%/ '
observed. “I was thinkin’ all the time the little
bloke had me set.”
Miss Forsyth shook his free hand. “Why on
earth didn’t you tell them about me at once instead
of letting me find out through the newspapers?”
“Well you see,” said Joe, “I didn’t want to be
draggin’ you into it. It ain’t a nice thing for a
lady to be mixed up in a murder. There!” he said
turning to Harrie with a smile. “Blowed if I
didn’t say ‘ain’t’, and I thought I’d cured meself.”
And because he had been under a great strain for
some days, Joe laughed immoderately.


Chapter XI.
JOE went philosophically back to his hay-cutting and
spent some days on the reaper and binder, while
Jimmy followed him up and stocked the sheaves.
Donaghey, the mailman, dined with Joe once a
week on Fridays, when he came round with the mail.
He had a long circuitous course to follow, which took
two days to complete. Joe rarely had any letters
beyond an occasional bill from the storekeeper, but
he was always glad to see Donaghey, who arrived
about mid-day. Everybody welcomed Donaghey.
Donaghey never made arrangements about where he
should eat and sleep on the trip. He dined with Joe
because he arrived there at dinner-time; for the same
reason he slept at Hoyle’s because Slogger landed him
there at about six o’clock in the evening. Had his
route been changed he would automatically have slept
at Joe’s and dined at Hoyle’s. This sort of hospi-
tality is always taken for granted in the bush.
A week after the inquest Donaghey turned up as
usual, but this time he had a real letter for Joe. It
came in a large square envelope, and the writing was
unmistakably feminine. Joe turned the letter over
many times and scratched his head. When he opened
it he found it was from Harrie. The knowledge made


him flush under his tan, and Donaghey, who was
watching him, chuckled.
“These young sparks that go gallivantin’ off to
Perth want watchin’,” he said. “When’s it toHje,
Joe?”
Joe smiled and went on reading.
Harrie’s letter was long and rambling, but Joe
thought it the most delightful thing he had ever read.
It contained little but girlish gossip about nothing
in particular, but there was a kind of proprietary
strain in it that appealed to Joe immensely. The
whole thing implied that the writer and the written-
to had a possessive interest in each other. It was
ended “Your affectionate cousin, Harrie,” and there
was a postscript which adjured him to write to her
soon.
Joe wondered how he was ever going to answer it.
The educational facilities on a cattle-station in central
Australia are usually nil. Joe could read and write,
but he had hardly written one letter in his life. He
tried his hand at composition while steering the reaper
and binder around his crop, but he could get no
further than “Dear Harrie, I was very pleased to
get your letter and hear you and Miss Forsyth were
well.” After that his mind refused to create a single
sentence. He was on the point of giving the task up
as hopeless, when he thought of the schoolmistress,
and decided to seek her help. On the following
Sunday, therefore, he rode down to old Jack Walker’s
and found Miss Bradley at.home, and seated in the
shade of a bushy jam tree, outside the house. She
got up quickly when she saw him and came to him
with her hand outstretched.
“I am so glad to see you back, and out of your


difficulties,” she said, cordially. “I knew everything
would be all right.”
“Thank you, Miss Bradley. I’ve had little to com-
plain of, really. Gaol isn’t much of a place, but I
never knew I had so many good friends before.”
“I must thank you for getting my books, and for
the two beautiful volumes you added. I appreciate
them very much.”
Joe felt shy. “Didn’t know whether you would
fancy them or not,” he said, awkwardly.
“I thought them beautiful. What a golden after-
noon it is. It is good to be alive this weather.”
‘ 4 l come down to ask you to help me in somethin ’, ’ ’
said Joe.
“I’m glad. What can I do for you, Mr. Thomp-
son?”
“Well, you see,” said Joe, “I got a bit of a letter
from a sort of relation of mine in Perth, an’ I want
to answer it, but I’m not much on letter-writin’.”
“I see. You think I will be able to help you out
a little.”
“That’s it,” said Joe. “I dunno what to say."
“ That’ll be easily fixed,” said the schoolmistress,
gravely. “I’ll just get a pencil and paper, and then
we can draft it together.”
Joe watched Miss Bradley go in through old Jack
Walker’s front door and thought how nice she looked
di’essed all ip white. He liked the way she moved
and spoke, and her welcome had been a very fine
thing to him indeed. She hadn’t bothered him with
any questions about the days he had spent in gaol,
or anything at all regarding the trouble he had been
through. All she had said about it was that she was


glad it was all over, and these words from her were
all sufficient for him.
“You’re very kind to a stupid chap like me,” he
said when she had returned.
“You mustn’t fish for compliments, Mr. Thomp-
son,” she said, gravely. “Won’t you sit down? I'll
get you a chair.”
“The grass’ll do me,” said Joe, sitting on the
ground at her side.
“Now, about the letter.” Miss Bradley put a pad
of paper on her knees and looked at Joe expectantly.
“How are you going to start it, or perhaps I can leave
it to you ?’ ’
“Oh, just dear Harrie,” said Joe.
Miss Bradley read the papers and knew what the
rest of the world knew about Harriet Taylor. She
was aware that Joe had met her for the first time
during his last trip to Perth. This set her wondering
what the relationship between the two was, and how
they had come to know each other so quickly. Joe
had told her several times that he had no relations
at all. She reflected that either he had discovered
a new one or there was some bond between him and
the girl he was receiving letters from. Just for a
moment she felt a pang of jealousy. There were sides
to Joe’s character in which she felt she had some-
thing of a proprietary interest, since she alone had
discovered them. She did not admit to herself that
she was in any way in love with this big son of the
soil. Her interest in him was largely maternal, for
he appeared to her like an overgrown boy, not yet
sufficiently equipped to be able to leave a mother’s
apron strings. It pleased her to bring out some things
in his nature, and the thought that someone «lse was


sharing these things made her feel momentarily re-
sentful. The feeling, however, only lasted a moment.
“Have you thought of anything you would like to
say?” she asked. Her manner was grave, sd as to
be in tune with his serious contemplation of a great
problem. She wanted to dispel his awkwardness and
shyness completely, and in this she was successful.
“You don’t mind if I light a pipe, do you?” asked
Joe. “I can think better then.”
“Smoke by all means,” she said, brightly. “I love
the smell of burning tobacco.”
“That’s better,” said Joe, puffing out great clouds
and throwing away the spent match. “Sort of makes
you think.”
“You look more comfortable now.”
“Feel it,” said Joe, puffing contentedly. “That’s
what’s wrong with drawin’-rooms. You can’t smoke
in ’em. I like a kitchen as well as anythin’, except
Barclay’s smokin’-room. That’s tip-top.”
“I can’t sav I’m verv fond of kitchens,” said Miss
1/ /
Bradley.
“I’m not much on any of these flash rooms. If
a man can get into a kitchen he’s struck a homey sort
of place. Puts me right if I can give a hand with
the washin’-up after tea. That’s why I like Barclay’s.
Often give Mrs. Barclay a hand with the dishes.”
“I see your point,” said Miss Bradley. “It is the
accessibility of the kitchen rather than the kitchen
itself that appeals to you.”
“That’s it,” said Joe. “You see, I never saw a
drawin’-room till I came to these parts. I wasn’t a
Government House man on the other side.”
“And you found drawing-rooms very formidable.”


“Froze me up,” said Joe, “an’ set me thinkin' it
would be nice to go out an’ get drunk.”
“Good gracious!” exclaimed the schoolmistress.
“What a strange fancy!”
‘ ‘ Thinkj I’m a bit dotty sometimes, the things that
come into my head. Too much ’magination for a
workin’ bloke I’ve got. Always thinkin’ somethin's
there that isn’t. Ever get that way?”
“Yes,” replied Miss Bradley, gravely. “Often.”
“An’ then find out next minute you’re all wrong.”
“That is so.”
“You alwaj’s seem to understand a chap,” he said,
gratefully.
“Part of my occupation is to understand people.”
“I can talk to you,” said Joe. “Blowed if I can
to some people.”
“There must be some affinity,” she murmured.
“I can talk to Mrs. Barclay, too, but not so well.
Funny thing, isn’t it ? ”
“It is,” replied Miss Bradley, seriously. There
was a pause lasting fully a minute, and then Joe said,
reflectively:
“I’m not much on talkin’.”
Miss Bradley noticed the absence of the familiar
“ain’t” in his conversation, and wondered. The crude-
ness of his speech sometimes made her wince. She
gave a little start when he next spoke, because their
minds seemed to have been working in the same
channels.
“Do I speak very rough, Miss Bradley?”
“Oh—er ” she began, in confusioir, but she
pulled herself together and said, calmly: “A little
crudely sometimes, Mr. Thompson, but nothing much
out of the way.”


‘‘ I want you to get me out of it, ’' he said. ‘ * Harrie
doesn’t like it. She hauled me up for saying ‘ain’t,’
but I’ve dropped that.”
“So I observe,” commented Miss Bradley.
“A bloke doesn’t think much about these things.”
“Suppose we start then by abandoning the word
bloke,” suggested Miss Bradley, with a smile.
Joe blushed, and then smiled too. “That's the
style,” he said. “You pop on to me every time I
go wrong. X won’t say bloke any more. What about
cove ? ’’
“That’s not so bad. A little slang, if it is no un-
musical, makes the speech of some people very bright.
Young Mr. Barclay, for instance, uses some slang, but
he avoids the crude words."
“I’ll notice how he speaks next time.”
“And now what about the letter?”
“Well, I wanted to say I was glad to get the letter
and that she and Miss Forsyth were well.”
“That is a very good start. I’ll put that down.
Well, what next?”
‘ ‘ That’s just it. I can’t think of anythin ’ that will
interest her.”
“Anyth ing,” corrected Miss Bradley, gravely.
Joe chuckled. “That’s right; pop the whip on.”
“Now about the letter. You could tell her what
you are doing on your place.”
“Hay cuttin’,” said Joe.
“No, hay cutting,” said Miss Bradley.
“That’s it, Miss Bradley, Hay cutting.”
“You could say I am cutting the hay at present.”
“Think it would interest her?”
l T am sure it would. ’’
“And Jimmy is stroking and he doesn’t like it.


Says he can’t ever see the end of the job, because
the machine keeps turning out more sheaves.
“I’ll put that in too, Mr. Thompson. Little things
like that would be sure to interest her.”
“Dashed if I thought they would.”
‘ ‘ She would be sure to like any funny little things
that happened.”
‘‘lt seems quite easy now, ’’ said Joe. “I m workin
-working, I mean —Gypsy in the reaper, and she’s
got a .foal ,that runs about nippin’ at the hay and
pullin’ down the stocks. I never saw Jimmy so wild.
He chased the foal all over the crop, peltin’ it with
clods. I had to shut the little devil up. Interestin’
thing’s, foals.”
“They’re darlings,” said Miss Bradley, whose pencil
was travelling over the paper at a great rate.
‘ ‘ Are you sure she’d like to hear things like that"? ’ ’
‘ ‘ Quite sure. It will be a most interesting letter. ’ ’
“Well,” said Joe, “I needn’t have troubled you.
I can put those things down all right. There’s the
spelling, though.”
“Suppose,” said Miss Bradley, putting down the
block, “suppose you write the letter yourself and
ask me about the spelling afterwards.”
“That’s tip-top,” said Joe. “I’ll write it to-night
and show it to you. Then you can go over it and
correct it —that is, if you wouldn’t mind taking the
trouble. ’ ’
“It would be no trouble,” said Miss Bradley. She
spoke truly enough, but she was very glad that this
correspondence would come under her supervision.
Somehow, there was a new interest about Joe Thomp-
son which she couldn’t altogether explain. She had
a half-formed idea that he might be drifting into


some hopeless infatuation, an idea which she discovered
later on to be very real.
Joe rode home thinking of all the things he would
put into his letters. The germ of the scribe, which
lies in most quiet'men, had suddenly come to life in
him. He felt as if he would like to spend the rest of
his days writing letters to Harrie now that he knew
the way.


Chapter XII
SPRING drifted into summer and the crops turned
from green to gold. Joe and Jimmy "worked hard
at taking the crop off, and then followed a period
of long lazy days spent on the waggon which earned
the grain into the mill. Life went back to normal
for Joe, or nearly normal, for Douaghey kept bring-
ing him letters from Perth written in a large girlish
hand which Joe had come to love. These constituted
a new thing in his life. They roused all the idealism
in his nature that the writer of them shone in
the heavens of his imagination like a big luminous
star. He worshipped her. His life became one long
adoration, hopeless enough but completely satis-
fying. He asked for nothing in return but that
the letters should continue. There was one great
day when the letter was accompanied by a photo-
graph. It was a good likeness, flattering in some
respects, but, of course, devoid of the colouring and
vivacity that gave the girl a great deal of her
charm.
“You’re gettin’ on, Joe,” said Donaghey "with a sly
wink at Jimmy as he handed Joe his budget. “Two
bills from Smalley’s and the letter, and a photo-
graph. “That’s the way of it, Jimmy. First the
letter, then the photo, after that the ring, an’ then
the parson.”
Joe grinned good humouredly. Nobody minded
Donaghey’s chaff, the mailman by reason of his occu-


pation being a privileged person wherever be went.
“He’ll be puttin’ up a couple more rooms soon,
Jimmy. There'll be a drorin’ room an a front
bedroom, an’ then he'll be buyin’ a pram an’ buildin
a nursery. Jimmy’ll act the nursemaid an’ I’ll be
the godfather with th’ tin mug. Ain’t you goin’ to
open it, Joe?”
“Plenty of time,” said Joe. “Can’t do it now
when I’m gettin’ dinner for a greedy devil like
you.”
“I’ll have to put on me best manners when the
hitchin’s done an’ the honeymoon’s over. Have to
wear a coat dinin’ with the missus.”
“Out in th’ kitchen, that’s where you an’ me’ll
be,” said Jimmy.
Joe did not open the photograph or the letter until
DonaeJiey had gone and Jimmy had vanished in the
direction of the stables. He looked at it for a long
time, then wrapped it up carefully and put it in
his portmanteau.
“I hope you will like the photo,” the letter said.
“I worried Fofcie to let me have it taken until she
consented to keep me rpiiet. I don’t think it is bad.
You must send me one of yours some day.”
Joe had never had his photograph taken, but he
resolved to rectify the omission, and one day, when
in town with a load of wheat, visited the local
photographer in his best clothes and the deed was
done. The result did not altogether please him,
and he sought the advice of the schoolmistress as
to whether he should send it.
“I don’t think I would send it,” said Miss Bradley.
“It is not very good.” She almost shuddered at
the picture which was almost in the nature of a


caricature. “Couldn’t you get some taken on your
farm, driving the binder or the waggon, or some-
thing like that. She has never seen you at work.”
“I don’t suppose Braeher would come out to the
place,” said Joe.
“Perhaps you would let me try my ’prentice hand
at a snapshot or two. I have a very good camera.”
“That would be tip top. I could get you to take
one, of the house, too. I think she would like to
see that.”
“I’m sure she would. You fix the day.”
“Well,” said Joe, “I’ll be home with the team on
Saturday loading up. P’raps you could get one of
me on the waggon.”
“Saturday be it then; but how am I to get up
there?” '
Joe saw the difficulty at once. Miss Bradley rode
a bicycle and could very easily pedal up to Joe’s
place, but that would not do. The idea of a young
woman paying a visit to a young single man by her-
self was out of the question. Even an unconven-
tional district such as this would not approve an
action of that kind.
Joe had a brain wave. “I’ll get Bob Barclay to
drive down for you and bring you along,” he said.
“That would be a splendid idea.” So Bob was
pressed into the service and Joe was taken standing
on the waggon with a load of wheat behind him and
a full team in front. Then Miss Bradley took the
house and the stables and the dam, and anything
else she fancied.
“You’ll have a picture gallery now, Joe,” said
Bob.
“Getting ’em for a relation of mine in Perth,”


said Joe. There was complete satisfaction in being
able to make an announcement like this to Bob Bar-
clay. The Barclays were ihe people of the district,
and although Joe was not a snob, he had pride in
announcing the fact that at least one person belonged
to him in a way.
“I’ll do two of each,” s said Miss Bradley. “Then
you can keep one. They will be interesting years
hence when the place has developed.”
Acting on some impulse Joe went to his portman-
teau and brought forth Harrie’s photo. “That’s
her,” he said briefly.
Miss Bradley took the picture and studied it
closely. Bob looked over her shoulder.
“What a lovely girl!” exclaimed the school-
mistress.
“By jove!” said Bob softly. “That’s worth
having for a relation.”
Joe felt immensely proud. “She’s just as nice
as she looks,” he said with some shyness.
“I’ll bet she is,” said Bob enthusiastically.
“When’s she coming to see you, Joe? Don’t forget
to ask me down then.”
“Isn’t she at the same school as Mr. Barclay’s
sister?” asked Miss Bradley innocently.
“Yes,” said Joe who could not hide his pride.
“Ritchley. ”
“Then I’ll see that Nellie brings her down some
holidays, ’’ said Bob. ‘‘ Why didn’t you tell us before.
Joe? She might have been down lots of times.”
“Didn’t know she was there until a little while
ago,” said Joe.
“Is she the girl who was concerned in that
money?”


‘‘That’s it,” said Joe. “When I got up there I
found she was a sort of relation.”
The photographs were a distinct success. In due
course Joe received two copies of each and sent one
on. Miss Bradley printed off a third series for her-
self, and put them away. Subsequently there were
occasions when she took them out and studied them
closely, especially that in which Joe figured
prominently. Her excuse was that she was in-
terested in Joe as a study in human nature, and his
picture helped the study. Humanity has a habit
of cheating itself in this way.
Nellie Barclay rose to the occasion, and invited
Harrie to Mundooring for the midwinter holidays,
but Harrie had already arranged to go elsewhere
and suggested Christmas as being a good time.
Nellie, however, was leaving school at midwinter.
There was a deadlock in the negotiations until Miss
Forsyth suggested that some time in the spring
might do, for Harrie also had finished her schooling
and would have plenty of spare time. Eventually
the arrangement was made that Harrie should visit
the Barclays about September and stay as long as
she liked.
Joe indulged in a great deal of happy anticipation
when the visit had been made definite, and proceeded
to brush himself up so that his “cousin” would have
no cause to be ashamed of him, and he would be
able to venture into the Barclay’s drawing room
without feeling awkward. He paid many Sunday
visits to Miss Bradley largely for educational pur-
poses, and the result was that his speech improved
beyond recognition. He even went so far as to send
to a bookseller for a work on etiquette. This he


studied in odd moments when Jimmy was absent.
At other times he hid the book. Not for worlds
would he have allowed anyone to know he had
bought it.
He was like an open book to the schoolmistress,
who pitied him in his infatuation one minute, and
loved him for it the next. She tended him like a
sickly plant in a bright, gentle, maternal fashion
which brought her many expressions of gratitude and
not a few pangs. Miss Bradley was a lonely woman
of an age when the delayed fulfilment of woman-
hood is most poignantly felt. Another woman might
have hated this slip of a schoolgirl who had com-
pletely installed hei’self in a heart that might have
contained herself, but Bonnie Bradley was not built
that way. She would not even admit to herself that
her interest in Joe was unusual. She had charmed
the whole story out of him. There was little that
he did not tell her now, and she could not shut her
eyes to the fact that this big man was most hope-
lessly in love for the first time in his life. It hurt
her just a little to think that Joe had never
wanted to brush himself up for her sake, and that
without the influence of Harrie he might have gone
on speaking like a clod for the remainder of his
days. And yet, as she looked back, she saw that
apart from Joe’s infatuation, he had responded to
her influence in many little ways, and the knowledge
brought a glow of satisfaction that helped to sustain
her in her hours of trial.
She lent him books that she thought might help
him, and got him to tell her his thoughts about them.
Joe had a sane commonsense way of looking at all
things. He was inclined to disregard precedent al-


together and decide matters in a perfectly unbiassed
manner. The result was often contrary to custom,
hut nevertheless it was this trait perhaps that Miss
Bradley admired in him most. He looked at things
absolutely straight, or, as he expressed it, without
“squinting around corners.”
In this manner life drifted along until the spring,
which brought with it sunshine and green things
for the world, and joy for one man whose life had
hitherto been grey and mechanical.


Chapter XIII.
JOE was washing clothes outside the back door of
Ids hut. He sat on a box with a tub containing a
washing-board and performed the conventional antics
with a piece of soap and a shirt. A few yards away
a fire was burning brightly in a three-sided enclosure,
made of stones stuck together with mud. On the top
of the enclosure was a bucket, made from a kerosene
tin, and filled with garments and furiously boiling
water. It was a Sunday morning of early spring.
There was bright sunshine and a nip in the air, which
seemed to invite the expenditure of energy. Joe
rubbed on the washing-board energetically, and trans-
ferred the cleansed garments to the kerosene bucket.
A man rode up along the track, dismounted, hitched
his horse to a post, and sauntered over to Joe. He
was a tall, clean-shaven man, dressed in a shirt and
a pair of dungarees. His wide, slouch hat was pulled
down over his eyes.
“ ’Day,” he said, nodding to Joe.
‘■'-’Day,” responded Joe, whose glance showed that
the man was a stranger to him.
“Nice day. mister.” /
“Yes,” drawled Joe.
“ Wash in’-day ?” suggested the man. with a smile
and a jerk of the thumb in the direction of the tub.
“That’s it.” said Joe.
“Makes you glad you ain’t a woman, don’t it?”
“That’s it.” Joe waited patiently for the man to


explain the object of his visit. Bushmen as a rule
do not come to the point straight away.
“Crop's lookin’ well, mister.”
Joe admitted that it was.
“Useter be a farmer once,” said the man. reminis-
cently. “Drought put me out o’ business. Xow I’m
on this here mallet bark.”
A gleam of understanding came to Joe. bark
was the talk of the district. It had been discovered
that the bark was an excellent tanning agent, and
the district was at present overrun with camps of
men who stripped the trees, and tied the bark in
bundles.
“I see yon got a thicket or two on this place of
yours, mister.”
“That's it," said Joe. “There’s a ridge of mallet
on the north-east boundary, and another just beyond
the ringbarking over yonder. What's the strength of
this business?”
“Nothin’ much in it, mister. I’m just fillin’ in
time before gettiu’ back to th’ fields. Might make
wages at it. I got a camp goin' the other side of
Barclay’s. ”
“People have gone mad on the stuff,” said Joe.
“And spoilin’ it. We'll be lucky if we get a fiver
a ton, and it weighs terrible light when it’s dry.”
Joe said nothing. He felt the main business of the
visit was about to be revealed.
“About this bark of yours,” said the man. “I'll
lake it off your hands if you like. I don’t s'pose
you'll be strippiu’ that little bit.”
“How much do you think is there?”
“Twenty or thirty ton. I'll give a pound on the
tree —say twenty pound the lot.”


“Cash?”
Money down as soon as the stuff’s stripped.”
Half now and the balance when the job’s done.”
Orright, mister. That ’ll do me. ’
What about a contract ? ’
“This is a good enough contract for me, mister,”
said the man, handing Joe two five pound notes.
“All right,” said Joe. “What name?”
“Harry Hicks. I’m a stranger here.”
“I’m Joe Thompson.”
“I know that,” said the stranger, smiling. “I've
heard about you.”
“Nothin’ to me credit, I suppose.”
“Well,” said the man, “I did hear you was mixed
up in somethin’ out yonder.
“They haven’t forgotten that, then," said Joe,
grimly.
“I remember that business, mister. I was on the
fields at the time. Thought they’d got the wrong ’uu
when they tried to nab you. Your description of that
bloke seemed sort of familiar. Couldn’t place him
exactly, because‘a man meets lots knockin about the
fields. An’ then there was th’ gold, y’ see. All the
miners was interested in it. Bloke come from th’
fields, all right.”
“I suppose he did,” said Joe, shortly. He did not
want to discuss the past unpleasantness.
“I always wondered what become of that gold.
“•Police have it still,” grunted Joe.
“Lookin’ for the rightful owner, I s’pose?”
A small mob of horses came past the hut and trailed
along to the dam for a drink.
“That’s the brumby he rode,” said Joe, pointing
to a small brown horse on the outside of the mob.


A gleam came into the stranger’s eye, but he said,
indifferently, ‘"ls that so?”
“Been runnin’ here ever since.”
v
“And so the bloke that rode him's dead?” mused
the man.
“Dead enough,” said Joe.
“Oh, well, some blokes are better dead, ain't they?”
Joe looked up suspiciously. The man’s words
seemed to contain a trace of venom.
“Murderers and the like,” added-the stranger, a
little hastily.
“Was this bloke a murderer?” asked Joe.
The man laughed forcedly, and there was a trace
of uneasiness in the sound. “How should I know,
mister ? ’ ’
“Sounded as if you knew something about him.”
“Oh, I was thinkin’ of another cove I knew—a mate
of mine that did his partners in for some an’
was killed tryin ’to get away with it. Blokes like that
ain’t got any right to live.”
“This cove might have done his mates in for their
money,” suggested Joe. •
“So he might, mister. There was a lot of talk that
way on th fields at th' time. The miners reckoned
he got away with the gold an' his mate chased him
up an’ done him in.”
“Murdered him?” suggested Joe.
“No, mister. Fought him fair for it. There was
two shots, wasn’t there?”
“That’s right.”
“There was men up there that reckoned they knew
somethin’, said the man, lowering his voice and
glancing uneasily about him.
“Why didn’t thev tell, then?”


“No, mister. We ain’t like that on th' fields. Let
a man settle his own business. There was detectives
all over th’ place askin’ questions, but they got
nothin’.”
“That’s not right,” said Joe. “I might have been
strung up for it, an’ me innocent all the time. The
law’s the law an’ murderers ought to be punished,
not innocent men.”
“The boys wouldn't have seen you strung up,”
said the man, confidently.
“Bnt if they know they ought to tell. There’s a
heap of things hanging to this business."
“And there’s some things better forgotten. You
didn’t happen to notice any mallet thickets out
Holland’s Tank way, I s’pose.”
“There was a big thicket on the far side,” said Joe.
“I must get out an’ get a look at it. By the way,
what was the cove like that y ’ found out there ?
“About your build, with long whiskers. Shirt and
dungarees and bluchers. Eyes that shifted about a
lot, and a finger gone off one hand —the right, I
think.”
The man, who was lighting his pipe, let the match
burn down to his fingers. Absently he knocked out
his newly-filled pipe and put it in his pocket.
“Which finger?” he asked, curtly.
Joe examined his own hand. “This one,” he said,
indicating the second.
Hicks began to cut up more tobacco. “Looks like
rain,” he muttered, glancing at the cloudless sky.
Away down the track a buggy and pair travelling
briskly came into view, and presently pulled up by
the hut. There was a cheery “Hi there, Joe!” and
a young man and a girl sprang out.


“ ’Sense me,” said Joe, and he walked quickly over
to the fence. The man followed with the evident
intention of getting 1 his horse and going. He nodded
to Bob Barclay, but when he saw Harrie Taylor he
stopped and stared at her.
“ ’Day, Mr. Hicks.” said Bob. cheerily. “How’s
Ihe bark going?”
Hicks said nothing but continued to stare at Harrie.
who flushed under his scrutiny, and presently turned
her back on him. Bob opened his mouth to speak,
but the man turned dully and stumbled towards his
horse. He stopped, however, as if he had remembered
something, lifted his hat, rubbed his forehead, and
said. “Beg pardon." The whole incident was like a
little play without words. A subtle atmosphere was
set up which affected all those in the drama. Bob
was silenced, Harrie edged nearer to Joe, who gaped.
1 ‘l’ll be shiftin' camp to here soon,” muttered
Hicks.
“There’s water up by the thicket,” said Joe, who
found his tongue with difficulty.
‘ ‘ 1 hanks, mister. ' and the man unhitched his horse.
ell, Harrie,” said Joe, “this is a surprise.”
“I m the culprit,” said Bob. “It was such a fine
morning that I thought a little drive down this way
would do Miss Taylor good. I say, Joe, what’s the
matter with that chap?”
Hicks had been in the act of mounting, but at the
mention of Harrie's name he stopped and stared at
her once more. He must have heard Bob’s remark,
for he suddenly swung into the saddle and galloped
off.
\\ hat a horrible man! said Harrie. shuddering
“Who is he?”


“Chap called Hicks,’’ said Bob. “He’s mallet'
barking bn the other side of Mnndooring. Seems a
decent enough fellow and always pays cash for his
mutton. I can’t say that for some of the other
barkers.”
“He stared very rudely,” said,Harrie. “I hate
people that stare.”
“Hear that, Joe? Don’t you so much as cast an
eye on Hiss Taylor again or you’ll be hated. 11l
have to be careful myself."
“Oh, you don’t count,” said Harrie, complacently,
“What are you doing this morning, Joe?"
“Washing,” said Joe, with a grin.
“Not clothes.”
“The washerwoman didn't call this week,” said
Bob. “Poor old Joe.”
“I’d love to see you doing it,” said Harrie.
“I’m nearly finished,” said Joe. “1 11 just put a
billy on for tea, and then you can see the whole per-
formance. I’m not much of a washerwoman.
The billy was put on and Joe sat down at his tub
once more. Bob chaffed him all the time, and Harrie
laughed and prodded the contents of the kerosene
bucket with a stick. There was great good humour
between them all. When Joe had finished they went
inside and drank some tea. Afterwards they went
over the stables and sheds, looked at the machinery,
and amused themselves with a couple of foals, which,
with their mothers, were hanging about the stables.
“Oh, the sweet little things!” exclaimed Harrie, as
one ran up to Joe and pretended to bite him. Joe
caught it round the neck and produced a handful of
oats which the little horse ate with delight. After
that the other had to be treated similarly.


“How tame they are,” said Harrie, “and what
dear little, soft noses they have.”
“I always handle them young,” said Joe. “They
give no trouble then when you start them working.
They walk off like old hands when you put them in
the waggon for the first time.”
“Joe’s a champion with horses,” said Bob, admir-
ingly. “The boss always sends his colts down here
for Joe to break in.”
“I’m sort of used to it,” said Joe, modestly.
“Broke a lot of horses in up north. Sort of got to
know them. They’re all different, and want
different treatment.”
“That’s what Foreie says about girls,” said Harrie.
“She says when you understand them you can do
anything with them.”
Joe watched the two drive off again and went in-
side to get his dinner. The morning had been delight-
ful to him, and all the more so because the visit was
unexpected. He set about preparing the meal,
whistling cheerfully.
“I think Joe’s a wonderful man,” said Harrie to
Bob, as they sped home.
“We all like Joe very much,” said Bob. “He has
done us many a good turn.”
“Those little foals seemed to love him. How gentle
and kind he is with them.”
“Joe wouldn't hurt a fly.”
A big red kangaroo bounded across the track and
disappeared in timber.
“Oh, what a beauty, Mr. Barclay!”
Bob was silent. He seemed to be chewing over
something. Presently he said:
“I say, Miss Taylor.”
“Well?”


Chapter XIV.
HARRIE was very happy at Mundooring. Life on
a sheep station is full of charm to a high-spirited
girl, especially if there is a young man or two handy
to flirt with. Harrie was not a flagrant coquette,
but she had a healthy appreciation of the amuse-
ment a young man can furnish, especially when the
young man was of the type to which Bob Barclay
belonged. Bob, of course, fell head over heels in
love with her. He could not help himself* but he
kept his feelings to himself in a manly fashion, so
that nobody had any suspicion of the state of his
mind. The two rode and drove together,'sometimes
accompanied by Nellie, but more often by them-
selves, for Nellie had a quiet studious nature and
eared little for outdoor amusements. On rare occas-
ions Joe joined them, but Joe was a busy man, and
he had a notion that when he made a third he was
in the way. Harrie’s familiarity with Bob gave him
some pangs, although it did not lessen his regard
for the man he considered to be something of a rival.
Bob on the other hand wondered if Harrie had any
special liking for Joe.
After Harrie’s arrival Joe neglected Miss Bradley
somewhat. He had usually seen her at intervals of
about once a week, chiefly on a Sunday, but Joe’s
Sundays were now spent at Mundooring. Miss
Bradley noticed his neglect and felt it keenly. She
made up her mind that she hated Harrie, and on


one occasion when invited to a small party at Mun-
dooring she declined. But one day Bob drove down
to old Jack Walker’s on business and took Ilarrie
with him. Miss Bradley saw them there when she
returned from the school. She pretended not to see
them, and was walking rather primly into the house
when she heard cheery Bob’s “Hi! Miss Bradley!’
and she was forced to turn and smile, whereat he
beckoned her over and introduced her to Harrie.
Later, while indulging in a few quiet tears in the
privacy of her room, the schoolmistress was forced
to confess to herself that she could not hate such a
sunny, lovable girl.
Hicks moved his camp to a spot just outside Joe s
boundary fence, and his men began to strip the
bark. Joe did not like the man, and began to wish
he would hurry up and cut out the thickets, for
Hicks developed the habit of strolling over to Joe’s
hut in the evenings for a yarn. He was a surly,
taciturn man, with little conversation, most of which
was in a vein that Joe detested. He put up with
him, however, because the bark had not all been paid
for. What annoyed Joe most was that Hicks per-
sisted in speaking of the Holland’s Tank affair,
and palpably tried to pump Joe of everything he
knew.
One night Hicks intimated that he was going out
to the Tank to look at the mallet there, and got Joe
to direct him.
“If there’s enough,” he said, “I’ll shift camp out
there as soon as I’ve cut out here, an’ I’ll get you
to cart some of th’ gear out if you will.”
“If it’s worth my while,” said Joe.


“Oh, a couple of cpiid would pay you, Mr.
Thompson.”
“A couple of quid for one load,” said Joe.
“Yes. One load would take the lot. I’ve got a
buggy that’ll take th’ men.”
“Done at a couple of quid then,” said Joe, feeling
relieved at the thought that he would soon lose
his undesirable friend. Hicks spent the rest of the
evening with him and pursued his usual line of con-
versation. There were moments when Joe felt like
kicking him out of the door, for he held women in
great respect, and this man talked of them in an
unspeakable manner.
Some days later Joe took his waggon early in the
morning to Hicks’ camp and gave a hand at shifting
the tents and utensils. When the waggon was
loaded, Joe got on the footboards and Hicks joined
him after giving his cook instructions concerning the
shifting of the men.
“I may as well settle up now,” said Hicks.
“Here’s the other tenner and the couple for the
strip. That’s the way the blasted money goes, ain’t
it?”
“Thanks,” said Joe, putting the money in his
pocket. “Wish they all paid up so promptly.”
The man laughed harshly. “Oh, Harry Hicks is
a good mark,” lie said. “Always pay his way,
does Harry, although he’s likely to lose on this hei’e
bark. I’m a good friend, Mr. Thompson, but
a damn bad enemy. There’s those as’ll know that
yet.”
Joe merely grunted and chirped to his team. The
load was not heavy and the horses moved briskly
along. At about midday Holland’s Tank came in


sight. Joe pulled up at his previous camping place
and both men got down and attended to the horses.
Afterwards Joe put a billy on to boil and Hicks
began to unload. He was about to tip a folded tent
out of the back of the waggon when he dropped his
load and suddenly jumped down.
“There’s a bloke over yonder,” he said. “Tryin’
to snap th’ thicket I reckon. I’ll just let him
know I’ve put me mark on it already.’
Joe looked in the direction indicated. A man was
coming towards them leading a horse. His head
was down and he did not see them. Joe saw the
man start and mount quickly as Hicks accosted him.
Evidently he meant to turn and ride away, but
Hicks caught the horse by the bridle.
Joe, who was fixing up the nosebags, stopped sud-
denly. There seemed to be something queer about
the actions of the two men. He could hear Hicks
cursing in a loud voice, and he seemed to be trying
to pull the other man off his horse. The rider was
endeavouring to free himself, and was also urging
his horse forward. Joe saw Hicks deal the man
a vicious blow with his fist, and decided it was
time to find out what the trouble was. He dropped
a nosebag and ran across to the scene of action.
Both men were snarling at one another like in-
furiated cats. The man in the saddle was defending
himself with one hand and holding the reins with
the other. Hicks had one hand on the bridle and
was hitting out vigorously with his right. Finding
he was making little progress he dropped the bridle,
flung one arm round the waist of the rider, and in
the face of a shower of blows tried to pull him off.
The freed horse moved on and next minute both men


were struggling on the ground. When Joe arrived
Hicks was on top with his hand at the other man’s
throat. Already the rider’s face was turning black,
and he would have been dead in a few seconds had
not Joe pulled Hicks off.
“Die, you —— swine!” The words were accom-
panied by a vicious squeeze ou the man’s throat.
Joe struck Hicks a heavy blow on the arm that
made him loosen his grip. Then he picked him up
as if he were a small boy and put him to one side.
“Steady, young feller,” he said quietly. “No
killin’ if you don’t mind while I’m about.”
The man who had been underneath choked and
gasped. Joe gave him a hand to help him up. and
suddenly saw stars and dropped as Hicks dealt him
a vicious blow from behind. He got up instantly
and just dodged another blow.
“I'll teach yer to interfere !” hissed Hicks. “This
is my business, not yours.”
Joe was not a bit ruffled. AStop it now,” he said
quietly. “You aren’t going to touch him again. If
you do I’ll knock you silly.”
“Out of the way you !” snarled Hicks making
a rush at Joe, who sidestepped neatly and sent him
sprawling with a blow on the back of the head that
sounded like a rifle shot. Hicks lay there for a
minute, and. Joe turned to the other man who was
now bn his feet.
“Thanks, mister,” said the man.
Joe started as if he was shot. The tones, although
husky, were familiar. He searched the man’s fea-
tures and recoiled a step. There was no doubt in
his mind. This was the man who was supposed to be
dead. The man he had buried at this very spot.


His head began to go round. Then a ton weight
seemed to hit him and lie went down.
Hicks had returned to thfe attack. He fell on Joe
like a tiger and smashed his fist in his opponent s
face. Then Hicks rolled off, Joe groaning as the
strange man’s heavy boot caught him in the side of
the head. Joe gasped and lav there for a
All the strength seemed to have gone out of him.
Hicks was quite still. Presently Joe sat up and
looked about him. The third man had vanished, but
Joe could hear a horse galloping in an easterly
direction.
All at once his strength seemed to come back to
him. He rolled the prostrate Hicks over, and dis-
covered that he was still breathing. Then he picked
him up and carried him down to the waggon. A
couple of buckets of water over the head of the un-
conscious man soon brought him to. Hicks looked
about him in a dazed fashion, put his hand to his
head and fell back groaning. Presently he sat up
and blinked.
“Where’s the got to?” he inquired wildly.
“Cleared out,” said Joe shortly.
“Blast you!” muttered Hicks. “Why didn’t you
leave us alone? It wasn’t nothin’ to do with you.”
“I wasn’t going to let you murder him,” said
Joe quietly.
Hicks staggered to his feet. “Which way did th’
go?” he asked.
Joe pointed out east.
“Lend me a horse then ?”
“What for?”
“Foller the swine, of course.”
“No,” said Joe. “I can’t spare and you


couldn’t catch him. Besides I’m not going to let
you murder him. If he’s done wrong the law will
punish him.”
“The law be !” growled Hicks. “This ain’t
a matter for th’ law.”
“It's going to be, anyhow,” said Joe. “That’s
the bloke I thought I buried out here.”
“You buried a better man than him, the low-down,
dirty blackguard! It was th’ bloke that follered
him that you buried.”
“’Well I’m blowed!” said Joe. - “Thought I’d
seen a ghost. What do you know about him, any-
way ? ’ 5
“Mind your own —— business!” growled Hicks.
“Well, if you won’t tell me you’ll have to tell
the police,” said Joe, who had learnt his lesson re-
garding the law.
Hicks had brought a rifle with him on the off-
chance of getting a kangaroo. He picked it off the
waggon and pointed it at Joe.
“You’ll keep the police out of this,” he snarled.
“Put that down,” said Joe, quietly.
“S’help me, if you don’t promise to keep quiet,
I’ll drill a hole in yer,” said Hicks menacingly.
“I dont want th’ police in this.”
“You’ll have them all the same,” said Joe.
“Promise!” growled Hicks. “I’ll give you one
more chance. I won’t have the police.”
Joe ducked suddenly and caught Hicks around
the waist. There was a deafening report as the
ride went off. Hicks was easy to deal with after
his recent clouting. Joe wrenched the weapon away
from him, and pushed him away.


“Get your gear off and hurry up about it!” said
Joe sternly.
“You be damned!” growled the man.
“Quick!” said Joe with a nasty gleam in his eye.
The man muttered something, climbed surlily on
to the load and began to throw his belongings down.
This done, Joe ordered him to yoke up the horses.
Hicks at first refused, but there was something in
Joe’s voice that compelled compliance. When the
team was ready Joe mounted the footboard holding
the rifle.
“Your mates will be out soon,” he said. “You
can wait here for them,” and he started up his
team.
“Give me back my rifle, you thief!” said
Hicks menacingly.
“I’ll hand it over when I meet the others on the
way out,” said Joe. “I brought it back by mistake.
See?”
Hicks saw and watched the waggon depart, grind-
ing his teeth and swearing vengeance. Presently he
moved on to the track and began to follow it back
east.
Joe was taking no liberties with the law this time.
He went home as quickly as possible, sometimes
urging his horses into a slow trot. Arrived home
he handed the team to Jimmy, caught a hack, and
was soon cantering off to town through the growing
dusk. Late at night he was battering on the police
station door.
Beazley, who was just on the point of going to
bed, came out quickly. Joe told him in a few words
what had happened.


“Then it wasn't the chap that camped with you
that was killed,” said the sergeant in amazement.
“No, Tom. I saw him with my own eyes.”
“Then we've been barking up the wrong tree all
the time.”
“That’s it, Tom.”
“And this fellow Hicks. What does he know?”
“He wouldn’t tell me, but I reckon he will you."
“What the devil did you let the other chap get
away for?” groaned Beazley. “We’ll have to start
the hunt all over again.”
“Couldn't stop him, Tom. I was knocked a bit
silly, and when I came to I heard him galloping
away.”
“Which way?”
“East.”
“Then we’ve got a chance. Put your horse in
the stable here and feed him while I go and rouse
them up at the post office. I’ll have to get a wire
through to Shannon straight away. After that we’ll
go out to Hundooring. I’ll want your help. Joe, and
any I can get from Barclay, and I must dig that
young devil Billy out.” He walked across the yard
to a tumbledown shanty and kicked on the door.
“Hi, Billy,” he called.
The occupant began to snore loudly. Beazley
chuckled and kick again! “Wake up, you young
devil. You can’t fool me with your snoring.
Quick, or I’ll get a big stick.”
The snoring ceased and there were sounds as of
someone waking up.
“Open the door, you young devil,” said Beazle}*
good humouredly.


“Me burry sick feller boss,’" said a plaintive voice.
“Well, get up sick feller, I want you.’
“All same poison, boss. Big feller pain longa
bin gey.”
“Open the door,” commanded the sergeant in un-
mistakably angry tones. The door was opened with-
out further argument. t
n iuriiici g uni cut.
“Saddle up Dolly and Spindle, and get yourself
ready, and if I hear an^ r more talk about pain in
the bingey, I’ll skin you.”
Billv emerged into the dim light shivering most
v o
ostentatiously and clasping his stomach. He was a
small aboriginal with a shock head of straight black
hair, and dressed in riding breeches and leggings
with an old coat slung about his shoulders. He
passed into the stables muttering.
Beazley and Joe walked down to the post office
where the former, after some strenuous knocking,
woke the "postmaster and despatched his wire,
When the two arrived back at the police station
they found the horses saddled and Billy waiting. It
was after midnight when the two men and the black-
boy cantered out of the town and took the Mun-
dooring road.


Chapter XV.
THE Barclays were having breakfast when Joe and
Beazley arrived. Barclay saw them through the
window, and, scenting something unusual, left the
table quietly and joined them.
‘ I won’t keep you long,” he said, when Beazley
had explained matters. ‘ 1 How many of us do you
want ? ”
“A couple of men will do,” said Beazley, “and we
will all need fresh horses.”
“I’ll come myself, ’’ said Barclay, “and bring
Anderson. He’s a good, steady chap.”
‘’What about me, dad?” inquired a voice from
behind.
“I’ll want you to stay behind and look after the
place, Bob.”
“Anderson can look after the place,” said Bob.
“Do let me go, dad.”
“There’s no danger, Mr. Barclay,” said Beazley,
who was an ardent admirer of young Bob.
“You're a toff, sergeant. I can go now, can’t I,
dad?”
All right, Bob,” said Barclay, good-humouredly.
“Get one of the men to run the horses in and put up
some nosebags. The missus will fix us up with some
tucker. ’ ’
Some explanations had to be made at the house,
and the feminine occupants were put into a state
of flutter. Mrs. Barclay and Nellie busied them-


selves with putting up some food, while Harrie
hovered about doing nothing in particular.
“I wish I could go, too,” said Harrie. “Can’t
you take me. Bob?”
Bob had executed his commissions and was hastily
finishing his breakfast.
“Little girls must stay at home,” he said, with his
mouth full.
“I hate being a girl,” said Harrie, vehemently.
“Just as .well you are, Harrie. I wouldn’t like you
half as well if you were a boy.”
“Pooh!” said Harrie, contemptuously. “1 wouldn't
stay being a girl just for that reason.
“All the girls would be men if they could,” argued
Bob.
“Please pass the jam,” said Bob, pretending to be
severe.
“I won’t, so there!"
“Hurry up, Bob!” called out Barclay from outside.
“There!” said Bob. “The boss is waiting, and
you’re hindering business. Jam, please.’
“Never!” said Harrie, firmly.
“Then I must go hungry. Coming in a minute,
dad.”
“Hurry up,” said Harrie, “or you’ll miss the fun.”
“I wish you were a man, Harrie.”
“Why?”
“Because, then you’d pass the jam."
“I wouldn’t; besides, bread and butter’s quite good
enough for you. You’re getting fat.”
Bob swallowed a cup of hot tea and got up.
“Good-bye, pearl,” he said.
“You are a pig,” said Harrie, with conviction.


“So I am,” said Bob, smiling. “A big, fat, wal-
lowing pig.”
“Oil, your coat’s all over horsehair or something.
Wait till I brush it.”
“It's only the skin of the pig, pearlie.”
“And take care of yourself/’ said Harrie, brush-
ing him vigourously. “Your mother will be worry-
ing her head off about you.”
“Only my mother?”
“Of course,” said Harrie, giving him a final brush.
“Nobody else would be so silly. And keep out of
the way of that man Hicks when you are out there.
I m sure he’s a bad lot and up to no good.”
“Yes, ma’am.”
“And if there’s any danger, keep close to Joe. Now
get along with you and don’t keep the others waiting. ”
Bob caught her suddenly round the waist, and
before she could stop him, he had kissed her on the
cheek and dodged out of the room.
“Good-bye,” he called out.
■'Good-bye, Bob,” she called out. Her cheeks were
flaming, but although she tried hard to be indignant
she failed completely. Her answering farewell was
music in his ears.
The little party maintained a steady pace out to
the Tank and arrived there before mid-day. The tents
belonging to Hicks’ party had been erected all about
the Tank, and there was a man cooking at a big fire.
’Day,” said Beazley. “Where’s all the rest?”
“Up there,” grunted the cook, pointing.
“Strippin’.”
“Boss there?”
“Dunuo; I ain't got second sight.”


“No more von have, Tim Sullivan, said Beazley.
easily.
The cook seemed to shrivel up. “Me name’s Miek
O’Hara,” he said, uneasily.
“Well, it used to be Tim Sullivan,’’ said Beazley,
smiling. “Remember Smith’s pawn-shop in Perth?”
“No, I don’t,” said the cook, defiantly. “You
leave me alone. I’m earnin' an honest livin .
“Glad to hear it, Tim,” said the sergeant,
pleasantly.
“A chap I arrested once in Perth when I was in
the foot police, he explained, as they rode on. He
got two wears for breaking into a pawn-shop. 1 his
mallet bark has brought a lot of lags about the
district.
They found the barkers hard at work slicing large
strips from the trees with long-handled Dutch hoes
on a ridge about a quarter of a mile from the camp.
Some, of the men were cutting down the bigger trees
and stripping them as they lay on the ground. Others
were tying the bark into bundles about three feet in
length.
“Where’s Hicks?” asked Beazley of one of them.
“Dunno, mister. He ain’t been here since yester-
day.”
“Where did he go then?”
“Dunno that, neither. When we come out here
yesterday Harry takes his rifle an says he’s goin
out to try {in' get a kangaroo. Ye ain t seen him
since.”
“Was he mounted?”
“Yes, he took one of the horses."
“Ai'ern’t von anxious about him?”


“Not as much as you seem to be/’ said the man,
grinning. “What do you want him for?”
“This is Mr. Barclay, of Mundooring,” said
Beazley. “He has a small matter of business to
transact with him. That's all.”
“Well, I dunno where he is, Mr. Barclay, but I
reckon he'll turn up. Harry ain't the sort to get
bushed.”
“That man’s lying,” said Beazley, as they turned
back towards the camp. - “I wouldn't mind betting
Hicks is keeping out of the way on purpose.”
“Or following the other chap,’/ said Joe.
“By God! You’ve struck it in one, I do believe.
Joe,” said the sergeant. “He’d be almost sure to
follow him. We 11 search the camp anyway.”
But Hicks was not at the camp, so Joe led the party
to the spot where the recent struggle had taken place.
“Have a look at that, Billy,” said Beazley, indi-
cating the spot to the black tracker.
Billy dismounted and peered about him. “White
feller big fightin’ feller all about here,” he said.
“Rollin’ about all same kangaroo. One, two, three
feller fightin’, mine tinkit. One feller ride away like
hell.”
“That’s the man we want, Billy. Follow him up.”
The black cantered off leaning sideways from the
saddle, with his eye on the ground. He led the way
along Holland’s route for about a mile and then
turned on to a big sand plain. Here he stopped.
“What’s the matter, Billy?”
Nother horse walkabout, boss, *he said, pointing
to a hoof-mark in the sand. “Bin track um first
feller, mine tinkit.”
“Hicks!” exclaimed the sergeant. “He’s after


him, too. Never mind him, Billy. You watchem first
feller.”
The party moved forward again. The tracks veered
round to the left, and presently the rabbit-proof fence
came into view. The black took his followers through
the gate and along the track leading away from it.
Then he struck off across a salmon-gum flat, leaving
that to skirt a clump of mallee, and continuing on
to another sand plain. Presently they emerged on
to an old sandalwood track, over which a lot of traffic
had been passing.
‘‘Where the devil are we now?” asked Beasley.
“We’re north of Mundooring,” said young Bob,
who was an expert bushman. “’This’ll be the track
up to Gardner’s, at Booracup. There's a lot of
mallet barking going on up this way.”
Billy dismounted and searched the track. He
seemed puzzled. “Horse make it big feller walk-
about,” he said. “One, two, tree, lot o’ horse.”
you pick up what you want, Billy?”
Billy shook his head. “All same stockyard.” he
said. 11 Too many horse goin ’ all about.
“Which way did he come on to the track?” asked
the sergeant.
“This way,” said Billy, indicating a westerly
direction.
“Then we’ll follow that way. Keep your eyes
skinned, Billy, to see where he leaves the track again.”
The party moved slowly. It was long past mid-
day. and, as all were feeling hungry, they made a
short stop in a watered gully, and fed the horses and
themselves. Later they moved on again, but although
Billy searched diligently, he could find nothing further
to guide him.


“Where does this track lead to?” asked the ser-
geant.
“Comes out at the gate at the north-west corner
of Mundooring, ” said Bob. “We must be getting
close up there now.”
Beazley looked at the sun. “I think we’d better
strike back again a bit,” he said. “There isn’t much
more time before sunset, and I don’t think this chap
would want to get too close to the settled parts. He
probably left the track further back or turned round
and went the other way. He ’ll have an idea we are
after him.”
“Funny his going back to the Tank,” said Joe.
“Murderers are always supposed to return to the
scene of a crime some time or other,” said Beazley.
They turned back and followed the track until it
was too dark to see, and then made for Mundooring.


Chapter XVI.
WHEN Joe Thompson left Holland’s Tank with his
team. Hicks followed up the tracks of the horseman
who had escaped him. At the point where they
turned off on to the sand plain he reflected for a
moment, and then hurried back to the tank. He
had been careful to walk a few yards away from
the tracks in view of the fact that Joe would un-
doubtedly bring the police and the tracker, and he
did not want to be mixed up in the affair more than
he could help. Going back he avoided the track
altogether.
He paced about the tank, fuming and fretting at
the delay of his., party. Now and again he would
ruefully rub his head, where the boot of the man he
had tackled had raised a large lump, and curse
softly.
“Poor old Long Bill,” he muttered once. “I
thought it was the other swine that was done in. an
now it was him done you in. I’ll get him for you,
Bill.”
Joe had handed over the rifle when he met the
others on the return journey. Hicks seized it when
the conveyance with his men arrived, filled the
magazine, saddled one of the horses, slung some chaff
over the saddle and tied a water bag and a tucker
bag to the saddle.


“I’ll be away a day or two boys,” he said. “If
anyone comes round askin’ for me you can tell ’em
I went out after a ’roo. That fat-headed Beazley. the
John Hop from Katanning, will be out here most
likely. If you let him on to what I’m doin’ I won’t
give you time to say your prayers.”
Hicks cantered away through the scrub avoiding
Holland's route. He picked up the horseman’s
tracks where they turned on to the sand plain and
followed them back through the rabbit proof fence
to where they took to the old sandalwood tracks.
Here he rode his horse about a great deal in order
to make many hoof marks and thus confuse the
tracker. He noticed with some satisfaction that the
tracks had been used a great deal, although there
were no fresh marks that day except those of the
man he was pursuing. A noise behind him made him
start. It came from a waggon and team which he
could see through the trees some distance aivay.
Behind it he could see a couple more teams. Hicks
chuckled.
“That'll put the police off, I reckon,” he said to
himself. “Now I must be off quick.”
For a white man Hicks was an expert tracker,
but he was far from being as clever as a black. He
had to travel very slowly, and his quarry must have
a good start on him. Keeping off the track he Avas
able to folloAv the hoof marks fairly easily. He
pushed on as quickly as possible, for night was
coming on, and it Avould soon be too dark to see.
The track ran through red loam at first, but later
began to mount a rubbly hill. Tracking here Avas
extremely difficult, but Hicks managed to keep going.
Presently the road ran alongside a dog-proof fence


on the other side of which sheep could be seen
grazing. Hicks stopped and took his bearings.
“Mundooring,” he said presently. “That’s Bar-
clay’s brand on the sheep/’
It was almost dark now. and the tracks were too
faint to see. Reluctantly Hicks abandoned the pur-
suit for the night and turned off into the bush to
find a camping place. He chose a jam tree gully
about half a mile from the fence where there was
a water hole and good feed. He doled out a little
chaff for his tired horse and hobbled the animal
out. He lit no fire but contented himself with a
deep draught from his water bag and a hearty meal
of soda bread and tinned meat. This completed he
laA r on his back, smoked his pipe and meditated.
Next morning he had some difficulty in locating
his horse. He had been afraid to put a bell on it,
and when he woke it was nowhere to be seen. Leav-
ing bi’eakfast until later he went in search of the
missing animal. Close to the Mundooring fence he
suddenly dodged behind a tree as three horsemen
went in through the gate from the Katanning road.
He recognised them easily as Joe, Beazley and a
black boy.
“Blast ’em,” muttered Hicks. “If I’m goin’ to
have any luck it will have to come to-day. Those
cows will be back here to-night from the Tank.”
He Avatehed the trio out of sight and then pursued
his search for the missing horse. He found it e\ ren-
tually not far from the camp. Hicks SAvalloAved a
hasty breakfast, lit his pipe, saddled up and rode
back to the point Avhere his pursuit had ended the
night before. Tracking over the rubble Avas even
harder that day. The gravel had been Avorn into a


hard, smooth track, and teams had passed over it
in the night. Hicks was nonplussed and presently
gave up trying to pick out the tracks. Hitching his
horse to a tree, he walked forward to the softer
ground and tried to locate the tracks there. Failing
to discover anything he retraced his steps and tried
to discover a point at which the hoof marks had left
the track. This he was unable to do.
These operations occupied him till mid-day. He
made another hasty meal and returned to the search.
Starting again below the rubbly hill he followed the
tracks as far as he was able, but there was a point
past which he could make no headway. The track
ran straight on and merged with the Katanning road
at Barclay's gate. He satisfied himself that his
man had not followed the road past the gate.
"P'raps he went in the gate,” muttered Hicks.
“I should have thought of that before, but it don’t
seem likely. He vaulted the gate and inspected the
road. There were the fresh marks of the three
horses that had gone in that morning, and just by the
gate there was something else —the impression of a
hoof with a gap on the near side. Hicks mentally
threw his hat in the air.
"‘Cunning, cow!" he muttered. “What’s his
game ?”
He ran back to his horse, led it into the bush out
of sight, made a mental note of the spot and ran
back to the gate. The one hoof mark on the road
led to many which ran through the paddock. Hicks
followed carefully. He had a notion that his man
was not far away now.
“He’ll be camped at the dam,” he muttered


“Must have come in here for water, though it isn’t
the place I’d choose myself.”
The gapped hoof followed the gully where track-
ing was easy. Hicks went forward on tiptoe, for the
big dam was close at hand. As the water came into
view he could see a number of sheep on the banks
drinking. Hicks scratched his head. The presence
of the sheep was proof that no man was very near.
The tracks stopped at the dam and then went on.
Hicks followed them until he came in sight of a horse
grazing. It was sadddled and hobbled and bridled
although the bit was out of its nuouth to enable it
to eat in comfort.
“That’s one to Hicks,” said the gentlemjan as he
removed the hobbles and the other gear. “If Jack
Evans wants you now in a hurry, he’ll get no further
than wantin’.” He gave the horse a well directed
kick in the ribs which set it careering about the
paddock.
Back at the dam Hicks searched about for human
tracks. These he discovered eventually along the
bottom of the clay bank. He followed them in a
crouching attitude until they stopped at the mouth
of an old shaft. Hicks chuckled and stopped.
Down there, are you, me beauty? Caught like
a dog in a hole! Better stop there as long as you
can, Jack, for your own sake. Soon as you come up
you’re goin’ to join poor old Long Bill.”
Hicks refrained from looking down the shaft and
took up a position behind a dead york-gum a few
yards away. There he sat with his eyes glued on the
shaft opening and his hands caressing his rifle.
The sun sank in a blaze of gold and orange, and
dusk came stealing up the gully like an invisible


mist. The blinds of night were drawn by unseen
hands. The droning of the bush dropped to a quiet
murmur, and a lone star burned softly in the western
sky. The man, waiting in the shadow of the dead
tree, (‘hanged his position and cursed softly. He
seemed to have been waiting half a lifetime.
Twilight turned to black night. A faint roar like
the surf of the sea could be heard from the south.
The noise increased until the bare branches of the
ringbarked timber began to move swiftly and a fresh
cold wind blew. The south breeze, better known in
those parts as the Albany Doctor, had arrived.
Then a long wait relieved only by the creaking of
dead branches and the occasional neigh of a
horse in the distance. High up above the
stars burned brilliantly and relieved the blackness a
little. Presently the eastern sky /began to glow and
the rim of a large yellow moon showed through the
trees. The man waiting got up and stretched him-
self, but almost immediately crouched again, his eyes
glued on the spot where he knew the mouth of the
shaft to be. His thoughts were as black as the night,
bad been. He meant to kill.
The moon rose above the withered branches of the
timber and spread a white carpet on the earth. The
man watching suddenly stiffened. There was some
movement at the mouth of the shaft. A head ap-
peared and glanced about cautiously. Hicks raised
his rifle and sighted on it, but he lowered the weapon
almost immediately. The light Avas too bad for any
fine shooting.
Presently a head and shoulders appeared, and then
a man leapt on to the solid earth. Hicks took care-
ful aim at the man’s chest and fired. There was a


shout. The man dropped, then got on his feet again
and ran. Hicks followed, cursing under his breath.
The timber was thick and he could not shoot with
any chance of success.
The man who had come out of the shaft was fleet.
He dodged hither and thither, but kept his direction
which was straight for Mundooring homestead. Tbc
runners were about even, but Hicks was hampered
by his rifle. The timber continued thick right up to
the homestead fence. On the other side was cleared
land. The pursued leapt the fence and made for
the homestead. Hicks stopped at the fence and took
aim. There was no mistake about this shot. The
man ahead threw up his arms and dropped.
That’s for you, Long Bill, ’ ’ muttered Hicks. He
jerked out the empty shell, put it in his pocket, and
disappeared at a quick run among the dead timber.


Chapter XVII
THE search party arrived at Mundooring about dark.
Dinner was waiting for them. Mrs. Barclay and the
two girls, who had had theirs earlier, waited on the
hungry men. Bob smiled at Harrie, who smiled
hack. * She was feeling very happy. Whenever Bob
caught her eye he smiled. Once Harrie thought of
the kiss he had given her that morning, and she
blushed and looked away. Young Bob was in good
spirits. Men are happy when they come home to
their womenkind at evening, and he had already
began to assume a proprietary interest in Harrie.
After the meal Joe said he must go home. Barclay
pressed him to stay, as they would be out again in
the morning, but Joe wanted to see Jimmy about
something and said he would be up first thing in the
morning. Barclay lent him a fresh horse.
“I’ll see you to the gate, Joe,” said Harrie. Young
Bob would have liked to go, too, but he had fine
sensibilities in some things.
“There’ll be a moon soon,” said Joe as he and
Harrie walked toward the gate which was only a few
yards away.
“Aren’t you seared riding through the bush at
night, Joe?”
“No fear,” said Joe grinning. “There’s nothing
to hurt you.”
“But it’s so terribly lonely.”
“I’m used to that. Harrie.”
“Poor old Joe,” she said softly.


Joe unhitched the gate and led his horse through.
He did not mount, but put one foot on the lowest
bar and leaned his arms on the top.
“Why do you say that?”
“You seem such a lonely man, Joe.”
I don t mind, Harrie. I’ve got Jimmy, and the
Barclays are very kind. And then I’ve got you.”
“You’re lonely too, Harrie.”
“So I am, in a sense. We’re two lonely people,
Joe. It s just as well we adopted each other isn’t
it? I’m glad I’ve got you. You’re such a real
person. I wish I could stay here alwavs.”
“So do I.”
“But I couldn’t, of course.”
Joe gulped. The thought came to him that if he
could take those two slender hands in his and hold
them for ever, nothing else would matter much.
“You could,” he said.
“How?”
Joe gulped again and began to wish he had con-
sulted Miss Bradley on the question of proposing
matrimony. He wanted badly to tell Harrie she
could stay as his wife, but he couldn’t find the
words.
“How?” she asked again.
Dunno, ’ ’ said Joe limply. ‘ * Queer things happen
sometimes.”
“You ought to get married, Joe.”
I m not the sort that gets married, Harrie,
unless ”
“Unless what?”
Unless the one I wanted was willing.”
“And isn’t she, Joe?”
I don t think so, said Joe miserably.


“Perhaps you have never asked her.”
“No, I haven’t done that.”
“Why not?”
“Well, it’s a tough job, and I don’t think she
would have me.” »
“But you can never tell till you try.”
“Is it any good me trying, Harrie?”
“Why ask me?”
“Because if you told me it was any good trying,
I’d do it.”
“But I don’t know her.”
“Oh, yes, you do.”
“Oh, how exciting! I wonder who she is.”
Joe gave up hope there. He had never had much.
He knew little of women and their ways, but Harrie’s
demeanour all through had not been that of a
woman who loved him. Perhaps some day she
might.
“Do you know any girl, Harrie, who would say
yes if I asked her?”
“Of course, fleaps of them ought to be proud to
marry you.”
“Ought be, perhaps, but is there one you know
of—one of whom you could say definitely that she
would. ’ ’
“I could only speak for myself of course and—
oh, Joe!” she exclaimed remorsefully, “you don’t
mean —you aren’t ”
“I’m just talking a lot of rot,” said Joe miserably.
He saw his blunder and was trying to save her
feelings. “Don’t take any notice of what I’ve been
saving.”
“But, Joe, you don’t really ”
“Of course not, Harrie.”


Joe dear, I do love you, and I don’t want vou to
be hurt.”
I know that, Harrie. I was only joking. I’m
not a maijrying sort.”
‘ I’m your cousin, you know, Joe.”
“That’s it,” he said with an effort.
■'And you’re not to marry anyone f don’t approve
of.”
“1 m not going to marry anyone.”
“We’ll see.”
Lnless they’re as good and as beautiful as a
cousin of mine. Good-night, Harrie. See you in
the morning,” and Joe swung lightly into the saddle.
“Joe,” she said, with a catch in her voice. “Bend
down a minute.”
She took his brown cheeks in her hands as she
searched his eyes. Then she kissed the tip of his
nose and both cheeks.
And I 11 only marry a man who is as fine and
good as a cousin of mine,” she said. “Good-night.
Joe, dear. It’s quite /proper for cousins to kiss
isn’t it?” \
Joe turned abruptly and cantered away. Harrie
listened for a moment to the hoof beats and then
walked slowly back to the house. She was endeav-
ouring to persuade herself that Joe meant
nothing by his conversation. She would not
hurt his feelings for worlds, and although he had
said he was only joking-she felt that he had meant
some things. At the back gate she almost ran into
young Bob’s arms.
‘ Oh, you did give me a fright!” she gasped. “I
didn’t see you in the dark.”


“Sorry, Harrie. Isn’t it a beautiful night?”
“Lovely.”
“Don’t go in yet.”
“Why not?”
“I haven’t seen you all day, and I want to talk
to you.”
“Can’t you do that inside?”
“No, I can’t. Not with all the mob about. What
did old Joe have to say for himself?”
“That’s a secret,” said Harrie tantalisingly.
“Couldn’t you rake up a secret for me, too?”
“I don’t think you could keep one, Bob.”
“Try me.”
“I’ve no secrets to tell.”
“Are you fond of Joe, Harrie?”
“Of course.”
“Very fond?”
“Very.”
“Damn!” muttered Bob.
“I must be going in.”
“Don’t go, Harrie. Let’s sit on the woodheap and
watch the moon rise. There she is just starting to
peep through the trees. Here s a box for you to
sit on and-I’ll just take the edge. Now is that
comfy?”
“Splendid. Isn’t the moon big?”
' “Yes. Are you going to many Joe?”
“What a question to ask? Look! It’s yellow
too.”
‘ ‘ But are you ? ’ ’
“Little boys shouldn’t ask questions,” she said
lightly, although her heart was beating most un-
comfortably.


“Harrie! Couldn’t we always. . .
. You and
I . . . . like this?”
“I’m not a little boy, ’’ he growled. “I’m a man. ’’
“Look! There’s the man in the moon.”
“Where?”
She pointed with a slim /finger. Bob glanced along
it, and the process brought his head very close to
hers.
I can t see him. ’ Bob could see nothing. The
only thing he was aware of was the sweet intoxica-
tion of her proximity.
“There, silly.”
Their heads came closer until their hair mingled,
lie pressed his cheek to hers and she did not draw
aw-ay. Somehow his arm stole about her waist and
her unoccupied hand became imprisoned in his firm
brown fingers.
“I must go in,” she said without the slightest in-
tention of going.
Harrie! He did not recognise his own voice.
There was the faintest possible flutter of her
imprisoned hand.
“Turn this way,” he commanded
She did so and their lips met.
“Oh, Bob!” she whispered. “I’m so glad.”
“You darling!”
The big yellow moon peering over the tree-tops
must have smiled, for she has a young heart despite
her antiquity, and the tale these two lovers told is
for ever new. Growing bolder she left the shelter
of the tree and shone full on these new-made lovers
and gave them a golden blessing. They forgot the
moon which had brought them together. They were
oblivious to the stirring of the breeze in the leaves


V
A form leapt the enclosed fence, and made straight for them.


of the big jam tree close by. They heard none of
the million sounds that floated up to them from the
bush. They only knew what their hearts held and
were glad.
Suddenly, in the midst of their dreams, a shot rang
out. Harrie started.
“What was that?”
“One of the men shooting ’possums in the ring-
barking probably. Never mind the old shot. Do
you love me as mucji as I love you, Harrie?”
“More, Bob dear.”
There was a crashing of dry twigs and the sound
of a man running.
“Look!” exclaimed Harrie. There’s a man
running. ’ ’
A form leapt the enclosure fence and made straight
for them. A sheet of flame seemed to leap out of
the fence accompanied by a deafening report. The
man running threw up his hands and fell, and then
all was still save for the crackling of twigs in the
paddock where an assassin was running away.
With a shout, young Bob leapt to his feet and
raced, up to the prostrate figure. Lights appeared
in the back verandah and Barclay and the sergeant
hurried out.
There! cried Harrie, pointing. “Oh, be quick!
Be quick!”
f
J - L „


Chapter XYIII
THEY carried the wounded man into the house and
laid him on young Bob’s bed. The
entered his back and come out in front inflicting a
ghastly wound. Mrs. Barclay brought brandy, and
the two girls searched for bandages. Under the
influence of the spirit the man revived.
“Where am I?” he asked in a whisper.
“Mundooring,” said Barclay. “Some one shot
you while you were running here. Who was it?”
“Must have bin Harry Hicks. 'He’s done me in
this time.”
“Take his depositions, Mr. Barclay,” said Beazley.
“I’m off after Hicks,” and he rushed out of the
room. At the back gate he met Joe, who had heard
the shooting and returned. The sergeant explained
matters and took Joe with him.
“Someone ought to go for the doctor,” said Mrs.
Barclay.
The man shook his head. “I’m past doctors,” he
muttered.
“Tell Anderson to go in for Dr. Rogers,” said
Barclay to Bob. “Tell him it’s urgent. There may
be a chance.”
“Feeling easier?” he asked, turning to the man.
“As easy as I’ll ever be now, boss,” said the
man smiling feebly.
“Who are you?”
“Jack Evans they call me.”
“From where?”
“Nowhere partie’lar.”


“Are you the man who camped with Joe Thompson
out at Holland's Tank when that man was shot?’’
“Long Bill Mooney. Yes, I done him in.”
“Why?”
“It’s a long story, boss.”
“Give him some more brandy,” said Barclay.
Harrie came forward with the brandy. The man
stared at her and his jaw dropped.
“Little Harrie,” he muttered. “You’re Doc
Taylor’s little girl, ain’t you?”
“My name is Harrie Taylor.”
“I knew you was here,” he muttered. “That was
why I came back. You don’t remember Jack Evans
that used to carry you about when you was a baby
an’ give you the little yeller stones to play with.
You was too young to remember then, but I ain’t
forgotten.”
“Oh, did you know me when I was little?” asked
Harrie trembling.
“Hold me head up a bit. No, let Harrie do it.
I always meant to tell you some day, little Harrie.
You’d have known before this only for Hicks an’
Long Bill. I done Long Bill in, but he’d have killed
me if I hadn’t. Came on me that night at the
Tank. He fired first an’ I had to let him have it,
the swine. Next day I follered the other bloke’s
waggon an’ pinched Long Bill’s moke an’ got away.
1 done it all for you.”
“Oh,” said Harrie. “I didn’t want you to kill
people for me.”
“Bless you, I never killed him for you. I had to
do that to save me own life. What I done was to
earn money to keep you at school an’ give you your
proper place in life. I ain’t braggin’ about it,


Harrie. I done it because I couldn’t help it. You
was such a helpless little thing with such pretty
ways. I always had a heart for the little kids, but
you was the daddy of them all.
“If you could turn me a bit, Harrie, I’d be com-
fortabler. That*s better. I had a hankerin’ to see
you agen. I didn’t want to intrude because I’m a
rough chap. I wanted to see what you’d growed up
like. I hung about Ritehley an’ found out you was
here, so I come down, although it wasn’t safe. I’ve
bin tryin’ for days to get a word with you alone.
Then it came over me to go out to the Tank agen.
I don’t know what made me. I met Hicks there.
Him an' Long Bill was partners with me once, but
they turned dog on me. Hicks an’ me had a scrap
an’ he’d have done me in but fbr the big bloke
I camped with out there. Funny he should be there
agen when I was.”
“He was arrested after the murder,” said Barclay.
“He wouldn’t have struck no trouble, boss. I’d
have given meself up if they’d done anjThin’. ”
“Tell me about my people'if it doesn’t hurt too
much,” said Harrie.
“It don’t matter if it hurts now. I ain’t got long
an’ I want you to know it all. Your father was Dr.
Felton Taylor, and he was a clever man. The miners
up at Barrauangie swore by him. It wasn’t much
of a place. Just a little minin’ town beyond Cool-
gardie, but the gold Avas there and Ave Avas gettin’
plenty of it. Your father oughter been, in the city,
but lie Avas a young man an’ a bit Avild. He brought
your mother up there after they Avere married but
it Avas no place for a lady. She Avas th’ liAun’ image
of you, only more delicate like.


“Well, me an’ Hicks an’ Long Bill was workin'
a little claim up there an’ doin’ well. When you
was born all the miners clubbed together an' made
up quite a heap of gold for you. You was the only
white kid in the place, an’ all those big rough men
worshipped you. Your mother never seemed to get ,
over it. She faded an’ faded, an’ one day when
you was about a year old she went east. It was a
terrible blow to your father. He was right off his
head for a while. We give her a great funeral, an’
afterwards you was put in the care of old black
Lizzie an’ Mamie Fewster, th’barmaid at th’ pub.
They say Mamie wasn’t what she ©lighter been, but
she had a kind heart an’ that makes up for most
things. Well, your father didn’t seem to be able to
get his own back somehow. He was all the time
cursin’ himself for bringin’ your mlother to such a
place. It wasn’t no place for a lady. He took to
drmkin ’ pretty heavy, an ’ one day he dropped in
a kind o’ fit an’ never come out of it.
“That left you all alone in the world. The doc
never spoke of his relations, an’ we didn’t know any-
one belongin’ to him, so we sort of had to adopt you.
Me an’ Long Bill an’ Harrj* Hicks swore a solemn
oath to provide for you all your life. We was gettin ’
plenty of gold an’ could afford it easy enough. 1
made ’em swear it solemn over the dead body of
vour father. We was all lonelv men with nobodv
V %,
carin’ for us, an’ you was one of those happy little
kids that loved everybody. I can see you now,
toddlin’ about outside your father’s house an’ wavin’
your little hand to big rough Jack Evans as he
came down the street. I always loved the little kids,
but you fair got me. X useter drop in of a night


an’ give a hand in the house when your father
wasn’t well. Many’s the time I’ve Avashed out the
little bottle you useter drink your milk out of.
Mamie an’ old Lizzie fair loved you, too. Harry an’
Long Bill gave a hand sometimes, but they wasn’t
so k£en as me. You useter say to me ‘ Wide. Jacky,’
m'eanin’ you Avanted a ride a cock horse on me knee.
Many’s the time I dangled you though you Avouldn’t
think it now.”
Harnie gave a little choke. There Avas something
grandly simple in the AVay this dying man told of
his love for a little child. The tears streamed out
of her eyes and she cried a little.
“There, miss,” said Evans clumsily. “Don’t take
on. I always kneAv you’d have a kind heart. Well,
Ave got Mamie to take you down to Kalgoorlie an ’ Ave
set her up in a little shop there. We said she Avas
your aunt, an’ she took her proper name which Avas
Lucy. We fixed you both up comfortable, an’ the
three of us swore once agen to look after you an’
provide for you an’ get you brought up a lady
which was your right. Then Ave went back to the
claim. By an’ bye, Mamie died an’ we got you sent
to Ritchley. Harry Farrar the lawyer did it for
us. We knew him first up at Barranangie, where
he come to make money to get his profession. When
you Avent away, Ave couldn’t get down to see you.
We thought it better not to. You see you were goin’
to be a lady, an’ you Avouldn’t want rough blokes
like us claimin’ you or haAun’ anythin’ to do Avith
you. We useter send the money to Farrar an’ he
passed it on. Sometimes if I had an extra good
strike, I useter send along a bit to Miss Forsyth for
you. ’ ’


“Oh, I remember those little notes and what they
contained,” said Harrie. “We always wondered
who sent them.”
“Well, we done well at Barrauangie until Farrar
died. Just about that time the field petered out an’
we had to up swags an' get out. There was some
bad days after that. We couldn’t get on to anythin
payin', an’ things was anyhow. Sometimes we had
to go cuttin’ wood for the mines, an’ as soon as
we got a bit of brass together we’d get out
prospectin’ agen. But we never had no luck. Now
an’ agen I useter get a few quid together on the
quiet an’ send it along. I’d have given anythin’ to
knoAV how you was farin’, but I didn’t like to ask,
me bein’ just a roughie, you see, an’ you an’ Miss
Forsyth ladies. I had a little picture of you taken
by a chap at Barranangie, an’ often I useter take
it out when things was bad an’ look at it an’ wonder
how you. was gettin’ on. Often when the others
wasn’t lookin’ I useter pray God to let us strike it
rich agen, so that we could make everything right
for you, but the luck seemed dead agen us.”
“Oh, you shouldn’t have bothered,” cried Harrie.
“Miss Forsyth was awfully kind to me, and kept me
with her just the same. Oh, I wish you had let
us know. It might have saved you such a lot of
worry. ” v
“It don’t matter now,” said Evans. “You're in
your right place with good friends. There ain't
much use for the syndicate now, or what’s left of
it. There’s only one out of three that’s kept his
word, an’ he’s wanted for killin’ a bad beast that
couldn’t keep his. A couple of years ago we struck


it lucky agen, but when I reminded the others about
you, they said they’d done enough an’ wasn’t goin’
to be bothered about you no more. I said nothin’
then, thinkin’ they might change, but they didn’t.
I was determined you should have what was due to
you, an’ one night I slipped out of the camp with
half the gold an’ rode down this way. I knew I’d
be caught if I went through Kalgoorlie, so I dodged
there an’ come down the track. All the time I had
a feelin’ that Long Bill would be after me. He can
track like a nigger. I though I heard him that
night I camped at the Tank, an’ sure enough he
turns up in the middle of the night. I heard him
cornin’—sort of knew his horse’s step, so before he
gets there, I put the swag quiet like under the
waggon an’ slipped into the bush. Long Bill
muster seen me for he got to wanderin’ round with
his gun. I was hidin’ behind a big white gum when
he banged right'into me. He stood off an’ fired, but
I ducked just in time, an’ then grabbed him. We
muster been strugglin’ for a couple of minutes an’
he muster jerked in another cartridge. We was
battlin’ for the gun, an’ on the off chance I twisted
the barrel round to his face an’ pulled the trigger.
He dropped, but I loaded up agen in case he got
up an’ come at me. I lit a match then an’ seen he
was dead. It gave me a fright. I come out in a
cold sweat for I’d never killed a man an’ never
wanted to. Without thinkin’ I dropped the gun an’
bolted. I heard Thompson searching about, an’ I
hung round out of observation until he left. Then
I follered, an’ as soon as we got inside the rabbit
fence, I unhitched Long Bill’s moke from behind the
waggon an’ cleared.”


“Then you couldn’t help killing him/’ said Harrie.
“No, mfes. It was me or him.”
“I don’t know what to say,” said Harrie help-
lessly. “You’ve told me so much and I’ve so much
to thank you for.”
“Don’t say nothin’, miss,” said Evans uneasily.
“I don’t want no thanks or anythin’ like that.
Makes me feel uncomfortable it does. What I done
was real pleasure. I always loved the little kids,
an’ I’m glad you’ve growii up a lady as you ought
to be. I’m sorry Long Bill went under. I didn’t
want to kill him. If he’d have kept his word
there’d have been no trouble at all. I’m glad I seen
you, miss. I’ll die happy now.”
“Oh,” cried Harrie tearfully. “You must get
better. We’ll care for you. I’ll nurse you and make
you and make you well again, and love yoy all
my life for what you have done for me.”
“I’m only a rough chap,” muttered Evans.
“Oh, I think you big rough men are the best of
all,” she cried. “Oh, don’t leave me now you have
found me. I need you just as much.”
v “You was such a dear little kid,” said Evans
brokenly. “Got round me heart, you did, with your
cunnin’ little ways. A bloke couldn’t help wantin’
to make things right for you.”
Harrie bent forward impulsively and kissed him
on the forehead.
“God bless you for that,” he muttered. Tears
rolled down his rough cheeks and he lay still.
“Brandy,” cried Harrie. “Oh, don’t die, please
don’t die.”
Presently Evans opened his eyes. “That was a
decent bloke I met out at the Tank,” he said. “It


wasn’t his fault you didn’t get the gold. Not many
blokes would have done what he did for me an’
you. All I could do was slip a note under his
door askin’ him to let you have the stuff, an’ he
done what I wanted like a true mate. I’d like to
thank him.”
“We all love Joe,” said Harrie.
“I’d die happier if I knew you was well provided
for,” went on Evans. “You’ve got Miss Forsyth,
but a woman ain’t enough. There ought to be
a man somewhere, even if he’s only in the back-
ground, like I was.”
“I’ll see to that,” said young Bob huskily.
“Harrie and I are going to be married some day.”
Evans beckoned him over and searched his face.
“Swear you’ll always love and protect her,” he said.
“I swear it,” said young Bob gripping the almost
lifeless hand.
“You was such a knowin’ little thing,” said the
man, “an’ I always loved the little kids. It’s a good
thing for a man to have a little kid in his life.”
There was a stir outside and presently Joe entered.
“We got him,” he said. “It was the greatest
bit of luck. He must have fallen over a tree and
fired his rifle accidentally. He couldn’t find his
horse, and while he was looking for it we came on
him. Beazley’s got him outside now.”
“Who’s that?” asked Evans.
“Joe Thompson. The man you camped with.”
Evans with an effort put out his hand. “I don’t
know you, Joe,” he said, “but you an’ me would
have bin good mates. Next best thing to havin’ a
little kid is a good mate. You done for me what few
men would have done an’ got yourself into trouble


over it; but I'd have given myself up if they hadn’t
let you go,”
“That’s all right, mate,” said Joe.
“I’ve knocked about an’ lived hard, an’ I ain’t
what you call a gentleman, but no man could ever
say I turned down a good mate. I ain’t got long
but so long as I’m on deck I’m a mate of yours,
Joe Thompson.”
“We’ll get you through, old man,” said Joe.
Evans shook his head and relapsed into silence.
Harrie reached for the brandy and moistened his lips.
“There ain’t nothin’ to live for now,” he muttered.
“I set meself somethin’ to do, an’ now it’s done. I
don’t take no credit for it, because I couldn’t help
meself. I never had a little kid of me own. There
was a woman once, but I couldn’t ask her. I was
too rough, but I useter think we might have had a
little kid like Harrie. Perhaps that’s what made me
love Harrie. A man’s got to love someone.”
“That’s right,” said Joe. “Loving a woman
doesn’t always mean that you’ll get her, but you can
go on loving her just the same.”
“That’s it, mate. That’s the sort of love that
counts. That’s why you go on lovin’ a little kid.
There ain’t nothin’ to get.”
He began to breath heavily and painfully. “Kiss
me agen, Harrie. I’m glad I saw you before I went'
out. I always though you’d grow up pretty an'
good. Old Jacky was right that time.”
There was silence for about five minutes during
which the man seemed to doze. Then he opened his
eyes.
“Harrie,” he Avhispered.


“I’m tired,” he muttered. “Dead beat; I’ll turn in now and
be fresh for the morning.”


.
*
'
' -
• ' /
/
\
AT HOLLAND’S TANK 183
Harrie laid her cheek against his.
“I'm sorry I done Long, Bill in.
“Never mind that now, Jaeky, dear.
“I’m tired.” he muttered. “Dead beat. I’ll
turn in now an’ be-fresh for the momin’.”
So he went out —a man whom love had passed apd
yet held —a rough, uncouth man who had given his
life to a little child and counted the giving as great
joy.


Chapter XIX
JOE THOMPSON was coming home with an empty
waggon after having discharged a load of wheat in
town. It was Saturday, and he was contemplating
with some pleasure the approaching day of rest. He
stood on the footboards lounging against the waggon
Frame with his big brown arms folded and his lips
closed on a freshly lit pipe. The Holland’s Tank
mystery had been cleared up for some weeks. Hicks
was awaiting his trial for murder, and in the Mun-
dooring district things had gone back to their wonted
calmness.
When in town Joe had paid a visit to the little
cemetery, and had leaned for a long time on the
railing round a grave, and mused. A new head
stone had just been erected there;
TO THE MEMORY OP
JOHN EVANS,
Who died at Mundooring, 19th September, 1907.
‘“Forasmuch as ye did it unto these my little ones,
ye did it unto Me.”
And over the railing Joe had pondered over many
things and found comfort. For many weeks he had
been eating the bread of disappointment. The
ending of his hopes of Harrie had gone hard with
him. He had been prepared to wait for her until
love for him had begun to blossom in her heart, and


now young Bob Barclay had taken her from him
and life was hardly worth living.
It was pleasant travelling in the cool of the
evening. The sun was almost out of sight and a cool
breeze had sprung up. Home was very close now.
He could see his boundary fence, and surely that
was a figure on a bicycle coming down the track
towards him. Joe suddenly felt shy and confused.
It was long since he had seen Miss Bradley, and he
did not know what his reception would be. Ever
since the advent of Harrie he had not been once to
old Jack Walker K He had thought of going there
after Harrie and Bob had settled their future and
given him his first great disappointment, but he
had felt that the schoolmistress might have felt
slighted, and he did not care to risk the possibility
of her scorn. Things were easy with Joe now. He
had taken off a good crop, and his affairs had settled
down into their usual placid groove.
Something stirred uneasily in Joe’s chest as the
schoolmistress approached, but it disappeared as she
came abreast of the waggon and smiled at him in
the old familiar way. Joe thought it fine of her to
greet him thus, and stopped his horses.
“Just getting home?” he said.
“Yes, Mr. Thompson,” she said brightly. “I’ve
been to Mundooring to see Mrs. Barclay. How have
you been all this long time 1 ’”
Joe got down. “Not so bad,” he replied. “I
reckon you were wondering what had become of
me.”
Miss Bradley flushed. Joe’s words implied that
she had been looking for his coming, and her
feminine nature resented the suggestion that she


took even the faintest interest in him or ever wanted
to see him. But she recognised that his words were
true, and somehow to her Joe was different from
other men. \
“Oh, but you had your cousin,” she said quickly,
“and she had to take precedence over us all.”
“I was coming,” he said clumsily, “and then I
didn’t tliink I would.”
“So the young people have fixed things up among
themselves,” she said watching him closely.
Joe flushed and said nothing.
“They are a handsome pair,” went on Miss
Bradley lightly, “and they are both tremendously
happy.”
Bob s a good chap, said Joe generously.
“And a lucky one,” said Miss Bradley with equal
generosity. “Mr. Barclay is going to build them
a house on the Dooyering property, and I suppose
they will be married next year.”
Joe studied the sky and then the ground. There
was something he wanted to say and he didn’t know
how to say it.
I 11 probably be moving away from here soon,
Mr. Thompson. I hear there are some changes going
forward and I expect to be included in them.”
“I’m sorry, ’’ said Joe bluntly.
Oh, but I’m glad. It means promotion. One
must look after that.”
“I’m sorry you’re going all the samfe,” he said,
feeling that the only joy left him was about to be
taken away.
It is nice to be regretted, but my successor will
probably be much nicer.”
“When are you going?” asked Joe.


“Oh, not for some months, perhaps, and then
again it may be a matter of weeks only.”
“I hope it’s months,” said Joe.
“It’s a lonely life for a woman out here,” saio
Miss Bradley. “None of us like going to the bush.”
“It’s lonely for all of us,” said Joe. It gets
you down sometimes. Life isn t all happiness.’
“Of course not,” said the schoolmistress. “If
there were no unhappiness how would you be able to
recognise the happiness?”
“But some things are too hard,” said Joe.
“Not so hard when you look back on them, Mr.
Thompson.”
“It’s the going through that’s hard.”
“Yes, but you get through eventually. If we Ead
everything we wanted in this life we would perish
of ennui. We must expect disappointment some-
times.”
“I suppose so,” said Joe gloomily.
“And I must move on if I want to get home before
dark.”
“Can I come and see you on Sundays again?”
blurted out Joe, who had been trying to ask the
question ever since the conversation had begun.
“Of course,” said Miss Bradley, lightly. “You
know I’m always glad to see you.”
“I thought ” began Joe.
“What did you think, Mr. Thompson?” asked
Miss Bradley, who knew quite well the answer to
her question.
“Oh,* nothing,” said Joe. “Perhaps I reckoned
vou wouldn’t want to be bothered with me.”
“When you are bothering me I shall let you know.
Mr. Thompson. And now good-bye for the present.”


Joe took her hand and held it. “You’re a good
friend. I wish yon were’nt going. Life isn’t so
easy that a man can afford to lose a friend who
has done a great deal for him. There’ll be nobody
left.”
friends don't vanish just because they are at a
distance.”
But you can’t talk to them when you want to.”
“But there are other people, Mr. Thompson.”
“I make no more friends,” he said. “What’s
the good when you lose them. A man is better on
his own.”
“That’s pessimism,” she said smiling.
It may be. Things don't go right somehow.”
I can see I’ll have to cheer you up, Mr. Thompson.
One swallow doesn t-make a summer, or one disap-
pointment a life of misery. I think your malady is
curable.’\
Joe shook his head.
‘When you can’t get what you want, forget it
and try something else. The child cries for the
moon and is content with a rubber ball. You
wouldn’t have it cry for the moon all its life, would
you ? ”
“A child forgets,” said Joe, “but a man
remembers.”
“Then there is the other person to be considered,”
said Miss Bradley in her clear voice. “I have known
men mope because a girl would not marry them.
That is a selfish attitude. They do not consider the
woman’s feelings. No girl wants to be tied up to a
man she cannot love, especially when the right man
wants her.”


“I never looked at it in that way before,” said
°‘ 6 ‘Well think it over. Now, if you don’t mind 1 U
have my hand back. 1 must fly if I want to be
home before dark.”
Joe dropped her band and blushed. ‘Would yon
stay in the district if I asked you to?” he said;
clumsily. _
Miss Bradley’s eyes searched his face, hor an
instant they revealed all the heart hunger of a lonely
woman. “I might,” she said lightly. “Ask me
that later on. I’ll be seeing you soon.”
*
“Yes.”
“To-morrow week,” she called out as she rode
slowly away
“No, to-morrow.”
He watched her riding down the track. Suddenly
all his troubles seemed to slip from him and he rode
home feeling that a newer and better life was
opening up before him —a life in which all the
smudges would be wiped clean for and e^ei.
[The End.]


1/- each.
THE “BOOKSTALL” SERIES.
New Volumes added Monthly.
1/2 posted.
Sporting Novels
ARTHUR WRIGHT
Australia’s most popular Novelist
A GAME OF CHANCE
A story of a daring attempt at impersonation, which for
a time succeeds with startling results. A strong sporting
interest and a good love story run throughout the novel.
IN THE LAST STRIDE
A rattling good story, which deals with the adventures
of an »all-round athlete. Undoubtedly one of the best
Australian sporting novels ever published.
THE SPORT FROM HOLLOWLOG FLAT
An exceptionally bright and entertaining storv, which is
acclaimed oy the critics to be one of the best novels this
popular author has vet written.
GAMBLER’S GOLD
A capital sensational story, in which the course of true
love is impeded by the effects of an old-time tragedy, but
hich is again set on its happy way by means of some
fine sporting episodes.
RUNG IN
Strength, A sparklm S noTel , possessing great
A ROGUE’S LUCK
A thrilling story that holds the reader’s interest from
page to page.
N.S.W. BOOKSTALL CO, LTD, 476 George St, Sydney.


N.S.W. BOOKSTALL CO. LTD.; 476 George Street, Sydney.
The Poems of
ADAM LINDSAY GORDON.
The most carefully revised edition of the famous
poet’s works, including biographical and other notes
by A. G. Stephens—“ The best criticism of Gordon
yet,” says “ The Triad.”
Cloth-bound, 3s. 6d., posted, 3s. lOd.
Paper-covers, Is., posted, Is. 2d,
THE BULLETIN RECITER
THE BULLETIN BOOK OF HUMOR-
OUS VERSES & RECITATIONS.
Two volumes of the best of Australian verses suit-
able for recitation.
Is. each, Is. 2d. posted.
CANBERRA COOKERY BOOK.
of Good and Tried Recipes.
Including special section on jams, preserves, pickles,
sauces, etc.
Price Is. 6d., posted, Is. 8d
PUBLISHED BY
N.S.W. BOOKSTALL CO. LTD., 476 George Street, Sydney.


m
i


.
■
*






feili-la JlilfeiiißlMiiiai fe
aMpptapttgp
jpaim
