





PREAMBLE.
:o:
THIS book is -written, as its title implies, for a “ purpose.”
Now-a-days it is the fashion for .authors of even fiction, to
embody some definite meaning in their lucubrations : and, as
even a superficial student of modern literature "will allow, the
purposes set forth in a large number of the works that issue
from the public press are, in many instances, if not utterly had }
at least of such a nature as to confer no kind of benefit upon
humanity. We do not even except many of the so-called
“medical treatises” which are'launched at the heads of an
unoffending public. Within the last few years, there have been
more mad medical theories propagated by means of ink and
paper than even a Dulcamara could dream of after a tripe
supper; and if the unwary traveller by chance enter the shop of
a medical bookseller, he can, in ten minutes, sup fuller of
horrors than even Macbeth did after the murder of Banquo.
The profession of medicine is unfortunately possessed of more
empirics than any other calling. These may be said to be
divided into two classes, —those who have many theories and no
practice, and those who have some practice but no theory
whatever. These persons are equally dangerous to the patient,
and are, in consequence, the bulwark of the stone-mason, and of
the undertaker. It has been within the painful experience of
the author to meet with patients -who have been treated during
lengthened periods by members of the medical profession, and
who, instead of deriving any benefit therefrom, have found the
disorders under which they were suffering increased in virulence ;
and this, let it be marked, after a very large—indeed in some
cases an abnormal—expenditure of money. To individualise
would, of couise, be both unprofessional and invidious: Yet


when facts are’ stated the reader is entitled to have them
fortified by some corroborative circumstances. Of these,
fortunately, there are shoals at hand. For instance, “W*
J. A.,” writing to the author from Ballarat, says : e
“I told you that medical men—whom I esteem for their professional
skill and knowledge, and also for their sincere desire to cure —had failed to
relieve me ; and that my pocket had also been seriously affected by
purchasing trashy, obnoxious quack medicines, which, in fact, only tended
to irritate my genital organs.”
And again a Melbourne gentleman, well-known in that city,
writes as follows :
“ I tried everything I could hear of, and was attended by one of the
best physicians in Melbourne. My business calling me to Ballarat, I called
on you. Judge of my surprise in a few weeks, that I quite recovered. I
feel active and cheerful, in the place of langour and depression. I can
attend to my duties like another man, having lost that fickle, foolish
irregularity with which I was troubled; I feel prepared for any amount of
fatigue. Believe me that I shall always look upon you as my benefactor.”
To these extracts a special, even a solemn attention is directed.
A loathsome and unnatural disease is a great evil—a deplorable
misfortune; but this may be cured by a skilful, honest, and
conscientious man. The maladies, however, which follow the
effects of the deleterious drugs, and cruelly ignorant
“ operations ” of unscrupulous “ quack-doctors ” are far more
difficult of cure than the most virulent phase of the disease
itself.
The principal aim of the author, in “At Once ob Neves,”
is to set forth, in a clear, lucid, —and it is to be hoped, not
unscholarly manner, —the evils which emanate from those
covert acts of mortals, which are as loathsome in their nature as
they are deplorable in their results. If this end be attained, and
many of the human phantoms of this, and other cities, be drawn
hack into the ranks of manhood, and into the paths of virtue,
the labor of the author will be amply—nay, munificently-
rewarded.
E. H. T. BOTTEELL.
197, Castlereagh Street,
Sydney.


i:\L-
; .,r rA**-
AT ONCE OR NEVER;
d PAMPHLET WITH A PURPOSE.
“ It would be as well if vice were always exhibited to us—like the drunken
Helot to the youths of Sparta—in her true and disgusting shape.”
—Cotton.
“Man’s body , when ’tis stricken by disease,
So surely will the mind be ill at ease.”
—Sbneca.
“ The horrible catastrophes that sometimes happen to the vicious, are as
salutary to others by their warning as the most brilliant rewards of the
virtuous are by their example.”
—Steelb.
Wi live in a beautiful world; in a world that is fair with sunshine and
flowers, with waving trees and moving waters. We have but tp gaze out into
the sunshine, and our vision is entranced. Above, the clear blue of the vast
mysterious canopy, and all around the lavish beauties of Nature. To the
North, perhaps, a chain of mountains, upon whose wooded sides every colour
flashes, every shade reposes; to the South the vast rolling ocean, every wave
of which is tipped with gold by the hand of the mighty Magician ; to the
East vast undulating plains, the soft green of their verdure relieved by the
moving kine that are dotted about on every side; to the West, the vast city,
with its forest of spires—myriads of buildings—a place fair as the city we see
in a dream—all colour-dyed and gold-bedecked.
And if the world is beautiful, of what like’ are the denizens of it ?
Beautiful likewise P Are they as fair as the sky, and as pure as the mountain
stream ? Are they typical of the lofty tree which uprears its waving crest to the
heavens P Well— »om« of thtm. Let us draw a pleasant picture —something
TO _
>I'OOL ST RKF.T,


which assimilates itself to the world when it is at its fairest —to the sky and the
waters, when they are at their brightest and loveliest It is sweet to us to
make this pen-and-ink sketch of something pure and beauteous ; for by-and-
hy we shall have to delineate upon the page types of a very different
character.
The scene shall he—and it would be difficult to discover one more lovely
—the grounds of the Garden Palace on the occasion of a morning concert.
Grouped upon the sward, which overlooks perhaps the most magnificent
marine panorama in the world, is a coterie of four adults and one child—a
young married couple and their first-born, and the father and the mother of
the bride. Let us first take the elderly couple. The old gentleman, tall,
robust, and hearty. His age is nigh unto four score, hut although his hair
is white, there is a brightness in his eye and a suppleness in his gait that
many a man of half his age might envy. The old lady by his side is the
beau ideal of an elderly dame. Her figure has just enough of embonpoint to
he symmetrical, and her complexion is of that transparent clearness which is
an infallible criterion of the robust health which ernenates from a pure and
unsullied existence.
But fairer, oh, how fairer, is the daughter that stonds by her side,
holding by the hand a beautiful boy, whose long curly hair falls in a chesnut
cluster on his broad sailor collar. The young mother forms a picture that
absolutely lights up the scene with its loveliness. Imagine, then, a small,
well-shaped head, around which heavy plaits of chesnut hair are lightly
coiled. A broad forehead, beneath which sparkle a pair of bluish-grey eyes
of marvellous brightness—eyes in whose “starry depths” there is the gleam
of health, and the sparkle of virtue. Ber nose is as delicately chiseled as that
of Power’s Grech Slave, and small ruby lips close over two rows of teeth of
surpassing whiteness—
‘ 1 Teeth which gleam
Of Orient pearls a double seam.”
In the husband who stands near her we behold man in the noblest form
of manhood—tall, muscular, and hirsute ; a man, in short, in every accepta-
tion of the term. Upon him is affixed indelibly the stamp of health. It is a
good thing to look upon this upstanding, brawny fellow, whose heart is big,
and who is overflowing with animal iife and gaiety.
It is with a stern end in view that we have sketched this picture—with
the view of making a contrast perhaps hideous and repulsive-hut all the
more necessary in its hideousness and its repulsiveness for the enlightenment
of the ignorant—for the amelioration of the afflicted.
The family then that we have depicted springs from a stock that is sound
and healthful. Thus their children, and their children’s children inherit
their purity of blood and solidity of sinew. Thus, they live and flourish upon
the earth, as the loveliest roses flourish in a garden—an ornament and a boon
to the universe!
This is the bright side of humanity. Tho dark side has to follow.
Vice is wide-spread. Speaking in newspaper parlance, it has “the
largest circulation in the world.” Vice and crime, some persons consider,
are not synonymous, and many authors infer that the former is merely the
father of the latter. This is entirely an erroneous supposition. Vice, as
popularly known—the vice, for instance, of self-abuse is a far greater sin
than very many of the crimes that are punishable in the calendar. From
the mere fact that crimes are punishable—can be unearthed, laid bare to the
world, and avenged in the name of law and morality—it will be seen that a
deterrent is provided. The danger, therefore, is an open danger; and on


that account the less to be feared. On the other hand, the secret and
disgusting crime of self-pollution, which, at the very moment we are
writing, is slowly but surely eating its way like a canker-worm into the very
heart of the community, is not punishable by any tribunal. Yet in the 38th
chapter of Genesis we find that on Onan committing this offence he was
adjudged to death by his Maker, “ because he had done a detestable thing.”
There being no deterrent or preventive to this horrible vice, the
consequences of which, as will presently be seen, are appalling, a sacred
duty devolves upon some one—of warning the rising generation against the
commission of this crime, and of putting it in the power of those who are
now practising, or have practised the obnoxious habit, not only of breaking
themselves from it, but of being, by a skilful process, entirely cured of the
EFFECTS of their fearful indiscretion. That this is “a consummation
devoutly to be wished ” by many, we are well and perfectly assured.
The author of this little book, in a comparatively short life’s experience
of “ men and things,” and study of human nature, has had opportunities of
witnessing the harrowing effects of Onanism which have fallen to the lot of
no other practitioner. Having made Spermatorrhoea and Venereal Diseases
(of which more anon) specialities, the “examples”—poor timid shadows—
that have flocked to him for relief can be counted by hundreds. And it is a
proud thing to be able to say that not one of those patients applied in vain
to us to be clothed in the garb of “ moral manhood.”
Even as we write this, with the sun beaming brightly down upon the
city—with the subdued buzz of voices beneath the window, and the music of
children’s laughter floating in at times on the summer breezes, we have at
our hand piles of letters, nearly every one of which tells the same sad story
—the same fearful tale, varied only by circumstances. It is worthy of
remark that the greater number of the writers of these missives have
addressed us in the desperation of utter despair—as a forlorn hope—as the
last straw which was to keep their heads above ,the black flood of complete
physical and moral ruin. In stating this we state what is positively the case,
and we give it to the world for the benefit of whom it may concern—a hidden
legion, alas ! amongst the wealthy and the indigent alike! To those who
are ruining themselves slowly but surely ; to those who are already broken
and debilitated by the practice of a contemptible vice, we repeat the title of
our pamphlet—
AT ONOE-OR NEVER!
Modesty in a case where the body is wasting away is the falsest of all
modesty,—it is more than false, it is sinful! Self-pollution is a vice that
must be faced —both by the victim and by him who wishes to benefit his
follow-man. A hunter in an Indian jungle who comes suddenly upon a
tiger knows it is useless to flee. The danger has gone too far—he must face
it. And the metaphor applies in an equally apt manner to the subject now
under consideration.
Then let us face it.
The subject of course is not pleasant. It is not pleasant to think about
it, to write about it, or to treat it: and in doing all three we merely obey
the law of necessity—for necessity, in spite of the old Latin maxim, has a
law, and a very stringent one too.
Persons who indulge in self-abuse are to bo encountered almost
continually. When you meet them, and take a critical glance at their
appearance, it becomes at once evident that something is wrong. From
fifteen years upwards the symptoms in these cases become more pronounced.
You can mark the hollow cheek, the drooping form, the lack-lustre eye.
The hands are either feverishly dry, or else clammy with moisture. There
is no animation in the gait of these phantoms, and they start at the merest


sound. They arc shy and reserved, especially in the society of women.
They have only one pleasure on earth—that of gratifying their secret,
degrading vice.
A man being a free agent, and his existence belonging exclusively to
himself, is supposed to ho allowed to bring as much misery upon his own
soul; and to cause, short of actual mutilation, as much pain to his own body
as he may think fit, for the simple reason that it harms nobody hut himself,
But it frequently occurs that men who have ruined their bodies during ten
or twelve years of the loathsome practice taae to themselves wives, and thus
while bringing additional shame and misery upon their poor impotent selves,
are the means of causing insufferable agony to innocent, harmless girls.
Many, many of these cases have come under our knowledge, and could but a
JDiable Boiteux take a midnight journey over the roofs of the houses of this
city, he would find many a home—even where wealth is in plenty—rendered
wretched through the husband’s inability to perform his natural duties, In
law, a woman is permitted to have her marriage annulled; but there are
numberless obstacles in the way of a modest woman seeking a divorce in open
court on such a plea. Usually in a case of this kind the husband becomes
morose, and the wife reckless. The man, often after consulting the old
family pill-box, who is as much likely to cure him as he is to swallow any of
his own nostrums, takes to drink, and goes to the devil at rail-road speed;
whereas had he applied to us, we should have altered the whole of his life.
It is, of course, difficult when effecting cures of this kind to trove the
authenticity of the testimonials one receives; more particularly so far as we
are concerned, as our principle has always been to observe the strictest and
most inviolable secresy. Even where patients who, being so grateful at
being restored, entreated us to use their names, so as to further the means of
our benefiting humanity, we have strenuously withstood from availing
ourselves of these offers. Letters, however, which are unsigned can injure
no one, even if published entire ; we, however, purpose only giving extracts
from one or two epistles, which we take hap-hazard from the bundle near us.
Now then for No. 1 :
“ I should be wanting in gratitude if I failed to acknowledge what your
valuable medicine had done for me Ido not hesitate in acknowledging that
I was impotent when I first wrote to you. I feel now as if the natural
spring of life went on in the even tenor of its ways. My wife smiles and
wonders what has happened.
*******
I enjoy excellent health, and the parts affected were never stronger.
Indeed, I never recollect ever being better fitted for the performance of the
duties required. Accept ray humble thanks.”
These extracts speak for themselves, and the reader may imagine the
pleasure we feel at having, by means of a process we have made our own,
brought happiness to a home where all before was misery and desolation.
But let us take up another letter. Here it will be seen we were not only
successful in averting an awful calamity; but, even after the catastrophe
occurred we succeeded in bringing together “what no man should cast
asunder.” The truth of this touching letter lies upon the face of it. Now
mark :
“ In offering my mite of testimony as to the beneficial effects of your
invaluable medicine as a specific for ‘nervous debility,’ arising from
onanism—called masturbation. When I remember all my sufferings sinco
marriage and before, it is sufficient to rack my feeble brain, I cannot but
consider myself fortunate in having read your advertisement. My wife left


me. What for ? Because she found me less than a man—unable to fulfil
marriage obligations ; Oh, dear! —how I have cursed myself for ruining my
constitution (self-murder) for years.
***** * »
“I at once placed myself under your treatment; lam cured. I am,
thank goodness, also my wife can testify the truth. Your remedy must
prove a boon to all sufferers. Since my cure was effected I have seen its
magical effects, and I firmly believe it—the most perfect preparation
discovered for man’s relief.
* * *
“ P.S.—My wife is expected to be confined soon, I hope sincerely it
will be a healthy child.”
The concluding period is very naive, and would be ludicrous but for the
obvious earnestness of the writer.
Now before quitting the subject of married men who have lost all power
of coition through self-abuse, Wo ask the reader to ponder over the fearful
picture which this correspondent draws of his domestic hearth, before
consulting us. “My wife left me”! These dreadful words will find an
echo in the heart of every man who has experienced—and who has not ?—a
woman’s uncomplaining fidelity and a woman’s love. To all then who have
erred, and do now err, we solemnly adjure to mark well the foregoing, and
to bear always in mind our motto-title—
“AT ONCE OR NEVER!
We shall now devote a little attention to unmarried members of the
male sex. We have it on record, from an experience of over twenty years,
that the practice of onanism is commenced by boys at a very early age —even
—appalling as it may appear—under that of ten years. This fact is cor-,
roborated by the written testimony of the head-master of a large and impor-
tant school. In reply to a correspondent (Mr. Acton, author of a work on
the generative system), the head of the school thus writes :
“ You are not far wrong in your facts, if I may judge from my experi-
ence of the three great public schools and several private ones
I think those judge erroneously who select the public schools as the chief seat
of this evil. My own experience is the other way. I used to see it practised
shamelessly at a large private school I was at; and, alas ! it was known and
taught even at the little one. of boys all below ten years old, where I was before
that. At ,on the other hand, which I consider far the purest of the
three public schools. I have been connected with, all open or av owed practice
of the vice was sternly repressed by the force of public opinion
At any rate it is very important, as I said at first, that parents and tutors
should be fortified with a knowledge far greater than they generally possess
on these subjects, &c.”
The italics are, of course, ours ; but there the fact remains. Evidently,
therefore, it is necessary that some work, such as the present one, be widely
circulated, because what becomes a practice at ten years, merges into a mono-
maniac at sixteen. We would call the attention of these young sinners to a
few lines of verse which we have composed for them on the subject of
The Secret Sin.
Gaunt and hideous—foetid, foul,
’Mongst us stalks the grisly ghoul!
When the sun is in the sky,
When the pale, bright moon is shining
7


Watchful e’er that,Six ia by,
Bringing sorrow and repining,
Bringing folly, madness, crime ;
Bobbing mortals of their prime;
Bringing fathers’ doubting fears;
Bringing mothers’ scalding tears:
Bringing with his poisoned breath—
Ruin — desolation —DEATH.
It is difficult, without overstepping the bounds which we have laid down
for ourselves, to describe the exact effect of a long course of self-pollution has
upon the growing youth (to be scan, a man alas ! in name only) and the adult.
We wish to be realistic: but we wish to offend the sensibility of no one; for
to be realistic with our subject is to border on the ultra-grotesque.
In a fe v words, then, the symptoms from which patients afflicted with
spermatorrhoea suffer are invariably the same. Their letters to us giving
£ a ? n ? ses their cases are curiously similar in detail. Very many in point
o± tact are—allowing for a slight variation in phraseology—identical. Ono
writes to us, commencing as follows:
I am twenty-seven years of age, of a delicate, nervous temperament *
lam single, and likely to remain so unless you can assist me; for there is no
disguising the fact, I am impotent through the effects of self-pollution, which
1 practised from eleven years of age until twenty.two, when I became acquainted
with its mischief and left it off for ever.”
This is, truly, a terrific statement. Eleven long years of secret sin ! From
boyhood to manhood, when ideas are said to change, one unchangeable career
or covert crime!
“Ob, horror, horror, horror ! tongue nor heart
Cannot conceive nor name thee ! ”
He then proceeds :
I then obtained medical advice, which gave me only temporary relief, and
I have since applied to another medical man, who gave me tonics, but I am
grieved to say without effect. My bowels are regular, as lam very careful
in my diet; l am much afraid I am suffering from spermatorrhoea, as I have
noticed that the last drop of urine is thick and ropy, and there is always a
copious discharge of semen after any excitement by being in female society
and I have very frequent nocturnal emissions. The testicles and penis are
very small, and there is something like a lot of hard cords attached to the
left testicle. I have a slight cough always on me, with shortness of breathing,
hurriedi an ’, Very am °^ en vei 7 giddy when rising or stooping
These details are neither pleasant to road nor pleasant to quote, but they
must be read—aye, and re-read, and digested too, by many hundreds of
readers, before the good work which we are so anxious to perform can be
accomplished.
He continues:—
“My sight is weak. I have no confidence in myself. I blush and look
guilty at the slightest thing said to me, whether right or wrong; blushing
and becoming pallid by turns. I find my constitution is weakened most
terribly. I have got very thin this last month, and have had nocturnal
emissions sometimes two or three nights running. Sometimes, on going to
stool, a thick gummy matter comes from the penis, and there is a slight
irritation at the root of the penis after passing it. I have slight pains in the
back, and sometimes in the testicles.” *


Now, this is undoubtedly a bad case. In the first place the natural symptoms
were bad (as well they might be), but these symptoms had been aggravated
by the “tonics” and other rubbish which he had been made to swallow by
the eccantric iEsculapii of whom he speaks. In this case—and we do not
deny we hare some pride in making the statement—our success was complete.
We sent this broken-down, emaciated phantom back into the world again—-
what, before consulting us, he had never dreamed of being —a man.
Let bachelors carp as they may, there is little or no enjoyment in life
without marriage. The Bradlaugh-Besant dogmas are very plausible in
theory, but mere dead sea fruit in practice. The same with Victoria Wood-
hall’s “ free love.’’ Wo remember some years ago (a good many now) being
introduced to Victoria and her sister Fanny C. Clifton (who, by-the-way was
‘ Colonel ” of the 4th Regiment of Negro Militia !) at a restaurant near Wall-
street, N.Y., which they much frequented. Victoria then told us that she
was living in a house on 4th Avenue, on the first floor, with her
husband —her divorced one occupying the res de chaussee. “Where love,”
she said, “ ceases to moisten the roots of the plant, immediately the flower
fades.” She did not say whose love, but spoke with a cheerful generality.
A man with a well-ordered mind finds his chief delight in his wife and
children. They resemble in some degree (to him, at least), a kaleidoscope.
With every revolution of the earth, he discovers new beauties in his offspring
—new charms in his wife. What then must be the feelings of those incap-
ables who contemplate this happiness, and know, in their own hearts, that
they can never enjoy it ?
That the evils which spring from self-abuse are deemed by many of the
victims to be incurable is only natural. They have an innate knowledge of
their terrible physical and mental condition; they see that they are but
flotsam, drifting aimlessly through the world; they see other men who are
strong and stalwart, and look down upon their own puny forms and sigh.
As the witch in Tam O’Shanter “ nursed her wrath to keep it warm,” these
miserables muse their obnoxious passion that has taken possession of them
until that one desire supersedes all others. Then when the pain and sorrow
come-when the hacking cough and bloodshot eyes proclaim even to the
outer world the reign of the demon “ Secret Sin,” then melancholia (in itself
a phase of madness) supervenes, and the unfortunate man considers that his
case is hopeless. He then, perhaps, in his despair, continues his course of
pollution until he crumbles
* To the vile dust from whence he sprung,
Unwept, unhonoured, and unsung.”
These, however, are mere morbid fancies on part of the afflicted. Cure
in these cases, with us, is always possible , and frequently expeditious. In
support of this assertion we can bring abundant proof. We will in
quoting extracts from letters, include those in which the writers enclose rich
and costly gifts, although, perhaps, it will interest the reader to know that
from grateful patients we have been the pleased recipients of many munificent
gifts in precious stones, and money from grateful patients, whom wo have
successfully restored to health and manhood. We will, however, reprint a
paragraph that appeared in a Melbourne paper, in order to demonstrate to
our readers that the success we have achieved in our profession has by no
means been ignored by the public press. The par. was as follows: —
“It is not often we have to record such a handsome recognition of
medical skill as took place on Monday evening, when Dr. Bottroll, of
Spring-street, was presented with a very handsome sapphire and diamond
ring, value 100 guineas, the donor being a gentleman who has been suffering


for a considerable time from paralysis, and who has been thoroughly cured
under Dr Bottrell’s galvanic treatment. The presentation took place at the
White Hart, before several members of the Legislative Assembly and private
friend* of the donor. A very pleasant hour was wound up by drinking the
Doctor’s health in bumpers.”
It has been broadly stated by many eminent philosophers that the world
is proverbially ungrateful. Well, so far as we are concerned, we have not
experienced this ; our efforts on behalf of patients having met with the most
ready acknowledgment. We would invite now the earnest attention of
young unmarried men who may have been “ indiscreet ” (to adopt a popular
term) to this extract: —
“ Do you know that I was engaged to a young lady for six years, but
dared not marry her in the helpless state you saved me from. lam now,,
thank God, married to her. My present state of health is extremely
comfortable, and I can believe that I need not suffer from any anxieties—
which I could not help suffering at one time —on that account, as I consider
I am now restored to a healthy and strong condition, since my wife has
presented me with a fine hoy, not puny, but a strong healthy child. I may
mention that I recommended your skill to a friend of mine, and he also can
testify the amount of good he received through taking your medicine. I
look upon you as the man who saved me from a life of misery, and I shall be
glad to serve you.”
There could be, wo take it, nothing more satisfactory than this, for in the
extract are in reality embodied two testimonials. In curing the writer, we
succeeded in making not only him but his fiancee happy; and from the fact,
of her presenting him with a healthy child, it will, at once, be seen that the
cure effected was thorough and permanent—not like the fictitious cures
(improperly so culled) of unscrupulous charlatans, who by means of Spanish
Fly and other deleterious drugs succeed in procuring for the patient a
temporary period of coitional power, to leave them only more debilitated and
cast down, when the artificial power inspired by the drug has evaporated;—
but a restoration to health complete and absolute.
One more extract and we have done: for we cannot but think to
enumerate more would be “to gild refined gold and paint the lily.” Here
now is a young man who had tried doctors d droite et d gauche with no good
results. After placing himself under my hands he writes as follows :
“ In reply to yours, I wish to say I regret very much that I did not.
come to you before. Y our medicine is best. I am perfectly well of my
complaint. If any person had told me I was going to recover so soon I
would not have believed them. What a miserable creature I was when I
came to you, and have been all my life till now. I feel quite a different
man, jolly and happy.”
In fact the letter of one is repeated in the story of the others.
In concluding this topic we will make one earnest appeal to those who
are living, and have lived, in the shadow of Onanism. We ask thoso£to
throw aside all outside considerations, and to call without delay upon us,fat
197, Castlereagh Street, Sydney ; or, if living at a distance, communicate by
letter. Procrastination, which is the thief of time with the world, is the
vampire that is sucking your heart’s blood. So do not delay. Have no fears
of your communicating with us being discovered. The secresy we observe,
as we have before stated, is inviolable. Once more then remember, if you
wish to be restored to manhood—
AT ONCE OR-NEVER!


POSTSCRIPT.
The experience and the success which have attended our efforts in the
treatment of Yenereal Diseases are facts so universally admitted throughout
the length and breadth of Australia, that but a few lines are needed on this
head. Suffice it to say, however, that under our care even the most advanced
and so-called hopeless cases are cured with swiftness and facility. In all
cases of paralysis we invite the sufferers to seek our aid, in which case we
promise to do for them the best that human skill can perform ; and, as we all
know, “ the best can do no more.”
With these words, and many good wishes for the welfare of our readers,
we wish them, for the present,
ADIEU
'C. E, PULLER, PRINTER, 385-7, GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY AND PARRAMATTA.


