

%t % galteat <2ioltr Riggings.
A PERSONAL REMINISCENCE.
BT F. HASLEHAM.
CHAPTER I.
Just before sunrise, one Sunday morning in midsummer (the exact date was
the 3rd of December, 1854), a young Ballarat gold-digger staggered into his
tent fainting, and wellnigh breathless, and motioned for a drink of water.
His three mates were quickly by his side.
“Good God, you’re hurt! ” said one (a draughtsman on the Illustrated London
News).
“He’s wearing fantastical wristbands,” said another, referring to the inter-
esting fact that his friend was manacled. (This speaker was a North of Ireland
man, and, by profession, a civil engineer).
“ Amigo mio ! ” exclaimed the third (whose powers of English were at best
but limited, and who invariably fell back upon his mother tongue whenever
his feelings were at all stirred).
“ I’ve got it, and soundly,” gasped the patient, after emptying a pannikin of
cold tea which his Spanish friend had handed to him. “ We’re licked. The
game’s over—and better so than otherwise. But, by Jove, I believe I’m
peppered for this world.”
“ What do you mean ? ”
“Shot in the breast, at close quarters, by a trooper. How about a surgeon ?
There are lots of them down in the gully, busy with the wounded. For God’s
sake give me a drink of water! ”
While the Spaniard went to fetch a surgeon his two other friends laid their
mate on his bed, and, after ripping open his Garibaldi shirt and underclothing,
discovered a gunshot wound above the right nipple.
“By Jove,” said the North of Ireland man, “this has been a close quarters
job judging from this mixed smell of gunpowder and singed serge ; and I’ll be
hanged if the ball hasn’t carried the wad, and a bit of guernsey along with it,
into the wound. But cheer up, old fellow, for we’re none of us dead men yet.”
“Severe, but not mortal,” said the surgeon, quietly replacing in his pocket a
thin gold probing wire, by the aid of which he had been examining the
wound, without, however, finding the bullet. “ Let him keep quiet for an
hour or so, until I see him again. Give him a newspaper to look at ; and if he
cares to smoke a pipe let him. By-the-by, when I left the barricade just now
I heard the commanding officer give orders that the tents were to be searched
for firearms and the wounded; so if you have any guns or pistols lying
about, you had better put them out of sight; and as for our friend here, I
will just jot down a certificate that he cannot be removed without danger. By
the time I see him again you may have eased him of thosq bracelets. Never
mind about getting them off at present; just file the chain in two, so that he
may separate his wrists. Good-bye, for an hour. This has been a sad morn-
ing’s work.”
“Sad enough,” said I. “But it had to come off at some time, and the
sooner the better.”
“A barbarous piece of business,” rejoined the surgeon.
1
AT THE BALLARAT GOLD DIGGINGS.


“ I don’t know about that,” I replied. “There was no possibility of the
Government understanding us without having a bit of a brush to begin with.”
“ Well, well,” said the surgeon ; “ don’t excite yourself, and you will manage
all right. There are many worse cases than yours.”
“ How’s Peter Lalor going on ? He fell at the first volley, and I helped to
screen him with boughs and brushwood. I hope he’s not badly wounded.”
“Left arm and shoulder shattered : case of amputation. He’s in safe
quarters, however. The priests are taking care of him.”
“ And Captain Wyse, of the regulars ? ”
“Gunshot wound in the thigh—reported dangerous.”
“ How many casualties in all ? ”
“About twenty killed on each side, and perhaps 100 wounded. But you
must really keep yourself quiet.”
“All right, doctor. What’s the meaning of that shouting ? ”
“ When I left, just now, they were preparing to march the prisoners to the
Government camp, and the commanding officer was calling for three cheers
for the Queen.”
“By all means, three cheers for the Queen. A gold-digger in these times
may be a rebel without being disloyal.”
But how did all this come about ? asks the reader. What were the causes,
proximate or remote, of this armed insurrection, with its miserable loss of life ?
Answering this question in general terms, I should reply, colonial maladminis-
tration together with corruption on the bench of justice.
First, as to maladministration. It maybe conceded in the outset that, in
the early stages of the extraordinary gold discoveries in the colony of Victoria,
the Government was brought face to face with a set of circumstances wholly
without precedent, and was confronted with difficulties of the most perplexing
character. The population was migratory, and had the evil credit of being
thoroughly lawless. What was yesterday an untrodden wilderness—tenanted
only by the kangaroo, the laughing jackass, the parrot, and the cockatoo —
would be changed in a month to a dwelling-place of forty thousand men, all
making haste to become rich. Such was Ballarat a little more than a quarter
of a century ago. A glance at the mixed character of such a multitude will
suffice to show the unprecedented difficulty the Government had to surmount
in any attempt to educe order out of this moral chaos. Calculating roughly,
the population may be sorted in the following proportions : One-half composed
of adventurous spirits recently arrived from the “ mother country ” —some
youths, others in the prime of life —people of all trades and none—professional
people and people of no profession—runaway sailors, discarded lovers, scape-
grace sons of good families, and university men who had come to grief—truly
a motley crew, but in the main loyal and law-abiding, and bound together by
that bond of rude but strong sympathy which springs from a community of
pursuit and a community of peril. The other half was still more miscellaneous,
consisting of refugees from all the continental states of Europe—the scum of
the revolutionary period of 1848 —together with a large admixture of our own
convict element—desperadoes who had escaped from Van Dieman’s Land, or
“ old lags ” who had served their time at Botany Bay. Every man had his rifle
or other firearm, and at twilight every evening a constant fusilade was kept up
for hours, partly to warn neighbours that a warm reception was in store for
them, and partly to make sure that the weapon should be in good order if
required before morning. This being the condition of affairs, it was no easy
task for the authorities at the Government camp to maintain law and order,
even if they had not committed the flagrant administrative blunder of imposing
a licence tax which had to be collected at the point of the bayonet. And -it


was this monstrous piece of oppression that operated as the remote cause of the
Ballarat insurrection.
To anybody writing of this event after so long an interval it seems incredible
that the Government could have been so stupid, or that the gold-diggers could
have been so patient. From week to week for two years a body of police, some
mounted and others on foot, and supported by files of soldiers, bore down
upon the gold-workings, and called upon the men to produce their licences.
Those who had them produced them; those who had them not were taken
prisoners. It was sufficiently galling in the former case; in the latter
intolerable. Redress seemed impossible. The “ prisoners ” were marched in a
squad to the Government camp, where, in default of prison accommodation, they
were chained to logs, and in that plight awaited their sentence next morning.
It can easily be believed that in this indiscriminate capture of defaulters many
cases of special hardship would occur. Perhaps one man had lost his licence
paper ; another had left it in his tent, having forgotten to put it in the pocket
of the dry pair of trousers he was wearing that morning in lieu of the wet pair
he had put off last night; while a third might have just arrived from some
distant goldfield, and was possibly on his way to the camp to procure the
necessary document. All were treated as common felons.
Public meetings began to be held, and vigorous resolutions were passed, but
unhappily no heed was paid to them. The newly-appointed governor (Sir
Charles Hotham) conceived he had but one duty to perform, which was to
govern the gold-diggers as a quarter-deck captain would deal with a mutinous
crew. He accordingly issued his fiat, “Let the revenue be collected at all
hazards.” He was only too well obeyed.
While the spirit of discontent was at its height an incident occurred which
precipitated the crisis. The diggers had long known that Justice was harsh.
They now discovered that she was corrupt. During a midnight brawl at an
hotel (in which profitable place of business it was notorious that the stipendiary
magistrate at the Government camp had a pecuniary interest), the landlord
struck one of the customers with a puddling shovel and killed him. The man s
mates took the landlord in custody, and conveyed him to the camp, where
they delivered him to be dealt with according to law. The magistrate in
question adjudicated upon the case, and, notwithstanding the weight of evidence
against the prisoner (who, by the way, was an ex-convict), decided that there
was no case to go to the jury. He treated it as justifiable homicide, and ordered
the prisoner to be released. The greatest uproar prevailed in court, and voices
were soon heard calling upon the gold-diggers to defend their rights and liberties.
The throng hurried from the court-house, and, swelling in numbers as they
passed through the diggings, proceeded to the hotel and burnt it to the ground.
The appearance of the mounted police and the military was the signal for a
general riot, in the course of which shots were exchanged, several men being
wounded and others arrested. The hotel, however, was reduced to ashes, and
to that extent justice was effectively, if wildly, avenged.
A meeting of diggers was immediately convened, and a resolution was
passed calling upon the men to follow up their action and strike for freedom.
At the close of the meeting the licences were publicly burnt, and an oath was
administered to the effect that the licence system should come to an end. The
flag of rebellion was hoisted, and the diggers chose Peter fjalor as their leader.
This gentleman was a son of the member of the House of Commons of that
name, and a kinsman of Lalor Shiel. The objects of the insurrection were to
attack the Government camp, release the prisoners, march to Melbourne, and
demand redress from Sir Charles Hotham.
The Victorian Government lost no time in issuing a proclamation denouncing
the gold-diggers as “rebels,” and calling upon all loyal and dutiful subjects of
the Queen to abstain from taking part in the movement.


In the meanwhile all mining operations were suspended. Trees were felled
to make barricades, and the blacksmith’s anvil and hammer were laid under
contribution for forging spear-heads and pikes. Men were formed into com-
panies, were well armed, and in some cases efficiently officered. Squads for
purposes of drill were marching in all directions, even within gunshot of the
Government camp. Little was it suspected, however, that Government spies
were being drilled among the rebels.
By the end of November (that is to say two or three days before the Sunday
morning mentioned at the beginning of this reminiscence) a large barricade
was formed —a kind of wooden fort, circular in shape, and capable of holding
1,000 men. Sentries were posted between the fort and the Government camp,
and after a succession of false alarms during the next couple of nights the
outposts were driven in, and the rebels were saluted with the unmistakable
note of the regimental bugle, ordering Her Majesty’s troops to treat them to a
little file-firing. It was now grey dawn, between two and three o’clock, and
the smartest skirmish was about to begin that I ever experienced on a Sunday
or any other morning while I was a sojourner at the Victorian goldfields.
(To be concluded in our next.)
Simplicity. —ln art, simplicity is economy, not meagreness ; it is the
absence of superfluities, not the suppression of essentials ; it arises from an
ideal generalisation of real and essential qualities, guided by an exquisite sense
of proportion.— On Actors and the Art of Acting, by G. 11. Lewes.
Language and Race. —Against the theory of a language as a race
characteristic may be simply set, as sufficient rebutting evidence, the existence
of a community like the American, where there are in abundance descendants
of African, of Irish, of German, of Southern European, of Asiatic, as well as
of English ancestors, all using the same dialect, without other variety than
comes of difference of locality and education, none showing a trace of any
other “ mother tongue ” or “ native speech.” But the world is full of such
cases, on the small scale and on the large. Any child of parents living in a
foreign country grows up to speak the foreign speech, unless carefully guarded
from doing so : or it speaks both this and the tongue of its parents with equal
readiness. The children of missionary families furnish the most striking
examples of this class ; no matter where they may be in the world, among
what remotely kindred or wholly unrelated dialects, they acquire the local
speech as “naturally” as do the children of the natives. And it is only
necessary that the child of English or German or Russian parents, born in
their native country, should (as is often done) be put with a French nurse,
and hear French alone spoken about it, and it will grow up to speak French
first and French only, just as if it were a French child. And what is French,
and who are its speakers? The mass of the people of France are Celts by
descent, with characteristic Celtic traits which no mixture or education has
been able to obliterate ; but there is hardly an appreciable element of Celtic in
the French language ; this is almost purely a Romanic dialect, a modern
representative of the ancient Latin. There are few unmixed languages in the
world, as there are few unmixed races ; but the one mixture does not at all
determine the other, or measure it. The English is a very striking proof of
this ; the preponderating French-Latin element in our vocabulary gets its most
familiar and indispensable part from the Normans, a Germanic race, who got it
from the French, a Celtic race, who got it from the Italians, among whom the
Latin-speaking community were at first a very insignificant element, numeri-
cally.— The Life and Growth of Language, by Professor W. Dwight Whitney.


Cnwltjj to gatmmls.
H. OWGAN, LL.D.
It was decided, some time since, on the high authority of the presiding
magistrate in one of the suburban police courts of London, that cats are not
animals, because they are not mentioned in some special Act of Parliament;
and under the operation of another well-known and popular statute it would
appear that a similar exception, to the disadvantage of human beings, is very
generally recognised. From the scope of the Act prohibiting cruelty to animals
man alone seems to be excluded. There can be no doubt that it is in the
spirit of a practical Christianity that influential philozoists—for they can
scarcely be called philanthropists—demand and enforce for all other animals
subject to man’s dominion, an immunity from the the tortures hitherto
inflicted upon them by his thoughtless and objectless cruelty. Beasts of
burden—the patient and willing slaves that minister so largely to our wealth
and enjoyment—-wild quadrupeds and birds, scarcely less useful —are now
protected from the sufferings involved in many of the savage amusements of
past generations. Bull-baiting has altogether, and cock-fighting very nearly,
disappeared; pigeon-shooting is discouraged ; and, even in Spain, the mata-
dors will probably have soon to seek another and safer, though it may be a
less picturesque occupation. All this is perfectly proper and legitimate as a
result of advancing civilisation, and encourages the hope that, in the time to
come, mankind may learn to extend to each other the consideration which they
are so liberally bestowing upon creatures of lower organisation; though,
unfortunately for the analogy, it has been always hitherto found that the mutual
cruelties of men have been aggravated in proportion as life became artificial, and
that injuries to property have been more seriously regarded than any personal
violence short of actual murder. In these latter days, however, a still further
step in favour of lower animals has been taken by a number of tender-hearted
persons who insist upon protecting them from the knife of scientific vivisection—
an interposition so humane that one can scarcely suppress a feeling of regret
for the inconsistency with which all their charity is bestowed in one direction.
It is an old and true axiom that the caprices of sentiment are subject to no
law ; and this is probably the reason why the same person who evinces an active
sympathy with a lame horse will turn away with the most tranquil indifference
from a starving man. It would perhaps be uncharitable to suspect or insinuate
that the difference may be attributed to the fact that, in the one case, the
benefaction costs nothing but words, while in the other it would involve some
small expenditure of money.
The cruelty, however, with which human beings treat each other is unhappily
not confined to mere laissez-faire; it sometimes exhibits an active and aggressive
energy which suggests the inquiry, whether the physical vivisection of a
quadruped is a worse cruelty than the moral vivisection of a man. It was
remarked long ago by a celebrated ancient, whose knowledge of human nature
was as nearly perfect as it could be, that man is the most cruel of all animals,
and that women are still more cruel than men. It would seem, indeed, as if
the great and original sin of human nature were this mutual cruelty which no
forms of religion have ever been able to mitigate, and some have even con-
siderably aggravated; and yet, if it could be to any measurable extent
5
CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.


eliminated from human life—if, for instance, we could all feel toward the
living as gently and mercifully as we do* towards the dead—how immensely
the sum of human happiness would be increased !
It would be interesting, if possible, to discover a reason why this is so. If
we look round us and observe the several motives to cruelty, we find that, as a
general rule, the offences which the aggregate of men and women constituting
society punishes most severely are, in the first place, misfortunes of various
kinds, especially those induced by impulsive generosity and imprudence ; and,
secondly, difference of religious opinion and belief. And these facts point to
two motives—the one, operating in the first case, being the instinct of self-
preservation morbidly intensified ; the other, a consciousness of one’s own
superior judgment, blended with some love of power over the intellects and
consciences of others; and it is strange—all such motive notwithstanding—
that it should never have occurred to religious persecutors that they supplied
in their own actions the most unanswerable of all arguments against the
dogmata which they so enforced.
It has been often and very truly said that in this, and, in fact, in all other
civilised countries, ancient and modern, so long as a man can pay his way
independently, he may do anything else he pleases short of actual and serious
violation of the criminal law—and even that he can defy to any extent
proportioned to his means of purchasing impunity; while the smallest devia-
tion on the part of a poor man from the strictest moral propriety, is unmerci-
fully resented, because society wishes to have some plausible excuse for the
animosity with which it hunts him down. In the one case, it says : “Well!
’tis a pity that he forgot himself ; ” in the other, the verdict is, “ He’s a
scoundrel—show him no mercy ! ” Hence it happens that it is so much more
easy to raise oneself to wealth and power from a condition of original poverty,
than to regain a position of affluence from which one has fallen. To grow rich
is always meritorious, no matter how ; to become poor is always disreputable.
A French philosopher, whom long experience and study of the phenomena
of life have made cynical, remarks that if we hear of any acquaintance having
fallen or been knocked down in the street, we regret that we were not there to
look on, and possibly to help him ; and that, on the same principle, if a person
whom we know, is coming down in fortune, and consequently in reputation, we
feel benevolently tempted to add a little to the impetus, if he seems not to be
falling fast enough. We fear, in fact, lest we may suffer—that is, lose—some-
thing by contact or association with the unfortunate ; lest they may make
some inconvenient claim upon our sympathy or gratitude ; lest it may be
suspected that we also are unlucky; and as they are certainly going to
destruction, we feel that it is only common charity to give them the coup de
grace at once, and put them out of their misery.
This account of the phenomenon, though not very complimentary to human
nature, is still an explanation so far as it goes. But on what principle can we
account for the not uncommon fact that a rich man, on his death-bed, will
leave his property rather to some wealthy stranger than to a poor relative, to
whom it would open a new vista of useful and happy life.
To such a testator, if one were to suggest the claims of such a relative,
“ Oh, there’s no use, you know, in giving anything to him, he’s always unlucky ;
’twould do him no good.” And it would be useless to ask, “Have you ever
tried the experiment ? How do you know what may be the effect of a little
kindness and a turn of the wheel ? ”
Again, how can we account for the other still more familiar fact, that if we
inflict upon any man some injury punishable by law, the question of redress or
penalty will be strictly confined to the sufferer and the aggressor —no third
party taking the trouble to care much about it, except, perhaps, now and then,
as a matter of idle curiosity. While, if we imprudently bring down losses and


sorrows upon ourselves, the whole community will be incensed against us, and
we come under the ban of a social Excommunication scarcely lees ruinous than
the papal outlawry of the Middle Ages. No man recognises, or associates, or
even trades with us.
Nobody knows but those who have tried it how hard it is for such a pariah
to return to his caste —how carefully every stepping-stone, every support which
he attempts to grasp, is placed beyond the reach of hand and foot.
I once knew a gentleman, highly educated and distinguished in his university,
who was in the habit of lecturing gratuitously at various literary institutions,
and, as he generally drew large audiences, of contributing more or less to their
funds. This he was enabled to do by the possession of a small private fortune,
until that resource was swept away by the dishonesty of persons whom he
trusted unwisely and too far. From that hour, not only did the institutions to
which he had been a benefactor refuse to include him among their paid
lecturers, but even the audiences, with whom he seemed to have been a
favourite, deserted him with one accord, when he tried the speculation of
lecturing on his own account. It happened, also, at that crisis when his popu-
larity and his exchequer were at the lowest ebb—when it became the fashion
to cut him in the street, and to accuse him of all imaginable follies and vices—
that his most active and unrelenting enemy was a near relative of his own,
whom he had, during eight years, fed and clothed and educated, until he placed
him on his own level in the university where they both graduated. It is won-
derful, but not at all unaccountable, what a revulsion of all feeling and senti-
ment is produced by one’s first experience of such gratuitous cruelty as this.
It dispels for ever one or two of the most fascinating of those delusions which
are said to make up the happiness of this mundane life. Once those glittering
veils are lifted, we have no further trust in friendship or in love —mo further
faith in man or woman; thenceforth we are alone, face to face with our many-
headed enemy—the world ! But, as the Arabs say, “The man who has not
suffered, what does he know ? ”
Taking, however, a wider view of these phenomena, we find that they may be
traced back to an instinct which prevails even among the lower animals. The
“ stricken deer ” has long been a proverb, and some other species of quadrupeds
and birds are not more merciful than man to their afflicted fellow-creatures.
If this tendency, then, is instinctive, it is, of course, a matter of providential
arrangement that the weakest shall always go down in the struggle for life ;
and that imprudence, which is always more or less a weakness of some sort,
shall be regarded as less pardonable, and shall involve more suffering than actual
crime. This consideration leads up to the philosophy of the question. It is
laid down as a law by some jnodern philosophers, that the essential character-
istic of evil, or crime, or vice, of whatever else wo may call the opposite of
good, is its tendency to bring with it its own punishment, by an inevitable and
uniform consequence, and independently of the action of any artificial law—to
be followed by some penalty in the shape of either some material injury, or,
more frequently, of that uneasiness of conscience which is called remorse—a
theory, by the way, which seems, like most other ethical axioms, to have origi-
nated with Aristotle, who says, in his own epigrammatic style, that “ evil is
destructive and good is conservative and taking this in connection with
another axiom that, so far as prudence is a virtue, imprudence is a vice—
because we have no more right to injure ourselves thali to injure others —we
arrive at the conclusion that all the penalties with which society aggravates the
natural consequences of imprudence are merely the unconscious recognition of
an eternal law.
On the other hand, and looking from the standpoint of another ethical
maxim, that all offences should be punishable only in proportion to the injury
inflicted and with reference to the intention of the offender, it is not easy to


understand why a man who injures only himself is more severely punished
than one who purchases his own safety or enjoyment by the sufferings of others—
in short, why the natural punishment should not be sufficient without the
adventitious. It seems, however, that it never is ; and that our most humane
sympathies and most generous impulses are apt to entail much bitter suffering,
from which the cold and selfish and calculating are always exempt. It is merely
one of the anomalies which we see all round us in the moral world, where those
who minister most to the happiness of others generally have least of it to their
own share. But, after all —that is, after the most careful comparison of
motives —selfishness, in one or another of its many phases, appears to be the
most fertile source of cruelty ; the dread of being involved to any extent in the
perplexities of the unfortunate ; and, just as frequently, the dread of having
our own equanimity ruffied by the recital of their troubles. And here we are
met by one of the strangest of all inconsistencies, in the sensitive horror with
which the presence of real suffering is avoided by the same persons who find a
pleasure in shedding sympathetic tears over the simulated agonies of the tragic
actor ; but then, in this latter case, they can enjoy the luxury of strong emotion
without being expected to administer any help to the afflicted.
In association with this subject there are two comparatively small classes of
human agents to be noticed, if only for the abrupt contrast which they exhibit,
seeming to maintain between them that antagonism of moral good and evil
which has been for long centuries the great shuttlecock of ethical philosophers—
the one consisting of those whose dearest enjoyment lies in mean and mischievous
cruelty—to whose perverted instinct maimed and mutilated animals bear
horrible witness —whose most innocent delight is in practical jokes and the
infliction of pain of some sort upon all creatures from whom they fear no
retaliation ; the other, including the few truly benevolent persons wlm devote
time and trouble and even money to the alleviation of human suffering—to
whose persistent mediation we owe the most humane and useful of our public
institutions —to whom, so far as they can exert any counteracting influence,
pain and sorrow never appeal in vain—the small minority who do not exactly
“ hold it for a rule,
That every man in want is knave or fool. ”
Realism and Idealism in Art. —Every historical work of art reflects the
mind of the narrator no less than the subject presented ; and this only
acquires a living reality for the human mind when it has been received and
newly fashioned by the creative power of human genius.— Gervinus.
Strange Notions about Shakspere. —lt is said that at Stratford children
generally believe that Shakspere is the writer of everything that was ever
printed, down to the placards on the walls; while a few of the more intelligent
doubt his being the author of the bills and the newspapers, but firmly hold
that he wrote the Bible from Genesis to Revelations. —A thenceum. [A facetious
friend of ours is responsible for the following: Professor G. : “John, did
you ever read Shakspere?” John (country shopkeeper) : “No, I don’t think I
hev!” Professor: “What, never read Shakspere?” John: “Stay, stay; I
think I hev. Didn’t he once write for the Oddfellows’ Magazine t” The
president of a local literary club, wishful to encourage native genius, sent to
an uneducated rustic poet, who wrote verses in the vernacular, a copy of
Shakspere as a Christmas present. A few days afterwards the book was
returned with an intimation that the said rustic genius declined the oppor-
tunity of reading Shakspere, from a fear that such perusal “ might spoil his
own style! ! ”] — Ed. Oddfellows’ Magazine.


fifth irafrt ®nte % Snob.
[ORIGINAL.]
There’s a neat little grave in our snug churchyard,
Concealed ’neath a mantle of snow,
Close down by the side of the rustic porch
Where in summer the daisies grow ;
In the waning light of an afternoon,
A Sabbath not long ago,
They buried her deep in the cold cold earth,
In that little grave under the snow.
Escaping the cares of the after-life,
The struggles, and sorrows, and tears,
The rumble and din of contending strife,
And the buffets of after years ;
Free from all these in the sheltering earth,
Till the trumpet of summons shall blow,
Free from the trials that follow oui birth,
In the little grave under the snow.
True, there’s a father on earth, whose love
Its object will certainly miss !
But there is a Father who watches above
To guide her through realms of bliss :
The spirit is with its compassionate God,
And the angelic face is aglow,
As she watches the body beneath the green sod,
In that little grave under the snow.
Ah ! doubtless she looks from the land of blue,
And watches her mother in team,
And watches the children who miss her, too
And she’ll watch in the coming years ;
Watching for ever the home of the dead,
In the toiling world below,
Where the leaves from the bending trees are spread
O’er that little grave under the snow.
And the spring will come with its primrose tints,
And the summer with violets sweet,
And the autumn, aroma’d in mellowing light,
Will follow in gold-clad feet;
And winter again with his evenings long
O’er the sleeper will rudely blow,
And the robin will twitter the old old song
Near the little grave under the snow.
And the father will sit by the lonely hearth
And think of his poor dead dove,
Whose soul from the body is parted and’gone
To sit ’mong the angels above ;
And the children, at times, as they wander to churcH,
A look of mute sorrow will throw
At that mound of earth near the rustic porch,
The little grave under the snow.
Rose of Houghton Lodge, Houghton-le Spring. John Rowell Waller.
John Rowell Waller.


Curkxslj (^irilas.
BY RONALD SMITH.
The Arabian caliphs were conspicuous examples of rulers, encouraging and
dignifying industry by becoming themselves workmen in some art or trade.
Not at all in the honorary sense which is understood when we speak of the
Prince of Wales being a fishmonger or the King of the Belgians a tailor, but as
skilled workmen, using the tools of their trade as though they were dependent
for their bread upon their industry. They established “ esnafs ” or guilds for
the benefit of the trades, and became themselves members. Their example was
followed by the Othman sultans, but we believe that Abdul Mejid was the last
of the line who did any actual work. He was an ornamental caligraphist, and
caused his productions to be sold for charitable purposes. Suliman the
Magnificent was a valuer of precious stones, and was proud of being at the head
of his craft. Guilds, too, were formed on the Arabian plan in many parts of
Turkey, and now in Constantinople there are about 140 guilds, which include
about 13,500 persons, of whom there are nearly 4,500 Greeks, 3,200 Armenians,
500 Jews, and 5,300 Turks. The guilds are recruited from amongst men of one
race only. Thus jewellers, watchmakers, tailors, furriers, and men engaged in
the working of silks, are all Christians; whilst saddlers, seal engravers, and
others, are Moslems. The property of each guild is made “ vakouf,” that is,
endowed, so that it is secure from arbitrary seizure on the part of the authorities.
The term of apprenticeship which an artisan serves is from three to five years.
He is then a “ Kalfa,” or companion, and receives wages from an “ Oosta ”or
master of a room. When he can afford to hire a room and engage journeymen
he attains to the dignity of master. As may be imagined, Moslem misrule has
for the last quarter of a century seriously affected all branches of Turkish
industry. The policy of the Arabian caliphs became a tradition, and as the
interests of the sultans in trade decreased, in like manner the guilds grew less
in number, and so little supported that they ceased to exercise any influence on
their members. In Constantinople the guilds can only in courtesy be called by
the name.
In Epirus, where the Mussulmans are sensibly diminishing, the guilds are on
a better footing, but that is not saying much. In the five centres of the
province—viz., Janina, Arta, Prevesa, Berat, and Arlona—there is no fellowship
or community of privilege between the guilds. A tradesman of Janina, for
instance, cannot apply for assistance to the guild of his calling in Arta, should
he happen to be in distress. The Epirotes being composed of fragments of
dissimilar races, such as Albanians, Greeks, Vallaks, Sclavs, Gipsies, Jews,
Negroes, and Turks, who retain their original instincts, have never assimilated
though in contact for ages. Each guild has its president and treasurer, but
the duties of the former are little more than nominal, for neither he nor the
guild in its corporate capacity assumes the right of dictating to the individual
members, or of imposing restraint on their free and independent action. There
are no restrictions with regard to wages, hours of work, terms of contract, or
any other particulars connected with labour or business. The president does
little more than maintain harmony among the members. The matters affecting
the members of the guild are left to adjust themselves according to the force


of local or special circumstances ; and every man has full liberty to act as be
likes in the disposal of his labour, and to make the best conditions he can for
himself. Considering that the ostensible end of the guild is to afford relief to
members in distress, to defray funeral expenses, and to provide portions for
orphans of deceased members left in a state of indigence, the resources of the
guild seem both slender and precarious. The funds are formed by a payment
varying from 10s. to 80s. made once for all by each member on admission. It
happens, however, that instead of the new member paying down a contribution
in money, he gives an entertainment to the chiefs of the guild, which can be
no benefit to the guild itself. If members were to obtain admission into
English benefit clubs by asking a few officials to dinner, there would soon be
an end of the clubs. And this seems likely to be the case with the guilds of
Epirus, for though every master is expected to become a member, it is not
obligatory, and many do not seek for admission. In fact, like most institutions
in Turkey, they fall far short of their intended design, and consequently are
on the decline. At present they are of 35 different denominations, and comprise
altogether 3,500 members.
This inability to put their clubs on a proper footing seems remarkable, seeing
that the Epirotes, as tradesmen and artisans, are highly thought of throughout
the Levant. They are intelligent and display a keen desire for instruction,
and would, we would think, feel the necessity of making a provision against
distress which could be relied upon. The cause of this may probably be found
in the fact that no operative sticks to his trade, and may therefore be indisposed
to attach himself to and take an interest in one particular guild. In the
construction of buildings, for instance, the same man is often architect, mason,
tiler, and joiner, working at each and all with his own hands—sometimes he
will even make the furniture. We have been told on consular authority that
there are workshops where one may order such dissimilar things as a fiddle, a
ladder, and a tombstone. The Epirotes are truly jacks of all trades. The
apprenticeship, which is of a most desultory and irregular kind, generally
begins at the age of 12 or 13. There is no indenture, or legal deed, or fee paid
to the master. He takes the boy for a day, a month, or a year, just as he and
the guardian may think proper, paying a wage—if by the day, a penny, which
gradually reaches three or four pence, and if by the year £1 to £2. When the
time agreed upon has expired it may be renewed, or, what is done more
frequently, the boy may go to another master and learn a new trade. After serving
an irregular apprenticeship of this kind for four or five years, the lad begins
work as a journeyman on any one of half-a-dozen different kind of jobs. On
this account, although the Epirote does very fair work, he never attains that
high degree of proficiency observable where there is a division of labour. In
some employments the workmen do attain a high degree of excellence —especially
in gold embroidery they display exquisite taste and produce durable work.
As workers in precious metals and in diamond cutting they hold their own
against any competitors.
If unassisted by their guild to educate their children individual munificence
has made large provision. The brothers Zosima, natives of the country, devoted
nearly £20,000 for the foundation and endowment of an education establish-
ment, consisting of a gymnasium and academy, whose curriculum embraces
Greek, Latin, French, Turkish, mathematics, geography,, history, theology,
chemistry, and physics. All creeds and classes enjoy, without distinction, the
advantages of the institution. Instruction, however, is not confined to the
larger towns, for almost every Christian village has its school. Now, taking
into account the intelligence of the people, their industry and love of instruction,
the educational advantages they possess, and their good character, we think
that under the rule of a stable and generous government they would make
rapid advances in prosperity and happiness.
11
TURKISH GUILDS.


gtbibtlt |]arbljcs antr
ftt, 1876.
EICHARD HALDENBT, P.G.
It will no doubt appear to our readers, or at all events a many of them, that,
judging from the text, we are going to treat of a subject foreign to the objects
for which this magazine is intended.
This, however, is far from being the correct conclusion, as we shall endeavour
to show. Certain clauses of the Divided Parishes and Poor-Law Amendment
Act, 1876, affect not only our own society but all other legally constituted
friendly societies. We do not know whether the Directors took any cognizance
of this Act of Parliament while it was being passed through our Houses of
Legislature, but no notice of such having been the case appearing in our official
organs, we must assume that it inadvertently escaped their notice. The pro-
visions of the Act, however, are such as should greatly influence them, and also
the Parliamentary Agent of the Unity, in watching more closely in the future
than they have done in the past all legislation which is in anyway likely to
have introduced into it enactments affecting the internal working of our
societies. Whether the operation of this Act will in anywise prejudicially
affect our institution remains to be seen, which we are inclined to think will
not be the case.
The section (23) of the Act to which we more particularly refer provides
that “ where any pauper shall be entitled to any annuity or periodical pay-
ment, the trustees or other person bound to make payment of the same to the
pauper may from time to time pay to the board of guardians, out of the
instalments which have become due, the cost incurred in the relief of such
pauper accrued since the last instalment, and such payment shall be a legal
discharge to such trustee or other person for so much money as shall have been
so paid.” The payments of the benefits by our society to its members in old
age will certainly he considered an annuity or periodical payment, and therefore
any such provision should be of a sufficient amount to keep the members off
the poor-rate altogether. It is during the infirmities of old age that the
members are the most likely to require that assistance, and we should therefore
make an attempt to provide the necessary means to enable them to travel over
the last few tottering years of existence without it. It has already been
acknowledged that members of our own and similar societies seldom apply for
poor relief.
The section to which we have referred goes on to say, “ where the guardians
incur any expenses in the relief of a pauper lunatic, being a member of a
benefit or friendly society, and as such entitled to receive any payment they
may recover from him as a debt, or from his executors, administrators, or
assigns in case of his death, the sum so expended by them as aforesaid, and
the managing body of such society, after notice from the clerk to the guardians,
served previously to the money being paid over, shall be required to pay the
same to such guardians, and shall be exonerated on payment thereof from any
further liability.” After having once parted with the money, the societies are
not to be held responsible to the poor-law guardians, and they are only bound
to pay it over to them, after notice, obviously to be in writing, from the clerk


to the guardians previously served. It will have to be considered in each case
whether the pauper lunatic is “ a member of a benefit or friendly society, and
as such entitled to receive any payment,” for it will probably be found that by
the rules of some societies the payments to the members cease in the event of
their becoming afflicted with insanity.
Where any trustee, manager, or other person shall decline to make any pay-
ments, the guardians may apply to the justices in petty sessions assembled for
an order upon him to pay the money then due, and for a continuing order to
pay in respect of any future relief.
The provision is not to have effect “ unless and until the guardians or their
relieving officer shall have declared the relief to be given on loan,” and this
brings the matter, so far as we can see, into exactly the same position as that
occupied by the members previous to the passing of the Act. The guardians
then had power to declare any relief given to be by way of loan, and also to
recover payment of the amount advanced in a summary manner. The difference
being that instead of the guardians claim being upon the pauper alone, they
can now go past him, if they desire to do so, direct to the society of which he
may be a member.
On the whole we do not think the societies will suffer much under the Act,
unless it has the effect, as some say the restrictions in the administration of
the poor-law have, of preventing persons joining our societies. No such
influence will for a moment deter any right-minded person from doing what he
can to obtain an independency for himself and those relying upon him for sub-
sistence. The effect should be quite the reverse to injuring our societies, as
stricter the administration of the poor-law, stronger should be the desire and
determination to keep clear of it.
We cannot conclude our remarks upon this question without for one moment
referring to the rules of our society bearing upon the subject of relief to mem-
bers during sickness. The rule (63) provides that “ any member becoming
lunatic shall be entitled only to so much of the weekly sick allowance as may he
necessary for his maintenance, or that of his wife or any relative who may
be dependent upon him; and such sick allowance shall be paid, at the dis-
cretion of the lodge or district (if a district member), to his wife, or to any
relative who may be dependent upon him, or be at the cost of his main-
tenance.” This appears to give the lodges a discretionary power to dis-
pose of the money in the manner appearing to them the best, but as they
have no power to withhold it altogether, the guardians can of course
claim it, or “so much as may be necessary for the maintenance” of the
member in case he became chargeable to the poor-law. We certainly
think it has not been the intention of the framers of this rule, but it
seems that after the maintenance of the member has been provided for, and
there should be any surplus left, the societies can either give it to or withhold
it from the member’s wife or relatives ; or, on the other hand, they can debar
the member from having the benefit and devote the money towards the main-
tenance of the member’s wife or any relative dependent upon him, but the
member, his wife, and any dependent relative do not appear to be entitled to
the weekly sick allowance for their combined maintenance. Why the member
or his friends should not have the unrestricted enjoyment of his sick allowance
under these circumstances, the same as when suffering under any other kind of
affliction, we cannot for one moment conceive. To still further complicate the
matter, the rule goes on to say that, “ any member being afflicted with insanity
shall he entitled to sick benefits the same as in any other disease, whether he
be at large or confined in an asylum.” This is clearly a contradiction of terms ;
but we think the part of the rule we have just cited a far preferable provision
to the earlier portion, but, unless the rule is altered, it may at some time or
other necessitate the Arbitration Committee having to decide upon its con-
13
DIVIDED PARISHES.


struction, which, in all probability, would not be a universal one, and this, of
course, ought to be the case.
We hope to see the rule amended, but not so as to keep the society free
from the operation of the Act we have been dealing with, as we do not think
any good would thereby be done, for, we must bear in mind, the guardians
have the power to grant relief on loan, and recover payment of the money
advanced, and we ought, therefore, to assist in keeping such an incumbrance
off the shoulders of our members on their being restored to health, by allowing
the benefits to which they are legitimately entitled during such painful
afflictions as insanity being paid in the same free and unrestricted manner as
the benefits during other kinds of sickness, so as to allow of its application in
the mode prescribed by law, and not as the societies may individually dictate,
as the rules of all societies should always conform to, and not controvert, the
laws of the realm.
% Warfr for % Sumfmes.
It is said to be an Englishman’s privilege to grumble, and therefore I
crave a comer in your popular Magazine that I may give expression to my
opinions—grumblings, if such you please to call them—with respect to the
duties and remuneration of permanent secretaries of lodges. There can be no
diversity of opinion upon the importance of the duties they have to perform,
more particularly now that lodges are under the supervision of lynx-eyed
Government officials, and a conscientious man discharging the duties con-
scientiously feels that the office is no sinecure. I need not point out to those
of your readers who are conversant with the machinery for carrying out the
business of the Order the duties of these lodge functionaries, which are
becoming more onerous year by year, as returns for the Order and Registrar
are called for. This year the first return under the Amended Friendly
Societies Act was required—not the printed balance-sheet which satisfied the
old law—and if the framers of this return had laboured to make it abstruse
and complicated they could not have succeeded better. In comparison with
the work, taking it as a general rule, the remuneration of a secretary is a mere
bagatelle. I can point to cases where the ridiculously small “salary” appears
as though it invited neglect of the accounts, and where lodges cannot exact the
full attention to the business which the duties require, because they know that
the workman is not amply paid for his services. Lodges of this character—
and one cannot shut his eyes to them —are like an uncultivated garden, the
nursery of the rankest weeds ; whereas, were it duly husbanded and cared for,
it would blossom forth in rich luxuriance. Therefore I trust lodges will
consider well the question I raise in their interests. It may be, and indeed it
is argued, that the office is an honourable one, and that the bonds of brother-
hood impel members to do their utmost for their society. Granted; but when
that rule is reduced to practice by a man whose labour is his patrimony, he
finds it to make good poetry but very poor fact. Cheap labour is not always
the cheapest in the long run, and it is of the highest importance to the well-
being of every lodge, that its accounts should be clearly and intelligibly kept.
The failure of old benefit societies is attributable in no small degree to the
pottering and tinkering of their accounts by inefficient men, and while we
have, as it were, raised a superstructure upon their ruin which is the admiration
of the whole known world, we should be careful that we do not, in an unwise
parsimony, fall into one of their most egregious errors.
Bank Place, Holywell. Thos. Thomas, P.G.
Thos. Thomas, P.G.


Jtwnblg ifadeltts anb %
%ct.
At the recent quarterly meeting of the Board of Directors of the Manchester
Unity, the operation of clause 23 in the Poor-law Amendment Act was
brought under consideration, with a view to Parliamentary action being taken
on the subject. The' question was raised at the instance of many lodges in
different districts, on the ground that the obnoxious clause was one that
“aimed a fatal blow at the independence and self-respect of every friendly
society in the United Kingdom.” The* clause was considered as empowering
Boards of Guardians to recover moneys from a society as payment for the
maintenance of sick members who may have become chargeable as inmates of
a workhouse or other asylum—the payment so demanded being, as alleged, in
contravention of a special rule of the Order, and at variance with the spirit
and letter of the Friendly Societies Act of the present Parliament. The clause
reads as follows :
“Where the guardians incur any expenses in the relief of a pauper lunatic, being a
member of a benefit or friendly society, and as such entitled to receive any payment
they may recover from him as a debt or from his executors, administrators, ox assigns
in case of his death, the sum so expended by them as aforesaid ; and the managing body
of such society, after notice from the clerk to the guardians, shall be required to pay the
same to such guardians.”
In the course of the discussion it was remarked that the Parliamentary
Secretary of the Poor-law Board (Mr. Salt), in his speech when the bill was
before the House, was understood to indicate that the Friendly Societies
would be protected by their own rules from any operation of the act adverse
to their interests. Mention was also made of a letter from Mr. Sclater-Booth
on the same subject, and to a similar effect; but the Board of Directors was of
opinion that notwithstanding these disclaimers the text of the clause was
clear, and if it were put into force the result would be that no lodge could be
considered to hold the disposal of its funds completely in its own hands. A
resolution was passed instructing the secretary to inform the several lodges
that the Board would place itself in communication with the Government,
with a view to removing any ambiguity on the subject, or, in the event of the
Act of Parliament being ascertained to be in contravention of the society’s
rules, to press for the unconditional repeal of the clause in question.
A letter has since been received from Mr. Danby P. Fry, assistant-secretary
of the Poor-law Board, as to the meaning of the 23rd section of the act which
relates to friendly societies. In the case of members of friendly societies who,
becoming lunatics, are sent to a lunatic asylum, and are there chargeable to
the rates, the 23rd section provides that poor-law guardians “ may” reimburse
themselves out of the sick pay which would be due to the l.unatics as members
of such societies. Recently the Sheffield Board of Guardians communicated
With the Local Government Board with the view of ascertaining whether they
had a discretionary power or no. The reply is as follows ■-
, 1 1 am directed by the Local Government Board to advert to your letter in reference
r° j .terms of section' 23 of the Poor-law Amendment Act, 1876, and to point out to the
guardians of the Sheffield Union that the section has no effect until the relief granted
us a P\ v ll jer lunatic has been declared to be a loan ; consequently the guardians have the
suai discretion in granting relief to decide whether in cases applicable to the statute
ey shall declare it to be given or not.”
15
FRIENDLY SOCIETIES AND THE POOR-LAW AMENDMENT ACT,


The following appeared in the Manchester Examiner and Times: Sir, —A
paragraph is going the round of the papers to the effect that the opposition of
the friendly societies to the oppressive clause of the new Poor-law Act relative
to their members will be silenced by a letter which has been written by an
official of the Poor-law Board. Permit me to assure you that such will not be
the case whilst even a permissive power is vested in boards of guardians to
deprive a poor man’s family of the benefits to which they are I hope
my fellow-members will be aroused to a sense of the injustice which is sought
to be perpetrated, and for that purpose I ask you to publish the following copy
of an official letter, the poor fellow to whom it refers having for years helped
to support a widowed mother. —I am, sir, &c., Alfred J. Dyer, P.H.C.S. of the
A.O.F. Southampton, January 19.
“Cirencester, 15th January, 1877.
“ Dear sir —I am requested by the Board of Guardians of the Cirencester Union to
inform you that John Brewer, of Cricklad e-street, a member of your Court, was removed
to Gloucester County Lunatic Asylum by order of the J.P., and that he is now chargeable
to the common fund of the Cirencester Union. I must, therefore beg you to pay me any
sick benefits he may be entitled to, that it may be devoted to the defraying the cost of
his maintenance in the said asylum.—l am, dear sir, respectfully y Collector> ..
“ To S. Clutterbuok, secretary to Court Alfred the Great, A.O.F.
A deputation of Foresters, on December 15th, waited upon Mr. Salt, M.P.,
the Parliamentary Secretary of the Local Government Board, with reference to
a grievance under the Poor-law Amendment Act of last session, under which,
the deputation allege, the guardians may demand from the managing body of a
friendly society any sum, so far as the member’s sick pay will go, to recoup
them for his maintenance while an inmate of a workhouse or asylum connected
with a poor-law union. ~ . ~,
The deputation consisted of Messrs. Shawcross, Pinchbeck, Mood, Brown,
Hunt, Turnum, Fisher, and Glover, the chief officers of the Foresters, and they
explained that this clause, which had been put into the act at the close of last
session, had already raised a great outcry in all the large towns, and. they
wished to have it abolished. There were over 2,000,000 members of friendly
societies, who by their frugal habits saved the poor rates very much, and they
considered it very hard to deprive an unfortunate man’s family of what became
due to him from a friendly society. .
Mr Salt, M.P., said the clause was introduced to remedy the grievance which
arose in a case where a man was in the habit of getting drunk and becoming
chargeable to the parish, and, after being let out, receiving his club money,
with, which he again got into such a state as to become an inmate of the work-
house ; and this was really a great hardship upon the poorer class of ratepayers.
He did not think it would apply to any other case, and he could assure them
that, if it operated generally in the way they had indicated, the department
would see that the grievance was remedied.
The Cost of Our Crimnal Population.— An interesting and important
official paper issued recently shows the enormous amount expended for the
protection of persons and property during 1875. In England and Wales,
£3 321 285 2s. 3d. was expended upon the police and prisons. Of this amount,
£2 742* 525 14s. 6d. was for the police, and £578,759 7s, lOd. for prisons.
In Lancashire the sum of £334,518 os. 3d. was expended for police and
prisons. In aid of this £140,613 14s. lOd. was granted from the Imperial
exchequer. Of the total, £260,428 2s. was for police, and £74,089 18s. 3d. for
prisons. Towards the former Her Majesty’s Treasury allowed £134,260 10s. 9d.,
and the latter £16,353 4s, Id.


faluatwms jof % Assets mtir fiabilife of
Jfrieitblir Stfdeths.
The following are the instructions to public valuers appointed by the Treasury
under the Friendly Societies Act, 1875 :
1. A limited number of public valuers, not exceeding for the present
fourteen, will be appointed for England, Scotland, and Ireland respectively.
They will not be ranked as public servants, and will have no salaries, nor any
claim to pension or gratuity.
2. A public valuer is bound to undertake by himself, or through some other
public valuer, every valuation under the Act tendered to him by a society (the
term to include a branch of a society) within the country for which he is
appointed.
3. The valuer may require that the particulars for valuation shall be supplied
to him in such form as he may think fit, together with a copy of the rules for
the time being of the society, and copies of the annual returns, and also of
the annual statements of account of the society, where these are not identical
with the annual returns for at least the five years next preceding the date up
to which the valuation is to be made.
4. The valuer may ask for such further information as to the affairs of the
society as he may deem necessary for the purpose of his valuation.
5. In no valuation of a society’s future sickness liabilities shall the total
sickness per annum at each age up to age seventy expected to be experienced
be less than that given by “Ratcliffe’s Sickness Experience for the Years
1865-70 of the Manchester Unity of Oddfellows, Rural, Town, and City
districts combined.”
6. In the case of societies granting sick allowance beyond the age of seventy,
the valuer shall call attention in his report to the principles on which he has
valued this portion of the sickness liabilities, with special reference to the
probable effect of cases of prolonged sickness on the funds of the society.
7. In no valuation of a society’s future sickness liabilities shall a higher rate
of mortality at any age be employed than that given by “ Ratcliffe’s Mortality
Experience for the Years 1865-70 of the Manchester Unity of Oddfellows,
Rural, Town, and City districts combined.”
8. In the case of societies having members engaged in occupations more
than usually hazardous or injurious to health, or having members residing in
localities known to be unhealthy, the valuer shall in his valuation make such
allowance or allowances therefor as regards conditions 5 and 6 as he may deem
expedient, and shall call special attention thereto in his report on the valuation,
9. The valuer may, in estimating the value of a society s liabilities under
its assured benefits, use such a rate or rates of interest as he may consider
expedient; but when such rate or rates shall exceed 3 per cent, he shall, in his
report on the valuation, state fully the grounds on which a higher rate of
interest is made use of. ...»
10. No allowance is to be made for possible future profits arising from
secessions, unless the number of contributing members in the society, and the
nature of the society’s business be such as fully to justify an allowance being
made ; and the valuer shall in all such cases state in his report what allowance
has been made, and the grounds on which it is made.
11. The method of valuation must in no case have the effect of treating any
of the society’s assurance contracts as assets ; in other words, the liability of


the society under its assurance contracts must in no case be treated as having
a negative value.
12. The valuation report must in all cases state distinctly what provision is
made for future expenses of management, and the valuer shall state whether,
in his opinion, judging from the experience of the society, such provision is
adequate.
13. In making his report on the valuation the valuer shall in all cases
specially call attention to the assumptions on which the valuation is based,
particular care being exercised in this case where the number of members is
small.
14. The valuer shall make his valuation and furnish to the society the
report and abstract of valuation required by section 14 {i, f) of the Friendly
Societies Act, 1875, within three calendar months after the necessary particulars
have been supplied to him, unless there be just and sufficient reasons for any
delay.
15. If in consequence of the large number of valuations under the Act
which are submitted to him a public valuer is unable to complete any such
valuation within the time above specified, he may transfer such valuation to
another public valuer upon the same terms and conditions.
16. When the benefits to be valued do not exceed two classes of sick
allowance and deferred annuities, together with sums payable on the deaths
of members and of their wives, the scales of payment to public valuers shall
be as follows :—
• ■ & s. d.
For societies consisting of not more than 75 members 3 3 0
For societies with over 7 5 members and not exceeding 100 members... 4 4 0
„ „ 100 „ „ 150 „ ...5 6 0
„ „ 150 „ „ 200 „ ...6 6 0
„ „ 200 „ „ 300 „ ...7 7 0
„ „ 300 „ „ 400 „ ...8 8 0
„ ,, 409 „ „ 500 „ ...9 9 0
„ „ 500 „ „ 600 „ ... 10 10 0
„ „ 600 „ „ 750 „ ... 12 12 0
„ „ 750. „ „ 1000 „ ... 15 15 0
With a further £5s 5s. for every 500 members, or portion thereof, beyond the
total amount of members not exceeding 2,500. Beyond 2,500 members the
fee to be a matter of special arrangement, as well as in all cases where the
number of benefits exceeds that above mentioned.
Valuers may accept valuations on terms lower than those of the above scale.
Valuers must take such steps as they think fit for obtaining payment of
their fees.
17. Valuers shall hold their appointments from year to year, beginning on
the 1st January, 1877.
The Treasury reserves to itself entire discretion as to reappointing them.
18. The scale of fees above laid down will remain in force till the end of
1880.
At the end of that time it will either be confirmed or altered in such
manner as the Treasury may direct.
19. The Treasury reserves to itself the right of appointing additional
valuers if required.
20. Valuers are requested to make themselves acquainted with the provisions
of the Friendly Societies Acts, and with the Treasury regulations which affect
the exercise of their functions. Their attention is particularly directed to
sections 14 and 32 of the Act of 1875.
The following is the list of public valuers for England and Wales : M. N.
Adler, Actuary of the Alliance Assurance Company; C. Ansell, jun., Actuary


of the National Life Assurance Society ; R. P. Hardy, Actuary of the London
and Provincial Law Assurance Society; W. Hatton, Brighton Savings Bank ;
W. L. Newman, Actuary of the Yorkshire Insurance Company, York ; W. P.
Pattison, Actuary of the Commercial Union Assurance Company ; H. Ratcliffe,
Manchester Unity of Oddfellows, Manchester ; H. Ambrose Smith, Actuary of
the Scottish Imperial Insurance Company ; T. Y. Strachan, Actuary and
Public Accountant, Newcastle-on-Tyne.
For Scotland : J. Meikle, Actuary of the Scottish Provident Institution,
Edinburgh ; C. Prentice, Chartered Accountant and Actuary, Edinburgh.
For Ireland : H. Engelbach, Actuary of the National Assurance Company,
Dublin; W. J. Hancock, Actuary of the Patriotic Assurance Company of
Ireland, Dublin.
Cj)* lisjiop jof gtodjsstcr an Jfnmfrlg Siamtm.
On March 4th the Bishop of Manchester preached a sermon at All Saints’
Church, Newton Heath, Manchester, when collections were made on behalf of
the Widow and Orphan Fund of the Independent Order of Oddfellows
(Manchester Unity), Newton Heath District. In speaking of the objects of
friendly societies in general, his Lordship said they sought to make provision
for what was called a rainy day. Their members were making a wise provision
in days of health and strength for times of sickness, trouble, or death. These
friendly societies had been carried on by the working men, and it was a matter
of great pleasure to them to have worked such great social problems. He was
glad to think that these men had done this for the most part out of their own
resources, and had not been beholden to that class of society above them.
They had taken counsel amongst themselves, and they had no doubt sought
information from the most valuable sources. He was glad to know that the
Legislature had stepped in and put all these great organisations on a solid and
permanent footing that many of them did not occupy before. They had
realised the great maxim that union was strength. The monthly or weekly
contributions to this Order coming in from upwards of 4,000 lodges had
accumulated to a vast sum. He was told by their secretary that the society
was worth nearly four millions capital proper, and that it was increasing at the
rate of £lBO,OOO or £200,000 a year. That was to him a marvellous phenomenon,
and it showed what working men could do without the patronage of the great.
He did not pretend to understand this great institution, and he would only be
guilty of a great act of presumption if he attempted to lecture to them upon
it. But he could conceive that it was a national concern, and one which every
Englishman should take an interest in. An institution of this kind, he thought,
should be on a thoroughly sound financial footing. At the death of a member
he supposed there was a certain sum payable to the widow for funeral expenses.
He would like, however, for all ranks of society to try and introduce a little
reform in the expenses of funerals, for he thought they were very extravagant.
Some people thought they did not show respect to the dead if they did not
have a pompous funeral, but he was sure it fell very heavily upon the resources
of some of the widows. He believed they would be doings an act of kindness,
following a true policy, and showing a deal of love for the departed if they
spent less on such things as hatbands and gave more to the widow. He was
afraid the funerals were conducted on a scale that pressed heavily upon the
resources of the family just at the moment when the bread winner perhaps
Was cut off.
19
THE BISHOP OP MANCHESTER ON FRIENDLY SOCIETIES.


©it % of tljc surattmt 0f jsixk Uag
m Jfrwnfclg Sandies.
On the evening of December 2nd, at a meeting of the Past Grands’ Lodge of
the Manchester Unity of Oddfellows, held at the Marlborough Hotel, Brighton,
under the presidency of P. Prov. G.M. S. Godfree, Bro. W. Hatton, actuary,
inaugurated a very interesting discussion on the question of the duration of
sickness pay. He said : The subject which I gave notice to bring before the
Past Grands’ Lodge in connection with the Brighton District of the Manchester
Unity this evening, viz., on limiting the duration of sick pay, is one of great
practical importance to friendly societies. It is of great practical importance,
inasmuch as in the ordinary run of friendly societies, such as the lodges of the
Manchester Unity, the death benefits are very small, whereas the sick benefits,
more particularly in cases of continued sickness, are, in the aggregate, very
large. In case of the death of a member in the Brighton District, £l2, so far as
the lodge is concerned, once for all settles the claim of the family, and in case
of the death of a member’s wife, £8 once for all settles the claim of the husband.
But in case of the sickness of a member, a sum once for all does not settle the
claim of the member. On the contrary a sick member in the Brighton District
is entitled, with rare exceptions in the case of certain lodges, to 12s. fid. per
week in the first twelve month’s sickness, and 6s. 3d. per week in sickness after
twelve month’s continued sickness. There is, therefore, no limit whatever to a
member receiving what is called sick half pay, so that he may receive sick half
pay for years and years. Now, 6s. 3d. per week is £l6 ss. a year, which, if
paid by a lodge with the number of members not large, amounts in the course
of years to a very considerable sum of money, and is, of course, a very serious
drain on the sick fund. Every Past Grand present must know of cases of this
kind in the Brighton District. Several cases could be mentioned, but the fol-
lowing ones will perhaps suffice by way of illustration. In going through the
Brighton District returns for the purpose of valuation, I found the following
note appended to one of the returns by the secretary : “We have at present
five members who from continuous sick pay have drawn upwards of £622.
No. 1, age 51 £334 18s. Od On half pay 18 years.
No. 2, „ 27 £133 Is. 6d „ 6 „
No. 3, „ 33 £77 14s. 9d „ 2| „
No. 4, „ 51 £36 ss. Od „ 12 weeks.
No. 5, „ 41 £4O 14s. 6d „ 26 „
These amounts are exclusive of previous sums drawn; in two or three cases
this addition would equal a year’s full pay, certainly in cases No. 1 and No. 4.”
Other friendly societies, like the Manchester Unity, have had their sick pay
difficulties. In 1847 the Brighton and Sussex Mutual Provident Society was
established, professedly for the purpose of granting full sick pay during the
whole of sickness. Theoretically this may have appeared to be right to the
founders, but alas ! experience proved that this could not be carried out in
practice. In 1856 attention w r as drawn to the case of a member who had
drawn £246 12s-, and had been on 12s. per week full sick pay for 411 weeks.
This case, like the cases already mentioned, was not one of infirmity of age,
but of permanent disease, so that there seemed no prospect whatever


of such member declaring off, and the sick pay ceasing. To meet this
and similar other cases the rules were then altered. In future, full sick pay
was granted for only fifty-two weeks, half pay for twenty-six weeks,
and one-third pay during the continuance of the same And to meet
cases of permanent disease a new rule was made, which is so important that
I prefer to give it in its entirety. It is as follows : “34. Should any member,
by reason of the infirmities of age, or from being afflicted with paralysis,
blindness, lameness, or any other permanent disease, be, in the opinion of the
Medical Officer—such opinion being certified, in writing, to the Board of
Directors —permanently incapacitated from following his or her usual employ-
ment or occupation, he or she shall be entitled to full sick pay for a period of
fifty-two weeks, half-pay for twenty-six weeks, and one-third pay for seventy-
eight weeks \ but after the completion of these periods, the payment shall
cease. Should, however, the member recover, either prior to, or at the
expiration of, the beforementioned periods, he or she shall be subject to the
same regulations as other sick members.” The effect of rule 34 may be seen
in the following cases of permanent disease, here given by way of illustration.
No. 1 (as above) received sick pay as follows : 411 weeks at 125., full pay,
£246 12s. ; 26 weeks at 65., half pay, £7 165.; 78 weeks at 45., one-third pay,
£l5 12s. ; total, £270. 515 weeks, or 9 years and 47 weeks.
No. 2 received sick pay as follows : 52 weeks at 125., full pay, £3l 4s. ; 26
weeks at 65., half pay, £7 16s. ; 78 weeks at 45., one-third pay, £l5 12s. ;
total, £54 12s. 156 weeks or 3 years. This member is still living.
No. 3 received sick pay as follows : 52 weeks at Bs., full pay, £2O los. ; 26
weeks at 45., half pay, £5 4s. ; 78 weeks at 2s. Bd., one-third pay, £lO Bs. ;
total, £36 Bs. 156 weeks or 3 years. This member lived 3 years after the sick
pay had ceased.
No. 4 received sick pay as follows : 52 weeks at 125., full pay, £3l 45.; 2o
weeks at 65., half pay, £7 165.; 78 weeks at 45., one-third pay, £l5 12s ;
total, £54 12s. This member lived upwards of 2 years after the sick pay had
ceased.
Had Rule 34 not been made, these four members would have drawn still
larger amounts, to the still further diminution of the sick fund. To meet
cases of permanent disease, bodily or mental, it appears, therefore, from the
actual experience of friendly societies, that there should be a limit to the
duration of sick pay. What that limit should be is a matter of detail, whether
one, two, or three years, or otherwise. Certainly no rule should exist which
allows a member to draw sick pay for eighteen years. Friendly societies are
intended to secure weekly payments in sickness incapacitating
the members from following their usual that is to say, only
during recoverable sickness. To provide for the infirmities of age, when mem-
bers become almost permanently incapacitated, sick pay should cease about the
age of 65, when, in lieu of sick pay, a small annuity should commence, which
the members should provide for by separate contributions.
The “ Hour and the Man.”— The honour- of being in advance of the age is
in most cases only equivocal. A man should belong to his age, and the work
which lies nearest he should advance according to his ability. Anticipating
time, moreover, is only too often the incapability of idealistic enthusiasts to
bear the actual. It is only when a man such as Shakspere entirely and fully
belongs first to his age and its cultivation and business in every essential
direction, and also by his power of mind anticipates the method of thought
and feeling in generations to come, that we can respect this advanced position
as the token of a true and great superiority. —Professov Oervinus,
21
DURATION OF SICK PAT.


gistnxt Jfmreral Jfmtfcs.
PROV. C.S, THOMAS FLANAGAN, MANCHESTER DISTRICT.
The attention of the Unity could not be directed to a more important question
than to the formation of District Funeral Funds created upon an equitable
basis. An article under this head appeared in the October Magazine of 1876,
which led to the hope that the question would have been taken up and venti-
lated by some of the leading men in the Order. It is, however, not too late
yet, and it is to be earnestly hoped that some able articles will yet appear on
this subject in the columns of the Magazine—one from the editor would be very
opportune at the present time.
The practice which, with few exceptions, prevails in the Unity of levying for
the current expenditure is fundamentally erroneous in principle, and is pre-
ventive to that bond of union so much needed in the districts throughout the
Order. The money contributed by the members for the funeral liability is in
reality the common property of districts, no portion of which should be used
by lodges, and should be paid over to the District Funeral Funds from the
commencement of each member’s initiation. Districts and not lodges should
have possession of the accumulated funds to meet the accruing funeral
liabilities. Had such been the case the older districts would have had
possession of large accumulated funeral funds, and would not have been
necessitated to keep continuously increasing the funeral levies year after year
as experience has proved.
The system of levying an equal sum per member, regardless of the age of the
member levied upon, for the purpose of defraying the funeral expenditure in
districts, is a direct departure from the principle which was recognised and
approved by the Unity at the Preston A.M.C. in the year 1853, now twenty-three
years ago, when the contributions of all incoming members were graduated
according to their ages at the time of admission; and whatever course will
expedite the speedy application of a remedy should be universally encouraged
and supported, as the longer it is delayed the more disastrous will be the
results.
The financial failure which the system referred to entails is not readily
discovered in young districts where the funeral levies do not much exceed the
average of the whole Unity. It is not till the annual levies in the older districts
become double or even treble that of the Unity’s average that lodges begin to
discover the serious consequences. The mischief, however, has already been
done when the discovery is made, and when there is little or no chance of
escape from it, “Bring in plenty of new members” is then the prevailing
cry; but the addition of young members only adds to the difficulty, as a
member, say aged twenty years, for a funeral benefit of £lO for himself and
£5 for his wife, only pays to the lodge the sum of 4s. per annum, whilst the
lodge of which he is a member has to pay to the district funeral levy for such
member often twice or thrice that amount. It follows, as a matter of course,
that the lodges having the greatest number of young members are called upon
to pay a very much larger sum than' they receive from those members. The
result of this must eventually cause the payments for sickness to be considerably
reduced, to avoid which lodges are tempted to secede from the district to which
they belong, particularly so if they have plenty of money; and some lodges have


so seceded in the writer’s district, and subsequently have divided their funds
amongst their members, and there is little doubt but that a similar proceeding
has taken place in other districts in the Unity. The case is different in lodges
with deficient capital. They find themselves compelled to resort to reduced sick
benefits with a view to prevent collapse; but this course only hastens that
which they desire to retard, as there is at once a wholesale withdrawal of the
younger members.
Is it not true that many lodges in the various districts throughout the Unity,
in possession of considerable funds, show, on valuation, very large deficiencies,
the members of which, in most instances, will not believe it, being ignorant
of the fac?t that most of, and in some cases all, the funds they hold are barely
sufficient to pay their funeral liabilities ? The funds they hold in those cases
are in reality the property of the districts to which such lodges belong, and in
this way the bulk of the members are prevented seeing their true financial
position, and failing to see the necessity for making timely provision for the
future, oppose every scheme brought forward to remove that which is inevitable
in such cases, viz., reduced benefits, or breaking up for want of funds and then
becoming district members.
Until a better plan be discovered it appears to the writer that the regulation
of district funeral levies upon the average age of the members taken in groups,
or otherwise, although not entirely equitable would be a step in the right
direction, which would mitigate, to a considerable extent, the injustice of
charging the same funeral levy for a member of 20 as for one of 60 years of age.
The only just and equitable system is to pay to the District Funeral Funds the
exact sum received from the members for the funeral liability ; but this is
impracticable in the older and poorer districts; and, this being so, the step next
nearest to that should be at once taken, viz., let the table in the 26th' General
Rule be applied to all new members from a given date, the districts keeping a
separate account for them, and levying according to the average ages of the
other members, as existing on the 31st December in each year, for the funeral
expenditure of such members. The adoption of this scheme would be a pro-
tection to the incoming young members and an encouragement to the opening
of new lodges in any district, no matter what the financial condition of such
district might be. The writer propounded this system to the Manchester
District some time ago, which was adopted, and is now in operation. There is
no difficulty in carrying it out, and, so far, it has been found beneficial.
Returns to the Registrar. —At Southwark, on December 23rd., Charles
Windridge, secretary of a temperance benefit society, was charged with neglect-
ing to furnish a proper balance-sheet, in accordance with the New Friendly
Societies Act. The defendant was fined £5 and costs.
Building Societies. —On the motion of Mr. John Holms, a return was last
session ordered by the House of Commons of certain particulars regarding the
building societies incorporated under the Acts of 1874 and 1875. Owing to the
great variety of form in which the various societies draw up their balance-sheets
it has been found extremely difficult to obtain the desired information. Of
the 396 societies incorporated up to the 31st December, 1875, 272 have made
returns which show the following aggregate results : Total receipts during the
last financial year, £7,824,442; subscriptions or uncompleted shares, £6,254,410;
completed or realised shares, £1,279,650 ; preferential shares, £728,526 ;
liability to depositors and other creditors, £4,025,275 ; balance of unappro-
priated profit, £337,445 ; balance deficit, £45,293, The assets were
hue on mortgage securities (not including prospective interest), £11,793,926 ;
amount invested in other securities and cash, £786,087.
23
DISTRICT FUNERAL FUNDS.


Jfrmtblg SoridjJ Jtttelligwa, Statistics*
Important Decision Affecting Friendly Societies. —At Hartlepool
County Court, on November 4th, before Mr. E. J. Meynell, Judge, the decision
in the case of the trustees of the Good Intent Lodge of Oddfellows, West
Hartlepool, versus Watson, secretary of the Benevolent Lodge, Wolsingham,
was delivered by His Honour. The case was heard a month previously,
Mr. R. H. Young, of West Hartlepool, appearing for the plaintiffs, and Mr.’
Maw, of Bishop Auckland, for the defendant. His Honour gave judgment as
follows : The plaintiffs are the trustees of the Good Intent Lodge of Oddfellows,
a duly registered branch of that society ; the defendant is the secretary of a
lodge called the Loyal Benevolent Lodge of Oddfellows, but which in 1872 was
not registered. The 46th General Rule of the Oddfellows’ Society provides for
the transfer of a member of one lodge to another, but if he falls sick or dies during
twelve months from such transfer the transferring lodge is to be liable for all
claims, and the member is to be paid sick money and funeral benefit at the
rate allowed by such lodge. A man called Brown, a member of the unregis-
tered lodge, was transferred in August, 1872, to the Good Intent Lodge, the
trustees of which were ignorant that the rules of the Loyal Benevolent Lodge
were not registered. Brown fell sick, and died within the twelve months.
The secretary of the Good Intent Lodge, in accordance with Rule 46, wrote to
the defendant on September 23rd : “ Good Intent Lodge, West Hartlepool, Sept.
23rd, 1872. Mr. Cuthbert Watson, secretary of Benevolent Lodge, Wolsingham.
Sir and Brother, —Your member, Brother Robert Brown, whom we accepted by
clearance, has declared himself on the funds by surgeon’s certificate, which I
have enclosed, dated September sth. Please state what amount we are to pay
him per week, or per day, as you are aware that you are held responsible for
twelve months, according to General Law. Your immediate attention will
oblige, yours fraternally, H. S. Steel, Secretary. 55, Scarborough Street,
West Hartlepool.” He received the following reply : “Loyal Benevolent
Lodge, Wolsingham, October 2nd, 1872. Sir and Brother, —I write these few
lines to inform you of what our lodge allows in sickness ; Bs. per week for the
first 26 weeks, and 7s. per week for the next 26 weeks. I wanted information
before I answered your letter, or else I ought to reply sooner. —Yours
fraternally, Cuthbert Watson, Secretary.” The Good Intent Lodge paid on
Brown’s behalf £l7 14s. Bd., and which, according to Rule 46, the Loyal
Benevolent Lodge, if duly registered, would have been obliged to pay, and to
recover this sum the action is brought. Had the Loyal Benevolent Lodge been
a registered society, the matter is one which probably would have come under
the general arbitration rules, but being an unregistered society it was argued
and conceded that these rules would not apply. Mr. Young contended that
the trustees could recover from the defendant for money paid to the use of the
defendant at his request, relying on the letters. I think that contention is
right. The members of an unregistered friendly society are either in the
position of partners or as members of a club, and the latter seems a more
accurate description of their position. It is not material in this case whether
they are partners or not, as by the County Court Act one partner can be sued
without joining his co-partners. I think the defendant’s letter is a sufficient
request to pay the money, and that it is paid to his use. If not recoverable


as money paid, it perhaps may be so as money paid and received, and I would
amend by adding such a claim if necessary. It appears to me the money is
recoverable, and I find for the plaintiffs.
Savings Banks.— Mr. Torr, M.P., has obtained a return, issued in a Parlia-
mentary Blue Book, giving a good deal of useful information as to every savings
bank in the United Kingdom. In England there are 355 banks, and. in Wales
The amount of security given by unpaid officers is £301,520, and by paid
officers £299,550. The salaries and allowances to paid officers amount to
£B7 725 18s. The annual. expenses of management, inclusive of all pay-
ments for the year ended the 20th November last, were £113,117 7s. 9d.
There were 1,149,443 accounts opened on the 20th November, The total
amount owing to depositors on that day was £34,538,495 3s. Bd.; the total
amount invested with the National Debt Commissioners on the same day,
excluding the surplus fund, was £34,400,901 Is. 3d. Balances in the hands of
treasurers on the 20th of November amounted to £265,169 18s. 3d. Ihe
average rate of interest paid to depositors was £2 19s. sd. The separate surplus
fund in the hands of the Commissioners was on the 20th of November
£367 519 18s. sd. The number of life annuities was 9,457 immediate and 880
deferred. For terms of years there were 274 immediate and 15 deferred. The
annual number of receipts from depositors in the year ended as stated was
1,198,580, and the annual payments 646,355. The average receipt was
£4l9s. 6d., and payments £9 11s. sd.
Building Societies.— Mr. J. Malcolm Ludlow, the Registrar of Friendly
Societies in his annual report gives the totals of the building societies which
have made returns. The liabilities are: To the holders of subscription or
uncompleted shares, £6,254,410 ; completed or realised shares, £1 279,650 ;
preferential shares, £728,526 ; to depositors and other creditors, £4,025,275.
The assets are : Mortgage securities are £11,793,926 ; amount invested in
other securities, 786,087. There is a deficit in thirty-six societies of £45,293,
and in 275 a balance of unappropriated profits of £337,445, Under the Act
396 societies have been registered, 272 have made complete returns, and 11 do
not furnish accounts of liabilities. Every member and depositor m a building
society can procure the return for a few pence. It should be added, however,
in order to prevent misunderstanding, that the Act is a permissive one so far as
regards those building societies which were in existence before it was passed.
These can either enrol themselves or leave it alone. To the extent of their
omitting to do so, the statistics do not afford anything like a complete view of
he building society business of the country.
Friendly Society Case. —At the Lancaster Police Court, on February 2nd,
John Lockhart, Secretary of the Good Intent Lodge of the Grand United
Order of Oddfellows, was summoned for to pay John Bolland, an old
man, 69 years of age, the sum of £27, due for sick allowance. Bolland, who
is suffering from chronic rheumatism, had been fined and suspended for
working a little in his garden, but he stated that he had done so in accordance
with instructions from the medical officer. He had, however, paid the fine
and continued his contributions, and the present claim was for sick allowance
due since the expiration of the period of suspension.—The defence was that,
according to the general rules of the Order, Bolland had forfeited all claim to
the pay, and that those rules ought to be accepted as secondary evidence ]ust
as much as the branch rules which were put in. As, however, it could not be
pointed out that in those rules (which were the only ones ever supplied to
Bolland, who had been a member 25 years) there was any intimation of certain
general rules having been altered or repealed, the Chairman said the bench


were unanimously of opinion that, according to the branch rules, they must
make an order for the full amount claimed and 19s. 6d. costs, and they further
ordered that Holland should be reinstated on the books of the society.
Poor Rates in 1875-76. —The annual poor-rate return shows that the
sum raised by poor-rates during the year ended Lady-Day, 1876, was
£12,092,087 ; the receipts in aid, inclusive of £496,741, the Treasury subven-
tions and payments for Government property, amounted to £813,308, forming
a total receipt of £12,905,395. It is to be observed that £4,650,613, or more
than one-third of the whole poor-rate now levied, is expended for “other
purposes” than the relief of the poor. The figures which represent for
1875-76 the whole expenditure out of the rates are these : Relief to the poor,
£7,335,858 ; law charges, £27,162 ; purposes partly connected and partly un-
connected with relief, £623,309 ; purposes wholly unconnected with relief,
£4,650,613 ; total, £12,636,942.
Mortality in the Society op Friends. —“ J. F.” writes to the Daily
News: —“ Some of your readers may be interested in the following statistics of
the society: According to the latest official returns the number of Friends in the
United Kingdom was 17,186. The number of deaths in 1876 was 330. Of
these 51 were of persons between 60 and 70 years of age, 86 between 70 and 80,
five between 80 and 90, and four between 90 and 100, Thus, nearly 57 per
cent, of the deaths were of persons over 60 years of age ; whilst the deaths
under 21 were 19 per cent. I have heard it so frepuently stated that the
Quakers are not long lived, and that the mortality amongst their children is
much higher than the rest of the population, that the above, together with the
fact that the average age of Quakers for the past three years has been just 55
years, will dispel what seems to be a popular delusion.”
Increase of the Population. —At the meeting of the “Health” section of
the Social Science Congress at Liverpool in October last, Mr. T. Hawkesley,
C.E., said the population of England (including Wales) now amounts to
24.000. persons, distributed over about 30,000,000 acres of cultivable land.
There is, therefore, one person to one and a quarter acres, whereas in most
(and averagely in all) of the other kingdoms of Europe there are about five
acres of land to each person ; and on the entire surface of the earth, exclusive
of the arctic zones, about ten acres of land to each person ; or, after a fair
deduction for uninhabitable deserts and mountains, probably seven or eight
acres of cultivable land to each person. The absolute increase in the numbers
of our population is something enormous. Naturally the annual ratio of
increase, as determined from the excess of births over deaths, is, on a mean of
many years, almost exactly that of 10,150 to 10,000 ; or, in other words, 10,000
people living at the commencement of a year are augmented to 10,150 at its
termination. Taking our present population ot 24,000,000, and assuming this
ratio of 10,150 to 10,000, and, to simplify the illustration, taking the duration
of a current generation at 42 (accurately 41'8 years, as is found by the
Registrar-General from his last published life tables), the following results may
follow : At the end of the first generation the population of England might
become 44,808,000 ; at the end of the second generation, 83,656,000 ; at the
end of the third generation, 156,000,000 ; at the end of the fourth generation,
291.000. ;at the end of the fifth generation, 544,000,000. And so on, till
in the seventh generation the people of England and English descent, even if
not then all in England, would exceed in number the present population of the
whole world ; and in 20 generations (little more than the time which has
elapsed between the Norman Conquest, when England first became possessed
of a rude but stable government, and to-day), would amount to 24,000,000 X
(I’ols) 20 = 27,220,000,000, and would require 20 worlds as populous as our earth
now is for their habitation.


Unites arhs, fe
Accrington. —On October 7tb tbe members of the Rose on the Hill Lodge
celebrated their anniversary at the Commercial Inn by a dinner, after a grand
procession. The chair was occupied by Dr. Pilkington, who delivered an
exhaustive address, in which he traced the progress of the Unity from its
origin to its present flourishing condition. The address was well received.
Alltwen. —On the 13th December the members of the Loyal Patriot Lodge
presented to P.G. Thomas Lewis, one of their trustees, a pair of coloured
emblems—one of the Order and the other of the Widow and Orphan Fund —in
handsome frames, as a token of respect for fulfilling the various duties in
connection with his office, and for bringing new members to join the lodge
during the past two years.
Ashton-in-Makebfield. —On December 23rd the members of the Trium-
phant Lodge met at the Gerard’s Arms Inn, for the purpose of presenting to
Mr. Joseph Ashton a magnificent silver tea and coffee service, as a token of
their appreciation of his exertions as secretary for a period extending over 30
years, The articles cost £lB. Mr. John Hodgkinson, C.S., was called to the
chair. P. Prov. G.M. Latham made the presentation in very eulogistic terms.
He said in 1843 Mr. Ashton became secretary, and at that time the funds of
the society were low, compared to the number of members. They only owned
then £lB4 14s. 10d., with 107 members. Mr. Ashton proved a good secretary,
and with birri rested for weal or woe the conduct of the business. These small
emblems were offered him in testimony of their appreciation of his exertions.
In 1853 prosperity seemed to have dawmed on them, and the funds amounted
to £853 Bs.. Again, in 1862, a gradual increase was shown, bringing them up
to £1,480 ss. 4d. Their friend and brother during these years sat at the
station he now holds, and took care of the business. Still what astounding
facts of the stability of the lodge he had to lay before them. In 1872 they had
£1,782 4s. lOd. ; but he had not done yet, for in September last the amount
stood at £1,924 3s. with 181 members. The inscription on the service is
as follows : “Presented to Past Prov. G.M. Joseph Ashton, by the members
of the Triumphant Lodge, No. 97, Ashton-in-Makerfield District, M.U., in
recognition of his services as their secretary during a period of 30 years.
December 23rd, 1876.” Mr. Ashton acknowledged the presentation in appro-
priate terms. He said he always had an ambition to see the lodge worth
£2,000, and he hoped to see it yet.
Belfast On December 8 the members held their annual soiree and ball in
the Music Hall. Tea and very choice confectionery having been partaken of,
the party adjourned to the upper hall of the building, where the more practi-
cable business of the evening was transacted. Mr. R. Dalway, M.P. for
Carrickfergus, presided, supported by Dr. John Clarke, Dr. Core, W. Spackman,
Bsq,, Messrs. John Downing, Samuel Clifford, W. J. Thompson, &c. The
chairman said it was a number of years ago since he was enrolled a member of
the Oddfellows’ Association in Carrickfergus. He took a very great interest in
the society, because it was one of those associations which induced the artisan


class particularly to lay by and husband some of their earnings for a time of
sickness which otherwise would have been frittered away in a manner less
beneficial to them. There were four districts in Ireland, in Belfast, Dublin,
Cork and Limerick, with seventeen lodges, and a membership of 1,100. The
financial condition of the Belfast District was most favourable, it having now
a capital of £3,340. During the past ten years £3,839 had been paid out for
sick and funeral purposes.
Birmingham. —At the annual meeting of the district in December, the
following resolution was passed, which testifies in the handsomest manner to
the high esteem in which the late Past Grand Master Buck was held by those
who were most intimately associated with him during his long career of useful-
ness • “ That the sum of £IOO be voted from the District Management Fund,
to erect an obelisk in St. Philip’s Churchyard, to perpetuate the memory of
the late Mr. Henry Buck, and that the amount be recouped by an extra
levy of one halfpenny per member per quarter made upon the lodges.”
Birmingham— The annual Christmas gathering of the members of the
Wilson Lodge, Knowle, took place on December 27th. P.P.G.M. Fisher presided.
In proposing “The Board of Directors,” the Chairman gave almost interesting
and instructive account of the Unity, which was listened to intently, and the
enthusiastic manner in which it was responded to bears testimony to the great
confidence the members have in their Directors. P.P.G.M. Spratt responded
for the district in his usual happy, humorous, and telling manner; and then, in
an eloquent speech, proposed “The Wilson Lodge.” The members of the Wilson
Lodge expressed themselves grateful to Brothers Fisher and Spratt for their
kindness, and for their very eloquent addresses, and felt confident that much
good to the lodge would ensue from their presence that evening.
Blackburn. From the report of C.S. Haworth we leam that the district
now numbers 3,503 members. During the past year £977 had been paid for
funerals and £2,035 15s. for sickness. The total amount of the reserved funds
of the 24 lodges is £36,484 Bs. 7Jd., which shows an increase over the preceding
year of £1,638 14s. l^d.
Blackburn. The 6th of February will be remembered as a red letter day
in the history of Oddfellowship in Blackburn, as on that evening a specially
summoned meeting of the members of the Temple of Friendship Lodge was
held for the purpose of initiating W. E. Briggs, Esq., M.P., and Councillor W.
Arthur. There was an unnsually large assemblage of the brethren belonging
to the' lodge, as well as the district officials and visitors from Preston,
Accrington, Darwen, and other places. Mr. Briggs, in the course of his speech,
intimated that he had been most highly gratified during the whole of the
interesting proceedings that night, and that he should never forget to come
and join in the business of the lodge as often as he could possibly find time to
enable him to do so ; and if he could, when in London, by any means be of
service to the great and important Order he had now the privilege to belong,
every member might safely rely on his hearty and cordial co-operation to carry
out any improvements which Sir Stafford Northcote or any other minister might
deem necessary to introduce before Parliament. Councillor Arthur expressed
his surprise as well as satisfaction at their financial position, and concluded with
the hope that its members might continue to increase, and the lodge become
more ■wealthy than it was.
Bradford. The twenty-second anniversary of the Past Grands’ Lodge was
held on January 27th, at the Oddfellows’ Hall Hotel. Past Grand Master
Schofield presided. Appropriate addresses were delivered by the Chairman,


P.G.M. Charles Hardwick, C. S. Riley, a member of the Board of Directors,
and other gentlemen. Bro. W. D. Cawthra said that the number of members
was 129, as against 127 in January, 1876. The amount of capital in January,
1876, was £llO 11s. 5d.; this year it was £l4O 16s. Id., an increase of
£3O 4s. Bd.
Brampton, Cumberland. —On New Year’s Day the members of the
Brampton Lodge celebrated their 38th anniversary by a dinner and ball, at the
White Lion Hotel. The Rev. Henry Whitehead, vicar of Brampton, presided.
Mr. Philip Johnstone, the secretary and P.G.M., stated that from January Ist,
1860, to December 31st, 1875, 843 members had been sick, and their aggregate
sickness amounted to 8,996 weeks and 3 days, and those 843 members had in
that time received sick money to the amount of £3,112 12s. 6d. ; besides this
the lodge had provided its members with medical attendance at a cost of £5lB
7s. 2d.; during the same period 63 members and 40 members’ wives had died,
and the funeral money paid at their decease amounted to £664, making the
total expenditure of the lodge during the sixteen years £4,294 19s. Bd., or an
annual average expenditure of £268 Bs.
Brighton. —The 32nd anniversary of the Myrtle Lodge was celebrated on
March Ist, at the George Hotel, Henfield. The chair was taken by Mr. Henry
Longley. P.G.M. James Curtis expressed his desire to do everything in
his power towards the consolidation of the society, in opposition to the
bugbear cry of centralisation which had been raised against the action of the
executive of the society. Mr. James Martin, jun., said the income of the
lodge had, in the past year, exceeded the expenditure by nearly £l5O.
Brighton. —At the annual meeting of the district, on the conclusion of the
usual business, Mr. G. S. Godfree said it was with feelings of sympathy he
proposed the following vote of condolence to the family of John Geves, the
late Grand Master of the Unity : “ That this committee desires to express its
sincere condolence with the widow and family of the late Grand Master of the
Unity, John Geves, and to offer this expression of sympathy with them in their
sad bereavement.” The motion was seconded by Mr. C. Palmer, supported by
by Mr. Curtis, and carried unanimously.
Brighton. —On January 12 the annual dinner of the district took place at
the Oddfellows’ Hall. The mayor (C. Lamb, Esq.), presided. He was sup-
ported by Messrs. M. D. Scott, M.P. ; J. J. Holmes, acting G.M. ; J. Curtis,
Parliamentary Agent; all of whom delivered suitable addresses. Mr. Holmes
spoke of the Friendly Societies Act, and said he believed the inquiries of the
Royal Commission which resulted in that Act were made at the instance of
the Manchester Unity. It was necessary to continually inspect the accounts
of their lodges, and to have the lodges united by a legal as well as a moral
tie. The Act had made them a united body of Oddfellows. He said the
South London District was the first to be registered under the new Act.
Brighton. —On Feb. 16th the members of the Western Star Lodge sat down
to supper at the Oddfellows’ Hall, the occasion being taken advantage of for
the purpose of making a presentation to P.P.G.M. Morgan. P.P.G.M. Saunders
occupied the chair. Brother Child made the presentation*, which consisted of a
handsome gold watch and chain, on which was inscribed: “ Presented to P.P.G.M.
Morgan by the members of the Loyal Western Star Lodge and friends in the
Brighton District, as a mark of their esteem.—February 16, 1877.” P.P.G.M.
Morgan had been connected with the Order for over forty years, and was, with
a few exceptions, the oldest Oddfellow. He was one of those who helped to
form the Western Star Lodge thirty-five years ago. He had held many offices,


and although, he had perhaps not pleased everybody, he must have discharged
his various duties efficiently, or he would not have pleased so many. P.P.G.M.
Godfree also presented P.P.G.M. Morgan, on behalf of the Brighton District,
with a silver-mounted walking stick. P. Prov. G.M. Morgan responded in very
feeling terms, P. Prov. G.M. Godfree said he found that last year they
possessed over £5,400, He remembered that when Mr. Hatton made a valua-
tion some little time ago he found a deficiency of something over £l,OOO, but
he (P.P.G.M. Godfree) had no doubt when the lodge was valued again, as it
would be shortly, to see how it was working under the higher rate of contri-
bution, he should be much mistaken if it did not come out with an equal
balance-sheet, or, at least, a considerably less deficiency than when last valued.
The small extra contribution, he believed, had been the means of putting the
lodge in a sound financial position,
Burt St Edmunds. —ln September last, when Mr. Geves, Grand Master of
the Manchester Unity, dined with the Pride and Social Design Lodges, at the
Bull Inn, he mentioned the formation of a lodge for juveniles at Whitehaven,
Cumberland, which had been established thirteen years, and then had over 500
members, and was working well. Ihe use of this juvenile society is to secure
to boys sick benefit and (in case of death) funeral payment, and also to provide
their initiation fees when they become old enough to be transferred from the
juvenile society to the parent lodges. Mr. W. Welham asked all the lodges in
Bury to join in this work by electing representatives from each to consider the
matter, and as soon as the Committee of Management was formed, a code of
rules was drawn up, and they have since been printed. A juvenile branch
lodge was established at the Bull Inn, when twelve members were elected and
twenty-seven more were proposed. It appears to be making very rapid pro-
gress. No less than forty-six new candidates were proposed at the last meeting,
making a total of eighty-five admitted at two meetings.
Cambridge. —The fifth anniversary of the Unanimity Lodge was held at the
Wrestlers’ Hotel, Petty-cury, on February 15th. The chair was taken by Bro.
E. Banyard, D.G.M. of the District. Bro. Hutt congratulated the members
upon the continued success both in funds and members, the capital now
amounting to £235, and the number of members 77. The amount of sick pay
was £25 3s. Bd., being an excess of £l4 over the year 1875 ; £lO was paid to
one member who was injured by a railway accident. He thought that some
provision should be made in the rules of the society for the repayment of such
moneys, provided companies were found liable. He quoted part of a speech
made by the Right Hon. W. E. Gladstone, M.P., who, upon receiving an
address from the Oddfellows of Marlborough, said : “It gives me particular
pleasure to receive it from the society you represent. I look upon your society
as a body of the greatest importance, having the advantage of exercising those
habits of self-reliance, self-dependence, and self-government, upon which the
manhood of England in a great degree depends. I find in you no vestige of
rivalry with or disunion from other classes or branches of society. I find in
you an assertion, most honourable to your members, of the intention to aid
one another. lam glad to learn by recent investigation that those difficulties
which used to impede such societies as yours in placing their calculation on a
solid basis have been remedied, and the members may with confidence look
forward to realising those benefits they are led to expect.”
Chorlet. —At the usual meeting of the Pilot Lodge, after the conclusion
of the ordinary business, a very interesting lecture was delivered by P.Prov. G.M.
William Karfoot, on “ Equalisation as it would affect Oddfellowship,” which
was well received. The crowded state of our pages, however, necessitates the
postponement of the publication of the bulk of the text until our next issue.


Consett. —The members of the Rose of Derwent Lodge held their annual
supper at the Alexandra Hotel. P.G. George Coulson occupied the chair. The
secretary (Mr. W. S. Davies) said that the lodge in Jan., 1873, numbered thirty
eight members, with a sum of £9O at their bankers ; and in January, 1877,
they had sixty-four members with nearly £3OO to their credit. He
referred to the trying ordeal that friendly societies had recently undergone.
The superiority of the Manchester Unity was admitted by the Royal Com-
missioners.
Cork. —A complimentary dinner to Mr. C. J. Burke, Grand Master of the
District in 1876, was given on February 7th, at the Oddfellows’ Hall, to
acknowledge the able manner in which he discharged the duties of Provincial
Grand Master during the past year. He was also presented with an address, a
valuable gold chronometer and guard, together with a service of plate. Mr.
Patrick Geany, Deputy Grand Master, presided. Mr. Bradish said he had no
doubt that the position—the proud position—which the Manchester Unity now
occupied was entirely owing to the impartial manner in which those gentlemen
on the Board of Directors discharged their duties. The Manchester Unity at
present stood on a firmer foundation than it ever stood before, and its useful-
ness was ever increasing. Five hundred pounds had been distributed in Cork,
and the distribution of that sum had been presided over with much advantage
by Mr. Burke, in regard to whom they had that night assembled to pay a
compliment which he well deserved. The Chairman, in proposing the toast of
Our guest, Mr. Burke,” said that during his year of office he did everything
that would earn the respect and esteem of his brother officers, and the high
qualities he had displayed they were now assembled to acknowledge,-however
inadequately, by presenting him with a testimonial and an address, expressing
the warm friendship all the members of the society entertained towards him.
Mr. Burke responded in very feeling terms.
Cork. —On December 26th the members of the Cork District presented
Mr. David Bradish, P.P.G.M., with a handsome service of plate and a purse
of sovereigns, to mark their appreciation of that gentleman’s conduct
during his long connection with the Order in Cork, and particularly as their
representative at the Annual Movable Committees of the Order in England.
Mr. Charles Burke, Provincial Grand Master, presided on the occasion. Letters
were received from Mr. N. D. Murphy, M.P., from Alderman Daly, Mr. Scott,
Dr. Hobart, Dr. Cremen, and others, enclosing subscriptions, and bearing testi-
mony to the unwearying zeal and marked ability brought to bear on the cause
of Oddfellowship by Mr. Bradish. The presentation, which was made with all
honours, was accompanied by the following address : “ We, the members of
fue Cork District of the Independent Order of Oddfellows, M.U., desire to
convey to you our best thanks for the manner in which you performed your
duty as our representative at the Annual Movable Committees of the Order.
Ibe honour conferred on you by the Newport Annual Movable Committee in
selecting you as one of the gentlemen whose portrait should appear in the
Oddfellows’ Magazine, we regard as a compliment to our country and to our
; and we feel proud that so marked a distinction should have been paid
y°u. In congratulating you on the position you have attained amongst your
rethren of the Unity, we cannot but give expression to the feelings of respect
an< * esteem in which you are held by your own district; and we beg to express
our thorough appreciation of your work in the cause of Oddfellowship at
°me.” Mr. Bradish delivered a suitable reply, expressing his thanks for the
great compliment which had been conferred upon him.
Eastwood, Nottinghamshire. —On February 19th a Past Grands’ Lodge
us formed at the Sun Inn, Eastwood, in connection with the district. A code


of rules was drawn up which will shortly be registered, and the lodge will
thereby become a legalised branch of the Manchester Unity. The new lodge
will meet monthly for the purpose of discussion and harmony and the further
elucidation of the laws and principles of the Order.
Eastwood, Notts. —On January Bth the annual concert was given in aid of
the Widow and Orphan Fund in connection with the Rising Sun Lodge, in
the Mechanics’ Institute, R. Harrison, Esq., of The Grange, in the chair.
During the evening the chairman delivered an able address on the vast amount
of good done by the Manchester Unity and kindred societies, and urged on
those present who had not joined to do so at once. The concert was a success
financially and otherwise.
Guernsey. —A grand united meeting of the lodges in the Island of Guernsey
was held in the St. Julian’s Hall on January 11th, presided over by the officers
of the Pride of Sarnia Lodge. Past officers’ certificates, neatly framed, were
presented to G.M. W. Thorn, of the Loyal Guernsey Lodge, and P.G. J. Falla
of the Pride of Sarnia Lodge, the presentations being accompanied with appro-
priate addresses by the presiding officers of their respective lodges, and were
responded to in a very suitable manner. The members in the district number
615, being forty-eight more than they were at this time last year.
Hull On February 15th the fiftieth anniversary dinner of the district was
held at the Globe Inn, High Street. P.G.M. Richard Shepherd presided.
C.S. Pickering said that in the Hull District they had now 3,120 members, and
it was in the fiftieth year of its existence. During this term they had
accumulated upwards of £23,000. Upwards of £1,060 had been paid for
funerals in the course of the year, and a considerable amount had been allowed
for sick pay. The chairman presented a handsome black marble timepiece to
Mr. William Stubbs. It bore the following inscription: “Presented to Wm.
Stubbs by the members of the Hull District of Oddfellows, M.U.,
valuable services as treasurer, 1875, and Grand Master, 1876. February, 1877.
P.P.G.M. Clayton also presented him with a valuable gold Albert and silver
watch, upon which were engraved the following words ; “ Presented to Wm.
Stubbs by the members of the Oddfellows’ Medical Dispensary, for his valuable
services.—Hull, Feb., 1877.” Mr. Stubbs suitably acknowledged the gifts.
Ipswich. —The first dinner in connection with the Past Grands Lodge,
which has been established about four years, came off on February 2nd, in the
Oddfellows’ Hall. P.P.G.M. G. B. Keeble, president of the Past Grands Lodge,
filled the chair. Prov. G.M. Noble said the Ipswich District still continued to
prosper. They had 2,500 members, with a capital of £36,000, equal to £l4 »s.
per member. During the last year upwards of £2,000 was disbursed in sick
pay. P.G. Daking said the Past Grands’ Lodge was open to every Past Grand
belonging to the Ipswich District, and was formed for the purpose of discussing
matters of great importance to the district. It was necessary for the £> ()0
ruling of every lodge that every Past Grand should join. 1\ hero was there a
more appropriate place for such discussion than a lodge composed entirely o
workers in connection with the various lodges ? He hoped that there woul
hs a large accession of members as the result of that evening’s gathering.
Isle of Wight. —The thirty-second annual dinner of the members of the
Loyal East Medina Lodge took place on February 27th, in the Town Hal.
His Worship the Mayor (Alderman B. Barrow) occupied the chair, and was
supported by T. Dashwood, Esq., J.P., Dr. Beaton, Councillors C. Colenutt,
James, tho Town Clerk, Mr. R. Colenutt, &c. The Chairman, in proposing
the toast of the Unity, said with reference to the recent Annual Movable


Committee, he was himself fortunate in being present at many of their
meetings, and he had never attended any meetings where the members
appeared more anxious to do their duty to those who sent them. He never
came in contact with more hardheaded men than those who sat round the
tables on that occasion, or men who worked more strenuously, or asked more
decided and useful questions, or acted, he believed, more conscientiously or
with less view to their own personal aggrandisement than did those 400 men
who sat in that room day after day. Mr. Councillor Colenutt likewise referred,
in equally complimentary terms, to the general intelligence, independence, and
conduct of the deputies attending the A.M.C. Bro. T. A. Butler said the
capital of the lodge on the Ist of Januaty, 1876, amounted to £3,458 14s. lid.;
and on the Ist of January, 1877, to £3,762 19s. 7|d., making an average for
each member of about £ll 155., and being an increase during the year of
£304 4s. B|d. The number of members on the books on the Ist of January,
1877, was 320. He found that during the past ten years they had paid for
sick benefits, £2,080 65.; on account of deaths, £345 ; and they had increased
their capital in that time £1,699 15s. 9d.
Jersey. —At an amalgamated meeting of the three lodges in the island, the
Corresponding Secretary said the total capital amounted to £3,512 12s. 2|d.,
showing an increase during the past year of £779 4s. 9d. T members
numbered 685, or 87 more than at the commencement of the previous year.
A handsome Past Officer’s Certificate, in richly mounted gilt frame, was
presented to Past Prov. Grand Master C, H. Rondel, as a recognition of
services performed whilst in office.
Jersey. —At the ordinary fortnightly meeting of the members of the St.
Helier Lodge, held on the 17th January, the Permanent Secretary, P.P.G.M.
Clement H. Rondel, presented the seventh annual financial report, which
showed the lodge had enjoyed a most prosperous year, the lodge numbering on
the 31st December, 1876, 201 financial members, with an average age of only
25 years and 7 months. Fifty-three new members were admitted during the
year. A valuation of the assets and liabilities of the lodge was made by
Mr. Ratcliffe in 1872, when the lodge was declared to have a surplus capital
of £B3 4s. 6d. Another valuation has recently taken place, the result of
which had not come to hand, but no doubt when completed it will be shown
to have a large surplus. The juvenile branch in connection with the lodge
numbered, on the 31st December, 115 members good on the books.
Kidderminster. —The fifth anniversary of the Lord Hill Lodge was
celebrated on February 13th, at the Foley Arms. Mr. Councillor W. Coweu
occupied the chair, and amongst those present were Councillors A. H.
Greaves, W. H. Green, and W. Coxon. In the course of the evening an emblem
of the Order, beautifully framed, was presented to Brother M. Pardoe, in
acknowledgment of the valuable services he had rendered to the lodge. _ Mr.
Dredge said at the commencement of last year they had £lO2 Bs. 3d. in the
Stourbridge and Kidderminster Bank, but at the commencement of the present
year there was £l4l 2s. sd. in the bank. Since that time £1 14s. sd. had been
added as interest, another £lO had been paid into the bank, and now there was
£155 18s. 2d. deposited there. The number of subscribing members was at
the commencement of the past year 42, they now numbered 67 good on the
books. C. S. Ainsworth said at the beginning of last year there was a total of
324 financial members belonging to the district, and now there were 410.
During the year they had paid for sickness £229 15s. Bid., and for funerals of
members and members’ wives, £62 ; making a total of £291 15s. Bgd. The
total worth of the district was £2,917 18s. 7d., being an increase of £199 6s. 9d.
during the year.


Kingston-on-Thames. —On December 4th last the Grand Master elect of the
Order, Mr. J. J. Holmes, of South London, and others, paid a friendly visit to
the Bushey Park Lodge, in return for numerous visits paid to South London
by the C.S. of the Kingston-on-Thames District (Mr. G. W. Ayliffe.) The large
room at the Cricketers’ was well filled by representatives from the various
lodges in the district and many from Richmond. The G.M. said he could not
speak too highly of the efforts made by Mr. Ayliffe to bring about such friendly
meetings, as they were among the best means of cementing the members more
closely and exhibiting the strength of unity. The lodge was in mourning for
the death of Mr. J. Geves, of Leeds, late G.M.
Kingston-on-Thames.— The sixth anniversary of the Lord St. Leonards
Lodge was celebrated on December sth, at the Three Pigeons. Mr. Ayliffe, in
an eloquent speech, gave an account of the progress and position of the Unity,
and feelingly referred to the sudden death of his old friend, Mr. John Geves, of
Leeds, the late Grand Master of the Order.
Leeds. —Some discussion has taken place in the Leeds Express respecting the
action of the New Friendly Societies Act on the nature of the compact by which
the branches of the affiliated Orders are united. Some parties seem alarmed
lest the moral obligation of branches to obey the Unity General Rules should
become a legal one. We confess we cannot understand the nature of the
morality which shrinks from making any obligation legal which the conscience
and honour of the parties regard as a moral one, in the usual acceptation of
the term. It is suggestive of a lurking wish to repudiate, if convenient, the
obligation solemnly undertaken at the time of initiation. Past Grand Master
Curtis, Parliamentary Agent to the Order, in a letter to the editor of the
Leeds Express, answers the question put in the following intelligent manner :
“ I cannot imagine that our members have anything to fear from the clause of
the Act which provides for the property of any branch of a society resting on
the trustees of the society. The section enacts that this shall only be so if
the rules of the society so provide. To effect this, it would be imperative that a
notice of intention to make such a provision should be circulated throughout
the Unity prior to the meeting (A.M.C.) at which it would be discussed. I can
imagine the consternation such a proposal would cause throughout the Unity.
Every district would rise against it, would send its full number of represen-
tatives to the meeting, there to denounce its promoters, and defeat so
monstrous a proposition. Let the members understand that they themselves
make the laws of the society, and bearing this in mind, they need have no fear
of injustice to themselves or their lodges.”
Leek. —On February 23rd the thirty-ninth anniversary of the Westwood
Lodge Was celebrated by a dinner at the Swan Hotel. Mr. T. Shaw occupied
the position of chairman, Mr. Farrow, in a very able speech, proposed “The
Grand Master and Board of Directors,” which was responded to at some length
by Past Grand Master C. Hardwick, who congratulated the district on the
result of the valuations, from which it appeared that they were not only
perfectly solvent, but possessed a handsome surplus, from which they were
enabled to augment their benefits. From Mr. Farrow’s statement it appeared
the valuations of all the lodges in the Leek District for the five years ending
December, 1875, had just been received from the Actuary. The total number
of members within the district at that date was 507, and the total capital
invested was £7261 12s. Bd., total assets £14,462 Bs. 5d., and the total liabilities
£12,777 Bs., giving a total surplus over and above the amount required to meet
their engagements of £1,684 Os. sd.
Lincoln. —The members of the Victoria Lodge celebrated their 39th
anniversary on * Feb. 24, The report showed that the lodge numbers


267 members, with a capital of £2,072 7s. lOd. The Mayor (P. P.
Dickinson, Esq.), who is a member of the Worsley Lodge and a praiseworthy
Oddfellow, took the chair. During the evening he presented on behalf of the
lodge an order of merit and a beautiful walnut inkstand to Bro. Michael
Angelo West, P.P.G.M., as a slight acknowledgment of, the services rendered to
the lodge and district. Bro. West, who has just obtained his P.P.G.M.
degree, is treasurer to the Widow and Orphan Fund, a trustee of the Medical
Institute, and a director of the limited liability company now being formed
to build an Oddfellows’ Hall and Medical Institute.
Liverpool. —The fifth annual dinner of the Grand Lodge of the district was
held at the Midland Hotel, Lime Street, on Thursday, January 11th. The
meeting was presided over by P. Prov. G.M. James Messenger. The memory of
the late Grand Master (John Geves), who died in his year of office, was drunk
in solemn silence. Bro. C. C. Moore said that Liverpool was an old district, and
the reason why it played so small a part in the Unity was that those who had
gone before had not made wise provision for the great and increasing popula-
tion of the town. The remedy for this was the opening of new lodges in the
outlying districts and the creation of juvenile Oddfellows’ lodges. The Liver-
pool District at present numbered 1,450 members. During the past year they
had made 116 members, 47 had died, and 8 had joined by clearance. The
income had been by contributions £1,772, interest £473 17s. lid., initiation
£43 Bs. The expenditure had been for sickness £1,280 18s. 9d., funeral
allowance to members’ wives and widows, £591. Total income, £2,253 Bs. lid.;
expenditure, £1,871 18s. 9d. This left a profit of £4OO.
London North. — A very interesting meeting took place on May sth, at the
Pride of Islington Lodge, held at the White Horse, Liverpool Road, Islington,
on the occasion of a presentation to P.P.G.M. Thistleton, who joined the Earl
of Lincoln Lodge, Lancaster, on May 4th, 1843, but afterwards threw his
clearance into the above lodge, about twenty-eight years ago. In consequence
of his having proved a thoroughly efficient and active member, both of his
lodge and district, there was a very numerous attendance, and what is most
worthy of remark, a large number of P.P.G.M.’s of his own and other districts.
P.G. Sprunt, trustee of the lodge, occupied the chair, and in presenting the
testimonial, which consisted of a handsome timepiece and a diamond ring,
stated that when he joined the lodge, now some twenty-four years since, the
number of its members were fifty-five, and the capital £209. It had now 207
Members, with a sick fund capital of £2,413, and no small measure of this
increase was due to the careful, judicious, and self-denying services of their
esteemed friend. He had devoted his time, not only to the lodge but to the
district generally, and especially distinguished himself during his term of office as
Prov. G.M., in pointing out ways by which the investments of lodge funds could
be made more profitable; many lodges have acted upon his advice, and the
Widow and Orphan Fund has also benefitted by his counsel and exertions.
Mr. Thistleton expressed his deep thankfulness for the handsome present.
London, South. —From the annual report of the secretary, P. Prov. G.M.
Omnn, of the Aged Members Pension and Almshouses Fund, we learn that the
institution is progressing satisfactorily. A grant of £ls has been made from
thuDistrict Incidental Fund, and the members of the Pride of Clapham have
a gam added to the fund in no small degree by an entertainment specially
organised for the purpose. The committee justly observe that “the number
of subscribers at present does not exceed 750, and when it is remembered tha t
be district comprises upwards of 7,000, and that the wives and children of
Members can obtain votes by subscribing, it will be seen that there is plenty
or scope for the labours of all.”


London, West. —The thirty-second anniversary dinner of the Prince of Wales
Lodge took place at the Prince of Orange, Artillery Row, Westminster, on
November 22nd. P.P.G.M. Chapman occupied the chair, and, in proposing
the toast of the Manchester Unity, paid a high tribute to the memory of the
late Grand Master of the Order, and said, in losing G.M. Geves, they had lost
a good hard-working Oddfellow, and one who had nobly won the position he
had obtained. P.G. Thomas Saxby Miller stated that at the end of 1870 they
had ninety-seven members good on the books, whose average age was 33 years
4 months, and a capital of £l,OOO, being an average of £lO 3s. lid. per membei.
The payments for sickness only amounted to £76 17s. Bd. During the present
year they had purchased £2OO stock and placed £4O in the savings bank. The
total worth of the lodge at the present time is £1,087 12s._3d. They had again
been fortunate as regards sickness, having only paid during the present year
£5O 16s, 10d., and had initiated sixteen new members, whose ages averaged
23 years. P.G. Bethell stated that the district contained 3,408 members,
whose average age at the end of 1875 was 33 years 8 months, with a capital of
£26,863 18s., averaging £7 Is. 3d. per member. £3,785 19s. lOd. had been
received for contributions, £BB7 6s. lid. interest on capital; £2,065 16s. lOd.
had been paid for sickness, and £766 for funeral donations.
London West.— The 32nd anniversary of the Shakspere Lodge was held on
the Bth November at the Grove Tavern, Brompton. The D.G.M. of the Order,
J. J. Holmes, presided. The chairman was ably supported by the surgeon of
the lodge, G. H. Pedler, Esq., M.D., O. C. Fitzroy, Esq., and the district
officers. P. Prov. G.M. Smith, in an able and eloquent speech, paid a high
tribute to the G.M. and D.G.M., for the intelligent, high-minded, and courteous
manner displayed by them, and for the efficient way that they have discharged
their duties. The D.G.M. in responding gave a succinct history of Oddfellow-
ship, and stated that the Manchester Unity was formed about 1812 by a few
workmen who used to frequent a certain public-house for the purpose of con-
viviality, and when any of the number were ill, used to make a collection for
them. Finding that was not enough, they formed themselves into a benefit
society, to give a certain sum when any one of them was ill, by certain
contributions, and they called themselves Oddfellows. From this small
beginning arose the Manchester Unity, which is the best society in the world,
both in the number of members, amount of capital, and the soundness of its
financial business, and the manner in which the business is transacted. But as
the founders had no knowledge of statistics, it was soon found out that they
had promised to do far more than they could meet, therefore it became
necessary to reform, which could not be done without great opposition. As i
is now, so it was then, the great bugbear being centralisation, but he would
say he did not believe in centralisation. What he and the Board of Directors
wished for was consolidation and reformation, so that we may be one, not in
name only, but in reality, with every lodge on a proper and sound basis, able
to meet every liability. P. Prov. G.M. Smith said the lodge now numbere
190 members, 22 having been initiated during the present year. They possessed
a capital of £1,200, which he considered proved the lodge to be in a soun ,
prosperous, and flourishing condition.
Newton Heath. —Recently the members of the Miners’ Lodge, held at the
Golden Buck Inn, Hollinwood, celebrated the anniversary of the lodge by a
dinner. Mr. Robert Levitt Campbell, the Prov. G.M. of the district, occupie
the chair, and spoke of the great advantages offered by the Manchester Uni y
to young men, and urged upon the members present the importance doing
all they possibly could to increase the number of their members, and to induce
those of their young friends who had not yet joined a friendly society to become
members of the great Manchester Unity.


Newton Heath, near Manchester. —At the quarterly committee of the
district, after the transaction of the business, the presentation of a testimonial
to P G* John Bates, of George the Fourth Lodge, on his retirement from the
office of treasurer for the district, took place. The meeting was presided over
bv Mr Robert Levitt Campbell, the Prov. G.M. of the District. The testi-
monial was in the form of an emblem of the Order, beautifully framed, and
bearing the following inscription : “ Presented by the members of the Newton
Heath District in recognition of the valuable services rendered by him as
treasurer during a period of seven and a half years.—Robert Levitt Campbell,
Prov. G.M., Edwin Shore, Prov. D.G.M., Ashton Ashton, Prov C.S.—Sept.
30th 1876.” Mr. Bates was elected treasurer for the district in the year loos,
retaining the office with great satisfaction to the members until June of the
present year. The District Committee, on accepting his resignation, unani-
mously resolved, “ That the best thanks of this committee, together with an
emblem of the Order, be given to P.G. John Bates for his valuable services.
The presentation was made by Prov. C.S. Ashton Ashton, who spoke in the
highest terms of the manner in which Mr. Bates had discharged the duties of
his office, of his uniform kindness and courtesy to all with whom those duties
brought him in contact, and of the regret felt by all the members at the loss of
his valuable services. Mr. Bates appropriately returned thanks.
New South Wales.— The members of the Rose of Australia Lodge presented
G M William Lincoln with a very handsome gold watch and chain, together
with an address, on October 26th, for his past services and advice to the lodge.
The presentation was made by Mr. A. Kethel, G M. of the Order in New South
Wales, and the recipient was introduced by W. F. Hmchy, P.G.M After
lodge was over the brethren assembled in the large Oddfellows _ Hall, Elizabeth
Street, and partook of supper. P.G. Murphy occupied the chair.
New Zealand.— The Green Island Lodge was opened at the Baptist Chapel,
Green Island, on the Bth October, and twenty-two candidates admitted.
G.M. Braithwaite, and other officers from Dunedin, paid a, high compliment
to the new members for the aid they had given towards adding another branch
to the Order The members of the lodge invited the visiting brethren to a
banquet, at the Rose, Thistle, and Shamrock Hotel, Bro. Davidson presiding.
New Zealand. —A special meeting of the Leith Lodge was held in the
New Oddfellows’ Hall, on the 16th October. After some discussion it was
unanimously resolved : “ That the Grand Master be requested to call a meeting
of the lodges in the town district, for the purpose of considering the propriety
of joining with the other friendly societies in Dunedin to establish a dispensary
for their own special use.” _
New Zealand.— At the anniversary of the Napier Lodge, m May last, Past
Grand Lewis delivered an excellent speech on Oddfellowship, and afterwards,
on behalf of the lodge, presented a congratulatory address to the Grand Master,
Joseph Chicken, who was about to remove to Ormond. _ The worthy brother,
although a young man, had devoted a great deal of his time not on y in pro
moting the welfare of this lodge, but also gave his valuable assistance at the
opening of branches in other parts of the province.
Norwich.— On the 13th of February the members of the Waveney Lodge,
Harleston, celebrated their 21st anniversary dinner. •J. Candler, surgeon to
the lodge, presiding. Mr. H. Flowers, C.S., in an able speech, dwelt on the
position of the district, which numbers 10,046 members, with a reserve capital
of upwards of £115,000. H. C. Nuttall, secretary; gave some interesting
figures regarding the position of the lodge. It numbers 99 members, with a
capital of £1,437 16s. 5d.; eight members have joined during the past year
and one died. The sick pay had been heavy during the year, viz., £4O 65.,
still they had added £9O 4s. to their capital.


Nottingham.— The annual meeting of the Mount Gilead Lodge was held on
February 19th, at the Poultry Hotel. The Permanent Secretary (Brother C. P.
Barber, P.P.G.M.) presented his annual report, of which the following is an
abstract ; “At the close of 1875 we had 249 members, whereas now we have
246 members, or a loss of three. This is mainly attributable to the death of
seven members during the year. The present worth of the lodge is
£1,022 13s. 6d. against £975 11s. 4d. last year, showing a gain in the year of
£47 2s. 2d. The average age of the lodge has decreased during the past year
twenty-two weeks and one day.” P.G. Thomas Jackson afterwards presented
a beautifully illuminated and framed address (executed by Bro. Mountenay, of
Fietchergate, Nottingham), of which the following is a copy: “Presented to
Bro. George Hibbert, P.P.G.M., by the brethren of the Mount Gilead Lodge,
Manchester Unity of Oddfellows, together with a gold ring, in appreciation of
the fourteen years faithful and efficient services rendered by him as secretary
to the Mound Gilead Lodge.—February 19th, 1877.” Mr. Hibbert responded
in suitable terms,
Nottingham.— The annual meeting of the district was held on January Ist
at the People’s Hall, the Grand Master (Mr. W. Bailey) in the chair. He con-
gratulated them on the greatly improved finances, which would be found on
reading the balance-sheet, and on the important legal standing the society had
assumed. The district was now registered under the new Friendly Societies
Act, and had by that means become an integral part of that great Order of
which it was his pride and pleasure to be a member. He had also to inform
them that a considerable number of lodges had adopted the necessary resolu-
tions and rules, and others were calling meetings to do so as early as possible.
He had no doubt that in a short time all the lodges in the district would comply
with the very easy forms that are required to enable them to become in reality
what until now they had only been in imagination—branches of the Manchester
Unity. The Deputy Grand Master, Mr. Copley, said the officers had con-
sidered that it would be advisable for the C.S. to supply all lodges with the
copies required for registration at the district cost, as the form once set up
could be altered to suit the time and name of each lodge when required. Mr.
Baiber, Mr, Maxfield, Mr. Goodall, and others, spoke approvingly of Mr,
Copley’s suggestion, which'was then adopted unanimously. The resolutions of
the Managing Committee, which were in favour of the A.M.C. being held at
Nottingham, were unanimously approved-
Oldham.—A special meeting was held on December 7th, at the Swan Hotel
to make suitable arrangements for the reception of the forthcoming A.M.c!
G.M. Edward Butterworth presided. The meeting was attended by the
principal officers of kindred societies. It was stated that it was intended to
ask the Bishop of Manchester to preach the morning sermon at Oldham Church
on Whit-Sunday, when it is expected a very large number of the members of
the friendly will be present. A long discussion then ensued as to the
advisability of holding the procession on the Thursday in Whit-week and
eventually it was resolved : “ That it is the unanimous opinion of this meeting
that the procession, fete, and gala should be held on Thursday in Whit-week ”
The following resolution was also passed : “That the Oldham District issue
circulars to the various friendly societies asking their co-operation in our
demonstration and gala at Whitsuntide.” The corporation, in answer to a
deputation, unanimously agreed to give their patronage to the committee and
brethren on the occassion of the annual gathering.
Oxford.— The eighth anniversary of the Widow and Orphan Society took
place on January 17, at the Druid’s Head, George Street. P.P. W. Jewell
occupied the chair, and was supported by A. W. Hall, Esq., M.P., Eev. Dr.


Whitmarsh, Rev. H. A. Harvey, Councillors Evetts and Parish, Dr. Thompson,
Dr. Guinness, &c. A. W. Hall, Esq., M.P., said it gave him great pleasure to
attend their anniversary, because it was the best society that could possibly be,
and if the treasurer would accept a donation to the funds, he (Mr. Hall) would
gladly give £lO. Mr. Talbot said that the balance due to the fund of the
Widow and Orphan Society, on January 1, 1876, was £267 14s. 4Jd., and the
receipts of the past year made a total of £407 9s. lid. During the year
£BO 7s. 6d. had been paid to widows and orphans, leaving a balance in hand of
£327 2s. 5d., or an increase on the year of £59 Bs.
fund there was a balance in hand of £2 13s. 4d., and in the guarantee fund a
balance of £27 9s. lOd. The. general statement showed that the total funds
amounted to £257 ss. 7d. for the year, with the exception of £l9 ss. 9d.,
which was invested in the bank. The Fete Committee had handed over £4O
to the general and £ls to the guarantee fund. The number of members was
177 ; 25 had been initiated during the year, 4 had died, and 6 run out, making
an increase on the year of 15. P.G. Tyler, in responding for the Management
Committee, recited the following lines with great effect: —
THE ORPHAN CHILD.
Amidst a little playful group,
Such as we oft have seen,
A lovely boy, in sable dress’d,
Danced lightly o’er the green.
No care sat on his youthful brow
To damp his passions wild ;
Though poor, no poverty nor grief
Oppress’d this orphan child.
“Alas! ” said I, “you soon must close
These sports that round you throng:
Tour father’s dead, your mother’s poor—
She can’t support you long,
“Do you not fear the workhouse ? ”
“No,” he calmly said, and smil'd ;
“ My father was an Oddfellow,
And I’m his only child.”
“ But what of that ? Your father’s dead.
And they don’t care for you. ”
“Don’t care? Ah, sir, you little know
What these kind people do.
“The frequent pains my father felt,
His cares they oft beguiled ;
And hearts that lov’d the Oddfellow
Will love his orphan child.
“ I recollect the day he died,
I saw his features pale :
The neighbours sighed, and wept around :
Dear mother sore did wail.
“ But father’s friends allayed her grief.
As thus they talk’d and smiled :
‘ Poor widow, well provide for thee.
And thy dear orphan child.’
“And now we live in yonder cat.
Beside the hawthorn tree :
My mother’s tears have ceased to flow.
And I am light and free.
“ And, oh, the words of those dear friends,
So kind, so good, so mild.
Cheer’d my poor mother in her grief,
And bless’d me, her orphan child.”
He ceas’d; then, whistling, skipt away.—
I bless’d the prattling boy;
But, more than all, I long’d to find
The source of all this joy.
I sought them, found them, join’d them too,
And, though they’re oddly styled.
Kind Heaven will bless the Oddfellow
That protects the Orphan Child.
Paisley. —On the 15th December, the members of the Alexander Wilson
Lodge met in the Globe Hotel to entertain Bro. John Carswell, P.P.G.M., to
supper, and present him with some tangible token of their esteem for his long,
valuable and gratuitous services to the lodge and district. The testimonial
consisted of a beautiful black marble timepiece, a purse containing £ls, and a
gold ring for Mrs. Carswell. The timepiece bore the following inscription :
“ Presented to Bro. John Carswell, along with a purse of sovereigns and a ring
for Mrs. Carswell, in recognition of his services as Corresponding Secretary for
the last 25 years.” Bro. Dr. Hutcheson occupied the ohair, and in a compli-
mentary speech made the presentation. Bro. Carswell replied in feeling terms.
Portsmouth.— The following letter from P.P.G.M. Jno. Nicklin, secretary of
the Royal Naval Lodge, will be read with interest by the whole of our members :
“ Gentlemen, —I am directed by a resolution of the Royal Naval Lodge to
forward a photograph of a flag made and planted in the Arctic region by
Brothers Woolley and Ayles, late of H.M.S. Alert. A copy of the flag


appeared in the Graphic of the 27th January, 1877. The Royal Naval Lodge
hopes the Grand Master and Board of Directors will acknowledge the receipt
of same in the Quarterly Magazine, and have the same put therein, if possible,
to show that our Order was represented in that expedition. We had three
other brothers with the two previously mentioned, one of which, I am sorry
to say, died, but to what lodge or district he belonged I am unable to say.
The Royal Naval Lodge consists wholly of warrant officers, petty officers, and
seamen, of H.M. Navy. We now number 370 good on the books. Our present
capital is £1,090 Bs. 6d., and the lodge was six years old on the 11th of March,
1871.”
Preston. —One important result of the representative banquet that was held
in November last has manifested itself in the adhesion to the Order of a num-
ber of influential gentlemen by whom it was formerly overlooked. The state-
ments that were made at the demonstration as to the useful character of
the Unity, not only from a philanthropic but a business point of view, created
an impression on the public mind that will not soon be effaced, and the reunion
cannot result otherwise than beneficially to the Order. Several gentlemen who
were thus favourably impressed have since intimated a wish to join the Unity,
and in January last a number of them, including the senior member for
the borough, were admitted honorary members of the Preston District. The
ceremonial was performed at the Mess-rooms, in Starkie Street, where the
brethren assembled in considerable force to welcome their new friends. Mr.
Chas. Hardwick, Past Grand Master of the Order, and Editor of the Oddfellows'
Magazine, officiated as Lecture Master. Bro. C. G. Castle, Grand Master of the
Preston District; Bro. Rourke, Deputy Grand Master; Bro, Appleby, Past
Grand ; and Bro. Jas. Kilner, C.S., and the principal district and lodge officers,
with several representatives from other districts, were present. The lodge
having been duly opened, Mr. Ed. Hermon, M.P., Mr. W. Harrison, J.P., F.S. A.,
Mr. W. E. M. Tomlinson, Mr. Thomas Tomlinson, Rev. Rupert Turner, Dr.
Spencer, Mr. J. S. Anderson, and Mr. Councillor Thompson, were initiated as
honorary members of the Preston District. P.G.M. Hardwick afterwards
addressed them, dwelling on the advantages which the Order offered to mem-
bers of all classes of society. Membership of the Order, he maintained, tended
to inculcate habits of thrift among the working classes, and it also brought out
their loyalty to the Government, a fact that was evinced by the hearty reception
that they gave recently to Sir Stafford Northcote at Newport, Monmouthshire,
for the simple reason that he represented the law of England. P.G.M. Castle
proposed a vote of thanks to Bro. Hardwick. Mr. Castle testified to the great
services he had rendered to the Order in times past, and confirmed his remarks
as to the progress of the Unity. P.D.G.M. Rourke seconded the motion, which
was supported by Bro. J. S. Anderson, who bore testimony to Mr. Hardwick’s
efforts on behalf of the society, attributing to them largely its salvation from
bankruptcy at a time when its affairs were in a very critical condition.
Rotherham. —A soiree in connection with the district was held in the Drill
Hall, Wharncliffe Street, on January 4th. Past Grand Master Schofield
presided, supported by several members of the Corporation and other influential
gentlemen. Suitable addresses were delivered by the chairman, Past Grand
Master Charles Hardwick, Past Grand Master Reuben Watson, the Rev. W.
Newton, M.A., vicar ; Mr. H. Outram, one of the directors of the Unity ; and
other gentlemen. Speaking of the Rotherham District, Mr. Watson said that
in 1872 it had a membership of 2,319. It had gradually increased year by year
until it had now reached 2,621, an increase of 302 in the five years. That was
hardly enough for Rotherham. He was sure from the splendid meeting they
had that night that those who lived to witness a similar gathering in the
district five years hence would see a far greater improvement. In 1872 the


accumulated capital of. the strict w« £8,329 4s. 3d. h 18J6 it ™s
f i 3™? The dltriKe had come from had always been looked upon as
e 1• + t Tj n itv but by constant perseverance they had put themselves
the pQQrest in the Uni y, y The Rotherham District had been paying
mfiMitr The demonstration passed off with great eM aud it Will
an impetus to the spread of Oddfellowsh.p m the dmtnct.
men of education and ability, and who are giving proof they axe abreast J
times in which they live. As a proof of this I have Unity,
tion of its kind, so far as I know, that was ever made m the U y
You all know it is customary when the mayor of ajw ?j, prese nted with
fortune to have a child born during his year o » , t Turner
a silver cradle As so fortunate a circumstance has occurred to mr. xuni r
have asked me to make the IttauSrLicrrlly
SShbut' !USThaltlSLrse with which you are identiied
which Us called it forth, will ever form in your estimation Rs st
Mr. Turner said he was taken by surprise, and all he couldL say em
deeply grateful for such a memento of their regard, and he
that it would stimulate him to still greater exertions in behalf of the Unity.
Stepney —A numerously attended meeting of the officers and bre thren of
tS« District 2S£
which were also present the district officer d ;<,4- r icts Grand
several past officer! aud brethren of the several surroun,printed to
P?a r M Bt Wffik W a touS““p»t Pr oScer! certificate, richly framed and
S, “tiho b ny of the "esteem iu which he was held havmg
their permanent secretary for the space of twelve ye”S-In"gS. £££
t\ 7 indie stated that on his entrance mto.office.there we M memb
financial, with a funded capital of over £3OO. At the present
numbered over 160 members, and held a capital of £l,obU.
STOOkPOET.-On December joth ofjffie Soured^mSlThl
respect fulfilling to their entire satis-
faction the various duties of office for the last four years.
South AusinaL.A._The quarterly hoard meeting »f in
the M.U. Hall, Franklin-street, Adelaide, on October 17,, G. • < s
the chair. The balance-sheet showed income, levies, £641 17b. 6d , ret
for newly-initiated members, £32 15s. ; goods Bold, £9B Ob. 6d interest an
rent o d • sundries, £24 2s. 3d.—total income, £l,lOO oa.
Expenditure at death of' 33 members, £915 , expenses of man«gem»t,
£6B 12s. 6d.; goods bought, £2 2s. 9d.; and sundries, £lB ss. 3d. total


expenditure, £1,004 Os. 6d., leaving a balance to the credit of the Widow and
Orphan Fund of £21,927 19s. 4d., which is invested, loans on mortgage and
freehold property, £20,403 ; cash.in bank and on deposit, £1,063 7s. 3d.; arrears
of interest, £312 Bs. 6d.; goods on hand and sundries, £149 3s. 7d.
South Australia —The fifteenth anniversary of the Bridgewater Lodge was
celebrated at the New Hall, Carey’s Gulley, on November 1. It being the
first time the hall was used for such a purpose, a special programme was
prepared, which comprised athletic sports, tea, a ball, and a lecture on “The
Lights and Shadows of London Life,” by Mr. W. Townsend, M.P. There was
unT er ? ** umerous attendance. The report *of the secretary was a cheering one.
ka!l, recently purchased from the Primitive Methodist Connexion! cost
£4O the seats, &c., £lO, and new tables, £3 17s. 6d.; total cost, £53 17s. 6d
—out of which nearly £2O had been presented by the brothers of the lodge.
iioA t0 , tal ,T th m, 0 the lodge funds > after deducting the purchase of the hall, is
£1.40 4s. j The recei P ts from the tea, &c., amounted to over £2O, whilst
very handsome presents had been received from friends towards the sports.
Todmordrn.— The four lodges whose home is the Oddfellows’ Hall—viz., the
Humility, Perseverance, Prudence of the Yale, and Loyal Hope—held a ioint
anniversary on March 3rd, in the Town Hall. About 680 members members’
wives, sweethearts, and children partook of tea, and afterwards the hall was
cleared for dancmg, &c., when Mr. Samuel Whitham was called to the chair
and dehvered a suitable address. He said the four lodges represented there
that night had during the last twelve months been increased by about 100
He did not know that there was one of the original members of the
lodges living, but he knew that at the commencement of some of them they
had great difficulties to encounter ; but they had succeeded, and, besides
providing for the sick and burying the dead, they had built the Oddfellows’ Hall
and a quantity of other property.
Truro— After the usual business at the annual committee in Dec the
retiring G M. (Bro. T. Worth) was presented with a P.P.G.M.’s certificate and
frame, Ihe G.M. then, in an eulogistic speech, presented the Prov. CS. with
a testimonial, consisting of an elegant silver teapot, and a beautiful mahogany
case containing silver prongs and spoons, both the teapot and case bearing
the following inscription: “Presented by the officers and members of the
Iruro District of the Independent Order of Oddfellows, M.U., to W. Downton,
Prov. C.b., the founder of the district, as a tribute of respect, and in recog-
nition of esteemed services, having filled the office of Prov. C.S. more than 22
years 26th Dec 1876. Thomas Worth, Prov. G.M., William Lidgey, Prov.
D.G.M. The Prov. C.S. suitably replied.
Waltham Abbey.— The members of the St. James’s Lodge celebrated their
™ anniversary by a dinner, at the Alma Tavern, Pondera End, on February
15th. _ James Abbiss, Esq., J.P., ex-alderman and sheriff of the city of London,
cdladr ’ supported by Peter Rumney, Esq., F. Agar, Esq T J.
Hill, Esq., and other gentlemen. Mr. Jas. Woodfield, P.G., said the district
was going on well, a new lodge having just been opened, making nine in all.
It consisted of 1,400 members, with an average of £lO per man. With but
few exceptions all the brethren are members of the Widow and Orphan Fund,
which has a capital of £4,000. Secretary Broomham said they opened with 14
members three years ago, and now they can boast of 82 financial and four
honorary brethren, with £147 2s. s£d. in the Sick and Funeral Fund. The
receipts for the last year were £lOO 7s. 3£d.; and the disbursements for sick
pay £37 145.; and for district funeral account £8 3s. 4d. A balance of £3 18s.
was on the wrong side of the Management Fund, but the opening of the lodge
necessitated a great outlay, and by studious economy they hoped before long to


clear it off. They also had a juvenile branch of 73 members, which had
scarcely been opened two years. The chairman and other gentlemen promised
to be initiated as honorary members at an early date.
Windsor. —The members of the Frogmore Lodge had a dinner at the Wheat
Sheaf Inn, on Tuesday, February 20th, to celebrate the event of their lodge
having been opened six months, when all members, who joined at the_ com-
mencement, had become entitled to sick and funeral benefits. The chair was
taken by Mr. John New, the District Corresponding Secretary, who was
supported by several P.P.G.M.’s of the district, and about fifty members of the
Windsor, Eton, Egham, and Old Windsor Lodges. The chairman remarked
on the great value of such societies to working men. He was pleased with
the success of the new lodge, which now numbered over 30 strong, healthy,
young subscribing members, and he urged the officers and brothers to use their
utmost endeavours to get that number doubled.before their next anniversary.
Wolverhampton. —The Harmonic Lodge celebrated its thirty-fourth anni-
versary on November 28th, at the Fox Inn, The chair was taken by Bro
Arthur Eaton, G.M., supported by Councillors Walsh, Newman, and Butler, &c.
P. Prov. G.M. T. Collins delivered an eloquent and practical address on the
present position and future prospects of the Unity. Bro. J. Jones, C.S., gave
some interesting statistics in reference to the lodges of the Their
present capital was £15,440, and their membership 1,685. The contributions
for the year amounted to £1,930 17s. 7d. During the past twenty years the
district lodges had paid in sick money £7,755, and in funeral money, &c.,
£18,525 ; making a total of £26,280. In 1860 the capital of the lodges was
£6,278, against upwards of £15,000 at the present time. Mr. Joseph Taylor,
secretary, said that in the first half of the year, up till June, the expenditure
of the lodge had been unusually heavy. Two of their oldest members had
died—one of them having been on the funds for seven years without inter-
mission. They had besides the 281 ordinary members, 10 honorary members.
Their capital was £2,256, or £8 per member.
Yeovil. —The Alexandra Lodge, opened about twelve months ago, is likely,
under careful management, to become a flourishing society. The first anni-
versary was celebrated on February Bth, when the members dined together at
the Greyhound Inn, under the genial presidency of Captain Harbin. Secretary
Cross said the total number of members was 29. The cash in hand upon the
sick and general fund amounted to £4B 2s. 3d., but the management fund was
unfortunately in debt to the extent of £7 7s. the expenses of opening
the lodge, which had to be borne by that fund, being £9 12s. 2d. The speaker
then alluded to the benefits of the society, and said that the sick pay ranged
from 12s. to £1 a week, according to the rate of contributions.
#bitarir.
Eastwood, Notts. —On February 18th, 1877, P.P.G.M. Thomas Gunn, in the
47th year of his He was elected D.G. M. in 1868, and the following year
Trov. G.M., which office he filled with credit to himself and to the satisfaction
°f the district. At the time of his death he held the office of Warden, which
office he had held for a number of years. He was interred on the following
Wednesday, when a large number of the officers of the district and lodge
attended his funeral. In social and in private life a more witty, humorous, and


entertaining companion could rarely be met with, and by bis death the cause
of Oddfellowship in this neighbourhood has lost one of its warmest supporters.
Harlingdex.— On the 4th of November the remains of Mr. Samuel Preston,
secretary to the Welcome Lodge, Edenfield, were interred at Shuttleworth.
He joined the above lodge in July, 1867, and for several years fulfilled the
duties of secretaryship, during which time he gained the friendship and regard
of its members. Mr. Preston was likewise chief clerk to the Eamsbottom Gas
Company, which he served faithfully and diligently for ten or eleven years.
Both the company and the lodge regret the loss of a valued friend and servant.—
The quarterly committee of the district passed a resolution to send a letter of
condolence to Mrs, Geves on the death of her husband.
Liscard, Cheshirk. —On Saturday, December 27th, at his residence, Mr.
W. H. Francis, aged 65 years. Mr. Francis was a native of Dursley,
Gloucestershire. Nearly half a century ago he went to reside at Liscard,
where, up to his death, he carried on successfully the business of a plumber
and painter. As a member of the Independent Order of Oddfellows he was
widely known and deservedly respected. The faithful manner in which he
discharged, for nearly thirty-five years, the duties of Prov. C.S. of his district
and Secretary of the Pride of the Village Lodge, secured him many friends in
the Order, and on more than one occasion he had the satisfaction of receiving
from his brethren substantial tokens of their appreciation of his long and
valuable services. His kind heart and genial disposition will long be
remembered by those who had the pleasure of his acquaintance. He was also
connected with the Freemasons, who, in recognition of his services in the year
1875, presented him with a badge of office, a gold key, and a portrait of himself,
by the eminent artist, Ferranti, of Liverpool. The interment of his remains
took place at the Wallasey Parish Church. About fifty members were present
to pay their last respects to their deceased brother.
Wisbeach. —On the last day of 1876, in his 68th year, P.P.G.M. George
James died peaceably and almost as imperceptibly as the old year passed away.
He had been afflicted with partial paralysis about four years, and at intervals
during the greater part of the time he had also suffered from bronchitis, and to
which he gradually succumbed. Mr. James was initiated into the Order at the
opening of the Neptune Lodge, on the 29th March, 1837, and consequently he
had been a member nearly forty years. Being naturally of a social and cheerful
disposition he entered heartily into the true spirit of Oddfellowship and took
an active part in spreading its principles and extending its usefulness. He was
one of the first officers in the new lodge, and when in 1838 Wisbeach became a
district he was installed D.G.M. In 1839 he succeeded to the office of G.M.,
and was presented with a handsome medal for his efficient services. During his
two years of office in the district the Order spread rapidly in this neighbour-
hood. Lodges were opened at Boston, Cambridge, Holbeach, Long Sutton,
Lynn, Peterborough, Whittlesea, &c., and each of these places, except Holbeach,
very soon became district towns. In 1840 the West Suffolk Social Design
Lodge, Bury St. Edmunds, was opened, giving an extraordinary area to the
Wisbeach District at that time. It was, however, speedily reduced, but a glance
at the important districts which have grown from the lodges opened by Mr.
James and colleagues, is good evidence of the success and value of their labours.
He was the first deputy from this district to an A.M.C., having attended the
York and Isle of Man meetings. He was Sick Treasurer of his lodge for many
years, and was a regular attendant at all its meeting until the time of his afflic-
tion, and was always a consistent and efficient worker. He was widely known,
not only in our own Order, but by members of other societies, and was much
respected by all.




m
' Ml,
warn. _ t MaMlm
Jnk/
MBmft
J^&UM
(Z^&c/^e^


THE
ODDFELLOWS’- MAGAZINE.
JULY , 1 877.
' J
v ■ >
ISAAC STOCKER, P.P.G.M,
The gentleman whose portrait accompanies this memoir was born
on the 23rd of March, 1815, at Fisherton, Salisbury, Wilts, in
which place he continued to reside until he attained the age of
twenty-one years. He then removed to London. His connection
with Odd fellowship commenced on the 10th of July, 1843, at
which date he was initiated a member of the Duke of Sussex
Lodge, North London District. At that time the : principle of
assurance was little understood. Each lodge fixed its own rate of
payment for sickness and funeral benefits, as there did not exist
either general or district rule to guide them in'this respect. Mr.
Stocker’s attention was very soon directed >to the low rate of
subscriptions paid for the benefits promised,' and when the scales
of payments and benefits, which wvere' prepared in accordance with
the resolution passed at the Glasgow A.M.C., were submitted to
the lodge for consideration he earnestly advocated the adoption of
No. 1 scale as the means of retrieving past errors and securing
future • welfare.. This scale was‘adopted, and m consequence the
contribution of every 'member .was increased 25 per cent for the
same benefits as were” previously granted. This alteration in the
rate of the subscriptions caused many members to leave the
society, as they failed to see the necessity of the increase.
Lower was conferred upon the various districts, after the Bristol


A.M.C., of fixing the rate of payments and benefits for every lodge
belonging thereunto, when a medium between the two scales
. 55 55 7
previously submitted was adopted.
Mr. Stocker, having passed through the several offices of the
lodge, was in 1847 elected a delegate to the district meeting, and
for the past thirty years, with hut few exceptions, he has, at those
meetings, represented his lodge. In December, 1852, he was
elected Deputy Grand Master of the District; and in the year
following he was elected its Grand Master, with the additional
honour of being one of its representatives at the South London
A.M.C., in 1854.
The experience acquired as a district officer, with the power of
examining the books of any lodge, induced Mr. Stocker to seek for
further information than could be obtained from the examination
of books during lodge hours, and accordingly, at the district
meeting in June, 1856, he succeeded in carrying a resolution that
each lodge should send in a return to the district showing the
amount of its Sick and Funeral Fund at the date of its last audit, in
1855, the amount of contribution and interest received, and the
amount expended in sick-pay to its own members, and also in
funeral levies, from the date last above-named up to its last audit
in 1856, and the then total of the said fund; the number of
members at each date to be also stated in the return. This has
since proved very useful as a means of detecting many errors in
the accounts of lodges, as well as collecting statistical information
in reference to the progress of the district. It led likewise
eventually to the obtaining full information respecting the income
and expenditure of the whole Unity, and which information was
published each year in the October reports. Mr. Stocker, at the
Leamington A.M.C., supported the proposition that each district
should appoint examiners of lodge books, which then became a
general law.
In 1860 Mr. Stocker was elected the Examining Officer of the
North London District, which office he still continues to hold;
and since the time districts had the power of appointing arbitra-
tors to decide on appeals between members and the lodges, he has
each year been elected one of that board. He has been one of the
representatives of the North London District at the under-
mentioned A.M.C.’s : South London, Durham, Bolton, Brighton,
Leamington, Chesterfield, Bury St. Edmunds, Lancaster, Wey-
mouth, Richmond, Newport, Hyde, and Oldham.
Mr. Stocker has taken an active part in the affairs of the Widow
and Orphan Fund. He was elected chairman at its annual meeting
in 1851, and subsequently one of the committee of management,
which duty he fulfilled for fifteen years. In consequence of a


severe illness he was, on one occasion, prevented from attending the
annual meeting at the time of election. This, however, did not,
on his recovery, prevent him from continuing his interest in the
welfare of the fund, and on several occasions since he has been
elected chairman of the special, general, and annual meetings.
In September, 1868, he brought before the notice of the general
meeting the perilous condition of the fund. Although the wisdom
of this was doubted by many at the time, it eventually led to the
adoption of more equitable rates of in-payments and benefits.
Mr. Stocker has for many years been one of the trustees of the
Duke of Sussex Lodge. He was married in the year 1840 to the
daughter of the late Mr. Thomas Hall, of Scarle, in Lincolnshire,
by whom he has three children, a son and two daughters. The
son is married, and is a member and a P.G. of the same lodge as
his father. The youngest daughter is also married, and the eldest
assists her father in his business of stationer and bookseller.
Mr. Stocker is a genial, kind-hearted, sympathetic Oddfellow-.
He is ever ready to give his best counsel and advice to anyone in
need of information respecting the affairs of the society. His
vision of the interests of the institution is clear, penetrating, and
farseeing. He has been the author of many improvements, and
he works with a hearty goodwill in anything he undertakes in
reference to our affairs. He has gained the esteem of his brethren,
and is highly respected by all who know- him. We hope that he
may be spared many years to come to assist in the deliberations
of the society, and give to it thie benefit of his sound advice.
Shakspeee’s Sonnets.— Shakspere’s sonnets were first described in his own
time by Frances Meres in 1598—as his “sugared sonnets among his private
nends.” They were first published in 1609, seven years before his death, and
dedicated by Thomas Thorpe, the bookseller, to “ Mr. W. H.,” in words that
Jlave sent critics upon many a wildgoose chase. The first description of them
yas the best, and the best modern editor of Shakspere, Alexander Dyce, said
in the account of Shakspere prefixed in 1866 to a second edition of his works :
■t or my own part repeated perusals of the sonnets have well nigh convinced
e that most of them were composed in an assumed character on different
and at different times, for the amusement, if not at the suggestion,
the author’s intimate associates (hence described by Meres as : his sugared
JMinets among his private friends ’) ; and though I would not deny that one
th W t ' lom reflect his genuine feelings, I contend thafallusions scattered
. ou 8“ whole series are not to be hastily referred to the personal circum-
wnces of Shakspere.” This is wholesome truth, and accords with what we
St/ 6 f Seen the nature the sonnet, and the original use of it. As to their
lind Ure ’ ®hakspere’s sonnets are not technically true sonnets, but fourteen-
0£ e< | Poems of exquisite variety and beauty, each consisting of three quatrains
alternate rhyme and a closing couplet.— Cassell’s Library of British Litera-
> edited by Professor Henry Morley.


JritnWg Societies ant) % foor-fafa fnisnimtnt
.. . • ' .
The 23rd clause of the recent Poor-Law Amendment Act has for
some time past caused considerable discussion amongst the officers
and members of Friendly Societies, arid called forth the expression
of much adverse opinion.- In many cases nothing less than its
immediate and total repeal will satisfy the disputants. Still this
strong feeling of antagonism is by no means universal. Like most
other difficult social and economic problems requiring immediate
solution it presents more than one aspect. From the strictly
judicial’p?>iht of view, which never loses sight of the hard and fast
line of demarcation between independence and pauperism, the
advocates of the' 23rd clause have unquestionably a very strong
case The imperial law of Groat Britain has decided that no one
of its citizens shall perish for want of adequate sustenance,
whether his destitution has resulted from misfortune, negligence,
or even guilt. But although the legal right to support under
such circumstances is undoubted and undenied, yet it is not a
right absolute but a conditioned one. Amongst these conditions is
the important stipulation that the right does not exist so long as
the applicant possesses any capital, chattels, or source of income
sufficient in itself to meet the temporary emergency or permanent
disability, as the case may be. In other words, the ratepayers are
not called upon to furnish the means of Subsistence to other than
destitute persons. Therefore, so long as any savings, with what-
ever self-denial or privation they may have been gathered together,
are legally responsible for the maintenance of the individual on
the verge of pauperism before the ratepayers’ liability commences,
it is difficult to sec why the asset resulting from the provision of
a certaid. weekly stipend, in the case of disability to labour, in a
Friendly Society should be exempt more than several other items
resulting from "the action of similar prudential forethought, such
as sums invested in‘savings banks or in a regular insurance
company. • •
On the other hand, it is maintained that the Poor-Law Guardian
have no right whatever to interfere with the action of Friendly
Societies, even though one of their members should be compelled
to enter a workhouse or lunatic asylum. This view of the question
was very distinctly enunciated by the Grand Master of the Order


of Druids in his opening address to the “ Annual Movable Dele-
gation” held at Warrington on Whit-Monday. He said, amid
much applause, according to the Warrington Examiner: “To his
mind that 23rd clause was a great injustice, and, deserved the
serious consideration of every man, whether a Druid, an Oddfellow,
or a member of any other similar society. Was it not hard and
unjust to a man’s family that after he had made provision for
benefits in adversity he should be deprived of them by the law 1
(Hear, hear.) Such a clause tended to encourage thriftlessness
instead of providence. (Hear, hear.) He hoped that the action
of the united Friendly Societies would be, through their powerful
representation to the Government, able to insure its abrogation.
(Cheers.)” ,
It appears that considerable difference of opinion on the subject
has obtained amongst the Directors of the Manchester Unity, and
that body, therefore, in their report, invited an expression of
approval or disapproval from. the deputies assenibled at the
Annual Movable Committee at Oldham during Whit-week. , After
a very animated discussion, during which the views of several
members of Boards of Guardians were elicited, the following
proposition, moved by Mr. Addy, of Sheffield, was carried by a
large majority:—
“ That the Board of Directors be instructed to take such steps as will tend
to the repeal of the 23rd clause of the Poor-Law Amendment Act, or to make
such alteration in it that its provisions cannot be used to the injury of members
of Friendly Societies.”
As similar views largely predominate amongst the Foresters and
other affiliated bodies, it is probable before this meets the public
eye that a very influential deputation will wait upon the Chan-
cellor of the Exchequer, and endeavour to enlist hi£ sympathies
and obtain his aid in the furtherance of the views so very generally
expressed.
No doubt Sir Stafford Northcote will contend, and justly too,
that no law of any Friendly or other Provident Society, however
commendable their objects, can be permitted to over-ride imperial
or general legislation of any kind whatever; and that, notwith-
standing his strong sympathy with the praiseworthy efforts of the
members of Friendly Societies to secure themselves and their
families against the necessity of applying for parish relief during
seasons of affliction, he fears direct legislation ‘on the subject is
surrounded with many difficulties.
Indeed, we do not ourselves see how the mere repealing of the
danse will meet the whole' case. It might satisfy the present
demands of the majority of members of Friendly Societies, but it
w °uld not on that account remove the ban of pauperism from the
51
FRIENDLY SOCIETIES AND THE POOR-LAW AMENDMENT ACT.


inmate of the parish workhouse, or the unfortunate denizen of a
lunatic asylum, supported at the cost of the Poor-Law Guardians,
or more properly the ratepayers of the union. One intelligent
deputy at the recent A.M.C. suggested to us that the amount per
week charged by the guardians for the support of a member
necessitated from insanity to become an inmate of one of the
county establishments, should be included in the insurance as well
as, or in addition to, ordinary siclmess. Necessarily some extra contri-
bution would be required for this, but as the number of members
at any one time requiring such treatment is so very limited this
would amount to a very trifling sum per member per annum.
Action of this kind would not only meet fully the present difficulty,
but remove the stigma of pauperism from the unfortunate recipi-
ents. We fear, however, the majority of the members are not in
the mood, at the present at least, to enter on such a course, not-
wdthstanding its justice and efficacy, and its thorough harmony
with the general precepts and practices of Friendly Societies.
The Grand Master of the Druids asks the following question:
“Was it not hard and unjust to a man’s family that after he had
made provision for benefits in adversity he should he deprived of
them hy the law ? ” And he is not the only individual, but rather
the representative of a very large number of members who put
forth similar interrogations. If the question embodied an indis-
putable fact we should unhesitatingly and emphatically answer it in
the affirmative. But is it true that the law deprives the member
or his family of anything of the kind 1 When a man has, by
insurance, provided for a w r eekly payment, say of ten shillings,
during sickness, does he expect that the whole of the money will
be paid to his wife or other dependents, and the expense of his own
maintenance, medicine, and attendance be defrayed by the guardians
out of the poor-rate! Most certainly not ! And what is the
difference, so far as the present question is concerned, between a
case where a member lies at home stricken by paralysis or other
lingering disease, and one in which insanity of a certain kind
necessitates his removal to an asylum specially prepared for the
reception of such patients 1 To expect the ratepayers to bear the
cost without pauperising the patient is simply absurd ! We might
as well object to the sick pay being liable for the doctor’s fees and
the patient’s maintenance when bed-ridden in his own house. Of
course we are aware in many Friendly Societies the doctor’s
fees for medicine and advice are paid out of the lodge funds, and
are not deducted from the sick pay; but this results from the
fact that a certain extra-periodical payment has been made by the
member to insure for this special benefit; and, as we have
previously intimated, by a similar provision the amount charged


by the guardians of the poor for a patient’s maintenance in a
lunatic asylum might be also secured, and then the member’s
family could legally demand the sick pay Avithout the least taint
of pauperism entering into the conditions.
Having now fairly placed the facts before our readers, and
acknowledged that the guardians of the ratepayers’ money cannot
be expected to totally ignore any source of income possessed
by an applicant either for outdoor relief or admittance into a
Avorkhouse or a lunatic asylum, we can Avith more confidence make
what we conceive to be a rational appeal to their judgment, their
sense of justice, and their perception of sound economic policy.
In the first place, the duty of the Poor-Law Guardians is to
protect the pockets of the ratepayers, and to keep pauperism at a
minimum, on both economic and moral grounds. Friendly Societies
have been and are their most earnest and efficacious allies in this
great national endeavour. Authorities have computed (in a some-
what vague manner, certainly) that something like tAvo millions
per annum are saved to the rates through the direct instrumentality
of these self-reliant institutions. It becomes, therefore, a vital
question, both for guardians and the taxpayers, whether the fact
that as these men have, by contributing for years, with consider-
able self-denial, to their Friendly Societies, been the means of
keeping themselves and families (with very rare exceptions, which
generally result from abnormal misfortune) from applying to the
parish for assistance, are not, from a purely economical point of
view, entitled to some consideration at their hands, under the cir-
cumstances, Avhich they avouM justly refuse to habitual paupers, or
to applicants avlio have preAdously made no such provision for
future contingencies, or haA r e brought on their destitution by their
own misconduct or criminality. On moral grounds, too, efforts so
praiseAvorthy and ennobling in themselves are Avorthy of the hearty
recognition and encouragement of philanthropists of every shade
°f political or religious opinion. We believe that a very large per-
centage of the guardians do at the present time recognise the
distinction to which we refer. In this view we are supported by
the evidence of Past Grand Master Schofield, Avho, as vice-chairman
of the Bradford Board, has had much practical experience in the
administration of relief in his neighbourhood. Mr. Schofield,
during the discussion on the 23rd clause at the recent Oddfellows’
A.M.C. at Oldham, said “he believed that ninety-nine out of
every hundred Boards of Guardians, in giving relief to the families
of lunatics, never took into consideration the benefit received from
the Friendly Society.” Such being the case, it seems that there
Eaust be a sufficient consensus of opinion amongst the various
parties interested to readily determine either upon the total repeal
53
FRIENDLY SOCIETIES AND THE POOR-LAW AMENDMENT ACT.


of the clause, on the economic and moral grounds to which we have
referred, or upon some instruction emanating from the Poor-Law
Board to the guardians of the various unions, that the interests
of the ratepayers will bo best secured by alone pauperising (if that
be indispensable) the unconscious inmate of the lunatic asylum,
rather than by ill-judged parsimony to undermine the self-reliant
instincts of the hitherto independent family of the victim of so
great a misfortune. C. H.
Pedantry in Writers and Teachers. —It is not that there have not been
many people who have known a great deal of the subjects they have under-
taken to write about, but they have not conveyed t’ eir knowledge with method
or precision : often they have not seemed to know what it is that other people
would stumble over ; and, worst of all, they have almost invariably presumed
that the persons for whose benefit they were writing did not require much
instruction, but were already very well informed, whereas there is no depth
or density of ignorance which might not more reasonably have been taken for
granted. Unfortunately, however, as soon as anybody knows anything well
himself he seems to be so far removed from other people’s ignorance as to be
unable to make any due allowance for it.— Organization in Baity Life , by Sir
Arthur Helps.
A Village School Cooking Lesson. —The Saturday Review gives an account
of a lesson given in a little village school of cookery near Watford. In a
pleasant, well-lighted room, built for the purpose by a generous friend, stood
four neat little girls with bared arms and tidy aprons. A pupil-teacher, who
had passed at South Kensington, directed operations. At one end of the room
was a bright fire burning in an ordinary cottage range. Under the window was
the sink ;at one side plenty of cupboard room. Everything was scrupulously
clean and tidy. There was no fuss or confusion. To each little girl were given
the materials for a certain dish, and she was directed how to make it, or, if she
had done it before, allowed to manage for herself, and perhaps cook some
vegetable besides. When everything was on the fire or in the oven the table
was laid and the chairs set. The clergyman came to claim his beef-tea for a
sick parishioner, and a couple of visitors joined the party and asked to be
allowed to stay for dinner. Then, with much pride, each little cook produced
her dish for approbation, and cooks, teachers, visitors, and one or two children
besides, sat down to a perfectly served simple, wholesome meal. This routine
is gone through two days each week, much to the disgust of the school
inspector, who denounces such innovations. The whole current expenses of the
year do not amount to more than £l5, which includes a subscription to South
Kensington, by which a pupil-teacher can be sent up each year. Although the
dinners cost on an average threepence per head, there is not much loss, as the
children pay twopence each. Mr. Newton Price, to his energy and judgment
the school owes its success, says that the lessons in cookery, far from inter-
fering with the regular school teaching, so develope the intelligence of the
school children that they more than make up for lost time. He has been
able through his little pupils to cultivate a taste for haricot-beans, macaroni,
dried peas, and many other nourishing foods not in general use among
the working-classes. Anyone who has seen the little cooks at Watford will
wish to see established in every village such a useful, well-managed school,
and will feel that we might then hope to have better servants, better working-
men’s wives, and in time a new generation who would neither waste nor want.


fxs’s Culture.
A STORY 11ST FOUR CHAPTERS.
BY ELIZA METEYARD.
CHAPTER 11.
As Benjamin Woodcraft’s children went onward through the forest glade—being
a nearer way than by the road —to the little hamlet in which helix’s grand-
mother resided, anyone with the smallest physiological knowledge would have
detected that Nature had cast them all in a higher mould than it had their
father. Old dwellers in the town who remembered their grandfather and their
uncle spoke of a strange family likeness; and one or more of their mother’s
relations, who came at distant intervals from the Forest of Dean and Northern
Staffordshire to see them, wondered equally at the children’s resemblance to
their mother’s race. The truth was, Nature had endowed them all with
unusual capacity—a capacity which combined the precision and aim towards
perfection of their father’s kindred with the ideality and refinement of that of
their mother. Yet while power and grace made together a striking characteristic
of their countenances—of that of Lis especially—they were all more or less
undersized and overdelicate. They had the look of children who were kept
much indoors, who were miserably underfed, and whose natural gaiety was
under constant and severe repression. The family surgeon often said to
Benjamin, “Your children, Mr. Woodcraft, want more beef, mutton, and milk,
more fresh air, more merry games.” But Benjamin’s sole reply was a shake
of his head, and if Aunt Patty was present he was sure to look more closely at
the next week’s butcher’s bill. The result was that the doctor was far too often
in the house. As Lis and Aunt Patty quite agreed, “ Ben and Amy, Stephen and
little Agnes, wanted larger slices of meat than father cut them, and to go
sometimes a country walk.” But now, oblivious of the repressions and short-
comings of their sad and monotonous life at home, the children plucked the
ferns and wild flowers, and ran onwards with light hearts.
The hamlet was very small. Upon arriving at a row of ruinous cottages
they found that the old woman had moved some few hundred yards away.
“You see,” said a woman of whom they made inquiry, “ her grandson has
grown up now, and has pretty good work in the town, so he wouldn’t let her
stay any longer in these ‘ parish pigsties,’ as we call ’em, but took her off to a
pretty cottage down that lane, where you’ll find her a deal comfortabler than she
used to be. Eh, dear ! the poor cretur had many hard days. She’d two
shillin’ a week from the overseers, and one of the worst o’ these holes. True,
she did get a bit by patching and darning for some o’th’ rich folks about here ;
but what was it ? What was more—for many a year^—while the lad was
parish ’prentice with Woodcraft in the town, she never saw naught of him
except on Sundays, and not always then. Now he comes home by rail most
nights, and a better lad there ain’t anywhere. Down that lane, missis ; there’s
a suckling all over the door.”


It was a mere labourer’s cottage of four rooms, but the garden around it was
large and picturesque, and before the front wicket was a strip of common,
backed by woods. Here they found the aged dame at her ordinary employ-
ment of patching and darning, and she was unfeignedly glad to see them.
Aunt Patty had a bounteous heart, and went empty-handed nowhere—where
her humble offerings were likely to be acceptable—so opening a basket she had
brought, she produced bread, butter, cake, tea, and sugar.
“You must just, Betty Medway, let us sit and talk about Felix, while the
girls boil the kettle and make tea. They are all so delighted to come ; for Felix
is a favourite, you know.”
“ And won’t he be glad when he comes by-and-by 1 ” questioned and answered
the dame. “Why, he’s always thinking of his old home, and Miss Amy
especially. * Grandmother,’ he often says to mje, ‘ I’d go back to-morrow if
the old master wasn’t so fractious—ay ! and do more for him than anyone.
Old Woodcraft’s business, it’s said in the town, is dying away ; but Mr. Zebedee
and I could bring it back again, and much more, if we had but our way.’ ”
This was a painful subject to Aunt Patty, so she answered, “A brighter
day may come, Betty. Through many a sorrowful year I have never despaired.
We have even now come to ask Felix to make a drawing for some work, and
better things may spring out of it. Now let us have tea.”
In spite of her age and feebleness the old dame would hobble about to
cupboard and shelf, fearing perhaps her crockery would be broken. The boys
she sent off into the garden to gather gooseberries, and Amy to see the chickens.
Aunt Patty cut the bread and butter, and Lis, asking permission, opened the
door of the little room leading from the kitchen, wherein, as his grandmother
had said, “Felix did all sorts of work.”
The walls were coloured buff and the floor was of brick, and a cabinet-
maker’s bench, as also lathe, occupied one end ; but an old oak table stood by
the open window, on which were a few books, drawings, and plans, and various
small carvings in wood. More carvings were hung on the walls, and some casts
in plaster. Curious to see the subjects of the books, for Lis well knew that
Felix was an ardent student in the Working Men’s College of the town, as also
in the local School of Art, she sat down and looked them through. Among
them were the usual class-books belonging to mathematics, geometry, and logic.
There was a German grammar, and another book on the laws of perspective.
There was a high-class work on grammar, and another on arithmetic ; but what
struck her most was a manuscript book filled with clean and good writing, on
the front leaf of which were the words, “ Cobbett’s English Grammar, copied
out twice (as recommended) by me, Felix Medway. A good book and a key-
stone to all my knowledge.”
Lis was deeply interested. She turned the manuscript book over and over
again, and the higher-class grammar by its side. After pondering some minutes
she said to herself, “ This was just what I wanted to know—that is, how to make
a beginning. At the wretched school I went to the people could teach me
nothing. Since then I have been mending my spelling, and observing how
differently people like Mr. Cumnor and his sisters put their words and frame
their sentences when writing to what I do. But I knew not how to begin so
.as to make a foundation for certain knowledge. But I will ask Felix. I shall
not be ashamed to own my ignorance to him, or ask his advice, for he knows
the difficulties we have with father.”
Again and again she looked through the books with reverence. New thoughts
and new desires crowded to her brain.
“ If father would only pay me for doing a clerk’s work I would enter the
French classes of the Working Men’s College at once, and study as hard as
could be. I would do all my work for him too, besides ; for it appears to me
girls miss the true aim of all high education when its most observable effect is


dissatisfaction with the class to which they belong, and an overwhelming desire
to quit it, and leave it to itself. For my part I always hope to remain a cabinet-
maker’s daughter; but a cabinet-maker's daughter of a newer and better age.”
She was called to tea, and after it she took Aunt Patty to see the room. She
said nothing of her intentions, or referred to the books. She only showed her
aunt the drawings and carvings in wood, and the pretty designs for furniture
of many kinds.
Close beside the honeysuckle-covered casement—where from the place of
the table, his books, and a chair, they might presume Felix usually sat—Lis
and her aunt were surprised to find a portrait of their own little Amy, a
delicate child of about eleven years of age. It had evidently been enlarged
from a photograph Aunt Patty recollected to have given him during his
apprenticeship, and then charmingly coloured and enclosed in an oval wood
frame highly and delicately carved. _ .
“How pretty! How very nice!” exclaimed Lis and Aunt Patty in a breath ;
“ only think of Felix spending so much money and so much time on such a
thing, and he nothing yet but a journeyman. He must so love us ail, and so
think of us.”
“Yes,” continued Aunt Patty; “his heart has always been with us, poor
lad. As to Amy, he was always very fond of her. He used to nurse her so,
and make her dolls and baby houses and little carts. Many a scolding he has
had from your father in consequence.”
The children were called to see the portrait, but they had gone off towards
the station to meet Felix, whose hour of return was near.
“He will not be late to-night,” his grandmother^had said, when she had
consulted her cuckoo clock; “it’s not his class night.” bhe had already
proved her faith in what she said by placing his tea ready. _ .
He soon came. A fine young fellow he was, though still with the air of a
stripling about him. He came in hand-in-hand with little Agnes, while the
boys carried between them his basket of tools. Amy lingered behind to gather
flowers. a
Aunt Patty at once opened her business about the drawings for Mr.
Cumnor’s bookcase, for the long summer evening had already begun to
wane, and she feared if they were not home by an early hour Benjamin s
wrath would break forth. _
“I have some drawings by me, Miss Patty,” said Felix, “ that with a little
alteration I think will suit. This is Tuesday evening ; by Saturday I can get
them ready. I will take them over to Mr. Cumnor ; and if he approve I will
try to see Mr. Zebedee without the old master’s knowing. I would fain do the
carving too, if he were not so sore against me.” (
“He is sore against us all, Felix,” replied Aunt Patty sorrowfully; hes
altering every day, and God knows what will be the end of it.
“ Well, we won’t talk sorrowfully, aunt,” said Lis, with that air of firmness
and courage peculiar to her. “ Felix, if you’ve a minute to spare, I will go
into your room with you. There are some books on your table I should like
to speak about.” The young mechanic led the way into his room and closed
the door.
“Felix,” said Lis, “forgive my speaking to you as to a brother if I had
one—as old as you. You know our home, and the trials we all have there,
and the need I have for sympathy. The children are all too young to speak
to, and dear Aunt Patty is very simple, and without tastes of any kind except
such as belong to housekeeping, and things like that; "therefore, lobk where I
Eaay I have no advisers ”
“You might have had, miss,” interrupted Felix respectfully, but master
cut them off, as it were, from his home. Who could be kinder than the
Selwyns were ”


“ Well, we won't talk of our neighbours, Felix,” she interrupted quickly,
‘‘but of what is much more interesting to me just at present—my growing
consciousness of ignorance. All around me—you and many others I know by
sight and name—seem advancing, and lam standing still. For the sake of
the business and the children, and many other things, I wish to learn to write
good English, and fully master arithmetic, and advance from the foundation
of these if I can. Ido not want any longer to have doubts, which I confess I
have still, as to the proper use of was and were, as and has, lie and lay, and all
such things, and I see I ought to work father’s business accounts on a better
plan. You are now high in the college classes, as the last reports showed, so
just tell me how you began. Was it by thus writing out Cobbett’s ‘ English
Grammar,’ as I see you have by this book on the table ? ”
“It was, Miss Lis. I read something about this grammar in a scrap of old
newspaper, which I kept by me for a long time. Then when I began to take
an interest in my trade, and to see by the example of others how ignorance
fetters and keeps a man down, I wrote to a young fellow who had gone to
work in London to try and get me the book. He soon bought a copy for six-
pence at a second-hand bookstall, and sent it down. I followed Cobbett’s
advice, and copied the book once on loose scraps of paper, and again in the
manner you see. This made me a tolerable master of spelling and grammar,
and since then our college classes have led me further on. I have taken prizes
for Latin, German, mathematics, and geometry, and could do much more
had I time—but I have to work at my trade, and this fills up long hours, as
you know.”
“ And you work none the worse for knowledge, do you, Felix ? ”
“ The better, Miss Lis, a hundred-fold. Since I have gained some mastery T
of geometry my designs as to ornament and form are greatly improved. Your
father, Miss Lis, did me great service in teaching me never to ‘scamp ’ my work,
but to do it honestly and well. So I could earn much higher wages than Ido
if 1 felt I could put forth my powers. But this I cannot do—my heart is
with my old place and my old master, and Mr. Zebedee and Miss Patty—
indeed with all of you.” The young fellow’s tears stood in his eyes as he
spoke.
“ It is very good of you, Felix,” said Lis ; “and we all hope, Zebedee and
Aunt especially, that a day is coming when you will return to us ; for the
gossip of the town, as you well know, is only too true—the business is declining
fast. But about this book — where can I get a copy ? ”
“ Pray have mine, Miss Lis —it is no longer of any use to me ; and the
higher grammar, too ; and several others that I have done with.”
“If you are sure you have, Felix, I will gladly borrow them. For I have no
money, as you know; and aunt—she has hardly enough for the house ! I have
spoken to father about some allowance for keeping the books and answering
letters, but he will not listen. As soon as I can I must try again. Little Ben
is always asking to be taught drawing, and Amy, who has such a nice ear,
music. Not long ago father took a very good piano for a debt, and there it
stands useless, because he says such things are sins and vanities.”
Here Aunt Patty was heard calling Lis to come, so Felix gathered the books
together, and fetching the now empty basket packed them therein. In a few
minutes more the little party were on their way to the station, Felix accom-
panying them and talking as he went.
All was peaceful when they reached home. The maid said Mr. Woodcraft
had been long in the shop—then he went out —upon his return he had supper,
read prayers, and went to bed.
Thus hoping for peace, Aunt Patty and the children supped, and went
upstairs, too—Lis to her room, but not tc bed. Taking off her hat and out-
door things, she renewed her candle with one she had hoarded in a drawer, and


from another drawer took paper, pens, and ink. She longed to begin her task
of self-improvement, to lay the foundations of that knowledge on which
depended so much utility, and, it might be, happiness.
His first copy of Cobbett’s celebrated book, Felix, as he had told her, had
written out on scraps of paper, for in his beginning he had been too poor to
buy a manuscript book. And such was the case with Lis ; but she always
carefully preserved all pieces of unwritten paper which came in the way of
business, such as the backs of letters, portions of invoices, bills, and other
' waste. But she resolved, as Cobbett so strongly insists upon, to make her
writing good, to have no erasures or blots, and to carefully fasten the sheets
together as she went on. Thus she had sat happily writing about two hours,
and was still as fresh and bright as when she had begun, when a slight noise
against the room door disturbed her. Then it was slowly opened from the
outer side, and her father, only partly dressed, advanced to the table. His
countenance betrayed the severest anger, and he trembled with passion. He
seized the candle, clutched the papers, overturned the ink, but fortunately the
book escaped his notice and fell to the ground. . .
“ How dare you,” he said, “be sitting up in this manner ? Ruining me by
this waste of candle, ink, and paper! Have I not told you to go to bed
directly after prayers ; and do you thus dare to disobey me ? My children aie
all disobedient, and you are the worst. Novel reading through the day,
writing at night; how will it end ? But you shall obey me henceforth, or
leave this home.” .
“I can do so, father,” replied the girl, calmly and proudly. Lou well
know I can have a better home elsewhere—among my mother’s relatives. A
home where I can at least have a room to myself, and wherein if I choose to
innocently endeavour to lessen my ignorance, I can do so undisturbed.
“You are not ignorant,” he said, passionately. “I have paid pounds and
pounds for your schooling, and if you are ignorant it is your own fault.
“ I am ignorant,” she said again, proudly, “ and the fault is not mine.
“Whose then ?” her father questioned, derisively. “Is it not due to
novel reading, to neglecting your duty to me, to being sinful, and loving
vanities ?” . ,
“My duty to you is always done,” she said again. 'Of this, no one knows
better than you. This done, I will, if I so please, take steps to lessen my
ignorance if I can. Others do so ; why not I! , , .
“ If you mean by this you will sit up at nights and read vain and unhal-
lowed books, you shall not. Did I not find the vile book Mr. Curnnor spoke
of in the ledger cupboard ? Did I not go to Miss Tibbius, and learn from her
that you have been for a long time one of her best customers, and that Jim
carries the books to and fro ? That lad shall leave my service to-morrow.
And you !—well, you shall sleep in the room leading from mine, and with open
door ; and candle and ink and paper shall be locked up from you.
“ Father ” she replied with steady and impressive firmness, ' you forget, or
are ignorant of the duty: which a father owes his daughter. lam no longer a
child, and if I cannot have the decency of a room to myself, and wherein i can
be mistress of my actions, I will go elsewhere. .
“ You shall not! ” - In the blind fury of his anger he tore into fragments
the papers he had clutched, scattered them on the floor, and seized her by the
arm so cruelly, that her cries awakened Aunt Patty and the maid, and
brought them to the room. " '■
“Beniamin,” said the former, “are you mad?. Cannot you allow us peace
night or day ? Lis is old enough to have a room to herself, and to remain mit
undisturbed. It is not a custom for fathers to intrude, or misuse a daughter
sc good as Lis is to you in every I who have known her from hei n
know her sterling worth. Please go.”


“ You encourage my children in their disobedience.”
“I do not,” was the aunt’s reply. “ Unloosen the girl. If this room cannot
be peaceful to her, mine shall. Lis, my dear, come with me.”
At this Benjamin unloosened his grasp, and turning away left the room.
Overcome by terror and deep emotion, both aunt and niece burst into tears.
The maid, more calm, shut and fastened the door lest the old man should
return ; and presently, aiding her mistress, they undressed and put the girl to
bed, and tenderly watched till she had sunk into a troubled sleep.
There was peace next morning at breakfast, but the moment Mr. Woodcraft
entered his workshop he called the boy Jim to him, and, giving him a week’s
wages, told him he no longer wanted his services. The workmen were all
amazed, as the boy was very useful and handy, and his small earnings of great
use to those he belonged to. In vain his mother came to plead for him.
Benjamin merely repeated he wanted the lad no longer, and peremptorily
dismissed her.
Thus matters went on for full a fortnight, Benjamin betraying his mood by
a stern and repressive silence. His children did not dare to laugh in his
presence, and he replied to their questions in monosyllables. He laid his
accounts, letters, and papers on Lis’s desk, merely saying, “Do this,” or, “Do
that,” or else he made one of his workmen his messenger. But he did not
intrude again upon his daughter’s room, although, with his own hand, he
removed both lock and bolt; yet she was courageous, instinctively seeing that
there was necessity for both firmness and revolt against this cruel domestic
tyranny, and well aware that all the future welfare of the family depended
more upon herself than upon anyone else. So, unweariedly, she copied a
certain portion of Cobbett’s “ Grammar ” every night, studied the declensions of
Latin nouns, and read the elementary work on ancient history Felix had lent
her. Thus satisfying her keen desire for knowledge her nights were happy—
if not her days.
Through the agency of her aunt and Zebedee Lis soon learnt that Felix had
been several times over to see Mr. Cumnor, and that at length, the ornamental
designs approved of, they had been sent to the shop, and were now in the
workmen’s hands. But of the result Zebedee had to be responsible, as his
master would not see the work or even hear about it, merely saying “ that if
Mr. Cumnor chose to have work done from Medway’s designs he would in no
way be responsible for the result.”
Thus matters stood, till one day there came a doubt as to a section of the
design, and it could not be settled without the approval of Mr. Cumnor. As
customary, Zebedee went into the parlour to consult Aunt Patty.
“Before we proceed with the ornament about the medallions ” he said, “we
want Mr. Cumnor to see a specimen of what Ave have already done. Could not
Lis walk over to the hall this afternoon and take the panel, which is small and
light ? She could bring it back Avith her. Benjamin is going out on his chapel
affairs, and you could mind the shop.”
Aunt Patty liked the proposal. “Yes,” she answered, “I Avill contrive for
Lis to go, for she is but poorly ; but Benjamin must know nothing of it, for
he’s in one of his Avorst humours this morning. He found one of Ben’s paintings
in the shop, and also the box of colours Sukey Watkis bought him, and there’s
been to-do enough. However, he’s going out on chapel business, and afterwards
to take tea Avith his neAv friend, BroAvn. I only hope his friendship with that
man will turn out well, for I neither like him nor what I hear of him.”
Zebedee made no reply by words, but the shaking of his head and the
uplifting of his hands indicated much.
Lis was delighted with the prospect of a walk to Cumnor Hall, which lay
about five miles away from the toAvn in a Avooded country ; so as soon as her
father was gone she prepared to start.


“You will probably find all the ladies away, my dear,” said the aunt, as
she kissed her niece at the door ; “ but Mr. Cumnor will sure to be at home.
Wait for him if he isn’t, and bring the panel back with you, and tell Mrs.
Sanderson we will all take a holiday, and go over as soon as your father gives
leave.” *
The next shop but one to the cabinet-maker’s was that of Betty and Sukey
Watkis, the renowned staymakers. They were old-fashioned spinsters, careful,
and rather eccentric ; but kindly and ever willing to serve others. Sukey was
sunning herself at the shop door as Lis passed by, so grasping the young girl’s
hand she led her in,
“Come in a moment,” she,said. “I want to speak to you. Ben and Amy
and the little ones I often see on their way to and fro from school; and
Ben, you know, is a great favourite with Betty. You or Aunt Patty I rarely
see.”
“Aunt has the house to mind, Miss Sukey, and I am father’s clerk and
bookkeeper.”
“Yes, my dear; we knew your mother and loved her, and we know your
trials and duties. What I have to say is this : Mr. Vernon, the well-known
painter, is staying in the town, and is likely to remain all the autumn, for he
is sketching hereabouts. The other day he saw some of little Ben’s paintings,
and he was greatly struck with them, for, as he says, they are exceedingly full
of promise. If your father will allow he offers to give the boy some lessons
during the time he stays here. Will you ask him ? ”
“ I dare not,” replied the girl sorrowfully. “You know enough of our home-
life to guess the reason. Even Amy may not have a few music lessons, though
we have a good piano standing unused ; and Miss Preston, whom I knew at
school, would teach her cheaply. But now I must go.”
Lis was too loyal to speak against her home and father, and so she sought
to close the interview.
“You are a good girl, Lis,” said the spinster, as her eyes filled with tears ;
“and we know full well the troubles around you. But one word more.
Mr. and Mrs. Selwyn have been asking about you, for something was overheard
in your house a' fortnight ago which sore distressed them. Harry, too, has
been asking after you. What will surprise you—in spite of all his college
honours—he is going to settle down at home. The shop is going to be new
fronted, and he is to just now head the fine old business at the ‘lndian
Prince.’ ”
“Indeed, the Selwyns were always so good to poor mother. But now I
must go.”
“Good-bye, my dear,” said the spinster, as she stooped to kiss the girl.
Then she added in a whisper, “ If I and Betty can ever serve you, be sure to
come to us. We loved your mother, Lis, and sorrow for her children.”
When Lis reached the hall she found, as Aunt Patty had surmised, that
Mrs. Cumnor and her daughters were away at Leamington, and Mr. Cumnor,
who was only just home from a brief visit to Cambridge, had ridden out with
a friend. But he would be home to dinner at five o’clock, the housekeeper
said. So she invited Lis into her room, and had tea brought in. After it she
showed the young girl over the fine old place, and left her at length in the
library.
“You can stay here,” she said, “till Mr. Cumnor comes. He is so liberal in
all things, he will not object to your looking at his books, and you are fond
°f them I hear.”
To look at leisure round this grand old room was a privilege and pleasure of
the highest kind. She availed herself of the permission to the full; and her
amazement grew as she thus beheld some little portion of the fruit and
intellectual toil of centuries.


At length, upon a table where many hooks were scattered, she found a
periodical lying open at an article on “Woman’s Culture.” It had been
written by one of our most progressive and boldest thinkers. Portions of it
were necessarily beyond her mental grasp, for her culture as yet had been so
small. But beginning to read, she read on, and her interest grew. For the
first time she learnt the grave necessity, of woman’s education, and the lament-
able social, physical, and moral evils which arise from her ignorance.
“ Come what may,” she thought, as she read on, “ I will strive for this
culture which is so precious.”
(To he continued. )
(Dur glissioa.
A BRIEF DEDICATION TO THE PSEUDO-PHILANTHROPIST.
Out in the dismal street,
Out ’mid the rain and sleet,
Helping the poor we meet,
Resting their weary feet,
This be our mission ;
Leaving our homes all bright,
Leaving the glad fire-light,
Out into starless night,
’Mid scenes appalling sight,
Like some dread vision ;
’Mid haunts of vice and shame,
Strong in our Master’s name,
Good ever doing.
Let those who have not more
Round go from door to door.
Tracts dole, and by the score,
Still we from humble store
Give food and raiment;
And the glad thanks that flow
From some poor heart aglow,
Whom pain hath long laid low,
These we shall feel and know,
This be our payment;
Though nauaht'of worldly fame,
Still in our Master’s name,
Ever pursuing.
Tradesman's Hope Lodge, Nuneaton. E.
E. A. Shutk,
Art Conventionalisms. —When the technical in ait becomes the principal
thing the form soon becomes over-refined, and at the same time human
nature, the subject and theme of poetry,' becomes falsified. Matter and form,
the poetical expression as well as the contemplation of human nature, are then
fashioned according to an arbitrary law, and not nature dictates the poet’s
path.— Gervinus: ShaJcspere Commentaries.


Crnnnmn mistakes about tlje Morkittg Classes.
BY EDWIN GOADBY.
Whenever any large complex body exists it is sure to offer to acute observers
many tempting opportunities for generalisation, and such opportunities are as
certain to be eagerly embraced. When the body happens to be above or below
the observer in social rank, this tendency is so marked as to become almost
a craze, and it requires the utmost vigilance on his part to prevent frightfully
unjust and sweeping conclusions, based upon a limited experience and a few
isolated facts. If we desire to obtain a fair insight into the character of any
section of a nation, at least we ought to make ourselves as familiar with it as
possible, in every variety it presents, and under every form in which it is
developing. If our knowledge of geology were wholly derived from the common
roads upon which we walk, ride, or drive, we should imagine the solid parts of
the world were either granite, slate, or sandstone ; and similarly, when we talk
of upper, middle, and working classes, we make distinctions that may be con-
venient but are not final, and which utterly fail to give us any comprehensive
idea of the richness and multiplicity of the social strata. But in social
judgments we cease to be exact, and that which is called social science seldom
acts in quite the same manner as would a handbook of geology upon the
mind of anyone who had grouped the strata of the world into granite, slate,
and sandstone. The three divisions are maintained, as if they were rigidly
fixed, and corresponded to a set of facts in each case which they adequately
described. Not only is this confusion of mind common, where we should not
expect to find it—amongst intelligent persons of each of the three divisions we
have named, binding down social life to a rigidity it does not possess, and
denying the interchange which sustains vitality in all higher sections, however
numerous they may be—but it leads to hasty generalisations, which do infinite
mischief, and develop antagonisms where none need necessarily or naturally
exist. We should not trust the rough judgment of a working man as to the
character of the titled, learned, or clerical classes, based upon such limited
observations as were only possible to him in the chance contact of his ordinary
life. We should at once desire to correct it by wider knowledge, and a more
personal acquaintance with individual and representative sections. To under-
stand what French, or German, or Italian people are like, it is not enough to have
made the acquaintance of a few specimens in this country, or elsewhere —we
must see them at home, at work, at play, and in the whole round of their
existence. But, whenever the working classes are in question, all this caution
and prudence seems to be unnecessary. Flippant judgments are passed upon
the merest surface examination ; and the man or woman who would at once
say, “ What can he know about us ? ” if a workman professed to pass judgment
on any higher class than his own, are ready to be far more severe upon the
classes beneath them, upon just as limited an observation, without for a
moment suspecting the range of their knowledge or distrusting the infallibility
of their judgment. Cultivation, it may be thought, can dispense with careful
comparison, whilst it is only stupidity that needs to be fettered by logical rules.
The result is a series of mistakes, constantly corrected, but always reviving.
The University man, fresh from his college, presumes to group mankind as if


Oxford or Cambridge were the macrocosm, when they are hardly the microcosm,
of modern life. The literary classes, who sharpen their wits by better observa-
tion, are not free from the presumption that they can see everything at a
glance ; and, as they act as expositors of opinion, they too frequently, in com-
paring notes, repeat the opinions of their social betters, and believe they have
obtained a confirmation of the results of their own study when they come across
shallow estimates, personal prejudices, and arrant misstatements of facts.
Thus we have on record a far more extensive collection of notions about the
working classes than about either the middle or the upper classes. The
operative classes, on their part, however, may have opinions, but they rarely
print them, and they rarely presume to consider them absolute.
The temptation to generalise about the working classes is so great that it is
hard to resist. But why need there be this generalisation, if everything be so
simple as nine-tenths of the persons generalising take for granted ? It is surely
unnecessary. The thing which tempts is the endless variety and complexity
of the body upon which the experiment is made. Men and women desire to
simplify, to carry about with them pocket-formulse, to obviate the necessity
for continually coming to an independent conclusion, and to be rid of the
trouble of expending as much intellectual energy upon working men as is
demanded by pictures, horses, business calculations, and the last new thing in
fashionable games. They do right to generalise, hut a generalisation which
does not take in all the facts is an illusion, a pretence. We admit the existence
of that complexity which, whilst it has tempted, has evaded them. It is the
very first fact on which we have to insist. Indeed, we might almost say that
it is here where all mistakes begin and centre. No one who has but imperfectly
mixed with the working classes can form anything like an adequate conception
of the richness of the various orders, sub-orders, and sections they present for
observation. All other classes are simple in comparison with them. They
may be described as the granite series in the social strata ; and to understand
their compound and crystalline character it is not enough to break them into
pieces, convenient for handling, with a geological hammer, but we must apply
the microscope to them. But, as little Lily says, in Buskin’s “ Dust Ethics,” all
books about crystals “ are so dreadfuland hence, we suppose, the preference
for less exact and minute study. It is this crystalline character of the work-
ing classes which has to be mastered before anyone can thoroughly understand
them. Take the primitive crystal—to dwell upon the thought for a moment.
How is he to be described ? Parliamentary language says that a working man
is someone in receipt of weekly wages—a definition which leaves out an
agricultural labourer who lives in a farmhouse, and is paid monthly or quarterly,
at one end of the scale, and takes in an “able editor” at the other, whenever
it is customary or convenient to receive salary by the week. A mode of pay-
ment, the moment we seriously think upon it, can never describe the social
rank, or work, or personal character of the person paid. The wage-earning
classes are sometimes spoken of as if the term were better than working classes.
But wage is only fixed remuneration, and a barrister’s fee is just as much wage
as a carter’s hire, if we press for strict accuracy —inasmuch as both pledge to
give something for it—if, alas, barristers sometimes become a mere wage-
receiving class. The fact is, you cannot get the working classes into a definition.
It is the old problem of the universal solvent, which no vessel could contain.
To show the world in miniature that actually exists amongst the working
classes is not easy, unless the length of this essay were a matter of no moment.
Any section taken from a big town, where there are varieties of employment,
would enable the reader to understand what is meant. The common mistake
is that if you want to study the working man you must go the public-house.
You will find a specimen or two, no doubt, but it would be a cruel injustice to
take them for types of a large class. “ The knottiest problem I ever had put


tome in my life,” said a parson to us once, “was put to me by a working
mason, who blew my old theological conceptions about as a gust of wind will
a heap of loose papers.” We do not doubt it. A mild-mannered, soft-faced
weaver once started a line of thinking in us which is not yet wholly exhausted,
although twenty-five years have elapsed, and our conversation did not last
twenty-five minutes. Do we, therefore, say that the brooding of the more
automatic workman is always wisdom ? Far from it. As little is the life in a
public-house the key to the ideas, hopes, and enjoyments of a large class. The
grades are too numerous to be counted. We may, however, express what we
mean in figures. For instance, if the whole range of social life in this country
be as the figure 21, with royalty constituting the odd unit, the series of figures
which represented the working classes would terminate at 13, leaving four for
the middle classes (14 to 17) and three for the upper classes (18 to 20). That
is, there are 13 shades to 4, 3, and 1. The difficulty of generalising, as if the
order of the figures were reversed, will be at once understood. Ais an observer
who sees specimens of grades 1, 3, and 12, and he fancies he is competent enough
to pronounce judgment upon the whole thirteen. B sees 13, 12, and 11, but
he is marvellously shocked and unsettled when he is brought into violent
contact with 1, 2, and 3, who may have veneered themselves over with a chip
or two of what they saw he admired in numbers 11 to 13. He is disgusted.
C observes a complete series from 5 up to 12, and is not his judgment more to
be trusted than that of D, who brings the middle classes from 17 to 14 down
to 5, or that of E, who manages to make royalty number 5, and puts the whole
of the working classes into 1 and 2 ? This diversity amongst the working
classes is the great fact nineteen-twentieths of the world never under-
stand. When some drunken brute kicks his wife, “ What are these working
classes coming to ? ” ask the humane, the finical, and the shallow-minded.
What would they say if the same question were asked when a titled individual
is served with notices by a Local Board of Health, becomes bankrupt, or figures
in the police-court ? Whenever necessaries are dear they blame the workmen
for asking for higher wages ; and if they belong to the middle or lower section
of upper class it never occurs to them that they, also, are getting more
money than persons in their own rank of life did forty and fifty years ago.
Similarly, they say that the working classes prefer to be ignorant whenever any
little school board difficulty occurs. The answer to such a monstrous
generalisation from odd facts, gathered from sections or grades 1, 2, and 3, is
the last London School Board election. It is your shopkeeping middleman
who is caught by economical cries, and not the working classes. There is
intense sympathy, in fact, between the social grade number 14 and social
grades 1, 2, and 3 ; and in point of intelligence grades 11, 12, and 13 are far
superior to grades 14 and 15. The fact will be more striking by-and-by,
when men have the courage of “ Felix Holt.” “ Why should I want to get into
the middle classes because I have some learning?” he asked. “ The most of the
middle classes are as ignorant as the working people about what does not concern
their own Brummagem life. That’s how the working men are left to foolish
devices, and keep worsening themselves : the best heads among them forsake
their own comrades, and go in for a house with a high door-step and a brass
knocker.” ft is a well-known fact, as proving that grades 11, 12, and 13 are
Marked by high intelligence, that most of our successful manufacturers and
cotton lords have sprung from these grades, some of them rising, at a bound,
mto grade number 18. Moreover, as bearing upon the question of intelligence,
it is worth repeating that most of our best patents have sprung from the brains
°f workmen, although their names are only inscribed in the illustrious roll of
the forgotten.
It is frequently said that the working classes are fonder of amusements and
less thrifty than any other class. Mr. Smiles has supplied us with a host of


illustrations, in his work on “Thrift,” in disproof of the latter allegation.
There are many unthrifty sections, it may be frankly admitted, but unless
these sections preponderate it is unfair to attach a degrading stigma to the
working classes, as a whole. Individuals who freely use the uncomplimentary
epithet of “thriftless,” as describing the working classes, are unaware of the fact
that since 1867 there has been a steady increase in the deposits of Post Office
and Trustees’ Savings Banks. In 1867 the total amount of deposits in the
Post Office banks was £9,749,929 ; and in trustees’ banks £36,867,457. In
1875 the respective totals were £25,187,345 and £42,407,769. Take the Poor-
Law expenditure, as illustrating another side of the same fact. In 1867, when
the population of England and Wales stood at 21,608,286, the expenditure in
actual relief of the poor was £6,959,840 ; and in Scotland and Ireland, with a
population of 8,726,713, it was £1,604,765, In 1875 —we adhere to this year
for the sake of equal comparison—the population of England and Wales was
24,244,010, and positive Poor-Law expenditure was £7,488,481 ; in Scotland
and Ireland the population was 8,804,708, and Poor-Law expenditure
£1,835,454. That is, the gross increase of population was 2,414,168, and the
increase in actual relief was but £759,330. At first sight these figures look as
if there had been a considerable increase of pauperism, but, taking the able-
bodied paupers, we find that, in 1867, there were 23,399 indoor and 134,909
outdoor ; total, 158,308. In 1875 the first class had diminished to 21,196,
and the second to 94,013, a gross reduction of 43,099. This reduction has
since been steadily maintained. In fact, the total of the two classes last year
was but 97,065. The incomes of friendly societies and trades unions have also
increased in the same period, as have the general ratal demands upon all
householders in the towns. Putting all these facts together, and looking at
the improved homes—in the greater conveniences of which all expenditure is
a kind of economy—and better clothing, and increased book and paper
buying of the working classes, it seems to us difficult to come to any other
conclusion than this, that the working classes, as a body, have exercised as
much thrift as many of the classes immediately above them, if not more, in
spite of their constant and special exposure to the fluctuations of trade, A
minuter investigation would, we are convinced, bring the fact out in a still
clearer light. On the question of amusements, there is just as much to be
said. The English workman compares favourably with the French or German
one, and it is not his fault if he has to pay a little more for his entertainment,
mainly because he has to live in a less equable climate. He is not more
extravagant in his expenditure under this head than any of the classes above
him, nor is amusement the sole aim and end of his life. He takes it as
recreation, and not as serious business. Nor is life in our great towns, in
factories and warehouses, amidst the din of machinery and the odours of raw
material, so pleasant and satisfying as to make amusement a superfluity. As
a French writer has said, in the presence of machinery a man is so little man
“ that as soon as he comes out he must greedily seek the most intense excite-
ment of the human faculties.” It is for this reason that the drama follows the
factory. In small towns saving money becomes a sort of amusement of its
own. The difficulty is to save money in the big towns, and yet not be ascetic
in the matter of amusements proper.
Some other mistakes may be more briefly noticed. It is said that the
working classes are more immoral than any other; and, unhappily, there is
frequently cause to ponder over the allegation. But we very much doubt
whether it is strictly true. There is certainly less concealment, so more is
visible ; and where natures are rougher in fibre and more vigorous there will
always be unpleasant things to be seen upon the surface. The tu quoque
argument, however, may be very effectively employed, and minute observation
will show that rash assertions are unwarrantable. Taken in the mass, there is


as much virtue, fidelity, and high principle amongst the working classes as
amongst the same number of any other class. It is said, again, that bad
workmanship and loafing are frightfully common. Indeed, the cry is that
workmen are deteriorating. Mr. C. S. Read traces this deterioration amongst
agricultural labourers. But is there not here, as in the morality question, a
large amount of copying and reaction ? Adulteration, scamping, cheap contracts,
and insincere work, begin as much with the master as the man. The tricks of
trade are soon caught; and the master who trains his workmen to cheat his
customers can hardly be surprised if his workmen eventually cheat him. He
is a schoolmaster in the art of deception ; and perhaps when he has succeeded
in his haste to be rich he will give himself airs in private about the general
untrustworthiness of the working classes. We have come across such specimens,
and we have assisted in the congenial work of ‘‘ letting the sawdust out of
them.” The scamping workman, let it be said, is his own enemy. He rivets
his own fetters. He remains what he was, when he does not sink even lower.
He cannot take a walk in the fields without all Nature preaching him a lesson
against fraud. The oak, the beech, the ox, the waving corn, the birds, the
running brooks, the jagged rocks, the green carpet upon which he treads, are
all so many ministers of a beautiful realism, and he is the only sham amongst
them, much as he may be puffed up with a sense of his own superiority. It is
said, further, that the working classes of this country are more extreme in
their opinions than other classes, and many and well-barbed are the' taunts
shot at the “unwashed.” Here, again, we have limited deductions applied
to a large class, compounded with notions borrowed from French sources, living
and literary. The working classes have opinions, we admit, upon most questions—
political, social, theological, and scientific. They cultivate a Saxon bluntness of
speech, partly because they think plainly—if sometimes in narrow limits—and
partly because they hate finesse, trimming, and diplomacy. A contempt for
mere patronage is a good quality ; and where plain-speaking is so much disbe-
lieved in, and a diet of comfits and bon-bons is so common elsewhere, it is
refreshing to hear some of the sledge-hammer oratory which Air. Lavender-Glove
is sure to despise. If some of the middle classes had more opinions, and did
not dress their minds as well as their shop windows, to please their customers,
the contrast between them and the out-spoken orators in shirt sleeves would
not be so marked. Would life be less burdensome { Is brutal frankness the
negation of every virtue ? Ur is a certain amount of soft-sawder and falsehood
the alloy which makes pure Christian gold work up better into sovereigns ?
Whatever else you may not find amongst the working classes, the utter absence
of cant is very noteworthy. There are specimens, however, sugared over with
it until the real self is no bigger than a mustard-seed, and about as hot in the
mouth when you get the full and natural flavour. They bear about as much
resemblance to the real thing as Barnum’s mermaid did.
There are many other mistakes we could notice which come out in current
conversation, and in newspaper writing, and even in pulpit exhortations ; but
we may have said enough to enforce the necessity of caution in repeating and
carefulness in receiving all hasty judgments upon a large and finely-graded
class of human beings. If any of us are bold enough to think them beneath
us, let us be as kindly and reverent towards them as we are to the flowers of the
field, which are not to be trodden under foot as scornfully as if they were the
work of another and a lower Architect than ourselves*. The workers we may
despise are not machines, but men. They are not bondsmen, but free. They
have the same right to the sun and the showers, the blue sky, and the health-
giving breezes. Labour is no curse, for has it not made all that we name
Civilisation ? Poverty is no detraction, for has she not been the mother of all
Industry ? Horny hands are no detriment unless they be accompanied by hard
hearts. Nor is Ignorance itself a crime when it comes to us in the guise of
67
COMMON MISTAKES ABOUT THE WORKING CLASSES.


that wisdom which confesses its own defects, and takes care that the children
shall grow into a larger inheritance. “I have known in my time,” said Montaigne,
“ a hundred labourers and a hundred artisans wiser and more happy than the
rectors of the University, and whom I had much rather have resembled.”
There are many faults in the working classes very well known to themselves,
some of which are in a fair way of amendment; but, if the observer is honest
towards them, and honest with himself, he is far more likely to end by agreeing
with Montaigne than with some of our more modern and more ambitious
Cassandras,
The Fathers of Poets. —His father allowed him (Boileau) to do as he
pleased, a little indignant, as fathers of poets always are, at the waste of
valuable time, and occasionally remarking, with that absence of discrimination
which also characterises fathers of poets, that Nicholas was a good lad who
would never do harm to others or good to himself. Everybody has a sneer at
the parents of poets. For my own part, seeing the entire impossibility of
predicting poetical success, its rarity, its slender marketable value, and the fact
that poetry may be pursued with any other calling, I am disposed to agree with
M. Boileau pere, and the other anxious parents who rightly enough rank the
certainty of material comfort far above the chance of glory. This, after all,
if you get it, means chiefly the standing in a conspicuous place on the shelves,
and occasionally having your character dissected, and perhaps your reputation
destroyed by the critics, long after it has been firmly established. —The French
Humourists, by Walter Bcsant, M.A.
Changes in the English Language. —Few scholars, even, are aware of the
great chahges through which the English language has passed in successive
centuries. The following are specimens of the Lord’s Prayer, as used at various
periods in English history :
A.D. 1158. —Fader ur heune, haleweide beith thi neune, cumin thi kuneriche,
thi wille beoth idon in heune and in earthe. The euryeu dawe briend, gif ous
thilk dawe. And vorzif uer detters as vi yorsifen ure dettoures. And lene us
nought into temtation, hot delyvor eus of evel. Amen,
A.D. 1300.—Fader ure in heavene. Halewyn be thi name, thi kingdom
come, thi wile be done as in hevene and in earthe—Oua urche days bred give
us to daye. And forgive oure dettes as we forgive our dettoures. And lead us
nor in temptation, bote delyveor us of yvil. Amen.
A.D. 1370. —Oure fadir that art in heunes hallowid be thi name, thi kingdom
come to, be thi wille done in erthe as in heune, geve to us this day oure breed
oure other substance forgene to us our dettis as we forgauen to oure dettouris,
lede us not into temptation ; but delyuer us yvel. Amen.
A.D. 1521.—0 oure father which arte in heven, hallowed by thy name. Let
thy kingdom come. Thy wyoll be fulfilled as well in earth as it is in heven.
Give us this daye oure dayly brede. And forgive us our trespaces even as we
forgive our trespaceis. And lead us not into temptation, but delyver us from
veil. For thyne is the kingdome and the power and the glorye for ever. Amen.
A.D. 1561.—0ur father which art in heauen, sanctified be thy name. Let
thy kingdom come. Thy will be done, as in heauen, in earth also. Give us
today our superstantial bread. And forgive us our dettes as we forgive our
detters. And lead us not into temptation. But delivere us from evil. Amen.
AD. 1811. —Our father which art in heauen, hallowed be thy name. Thy
kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth as it is in in heauen. Give us this
day our dayley bread. And forgive us our debts as we forgive our debtors.
And lede us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. For thyne is the
kingdome, and the power, and the glory, forever. Amen.


%i % gdlmt (Soltr
A PERSONAL REMINISCENCE.
BY F. HASLEHAM.
CHAPTER 11.
Whizz ! Ping ! Dab ! and — next to no repercussive sound at all! ‘ Whizz
meant that one of the Queen’s bullets had just passed you by, too near to be
pleasant, but better so than worse. “ Ping ” signified a young marksman who
had fired too high, the result being that his particular message, instead of
being delivered near at hand, spent itself upon the gum-trees on the next
“rise” at the rear of the barricade. “Dab” was a more characteristic sound,
the ball having missed its man and .found a lodging in one or other of the
sod-chimneys (sole relics of deserted tents) within the enclosure of the wooden
fort The sound that was next to no sound at all was ominous of Her Majesty s
errand having been only too well executed. A bullet so landed makes no noise
worth mentioning, or very little fuss of any kind beyond dropping its man.
It is but bare justice to the gold-diggers to say that they remained steady
under fire. After the first surprise was over they made the best ot their
indifferent discipline and short ammunition. Peter Lalor s encouraging
injunction—“ Steady boys, and aim low,” did not fail of its effect, the rather
that it was evident he was Inforcing his precept by his own example.
The casualties, so far as appeared, were at this point about equal on both
sides. The skirmish had lasted about 20 minutes, and Mr. Lalor was numbered
with the wounded. He was, however, more than amply avenged, for the next
man to fall was no other than Captain Wyse. Shot above the knee, his wound
was destined to prove mortal, as might be seen written clearly enough m the
lines of his face as he was carried to the rear—a brave man, of singularly gentle
manners and conversation, whose doom it was to find a soldier s grave m the
wilderness of a far-off land, having done his duty in a wretched affray with his
fellow-countrymen, through a quarrel not of his own seeking. ,
Enraged at the loss of their captain, the men demanded to be led to the
assault. The boy-bugler stepped a few paces to the front, and as he sounded
the note to “ charge ” rendered himself the most conspicuous object to aim at.
But no gold-digger would think of firing at lam. What followed was very
sharp, short, and decisive. Clambering over the timber and brushwood that
had been rudely thrown up to serve as breastworks, the red-coats were upon
us with fixed bayonets. After a few minutes’ melee, m the course of which a
good deal of colonial English was discoursed on both sides, the bayonet had
done its work as usual, and as it always will do when it comes to the push.
We were already conquered when a new enemy appeared. This was the
mounted constabulary—a semi-military, semi-civil force—the special aversion
of the miner. We hated them partly for their tailors sake, and partly for
their own broken-down snobbishness. And yet they were goodly fellows to
look at, and from cap to spur had had ample justice done them. They leaped
their horses through the breaches made by Her Majesty s troops ; and it is
scarcely too much to say of them that they slew the slam ! They set fire to
the tents into which the wounded had crept for succour or death.
It was in an encounter with one of these “ mounted gentry that the present
writer was shot.


As it does not happen to most men to be pistoled, allow me to remark, for the
information of the uninitiated, that there is not much in it. I mean after it
has gone off. While the weapon is being aimed at you, you see and feel a lot
of things in considerable variety—especially if you yourself are disarmed and
helpless. The bore looks very round and the barrel very shiny, and you feel
remarkably sharp in your senses. Thackeray was quite right in sending
“ Little Billy ” up the rigging to say his catechism as a preparation to being
killed and eaten. But, as Shakspere tells us, the sense of death is most in
apprehension. _ The physical pain of being shot in the breast is nil, or next to
it. A slight tingling throughout the nervous system, and a sense of dead
weight in the right shoulder and arm (through a laceration of the pectoral
muscles), were the only symptoms I was conscious of on receiving an ounce of
lead.
But as I am the hero of this part of the story let me get over the ground
as quick as possible. It was my destiny to be not only shot but to be taken
prisoner. I had the honour of being put in irons as to the wrists, and was
strapped by the “darbies” to a trooper’s saddle. But the coward who had
shot me was a fumbler in binding me. Without any effort of mine the knot
became loosened, and I found myself no longer trailing beside the horse’s
flank.
I bolted.
“ Shall I shoot him?” shouted another of the mounted gentry, as I ran
dodging among the burning tents.
“ D n you, I’m shot already,” thought I, running as best I could.
And so, with a hole somewhere in the region of the right lung, with knees
beginning to slacken through hemorrhage, with wrists in a pair of bracelets,
and a sense of unquenchable thirst, I made the best of my way to my tent.
My arrival there takes back the reader to the point he started from at the
beginning of this reminiscence.
So much for what took place between dawn and sunrise on that midsummer
morning in Advent, 1854. And so much, also, for the causes by which the
offence came. I blame nobody—neither the Government nor the Rebels. The
compensation would have to be found in what followed. A little timely blood-
letting in a young energetic colony would do no harm. To say the least of it,
it might save a deal of political delay.
Of course the excitement in Melbourne was intense. The most alarming
rumours prevailed, and, true to his quarter-deck instincts, Sir Charles Hotham
issued orders for every available man to be sent to the front. Accordingly,
within eight and forty hours of the news reaching head-quarters, the whole of
the troops stationed in Melbourne—horse, foot, and artillery, reinforced with the
blue jackets from Her Majesty’s ships in Hobson’s Bay—arrived at Ballarat.
They were not required. There was a “ solitude,” but the authorities at the
Government Camp knew better than to call it “ peace.” What was needed
was not military subjugation but civil redress.
Nevertheless, martial law had to be proclaimed, and everybody felt more
contented under the new r&gime.
Then followed the state trials. The Attorney General (Sir William Stawell)
harangued himself hoarse in endeavouring to get verdicts. The charge was
high treason, and jury after jury refused to convict. Batch after batch, the
“rebels” were received outside the Assize Court with all the customary
expressions of popular sympathy and enthusiasm.
Foiled in obtaining a conviction against any of the prisoners, the Government
offered a reward of £SCO for Peter Lalor, “alive or dead.” In the meantime
Mr. Lalor remained in the safe keeping of his mother church.


The Legislative Assembly, no less than the Press, was staunch on the
popular side, the result being that Sir Charles Hotham, acting for the Queen,
was compelled to issue a Government inquiry. So faithfully, even in new
settlements, does history repeat itself. It was a portion of Peter Lalor’s creed
that there could be no hope of reform without a previous baptism of blood.
The Commission sat at Ballarat, with Mr. Horne (of “ Orion ” fame) as its
literary secretary and draughtsman of its report. The result was a series of
recommendations of which the principal were (1) that an amnesty be granted,
and that, by consequence, the offer of the £5OO reward for Mr. Lalor’s head
be annulled; (2) that the licence fee be reduced 100 per cent, and that it be
no longer collected at the “ point of the bayonet ; ” and (8) that Ballarat
be created a borough for the purposes of representation in the Legislative
Assembly.
With reference to the riot consequent upon the refusal of the police
magistrate to commit the hotel-keeper for trial, and the burning down of the
hotel, the Commission of Inquiry reported no less unfavourably to the Govern-
ment. The result was that the magistrate was called upon to resign, and the
hotel-keeper was brought to trial and sentenced to “ four years on the roads of
the colony, or such other public works as His Excellency the Governor might
direct.”
In due course Mr. Peter Lalor issued his address to the free and independent
electors of Ballarat. It was a modestly-worded manly announcement, and the
result of the election was that he was returned at the head of the poll. He
was welcomed in Parliament, and during the very first session received the
appointment of chairman of committee, with £BOO a year. The next year saw
him happily married to the lady of his love, to whom he had been engaged
before the insurrection, and who, of course, would love, honour, and obey him
all the more unreservedly for his armless sleeve. The present writer had
oftentimes the pleasure of seeing him preside in committee of the whole
House, and not even Charles Go van Duffy, with all his Parliamentary prece-
dents, bran-new from “ May,” could have managed the business better.
In the meantime the dead had been buried, and the wounded were being
healed. I don’t know how it fared with others, but in my case it took six
years for the bullet to work its way out. The surgeons having failed to find it
with their probes, I steadily refused to allow them to look for it with their
knives. The consequence was that sometime in 1860 I felt something rolling
down my right side. It was the ounce of lead I received on that memorable
Sunday morning.
■As to my mates who nursed me in my illness, the Spaniard came badly to
grief through a lot of slabs slipping the knot and tumbling upon him at the
bottom of a shaft. What became of the North of Ireland man I never knew,
but he was always a queer fellow, and, I think, had been unfortunate in love.
The Illustrated News man went home, and I believe he is now engaged in
literary work, with honour and profit, in London. My most pleasing and vivid
recollection of him in the bush is connected with some of the finest passages
m Chaucer. I remember with what natural pathos he read, in the
“ Canterbury Pilgrims,” the “ Tale of the Clerke of Oxenforde,” in the days of
our mutual trouble.
It only remains to add that Sir Charles Hotham did not long outlive his
appointment to the governorship of Victoria. He died and was buried in the
colony, and a pillar monument was erected over his grave. The then editor of
the Melbourne Herald suggested as a suitable inscription the closing lines of
Coriolanus :
“ Though in this city he
Hath widow’d and unchilded many a one,
Yet shall he have a noble memory."
71
AT THE BALLARAT GOLD DIGGINGS.


Cjr* (Smtlthroirwu's S*df-]§ds |nstxfwtc.
BY THE AUTHOR OF “ MY TUTORSHIP IN WALES,” “SCATTERED SEEDS,” ETC.
On the opposite side of Baker Street, but at a very short distance from that
celebrated “wax-work show” so familiar to us—for years too numerous to be
specified—as “ Madame Tussaud’s Exhibition,” are the premises rented for the
Gentlewomen’s Self-Help Institute. Originally established in the less accessible
locality of Bessborough Gardens, the infant society had somewhat of a
struggle for existence in the early days of its being, requiring a great deal of
help itself before attaining the capability of rendering efficient and sorely-
needed aid to others.
But change of place and change of management, under the energetic influence
of a most capable and painstaking secretary, have been productive of very
satisfactory results; purchasers are more numerous, and we are informed that
the sales of a single day are often more important and remunerative than those
of a whole month in the old neighbourhood. The gentlewomen in “ neces-
sitous circumstances,” willing and able to work, but unable of themselves to
find employment or sale for the embroidery, lace-work, dressed dolls, leather-
work, wool-work, &c., which they have leisure enough to accomplish in their
homes or lodgings, can here have their wares exhibited at the prices they
themselves put upon their goods, and obtain orders for a further supply,
supposing always that they are fortunate enough to send articles for which
there is a demand. Before being enrolled as working members they must
apply to Miss Lupton, the Honorary Secretary, “stating circumstances and
income; also furnish two letters of recommendation (one from a clergyman
preferred) testifying to her being a lady by birth, of good reputation, and
necessitous. After approval by the committee, the lady so applying will have
to procure a nomination from a subscriber to the institute (one guinea per
annum constituting the qualification of such subscriber) and she will become
eligible to partake of the benefits of the Institution.” “ Any lady wishing to
have her name placed on the Kegistry for Governesses, &c., must make appli-
cation to the hon. sec., and furnish two letters of recommendation (one from
a clergyman preferred), paying a fee of 2s. 6d. on the entry of her name, and a
similar sum when a situation is procured. All communications specially
relating to needlework are to be addressed to the Lady Superintendent at the
Institute.”
The business of the charity has so largely increased that the whole house is
now required for its conduct. The first room you enter is most particularly
the “ showroom,” containing a great variety of wares under glass and in boxes,
besides the beautiful specimens of lace work, embroidered screens, cushions,
leather frames, drawings, &c., which are on view round the room ; and on the
counter children’s clothing in great variety may also be purchased. An inner
room, on occasion of our last visit, was also quite full of ladies’ work, but in
boxes and drawers, which a young showwoman was ready enough to open for
inspection. Beyond this second room is a small apartment in which the
secretary carries on her labours on stated days, and from her, on any Thursday
morning between the hours of ten and one, additional information respecting
the working of the Institute may be obtained.
Gifts of clothing, both new and cast-off, are most acceptable, as well as
orders for work. Instruction in some kinds of needlework, and other branches


of employment, is also provided when possible, but more money is wanted for
this purpose. Indeed, more money is wanted for a great many purposes, but
the subscriptions are steadily increasing. Balls and fancy sales have been held
with “most satisfactory results,” and it is to be hoped that with every London
season the visitors and purchasers will also become more and more numerous.
You are not compelled to purchase because you go to see the work exhibited,
but as there are beautifully-dressed dolls from 9d. and upwards, babies’ socks,
and anti-macassars more plentiful than required, besides exquisite specimens of
elaborate work at three guineas and more, it would be strange if some small
articles were not procured even by those better able to afford a shilling than a
guinea for “charitable purposes.” It must not be imagined that all working
members are equally fortunate in the disposal of their wares. They may
persist in sending, as the secretary laments, unsaleable articles for which there
is no demand, or, as is too often the case, the plain needlework is by no means
of first quality, and so not likely either here or anywhere else to command a
high price. Some “will do what they like best,” instead of what is most
wanted ; others, unfortunately for themselves, will not take the pains to learn,
or to improve themselves where deficient.
At one time the demand for good lace-work was so great that “ one lady
realised as much as £7O in one year,” but latterly there has been very little
sale for this branch of industry. Every variety of underlinen for adults and
children may be procured at the institute, or can be executed to order, and
there is a fixed price for all clothing according to the amount of work. Also,
we find by the last report, “art needlework, in every variety—finished,
commenced, or traced, designs furnished, translations made in different lan-
guages, music copied and transposed, MSS. copied, photographs coloured, &c.”
There is “ a loan fund (for making advances of material to those members
who cannot always afford the necessary outlay), and during the past year the
number of applications for its help have been very numerous.”
Surely this Institute, doing its quiet work in an unostentatious way, deserves
to be “ generally known ” and more substantially supported, were it only that
it is designed to help “necessitous- gentlewomen” to help themselves, and in
more ways than that of “ going out as a governess,” whether “ apt to teach-”
or not, at one time the only way in which necessitous gentlewomen could think
of earning a living and remaining gentlewomen in the eyes of others.
Brain-work, of course, is the nobler service, but it demands health, energy,
and a life beginning with a bright though possibly far-off future. A young
gentlewoman does not expect to be a governess all her life when circum-
stances compel her to commence it almost in that position, but there are
many helped by this society upon whom the shades of evening are already
closing ; they are too old to take up teaching as a profession. They must live ;
there is no one who can entirely support, but a few may give them occasional
help. Now is the time to turn to some account that delicacy of finger and
‘ natty” use of the needle for which in brighter days they were famed, and
for such as these the Institute is an unquestionable boon. “ Failure ! Why do
you speak of failure ? I would strike that word out of the dictionary,” was the
emphatic remark of a next neighbour at dinner many years ago. “ And what
'would you substitute in its place?” “Renewed effort,” was the decisive
rejoinder.
A good and wholesome substitute in many instances; but there are some
natures to whom a single failure is as a death-blow to all energy, and “ renewed
effort,” on their own account, an impossibility. Their “ organ of hope ” is
deficient, phrenologists will tell us ; not so with the benevolent originators
of this means of helping others. “Renewed effort” has been their maxim.
Let us hope that many hands will be extended to strengthen theirs to prevent
fheir labour ever proving a failure. * Y. S. N.


Jfrbit&lg Stooelji intelligence, Statistics,
Friendly Societies and the Poor Law. —On April 27th an important
friendly society’s case came before the South Shields stipendiary. George
Robson, trustee of the George M'Cully Lodge of Oddfellows, was sum-
moned by Thomas Toshach, relieving officer, to show cause why the lodge
should not contribute to the maintenance of John Middlemiss, member of the
lodge, sick and an inmate of the workhouse. The defence was that, according
to the lodge rules, when a member became chargeable to the union he ceased
to become entitled to benefit from the lodge fund. The stipendiary disagreed
with the objection, and made an order upon the lodge for Middlemiss’s support.
Friendly Societies and their Arbitration Committees. —A case of
considerable interest to friendly societies has come before the Liverpool
stipendiary magistrate, Mr. Raffles, a man having summoned the Liverpool
Warehousemen’s Friendly Society to recover six weeks’ sick pay and medical
expenses, amounting in all to £lO. It appeared that the complainant, who
had been a member of the society for fourteen years, was taken ill a few months
ago with rheumatic fever and congestion of the lungs, which the society’s
doctor certified had been brought on by intemperate habits, and consequently
disentitled him to any benefits. Another medical man, however, who attended
the man, was of a different opinion as to the cause of the disease. According
to one of the rules all disputes were to be decided by the committee, which in
this case had done so adversely to the complainant. Mr. Raffles expressed his
strong opinion that the man should be paid the full amount of his claim, but
said he had no power to make an order, as the decision of the committee was
final. He therefore dismissed the summons.
A Friendly Society’s Officer Charged with Embezzlement. —On March
29th, at the Leeds Town Hall, John French, 40, was charged with embezzling
various sums of money, the property of the Olive Branch Lodge of the United
Order of Free Gardeners. Mr. W. B. Craven, solicitor, was for the prosecution;
and Mr. Granger defended the prisoner. The prisoner was the secretary to the
lodge in question, which held its meetings at the Cabbage Inn, Leathley Road,
Hunslet, between 1869 and 1876, and he received a small nominal sum in
return for his services. It was his duty to receive the subscriptions from the
members, enter the amounts on their contribution cards, and also in the
contribution book kept by him. At the close of the proceedings on each lodge
night he had to enter the whole amount received in the secretary’s cash book,
and also to put the amount on a ticket which, with the receipts, he then had
to hand to the treasurer. On the sth of August last Abraham Whysall was
appointed secretary in his place, and when the new official got possession of the
books he found numerous defalcations, the total number of which was near
£lOO. On the prisoner being summoned before the trustees he denied that
there was anything wrong, but accepted their offer to appoint a private member
to audit the books. As that audit confirmed the new secretary’s report the
prisoner was given into custody. Several members of the lodge were called,
and they deposed that on various occasions they had paid the prisoner small
sums of money, which he from time to time entered on their contribution
cards, but of which no entry could be found in the contribution book kept by
the prisoner. As there was also a charge of falsifying the books against French,
and as the evidence in this case was not completed, the prisoner was remanded.
74
oddfellows’ magazine.


Important Medical Officers’ Case. —Leigh County Court, March 2nd.—
In this cause Messrs. Pennington and Hannah were the plaintiffs, and John
Carroll the defendant, the amount claimed, £2 12s. 6d., being for professional
attendance during the period the defendant suffered from a fractured leg. Mr.
Ambler was for the defendant. Mr. Nathan Hannah gave evidence in support
of the claim, and in cross-examination admitted that his firm were the doctors
to the Oddfellows’ Lodge at Qolborne, from which they were paid 3s. 6d. per
head per annum. Surgical aid, however, was not included in the contract, and
he attended the defendant as a private patient, knowing that he was receiving
sick pay from the lodge at the time. The contract with the lodge was for
sickness, and not for accidents. It was not true that this action was brought
because they were likely to lose the appointment with the club. He was not
aware that Dr. Pennington had told the secretary that the claim would be
waived. William Jackson said he was secretary to the Oddfellows’ Lodge at
Golborne. For the past 30 years, to his knowledge, Dr. Pennington had attended
all cases affecting the members of the lodge. He had been secretary during
the past 10 years, and all sick members, and members suffering from accident,
had been treated as within the terms of the contract, and this was the only
dispute that had occurred. Defendant said a man named Ashcroft was attended
for an abscess before it was discovered that a bone was broken. The witness
Jackson said the defendant was on the books eleven weeks on the plaintiffs’
certificate. Defendant denied undertaking to pay for the attendance of the
plaintiff. His Honour said there w r as nothing to contradict the evidence of
Dr. Hannah. Verdict for the plaintiffs.
Friendly Societies and the Poor-Law Amendment Act. —A representative
deputation of the friendly societies had an interview with the President of the
Local Government Board on June 11th, with reference to the 23rd clause of
the Poor-Law Amendment Act, which enacts that if a member of a friendly
society goes into the workhouse, or becomes insane, or otherwise chargeable to
the parish, the guardians may take the relief due to him from such societies
for his maintenance. Mr. Cordes, M.P., introduced the deputation, consisting
of Mr. Wood, High Chief Ranger of the Foresters; Mr. Shawcross, the
Secretary ; Mr. Holmes, Grand Master of the Manchester Unity of Oddfellows,
and Messrs. Pinchbeck, Curtis, and Holley, who spoke on the matter. Mr.
Cordes, M.P., said the deputation represented a million and a half of members
of friendly societies, and with those connected with them about four millions.
He ventured to suggest that though the clause might be in strict harmony with
the other laws relating to the poor, inasmuch as no person was allowed to
become chargeable to the rates who had any means of his own, yet it must be
admitted that the friendly societies were in an exceptional position. They were
a large body of men who had greatly relieved the rates, and Parliament had
seen fit to pass exceptional legislation in their favour in the Friendly Societies
Act. Mr. Wood said Mr. Salt, M.P., had told them that this clause had been
inserted for detecting those who became paupers by their own folly, but the
answer was that the friendly societies’ rules prescribed that if a man became ill
by his own misconduct or folly he was not eligible to the benefits, but if the
guardians took the money from the society the wife and family of the member
would probably go into the workhouse, and thus become a burthen to the rate-
payers, so that this clause cut both ways. There had been meetings held all
over the country where the clause had been condemned as harsh, cruel, and
most unjust to friendly societies. The other gentlemen named having spoken,
the President replied that the Government were fully aware of the great
advantage these societies were to the country in saving the rates by teaching
people provident habits, but this clause was in the direction of keeping men
independent. This clause was not specially inserted with reference to friendly
societies, and be could not think that the guardians would ever call upon them


*
Years.
1841 ..
1851 ..
Deaths
in 1,000 Living.
Males.
Females.
20-8
21 -2
1861 ..
90-R
1871 ..
21 -3
Totals
83-9
Means
22-9
21-0
to pay where a member with a wife and family had been afflicted. The Act was
only passed last session, and he desired to watch what occurred under this
clause, and see whether it was necessary to make any alteration, or repeal it
altogether.
The Savings Banks. —lt appears from the balance-sheet setting forth the
assets and liabilities of the Commissioners for the Reduction of the National
Debt in respect of savings banks that the total amount due to trustees,
including interest up to the 20th November last, was £43,660,763 ; and that,
after taking into account the various securities held at their existing market
value, there was a deficiency of £3,250,676.
Capital Punishment. —A return of the persons sentenced to death for
murder in England and Wales in the years 1873-6 is given in a Parliamentary
paper recently issued. In 1873, 18 persons were sentenced to death, 11 were
executed, two of whom were women. In 1874 the number sentenced to death
was 25, of whom 16 were executed, two of them being women. In 1875 the
capital sentences pronounced were 33, and the number of persons executed
18, one of whom was a woman. 1876, 32 persons were sentenced to death, and
22 executed. The total number of persons sentenced to death in the four years
was 108, and the number executed 67, five of whom were women.
The Duration op Life.— Mr. T. Hawksley, C.E., at the recent Social
Science Conference said : “The actual duration of human life in this country is
under forty-two years. Since the year 1838 (when the office of the Registrar-
General was established) down to the year 1873, in all thirty-six years, there
has not been an atom of movement towards the extension of that duration.
If we extract the results from the four census years when the exact numbers
of the population were known, we have presented to us the following facts :
Once more we find no improvement in the latter part of the table over the
former part. Have, then, our efforts been unavailing? For the absolute pro-
longation of life I answer, Yes; for the general improvement of the people I
answer, Ho.”
The English Hews paper Press. —May’s Press Guide contains some interest-
ing particulars concerning the newspaper and periodical press of the United King-
dom. There are now issued 1,783 newspapers, thus distributed; Metropolis,
460 ; England, 946 ; Wales, 50 ; Scotland, 164 ; Ireland, 142; British Isles, 21.
The majority are published weekly, Friday claiming 363 and Saturday 675
examples. The penny newspapers number 914, far exceeding all others ; the
next highest being those at twopence-—263. There are 92 sixpenny and 20
shilling journals, and 14 are gratuitously distributed. Of political news-
papers, 515 are registered as Liberal, 296 Conservative, and 67 Liberal-Con-
servative, the remainder taking neutral ground. Politics would seem to
trouble the metropolis but little, as out of 460 journals only 79—viz., 46
Liberal, 23 Conservative, and 10 Liberal-Conservative identify themselves
with political principles. Of the 1,783 newspapers 46 may be termed reli-


gious, representing various denominations ; 68 are regularly and 7 occa-
sionally illustrated; 4 have coloured and 2 photographic illustrations. Six
newspapers appear in French, 1 in ‘German, 1 in Arabic, 9 in Welsh,
1 partly in Gaelic, and 1 partly in the Lancashire dialect. Five news-
papers, first published in the seventeenth century, and 76 established in the
eighteenth, still survive. The former are the London Gazette, 1665 ; Edin-
burgh Gazette, 1690 ; Berrow’s Worcester Journal, 1690 ; Stamford Mercury,
1695 ; and Course of the Exchange, 1697. Ninety-five journals represent
specific trades. Finally, as curiosities, there may be mentioned three maga-
zines containing literary compositions by patients of asylums for the insane.
Our Ports. —More than nine-tenths (in value) of the exports in the year
1875 of the produce of the United Kingdom was shipped at 12 ports. From
London went merchandise of the value of £57,923,927 ; from Liverpool,
£79,460,771 ; from Hull, £23,273,231 ; from Grimsby, £10,149,580 ; from
Glasgow, £9,128,372; from Southampton, £8,652,933 ; from Newcastle,
£4 882 433 ; from Leith, £3,848,466 ; from Cardiff, £2,837,747 ; from Harwich,
£2 806 149 ; from Hartlepool, £2,484,648 ; from Folkestone, £2,253,678. These
amounts together exceed £207,000,000 of the £223,465,963 which is the total
value of the British and Irish produce exported in the year. Liverpool takes
the lead in its vast exports of our cotton, linen, and woollen goods, and the
exports of coal materially raise the totals at Newcastle and Cardiff. The twelve
principal ports of entry for imports of foreign and colonial merchandise are
not exactly the same as the chief ports of departure above-named. The
ports into tlie port of London in 1875 reached the value of £135,102,452 5
Liverpool, £105,095,188 ; Hull, £18,456,334 ; Folkestone,. £11,822,742 ; South-
ampton, £9,236,460 ; Glasgow, £8,987,005 ; Leith, £8,084,081 ; Bristol,
£6,911,963.; Newhaven, £6,143,741; Greenock, £5,869,997 ; Dover, £5,409,042;
Newcastle, £5,151,115. These sums together exceed £326,000,000, and consti-
tute nearly nine-tenths of the £373,939,577, the total value of the imports of
merchandise into the United Kingdom in the year. That was never
before equalled in any year, and the value of the exports of British produce
in 1875 was never exceeded or equalled, except in the three years next pre-
ceding 1875. The imports of the year comprised articles of the value of
£139,047,488, being in a raw state, and to be used in manufacture ; articles
partially manufactured of the value of £28,568,266 ; articles wholly manufac-
tured of the value of £39,552,176 ; articles for food of the value of £162,274,950,
or ten millions more than in the preceding year; and other miscellaneous
articles, £4,496,697.
Educational Statistics. —According to the returns issued it appears that
whereas last year additional accommodation was provided for 2/9,894 children,
raising the total number of places in the schools in the country to 3,420,318,
the total attendance was only 1,984,573, the increased attendance last year
being 147,383. In the last three years additional school accommodation has been
provided for 843,769, while the actual increase in average attendance has been
only 502,093, so that adding the vacant places in the new schools to the unusual
school accommodation existing three years ago, we arrive at a grand total of
1,441,745 unoccupied school places against 1,984,573 occupied ones. The Church
of England provides school accommodation for 2,105,849, showing an increase ot
96,223 school places ; while the average attendance in these schools was 1,217,619,
an increase of 42,330 over the previous year. The accommodation provided by
“the British, Wesleyan, and other schools not connected with the Church
bas likewise slightly increased, 2,404 extra places having been provided ; but
there is a decrease of 246 in the average attendance. The Roman Catholics
have made considerable additions to their schools, having provided extia
seats, an increase of 6 per cent ; while the average attendance has risen


Area in Square
Production in 1874.
Miles.
Tons.
Great Britain
11,900
125,070,000
Germany
1,800
46,658,000
United States
. ... 50'000'000
France
1,800
17,060,000
Belgium
900
14,670000
Austria
1,800
12^280,000
Eussia
11,000
1,392,000
Nova Scotia
18,000
1,052,000
Spain
sjooo
680,000
Other Countries ....
28,000
5,000,000
270,200
274,262,000
from 106,426 to 110,969. But, as might be expected, the great increase is to be
found in board schools, in which there is an increase of 169,750 places, while
the average attendance has risen from 227,285 to 328,071. The voluntary
contributions for Church schools have risen from £528,483 in the previous
year to £592,300 last year ; the Nonconformists raised for their own schools
£105,386, as against £100,283 in 1875 ; and the Roman Catholics contributed
£50,638, an increase of £6,202. The average grant earned by each child in a
Church school was 13s. 2|d., as against 12s. in the previous year ; by each
Nonconformist child, 13s. 7|d., as against 13s. o£d. in the previous year;
13s. as against 12s. lOfd. by each Roman Catholic ; and 13s. o|d. in
Board schools, against 11s. 5Jd. in the previous years.
Coal. —Dr. C. W. Siemens, F.R.S., in opening the eighth annual meeting of
the Iron and Steel Institute at Westminster, on Wednesday, referred at length
to the subject of coal. Recent inquiry into the distribution of coal, he said,
had proved that its stores were greater than had at one time been supposed.
He submitted the following table of coal areas and production of the globe,
which, although incomplete, would serve for purposes of comparison :
It thus appears that the total area of the discovered coalfields of the world
exceeds 270,000 square miles. It is also shown thet the coal deposits of Great
Britain compare favourably with those of other European countries. Both in
the United States and in British North America, however, there exist deposit
of extraordinary magnitude, which seem to promise a great future for the New
World. According to the report of the Coal Commissioners published in 1871
there were then 90,207 million tons of coal available in Great Britain, at depths
not greater than 4,000 feet, and in seams not less than one foot thick, besides
a quantity of concealed coal estimated at 56,273 millions of tons, making a
total of 146,480 millions. Since that period there have been raised 600 millions
of tons up to the close of 1875, leaving 145,880 millions of tons, which, at the
present rate of consumption of nearly 132 millions of tons annually, would
last 1,100 years. Statistics show that during the last twenty years there has
been a mean annual increase in output of about three and one-third millions of
tons, and a calculation made at this rate of increase would give 250 years as the
life of our coalfields. In comparing the above rate of increase with that of the
population and manufactures, the president observed that it would be found
that the additional coal consumption had not nearly kept pace with the increased
demand for the effects of heat, the difference being ascribable to the introduction
of economical processes in the application of fuel.
Perfect Truthfulness. —The absolute disdain of all lying belongs rather
to Christian chivalry than to mere high breeding.— Jno. Ruskin.
78
oddfellows’ magazine.


Cjr* §,nmtal UfabaMe Committee,
The A.M.C. of the Manchester Unity of Oddfellows assembled in the National
Schoolroom at Oldham, on Whit-Monday, May 21st. The Deputy Grand
Master, Mr. J. J. Holmes, of South London, occupied the chair. Upwards of
400 delegates attended.
WELCOME FROM THE MAYOR.
The Deputy Grand Master introduced the Mayor of Oldham to the meeting,
who, in a brief speech, welcomed the A.M.C. to the town. He regretted that it
had so few attractions, but trusted the weather would be propitious, and that
the business transacted by the A.M.C. would conduce to the benefit and the
prosperity of the Order.
The Deputy Grand Master then delivered the following opening address
Respected Brethren, —In accordance with established custom it becomes
my duty, prior to the formal opening of this meeting, to make some brief
remarks. I feel I should but ill commence my task did I not express my most
unfeigned regret that he who strove so long and persistently for the honour of
occupying the post which I now fill, is not here instead of myself. This was
not to be : for that Power which governs Grand Masters with the same stern
impartiality as all others interposed. I will not further allude to this subject
except to say that my feelings in reference to my departed friend are entirely
in consonance with those of my colleagues, as expressed in the report which
has been presented to you.
Our meeting last year was held in one of the most aristocratic places of resort
in the United Kingdom. Those of you who were present thereat will long
remember your visit to that delightful place, and will find the change to Oldham
like a turn of the kaleidoscope. And it is well that such changes should occur:
that members from agricultural and trading districts should be brought
together, and if located for a time in a neighbourhood which cannot boast of
ancient renown or territorial aristocracy, assemble where the members can point
with just pride to what has been achieved by the mighty power of brain and
indomitable perseverance which has enabled them to cover their portion of the
country with those huge hives of industry teeming with thousands of busy
inmates, engaged in the production of fabrics of every kind for the use and
comfort of their fellow-beings throughout the whole habitable globe. This
interchange of association, if accompanied by exercise of those powers of observa-
tion which men like you are expected to possess, must necessarily lead up to a
more intimate, and therefore more correct, knowledge of each other’s require-
ments, also to a more practical method by which those requirements may be
obtained. This assembly being composed of deputies from all parts of the
country, all of whom must have devoted a considerable amount of time and
attention to the interests of the Order in their several localities, renders it
unnecessary for me to say one word as to the duties they are sent to perform.
But I may perhaps be excused if I call their attention to the fact that the
manner in which those duties are performed is of most vital importance, for
the due perception of others as to what each may desire is not to be obtained
by idle or noisy disputation, but by calm, clear, and concise statement of our
own views, and a like consideration of those of others; also with a predetermination
to ignore mere local prejudices, remembering that this is our Imperial Parlia-
79
THE ANNUAL MOVABLE COMMITTEE.


ment, and that rules made by it, if adopted without due consideration, or if
crudely constructed, do not obtain the respect of the members, and may become
a source of doubt and consequent litigation.
I have now to congratulate you upon the continued steady progress of the
Order. Numerically, the net gain in the last year was 10,357, somewhat less
than for the past few years, but after allowing for 26 lodges, consisting of
1,955 members, which have closed, seceded, or been suspended, and for deaths
7,247, and 14,087 who have left by reason of non-payment, the number of
members in the Order on January Ist, 1877, was 518,370. The financial state-
ment for the past year has not yet been collated, but I have no doubt that the
figures when published will show that we are still maintaining the increased
ratio of capital as against liabilities.
The growing influence of this and similar associations has necessarily attracted
the attention of those who have a desire to solve that difficult problem of how
to improve the social condition of the masses. These may be divided into
various classes. Some whose intellect is of a soaring capacity may be dismissed
with the statement that they know nothing about what they are writing, but
there are others whose interest in the welfare of the people is genuine, who
desire to encourage them in any efforts they may make towards self-dependence,
and who also take the trouble of obtaining something more than a superficial
knowledge of our transactions. And I take it to be an encouragement when we
find our efforts are appreciated by such men, in proof of which I quote the follow-
ing extracts from a very remarkable article written by the Rev. W. Walter
Edwards, published in the January number of the Contemporary Review,
wherein he says : “Although it is not possible to trace the history of all these
societies, it would be unfair to pass from the subject without some allusion to
that magnificent and independent effort of the working classes to better their
own condition known as the Manchester Unity of Oddfellows. By giving a
brief account of this society it will be seen what co-operation and union can
effect in this direction. Not that it stands alone among friendly societies. The
Ancient Order of Foresters is second to it only in number and importance,
but the Manchester Unity is indisputably first among all unity associations, and
therefore deserves closer attention. It counts in round numbers half a million
of members in Great Britain and Ireland, there are 4,000 lodges or separate
clubs all bound together by a common interest, they are under the same form
of government, and derive their great strength from their mutual reliance upon
each other. Whilst the business of each lodge is transacted independently, the
claim upon the central ‘ Unity’ is never lost so long as its laws are adhered to.
The great strength of the ‘ Unity ’ consists in the power of levying
funds from so large a body of persons, but the chief merit of this
association lies in its determination to set its affairs on a thoroughly
sound footing. In 1871 a valuation of assets and liabilities similar
to that which the law now requires from all registered societies was
voluntarily set on foot by the Oddfellows. This resulted in exhibit-
ing the serious deficiency of some £1,350,000. But inasmuch as the
total assets amounted to nine millions and a half sterling, the deficit
represented only about twelve per cent of the whole, or in other words the
society was in a position to discharge nearly ninety per cent of its liabilities.
This was of course very unsatisfactory ; but the worst being known only a
vigorous effort was required to put a growing concern like the Manchester
Unity.of Oddfellows into a thoroughly healthy condition. This is being done,
as it is believed, by raising the contributions and diminishing the benefits.”
Further on he continues : “ The office of their association is to supply the want
of saved capital in individual cases. Whatever advantages a man could expect
to derive from the possession of a private reserve fund, a stocking-full of
guineas, or a comfortable balance in a bank, should be secured to him by


membership in a well-managed and firmly-establisbed benefit club. In
sickness he should find his income, or a fair proportion of it, still going on. To
a reasonable extent his society should be prepared to help him when he is out
of and seeking for work. In old age he should receive a small but certain
and sufficient pension. At the birth of a child or the death of a member of his
family the pecuniary claims pertaining to such events should be defrayed by
his club. At his own death the insurance should be sufficient to start his
widow in a new way of life, and give her a chance at least of independent
existence. Of course the system cannot be expected to always work smoothly.
There will always be exceptional cases in which special and outside help will
find room for application. But on the whole the function of friendly societies,
as above described, will be found sufficient to meet the exigences of ordinary
lives. Nor is this system without its advantages. By throwing together the
contributions of many all the benefits which are derived by individuals from
their private hoards become at once available for every subscriber to the
common fund. Nearly a century ago the words ‘ Liberty, Equality, Fraternity ’
appeared to preach a new gospel to the masses. Is it not in co-operation and
mutual insurance against the ills of life that their realisation so long waited
for is to be found ? From the moment of membership with a friendly
society the working man becomes possessed of all the advantages of
property, not indeed to the extent of setting him free from the necessity
of labour, but as enabling him to face life with a fight heart. Without
combination he would have to wait many a weary year before his hoarded
savings would suffice to do for him what his club does at once.” Again, he
says, “ In England the man who saves a small sum of money has the greatest
possible difficulty in finding a place in which to keep it, and at the same time
receive a fair rate of interest for it. The very abundance of capital which exists
in the country creates and keeps it up, and there is no facility here as in some
other countries for the investment of minute sums in public securities, and
saving is therefore attended with unusual difficulties. The friendly society
naturally steps forward and undertakes the task of relieving the working classes
of their troubles in this direction.” The rev. gentleman finally concludes an
article which I would commend to the consideration of every member of 'our
Order, by saying, “As the pernicious action of the Poor Law, which suggests
carelessness, becomes better understood, and is therefore gradually modified, a
process which is already going on in the diminution of outdoor relief, it is
important that the only true substitute (for it is the friendly society which
suggests self-reliance) should be strengthened and encouraged.” The writer of
the preceding will, I doubt not, be equally pleased with ourselves to learn that
the results of the valuation ordered by the Isle of Wight A.M.C., so far as they
have been proceeded with, tend to show that when completed and compared
with that of 1871, a very considerable diminution of the deficiency then stated
will have been effected, and the advantages of periodical valuations fully
demonstrated. As a remarkable instance, I will refer to the Liverpool District,
which at the end of 1870 was deficient £11,464 3s. lid., but by the end of 1875
they had cleared that amount off and placed the sum of £305 6s. lid. to
surplus. Now, whether this has been done by a system of self-abnegation, or
improved investment of capital, or a combination of both, it proves the con-
servative tendency of periodical stock-taking, also that working men are
prepared to do that which the results derived from their own experience show
to be necessary.
During the past year a large number of applications for appropriation of
surplus capital have been received and allowed, but I regret to say that except
in very few instances the consideration that might have been expected towards
lodges in the same district, which are in need of assistance, has not been
shown, especially when examples have been set embodying that vital principle
81
THE ANNUAL MOVABLE COMMITTEE.


of brotherly love and unity enunciated by the Great Master, “ Bear ye one
another’s burthens.”
My friend and colleague, P.G.M. Cox, in that most elaborate and exhaustive
address he delivered last year, gave you a very lucid statement as to recent legis-
lation, and the confidence he then evinced that it would be found to be generally
acceptable has been fully verified, no less than fifty-seven districts having
already registered under the new law, and I have great pride in being able to
state that the South London District and the Sons of the Thames Lodge, in
that district, are the pioneers in the establishment of a really grand “Unity,”
in the place of the myth that has hitherto been so named. I have been
amazed at the weak and shallow objections which have been raised against
registration and also at the imputations cast upon its supporters, many of
whom will have been gathered to their fathers years before the results of their
efforts can be proved, and who therefore can have no other motive for their
action than the future welfare of the institution, and I am indeed proud to
know that in this association it is felt that no doubt should be allowed to exist
as to the honesty of our intentions towards each other. We therefore desire
to be legally bound together in preference to remaining under that moral tie,
which, reduced to the standard of common sense, simply means a loophole for
escaping liabilities when it becomes convenient. This is a matter that I look
upon as one of the past, except to see how we can best adapt ourselves to its
provisions, and if in so doing we find that some modification or further
improvements are required, I am fully convinced, judging from past experience,
that upon due representation being made, not with bated breath or loss of one
jot of independence, but with that due consideration towards those who have
the initiation of such matters, , such alteration or improvement may be
obtained.
This leads me on to a matter upon which I trust the remarks I have just
made will be applicable. I allude to the alteration in the Poor-Law Act of
1876, under the provision of which the trustees of all our branches are made
ex officio collectors for the several Poor-Law Unions in which they are situated.
Having myself, a few years ago, proposed the rule in reference to the sick pay
of lunatic members, I cannot see this attempt made to circumvent our rule
without calling your attention thereto, also of asking you to consider the
propriety of taking some means to frustate it. I know it is not my province
to discuss the proposed alterations of rules, but I should be unworthy of the
position I now hold, or of the still higher one to which I aspire, were I to
entirely sink my individuality as a member of this society. I trust you will
therefore pardon me if I exhort you to stand fast by the first clause of your
63rd rule, also if I take this opportunity of expressing the opinion that unless
you resist this encroachment upon your liberties to the very utmost, and
warning you that if you once allow your right to make your own conditions
upon which the benefits shall be paid to be questioned, that moment do you
sound the knell of your independence, and instead of being an association for
the prevention of pauperism you simply become an adjunct of the Local
Government Board for its relief. With these views, and believing I was acting
in support of an established rule, I have already taken some action in con-
junction with the Executive Council of the Ancient Order of Foresters (to
whom I here express my thanks for their courtesy), and I venture to hope that
my conduct in this matter will meet with your approval, for I am convinced
that if it had been suggested to insert a clause to the effect named in the
Friendly Societies Act it would have been met with instant and successful
opposition.
And here let me further remark that the Parliamentary legislation which
allows clauses affecting the working of friendly societies to be tacked on to
any Act that may be passing is fraught with danger and should be resisted.


During my year of office I have experienced the greatest kindness from my
colleagues on the Board, and also from a large number of members of the
various districts to which I have been invited, and for which I now publicly
tender my best thanks. To my friend (or should I not rather say our friend ?),
Mr. Henry Ratcliffe, I am much indebted for the courteous attention he has at
all times extended to me, and I am sure you all rejoice with me that he is
in the enjoyment of greatly improved health, also that the services he has
rendered to the friendly society cause have been recognised by his appointment
under the Treasury Department as one of the Public Valuers under the Act,
and I sincerely hope he may live for many years honoured and respected by
those for whom he has worked so long and so well. _ _ ■
Brethren, just a few words more in conclusion. We are living in a
momentous period, when all the evil nature of mankind is being excited,
backed by those mighty engines of destruction which have so recently been
invented. May the wisdom of our rulers enable them to retain us in a neutral
position ; but should wise efforts be unavailing, and our nation unfortunately
be drawn into the mMte, it will be found that while our principles are founded
upon the glorious axiom of “Peace on earth and goodwill to men,” the holy
fire of patriotism and love of country still burns with unabated intensity in
the hearts of our members. Let us hope the exhibition of this may not be
required, but that the heroism of our members may be confined to emulating
the feat of three of the brave Arctic explorers, Brothers Ayles, Wood, and
Woodley, of Portsmouth, who have planted the banner of Oddfellowship in
the highest latitude ever reached side by side with that glorious emblem of
freedom, the English Union Jack. Honour to them for their brave attempt
to explore the unknown ; still greater honour to them for the idea of placing
that flag in a spot where possibly in ages yet to come its beneficent meanings
may bear glorious fruit, and the oft-expressed desire be fully realised that the
blessings of Oddfellowship may reach from pole to pole.
DIRECTORS’ REPORT.
The Directors submitted their report, which first referred to the death of the
late Grand Master of the Order, Mr. John Geves, of Leeds, and stated that as
he had fallen ill and died whilst attending a Board meeting officially last
November, subject to the approval of the A.M.C., they directed all the expenses
connected with his illness and funeral to be defrayed out of the funds of the
Unity. They also forwarded an address of condolence, inscribed on vellum,
to Mrs. Geves ; but the question of erecting some suitable memorial over
deceased’s grave, as had been urged upon them by deputations from Ashton-
under-Lyne and Oldham Districts, they decided to refer to the A.M.C., not
feeling justified in personally incurring further expense. The death of Mr.
Geves caused a vacancy on the directory, and as there was no provision for
filling it under the then existing circumstances they requested the attention of
the sub-committee to the fact. They were gratified to be able to congratulate
the Unity on the steady increase of members. The number on the Ist of
January last was 518,370, being a gain of 10,357 on the year, after deducting
deaths, suspensions, and secessions. During the year, 33,646 members weie
initiated, of whom 23,155 were under 25 years of age, being 75 per cent of the
whole number admitted to the Order. At the last A.M.C. a proposition from the
Rotherham District was referred to them for compelling every district to form a
superannuation fund, to provide weekly benefits instead of sick pay to members
of lodges after 18 months’ illness; and the Directors were of opinion that, however
desirable it may be to establish such funds, it was not advisable to make them com-
pulsory, and, if sanctioned, the rule should only be permissive. The necessary
83
THE ANNUAL MOVABLE COMMITTEE.


tables already existed in Mr. Ratcliffe’s works for superannuation allowance to
members at given ages ; but it would be practically impossible to prepare
tables for pensions dependent upon the accident of permanent sickness
occurring. As to clearances, also referred to the Directors at last A.M.C., the
Board considered, looking at the facilities for remitting contributions and
benefits, and the fact that the different arrangements of trade societies had
greatly reduced the number of members shifting from town to town, the
existing rule as to clearances should remain undisturbed until there is a nearer
approach to uniformity of contributions and benefits throughout the Unity.
As to annuities to widows of members, and funeral benefits at their death, also
referred to them by the Ryde A.M.C., the Directors had caused tables to be
prepared, but refrained from proposing their insertion in the rules until they
had been before the Order a sufficient time for consideration. As requested by
the Ryde A.M.C., they had communicated with the American Independent
Order of Oddfellows as to members being mutually allowed to visit each other’s
lodges, and the correspondence would be submitted to that meeting. They
regretted that they had been obliged to suspend several lodges for neglecting to
make valuation returns before the 31st December last, as ordered by the Ryde
A.M.C. As these returns would be required in future at every
quinquennial period, they recommended the adoption of a rule inflicting
a substantial fine upon secretaries who failed to make the returns at
the required time, as failure to do so caused great trouble and loss
of time to the C.S. of the Order, and the suspension of lodges inflicted
a serious penalty upon the members, who were not in a position to
enforce the performance of this duty. Already over one-third of the
valuations of lodges in the Unity had been completed and published, and, it
was hoped, would be concluded in time to be laid before the next A.M.C.
Very gratifying results had already been presented of previous deficiencies
having in the last five years been swept away, and surpluses accumulated
instead,- in proof of which they cited the Liverpool District, mentioned by the
Deputy Grand Master in his opening address. Although in some cases, where
the lowest rates of contribution were being paid, the increased contribution had
been felt to be a hardship, in justice to the younger members, and for the
credit of the society, the principle had been upheld, even at some sacrifice on
the part of several members by whose unselfishness the extra contributions
have been paid. The Parliamentary Agent, Mr. James Curtis, of Brighton,
had at an interview pressed upon the Chancellor of the Exchequer the needless-
ness of the registrar’s certificate of death required by the Friendly Societies
Act to be produced before payment of funeral benefits, as each lodge of the
Unity had its own medical officer, on whose certificate that of the registrar
himself was founded. The Chancellor admitted that the provision might not
be necessary as a safeguard in the cases of the Manchester Unity and the
Foresters; but he believed it would be undesirable to alter the law in
this particular, and it was a subject upon which he had not made up his mind
without great hesitation and attention. Rethought it would be better to wait
another year, and see how the bill worked in the meantime. The Registrar-
General had also declined to permit the Unity to publish its own form of
application for the registrar’s certificate. The Directors left it for the A.M.C.
to say what action should be taken as to these matters in the future. In the
case of a member dying abroad, a certificate would not be required from the
registrar of any foreign country, but funeral money could legally be paid on
satisfactory proof of the member’s death. After enumerating the 57 districts
which have registered under the Friendly Societies Act, the Directors expressed
gratification that the new district and lodge rules are being prepared in a
manner insuring greater uniformity than has hitherto been attained. They
expressed conviction, also, that when the subject of registration has been


thoroughly ventilated and is fully understood there will remain only very few
districts or lodges which will not have accepted a principle that, whilst binding
the branches of the Order into one solid whole, will still leave them full power
to regulate their own local requirements, and, above all, retain the independent
control of their own funds. Numerous applications to appropriate surplus
capital had been sanctioned during last .year. The surplus had been chiefly
confined to an increase of sick or funeral benefits, the assistance of management
expenses, or the reduction of annual premiums. They had adopted a principle
that members who had not belonged to the Order five years should not partici-
pate in the distribution of surpluses, and they recommended this should be added
to the rules. Since the last A.M.C. 49 lodges had been opened in England, and
three in the colonies, and the Twycross Friendly Society, now Earl Howe Lodge
of the Atherstone District, impressed by the advantages of the Unity, had
bodily raised their contributions to make the society solvent, and then joined
the Order. Having mentioned that they had decided that holding the office of
trustee does not exempt a member from filling any other, except secretary or
treasurer, the Directors stated, in reply to a question from Nottingham, that
past grand lodges can only be registered as branches of the Manchester
Unity when the Unity levy is paid for every member, as in other lodges.
They had fully considered and discussed the 23rd clause in the Poor-Law
Amendment Act, 1876, and in reply to an invitation from the Executive
Council of the Ancient Order of Foresters to take joint action with
them in endeavouring to get it repealed, they had replied that the
importance of the subject warranted them in referring it for discussion to
the A.M.C., as the date for its meeting was so near at hand, and it would
afford an opportunity of obtaining a free expression of opinion of the members
upon a subject which is being greatly agitated in various parts of the country.
The final clause related to a case tried at the Wellingborough County Court,
the decision of the judge being to establish that so long as the arbitration
rule remained unrescinded it was binding upon lodges which seceded from the
Unity. The Directors considered it should be urged upon the Registrar of
Friendly Societies not to permit lodges to rescind the arbitration rule until an
arrangement had been entered in to pay an equitable share of the funds
to every member desirous of continuing in the Unity. The report was received,
but not discussed until Wednesday’s sitting.
AUDITORS’ REPORT.
The auditors also submitted their report of the Unity funds, which are wholly
separate from those of lodges and districts. The cash balances were : General
Fund, £1,314 15s. 6d. ; Valuation Account, £864 15s. 4d. ; and Distressed
Operatives Fund, £llß 7s. sd. ; making a total of £2,297 18s. 3d. The profits
on goods sold had slightly increased during the year, and that on the sale of
the Magazine was more favourable, but still in their opinion not satisfactory.
The cost of management had been the same as previous years, the Parliamen-
tary expenses connected with the passing of the Friendly Societies Amend-
ment Act being the only item of importance. On the £549 Bs. 4d. owing to
the Unity by districts the greater proportion is due from foreign and colonial
ones. Having urged the importance of all money owing to the Unity being
paid before the end of the year, they recommended that the Unity property in
Manchester should be insured for something nearer its real value than £l,lOO,
so as to prevent the danger of heavy loss occurring, and recommended that the
£llß 7s. sd. to the credit of the Distressed Operatives Fund should be invested
m a way they suggested, at 3 to 3J per cent, subject only to three months’
85
THE ANNUAL MOVABLE COMMITTEE.


notice of withdrawal. In conclusion, the auditors expressed their warmest
thanks to Mr. Ratcliffe, the respected C.S. of the Order, for the assistance he
rendered, and complimented him on the admirable way in which the books were
kept. This report was discussed on Thursday. The remainder of the sitting
was occupied in the appointment of the various sub-committees.
TUESDAY, MAY 22.
THE C.S. OP THE ORDER,
Past Grand Masters Schofield and Watson reported that, as deputed by
the A.M.C. on Monday, they paid a visit to Mr. Henry Ratcliffe, the
C.S. of the Order, who, for the first time during the twenty-nine years
he has held that office, has been prevented by severe indisposition from
attending and discharging his duties at the A.M.C.—Mr. Schofield said they
found Mr. Ratcliffe confined to his bed, and suffering extreme pain from an
attack of rheumatic gout, from which he had occasionally suffered for years,
and which he believed had now been induced by attending in that room on
Saturday last to make the necessary preliminary arrangements for the A.M.C.
Mr. Ratcliffe evinced great anxiety that everything had been done to facilitate
the business and to insure the comfort of the deputies. They were informed
by him that even under the most favourable circumstances some days
would probably elapse before he could possibly leave his room. He had
authorised them to make a communication to the A.M.C. which would be
received with extreme regret. It was that, after 29 years’ service as
C.S. of the Order, he desired at the end of another year to resign
the office he had so long and ably filled, if his life should be spared until the
time named. Mr. Ratcliffe thought this communication should be made at
the present time, in order that the Directors might have the ensuing year to
look about for a suitable successor, which, Mr. Schofield said, it would
indeed be difficult to find. Some years ago he had the pleasure of proposing
the advance of his salary, and he might truly say that if he had devoted
his talents and abilities to mercantile pursuits he would readily and easily
have obtained four times the salary paid him as the C.S. of the Man-
chester Unity. The time had now come when it would have to be con-
sidered whether, after the years of zealous services ho had given to the
Order, he should not be granted a retiring pension. Personally he thought
it should not be less than the salary he now received. He thought the Order
would be wanting in gratitude to Mr. Ratcliffe if this matter were not favourably
entertained next year. Many who were secretaries of districts, who had
attended previous annual meetings, would be personally aware of his many
estimable qualities ; but to those who had not had facilities for becoming
acquainted with their worthy C.S., he might say that a better man, a kinder-
hearted gentleman, or a more agreeable social companion never existed. Mr.
Ratcliffe was now nearly 69 years of age, and, therefore, it was not
surprising, after the arduous duties he had for so many years discharged
in connection with the Order, that his vital powers were now failing, and
his health declining.—Mr Watson heartily endorsed all that Mr. Schofield
had said about the valuable services and excellent qualities of Mr. Ratcliffe,
and added that he was very anxious to complete the second of the quin-
quennial valuations of assets and liabilities now being made throughout
the Order. Mr. Ratcliffe expressed great confidence that he should be
able to satisfactorily complete this great and important work before the time
he had named for resigning the onerous position he now held in connection
with the Unity.—The Grand Master said that no one was more indifferent to


flattery than Mr. Ratcliffe, but on the other hand no one valued more the
goodwill and friendship of his fellow-men. He would, therefore, suggest that
some official notice should be taken of the communication just made, which
would be received with regret throughout the Order as well as by that A.M.C.
It was decided to refer the matter to the sub-committee.—Mr. Schofield added
that they had requested Mr. Ratcliffe to take two or three days to consider the
subject, but he said that he found his health so uncertain that his mind was
fully and conclusively made up not to retain the office when he could not
satisfactorily discharge the duties.
REPORTS OF COMMITTEES.
The Relief Committee’s report, which simply recommended that Bro. Nield, of
Oldham, should be granted a sum of £5, was formally adopted. That of the
new Districts Committee was also passed without discussion. The only appli-
cations granted were that the Stonehouse District should be allowed to change
its name to the Stroud District ; and that the Phoenix Lodge, Watford, should
be allowed to form a new Watford District, and that the British Queen Lodge,
Turner, should be allowed to join it. The report of the Estimates Committee
was also formally passed. The chief successful tenders were those of Messrs.
Broadbent, Huddersfield; Hey wood, Manchester; Johnson and Jessyman,
York ; Williams, Newport; Hind and Co., Manchester ; and M‘Clelaud, Hud-
dersfield.
A difficulty arose shortly after two o’clock in consequence of the rules
specifying that the report of the sub-committee should next be considered, and
though in the hands of the printer it had not been completed. Objection was
taken to the meeting proceeding with the consideration of propositions for
amending the general laws of the Order ; and therefore there was no alternative
but for the meeting to adjourn until this morning, as a proposition for holding
an evening meeting was defeated.
In the evening, at a social gathering in Duckworth’s Assembly Rooms, Mrs.
J. Swindells presented the Oldham District with a splendid new banner from
Mr. Whaite’s establishment, on behalf of the ladies of Oldham.
WEDNESDAY, MAY 23.
THE REPORT OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE.
Mr. Collins, of Wolverhampton, as the chairman of the sub-committee,
read their report, reviewing the proceedings of the Grand Master and
Board of Directors during the past year. They approved of the expenses
of the illness and funeral of the late Grand Master Geves having been paid
out of the funds of the Unity, and endorsed the expressions of condolence
the Directors addressed to his widow, Mrs. Geves. As to the position of
Mr. Cox in relation to the directory, owing to the death of Mr. Geves, they as a
committee had no power to submit a proposition on the subject, as the A.M.C.
had only power to elect nine members. Nor did they consider it necessary to
do so, as in the case which had occurred, Mr. Cox, being the last Past Grand
Master, was therefore entitled to a seat at the Board. They approved of the
correspondence between the Secretary of the Manchester Unity and the Grand
Secretary of the American Independent Order of Oddfellows. As to the
members of each society visiting the other’s lodges, and believing this would be
of a pleasing and satisfactory nature to the members of both societies,
they suggested that the subject should be left to the Directors, with
a request to continue their efforts to achieve the object in view. They
approved of some wealthy lodges having appropriated* surplus capital
87
THE ANNUAL MOVABLE COMMITTEE.


to relieve other distressed lodges, as such generosity was giving practical
effect to benevolent principles inculcated in the rules of the Order. They
were gratified to find that many districts and lodges have taken prompt action
to register their rules under the Friendly Societies Act. This subject was of
paramount interest to the Order, as the Directors had been compelled to refuse
dispensations to open new lodges in unregistered districts, because of the
anomalous position in which lodges would be placed under such circumstances.
They cordially endorsed the action of the Directors in this matter. The
importance of adopting measures to effect the registration must be patent to
every thinking member of the society ; and the committee therefore strongly
recommended that every district and lodge should as soon as possible take the
necessary steps to register, and thus make the society what it is now but in name,
the Manchester Unity Friendly Society. As to lodges being allowed to
appropriate surplus capital, they respectfully directed the attention of the
A.M.C. to the very large amount of capital which will necessarily be withdrawn
from the reserve funds of the Unity under the present system of allowing two-
thirds of the surplus to be appropriated ; and they recommended that the general
law on this most important question should be altered at the next A.M.C., so
that in no instance shall more than one-half of such surplus be appropriated,
especially in the cases of small lodges, where the danger of such appropriation
is considerably increased by the want of their experiencing an average amount
of sickness. The committee regretted the Directors had been obliged to
suspend several lodges for not supplying the returns ordered at the Ryde
A.M.C. for the quinquennial valuations now being prepared, and they
hoped members generally will see the necessity of complying with the
requirements of the Executive when acting under the directions of an A.M.C.
The committee respectfully called attention to the fact that there seemed a
disposition on the part of the Directors to submit to the sub-committee questions
which the time at their disposal did not allow them to do full justice to, and
which they were of opinion might be more deliberately and satisfactorily dealt
with by the Directors themselves at their board meetings. The Directors, *they
considered, were entitled to the thanks of the meeting for their services, which
the Friendly Societies Act and the Treasury regulations under it had rendered
unusually arduous. Referring to Mr. Ratcliffe’s severe illness and contemplated
resignation at the next A.M.C., the committee regretted the cause which
necessitated the step, and sympathised with Mr. Ratcliffe in his suffering.
They attributed the great success the society had attained largely to the
energies, zeal, and ability of Mr. Ratcliffe, with whose name it would always be
largely associated. They felt the subject to be one which required the very
gravest and most serious consideration, and that if Mr. Ratcliffe persisted in
the determination to retire next year the Directors should then be prepared
with some scheme which will relieve Mr. Ratcliffe of the onerous duties at
present attached to his position, and yet enable the Unity to retain him in
some honorary position, where his great experience and advice on matters
affecting the welfare of the institution would be available, and the efforts of a
lifetime be not overlooked in retirement.
The meeting first discussed the various clauses in the sub-committee’s
report.—Mr. Collins, the chairman of the committee, referred to the death of
Mr. Geves, which, he said, was unprecedented in the history of the society, no
previous Grand Master of the Unity having died during his year of office.—Mr.
Scafe (Leeds) asked why the whole expenses of the funeral had not been paid;
and another deputy (Newton Heath) pointed out that the cost of the vault,
about £ll, had not been so met.—Past Grand Master Curtis said the Board of
Directors had intended by their resolution that the necessary expenses
should be borne by the Unity funds.—lt was stated, in reply to a Liverpool
delegate, that the Directors considered the correspondence with the American


Independent Order of Oddfellows, as to members being allowed to visit each
other’s lodges, likely to lead to the desired result. The clause urging poor lodges
to take prompt action to put themselves in a sound financial condition was
also unanimously passed; as also the next one, commending those lodges and
districts which had already registered, and urging all others to do so without
delay, so as to make the Order really, and not merely nominally, the Manchester
Unity. As to the recommendation of the sub-committee, that the rule allowing
surplus funds to be appropriated, should be altered at the next A.M.C., so that
instead of two-thirds not more than one-half should be so appropriated, the
chairman of the committee stated that five years hardly gave a fair average of
sickness, and that in some cases where a surplus had been divided the next
five years had shown much heavier liabilities. Mr. Hicks (Southampton)
expressed a strong opinion that valuations should be based on only three per cent,
but this elicited strong dissent; but was endorsed by Past Grand Master Watson,
of Nottingham, who pointed to the fact that the value of money in this
country was depreciating, and that corporations and local companies instead of
paying five per cent, now obtained, loans readily at 3 and 3| per cent. The
only other clause which elicited any remark was that relating to the illness of
Mr. Ratcliffe, the C.S. of the Order, and his contemplated resignation, when
regret was again expressed, and the suggestion as to granting him a suitable
pension, and retaining for the Unity his valuable advice and practical experience
elicited hearty cheers.
THE DIRECTORS’ REPORT
Was discussed clause by clause. The meeting affirmed the retention of Past
Grand Master Cox as an ex officio member of the Board for another year, to fill the
vacancy that had been caused by the death of Grand Master Geves. The retire-
ment of Mr. Lovsey (Worcester) from the directory of the Order was acknow-
ledged by a hearty vote of thanks ; and in reply to an appeal to reconsider his
decision, Mr. Lovsey said that he regretted that indifferent health and other
circumstances rendered it impossible for him to accede to the request. The
clause relating to the numerical strength of the Order—being now 518,370,
and that out of the 33,646 initiated during the year 75 per cent, were under
twenty-five years of age—was received with great cheering. The meeting
endorsed, by passing without question, the recommendation of the Directors,
that further time should be given for the consideration of the tables they had
prepared for securing funeral benefits to widows of members, and annuities to
the same; and also their expression of opinion that until there is a nearer
approach to uniformity between the contributions and benefits throughout the
Order, the law as to clearances should not be altered. The clause relating to the
Friendly Societies Act requiring the certificate of a registrar of deaths before
payment of funeral benefits, and the Chancellor of the Exchequer having declined
to undertake the responsibility of rescinding this clause of the Act of Parliament,
which he thought ought to be practically tested for a few years. Mr. Schofield,
°f Bradford, explained that the object of the Directors with regard to clause 12
was to elicit the feeling of the A.M. C. on the principle upon which they had acted
when sanctioning the appropriation of surplus funds. After a lengthy debate,
J t was decided to abandon the clause in the Directors’ report, and an amend-
ment was unanimously adopted to the effect that the meeting strongly
recommended that the members of lodges should consider the desirability of
such surplus funds being applied towards the formation of annuities for aged
Members. The Directors’ report was all disposed of, with the exception of that
uniting the opinion of the meeting as to the desirability of co-operating with
the Executive Committee of the Foresters, in endeavouring to obtain the repeal
°f the 23rd clause of the Poor-Law Amendment Act, the consideration of
which was postponed until Thursday.
89
THE ANNUAL MOVABLE COMMITTEE.


THE BANQUET.
In the evening a grand banquet was given to the deputies by the Oldham
and neighbouring districts at Mr. Jennison’s large room, Belle Vue Gardens.
The usual toasts were given and responded to. The proceedings passed
off with great eclat. The chair was occupied by the Hon. E. Lyulph
Stanley, who said it gave him great pleasure to rise and propose the toast
of the evening. It was now five years since he had the pleasure of attending
the A.M.C. at Lancaster. Those of them who met him at that time
would know how deeply interested he was in the society. From the work
he then had to do he thought he owed the great honour they had con-
ferred upon him of being appointed to preside at this meeting. In that great
work he came in as a learner, and he might say he learned a great deal
that was most valuable to all who took an interest in politics and in the
social well-being of their country. He thought that that commission on
which he served was of great service—he did not mean of service to friendly
societies only in the sense that Mr. Curtis spoke of it and its subsequent legis-
lation—it was of great service, because in the work of the commission he
thought he might say the friendly societies of England, and particularly and
above all the Manchester Unity of Oddfellows, educated, amongst others, two
men who now sat in the Cabinet of England. He had no doubt that if Sir
Stafford Northcote and Sir Michael Hicks-Beach were here to-day they would
tell them they learned a great deal about the working classes in course of that
inquiry; that their views of these classes were modified ; that their confidence
in them was vastly increased, by what they learned of the working of those
self-acting and self-governed institutions they were appointed to investigate.
Nobody could doubt —this was not flattering his hearers, it was speaking the
simple truth—that of the friendly societies of England the Manchester Unity
stood a far and long way ahead. They were the oldest of these societies. He
believed this was their fifty-fifth Annual Movable Committee held in uninter-
rupted succession from the year 1822. Let them look round at the nations of
Europe. No nation of Europe outside ourselves could point to an unbroken
series of 55 annually elected parliaments. But though the Unity had not had
their career interrupted by revolution, they had had the wisdom to alter their
constitution from time to time by introducing reforms. They had grappled
with secession; they had seen lodges desert them by hundreds when whole-
some reform was introduced. He hoped, however, those dark days had gone
by for ever, and that the Manchester Unity, now and henceforward, might
fearlessly undertake to carry out any reform, whether financial or adminis-
trative, which the wisdom of those who had control of their affairs might
suggest, and that any danger in future, such as that which upset it in the years
1844-5-6, might never come again. To whom did the Manchester Unity owe
its great and prosperous condition ? Let him just say a word or two upon their
prosperous condition, because, although they knew their own affairs better than
he did, still there were others outside for whom he might mention one or two facts
about their society. It was a great thing for the Manchester Unity to say it now
numbered half a million and more of grown-up men, who made contributions
and participated in the benefits of the society. What a vast number that was
secured from the inevitable consequences which followed sickness and other
infirmities, to which they were all exposed. His hearers ought to know
well enough —-and none better—that it was not necessarily large numbers
that constituted stability. They understood well enough that as they increased
their numbers they increased their liabilities, and unless they had a good
balance at the bank to set against those liabilities, the increase of members
only brought an increase of risk. Let him congratulate them there that
they showed an accumulated capital of nearly 4J millions sterling. That


was something like £8 per member. When he was investigating their affairs
about six years ago, their funds amounted to an average of about £6 per
member, so that they had so far improved ; but they knew it was not merely
go much per member that constituted the stability of a lodge, and it was not by
counting up money, and saying they were worth £(5 or £7 per head, that they
were secure from financial difficulty. Taking a rough estimate, he did not find
that the average age of thfeir members had materially increased in these last
six years. What they required, if they wanted to know the solvency of a
society, was to test its capital by actual valuations. Six years ago this
society had manfully grappled with this difficulty, and they had under-
taken an immense enterprise of making a valuation of the whole society
for the first time. That was a work which the professional actuaries
in London would have shrunk from, because it was so enormous and
so great. They knew many benevolent and philanthropic persons—much as
they insisted upon a valuation—found that the charges of actuaries were so
high that it was almost impossible to ask friendly societies to submit to
investigations; but their secretary, Mr. Ratcliffe, who had earned the
gratitude not only of this society, for whom he had worked so long and so
faithfully, and had spent his health and strength in their service, so that now
in the evening of life he was forced to retire from his long labours, and to whom
they had thought fit to offer a testimony of their substantial gratitude—Mr.
Ratcliffe had years ago drawn up these actuarial tables, which had been adopted
as the bases of calculation by many actuaries. He brought out these tables,
which they were not afraid to test. Although they were proclaimed insolvent,
they had that true courage and true honesty which preferred to know the
facts, and state the facts, rather than live in a fool’s paradise and say, “ It will
last our time.” They were not prepared to bring in young men tempted by
an apparent surplus to pay the liability of the old instead of accumulating the
money to meet their own liabilities. They were determined to find out
how they stood, and to find out financial laws which would remedy the
deficiency. Looking at their last quarterly reports, so far as the valua-
tions had been published, he saw a marked improvement in many of their
lodges, and in many of their districts. It was quite clear that many of them
had grappled with the evil, being determined to surmount it. He looked
through the district of Truro—he hoped there was a delegate from Truro
present in order that he might congratulate him on what Cornwall had done,
and upon that valuation. What Truro had done in that valuation at three
per cent, why should not the whole Manchester Unity do, if the members
would determine in their districts and lodges to do what they should do—
namely, to equalise their benefits and raise the contributions when necessary,
and deal in such a way by the advice and experience of their wise members as
would enable them in five years hence not to show a deficiency in any district ?
Looking through these valuations, he was pleased to find in the South-West
of England—where Oddfellowship had more recently developed than in Lan-
cashire and Yorkshire —he was pleased to find, not only in Cornwall, but in
Devonshire, the lodges were solvent, and in Gloucestershire there was the same
result. When they looked nearer home, and glanced at Lancashire and the West
hiding of Yorkshire, he was sorry to say the valuation told a very different
tale. He thought the holding of this annual conference in Lancashire might
do good work. He was glad they had met in Oldham, for when they considered
the financial condition of -the district it made his heart bleed. He might say
this—that he hoped the holding of this conference, and the coming in contact
with the picked men in the Order throughout the country would stimulate the
people of Oldham, and that the members of that district would determine that
hye years hence their position should be very different to what it is now. He
did not think Oldham could stand up firmly upon its legs altogether unaided,
91
THE ANNUAL MOVABLE COMMITTEE.


and tie hoped that something in the way of assistance would he extended
towards them ; and he hoped, also, that the Oldham District would take care
that the new members did not pay the liabilities of the old members. It was
a sad thing to consider that whereas ten years ago the Manchester Unity in the
district of Oldham numbered 2,500 members, it now only numbered 1,760
members. It had gone back more than 800 in those ten years, and he
was afraid unless a change was made the numbers might go back still
further.- It was not for the sake of the 1,760 members that he wanted
new ones to join, but for the sake of the young men of Oldham, that they
might have a sound, efficient, and well-managed society to go into, and
because if the Oldham District of the Manchester Unity was in a shaky
condition, the other orders in Oldham were in a ten times more shaky
condition. He knew quite well how helpless the young men were when
joining a friendly society. They ought to be able to know that when
they paid their contributions they would get their full benefit in old age
or in time of sickness, instead of the money going to meet the liabilities of the
older members. He hoped no one would think he was speaking unkindly of
Lancashire and Yorkshire when he said they were behind the other counties in
England. Why were they behind ? It was because fifty years ago they were
ahead of all the rest of England. The Manchester Unity, as its name implied,
took its rise here, and the rest of England profited by their experience. They
found out their mistakes at their own expense, and the other orders were
benefitted by it. They were now paying the price for their learning, of
which others had reaped the benefit. The oldest lodge in Oldham was opened
in 1814. That carried them back to a time before most of the people in that
room were born. Again, just think how far back it took them in the history
of Oddfellowship. The chairman then referred to the bright side of the
Oldham District, pointing out the Educational Fund, and the assistance given to
the children of widows by the payment of school fees. He concluded by
wishing long-continued and increasing prosperity to the Manchester Unity of
Oddfellows, and to all its members long life.
At the conclusion of the meeting the deputies perambulated the gardens,
and inspected the various objects of interest. The entertainments concluded
by a most magnificent display of fireworks, which elicited marked expressions
of approval both for their brilliancy and artistic arrangement. Mr. Danson’s
clever picture of the Morava Valley and the great battle before Alexinatz was
likewise much admired.
THURSDAY, MAY 24.
THE HEALTH OF C.S. RATCLIPPE.
The President, at the opening of the proceedings, made the gratifying
announcement, which was received with great cheering, that Mr. Ratcliffe, the
C.S. of the Order, was yesterday somewhat better.
A VISITOR.
The acting Grand Master introduced to the meeting the Hon. E. Lyulph
Stanley, who occupied the chair at the banquet in Manchester the previous
night, and he was received with great cheering, in response to which he made
a few remarks.
THE OFFICERS OF THE ORDER.
The only person nominated for the post of Grand Master of the Order for
the ensuing year was the present Deputy Grand Master, Mr. J. J. Holmes, of


London. Four decided to compete for the distinction of Deputy Grand
Master of the Unity : Thomas Flannagan, Prov. C.S., of Manchester ; Joseph
Riley, Prov. C.S., of Halifax ; Robert Williamson, P. Prov. G.M. of Hull ; and
Thos. A. Woodbridge, P. Prov. G.M., of London. Thirty-two candidates
elected to go to the poll for the nine vacancies on the Board of the Directors for
the ensuing year ; and the following eleven districts for the A.M.C. of 1878—
Accrington, Cardiff, Edinburgh, Exeter, Salisbury, Gloucester, Lynn, Notting-
ham, Rotherham, Stockport, and Stockton.
THE LATE GRAND MASTER.
Mr. Curtis, of Brighton, referring to the statements made on Wednesday
respecting some of the necessary expenses Connected with the funeral of the
late Grand Master Geves not having been paid, explained that Mr. Ratcliffe had
not felt justified in paying some bills without first submitting them to the
Board of Directors. When this had been done every necessary expense would
be defrayed out of the remaining funds. The Newton Heath deputies, whose
district had made the funeral arrangements, expressed their satisfaction and
thanks. As to the proposed memorial to Mr. Geves, it was stated that some
few districts had subscribed over £3O for the object; and in reply to a sugges-
tion that any money raised might be more usefully devoted to the benefit of
the widow and family of the late Grand Master, it was explained that some
grant was contemplated towards the close of the meeting.
THE SICK BENEFITS OF LUNATIC AND PAUPER MEMBERS.
Nearly the whole of the morning sitting was occupied by a debate on the
2Brd clause of the Poor-Law Amendment Act, 1876, which has evoked
considerable opposition amongst friendly societies throughout the country,
because it enables boards of guardians, if they choose, to claim the sick
benefits of lunatic or pauper members who become recipients of poor-law
relief. Great diversity of opinion was expressed on the subject. The
opponents of the provision argued that it was an unfair interference with the
liberty of the society, which had a right absolutely to determine to whom its
benefits should be paid, and in the cases in question they directed they should
go to the wife and family of any such member. It was not enough, they
contended, that the power thus conferred had not been abused ; but the Act
bad not long been in force, and it was quite impossible to tell how the
guardians might act in the future. On the other hand, a considerable number
of delegates took the view that the common sense of the guardians would
always prevent their using the powers of the Act to the prejudice of members
of friendly societies, because the sick benefits of members would not be at all
commensurate with the burden that would be imposed upon the rates if, on
being deprived of the sick pay, the families of members became chargeable to
the poor rates. It was eventually decided that the Directors should be
instructed to take such steps as they thought proper, either to secure the
repeal of the objectionable clause of the Act in question, or such alteration of
it as would prevent its being used to the detriment of members of friendly
societies. A proposition to petition Parliament in favour of its repeal was
withdrawn, the feeling of the meeting being obviously in favour of the
Directors exercising their own discretion.
MEMBERS OF A SECEDED LODGE.
The case of the Whitworth Lodge (Northamptonshire) and its members, the
majority of which had seceded from the Unity in opposition to the rules,
resulted in the Directors being directed to take such steps in the matter as they
might think proper. A proposition for requiring the Directors to take steps to


reinstate the first of the expelled members, P.G.M. Copson, m whose favour
the iudge of the Wellingborough County Court had already given a favourable
decision, and for security for those members of the lodge desirous of remaining
in the Unity, was defeated.
auditors’ report.
The auditors’ report was next discussed. The report was published on
Tuesday. The discussion related principally to the increased expenses of the
directory, those of the Parliamentary Agent, and some of the minor expenses
attendant on the holding of the A.M.C. The observations of the auditors as to
the desirableness of the Magazine being devoted more to matters relating solely
to friendly societies were endorsed by some speakers, and that the practice of
sending it out so long a time after it was published should be rectified. Ihe
recommendation as to increasing the insurance of the Unity property in
Manchester to something more approximate to its value than £l,1 00 was
unanimously approved. The report was then adopted.
THE UNITY EXPENDITURE.
A discussion arose out of the auditors report as to the of
details being given of some of the principal items of expenditure, in connection
with the Unity, and notably the Directors’ expenses. It was urged that at
least the number of days they attended the various Board meetings should be
given. The intention of casting any reflection on the auditors, to whom these
details were annually submitted, was emphatically disclaimed ; and to the
suggestion that this would make the report so voluminous that few delegates
would be able to examine the auditors’ report, it was decided, by 142 votes to
110 that in future full details of all expenses connected with the management
of the Unity should be given, and in order to show that by this no reflection
was intended to be cast upon the auditors, a vote of thanks to them for their
services during the past year was carried unanimously, and was acknowledged
by Mr. Pownall, of Woolwich, the senior auditor.
THE LAWS OF THE ORDER.
The revision of the rules of the Order was next commenced, but up to the
hour of adjournment no material change of principle was determined upon.
COMPLIMENTARY,
At the conclusion of the day’s business, a testimonial, consisting of a
salver and a gold eye-glass, with a brooch for Mrs. Lovsey, was presented by
P.G.M. Curtis, on behalf of the subscribers, to Past Grand Master Lovsey, of
Worcester, who had signified his intention of retiring from the directory, with
which he had been connected many years. Mr. Lovsey responded in very
feeling terms. _ , Q
A grand procession of friendly societies took place during the day, ana a
fete of the usual character was held in the volunteer field, at which about
10,000 persons attended.
FRIDAY, MAY 25.
The meeting proceeded with the revision of the General Laws, and the
consideration of some forty propositions from various districts for their altera-
tion. The great majority of them were of a comparatively trifling character.
Those of any moment or importance are briefly noticed below. The North
'London District brought forward a proposition for depriving the Board ot


Directors of the power they possess of submitting any proposition relating to
the amendment of the General Laws direct to the A.M.C., without its first
being submitted to some lodge, and afterwards at a district meeting. It was
argued that the proposition emanating from the Directors came to the A.M.C.
with an authority it ought not to possess; but the meeting repudiated the
idea of being thus influenced, and rejected the proposition by 225 votes to 49.
A motion from Glasgow for only revising the General Laws every three years,
instead of annually, was signally defeated by an overwhelming majority. The
75th law was so altered that district arbitrators may be objected to by appellant
or defendant until the number is reduced to ten only, instead of nine. The
Accrington delegates took exception to the meeting deciding to proceed to the
next business when one of their propositions was under consideration, and they
declared that they had some difficulty in getting their district to send repre-
sentatives to the A.M.C., because of the way in which they understood the
business was conducted ; and that when they reported they had not been
permitted fully to state their views on this question, they did not believe they
would ever again send delegates. The Bury St. Edmunds District submitted
an important proposition, authorising any district or lodge to form a superan-
nuation fund, and to fix the contributions, benefits, and when benefits shall be
paid, subject to the approval of the Directors for the time being. The value
and advantage of superannuation funds for old members was generally admitted,
but considerable diversity of opinion existed as to the practicableness of such a
project. It was eventually decided to allow the formation of superannuation
funds by lodges or districts, subject to the rates of contributions and benefits
being approved by the Directors. Several motions were made for reducing the
fees payable on the initiation of members, which it was urged was necessary to
compete with the Foresters and other friendly societies, but all were defeated,
and the present scale of initiation fees was retained.
DEATH OF MR. H. RATCLIFFE.
The President suspended the ordinary business to make an announcement
which was received with expressions of profound regret. It was that he had
just received the intelligence that Mr. Henry Ratcliffe, the Corresponding
Secretary of the Order, had expired at his residence in Manchester shortly
after eleven o’clock that morning. Under the circumstances he could not
trust himself to attempt even to make any remarks, and he would therefore
simply declare the meeting adjourned for an hour. This was done, and on
reassembling it was decided, out of compliment to Mr. Ratcliffe, to conclude
the business as speedily as possible, and with this object in view the remaining
propositions affecting the alteration of rules were adjourned until next year.
ELECTION OF GRAND MASTER.
Deputy Grand Master Holmes, of London, was unanimously elected Grand
Master of the Order for the ensuing year, on the proposition of Past Grand
Master Cox, seconded bv Past Grand Master Schofield. In acknowledging the
compliment, the Grand Master elect simply said that under the circumstances
he would not attempt to make any speech, but would merely say that he should
endeavour so to act as to deserve their confidence.
DEPUTY GRAND MASTER.
Pour candidates went to the poll for the office of Deputy Grand Master of
the Order, and at the first poll the votes were ; Mr. Riley, Halifax, 132 ; Mr.
Plannagan, Manchester, 130 ; Mr. Williamson, Hull, 61 ; and Mr. Woodbridge,
London, 5. As the law required the Deputy Grand Master to be elected by a
clear majority of the delegates present, the names of Messrs. Riley and
95
THE ANNUAL MOVABLE COMMITTEE.


Flannagan were submitted again, when the former received 850 votes to the
latter 196 votes, and Mr. Riley was consequently declared duly elected Deputy
Grand Master of the Order for the ensuing year. Past Grand Master Curtis
(Brighton) -was re-elected Parliamentary Agent of the Order, with the usual
honorarium of 15 guineas. A telegram was received, in answer to one
despatched by Grand Master Holmes, from Secretary Shawcross and the
Executive of the Ancient Order of Foresters, expressing deep regret at the
death of Mr. Ratcliffe, tendering their sincere sympathy, and stating that they
had been much shocked by the sad news. A similar telegram was received
from the Ashton Unity of Shepherds in annual session at Newport.
directors.
The contest for Directors resulted in the election of the following 9 out of
29 who went to the poll: Mr. Watson, Nottingham; Mr. Curtis, Brighton;
Mr. Schofield, Bradford; Mr. Flannagan, Manchester ; Mr. Western, Poole;
Mr. Pownall, Woolwich; Mr. Outram, Sheffield; Mr. Walton, Southampton;
and Mr. Warbrick, Lancaster. Messrs. Walton and Pownall take the places of
Messrs. Daynes and Lovsey, who decline re-election, and Mr. Cox, who
becomes ex officio a Director.
Exeter was selected as the town for the next Annual Movable Committee,
Edinburgh being second on the poll. The magazine portraits next year have
to be those of Messrs. Waring, Oldham ; Watts, Bristol; Smith, Wigan ; and
Hughes, Holywell. Oldham District was selected to appoint the junior Unity
auditor for next year. Fifty guineas were voted to Mrs. Geves, widow of the
late G.M. Geves, and twenty guineas to D.G.M. Holmes for special services. A
similar grant of £lO was made to Mr. Banyard for his services as Assistant
C.S., and £25 to the Oldham Infirmary.
A resolution, deploring the death of Mr. Ratcliffe, acknowledging his services
and condoling with his family, was passed, and the meeting terminated.
Wisdom and Goodness. —The correspondences of wisdom and goodness are
manifold ; and that they will accompany each other is to be inferred, not only
because men’s wisdom makes them good, but also because their goodness makes
them wise. Questions of right and wrong are a perpetual exercise of the
faculties of those who are solicitous as to the right and wrong of what they
do or see ; and a deep interest of the heart in these questions carries with it a
deeper cultivation of the understanding than can be easily effected by any
other excitement to intellectual activity. —The Statesman.
Canned, Bituminous Coal, and Anthracite. —lt appears from the researches
of Liebig and other eminent chemists, that when wood and vegetable matter
are buried in the earth, exposed to moisture and partially or entirely excluded
from the air, they decompose slowly and evolve carbonic acid gas, thus parting
with a portion of their original oxygen. By this means they become gradually
converted into lignite or wood coal, which contains a larger proportion of
hydrogen than wood does. A continuance of this decomposition changes this
lignite into common or bituminous coal, chiefly by the discharge of carburetted
hydrogen, or the gas by which we illuminate our streets and houses. According
to Bischoff, the inflammable gases which are always escaping from mineral coal
and are so often the causes of fatal accidents in mines, always contain carbonic
acid, carburetted hydrogen, nitrogen, and olifiant gas. This disengagement of
all these gradually transforms ordinary or bituminous coal into anthracite, to
which the various names of splint-coal, glance-coal, hard-coal, culm, and many
others have been given. —Sir Charles Lyell.


Cjje ©bbfellofos* Jflag antr % Arctic (^.ebxtioiT.
(See Oddfellows’ Magazine for April last, page 123J
Old England, fired with glories
Achieved in days of yore,
New honours fain would gather ;
And from her wave-washed shore
A band to fame devoted
Go forth the Pole to find,
On which the flag of Freedom
Should dare the northern wind.
They go not forth in anger
God’s image to deface,
They seek a peaceful conquest
In that far lonely place ;
They crave not warriors’ laurels,
Red with the blood of foes,
Content to share the triumphs
That science fair bestows.
These are not stained with plunder,
With crime or greed of gold,
With liberties down-trodden,
With kingdoms bought and sold ;
But with defiant nature
They speak of gallant fight.
With Nature in its terror
And all its awful might.
The Pole yet stands defiant,
But ardour is not dead—
There’s not a spot of country
But England’s sons will tread ;
Their heads are strong with courage,
They heed not toil or pain :
There is a goal to compass—
That goal, at last, they’ll gain.
Yet may they boast of reaching
Where none before have trod,
Beyond all living nature,
Where raging tempests brood ;
And there the Flag of England
In proud defiance waves,
And marks the deed accomplished
By England’s dauntless braves.


But yet the Flag of England
Not that spot knows alone—
Brave Adam Ayles hath planted
Upon that Frozen Zone
The flag of Peace and Concord,
Of Friendship true and tried,
And there in solemn glory
They are waving side by side.
The world now knows the spirit
Our brothers’ hearts possess ;
They shrink not back from danger,
But onward ever press ;
No clime shall man discover,
No track of emerald sea,
But brothers there shall carry
Our Flag of Unity.
7, St. Many's Road, Kingston, Portsea.
G. Cooper, P.G.
The Working-man’s True Mission.— ln November last, Mr. Gladstone, on
distributing the prizes to the successful students at the Greenwich and other
local art and science classes, concluded with the following pertinent observa-
tions : He wanted now to say a few words on the position of the working-
classes, They had arrived at a time when elementary education was being
very widely diffused, and he hoped before many years had passed they would
reap benefits and blessings that would be universal. Under these circum-
stances they had to consider what the results would be. One of the first
results of elementary education was to produce a desire on the part of young
persons themselves, or in their parents, to escape from the necessities of
manual labour, and pass into what was called head work, as distinguished from
handwork. There they had before them a most important subject. There
was far too much eagerness on the part of the working-classes to get out of the
working-classes into another which was not a working-class. He said if a man
made a fortune by commerce it was a vulgar thing to try to remove everyone
in the family out of it. The first thing a man ought to do was to elevate his
vocation. That was the work assigned to him by Providence, and that was the
special work to which he should address his energies, and for which there was
unbounded scope. Let them look again at this picture (of a screen in the
church of Langroon, between Usk and Chepstow), of what a carpenter in a
village in Monmouth did 400 years ago, and compare that with what a carpenter
would do now in the same place, and say whether there was not room and
scope for improvement. It ought to be the special duty of a working-man to
raise the character of the work he performed, and in doing that he was doing
more to raise himself and his family and class than he could possibly do by
precipitately hurrying out of his position. We lived in a day in which the
value of manual labour was almost universally rising, and when the value of
what was called head labour was almost universally falling. If they inquired
how many unemployed clerks there were in the city of London, and how many
unemployed carpenters there were, they would be astonished by the contrast.
Hand labour was progressing and rapidly rising, whereas what was called head
labour was falling ; and, in conclusion, he urged that what the working-man
should aim at was to raise the character of the labour which he was called upon
to perform.


(sbbMotosjnp, lumbers ants, tie.
Ashton-undeb-Lyne. —The anniversary dinner and ball of the Booth Mason
Lodge was celebrated at the Oddfellows’ Hall, when a large number of ladies
and gentlemen attended. Bro. W. Greenwood, N.G., was voted to the chair.
The income of the Sick and Funeral Fund for the past year (including £330 in
the bank, and £8 2s. 6d. Oddfellows’ Hall shares) was £545 195., and that of
the Management Fund amounted to £6l 9s. 7d., including £27 7s. 9d. balance
in hand. On the first-named fund, payment side, there was a balance in the
treasurer’s hands of £l7 ss. 4d., and on the Management Fund £23 7s. 3|d.
Cash in savings bank, £4OO ; loss on Management Fund, £4 Os. ssd. The
general summary showed a gain to the lodge of £6B 6s. 4|d. The number of
members in 1875 was 118 ; 36 had been admitted during the year, 12 left by
non-payment, leaving on the 31st of December last 130, and the lodge has
four honorary members. The worth of the lodge per member equals £3 11s. 6d.,
and the average sickness per member during the year was two days. Average
age per member 29 years 1|- months, and the average age of members admitted
during the year amounted to 23 years 9 mouths. Mr. John Haydock, C.S.,
said the Loyal Booth Mason Lodge had made rapid strides since its formation,
and at the present time it was the most numerous in the district, there was
not a lodge that gave greater encouragement.
Ashton-under-Lyne. —At the Oddfellows’ Hall, on March sth, the officers
connected with the Juvenile Fund assembled to present P. Prov. G.M. James
Andrew with a beautiful timepiece, in recognition of his long and valuable
services connected with the fund. The chair was occupied by Mr. James
Earle, president, who spoke of the long connection of Mr. Andrew with
Oddfellowship, and the zeal he displayed in all that concerned the Order. He
was sure no one better deserved the testimonial, no matter what society he
belonged to. Kindness was a marked characteristic of Mr. Andrew, and no
case that came before him was treated rashly or inconsiderately. When the
society was in jeopardy, and when they were in low water they had frequently
to thank him for his valuable suggestions. The inscription on the timepiece
was as follows : “ Presented to Mr. James Andrew by the officers and friends
of the M.U. Juvenile Fund, Ashton District, as a token of esteem for long
services. Ashton-under-Lyne, March sth, 1877.” Mr. Andrew, in acknow-
ledging the gift, said he had done nothing more than his bounden duty, and it
had been a pleasure to him to do it. He referred to the progress made by the
Order, and said the testimonial would be treasured along with others he had
received in a similar way. He thanked the donors for their great kindness,
and hoped the society would continue to prosper. Prov. C.S. John Haydock
had known Mr. Andrew for forty years, and he was sure a better Oddfellow
could not be met with. He had always been a worker, and he was a worker at
the present time. Several other speakers likewise highly commended Mr.
Andrew’s labours in the cause of Oddfellowship.
Banbury.— The sixth of March was a day of rejoicing and feasting by the
inhabitants of Shipton-under-Wychwood, the occasion being the opening of a
new lodge in connection with the Manchester Unity, to be called the Loyal
Wychwood Forest Lodge. The officers and members of -the Loyal Old Elm


Tree Lodge, Chipping Norton, having received an intimation from several
young men in the neighbourhood of their wish to form a lodge, took the matter
in hand, and being assisted by several gentlemen of the neighbourhood, have
been successful in forming what promises to be a very flourishing branch of
the Manchester Unity. Twenty-eight respectable and for the most part young
men presented themselves for initiation. The new lodge was duly opened by
Bro. J. Compton, Grand Master of the District, assisted by other past and
present officers. After the business of the day was concluded the members
with their friends proceeded in procession to church. After listening to a very
appropriate sermon the party returned to the lodgehouse to dinner—the
chair being taken by H. Wilkins, solicitor.
Baebadoes. —The Amity Lodge celebrated its first anniversary on the 12th
of January by a dancing party, at which several members of the St. Michael’s
Lodge, including Prov. G.M, James E. Fields, were present. N.G. E. Isaac
Baeza congratulated the St. Michael’s and Amity Lodges on their having as
Prov. G.M. a member who was interested in both lodges—being an honorary
member of the Amity. The Prov. Grand Master, in some appropriate remarks,
returned thanks, and trusted that the two lodges would be cemented in the
ties of brotherly love and concord. He concluded by expressing the hope that
the good feeling now existing between the two lodges would remain intact,
and that the Amity at their next anniversary would number as many members
as the St. Michael’s. He particularly impressed on the members to throw aside
individuality and work for the common good of the Order, keeping always in
view their motto of “ Friendship, Love, and Truth.” Secretary Alexander
S. Bayne, of the St. Michael’s Lodge, in a lengthy speech, gave a resume of the
working of the Unity and its resources. From the auditor’s report for the
first year of the lodge we deduct the following statistics : On the 31st of
December there were 17 members good on the books. The amount received on
account of the Sick and Funeral Fund was £29 13s. 2Jd. ; paid, £3 15s. 4d.;
balance, £25 17s. 10|d. Received on account of Management Expenses Fund,
£l4 Os. 4d. ; paid, £lO 16s. Id. ; balance, £3 4s. 3d. Total amount to credit
of the lodge on the 31st of December, £29 2s. l|d. The auditors
commented on the liberal feeling displayed by the St. Michael’s Lodge in
granting the Amity the use of their lodgeroom and fittings for their inaugural
year, free of charge, which the members of the Amity have not failed to
appreciate,
Beeston. —This district held its annual meeting on the 29th December.
After the ordinary business had been disposed of P.P.G.M. Davenport, the
President of the Beeston Castle Festival Committee, paid over to the repre-
sentatives of each lodge their proportionate share of the proceeds of the annual
festival held for the widows and fatherless children of deceased members of the
district. About £l2O was thus distributed, each widow receiving 30s. and each
orphan 20s. Some widows with large families have received as much as £8 10s.
annually. Owing to the kindness of Lord Tollemache in granting the use of
the Beeston Castle hill for a festival in June each year, the Committee have
been able to distribute to the widows and orphans of the district during the last
10 years the sum of £1,381. The whole of this amount has been realised
entirely independent of any contributions from the members of the lodges
in the district.
Belfast,— On April 6th the District Committee held their first quarterly
meeting for the year in the Oddfellows’ Hall, Academy Street. William
Crawford, Prov. G.M., in the chair, and Joseph R. Bell, Prov. D.G.M., occu-
pied the vice-chair. The Secretary read his report for the past year, from
which it appeared that five members and three members’ wives had died in


1876, which, cost the society £BO. The sum paid to sick members amounted
to £268 18s. Bd., besides £3l 18s. 6d. paid to sick members of other lodges.
The report further stated that the Ulster Lodge, with a membership of 200,
possessed a capital of £1,446 13s. ; the Marquis of Donegal Lodge, 100
members, capital £Bl5 12s. Id.; City of Carrickfergus Lodge, 81 members,
capital £620 2s. 9d.; Belfast Lodge, 51 members, capital £620 9s. 7d.; True
Blue Lodge, Newry, 13 members, £56 9s. 7d. Total value of the district,
£3,562 12s. lOd. The proceedings were brought to a close by the chairman
presenting Bro. James M‘Creery with a silver medal as a mark of appreciation
for his services while acting as Grand Master of the district. The medal bears
the following inscription : “ The Independent Order of Oddfellows, M.U.
Presented to James MUreery, P.P.G.M., by the Belfast District, January,
1877.
Bradford. —Corresponding Secretary J. Walwork, in his annual report on the
financial condition of the district, says : “On January Ist, 1871, our accumu-
lated capital in connection with our Sick and Funeral Fund was £24,139 15s. Bd.;
on January Ist, 1876, was £34,597 Bs. lOJsd., or an additional accumulated
capital of £10,457 13s. 2Jd. The last valuation for January, 1871, showed us
to have a deficiency of £14,942 4s. 5d., at an average age of 40 years and 4
months. On January Ist, 1876, our average age was 40 years 25 days, and
with the accumulation of the above capital, together with our valuations, based
upon 4 per cent instead of 3 per cent, as in former valuations, will, I think,
place us in a solvent position. We must not, however, lose sight of the fact
that there will be several of our lodges with deficiencies, whilst others will
have a large surplus.”
Brighton. —From the report of the Secretary, Past Grand Master Curtis,
we extract following : “ I have to congratulate the district that the year
1876 has been very favourable as regards the sick and funeral claims, both being
considerably below the average experience of the Unity, while the income has
considerably increased. The improvement in the financial condition of the
district is highly creditable and satisfactory, as the following statement will
show: The receipts have been from contributions, £5,631 Bs. 4d. ; from
interest, £1,632 18s. lid. ; for admissions, £7l 19s. v- The payments were for
funerals, £675 ; for sick benefits, £3,294 6s. lOd. The total amount returned
as capital at the beginning of the year was £39,197 ss. Id., irrespective of a
District Funeral Fund of £314 Is. 7d. ; and at the close it was £42,194 os. 3d.,
irrespective of the District Funeral Fund of £607 14s. 5d., showing a net gain
of £3,290 Bs. on the year, equal to 15s. sd. per member. The advantage of a
Reserve Funeral Fund (now increased to nearly £450) can scarcely be over-
estimated.”
Bury St. Edmunds. — One of the most flourishing lodges of this district in
the county of Suffolk has its head quarters at Saxmundham—the manner in
which it is managed having much to do with its success. The lodge is fortunate
in. the possession of officers of great energy and ability, and it has mainly by
their efforts secured for itself a very high place amongst similar institutions in
the kingdom. The Loyal Fidelity Lodge has an accumulated capital of
£3,394 15s, 4d., all well invested on real estate at 44 and 5 per cent, showing
a high average amongst the 216 members. The thirty-second anniversary was
celebrated on Thursday, the 3rd of May, and, as usual, the event created quite
a sensation in the town of Saxmundham. The brethren first attended the
parish church, where a most eloquent sermon was preached by Bro. the Rev.
William Henry Ridgeway, M.A., after which the dinner took place in the Corn
Exchange. Bro. Lieut.-Colonel Barne, M.P., presided, supported by Bros.
Lieut.-Coionel Long, Captain Mayhew, the Revds. C. P. Tiley, and E. B.


Hewett; Bros. C. B. Rendle, Esq., J. M. Ling, Esq., and many others. About
250 persons sat down to dinner. Bro. Jordan, the vice-chairman, in a
very able speech, proposed “ The Grand Master and Board of Directors,”
regretting the absence of Mr. Holmes, the acting G.M. of the Order, whom he
had hoped would have been present. P.P.G.M. Welham responded, and gave
some interesting statistics relative to the Order, and in concluding an admirable
speech strongly advocated the formation of juvenile branches.
Bury St. Edmunds. —On May 2nd the members of the Haven of Success
celebrated their thirty-third anniversary at the Crown Hotel, Diss. The chair
was occupied by the Rev. W. S. Beevor. Mr. Flatman said the Bury St.
Edmunds District comprised 38 lodges, 5,530 members, and an accumulated
capital of £63,851 ss. During last year the sum of £3,794 was paid away for
sickness, and £BSO for deaths. £2,342 13s. 7d. had been received as interest
on capital; the average value of the fund per member was £ll 10s. lid.;
average age of members, 36 years 8 months ; increase of members, 93 ; increase
of Sick and Funeral Fund, £3,344 18s. Bd.; average sick pay per member,
13s. B|d,, which was 3d. per member less than the previous year. Mr. Reeve
said the amount paid by the lodge last year for sickness was £383 9s. 4d.,
relieving 93 members. This was a very large sum, and showed that as the
members got older their infirmities increased, and it also showed the importance
of keeping the sick pay at a fignre which the contributions would afford. The
interest on their capital was a great help, and had assisted very largely in
bringing their funds to the present satisfactory condition. The valuation of
the lodge a few years since showed a deficiency, but a new valuation had just
been made, and although the particulars had not yet reached him, he had no
hesitation in saying things were improved in that direction. The amount of
money now out on mortgage was £3,750; at the beginning of last year they had
£1,105 in the savings bank, but £I,OOO of that money had been put out at 4
per cent; the total value of both funds was £4,203 16s. 9Jd. Seventeen new
members were admitted last year, bringing the number to 405. The average
age of their members' was rather below that of the district. He could tell them
their lodge had complied with every requisition of the Government, and all the
forms sent had been duly filled up and returned, and there had never been any
complaint on those matters.
Burt St. Edmunds.— The Hive of Industry Lodge held its 35th anniversary
at Lavenham on Easter Tuesday. The members proceeded to church in order
to attend divine service; and a short but appropriate address was delivered by
the Rev. J. Wise to the assembled brethren. After dinner at the Black Lion,
the chair was occupied by F. T. Barkway, Esq., surgeon of the lodge. P. Prov.
G.M. Welham, after referring to the general statistics of the Order, said the
number of members in the district on January Ist was 5,530, being a gain of
79 only, and he therefore thought that the progress of the Unity in the district
was very slow indeed ; and he regretted to see that more had not been added.
At the last A.M.C. it was proposed that all the money they had invested in
different securities should be valued at 3 per cent, compound interest, and as
that was a very low average, it proved that the Unity was even in a better
position than it had been said to be, and he hoped that at the next valuation
that was made they would be able to point to a better state of things still.
Mr. Tatum, secretary, said that the sickness among the members during
the past year had been unusually large. They had paid no fewer than
thirty-one members, and the total numbers of days’ sickness had been 1,297,
whilst the amount paid was £IOB os. lOd. This was the heaviest call upon the
funds they had ever experienced since the lodge was established. Perhaps it
was necessary to make some allusion to the cause of this. If they looked over
102
oddfellows’ magazine.


their books they would find they had a great many members verging on
seventy, and some over seventy years of age ; and he therefore thought it was
not a matter for surprise that their liabilities should become larger in pro-
portion as the ages of their members increased. This was no mystery, but it
was an event that had been anticipated. But the amount would not be so
large if they had men who were not permanently on the sick fund. They had no
superannuation fund, and the society would never be what it was intended to
be until they had a superannuation fund. The receipts of the lodge in the
Sick and Funeral Fund up to the end of last year were : £2,090 13s. 6ifd., but
this included £1,814 17s. 4|d., balance in hand at the beginning of the year.
Their payments in the same fund included sick pay, £IOB Os. lOd. ; district
account, £2O 16s. lOd. ; other lodges, £5 2s. lOd. ; six members funeral money,
£6O; paid into bank, £4O ; and they had a balance of £1,856 3s. Ofd. With
regard to their Management Fund, the receipts (including balance of £29 Bs. 6f d.
from the previous year) amounted to £9l 14s. whilst the payments
included —surgeon, £2B 2s. ; printing, stationery, &c., £3 Is. Id.; district
account, £3 ss. lOd. ; secretaries and sick visitor, £6 14s. 7sd.; rent and insur-
ance, £1 2s. ; petition, 10s. ; deputies to district meetings, £2 2s. 6d. ; repairing
box and auditing, £1 4s. 6d.; and there was a balance of £45 11s. 9fd. The
treasurer’s account showed a balance in hand of £46 os. lOd. ; and received
from lodge and district, £299 17s. ll^d.; whilst the payments were, for sick
and funerals, £194 os. 6d. ; management, £46 2s. 6Jd. ; to bank, £4O 10s. ;
and balance in hand, £65 ss. 9d. The total value of the lodge, as shown by
the full statement of their funds, was £1,958 18s. 10d., and the total saving on
the year was £79 Bs. lid. The number of subscribing members in the lodge,
January Ist, 1876, was 133 ; and honorary members, 2 ; whilst 9 had been
admitted during the year, 1 had left by non-payment, and 6 had died; leaving
the total number of members on the Ist of January last, 137.
Cape of Good Hope. —February 9th was the thirteenth anniversary of the
establishment of the Order in the colony, and was quite a red-letter day in the
history of the town. In the morning the brethren, to the number of about 100,
marched to Trinity Church, where a sermon was preached by the Yen.
Archdeacon Kitton from an appropriate text. In the evening the brethren
sat down to a dinner in the Town Hall. Bro. Duncan, Prov. G.M., presided.
He said he was one of the five who, thirteen years ago, met to establish a
lodge, and now in the Kaffrarian Lodge alone 400 had been initiated. In 1870
the Grand Lodge was formed, circumstances compelling them to separate from
the shank end of the colony, and the first meeting of the Grand Lodge was
held on the 12th March, 1871. Then there were four lodges at King William’s
Town, Queen’s Town, Fort Beaufort, and East London, with 202 members,
and now there were 13 lodges with 781 good members —so that within the
district there were probably 900 members, with a capital of £6,000. Bro.
Thomas, N.G., said he did not think thirteen years ago they would have made
such pi-ogress as they had. There were now 400 brethren, half of whom
resided in the country —that number included many military brethren, whom
they were glad to welcome. There were now 190 members clear on the books.
The average age of the members was 31 years, which was proof that they
were as a whole hearty young men. Their capital was £2,500. The chairman
then presented a handsome testimonial, with a suitable address, to P.G. Smith,
the permanent secretary of the lodge. It consisted of a French bronze gilt
dock under a glass shade, and a stationery cabinet, of the value of £4O. The
recipient responded in suitable terms. In the course of his remarks, he said
they had a capital equal to £ll a man, and their papers had been sent home
to the secretary, by an eminent actuary, and he reported that, if called upon to
meet all liabilities, they would have a surplus of £670 ; and he believed


that the mail that brought the order for creating the Albany District
would also bring permission to raise the sick allowance from 16s. to 20s. a
week.
Chester. —There was a large gathering of members of the Manchester Unity
of Oddfellows at the Bed Lion Inn, Lower Bridge Street, on April sth, the
occasion being a visit to Chester of brethren of the Birkenhead Past Grands’
Lodge, and the presentation of a testimonial to Mr. Councillor Jas. Gerrard,
P.G.M. of the Unity, by members of the Victoria Lodge, Chester. Ero. Swin-
nerton, Grand Master of the Chester District, presided. Mr. Gerrard is the
most distinguished member of the Order in this part of the county, and has, on
several occasions, received pleasing tokens of the high esteem in which he is
held by his brethren. Addresses have been presented to him by the Board of
Directors of the Unity, and members of the South London District, and these,
together with an address and tea service, presented to him a few years ago by
members of the Chester District, were exhibited in the lodgeroom. The testi-
monial on the present occasion consisted of a magnificent epergne of chaste
design. It bore the following inscription : “ Presented to Past Grand Master
James Gerrard, by the members of the Victoria Lodge, 1.0.0., M.U., on his
retirement from the honorary treasurership of the above lodge, having held the
same for a quarter of a century.” The Mayor of Chester (Alderman Johnson),
who is a member of the Order, attended to make the presentation. The
Chairman said in 1850 Mr. Gerrard was appointed a trustee of the Victoria
Lodge, and in 1851 treasurer. Mr. Gerrard had been their treasurer for
upwards of a quarter of a century, and the lodge had prospered wonderfully
during the time he had held the office. When Mr. Gerrard became their
treasurer the amount of the lodge funds was £447 14s. 5d., but now the fund
had increased to £4,665 ss. lOd. Mr. Gerrard had ably represented the district
as a deputy at the meeting of the Annual Movable Committee until he was
elected to the highest position in the Order—that of Grand Master of the
Unity. He had filled that high office with dignity and success, and to the
satisfaction of all with whom he had been brought into contact. P.G.M.
Gerrard had been the mainstay of Oddfellowship in the district, and had
always been ready, by means of his time, ability, and money, to advance what
ever was for the good of the Order; and he was glad the Victoria Lodge had
not lost this opportunity of honouring a man who had done honour to the
Unity at large. The Mayor, in making the presentation on behalf of the
subscribers, said it was at all times a great pleasure to him to meet his brother
Oddfellows, but on that occasion it was a double pleasure. He had known Mr.
Gerrard for a great number of years, and could bear testimony to his industry,
energy, and integrity. He was in every way a very worthy man, and he was
glad that the lodge had done honour to him. He (the Mayor) would advise
the young members of the lodge to emulate Mr. Gerrard’s good qualities, for
if they did so they would gain the respect of their fellowmen and improve their
chances in life. As a town councillor Mr. Gerrard had proved himself an
energetic and practical man, and a most useful servant of the ratepayers. Mr.
Gerrard remarked that if he had rendered any service to the lodge, the district,
or the Order, the pleasure it gave him to render that service was a sufficient
reward ; but he might say that if it had not been for the assistance of many
past and present officers it would have been impossible for him to have done
one-fiftieth part of the work they had attributed to him. tie saw many good
brethren before him that evening, whose efforts had raised the Victoria Lodge
to its present high position in the Unity, and he felt proud in belonging to
that lodge. The Manchester Unity had now attained a high position in the
country, and was deservedly respected by the people. It had placed its
financial statement before the world, and the nation was able to appreciate its


manifold beneficial operations. He believed it would continue to progress
until it was able to provide for its members in old age as well as in sickness,
and lie hoped the day was not far distant when a permanent fund would be
established for the benefit of widows and orphans, and a school erected for the
education of the orphan children of Oddfellows. Mr. Gerrard concluded by
warmly thanking the members of the lodge for their generosity in presenting
him with so magnificent a testimonial, and the Mayor for the kind manner in
which he had made the presentation.
Chichester. —The officers of this district, with other brethren of the Order,
met at the Black Boy Inn, Old Fishborne, on the 22nd March, and opened a
new lodge named the Loyal Spring. Bro. George Tippen, P.P.G.M., acted as
president of the meeting, and Bro. Frederick Stephen Peskett, Secretary of
the Rock Lodge, as vice-president. Bro. Isaac John Cooper, P.D.G.M., gave
the inaugural address, authorising the opening of the lodge by the Board of
Directors. Certificates of health having been presented by the new members,
they were duly initiated, and officers for the new lodge appointed. The
members of the Chichester District at the present time number 650, and it
is registered under the new Friendly Societies Act 1875.
Cromer. —The twenty-ninth anniversary of the Baring Lodge was celebrated
on the Bth of May. The members, after the usual parading of the town,
proceeded to church, where a suitable sermon was preached by the Rev. F.
Fitch. They afterwards dined at the Lion Hotel. T. Wyndham Cremer, Esq.,
presided. Amongst those present were Edward Martin, Esq., of Bixley Hall,
and Mr. A. E. Fluder, surgeon to the lodge. Past Grand Master Daynes said
he had recently come from Manchester, where he had been engaged with his
brother Directors in going over the accounts for the past year ; he was
therefore enabled to speak with considerable accuracy as to what had been
done in the year 1876. He had been engaged in this Order for thirty-five
years, and thirty years he had been a Director of the great Manchester Unity,
and for the last sixteen years senior member of that Board. He was now, in
point of years, the oldest member on that Board, and it should be a warning
to him that his work was nearly done. The number of members admitted in
1876 was 40,000. It was gratifying to him to be able to state that they were
not falling behind, but quickly increasing. When he first became a Director
the number of members was 220,000 ; it was now 518,000 ; so that there had
been continual progress to the present time. The increase in the last three
years was upwards of 30,000. There were now 4,280 lodges, and 432 districts.
The amount of capital on the Ist of July, 1877, was £4,188,800, £210,000
having been added in 1876. The number of deaths was 8,100. The mortality
account of the Unity during one year amounted to the large sum of
£IOO,OOO. This one society paid for every working day in last year £I,OOO for
the relief of its sick members, there being no less than 20,000 homes to which
this relief had been conveyed. Thus the total amount of expenditure had
been over £400,000. Mr. Daynes further alluded to the advantages to be
derived from a society like this, and said it was placed upon such a foundation
that it would last not only their time, but their children’s and their children’s
children. Bro. James Grimble, the secretary to the lodge, stated that £172 14s.
had been expended in sick pay during the past vear, £73 7s. 6d. in funeral
donations, and £IOB 19s. lOd. in medical attendance and working expenses,
making a total of £355 Is. 4d. During the same period £l6B 18s. 9d. had
been added to the capital of the lodge, which now amounted to £2,407 4s. lid.
The present number of members is 310. The local newspaper says: “Asa
proof of the respect and esteem felt by the members of the Baring Lodge
towards Mr. Daynes, about eighty of them with the band and banners went to


the railway station to meet him and escort him into the town. This ovation
was all unexpected by Mr. Daynes, and it was evident that he was a little
moved at this manifestation of good feeling.”
Droylsden. —On February 17th a new lodge in connection with the above
district was opened in due form at the Richmond Inn, Morton Street, Long-
sight, on which occasion there was a numerous attendance of brethren from
other lodges, amongst whom were a many past officers. In compliance with a
request from the District Officers, P. Prov. G.M. John Ashbrook performed the
requisite ceremonies appertaining to the opening, including the presentation of
the dispensation to the ten members of the new lodge, who had been previously
initiated. After the election of officers, eight more candidates were proposed
for admission, and, we understand, many more friends intend to join. Mr.
Thomas Flannagan, a member of the Board of Directors, delivered some very
appropriate observations on the numerical strength and financial position of the
Unity. He also urged upon the members the desirability of paying particular
attention to the healthy condition of those who might be wishful to join, as
upon the caution manifested in that direction depended the success of the
Prosperity Lodge. The lodge is situated in the midst of a densely-populated
and respectable neighbourhood, and has every appearance of becoming a
very numerous and wealthy branch of the Order,
Durham. —From the annual report of the Secretary (Past Grand Master G.
Walker) we gather the following information : “ On the Ist of January, 1877,
our numbers were 4,102 entitled to relief, showing an increase of 39 members.
Our receipts towards the Sick and Funeral Fund for 1875 amounted to
£4,996 13s. 2d.; and for the year 1876 the receipts were £5,148 11s. 2d., being
an increase for the latter year of £lsl 18s. In 1875 our payments to the sick
members amounted to £3,234 (ss. lOd.; for 1876 £3,155 Os. Bd., being a
decrease of £79 6s. 2d. for the latter year. The total capital of the district for
the year ending January Ist, 1876, was £21,124 19s. sd. ; and on the Ist
January, 1877, the funds amounted to £22,095 2s. 5d., being an increase of
£970 35.”
Glasgow. —The annual supper of the Lord Clyde Lodge was held in Mr.
J. Middleton’s restaurant, Trongate, on the 28th of April, when, in the absence
of Dr. Samuel J. Moore, the chair was taken by the managing secretary of the
lodge and P.G.M. of the district. Mr. J. Inglis stated that the Lord Clyde
Lodge had at present 309 members and a capital of £1,240, after being ten
years registered, and paying in sick and funeral benefits about £I.OOO. The
Treasurer, P.G. A. Ross, in replying to the toast of “ The Lodge,” did so in a
poem of his own composition—his usual course on such occasions,
Guernsey. —From the report of the C.S. read at the District Committee, on
March 28th, we learn that the four lodges possess a capital of £6,453 15s. ll|d.,
a little over £lO per member. The number of subscribing members is 645,
honorary members 14, which shows an increase during the year of 37. The
juvenile branch numbers 87 members, with a capital of £llO. During the
evening the Prov. G.M., Mr. C. B. Martel, presented to P.P.G.M. Richard
Lihou a coloured certificate of merit in a neat gold frame with a complimentary
address, which was responded to in suitable terms.
Halifax. —One of the best parties which has ever taken place in the
Liberal Clubrooms, King’s Cross, was held on April 24th, when the Loyal
Bard of Avon Oddfellows’ Lodge held their anniversary. Nearly 100 members,
with wives and sweethearts, sat down to tea. After tea the room was cleared
for dancing, when P.G.M. J. Mackie officiated as master of ceremonies, and


was ably supported by Bros. P.G. Normanton, C. Cooper J. Greenwood
and Middlebrook, Green, Bradley, E. Mackie, and Lang A cordial vote of
thanks was awarded to Bro. J. Mackie, on the motion of P.P.G.M. J. Bradley,
for the very efficient manner he performed the duties of M.C.
Huddersfield.— From C.S. Sanderson’s March report to the District Com-
mittee, it appears that on January Ist, 1876, the r ® fl^ s
amounted to £lB,BlO 18s. 5d., and in the same m 1877, to £19,851 15s 4Jd.,
showing an increase during the year of £1,040 16s. Hid. The district
numbers 2,050 members.
Ipswich.— When about three years ago it was proposed to establish a lodge
of Oddfellows in connection with the Working Men’s College, Mr. W. O. White,
who takes great interest in both Oddfellowship and in the College, exerted
himself greatly to make the new lodge a success. Amongst other ways in
which Mr. White assisted the lodge was in taking the office of Permanent
Secretary. The lodge has flourished well, and it has now somewhere about
100 financial members, besides a number of honorary members. Mr. White has
now resigned the post of secretary, and the members of the lodge subscribed to
make him a present as a small return for his efforts on their behalt. ihe pre-
sentation was made on July 25th, 1876, at the ordinary lodge meeting, and
the gift chosen was a handsome marble timepiece, with a companion bronze
ornament, which, together with a handsomely illuminated address, was presented
to Mr. White by the surgeon, Mr. G. S. Elliston. Mr. Elhston spoke of the
valuable services Mr. White had rendered, expressing himself m highly eulogistic
terms. Mr. White, in acknowledging the present, assured the members that it
had been a pleasure to him to do what he had done in the matter, and said he
should still be willing to do all he could to assist the lodge. Mr. C. F. Baldwin,
Mr. F. Pickford, and Mr, J. H. Grimwade, who were amongst the earliest
members of the lodge, also spoke in complimentary terms of Mr. White s action
in the matter. The clock has upon it a plate with the inscription— Presented
to P.P.G.M. W. 0. White by the members of the Loyal Working Men College
Lodge, No. 5,971, 1.0.0., M.U., as a mark of their on his retirenient
from the permanent secretaryship of their lodge. July, 18 1 6.
Ipswich.—A very interesting gathering of members of the Orwell Lodge of
Oddfellows took place at the lodgeroom, Falcon Inn, with the object of con-
gratulating the indefatigable and esteemed permanent secretary of the lodge,
Mr. W. O. White, on his return from his wedding tour, and to present him
with an elegant electro-plated tea service as a wedding present. N.G. E.
Scrivener ably occupied the chair. P-G. H. Foulger, after congra ua mg r.
White upon his marriage, read a beautifully illuminated address, wic ore
upwards of 100 signatures. P.G. Foulger then begged Mr. White to accept the
present as a small token of the esteem and regard of the members of the lodge,
and wished both Mr. and Mrs. White health, happiness, and prosperity.
Several other members added their congratulations, and testified to the upright,
conscientious, and satisfactory manner in which Mr. White had at all times
carried out the duties of his office ; and the lodge was fortunate in having such
a gentleman for its secretary. P.P.G.M. W. O. White said that he had on
numerous occasions addressed the members of the »lodge, but a 1^ rer e
that he could speak with less freedom than on the present occasion, ibe only
expression of regard that he had wished for was the acknowledgment that be
had done his duty to the lodge. He had always endeavoured to carry out the
law, in the spirit rather than in its exact letter, and m all to consider as far as
possible the interests of the lodge. He hoped nothing m the future would
tend to diminish the confidence that existed between them in the slightest


degree, and he assured them that he esteemed that confidence more even than
the valuable present they had so kindly given him.
Isle of Wight. —The annual meeting of the Earl of Yarborough Lodge of
Oddfellows was held in the Queen’s Rooms on March 21st. The Mayor
occupied the chair, supported by Mr. F. Bamfield Tuttiett, surgeon to the
lodge, Captain Francis (2nd Isle of Wight Rifles), the Rev. A. Chalmers
(Oldham). The Rev. A. Chalmers said that though he was not an Oddfellow
he ha,d great interest in anything which had for its aim the amelioration of the
working classes. He gave a brief resume of the advance of co-operation in
Oldham. P. Prov. G.M. Saunders said the total receipts from the seven lodges
in the during the past year was £1,864, and the payments £684. The
actual stock in hand was £14,200, being an increase on the year of £2,773,
£1,600 of which would result from the formation of the Whippingham Lodge.
The number of members was 1,163, being an increase on the year of 138. All
the lodges in the district had a surplus of assets over liability amounting in
the aggregate to £6,513 9s. The surplus in the Yarborough Lodge was
£1,860 16s. 7d. The Mayor said some of them would remember he was con-
nected with them when the whole of the funds of the lodge could be put into
Mr. Sutton’s pocket, and that in silver too. This was the first lodge of Odd-
fellows in the island, and now there were six others following the example set
by .them. Last year was a red letter one with them, inasmuch as they had a
visit from the A.M.C., when they entertained them at a banquet at the
Volunteers’ Hall, and assembled 500 strong to welcome them. There was one
thing which was a great gratification to him, and that was that he was the first
on the list of honorary members, who numbered 17.
Leek.— The annual meeting of the Ashcombe Lodge was held at Cheddleton,
on May 22nd. The members first met and walked in procession to the church,
where an appropriate sermon was preached by the Rev. F. T. Downs, the curate’
on the advantages to be derived from affiliated friendly societies, such as that
of the Oddfellows. After the service the members proceeded through the
town, headed by the Milton Brass Band, to the Red Lion Inn, to dinner.
The Rev. F. T. Downs presided. Mr. John Turner, the secretary, read
the thirty-sixth annual report of the Committee of Management, which
complimented the members and friends on the steady progress of the society.
The sickness experienced by members during the past year had been 130
weeks 5 days. The number of funerals 2. The last valuation of the assets
and liabilities of the lodge showed a surplus of £358 15s. 5d., thus proving the
stability of the society, and giving assurance that those who became members
might be fully certain that the benefits they subscribed for would be more
than realised. The income of the year had been £655 10s. 3d. The total
funds in hand were £2,020 16s.
£1,927 14s. sid. ; saving effected during the year, £93 2s. Id. The capital
account showed that there was invested with the Leek Improvement Commis-
sioners, at 4 per cent, £1,900 ; in the Leek Savings Bank, at £3 os. lOd. per
cent, £95 16s. lid. ; balance in hand, £24 19s. 7Jd.; total, £2,020 16s. 6£d.
Liverpool.— We have received the following communication from Prov. C.S.
Hughes, to which we commend the attention of members of districts similarly
situated : “ Reference having been made by our friend G.M. Holmes in his
address (also in the Directors Report) to the improved financial position of my
many deputies at the meeting wished to know how it had been
accomplished. The question may be put through the Magazine. I give you the
particulars ; (1) The funeral benefit for members’ wives were reduced from £lO
to £B. (2) Registration fee for second wives was increased from 3s. to £l. (3) All
members initiated previous to the formation of a graduated scale were compelled


to pay contributions stated in a scale adopted by my district and certified by the
Directors, according to their age at entrance. This increased payment amounts
to nearly £IOO per annum. The adoption of these remedial measures lost us a
few members. One lodge left us. It had a large deficiency. I hope to
influence lodges having a surplus to receive those with a deficiency, and so
remove, at least in my district, this blot on our Unity.”
Llanelly. —Mr. James Lane Bowen, the Prov. Grand Master, has just pub-
lished a very interesting little “ History of the Llanelly District and the several
lodges comprised therein.” It contains a mass of well-arranged information,
which will prove not only interesting to young or newly-initiated members, but
to all interested in its rise and progress. We commend Mr. Bowen’s labour in
this direction to the active members of other districts as an example well worthy
of their imitation. The Llanelly District was formed out of the Swansea
District in 1834. It now consists of twenty-two lodges, containing 2,352
members, with a reserve capital of £10,090 Bs. 24d.
London North. —On March 12th the members of the Hackney Lodge held
a social meeting at the Horse and Groom, Mare Street. The object of the
meeting was to do honour to Bro. E. Stracy, P.G. of the Haggerstone Lodge,
who has recently vacated the secretaryship of the Hackney Lodge, after
discharging the duties of the office for five years. During that period he
earned the esteem and respect of every member, and on the present occasion there
was a very numerous attendance, every one being anxious to pay a compliment
to their old friend. After supper P.G. Rawlinson was voted to the chair, and
Bro. Sadler, N.G., to the vice-chair. The Chairman, in proposing the health
of P.G. E. Stracy, their late secretary, said it gave him unqualified pleasure to
see how the officers and brothers had rallied round each other that evening to
do honour to their friend, and he trusted he might be spared for many
years to come to give his valuable assistance to the cause of Oddfellowship.
At a special meeting of the lodge it was unanimously agreed that a testi-
monial should be presented to their friend on this occasion. He therefore
begged him to accept from the hands of the lodge a handsome electro-plated
inkstand, not as an adequate reward, but as a small token of love and grateful
remembrance. Occasion was then taken by visiting officers and brothers,
especially by some from Haggerstone, who knew Bro. Stracy longest and best, to
say a few words in honour of the “guest,” all agreeing that he fully deserved
the distinction now shown him. Bro. Stracy, in reply, said he should ever
remember the present occasion with the greatest pleasure. It filled him with
emotion to think that the lodge should have done him the special honour in
presenting him with such a beautiful souvenir of their esteem. After a speech
of considerable length, he concluded by putting statistics before the members,
showing them that although it was but a lodge of 44 members, their
accumulated funds were £550, and saying he left them with every confidence
in the hands of their newly-elected secretary, feeling assured that he would
do his duty in the position he now occupied.
London South. —The brethren of the Europa Lodge, Battersea, met on April
31st for the purpose of presenting P.G. Pemberton with an elegant timepiece,
bearing the following inscription : “ Presented by the members of the Loyal
Europa Lodge, 1.0.0., M.U., to P.G. Pemberton, as a token of respect for
services rendered as secretary for a period of 31 years.” P.G. Pemberton
being well known throughout the London Districts there was a very large
attendance, consisting of the past and present district officers of the South and
West London Districts, also officers and brothers from the Philanthropic, Pride
°f Clapham, Earl Cardigan, Shakspere, Prince Alfred, Rose of England,
Belgrave, and other lodges. The N.G., W. N. Knowles, haying reviewed the


services rendered by Secretary Petnberton, Prov, G.M. Nicbol presented the
testimonial, and in a most eloquent speech pointed out the example set by so
worthy an Oddfellow as P.G. Pemberton. He had been a member 43 years,
out of which time he had been an officer of the Europa Lodge 31 continuous
years, which clearly showed he had the love of Oddfellowship at heart. P.G.
Pemberton responded, thanking the members of the Europa for their gift. He
hoped it would keep good time, and would teach him to keep good time,
especially when the interests of the Order were in question. Prov. G.M, Nichol
proposed a toast in honour of the West London District officers and brothers’
presence, which showed the respect they had for an old member of the South.
P.P.G.M. Leary supported the toast, and Prov. G.M. Francis and C.S. Newman,
of the West London District, suitably responded.
London South. —The members of the Shakspere Lodge celebrated their
tenth anniversary on May 19th, at the Woodland Tavern, New Brompton,
when a large number sat down to supper. The chair was taken by Past Grand
J. H. King, who, in the course of an able address, said the editor of Labour
and Unity, when giving a comparative statement of the progress of the Man-
chester Unity and the Ancient Order of Foresters during the last thirty years,
was pleased to observe “ that in all probability in this friendly rivalry Forestry
will shortly take the lead.” , He was delighted to know, as a member of Court
3089, A.0.F., that Forestry was almost treading on their heels in respect to
number of members ; but to be the largest friendly society in the world, it
was, in his opinion, necessary not only to have large numbers, but also a large
accumulated capital; otherwise an accession of numbers might prove a source
of weakness instead of stability ; and he should be pleased indeed when the
capital of the A.O.F. will bear favourable comparison with that of the
M.U.1.0.0. With respect to the South London District, of which the
Shakspere Lodge is a branch, he was pleased to state that it was in a favour-
able condition compared with other districts of the Order. This was mainly
due to the untiring energy of the district officers, and their attention to the
business entrusted to them. The district consisted of forty-five lodges, with
6,952 members, the value of the funds being as follows : Funeral Fund,
£13,690; Widow and Orphan, £20,263 ; Management, £231; Distress and other
Funds, £520 ; total, £34,704. The Shakspere Lodge was opened in 1867 with
ten members, under disadvantageous circumstances. Two large and important
benefit societies had firmly established branches in the neighbourhood, the
A.O.F. opened Court No. 3089 in 1858, and the U.A.O.D. had opened Lodge
No. 509 in 1865 ; many provident men had wisely joined one or both of these
societies before the Oddfellows’ Society was introduced to New Brompton ;
consequently at the end of 1872, after 5h years’ existence, the lodge numbered
only 41 members, with a capital of £73 ; by the end of 1873 it had increased
to 54 members, with £lO7 ; by 1874 to 80 members, with £l7l ; by 1875 to
100 members, with £229 ; and by December, 1876, to 113 members, with £3lO,
of which £270 is invested, bearing interest at £5 per cent per annum. He
ascribed the progress made since 1872 to the bold step which the Manchester
Unity took in publishing the result of a valuation of the assets and liabilities
of every lodge in the Order. Another valuation of the society was now being
made to the end of 1875, and he looked forward to a far more favourable
result in respect to the whole Unity, while he believed their own lodge would
be found in a solvent condition.
London West. —A pleasant evening was spent at the Earl Cadogan lodge-
room, on March 15th, when about thirty brethren and friends met at the
invitation of Prov. G.M. Francis, who is secretary to the lodge, to celebrate the
twenty-first anniversary of his membership. During the evening P. Prov. G.M.


Smith proposed “ The Health of P.G.M. Francis.” Bro. Smith spoke very
highly of his upright character during his career as an Oddfellow, and how
gratified he was to see him in the Prov. G.M.’s chair. Prov. G.M. Francis very
ably and suitably replied, thanking them for the honour they had done him,
and hoped that he would still merit their esteem for many years.
London West. —On the 21st of February the officers and brothers of the
Rose of England Lodge assembled at the Flask Tavern, Ebury Square, in order
to present a testimonial to one of their past officers for his valuable services.
The presentation was made by P.Prov. G.M. John Swan in an excellent speech.
P.G. 0. P. Goff, in a very impressive and feeling manner, duly responded, thanking
in the first place the N.G., as the proposer of the testimonial, then the com-
mittee, then the district officers, the P.P. G.M.’s, and lastly the visitors generally.
The testimonial consisted of a 14-day gilt striking clock (under shade) and bore
the following inscription on a silver plate at its base: “ The Loyal Rose of
England Lodge, 1959, West London District, Independent Order of Oddfellows,
Manchester Unity, Friendly Society. Presented to P.G. Charles Phillips Goff
by the officers and brothers of the above lodge as a mark of their high esteem
for his past services, more particularly as their trustee for fifteen years. Feb.
21st, 1877. Friendship, Love, and Truth.” The N.G., Mr. C. W. Yates,
said, “ 1 hope the numerous representatives will note this occasion as
a precedent, and upon their return to their respective lodges truly state
what they have seen us do, and urge their members to do something similar
to their hardworking ‘bees.’ I feel sure there are a great number in this room
now who by this time ought to have received some mark of their brother-
members’ approbation, but I fear, as a rule, that those who take the greatest
interest in the lodge are the least noticed. I mention this more particularly
through my being the promoter of this presentation, in order that it may be
an encouragement to the younger members to come forward, and not send their
contributions and never visit their lodge at all.”
Newport, Mon. —From the annual report, compiled by C.S. Davis, we
extract the following ; “ The members’ contributions to the various funds
amount to £4,709 19s. 7d., or an average payment of £1 11s. s|d. ; and if
from this we deduct Bs. Bd. per member for Widow and Orphan and Manage-
ment Funds, it shows an income of £1 2s. 9|d. per member (the average of the
Order is 19s. 10^d.); we then have £1,017 17s. 9d. received for interest upon
capital, equal to an annual payment of Bs. KHd. If from this we deduct the
proportion due to Widow and Orphan and Management Funds, we have
£B2O 7s. 4d. for the sick and funeral (the average of the Order is ss. s|d.).
Turning to the other side of the account we find £2,899 17s. lOd. paid for sick
benefit, equal to 19s. o|d. per member, an increase of per member over
that of last year, and ss. above the average of the Order. Passing on to
the Funeral Fund we find an expenditure of £512, equal to a levy of 3s. sd.
Per member, as against 4s. 6Jd. in 1875, and lid. per member less than that of
the Order. From these figures—which you can test for yourselves—it is
obvious that, although our rate of mortality still remains less, our sick
experience is nearly 25 per cent in excess of that of the Order. You may ask
what is the cause. I unhesitatingly answer unlimited sick pay; and it is quite
incomprehensible to me how any person possessed of ordinary intelligence can
come to any other conclusion. Just let me invite your attention to the tables,
and you will find the figures therein conclusively prove that in nearly every
instance where the unlimited sick pay is recognised without a corresponding
increase in contributions, there is a decrease in the funds, and in the excep-
tional instances an analysis of the balance-sheets will prove indebtedness to the
preponderance of a large number of new-class members, who are unquestionably
taxed to perpetuate a vicious and inequitable system, advocated only from


selfish, motives by a few individuals who are encouraged in their work of
obstruction by the apathy of those who, though better informed, lack the
moral courage to declare war against a continuance of the antiquated practice
of their predecessors, whose knowledge of finance has been proved by science
and experience to be totally unreliable.”
, New Zealand. —The Parnell Lodge, Manukau Road, Parnell, near Auckland,
celebrated the 18th year of its existence by a picnic in the Government Domain,
on February 14th. The members, with their families and friends, assembled
numbered about 200. The sports consisted of dancing, football, cricket,
quoits, swings, Aunt Sally, &c., &c. The dinner and tea was laid out in a large
marquee capable of seating 150. P.P.G.M. Thos. Cole, the father of the lodge,
presided. The picnic was one of the most successful of this or any other season.
In the evening some of the younger members, and those unable to leave their
employment during the day, held a ball in the hall belonging to this lodge,
which was also very successful. This lodge numbers 71 members with a net
value of £613 10s.
New Zealand. —The eighth anniversary of the St. George Lodge, M.U., was
commemorated by a soiree at the Exchange Hall, Invercargill, on June Bth,
1876. There was a large attendance, fully 300 persons being present. Prov.
C.S. Scandrett said, notwithstanding the pretended antiquity of the Order, it had
only attained its present position and popularity as the largest and safest
friendly society in the world during the past thirty or forty years. He
pointed out that its progress in Australia and New Zealand was remarkable,
and gave some interesting particulars. The first lodge south of the equator
was opened in Sydney in 1841 ; the first in Victoria in 1844. In New Zealand
the first lodge was opened in Auckland in 1843 ; the second in Nelson in 1844 ;
and the third in Wellington in 1845. The most successful group of lodges
were those in Otago, exclusive of Southland—the members in Otago numbering
1,523, having a capital of £IB,OOO. No general statistics had been compiled
for New Zealand, because they did not possess the higher branches of the
Order, as did Victoria and New South Wales, and he had found it very
difficult to procure the information, having to communicate direct with each
separate part of New Zealand, but he thought the trouble was repaid by the
pleasure it afforded in making known the information. In New Zealand there
were then 7,300 members, with a capital, which was to a large extent bearing
good interest, of £79,000. He concluded by remarking that the meeting
would gather a much better conception of the value of friendly societies when
it was remembered that this was the result of one institution only. If the
combined results of the other societies in the colony—the Foresters, the
Ancient Order of Oddfellows, the Sons of Temperance, and others that are not
perhaps so well known —could be tabulated, it would prove, he thought, that
New Zealand colonists had brought to their adopted land such prudent habits
as could not fail to raise New Zealand to a high standard amongst the future
nations of the earth.
Nottingham. —From the annual report of the Secretary, Past Grand Master
Reuben Watson, we gather the following particulars : “ The year 1876 has been
a very favourable one, as regards the sick and funeral claims, both being
considerably below the average experience of the Unity, while the income has
considerably increased. The improvement in the financial condition of the
district is highly creditable and satisfactory, as the following statement will
show : The receipts have been from contributions, £3,242 os. lid.; from*
interest, £542 4s. 3d.; for admissions, £56 16s. 2d. The payments were for
funerals, £SBB ; for sick benefits, £1,730 17s. Bd. The total amount returned
as capital at the beginning of the year was £14,742 11s. and at the close


it was £16,289 9s. 3d., showing a net gain of £1,546 18s. 2sd. The Incidental
and Management Expenses Funds, from which surgeons’ fees and other expenses
are paid, are generally satisfactory. The practice of borrowing from the Sick
Fund has not been resorted to in many instances, and should be discouraged
altogether, for even the smallest sums so borrowed lead to perplexities, as they
are almost invariably entered as expenditure when lent, and as receipts when
repaid, while it should appear in every case as a portion of the invested capital
of the Sick Fund.”
Oldham. —C.S. Waring,in the March Quarterly Report, says : “The amount
of capital on hand at the beginning of the year was £6,465 10s. 10d., and at
the close it was £6,742 16s. Id., showing a net gain of £277 ss. 3d. The
funeral claims have been very heavy, amounting to £1,014, a sum equal to a
levy of 11s. per member, and we have paid for sick benefits the sum of
£Bls 12s. 4£d. The receipts for contributions have been £1,662 13s. 6d.;
interest, £241 Os. 4^d.; admission fees, £44 Bs. 3d. We have received £SO
more for interest, and £24 more for admission fees than in the previous year,
while the payments for sick benefits have been over £IOO less.”
Oxford. —The anniversary dinner of the Good Intent and Wellington Lodges
Was celebrated in the Town Hall, on Easter Monday, the chair being occupied
by the present G.M. of the district (D. Higgins, jun.) In addition to the 200
brethren present there were the Mayor and ex-Mayor of Oxford, the Rev. Dr.
Whitmarsh (honorary member), and the following gentlemen of the corpora-
tion : J. R. Carr, Esq., J. Saunders, Esq., W. Parish, Esq., and T. Malian,
Esq. The dinner was a great success, followed by a ball in the Corn Exchange,
at which about 600 persons were present. The chief feature of the evening
was the presentations to P.P.G.M. Buckle, sen., treasurer of the Good Intent
Lodge, and P.P.G.M. Green, treasurer of the Wellington Lodge. The former
consisted of a massive silver antique tankard and stand, and the latter a
splendid timepiece, each bearing a suitable inscription. The presentations
were in acknowledgment of their long and honourable services as lodge
treasurers. P.P.G.M. Buckle represented his district at the Weymouth,
Richmond, and Newport (Mon.) A.M.C.’s. Bro. Green responded in verse.
Bro. Buckle, in thanking them for their kindness, said he had been prompted
entirely by a sense of duty —the duty which they owed to each other. He
had been connected with the society about 37 years. He had filled every
office in the lodge and in the district. He expressed his opinion that such
societies ought to be more encouraged by the upper and middle classes of
society, because, but for the provident habits of their members, a great
deal of the money paid in sickness and deaths would have to be raised by
taxation or benevolence.
Plymouth. —At Devonport, on the 30th of April, Rear-Admiral G. O. Willes,
L.8., the Admiral Superintendent of Devonport Dockyard, and retired Rear-
Admiral G. J. Napier were admitted honorary members of the Tamar Lodge,
the ceremony took place in the large and handsome lodgeroom in the Odd-
fellows’ Hall, Ker Street. The attendance of brethren was large, over 300
being present. Bro. W. Bastard, P.G., officiated as N.G; The Prov. G.M. con-
gratulated the lodge on its satisfactory progress and on the circumstance which had
rought the district officers there that night. Since its formation £BO,OOO had
been paid by the district on behalf of its members for sickness and burials, and
P re sent it had £60,000 invested to provide for similar contingencies. It had
J“° £II,OOO invested for the relief of widows and orphans. He believed that
e time would come when, by the payment of a further small sum as insurance,
embers would be able to secure to themselves aid in old age,-and to meet the
ants of declining years. Bro. Bright said the Tamar Lodge had existed


33 years. Thirteen years since it had 120 members and £990 11s. stock. Now
it had 162 members and £1,852 18s. 4d. stock. During that period it had
paid £1,749 for sick pay, and £258 11s. for its share to the Funeral Fund.
The recent valuation of its assets by Mr. Ratcliffe had returned it as having
£563 surplus capital. A cordial vote of good wishes was given to the two
new members, and acknowledged. Admiral Willes said that until recently
he knew nothing of the Order, but a member having suggested that he should
join it as an honorary member, and given him its rules to read, he found its
objects so satisfactory that he felt no hesitation in joining, and should be glad
to render it any aid it required and that was in his power.
Preston. —On the sth of January last a District or Country Members’ Lodge
was opened at the Market Hotel, Tithebarn Street, in connection with this
district, which has proved most successful, great interest being taken by the
members in the proceedings. There are on the books at the present time
some 160 brethren, belonging to lodges as far north as Edinburgh and as far
south as Portsmouth. It bids fair to be a very useful and convenient branch,
affording members residing at a distance from their own districts an oppor-
tunity of taking office, paying the usual contributions, and receiving _ the
benefits during sickness, &c., as easily as when residing in their own districts.
At the date of our communication from twelve to sixteen sick members were
visited and relieved. We commend this action to the consideration of other
districts.
Richmond, Surrey. —-The Stuart lodgeroom was well filled by members
when a testimonial was presented to P.P.G.M. Pegrum, in recognition of his
services during the period he had presided over the Richmond District.
Amongst those present was J. J. Holmes (Deputy Grand Master of the Order),
the officers of the Richmond District, and several distinguished members from
London. The testimonial was presented by the Grand Master of the District,
who said the presentation was made in pursuance of a resolution which was
passed at the last annual meeting of the district, when it was agreed that a
testimonial and certificate should be presented to P.P.G.M. Pegrum. He
hoped this would be a lasting memorial of the work P.P.G.M. Pegrum had
doile in the district, and he had also great pleasure in presenting a very hand-
some timepiece as a mark of the respect of the members. P.P.G.M. Lane
afterwards presented another testimonial from the Pride of Hanworth Lodge,
as a mark of the appreciation of the members of that lodge of the services of
P.P.G.M. Pegrum as their secretary. In doing so he spoke in terms of the
highest praise of the manner in which Bro. Pegrum’s duties had been discharged,
observing that when that officer entered the Pride of Hanworth Lodge it had
only ten members, and was in a languishing condition, but it now had thirty-one
members, and they could lay claim to nearly £IOO. He then handed to Bro.
Pegrum a teapot and cruet, both of chaste design and elegant appearance,
P.P.G.M. Pegrum said while in office he had endeavoured to do his duty, but
he little thought that he should receive such a trophy of his work as was
now presented to him. He referred to some new features which had been
introduced, and which were now going on well, especially the juvenile branch,
which now had five or six lodges in the district. These testimonials were a
proof to him that however humble an individual might be, if he worked with
a will in Oddfellowship, he would meet with his reward.
Rochdale. —The members of the Tranquillity Lodge held their anniversary
on March 31st, at the White Lion, Yorkshire Street. After tea P. Pruv. G.M.
James Wilson was called to the chair. He delivered an elaborate address on
the past experience and future prospects of the lodge and Unity. The meeting
was addressed by several of its old brethren, some of whom bad been members
for over thirty-six years. P.G. Edmund Blomley read the balance-sheet, which


showed the lodge to be in a very satisfactory state, the amount of the funds
being £917 18s. 2d., which divided by 66 members gives £l3 18s. Ifd. per
member, or a gain of £26 13s. 10£ d. for the year.
Runcorn. — A tea party and ball in connection with the Wright’s Pride Past
Grands’ Lodge was held in the Public Hall on February Bth. Upwards of 250
persons sat down to tea. Pro. Charles Reynolds, J.P., took the chair, and ho
was supported on the platform by the Rev. Canon Barclay, vicar of Runcorn,
the Rev. Bro. J. Lockwood, vicar of Halton, and several of the officers and
Past Grands of the district. The Rev. Canon Barclay said he was very much
obliged to the committee of management for their having honoured him with
an invitation to be with them, and the only reason he could assign for their so
doing was that they were well aware that ever since he became vicar he had
taken a great interest in the welfare of the working classes. He had always
considered that clubs were an excellent means by which to elevate the working
classes in the social scale, and to enable them to discharge the common duties
of every English citizen. The rev. gentleman concluded a very able address
by saying that he hoped that the Manchester Unity and all other kindred
societies would continue to flourish, and the members be distinguished for
their loyalty to the Queen, their independence, and their good feeling one to
another. Mr. Robert Wright, P.P.G.M., read a report of the state of the
district. “ The Ebenezer Lodge was opened in the year 1828, and has been able
up to the present time to meet all its liabilities, which have been something
enormous during the 48 years of its existence. If we take into account what
it has paid in 1876 as a sample, the wonder is that it is living at all. It has
paid for sick £lB4, and has a capital of £Bll 18s. 7d., and is worth per member
£5 17s. Bd. Number of members, 138. The William IV. was opened in 1836,
and has paid for sick for the past twelve months £l6O, with a capital of
£1,455 13s. 6d., and its present worth per member is 6s. 3d., with 199
members. The Royal Oak Lodge was opened in 1852, and I may say that this
lodge has done something wondeyful in 24 years. It has accumulated the large
sum of £1,604, the interest they have received being £62 2s. 10d., or only
£37 7s. 2d. less than what they have paid for sick during the past twelve
months, and it is worth per member £6 10s., with 246 members. The Duke of
Devonshire Lodge was opened in 1862, and has made steady progress as to
funds, but not with regard to members. It has a capital of £242 18s. 10d.,
and its present worth per member is £5 ss. 6d., with 46 members. The Earl
of Chester Lodge was opened in 1873, and has a capital of £9l 19s. 4d., and
56 members worth £1 13s. per member. Kent’s Pride Lodge was opened in
1874, and has a capital of £3O 16s. 7d., and 40 members worth 15s. 6d. per
member. Adelphi Lodge was opened in 1874, and has a capital of £29 19s. 3d.,
and 23 members worth £1 6s. Id. We have also paid for sick in connection
with the seven lodges for the past year £479, and for funerals £l6O, making a
total for sick and funeral payments of £539 ; and in putting all the figures
together for sick funds in the district, I find that our worth is £4,268 2s. 2d. ;
and besides this we have another fund called the Funeral Fund, which is worth
£235 12s. 4d., making a grand total of £4,503 14s. 6d., or a gain on the year
of £244 17s. 6d. And in looking back for the past ten years I find that we
We paid no less than £3,360 for sick, and £1,372 for funerals, making with
last year’s payments the noble sum of £5,271 for sick and funerals in ten years,
and our capital has been steadily increasing. In 1867 we were then worth
£2,057, and now in 1877 we are worth £4,503, or a gain in the ten years of
£2,446 ; worth per member of the whole district, £6 os. sd.
Shaw, near Oldham.— At the annual meeting of the district on April 28th,
after the usual business, P.P.G.M. Thos. Key and P.P.G.M. Wm. Baker, were
called upon to make a presentation of one of J. C. Hind’s pictorial certificates


to P.P.G.M. Reuben Hall, in recognition of bis valuable services to the society
as Prov. G.M. Mr. Hall acknowledged the presentation in graceful language,
and expressed a hope that the district would continue to prosper as it had done
for the last ten years. O.S. Warhurst read the annual report, from which we
learn that the district consists of eight lodges comprising 823 members with a
capital of £4,925 9s. 3d., or an average worth per member of £5 19s.
showing an increase during the year of £342 15s.
Shaw, near Oldham. —The anniversary of the Bud of Hope Lodge was
celebrated by a dinner and ball on the 31st of March. The balance-sheet was
submitted to the members and approved of. From it we extract the following:
“The receipts during the year to the Sick and Funeral Fund have been
£lO5 Os. and the expenditure £42 Os. lid., thus showing a gain of
£62 19s. Our sick pay to our own members has been £l6 165., being
£6 4s. Bd. more than was paid last year on this account. We have experienced
252 days’ sickness, against 158 last year. The average cost per member for
sick pay has been 3s. 3d., against 2s. Of d. last year. The receipts to Manage-
mant Fund have been £33 6s. Bd., and the expenditure £26 6s. 10d., showing
a gain of £6 19s. lOd. The cost per member for management has been 4s. l|d.”
The lodge contains 103 members of the average age of 36 years and 9 months.
South Australia. —The quarterly board meeting of the directors of this
society was held at the M.U. Hall, Franklin Street, Adelaide, on April 17. G.M.
W. Sketheway in the chair. The balance-sheet showed : Income for the
quarter—Levies, £767 195.; returns for new members, £23 4s. ; goods sold,
£6l 7s. ; interest, £358 Bs. 9d.; sundries, £22 Is. Id. ; total income,
£1,232 19s. lOd. Expenditure—Paid on death of 21 members, £560; expenses
of management, £65 Is. 6d. ; goods, £9 Os. 2d.; sundries, £l2 Is. lOd. ; total
expenditure, £646 3s. 6d., leaving a balance to the credit of the Widow and
Orphan Fund of the society of £22,737 19s. 10d., which is invested as
under ; Loans on mortgage and freehold property, £20,018 ; cash in Bank of
Adelaide and on deposit, £2,064 os. sd. ; interest and insurance premiums due,
£353 13s. 6d. ; goods on hand, £302 6s. lid. The levy to the Widow and
Orphan Fund for the ensuing quarter was fixed at Is. 6d. per quarter.
South Australia. —The annual meeting of the Adelaide District was held at
the M.U. Hall, Franklin Street, March 27. Prov. G.M. Anderson in the chair.
The balance-sheet showed income from levies, &c., £2,212 os. Bd.; balance
last half-year, £B2B 2s. lOd.; total, £3,040 3s. 6d. Expenditure—Paid to
Widow and Orphan Fund, £1,384 16s. lid.; Benevolent Fund, £42 10s.; paid
account of death of 42 members and 19 members’ wives, £BSB ; expenses of
management, £lls 9s. lid. ; reimbursements, £23 7s. 9d.; total expenditure,
£2,424 4s. 7cL, leaving a balance to the credit of the District Funeral Fund of
£615 18s. lid. The balance-sheet of the District Benevolent Fund showed
income £llß 10s. lid., including the handsome donation of £SO sent by the
Mosquito Plains Lodge, profits of an excursion at opening of railway to Kingston.
Expenditure, £2O 10s., relief to six members and one widow ; leaving a balance
to the credit of that fund of £564 Bs. Id. The levies for the ensuing two
quarters were fixed at 3s. per member per quarter. The district officers reported
two lodges having been opening during the half-year. There were 8,273
members belonging to this district. Prov. D.G.M. King was elected Prov. G.M.,
P.G. Lane was elected Prov. D.G.M., and Prov. C.S. Beyer was re-elected for
the ensuing twelve months. A testimonial to the value of £5 was voted to
P.P.G.M. Anderson for the efficient manner in which he had fulfilled his duties
during his term of office.
Southampton. —On October 26th, 1876, there was a very large attendance at
the Princess Royal Lodge, at the Kingsland Tavern, St. Mary’s Street, and in


addition to its being the ordinary lodge night it was also made the occasion of
the presentation of a testimonial to Brother Alderman E. Jones, J.P., the
ex-Mayor of the borough. Mr. Secretary Russell made the presentation. Having
alluded to his many benevolent acts during his mayoralty, Bro. Russell said all
would recollect the banquet he gave when the H.C.M. of the Foresters was
held at Southampton, and when many of the Manchester Unity of Oddfellows
were invited to meet the delegates at the festive board. And then when the
A.M.C. of the Oddfellows was held at Ryde, Bro. Jones kindly invited the
delegates to come up to Southampton to a banquet, but through circumstances
over which they had no control they were unable to accept the invitation. He
(Bro. Russell) very much regretted it, because he was sure the reception they
would have met with would have been such as to make them have a desire to
come to this part of the country again ere long. And then when the thirty-
second anniversary of the Princess Royal Lodge was held on the 24th of October
last Bro. Jones was unable, through illness, to be present, but he generously
invited the ladies to join them, and it enabled them to spend a most pleasant
evening. Bro. Jones had received some very valuable acknowledgments from
his fellow-townsmen for his services, but at the same time none had ever
been given with more respect than the testimonial they desired to present
to him that night. He hoped that among the many valuable presents
he had received from the town theirs would not be considered so much
for its intrinsic worth, but because it was an earnest expression of the
feeling of the members of the lodge towards him. Bro. Russell then presented,
amidst loud applause, a beautifully illuminated address, the work of Mr. W.
C. Clarke, of the High Street, and enclosed in a handsome gilt frame. At the
top is the eye, heart, and hand, and to the right the ex-Mayor’s crest, while
below that are the emblems of the Order, ‘‘Friendship, Love, and Truth, ,on
a border in the centre a dove with an olive branch, and at the bottom the arms
of the borough, the whole being executed in the most skilful and tasteful
manner. Bro. Jones thanked them very sincerely for that kind and flattering
address. That mark of their good feeling and esteem was to him most grati-
fying, emanating as it did from a body of men who were connected with the
greatest friendly or benefit society in this country. They were men who were
engaged in an excellent work, one which should be encouraged by all who held
any position either in their town or in connection with the State. He was
pleased to find that this was done to some extent, and that they had among
their number several of the most distinguished men in the kingdom, and the
Oddfellows and Foresters and other kindred institutions should receive all
that support and encouragement they so richly deserved. Later on Bro.
Alderman Jones proposed “ Success and Prosperity to the Princess Royal
Lodge,” and announced that he would give £2 2s. towards the Widow and
Orphan Fund, This was acknowledged by Secretary Russell, who said he
was pleased to say that the progress of the lodge was not surpassed, if equalled,
by any in the Southampton District. At the end of the past quarter their
lodge was worth £4,005 13s. 84d., or an increase of £137 11s. 8i d. in the three
months, and of their funds £3,150 was out on mortgage. Their sickness was
very light indeed, only amounting to £3B 14s. on the quarter, and their interest
money during the time was a little over £64, or considerably more than enough
to pay their sick. Bro. James Clark, the senior trustee of the lodge, then came
and presented the members with a handsomely-framed photograph
of the address, to be hung in the lodgeroom, and this was accepted on behalf
of the lodge with thanks by the H.G.
St. Helens. —On the 28th April the members of the Earl Grey Lodge
mustered in strong force at the lodgehouse, Griffin Inn, Peasley Cross,
to do honour to their treasurer and host Mr. James Kay. For some time


past it has been determined to recognise in a substantial manner the
valuable services Mr. Kay has rendered the Earl Grey Lodge. The subscription
met with a liberal response, which enabled the committee to provide a splendid
centre-seconds gold lever watch with a gold Albert and appendages, valued
altogether at £35. The watch and pendant each bore the following inscription:
“ Presented to P.G. James Kay by the members of the Earl Grey Lodge, No.
623,1.0.0., M.U., as a token of respect and acknowledgment of past services.”
The presentation was made by P.G. John Helsby, sen., who in a highly appro-
priate speech bore testimony to the many excellent qualities of Mr. Kay. He
reminded the members of the warm interest he had always taken in the welfare
of the lodge, and the numerous gratuitous services he had rendered to promote
and consolidate its financial prosperity. He hoped the proceedings of the
evening would encourage otners to follow in the steps of their worthy brother.
Mr. Kay with evident emotion briefly returned thanks, assuring the members
that he never expected his humble services would have been so generously
recognised. All he had done was with the single intention of making his lodge
financially strong and great. He was still ready and willing to assist the Earl
Grey to further prosperity, and earnestly counselled the younger members
to pay more attention to financial matters, attend the meetings regularly,
and take every possible opportunity to increase the numerical strength of the
lodge.
St. Albans.— On January 22nd the members of the Lord Bacon Lodge
celebrated the ninth year of its existence by a dinner, which was held in the
Corn Exchange. It was presided over by Mr. Councillor Slade, ex-Mayor;
supported by the Hon. H. F. Cowper, M.P. for the county; the Rev. W. J.
Lawrance, M.A., rector of the Abbey; the Rev. A. Gray, curate; Mr. Councillor
Woods, Mr. Councillor Hart, and other influential neighbouring gentlemen.
The Hon. H. F. Cowper, M.P., delivered a lengthy and eloquent address, in the
course of which he said he had much pleasure in being present that night, as
the occasion was one of great interest to a stranger like himself; and he would
tell them why—because associations like those, the anniversary of which they
were celebrating that night, represented the strength, the self-restraint, and
the backbone of the working classes of England. There were a great number
of people who would be more willing to give half a sovereign to help a man to
support himself than find him half a crown to be supported by somebody else,
and it was because bodies such as those which they were celebrating recognised
this great fundamental principle that they were so interesting. Mr. Secretary
J. H. Gray, after a passing review of the general statistics of the Unity, said
with respect to the Lord Bacon Lodge, he thought he might say without
exaggeration that its progress has been almost unprecedented in the history of
Oddfellowship. Nine years ago that very day it started with 16 members
only, and at the close of the business on the first night they had £4 in hand
and were £5 in debt; but there were now 212 members, besides honorary
members, and they had a capital of £1,070. He (Mr. Gray) had been con-
nected with the Manchester Unity for about 24 years, and he had never known
a lodge make so much progress as the Lord Bacon had. They had been
exceedingly fortunate in experiencing but little sickness and death ; and they
were indebted to their worthy surgeon for passing into the society only those
members whom he believed to be strong and healthy. When they considered
that Mr. Webster had passed nearly 200 members into the lodge, and the little
sickness they had had, he thought his judgment had been remarkably good. It
might be of some little interest to the members to tell them that since the
formation of the lodge they had paid sick members the sum of £377 13s. Bd.;
the share of the Funeral Fund of the district had been £153 19s. ; and they had
paid out of the Widow and Orphan Fund £4B 14s.


Stockton-on-Tees. —Last Christmas the hon. member for Stockton, Mr.
Joseph Dodds, presented to each of the friendly societies in Stockton a bank
note as a Christmas gift. Shortly afterwards a movement was set on foot by
several of the lodges to present Mr. Dodds with some recognition of his kind-
ness, and after several meetings it was resolved that it should be in the form
of a’ vote of thanks. Several lodges, although invited to participate in this
matter, declined to do so, feeling that the replies forwarded by their secretaries
were sufficient, and would meet the views of the hon. member. Notwithstanding
such dissension matters progressed, and a magnificently illuminated address of
thanks, bearing Mr. Dodds’ arms at the head, and the Stockton arms at the
foot, was prepared, and in accordance with an arrangement with the worthy
M.P. it was presented May 17th, at the Borough Hall, which was crowded by
members of the friendly societies. Mr. Dodds acknowledged the gift in feeling
terms. It had pleased the Divine Providence to fid the bitter cup of sorrow to
the brim ; hence, in a great measure, was to be attributed their meeting there
that night—the taking away from him of one who for nearly thirty years of
the best part of his life had been associated with him in all matters of a phil-
anthropic nature. Mr. Dodds proceeded to say that the late Mrs. Dodds, in
common with himself, had condemned and deplored what they considered the
senseless, extravagant, and semi-barbarous display which prevailed at funerals
in this country. Many years had passed since they mutually resolved that
whoever was the survivor, he or she would not do anything to aid the keeping
up of such a state of things. This was a resolution which had fallen to his lot
to carry out. Whilst, however, he thus acted, he felt it would be a comfort to
himself that the money which, in pursuing the ordinary course, would have
been spent in worse than useless show and display, should be devoted to some
charitable and beneficent object. After consulting his son and family, he
agreed that this determination should be carried into effect through t}re
agency of the friendly societies. No one more than he appreciated the grand
principles upon which those were founded, and no one more fully believed in
them.
Trowbridge. —From the annual report of C. S. Haines we extract the
following: “On the Ist of January, 1876, the district numbered 1,090
members. During the year 70 were admitted, whilst 11 have died, and 23
withdrawn, leaving on the books an aggregate of 1,126, being a net increase
of 36. The financial progress of the district continues most satisfactory
and encouraging. The present accumulated reserved capital amounts to
£13,003 13s. 5d., being an increase of £854 7s. Id. on the year, and is an
average of £ll 10s. per member, this varying in the different lodges
from £3 2s. 3£d. to £22 Bs. Although some of the lodges have
experienced considerable sickness during the past year, still it is gratifying to
know that the ‘ average sickness ’ in the district has been 1 day per member
less than the year before—being 1 week 22 hours against 1 week 1 day 22
hours in 1875. The total amount of sick benefits paid during the year was
£760 ; for medical attendance, £231 12s. 3d. ; making a total of £991 12s. 3d.
The average mortality among our members for many succeeding years was
exceedingly low, but is gradually on the increase, and the past year is no
exception, 11 members and 3 members’ wives (or one per cent of the
members) having died during that period. The total amount paid on the
death of members in the year was £132, of members’ wives £lB, exclusive of
£147 from the Widow and Orphan Fund, making a total of £297. Notwith-
standing the heavy demands upon the Widow and Orphan Fund during the
year just closed, nothing can be more gratifying than the steady in
the funds of this most interesting branch of the society. After expending
£147 in administering some degree of comfort and consolation to the widow


and the fatherless, there remains an aggregate balance of £2,783 17s.
thus insuring future help to those for whom this wise provision is made.”
Woolwich.—On February 21st the annual general meeting of this district,
consisting of eleven lodges, with 2,200 members, took place at The Lord
Raglan, Burrage-road, Plumstead, and was attended by upwards of 300 members
and friends, among whom were most of the prominent members of the district,
as also Bro. T. W. Boord, M.P., the senior member for the borough of Green-
wich, who is an honorary member of the Peace of England Lodge. The
occasion was one to do honour to the retiring G.M., H. W. Baker, who had
efficiently performed the offices of D.G.M. and G.M. during the years 1875-6,
by presenting him with his badge of office, together with an illuminated
address on vellum, and a very handsome marble timepiece, as an expression of
the appreciation of his services. The chair was occupied by Prov. G.M. W.
Maisey, supported by D.G.M. J. J. Holmes, Bro. Boord, M.P., P.P.G.M.’s Lovell,
C.S. of the District; Vaughan, Chinn, and G.M. Nicholls (South London);
P.P.G.M.’s Baker, Pownall (senior auditor of the Order), Smith, Beavan, &c.
The chairman then proposed the House of Commons, associating the name of
Bro. T. W. Boord therewith. Bro. Boord acknowledged the compliment,
and said that he must be very particular and avoid getting into party
politics, which he knew were forbidden in all Oddfellows’ meetings. He
congratulated the society, and the Woolwich branch in particular, upon
the success which had attended their good work; and, in alluding to
recent legislation in respect to friendly societies, remarked upon the earnest
manner in which the Chancellor of the Exchequer had worked in the interests
of the people, and expressed as his opinion that Sir Stafford Northcote was
thoroughly content with the success that had attended his efforts in that
respect. He then referred to the many great improvements that were being
introduced and carried out in behalf of the working classes, alluding particularly
to the Artisans Dwellings Act. He concluded a very excellent address, by
promising to give his attention to any questions relating to friendly society
legislation in which he might be of service. D.G.M. J. J. Holmes, in an
excellent and exhaustive address, alluded feelingly to the sudden death of
the G.M., J. Geves, of Leeds, who had been a member of the Order for forty
years, and had worked zealously in the cause. He called particular attention
to the injustice of the 23rd clause of the Poor-Law Amendment Act, 39 & 40
Viet., c. 60, suggesting that every effort should be made for its repeal, and
expressed his warmest thanks for the compliment they had paid him and his
co-workers on the Board. The Grand Master then touched briefly on all
matters of interest connected with the district; he especially commented
on the flourishing manner in which the amalgamated sick fund of the
district was progressing, and hoped to see the day when such funds would
be established in every district in the Unity, and concluded by presenting the
retiring G.M. with the above-named testimonial. P.P.G.M, H. W. Baker
replied in an appropriate manner.
Ystradgunlais.— On the 2nd of May a new lodge was opened at the Golden
Lion, Ystalyfera, called the Flower of Glamorgan. The inauguratory cere-
mony was performed by the G.M., T. Williams, D.G.M. C. Jones, and P.C.S.
B. Thomas, assisted by P.G.’s D. Lewis, J. Kenrick, and R. Williams, of the
Faith, Love, and Truth, and P.G.’s T. Lewis and W. Thomas, of the
Patriot. After the opening ceremony the G.M., assisted by several past
officers, initiated 40 new members in a very impressive manner. The proceed-
ings of the evening passed off most satisfactorily, the room being scarcely large
enough to accommodate the new members and brothers from neighbouring
lodges. There is every prospect that the lodge will be a successful one.


of Pr, f mrjr gatdiffc, €3,
It is with deep sorrow and sincere regret that we record the death of the most
worthy and highly respected Secretary to the Order, Mr. Henry Ratclifie.
He departed this life, at his residence, the Manchester Unity Offices,
Grosvenor Street, about twenty minutes past eleven o’clock a.m., on Friday,
the 26th of May. The Annual Movable Committee was sitting at the
neighbouring town of Oldham during the last short but severe attack of his
old physical enemy, rheumatic gout, and, as the report received on Thursday
was a very favourable one, the announcement of his demise, by the presiding
officer, Deputy Grand Master Holmes, on the following day, caused the most
profound sensation, and the meeting adjourned, out of respect to his memory,
for one hour.
As Mr. Ratcliffe’s memoir (from the pen of the present writer) appeared
with his portrait in the Magazine so recently as January, 1875, it is
unnecessary here to do more than refer to it, and recapitulate some of its
more prominent features. He was born at Tyldesley, on the 4th November,
1808, and was consequently in his sixty-ninth year. On the 7th December,
1833, he was initiated a member of the Travellers Rest Lodge, Chowbent
District, He was elected Prov. G.M. in 1836, and Prov. G.S. in 1839. In
1848 he was appointed Corresponding Secretary to the Board of Directors
and the Manchester Unity, and he has been continued by re-election in the
office from then to the time of his death. In addition to the laborious duties
of his secretaryship, he has been entrusted with the compilation and publi-
cation of statistical tables and reports on the financial condition of the Unity,
and other works of a similar character, which reflect not only high honour 6n
the society, and justify the high encomiums passed upon it by the members
of the recent Royal Commission on Friendly Societies, but which have placed
Mr. Ratcliffe’s name upon the list of eminent actuaries and contributors
towards the establishment of the science of vital statistics upon a sound
foundation. In 1862, from data obtained between 1856 and 1860, Mr.
Ratcliffe published his second series of “ Observations on the Rate of
Mortality and Sickness Existing Amongst Friendly Societies ; ” and in 1872
his third contribution to this subject, from the data obtained between 186b
and 1870. In 1871 Mr. Ratcliffe was instructed, by a resolution of the Bury
St. Edmunds A.M.C., to prepare a valuation of the assets and liabilities of
every lodge in the Unity, with the view to financial adjustment. This great
work was completed and published in 1873. He was appointed by the
Treasury public valuer for England and Wales under the provisions of the
Friendly Societies Act 1875, and also to certify annuities. _ This was only a
fitting tribute to his great talents as a statistician, and it was an honour
which reflected credit not only upon Mr. Ratclifie personally but upon the
Unity on whose behalf he had laboured. A mere reference to the work
he has accomplished is the best possible eulogium of his general talent
and business capacity. He never had the slightest desire to figure as
an orator or even debater. Indeed, speech-making was not, as he was
wont to say, in his line; but he laboured hard to furnish exact materials


on which the Annual Committees of the Order have based legislative
enactments which will redound to both his and their credit so long as
friendly society action is recognised as one of the most important factors in
the elevation of the masses and in the progressive civilisation of the human
race. His honourable career is an apt illustration of what may be accomplished
by intelligent industry, combined with the most scrupulous integrity. We
can only again repeat that Mr. Ratcliffe’s unassuming manner and general
courteous demeanour to all gained him not only the esteem, but the
affectionate regard of the brethren throughout the Unity.
The interment took place on Saturday afternoon, June 2nd, at the Brook-
lands Cemetery, near Sale, Cheshire. The cortege was arranged to start
from the offices, Grosvenor Street, Chorlton-on-Medlock, at two o’clock.
The previous day had been very wet, and although on Saturday the weather
was a little more favourable the roads were very dirty, consequently the
procession consisted only of carriages, the great majority of delegates going
by train. When the cortege started from the offices a great crowd of people
was attracted to the spot, their demeanour being appropriate to the solemn
event which was then taking place. There were thirteen mourning coaches,
eight containing relatives of the deceased, the remainder being occupied by
the Directors and other offices of the Order. In addition to the mourning
coaches there were seventeen cabs and one private carriage—that of Mr.
Frederick A. Whaite, fine art gallery, Bridge Street, Manchester —occupied
by members of the Order. The Board of Directors was represented by
the following gentlemen : Mr. J. J. Holmes (London), Grand Master; Mr,
J. A. Riley (Halifax), Deputy Grand Master ; Mr. J. Schofield (Bradford),
Secretary ; Mr. J. T. Cox (Stafford), P.G.M. ; Mr. R. Watson (Nottingham),
P.G.M. ; Mr. James Curtis (Brighton), P.G.M. and Parliamentary Agent;
Mr. W. N. Western (Poole), P.G.M. ; Mr. G. Flanaghan (Manchester),
P.C.S. ; Mr. H. Outram (Sheffield), P. Prov. G.M. ; Mr. F. S. Pownall
(Woolwich), P. Prov. G.M. ; Mr. T. Walton (Southampton), P.C.S. ; Mr. W.
Warbrick (Lancaster), P.C.S. Among others were the following Past
Grand Masters, etc. : Mr. E. Smith (Bootle), Mr. J. Gerrard (Chester), Mr.
W. Lovesey (Worcester), Mr. F. Richmond (Manchester), Mr. G. Walker
(Durham), Mr. W. Hickton (Stockport), Mr. C. Hardwick, editor of the
Magazine, Mr. W. Watkins, Newport, Monmouthshire, senior auditor, and
Mr. T. Collins, Chairman of the A.M.C. sub-Committee.
The following districts were likewise represented by one or more members
specially delegated to pay the last tribute of respect to the remains of their
esteemed officer : Accrington, Altrincham, Atherstone, Bacup, Barnsley,
Barrowford, Beeston Castle, Billesdon, Birmingham, Blaenavon, Bootle,
Bradford, Bramley, Broseley, Burnley, Burton-on-Trent, Bury, Bury St.
Edmunds, Burton, Carnarvon, Chester, Chesterfield, Chirk, Chowbent,
Coventry, Darlington, Denbigh, Denholmgate, Dewsbury, Dorking, Dronfield,
Durham, Eastwood, Eccles, Edmondscote, Ellesmere, Gloucester, Halifax,
Hope, Hull, Kersley, Knaresboro’, Lancaster, Leeds, Leek, Leicester, Leyland,
Lichfield, Little Lever, Liverpool, Llanelly, Llangadock, North London,
South London, West London, Manchester, Marple, Mossley, Nantwich, New-
port (Mon.), Northampton, Northwich, Nottingham, Oldham, Plymouth,
Poole, Pottery and Newcastle, Prescot, Preston, Rochdale, Rotherham,
Rugby, Salford, Shaw, Sheffield, Shipley, Skipton, Southampton, Stafford,
St. Helens, Stockport, Stokesley, Sunderland, Wellington, Wrinehill, Wolver-
hampton, Woolwich, Worcester, York, Ystradd Rhondda.
The representatives of several other Orders were present. The National
Independent Order of Oddfellows was represented by Mr. W. Brown, P.G.M.;


Mr W G. Faulkner, P.G.M. ; Mr. E. Burns, P.G.M. ; Mr. G. Richmond,
D.G.M.; Mr. L. Robinson, Provincial D.G.M. ; Mr. Ashworth, P.P.G.M.;
Mr. W. H. Lord, P.G. ; Mr. James Coope, P.G. ; and Mr. P. Bradshaw (Stret-
ford District), N.G. Mr. J. Ogden, Corresponding Secretary attended on
behalf of the Bolton Unity. Mr. James Farron, G.S., attended on behall ot
the Shepherds, and the Foresters were represented by Past High Treasurer
John Beck, of Chester, and C.S. John Bennett, of the Chester District. An
invitation from the Directors was : forwarded, on Friday night, to Mr. Shaw-
cross, secretary of the Foresters, but a telegram was received m reply from
that gentleman regretting that business arrangements prevented his attend-
ance. At the same time he expressed great sympathy and condolence with
the family of the deceased in their bereavement.
When the cortege arrived at the cemetery at Brooklands the weather had
somewhat brightened. The gentlemen who had come by train were marshalled
in two columns along the road near to the cemetery, and between these the
hearse and mourning coaches passed to the cemetery gates, where a, number
of spectators had assembled. The Brooklands Cemetery is beautifully laid
out with flowers, shrubs, and trees, and almost in the heart of this picturesque
Henry Ratcliffe has been laid to rest. _ The mortuary chapel
was too small to admit many people, so that the service was only heard by
the mourners and some of the Directors, &c., of the Order. _ The service was
conducted by the Rev. Edward Morris, Congregational minister, of Sale, the
interment taking place in that portion of the ground set apart for Dissenters.
In the meantime the great body of the brethren were marshalled near to
the grave, where they were drawn up into line as the cortege approached.
The coffin bore the following simple inscription : “ Henry Ratcliffe. Died
25th May 1877. Aged 68 years.” Past Grand Master Lovsey, of Worcester,
brought with him an elegant emblematical wreath of flowers, which, at his
request, the Grand Master deposited on the coffin, and with this token of
affectionate regard the ceremony closed.
Many expressions of regret have been received both by the Directors o’f the
Order and the family of the deceased. Mr. Ratcliffe held a position which
brought him much under public notice, and it is therefore natural that his loss
should be felt by many outside his own immediate circle of friends, and even
beyond the society with which he has been so long and so honourably
identified. Perhaps one of the most gratifying marks of respect was received
from Sir Stafford Northcote and another from the Registrar of Friendly
Societies for England. These gentlemen sent telegrams, which were read by
Mr James Curtis, the Parliamentary Agent of the Unity, at a meeting of the
Directors on the Friday preceding the interment, and which expressed deep
regret at Mr. Ratcliffe’s death, especially as his services were deemed almost
indispensable in making valuations of the assets and liabilities of friendly
societies he being at the time of his decease one of the thirteen valuers
appointed under the recent Friendly Societies Act. The Board of Directors
presented the following address of condolence to the relatives of the deceased :
INDEPENDENT ORDER OF ODDFELLOWS, MANCHESTER
UNITY, FRIENDLY SOCIETY.
To the Members of the Family of the late Mr. Henry Ratcliffe.
“We the Grand Master, Deputy Grand Master, and Board of Directors,
in full ’meeting assembled, desire to convey to you the expressions of our
condolence in the loss recently sustained in the death of one who, for a period
of 29 years, occupied the position of Corresponding Secretary.


“Our late C.S. was universally beloved, and his memory will long be
cherished by thousands of members of the society with whom he was brought
into contact. As the most responsible officer of the Manchester Unity he
faithfully discharged his duties, and the services he rendered to friendly
societies generally will survive him and cause his memory to be cherished
wherever the English language is spoken or friendly societies exist. High
and deserved eulogiums were passed upon him by the Royal Commission
on Friendly Societies, and his valuable compilations and publications on
the statistics of sickness and mortality will for ever remain as standard works
of the utmost value.”
It will be seen, by reference to an advertisement on the cover of the
Magazine, that Messrs. Hind have commissioned Mr. Greatbach, the eminent
engraver, to execute a large first-class portrait of Mr. Ratcliffe, suitable for
framing. No doubt many of the members will gladly avail themselves of this
opportunity of securing a copy as a fitting memorial of their departed friend
and respected brother Oddfellow.
fw 'pUwmlitttt.
JOHN GEVES. Died November 18th, 1876.
HENRY RATCLIFFE. Died May 25th, 1877.
I.
Stricken down just as he reached the'goal—
The well-won point of his and our endeavour!
The height we all aspire to reach with toil
He barely reached when called from us to sever,
leader among men—the head of our vast army :
Who could desire a nobler post to fill ?
But in the midst of his command of glory,
John Geves was called to higher honours still.
11.
And now again—too soon, alas ! —we mourn
The guiding brain, the ever ready pen.
Of one who laboured well in our good cause
To raise our Order highest among men.
Our words are weak to half express his worth—
Nor can they well find vent when hearts are sore ;
But when our Ratcliffe’s name shall be forgot
Oddfellowship itself shall be no more.
Claremont Lodge, Esher. E. A. Everett, P.G.


(Dbitorju
Ashton-in-Maeerbteld. —On the 22nd of March P. P.D. G.M. Thomas Pilling,
of the Good Samaritan Lodge, Haydock, in the 72nd year of his age. He was
admitted a member of the Triumphant Lodge, No. 97, Ashton, on the 30th day
of August, 1828. In 1834 he drew his clearance for the purpose of assisting
to form the Good Samaritan Lodge. He lived to see his labours crowned with
success. He was interred at St. Thomas’s Church, Ashton, when a number of
the members of his lodge followed him to his last resting-place.
Ashton-in-Makerfield District.— On the 27th of March P. Prov. G.M.
John Fairhurst, senior, of the Good Samaritan Lodge, Haydock, in the 73rd
year of his age. He was admitted a member of the Triumphant Lodge,
Ashton, on the 12th day of February, 1831, afterwards drawing his clearance
in the year 1834, together with a few others, for the purpose of forming the
Good Samaritan Lodge, of which he was a member at the time of his decease.
P. Prov. G.M. John Fairhurst took an active part fn the formation of the
Ashton-in-Makerfield District, and in recognition of his services he was
unanimously elected the first Prov. G.M. of the new district on the 19th day
of July, 1834, which office he filled with credit to himself and to the satisfac-
tion of all. He was in every sense of the word a good Oddfellow, ready at all
times to stretch forth his hand to a brother in distress, give him his best
counsel and advice, and to offer up his warmest petitions for his welfare. He
was a zealous member of the Wesleyan body, enjoying a reputation which few
can boast of as a sound teacher and an eloquent and impressive preacher. As
a mark of the esteem in which he was held, his remains were followed to their
last resting-place by his employer, J. Evans, Esq., and a large number of the
members of his lodge. He was interred at St. Thomas’s Church, Ashton, on
Good Friday, the 30th day of March.
Brighousb. —On June 6th, at his house, Rastrick, P. Prov. G.M. Joseph
Haigh. He was born in 1813, and was initiated into the Manchester Unity on
the 28th of March, 1835, so that he has been a member more than forty-two
years. During that time he laboured hard for the furtherance of the principles
of Oddfellowship. He filled the various offices of his lodge, the Peace. He
laboured hard for the cause, trying to place the lodge in a sound financial
state; and much of its present prosperity may be attributed to his untiring
zeal. For the district he also worked hard, filling the offices in a meritorious
manner. He was Corresponding Secretary many years, till failing health com-
pelled him to retire and leave the work to a younger member. He has been
deputy to many of the annual Movable Committees, and so much had he the
welfare of the Order at heart that he attended several meetings at his own
expense. He was at the Oldham meeting in Whitsun-week, and got a severe
cold there that has had, no doubt, a tendency to accelerate his end. He was
much respected by a large circle of friends, and his loss will long be felt by
many who have shared with him the honour of being connected with the
Brighouse District.
Hunslet. —On the 22ud of April, at his residence, 10, Busk Street, Mr.
Thomas Harrison, aged 62 years. The faithful manner in which he discharged,
for 33 years, the duties of C.S. of the Hunslet District secured him many
friends in the Order. On one occasion he had the satisfaction of receiving
from his brethren a substantial token of their appreciation of his valuable
services. He was a member of the Lily of the Valley Lodge for 42 years, and
organist of the New Connexion Chapel, Hunslet, 42 years. His kind heart and
125
OBITUARY.


genial disposition will long be remembered by those who had the pleasure of
his acquaintance. He was also connected with the Order of the Golden Fleece.
The interment took place at Woodhouse Hill Cemetery.
Leicester. —The somewhat eccentric and “Musical Postman,” Mr. William
Fewkes, expired, after a short illness, on the 4th June, at his residence,
Northampton Street, in his 79th year. He had been in the postal service for
27 years, and was superannuated in 1866 in consequence of confirmed
rheumatism of several years’ standing. He was also well-known as an amateur
actor of no mean pretensions on the Leicester stage some 50 years ago. He
figured also as a very prominent Oddfellow of the Lord Brougham Lodge,
Leicester District, Manchester Unity, having been initiated on July 6th, 1839,
and consequently a member for 38 years. He filled the office of Prov. G.M. in
1845, and was the oldest P.P.G.M. of the district at the time of his decease.
Being a good singer and elocutionist, his presence was hailed with delight in
the various convivial meetings and anniversaries connected with the Order.
His funeral took place at the Leicester Cemetery, and was attended by upwards
of 60 officers and brethren of the Order, to mark the respect and esteem in
which he was held by the society. P.P.G.M. Bloxam read, in an impressive
manner, the address of the Order at the grave.
Preston. —On April 30th, P. Prov. G.M. Henry Proctor Watson. Mr. Watson
was D.G.M of the District in 1847 and G.M. in 1848, and at the Halifax A.M.C.
he was elected one of the Board of Directors, but only served during the
following year. He formerly took great interest in the affairs of Oddfellowship,
and was much respected by the brethren both of Preston and neighbouring
districts.
Torpoint. —The brethren of the Pride of Cornwall Lodge assembled on
Sunday, April 15th, for the purpose of conveying to their last resting-place, at
Antony Churchyard, the mortal remains of Bro. William Gibson, a member of
the Gibraltar Lodge, and late a Company Sergeant-Major of the Royal Engineers.
Upwards of 70 members of the Order were present, besides several friends of
the deceased who joined the procession. The bearers consisted of six sergeants
of the Engineer corps; the pall of the Order covered the coffin. Notwithstanding
the severe nature of the weather and the long distance over 100 persons
attended to assist in the mournful procession.
Warrington.— Mr. Wm. Savage, the registrar of the Warrington Cemetery,
died at his residence on April 7th. Mr. Savage, who was 48 years of age, was
best known in the town as an indefatigable promoter of the interests of friendly
societies, especially those connected with the Manchester Unity, of which
society he was one of the most prominent members. He joined the Order in
1865. He immediately was invested with a minor office, and step by step he
succeeded in attaining the highest office which it is in the power of the district
to confer, that of Provincial Grand Master. His services to Warrington Odd-
fellowship have been of such a character that his name will ever be associated
with one of the most prosperous and useful branches of the society. We refer
to the Children’s Burial Society, which he was the means of establishing in
1868, and which has now a fund of £6OO, and which is specially intended for
the benefit of the children of Oddfellows. Five times he has been chosen as
the representative of the Warrington District at the A.M.C., and he would have
been again appointed this year had his health permitted his election. During the
year a lodge has been opened at Padgate bearing his name, a compliment he
warmly appreciated. About twelve months ago the members of the district
presented him with a handsome gold watch, as a token of their appreciation of
his services to the Order. The funeral took place at the cemetery in the
presence of a large concourse of people, many of whom were the representatives
of friendly societies.




Jpfv'; |v
/ . , • ■ /■ //
' “V --' /itS/JZ'ry.rA' , JV J- ,nr ’" /
y / 7 jf "A •- / M'7iis


THE
(
ODDFELLOWS’ MAGAZINE.
OCTOBER, 1877.
THOB. BILLOWS, P. PROV. G.M.
The news was hailed with evident pleasure by the friends and
admirers of P.P.G.M. Billows when it was known that the delegates
assembled at the A.M.C. at Ryde, in 1876, had thought fit to vote
that his portrait and memoir should be inserted in the Magazine;
and more especially did the brethren of the Portsmouth District
take it unto themselves as an honour that one of their members
should have attained such a prominent position in the Order as to
justify the great compliment thus conferred upon him. Our
brother, in common with many others, cannot boast of many
hardships in his lifetime to call forth admiration and praise for
his exertions and manly efforts to raise himself to a social
position; still he has always been accustomed to thriftiness and
self reliance, and his chief sphere of usefulness has been, and
we hope it always will be, for the common good of our noble
institution. He was born in Portsea on the 11th of July, 1825,
and, after receiving the rudiments of a practical education, was
apprenticed as a shipwright, with whom he faithfully served his
time, and removed in 1847 to West Cowes. It was during his
stay in West Cowes that he bethought himself of the necessity of
providing against the time of sickness, and for that reason he joined
the Loyal Northwood Lodge on the Bth of February, 1848, and
immediately after his initiation began to take office.* He has ever
since closely allied himself to the Order; only on one or two


occasions has he been out of office. He married, on September
28th, 1851, Charlotte, the daughter of the late Mr. T. Cooper, of
Soutbsea, by whom he has issue four children, three of which now
survive. On his removal back to Portsmouth he was, and now
remains, employed in H.M.’s Dockyard. He immediately asso-
ciated himself with the Providential and Humane Lodge at Portsea,
in which he filled several minor offices, and on the 12th of May,
1849, deposited his clearance in that lodge. In June, 1850, he
was elected Secretary, and in December, 1850, to Vice Grand.
Whilst acting as Y.G., the Permanent Secretary having resigned, he
(Mr. Billows) was elected to supply the vacancy by a large majority
in January, 1851. This office he retains at the present time.
The lodge then numbered 120 members; now it numbers 870.
At the A.M.C. in 1861, at Bolton, he represented the South-
ampton District, and successfully applied for a new district, to be
called the Portsmouth District, the application being made by the
Providential and Humane Lodge, then numbering 305 members.
The Portsmouth District at present numbers over 3,000 members,
and too much praise cannot be given to him and many other good
workers in Oddfellowship for the cause of this advancement. Few,
if any, districts can record so much substantial progress in so short
a space of time.
Mr. Billows has represented the Portsmouth District at the
following A.M.C. ; s: Burton-on-Trent, Cheltenham, Sunderland,
Bury St. Edmunds, Richmond, Newport, and the Isle of Wight,
and has served on several Sub-Committees.
Deeds speak louder in his praise than any general eulogy, how-
ever eloquent, possibly could do. As a Secretary he may be
equalled but not excelled. His study has ever been to fulfil his
duties and devote his whole leisure time and experience to the
office. The way his books are kept has always been eulogised by
the lodge auditors and district examiners of lodge accounts, his
system being so clear and concise that his services have often been
solicited to help to set the books right of many of the lodges in the
district which have since adopted his system. It is his wish to still
continue to work and advance the best interests of Oddfellowship.
As a further proof of the esteem he is held in by his lodge,
the members, at a summoned meeting on the 6th July, 1877,
unanimously voted from the Management Fund the sum of £SO
to purchase a suitable testimonial for him for the faithful way in
which he had discharged the duties of his office for a period of
26 J years. This testimonial, which consists of a silver tea and
coftee service and teaspoons and a timepiece, was presented to him
on Tuesday, August 28th, particulars concerning which will be
found in another page of the present number.


oi ifyt |lxnL
BY J. S. BOBLASK.
Oh, the fun of the Rink ! —the fun of the Rink !
I went there last night, and what do you think ?
The floor was so polished, the skates so good,
The steam well up, nor pause nor stop I could.
Hither and thither, and to and fro,
Wherever I wheeled ’twas wheel and woe.
Yes, many cried, ‘‘Wo !” but I still wheeled on,
And down went the weak and down went the strong.
I charged an alderman, like shell of Herr Krupp—
He was so full of turtle he couldn’t get up.
Then right into an undertaker’s arms
I shot a doctor, but he showed no alarms,
And on the mishap seemed to set little store—
He’d let too many patients so fall before.
Next I plumped full against a fair dame,
With curls of Norway and eyebrows of Spain ;
She kept her colour but lost her hair,
A coincidence you may perhaps think rare ;
But some girls are so bold, let what will appal.
They never change colour—oh, no, not at all!
And as for the hair, ’twas her own I will bet—
She looked too well off to run into debt.
Then, thirdly, I chanced to upset a canon—
A great gun, no doubt ; but I thought, as I ran on,
That a Churchman aspiring to be to the fore
Should not take his stand on a slippery floor.
And then I knocked down, nor paused to assist,
A leader of fame and premier novelist,
Who remarked, with a smile, “ I’m not very busy,
So I’ll pause where I am, for I feel rather Dizzy ;
And I’ll own dizzy-pated he certainly looked—
I was very Loth-there to see him so nearly cooked.
Next down went a statesman, with eyeballs of snow ;
’Twas saddening to see him lying so Low,
And to list the excuse that he hastened to hatch,
“ You didn’t upset me—l slipped on a match.”
Ah ! no Happy Land can that Skating Rink be
For one loving hot water, le lon UvKV-de-vie !
After all these mishaps I came straight away—
I’d done mischief enough for one short summer day ;
But all who love fun and from upsets don’t shrink,
Rush away to the Rink—the famed Skating Rink.
Poetry.—That quick sense of two powers—of Nature and Humanity, of man
a nd a world outside of man—is the root of all poetry. —Alexander Smith.
131
THE SONG OF THE RINK.


gistrixt Jmeral Jfunbs*
One of the most important questions at present demanding con-
sideration at the hands of the more thoughtful members of the
Unity is the condition of our District Funeral Funds. As at present
collected and disbursed, scarcely in any one instance can they be
said to be based on perfect equity; and this important fact is
attracting the attention of the members of newly-opened lodges,
who, being much below the average age of the district as a whole,
feel that the present system of equal levies operates seriously to
their disadvantage.
It was early found necessary, in order to insure something
like a practical approximation to the average results obtained by
actuaries from extensive data, that several lodges should enter
into a copartnership of risk on account of the limited number
of members of which they are individually composed. Isolated
branches were found to vary so much in their mortality experience
that but for the district aid in unhealthy seasons, or during a
continuance of a series of exceptional claims, they must soon have
collapsed. Referring to this question, we have previously observed
that a “ levy of four shillings per head in the Preston District in
1850, extending over about 2,000 members, was sufficient' to
liquidate all claims on the mortality account. Yet there were six
lodges without a single death during that period, whilst one was so
heavily pressed upon that, had it stood alone, the sum of fifteen
shillings and ninepence would have been required from each of its
own members to meet their life assurance engagements for one
year V'*
It may be justly said that the experience of any single year may
be of an exceptional character, and that consequently no thoroughly
satisfactory inference can be drawn therefrom, as the observed
irregularity might be neutralised in succeeding years. To some
extent this is true, but not sufficiently so to correct the uncertainty
of the results attendant \ipon the smallness of the number of
members of which lodges are generally composed. An examina-
tion of the returns for five consecutive years showed that the
average cost per member per annum was 4s. 2d,; yet 10s. 2d. per
member would have been required by one lodge to meet its own
mortality account, while another could have discharged its claims
* “ Manual for Patrons and Members of Friendly Societies,” page 96.


with Is. BJd. Thus the necessity of district instead of lodge
funeral funds is a condition imposed by the inexorable laws
of mortality insurance as exhibited by vital statistical science, and
cannot with safety be either ignored or evaded.
The method generally, nay almost universally, adopted hitherto of
levying an equal sum per annum from every member in all the lodges
in order to discharge the mortality liabilities is, at the best, but a
rough-and-ready financial proceeding, which perhaps might pass
muster during the earlier years of the society’s existence when the
contributions of members entering at all the permitted ages was
uniform in amount. But since the adoption of graduated rates of
in-payment according to age on initiation, such a proceeding is
evidently absurd and even financially unjust. The calculation for
the in-payments to secure a certain sum at the death of a member is
a distinct item in the subscription required to meet all the promised
benefits, and every penny so charged ought to be devoted to the
liquidation of the demands on the district mortality account alone,
and not, as at present, confused with that of the individual lodges
which undertake to provide for their own sick members alone out
of their own funds, and not by a levy extending over the whole of
the members of the district.
On referring to one of Mr. Ratcliffc’s tables, we find that in
order to insure the sum of £lO at death an annual payment of
2s. 10|d. is required from a member entering at age 18; at age
30, 45,; and at age 40, ss. 7£d. Now the moneys so subscribed
have nothing whatever to do with the sickness insurance, and
ought to be invested in the names of trustees appointed by the
body undertaking the responsibility of the insurance at death —in
other words, the district.
It must be apparent to the least reflecting mind that a great
financial injustice is inflicted upon the members of a lodge newly
opened when they are called upon to pay an annual levy of from four
to six or seven shillings per member to the district funeral expenses,
when perhaps the average of their full contribution to this item of
insurance is only somewhere between three and four shillings !
Where is the additional money to come from 1 and where are the
members as their average age increases to look for funds to meet their
increased mortality liability 1 In fact the additional levied money
is abstracted from the fund which should be accumulating to meet
their increased sickness during old age, and no provision, or, at
least, no adequate provision, will eventually remain for the fulfil-
ment in the decline of life of any of the insurances promised on
the initiation of the members.
The financial danger as well as the non-equitable character of
the present system of equal levy has, as we have -previously inti-
133
DISTRICT FUNERAL FUNDS.


mated, begun to engage the serious attention of the members in
several important districts, and various expedients have been
suggested from time to time to remedy the evil. We have
expounded the only thoroughly equitable conditions on which a
district funeral fund can be founded. In the formation of a new
district this course ought to be adopted in its integrity. On the
other hand we are well aware of the difficulties which attend the
eradication of old habits and old prejudices, and consequently we
do not expect that in every district lodge majorities will speedily
inaugurate a thoroughly perfect financial system with respect to
the mortality insurance ■ but whatever attempt may be made at
improvement, it is necessary that the true vital statistical laws
should be clearly recognised and the equity of the financial adjust-
ment firmly insisted upon. We find several districts have adopted
the plan of levying the amount required for the payment of
the funeral liabilities according to the ages of the members in
each lodge. Notwithstanding its evident equity this course has,
in some instances, led to rebellion, and several lodges have been
suspended in consequence. We, however, do not anticipate much
injury to the permanent interests of the Unity from secessions
arising out of this action, inasmuch as the older lodges that leave
the Unity will in the future have to bear the heavier expense of
their own mortality insurance, owing to their advanced ages,
while the younger ones, being relieved of the additional burthen
unjustly thrown upon their shoulders, will have their loyalty to
the Unity thereby strengthened, and the course of further financial
improvement greatly facilitated. C. H.
Errors in Self-Estimation. —Scaliger, who hated everybody with any
pretensions to scholarship as much as German Orientalists hate each other at
the present day, said that Passerat (French poet at the close of the sixteenth
century) had only read eight books in his life, and was by no means the great
man he thought himself, which is quite possible. Vert few people are !
The French Humorists, hy Walter Besant, M.A.
The Importance of Intellectual Culture. —It may not be the very
highest view to take of the advantage of culture, but there can be no doubt of
the practical wisdom which bids us invoke it as a protection against the dull-
ness of existence and and the melancholy of old age. People with few ideas
are apt to set an undue value on them, and to urge them with narrow-minded
intolerance. It is good to be able to realise the vast variety of points of view
from which every question may be regarded, and the larger is our experience
or our knowledge both in time and space the less likely are we to generalise
hastily on matters which concern mankind. The lessons of history are in many
ways valuable ; and not the least so when they warn us against indul ;ing in
over-confident expectations or attaching an undue value to things merely
because they fill a large space in the view of our own age or country.—Man-
chester Examiner.
