

aft n
Ink I I liv DC ills w f
'W* |^^^||


NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA?


\ -V
-
«
**
# *
■
AT THE BEND OF THE CREEK.






v * ->‘- v * a
S' ■ * *'"'
“ I WATCHED HIM SAUNTER AWAY, CLENCHING MY HANDS AND
WHISPERING CRIES FOR HELP.” \J>. 123.


AT THE BEND OF
THE CREEK.
A STORY OF AUSTRALIA.
E. GERTRUDE and ANNIE A. HART.
FOUR ILLUSTRATIONS BY T. W. HO LG ATE.
LONDON:
S. W. PARTRIDGE & CO.,
8 & 9, PATERNOSTER ROW.


, /
/


IH7 CXOO
tsji
CONTENTS.
I “A Chit of a Girl” 9
11. “He Hates Music” - - 21
HI. A Tale at Sunset - - 34
IV. “The Heroine is tour dear Friend” 43
V. “If the Waters Rose ! ” - - 5 2
VI. “ Lighten our Darkness ” - 69
VII. A Cry for Help ... 85
VIII. “ All the Puzzle of Life has ended
FOR HIM ” - - - 89
IX. “ You too ? Poor little Woman ! ” 100
X. “Nineteen To-day!” - - m


■ >
.


AT THE BEND OF THE CREEK
CHAPTER I.
“ A CHIT OF A GIRL.”
ur I ' HE new teacher has come to State School
1009, —a lady : and, in spite of all
warnings and threats she means to stay, she
says.”
Brian Dene spoke lazily, looking all round the
long room, from the recess where Hugh and
Nellie Cathcart sat at the chess board, to the piano
where Marion was playing a choice morceau, and
lastly at me, as I knitted laboriously at a pair of
socks, which latter, as they rudely told me, had
come to stay.
“ Lazy little girl,” he said sotto voce, as I raised
my eyes to his. “Itis to be hoped that Hugh,
poor fellow, is not depending on getting those
articles of clothing before this time next year.
Kittie, they have been always in evidence this


week, and yet I am sure that you have not got
five rows done, —knit one, slip one, seam stitch,
knit two together. I wonder that you don’t
dream about them. lam sure 1 do."
“ I am turning the heel now/’ I said indignantly,
giving the while a pettish toss to the long plait of
hair which will persist in falling over my shoulders
at all times and seasons (Marion will not hear of
my coiling it on top of my head, though I am
eighteen now, and very tall). “ And this is the
second sock, not the one you saw before.”
But just then Hugh's quiet voice sounded across
the room.
“Your king is in check, Mrs. Cathcart, I think.
The new teacher, Brian, did you say, and a lady
after all ? What a pity! In a case like this I
think the Education Department would be wise to
study popular opinion.”
“ Why ? ”
Brian Dene asked the question carelessly, with
his eyes still on my unfortunate fingers. “ The
Happy Valley people had a male teacher once,
who managed to make himself very popular.
The Happy Valley people thereupon decide that
for the future none but a male teacher will suit
them. They accordingly decide to get their
own way, whoever has to suffer, so they bully and
harass any unfortunate lady who has the ill luck
to be sent to them in that capacity. Three have


already been fairly driven out, and the charming
creatures have so far triumphed. You would re-
ward them by giving them their own way now,
would you ? ”
Hugh did not answer, for at that moment he
was lifting his opponent’s queen from the board
with a slight smile of triumph. But Nellie Cathcart
said smoothly —“ You put it very well, Mr. Dene,
but that is not argument. It is easy to ridicule.
For my part I must say I agree with Mr. Manfred.
No principle is at stake, consequently it would be
wiser to yield,—if only for the sake of the unfor-
tunate teacher whom they send. I quite pity her.”
That was one of the things about Nellie
Cathcart that I hated so. She always did
“agree with Mr, Manfred.” In the old days,
when Marion and I were scholars at Pierrepont
College, wearing shabby dresses, and receiving
only letters from the dear grave elder brother
who toiled so unceasingly to clothe and educate
us, Miss Nellie Stokes, junior governess and
kindergarten teacher, took precious little notice
of us. But when Uncle Sam, who all his life
long had ignored us, died, leaving no will, and
Hugh became heir to all this wealthy estate : and
when very thankfully he brought his two little
sisters —as he loves to call us home to
“Weeanite,” we soon received a gushing letter
from the lady in question.


She had married the curate of the church we
had been accustomed to attend at college, was
widowed and poor, she wrote, would be grateful
to come and finish our tuition for very little —
for the sake of old times, etc., etc.
And to my surprise Marion, though she pursed
her lips at the idea of more education being
necessary in her case, yet carried the letter to
Hugh with a little eagerness.
“We shall need a chaperone, you know,” she
urged ; “ that is, if lam to see any society. And
I am very dull with only Kittie for company.”
Hugh looked a little grave at this speech, for
he holds all sorts of old fashioned notions about
sisters being content with each other’s society :
but in the end Marion had her way, and Nellie
came. She was very little altered, looked pale and
demure in her studiedly simple black frock : her
silky black hair was coiled as neatly as ever, and
her cold bright hazel eyes sparkled at sight of her
luxurious surroundings. It would be well worth
her while to make herself necessary to us all.
Already—and she had only been with us a few
weeks—she was part and parcel of the place, riding
or driving with Marion, playing chess in the
evenings with Hugh —a game of which he was
inordinately fond, while we two girls detested it
—and always, as I said before, agreeing with the
master of the house in his somewhat stereotyped


view of things, even putting the case for him
when he was at a loss for words, with masterly
skill. Yes, she was fast becoming necessary to all
in the house —with two exceptions.
I disliked her, and so, I think, did Brian Dene.
Hut then she considered him an outsider, not
worth studying, while as for m^ —I was only
a chit of a girl. When first Brian came on
that long visit, which at Hugh's urgent request
had lengthened itself out so much, the dainty
little widow had eved him with much favour, until
J w
she learned (from his own lips, I fancy, for we
never mentioned it) that he was only a barrister
with his way yet to make, taking a long holiday
after an inconvenient attack of brain fever. Then
with a little sigh she turned her thoughts and atten-
tions to Hugh. True, he had not the handsome
dark eyes and distinguished appearance of his guest,
nor the merry mischievous tongue that won a way
to all hearts. But then he owned “ Weeanite,"
with its miles of hill and dale, creek and forest, its
thousands of sheep and herds of prize cattle, —
and that spelt for this little schemer—happiness !
From the time this decision was taken she devoted
all her energies towards forwarding Marion's
efforts to attract the ineligible young barrister,
for Marion once disposed of, there remained only
myself to baulk her plans. And I was only a chit
of a girl, with a mind to form.


So as Brian spoke she bent over the chess
board, letting her tiny hands flutter over the
pawns, and said with gentle decision that she
quite agreed with Mr. Manfred, and that —with a
wise shake of her head —she pitied the lady who
had come in spite of the expressed desire of the
people.
“ I do not think you need,” Mr. Dene made
answer. “ This lady will win her way in spite of
them. They must love her. She is plucky too,
for she insists on living in the school-house
itself, instead of boarding in the valley like her
predecessors.”
“ Alone ? ” Mrs. Cathcart queried, with raised
eyebrows.
“ No; her father, I presume, is with her, a gentle,
sad-faced old man.”
“Then you saw them both,” Hugh said, pausing
a moment to glance round. “ Did you think to
inquire for the mail, Brian ? ”
“ I did. Nothing in the papers to-night. Yes,
I saw them bofh, had quite a long chat with them,
in fact. I advised the young lady to fight it out
to the end, —this absurd prejudice, I mean. And
she said such was her intention, I hope she
sticks to it ; she will make a nice friend for you
girls.”
“ What is she like ? ” Marion queried curtly; and
Brian answered —


“ She is one of the most beautiful women 1 have
ever met.”
Silence followed, a silence in which Nellie
Cathcart’s low laugh sounded almost harsh.
Marion struck a random chord so carelessly that
the discord she evoked made us all turn to look at
her : and with heightened colour she closed the
instrument and left the room. Then Brian spoke
softly to me, so softly that his words would be
inaudible to the players in the recess.
“ Put away that everlasting knitting, Kittie ;
it gets on my nerves, and I want to talk to
you.”
But I went on unheeding, not liking the impera-
tive tone and glance. Why should everyone,—
why should Brian Dene pretend that I was a child
to be coaxed and commanded ?
“ I am listening,” I said coolly. “ You want
me to do something for you, of course ? Well, tell
me what ! ”
“So you are vexed too,” he said keenly, “ And
you don’t know how to conceal that fact as yet.
That gentle art will come in time, so hope on.
By and by you will be a woman, then you will
smile prettily when you are most angry—stab
a fellow to the heart, and pronounce him a
brute when he shows you that he does not enjoy
the operation, even at your hands. Yes, yes, time
enough for that ! ”


“There you are again,” I said crossly. “Why
should you always treat me as if I were a child ? ”
“ Because you are one, —at present,” he said
with a keen glance that I did not quite understand,
“ and a very transparent one at that. A very true,
kindly one, though ; and that is why I would
sooner appeal to you in this matter than to either
of the others. This lady, Kittie—Miss Carlton, I
mean —will have an up-hill fight for a time. She
will need friends ”
“ She has made one apparently,” I said crossly,
for never had I seen him so earnest about any-
thing ; but he only answered with a shrug of his
shoulders,
“ One who can be of no use to her, worse luck !
One, who, if he showed kindly interest in her,
would do more harm than good. But it is different
with you, —can’t you see that for yourself, child ?
You could do a lot to brighten her life. Come,
Kittie, be good, and let me take you down to see
her to-morrow.”
But I shook my head, and walked deliberately to
the door.
“ I hate strangers,” I said curtly. Then without
even a good-night, I went slowly to my room.
But I did not light the candle or prepare for
bed, only pulled up the blind and stared out into
the moonlight with an odd sense of something lost
that puzzled me, since there was nothing to


account for it. Over the garden, glistening with a
million shafts of light as the moonbeams touched
leaf and twig and flower, over the shrubbery and
trees with their branches bowing softly to each
other my gaze wandered, till at last a glint of shin-
ing white in the distance caught and held it. There
was a break in the forest just there, and the moon,
passing by the thousand and one beauties around it,
had sought out and was bringing into prominence
the corrugated iron roof of State School 1009—the
ugly prim little building, reared to the Goddess of
Learning by a paternal Government, just where the
creek curved sharply to send one channel squarely
to the west, while the other wandered idly through
our garden. I had often seen it before—to-night
somehow it held a new interest for me. Under-
neath that roof was a woman whom I would
have pitied from the bottom of my heart, for I
knew well the petty spites and persecutions she
must face, but for one thing. She was the most
beautiful woman that my old friend Brian had ever
seen.
And at that thought I pulled the blind down
sharply, and lighting my candle, placed it on the
dressing table : then, leaning forward, scanned
critically the face that met mine in the mirror.
Rathei a cross face just now, but—rather pretty
too, with eyes that were soft and dark under
prettily pencilled brows. Cheeks a bit flushed,


and crimson lips well arched, —so far, so good !
Hair ? I pulled round the long plait that so often
had excited my anger, and eyed it dispassionately.
Dark, with a bright gleam on it where the light
caught it, with a thousand little tendrils that
would curl untidily.—Yes, it would do very well,
though Brian was always making fun of it because
of its roughness. Then I began to wonder just
what Miss Carlton was like. She had golden hair,
of course, —that was what Brian admired most —
he often told me so.
With a last wistful look in the mirror I blew out
the light, and hurried into bed in the dark just as
a well-known footstep sounded on the gravel out-
side my window. Brian was going for his usual
stroll before “ turning in,” as he phrased it. I woke
from sleep later on with a confused idea that some-
one was demanding my attention, then became
aware that the voices proceeded from Marion’s
room, which was next my own, and that the door
of communication must be slightly ajar, for a long
chink of light made itself visible.
“ How foolish you are !” I heard Nellie Cathcart
say in a voice she did not use for the chess table.
“ You fairly gave yourself away to-night, stamping
out of the room like a child in a pet. Even your
brother noticed it, so you may be sure he did, and
would draw his own conclusions —nothing disgusts
men more. Fudge ! He only said it to be dis-


agreeable : he is not such an idiot as to lose the
chance of Miss Manfred of ‘ Weeanite ’ for the
sake of a penniless girl.”
“ But I want to be loved for myself alone,”
Marion said piteously. “ And if she is really so
beautiful ”
“ she is, we will see that her stay in the dis-
ti ict is shortened somehow, —trust me for working
a point to checkmate a schemer. lam getting to
know the people in the district now, and could
pull a bundled and one strings. As for our own
set, they will follow where the ‘ Weeanite ’ party
leads, and we could easily make the place too hot
to hold her. But we must not act rashly; let it
come naturally, and in the ordinary course of
things. And,” in a lower voice, “keep it from
Kittie. The little minx would think nothing of
informing your brother if it suited her whim of the
moment. So that is settled ! By the way, dear,
you couldn’t lend me a couple of pounds for a few
weeks ? I am awfully short of funds just now.
And I must have a new dress if 1 am to go to the
Minton’s garden-party,—that is, if I am to go with
you. To be sure, your brother would not allow
you to go alone. Thanks ever so much ! ”
And then, in spite of all my efforts I fell asleep.
But in the morning I woke with two brand-new
resolves that restored my complacency for the
time being. I would go with Brian if" he asked


me again on that visit to the school-house.
And second, seeing that she had already made two
bitter enemies, —if she was bearable at all, —I,
Kittie Manfred, would be Miss Carlton’s friend,
for better, for worse !


CHAPTER 11.
“HE HATES MUSIC.”
BUT that projected visit with Brian Dene was
never paid.
The following day he went off suddenly to
Melbourne, to look after some business matters of
Hugh’s which were in a bit of a snarl, and I—
from sheer obstinacy—determined to let things
drift for awhile.
This was as much a punishment to myself as
am one else, for, as the days went by, a good many
conflicting accounts of Miss Carlton reached my
ears, and roused my curiosity to such a pitch that
se\ eral times I was on the point of going to spy
out the land for myself, and then was hindered by
one thing or another.
And in spite of that resolve of mine, if I had
gone to see the newcomer as I had intended, it
would have been more from curiosity than any
other motive !
Generally,—indeed always—l am inclined to
take up arms for the weaker side, and the fact that


there was a good deal of quiet opposition to Miss
Carlton should have enlisted me there and then as
her champion.
But then —Brian Dene had said she was deter-
mined to fight it out to the end, and had spoken of
her as plucky, also.
But I did not believe she was as pretty as all
that !
She would get on and win her way, and it was
absurd to think that I could have done anything
for her. It was not even correct for me to go—
that was Marion’s place as the elder.
I felt very dignified and proper when I presented
this fact to my mind as the fiftieth excuse why I
should not pay that call —I, whom dear old Hugh
was always placidly lecturing on some breach of
the proprieties—and it lasted me till I found another
to take its place.
And all this time—Mr. Dene had been away for
nearly a month —I had not caught a glimpse of
Miss Carlton.
Everyone was talking about her, and everyone
had something different to say. At last Happy
Valley was furnished with a real, live mystery of
its own, and the fame thereof spread abroad to
such an extent that I should not have been at all
surprised to learn that the stranger was a criminal
in disguise whose hobby was arson or some such
thing !


How the mystery began no one seemed to know
—the fact remained that it was there.
Every day I glanced at the streak of grey in the
forest which shimmered in the sunlight and glit-
tered in the moonlight—the roof of that very
commonplace State School—and many were the
romantic visions I conjured up in connection with
its occupants.
Nothing unusual happened, the school children
came and went, the same rowdy, boisterous crowd,
only—some of them tramped the bush at uncanny
hours to gather ferns and flowers for the new
teacher !
But her father, the gentle looking old man
whom Brian had spoken to, was threatening to
become a town nuisance ; at least, so the folk
said.
He was not quite right in his mind, but
perfectly harmless, Hugh declared, when anyone
spoke to him about the matter. He had a habit
of wandering aimlessly about at all hours, and the
Happy Valley people, who really paid particular
attention to their gardens, and vied with one
another as to who should produce the finest roses
or chrysanthemums, were naturally annoyed
when Mr. Carlton in his nocturnal rambles left
gates open, and the goats made tours of inspection
over flower-bed and lawn, and nibbled some
succulent morsel which appealed to their fancy.


There was something peculiar about father and
daughter, they decided ; and the chief reason for
this decision lay in the fact that neither ever went
to church !
Even our minister and his wife, who drove out
to inspect the new arrivals, and who were very
worthy people, though a trifle prosy, returned in
high dudgeon at the fact that they had been able
to extract from Miss Carlton no expression of
penitence for her depravity.
“ She could not attend church,” she had said
quietly, and that was all.
Once, a few of the most prominent citizens
came to Hugh to ask him to use his influence as
member of the Board of Advice, and “ big man ”
of the district, to get the new teacher transferred
to another part of the colony, as they did not
consider her father safe to be at large ; but they
went away with crestfallen faces.
That is one thing I do admire about my sober
brother, he will have fair play for everyone. And,
by the way, he was the only one who did not
express an opinion about the fair stranger, though
he had seen her many times.
Then Brian Dene came back, and pretty well the
first thing he said was, “Well, Kittie, have you
made acquaintance with Miss Carlton yet, sworn
eternal friendship and the like ? ”
“No,” I said lightly, “ I have not seen her.”


He gave that shrug of his shoulders which
makes me feel as if 1 am a naughty child whom
he would like to stand in the corner, then he
looked at me quizzically with those dark brown
eyes of his, which are so horribly piercing ; and I
suddenly realised that my excuses would sound
exceedingly lame and unconvincing.
But Brian has a way of finding out just what
one most wants to keep from him, and he eyed
me very sternly.
The end of it was that we quarrelled, as we
usually did, if quarrel it can be called where one
gets ruffled and one keeps provokingly cool, and
all that day—it was Sunday—l kept severely to
myself.
The evening was close and sultry. I watched
the others drive away to service and went to my
room in what Nellie Cathcart calls "one of
Kittie's moods."
A brilliant idea had come into my brain which
I intended to act upon, and the first thing I did
was to brush out my hair and coil it high upon
my head. It was not the first time I had done it
in secret, and I thought it looked very nice. For
once, I would look as grown up as I felt.
Then I put on a big hat which Brian Dene had
admired, and stole quietly out of the house.
I have said before that the creek ran through the
“Weeanite” grounds: I went straight to it and


followed its course with the definite object in
view of paying Miss Carlton that long deferred
call. She did not go to church, I remembered. I
would drop in quite casually and form an opinion
for myself.
The water was flowing sluggishly with scarcely
a ripple, and the mosquitos droned unceasingly,
and sometimes surrounded me as I went sedately
on. But here, what breeze there was was cooler,
and I took my hat off that it might lift my hair from
my forehead. It would soon be dark, and I was
not likely to meet anyone.
Presently I heard a low voice talking monoton-
ously, almost as if the speaker were trying to
commit something to memory. This was the
more probable because no one replied. I went
steadily on, and at length came upon Miss
Carlton’s father.
I knew him at once from the descriptions I had
been given—a little old man with a bent figure
and a club foot, and thin silvery hair brushed
neatly back.
His face, as Brian had said, was gentle and sad,
but it looked as if what had caused the sadness
had been long forgotten, it was so placid and still.
There was almost a childlike expression in the
blue eyes, and his mouth wore a half smile.
He was searching for something in the branches
of a tree which lay across the path, and he turned


to me eagerly as I came into sight, and advanced
hesitatingly and made a gesture of greeting.
“ Perhaps you can tell me,” he began wistfully,
“it was here a few days ago, the nest, and the
birds had got to know me, I often come and
talk to them ”
And then I saw what he meant.
The tree had been cut down the day before, and
the nest he was looking for evidently destroyed.
He did not seem to understand me at first when I
told him this, but presently I drew him on to talk
of the flowers he was so fond of, and asked him
why he had not been to see our garden yet.
He listened eagerly while I described a new
conservatory plant which Hugh had got on his
last trip to Melbourne, and we were soon pacing
side by side along the path which led to the school-
house, “ his birds,” as he plaintively called them,
for the moment forgotten.
It was quite dark now, but he kept confidently
on, as if he knew the way very well, talking much,
yet often leaving his sentences unfinished, and
looking vaguely round at me as if for help. But
at length we passed through the gate, and I halted,
a moment to replace my hat, and collect my
thoughts. Then I stood still and listened;
for the most wonderful voice I had ever heard in
my life was singing.
I shall never forget the effect it had upon me, in


that place and at that hour. And in that moment,
as I turned to look at the old man, my cry of
admiration had almost changed into one of terror.
Was it fancy, or did he echo it from those working
lips of his ? Such an expression of torture upon a
human face I had never witnessed before, nor,
thank God, have I seen since. Without a word
he hurried away, leaving with me the memory of
that look.
I went slowly up the path, my heart beating
wildly, unwilling to make my presence known, or
to do anything that would break the spell.
I kept in the shadow just for a minute, for the
door was open, and the light from the lamp was
enveloping the figure of the singer in a bright
glow. And while I grudgingly agreed with all they
had said as to her beauty, my heart went out to
her in an uncontrollable impulse —I was never one
to do things by halves.
And still the glorious voice rang out, and sank
into rich, low notes which thrilled through and
through me. She was sitting back in a low
rocker, on her knees an auto-harp, an instrument
which in the hands of most people becomes
commonplace to the last degree. But then no
one sang to it as Dora Carlton did.
The rocker went softly backward and forward
as she crooned on, but I stepped into the light,
and she looked up and saw me.


Jk 'fc ..
-■ ' ’ ' V ' . , U W
\m r
*tj *•, iSf ’ I M
j( ’ yTy£ ft ? <B * m ., -- 'f-<SI
* I |
■t ■ - - - W| \\
• _ _ ’ —, ,, .„ j
“AND STILL THE GLORIOUS VOICE RANG OUT.”


\


Such a beautiful face it was, with glorious dark
eyes, and wonderful mass of golden, curling hair.
Her lips, so clearly cut and delicate, parted in a
welcoming smile, and before I well knew what I
was doing I had thrown my arms round her neck
and given her an impulsive kiss.
All the way along I had been planning what I
would say to her, but I forgot everything of that
kind as we talked on and on, with sometimes
short silences which helped us to understand each
other better, I fancy, than any words would have
done. And my eyes took in the quiet refine-
ment of the plain little room she yet had managed
to make so homelike, with a sense of pleasure.
I would tell Brian of that—some time when we
were on good terms with each other ! There was
no piano, I noticed that at once ; yet the white,
long fingers looked as if they were very used to
one. I longed to be free to ask her to try the
splendid Lipp grand which had been Hugh’s
Christmas present to Marion and me —but they
would only snub and make her miserable if I did
so—my sister and Nellie Cathcart ! And I read
sensitiveness in every line of her face.
The darkness deepened outside, then paled before
the rising moon, and at last I got up unwillingly
and said that I must go.
I had noticed that all the time she was watching
the door, and, guessing the reason, I told her that


I had met her father in the bush, and that he had
left me at the gate.
A quick sadness darkened her eyes, and she said
hurriedly, “ I expect he heard me singing—l rarely
do so when he is about. He hates music ! Yes—
it is strange, is it not ? ”
She was standing beside me at the door looking
out, and all at once I saw a shadow pass over her
face. My own heart beat more rapidly, for, from
the gloom two figures emerged. The first was
that of Mr. Carlton, the* second —Brian Dene !
He came forward easily, as if it were the most
natural thing in the world to find me there at such
a time (if, indeed, he noticed me) ; and after his
few kindly words to the school teacher—spoken
with a gentleness I had never before heard in his
voice—l turned to go, leaving him to follow if he
chose.
But he halted a moment, and in the clear night
air these words came distinctly to me ;
“ Certainly not, that is our secret. I suppose
sooner or later it will come out, but for the present
you must keep silence. When the right time
comes, I will let you know. Xo one has any
And then I hurried on with crimson
cheeks.
I had gone no distance when he caught up to
me, and his manner was as cool and unconcerned
as ever, as he said lazily:


“ So you sacrificed your prejudices after all, and
being Kittie, did so in as original a style as
possible. What a child you are, to be sure. And
what on earth have you done to your hair ? "
I knew that he was laughing at me, and this fact
made me Grosser than I had been before. I marched
on in silence, disdaining a word in reply. Of
course in comparison with Miss Carlton’s hair
no doubt he retained a very vivid picture of
that in his mind !
Presently he said in quite a different tone, “ Well,
who was right about Miss Carlton, Kittie ? "
“You were, of course; you always are, you
know."
“ What did you think of her ? ” he asked, rather
eagerly I thought.
“ Oh, don t ask me, Mr. Dene—what would a
very shaggy puppy think of a great, majestic St.
Beinaid dog! I said a trifle incoherently, and
not choosing my metaphors with the happiest
result.
Exactly, a very shaggy little puppy," he
assented gravely ; “ I think the plait was better till
someone Mrs. Cathcart, say—has instructed you
in the gentle art of hair-dressing ! But I meant,
has to-night made you Miss Carlton’s friend?
Put away youi childish vanity for a moment, if you
can, and answer me." But I punished him for
that last thrust by absolute silence.


CHAPTER 111.
A TALE AT SUNSET.
THEN the summer passed without anything
to break the monotony, and at last autumn
came with its crimson leaves and its gorgeous
sunsets, its sultry days, broken into by thunder-
storms which filled the creek to overflowing, and
made it roar down the gully. Nothing new, I
said,—save that the unexpected had happened—
I was Dora Carlton’s sworn friend and ally, in
spite of that new pain tugging at my heart that it
need never have known, had not her lot been cast
among us. For that Sunday night a cruel awaken-
ing had come to me as I listened to those words
spoken by Brian to the girl whose friend he had
declared he never could be. And I was beginning
to wonder —too late, alas ! —whether womanhood
brought only pleasure in its train, whether the
price to be paid was not all too heavy. But an
odd wistful fancy had seized me to study for
myself the woman who had won without an
effort the only thing I coveted. So I haunted -the


school-house in all her hours of leisure, much
to the amusement of Hugh, and the ill-concealed
chagrin of Nellie Cathcart and Marion. Yet they
need not have feared that Dora would take
advantage of my girlish devotion to win a footing
for herself at “ Weeanite.” In her way she was
prouder than they, and always had some quiet
exxuse ready on a few occasions when Hugh
insisted that Marion should invite her to meet
friends at “ Weeanite, ” though she always
welcomed me with genuine pleasure on the
many occasions that I made my way to the little
home she had managed in some clever way to
beautify. \\ hat Brian thought of our mtimacv
I did not know, and I tried not to care. Some-
times I even feared that he had begun to suspect
what I knew only too well about myself, and then
my manner towards him would grow positively
waspish, as Marion took care to tell me, at which
I would smile, well pleased. For it was better
that he should think anything than that I had
given my love unsought—it seemed to me that
the flash of amusement in his eyes at the very idea
would have been more than I could bear—my
cheeks would flame at the thought.
Once or twice he came to the school-house
while I was there on various pretexts, for the mail
perhaps (Dora was post-mistress as well as
teacher), or to take the old man for a walk, for


they were rare friends, these two. And her beauti-
ful eyes would thank him, even if she said nothing.
Once she said a little sadly that his kindness
touched her, —she had so few friends. But
though I think she must have noticed my silence
when she praised him, she made no remark : only
once as she leaned back in the easy chair that was
the old man’s special property, she looked at me
in a strange, searching way as she spoke of him.
It was that night as I crouched at her feet, I
remember, that she told me, as if it were a
thought that had come unbidden, of a girl she
once knew who had let wilful pride step in to
blight her life, and that of another.
“ She loved him,” she said, smoothing the rough
hair back from my hot forehead, “yes, only God and
herself knew how much, and she was too proud
to let him see it. He was proud too, and he left
her at last with the words of love unspoken, the
words she would have given all she owned to have
heard from his lips. And these two lives just
drifted apart for want of a little frankness. I
think it is a pity for girls to think they owe that
sort of thing to themselves. Depend upon it,
Kittie, it is accountable for a lot of the missed
joys of life. There are enough sorrows that come
to us unbidden. \\ hy should we make others for
ourselves ? It is folly.”
“ What a horrid idea ! ” I said, rudely. “ A girl


should always be sought. And a man whose
pride is greater than his love deserves to suffer.”
“ Perhaps so,” she said dreamily. “ I do not
know. Men are not perfect any more than we.
But she need not have thrown away her happi-
ness, I think—though perhaps it was God’s will
for her. At any rate, she was His child, so He
was bound to make it work for her good, even if
she had blundered.”
“ Dora, I said, a little testily, u how queer you
are ! To think of God helping or hindering —a
love affair! \\ hy, lam not at all religious myself,
but I think that is positively irreverent ! ”
“Do you ? ” she answered patiently. “ But
Kittie, if He moulds our lives, guides our foot-
steps, counts the hair of our heads—why not ?
Can you tell me of any one thing in the lives
of the men and women He has made that has so
strong an influence for either good or evil as what
you would call—a love affair ? There are scores
of people who are working for God to-day as they
would perhaps never have done, had He not
denied them the desire of their hearts in this one
thing.”
She ended a trifle abruptly, perhaps seeing that
I w T as really shocked. For I honestly thought it
dreadful to talk so. But then Dora strange
that way, bringing religion into such funny places,
as if it was a common thing. Yet she never


went to church, and our minister’s wife con-
sidered her quite a heathen. Indeed she came on
to “ Weeanite ” after her one visit to the school-
house, with crimson, angry face, anxious to pour
out the vials of her wrath in response to the
skilful questioning of Marion and Nellie Cathcart.
“ Mr. Manfred, as member of the Board of
Advice, let alone as church elder, should take
action,” she considered. “It was bad enough, the
present godless system of education in our young
country, without having that system administered
by a woman of whose past we knew nothing,
who resented any questions, however kindly
meant, and who set the bad example to her
pupils of never putting foot in a house of divine
worship.”
And when Hugh, who happened to be in, gently
reminded her of the work for God that Miss
Carlton was doing among the young on Sundays
and beside sick beds, Mrs. Colter only looked
hard at him, and said that for her part she would
leave no stone unturned to get the dangerous girl
removed, and a plain honest teacher sent in her
place. When Hugh left the room a few minutes
later, I followed him to his study. He was look-
ing out of the window, and as I stood silently
beside him I noticed for the first time that a gleam
of the school-house was visible, even to the
window where Dora so often sat. Yet before I


was sure that only from my room could a sight of
it be obtained.
“ Hugh,” I said wonderingly, “ why, Hugh, those
beautiful tamarisk trees have been cut down—
and the laburnum. What a shame ! Simmons
is really getting too officious.”
My brother turned a little abruptly, and began
to fumble among the papers on his desk.
u I oave orders for it to be done,” he said con-
fusedly. ‘‘They were—choking other things,
Kittie.”
For a moment 1 watched him in wonder, yet
that, after all, was not what I had come in to say :
and as I saw him glance at his hat, I knew I must
be quick.
“ I wish Dora wouldn’t offend people so, people
who matter, anyhow,” I pouted ; “ she is the only
friend 1 have here, and now that woman will make
the place too hot for her, see if she does not !
And she calls that Christianity, Hugh, to fight
against the helpless ! ”
He was looking down at me with a very tender
smile that I could not quite understand. “ Christ-
ianity,” he said, softly, “why, no, little sister.
Christianity is to follow the Christ, and that includes
all loveliness. To believe on Him, who for our
sake died —then to grow into Him, as your
friend Dora would no doubt tell you. Ah,
Kittie, 1 wish I had realised all it means before


thirty years of life had been wasted. But it is not
too late even now.”
Then without another word he snatched up his
hat and left me wondering
C 5
However, as usual, that is not what I wished
to tell—l have gone off at a tangent. For it
is of what occurred that evening at the school-
house that I meant to write. Dora had scarcely
spoken those words that I considered so irreverent,
when a shadow fell across us suddenly, and Brian
Dene stood at the open window, quite ignoring
my presence, and looking at her with a peculiar
smile.
“ Yes ? ” he said inquiringly. “ And do
you always tell tales at sunset, Miss Carlton ?
Because I should so much like to hear the end of
that one—not just now, though. Kittie is a very
romantic child, and it is very bad for her to
be fed on such strong meat at her tender age.
ou will be filling her little head with all sorts of
sentimental ideas.”
And then, to my intense annoyance, Dora broke
into a peal of mischievous laughter, and Brian
joined her with malicious heartiness, as he glanced
lazily at my crimsoned face. I jumped up, in spite
of Dora's restraining hand.
“The end of the story ?” she said, laying one
hand on my shoulder, but looking straight into
the mocking, dark face at the window, “ oh, it


was commonplace in the extreme, but quite
natural, though it would not please the up-to-date
novelist. Each married—someone else ! ”
“And lived happy ever afterwards?” Brian
supplemented inquiringly, digging the while a
small rectangular hole in the painted window
sill.
“That is State property, Mr. Dene,” Dora
reminded him with her eyes fixed on the hole in
question, “ and the fine for destroying it is two
pounds. I could inform on you, and Kittie could
witness.”
“ Not against me,” he said solemnly. “ Oh, no.
she wouldn’t ! Kittie is very fond of me, though
when she is stroked the wrong way up, like her
namesake, ‘ the harmless but necessary cat,’ she
scratches.”
For a moment I flashed an angry look at him,
which he did not meet; then rose, and saying good-
bye to Dora, turned to go.
“ You need not cut short your visit to come
with me,’’ I assured Brian, in passing. But he only
raised his hat with a gesture that signified politely
and indifferently that he had had no intention of
doing so, and I began to pick my way between the
bracken fern and brushwood that lined the rise,
singing carelessly the while to hide the fact that my
eyes were full of tears that were not all the outcome
of childish vanity wounded. Just as I reached the


bridge I heard the sound of wheels, and saw, gladly
enough, Hugh's familiar figure in the trap that
was bowling along under the shade of the trees on
the other side of the creek. He reined up at once
when he saw me, and for a few moments answered
my questions absently enough. At last he said
with a keen glance at my downcast face —
“Was that Brian at the school-house, Kittie ?
Why did he not return with you ? He goes
there pretty often, does he not ? ”
“Yes,” I said dully, counting the trees idly
as we whirled past. “Yes—very often, I think !


CHAPTER IV.
“THE HEROINE IS YOUR DEAR FRIEND.”
SO the days seemed all at once to grow terribly
long to me, and each week as it passed was
drearier, and harder to get through.
For one thing, very wet weather had set in, and
1 found it much more difficult to get about. Marion
kept catching cold after cold, and finally wound
up with an attack of influenza. She was not very
ill, but fancied that she was, and that had just the
same effect. Hour after hour I read to her, till
Brian informed me that my voice was growing as
hoarse as a crow’s.
As long as she had been able to play at being
sick in a stylish dressing-gown on the sofa, Marion
had been amiability itself. Then Brian Dene would
peel oranges for her, and pay her the attentions
her invalidism demanded. But Marion in bed,
with a nose like scarlet flannel and eyes to match,
sneezing dismally for ten minutes at a time, was a
somewhat exacting personage ; and Nellie Cathcart,
who was secretly sulky because she was not seeing


as much of Hugh as she desired, soon tired of
dancing attendance on her ladyship.
So it fell to my lot to beguile the tedious hours,
and I am afraid that the patient fared very badly at
my hands often enough.
Sometimes Xellie would rouse herself to be
entertaining, but of late she had been singularly
uneven in her manner, passing from fits of gaiety
to almost sullen silence, always betraying open
malice when by chance Dora Carlton’s name was
mentioned.
Then too, she began to go out every day for the
mail, whatever the weather was like. She was tired
of being cooped up she said, and though I knew
Hugh was annoyed, for he dislikes the ordinary
routine of station work being interfered with in
any shape or form, he was too much of a gentle-
man to make any remonstrance.
I don't know what I really feared, but I always
J 7 j
breathed more freely on these occasions when she
returned from the school-house with only her usual
spiteful remarks upon some new eccentricity of
Dora’s, or her father’s. But at last, one wild even-
ing, her anxiety about the letters was explained !
It had been raining heavily all day. The morn-
ing had begun with a leaden, grey sky which looked
as if it were holding floods back.
Hugh went into the hall about every half-hour
to see the big barometer which hung there, and


“ THE HEROINE IS YOUR DEAR FRIEND I 45
was quite unlike his cheery self as he tapped the
glass, then went to the window and anxiously
scanned the clouds that were flying past in a mad,
scurrying race. He seemed as if he could settle
to nothing, and Brian Dene, who at first had
teased him unmercifully about his unwonted
excitement, began to look grave too, as the rain
poured steadily down, and the mist shut out the
trees and every distant object.
Each time 1 entered the dining-room those two
were talking in low tones ; each time they ceased
abruptly as they saw me. Sometimes Brian would
whistle a tune idly, but all the time his brows
would be puckered in a perplexed frown.
Once I found him alone, and, curiosity getting
the better of me, put a query.
“ What is Hugh afraid of, Mr. Dene —that we
are going to be flooded out ? ”
He turned and eyed me inquisitively.
“ Little girls should never ask questions,” he
remarked gravely, then, seeing that my wrath was
rising and threatening to overflow, he condes-
cended to answer as he would have answered
anyone else.
“ Hugh is anxious about the weir, Kittie ; some-
one has been getting up a bit of a scare. I think
it is safe enough. Still, we have had quite as much
moisture as we require to bring up those seeds you
sowed the other day. Now, are you going to be


frightened too ? a woman of such a calm, equable
temperament ! Your eyes are quite big enough at
ordinary times, they overpower me now,”
But I wasn’t listening. I was looking through
the window at the driving rain, noticing in that
moment the muffled noise which had escaped me
before.
“The creek,” I said breathlessly, “it was high a
few days ago, what must it be now ? But, Mr.
Dene, if there is going to be a flood, what about
the school-house, and Dora Carlton ?”
He grew grave at that, and was just beginning
to speak when I uttered an exclamation and drew
his attention to the window. His face darkened
angrily.
“ Is the woman mad ? ” he said with emphasis.
“ What on earth is taking her out in such weather ? ”
For it was Mrs. Cathcart in goloshes and mack-
intosh, making her way in the direction of the
township.
“ I wish I knew,” I said miserably ; “it is no use
your trying to stop her, she would not return now.
She is going for the mail.”
“ What! ”he said, eyeing me almost irritably.
And then Marion’s bell rang, and I hurried to her
room.
My heart was aching dully : of course I should
have been used to the idea by now, but sometimes
(never when I was with her) I found myself wish-


ing that Dora had never come to Happy Valley, or
that she had not come until But he would
have loved her all the same, even if he had cared
first for poor little me !
It was growing dusk, and I lit the candles and
built up a cheery fire, then curled myself round at
the foot of the bed, while Marion questioned me
languidly as to what was going on in the house.
Quite an hour after that, Mrs. Cathcart made
her appearance, a very different figure from the
one I had seen trudging through the slush some
time before ! She had taken off her out-door
things, and wore a soft pink dressing-gown, which
suited her better than anything she ever put on.
Her hair was loosened on her neck, and there was
a glow of triumph in her eyes as she threw herself
back in the basket chair and clasped her hands
behind her head, resting her dainty slippered feet
on the fender.
' “ What a glorious fire! ” she said dreamily ; “ and
oh, girls, you have no idea what it is like outside !
If this kind of weather keeps on much longer I
shall forego my evening walk to the township.
Just listen to that wind ! it is howling like a lost
spirit ; it was positively eerie among the shea-oaks
in the drive to-night. But I would not have missed
this saunter for anything. If Miss Carlton had
guessed the attraction the mail had for me she
might have been tempted to keep back one part of


it. And that would have been a loss to all of you.
It is just the night of all nights for a creepy
story, and I have one to tell you which is quite as
good as the best ghost yarn you ever heard. About
real, live people too, which makes it so interesting.
Hand me a chocolate cream, Kittie, there’s a dear.
Thanks. The heroine is your dear friend, Saint
Dora ! ”
But I was sitting erect with blazing cheeks.
“ thought so,” I said, hotly, “ you may spare
your trouble. I thought you were about something
mean.”
“Thanks so much, dear; one can always depend
upon hearing the truth from you,” she replied
sweetly. “Do you know, seeing that Brian Dene is
so open in his admiration for the lady in question,
I am surprised that you should stand up for her
so warmly ! But when he knows what I am
pretty well certain of, even his chivalry will not
stand the strain. Don’t glare like that, Kittie, it is
bad for your eyes, and they are not so fine as Miss
Carlton’s, anyway. Your beautiful martyr, poor
child, is not a ‘ Miss ’ at all, but unless I greatly
err, she happens to be the widow of a thief and a
murderer, who escaped the gallows by blowing his
brains out. That is almost sensational enough to
be true, isn’t it ? ”
I was listening with paling cheeks and fast
beating heart. If it were true —oh, my poor


“ THE HEROINE IS YOUR DEAR FRIEND 49
Dora, what a life to have led ! And if it were
true —would it also be true that Brian
Everything seemed to go round for one moment
in that swift, wicked hope which danced so mock-
ingly before me, that this knowledge would make
a difference. For he was proud—and it would
be a hard task for any man.
But Nellie went on quietly, her voice full of
scarcely veiled enjoyment of my agitation.
“ 1 don’t know whether you girls remember (you
will, Marion, at any rate), a case which excited a
a good deal of attention in Brisbane some years
ago. A bank was broken into, and the manager
shot by a masked robber. There was a good deal
of mystery as to who had done the deed, but it
was eventually traced to a young fellow whose
people were very well connected. My husband
was in Brisbane at the time, and took a lot of
interest in the affair, I have often heard him speak
of it. It turned out afterwards that Oakley,
the murderer, had been gambling dreadfully, and
had lost a good deal of money over the Melbourne
Cup. I hat was the excuse offered for his escapade
by the few who did not drop the family altogether.
“ He had been a great favourite in society, and
indeed was liked by everybody but his wife. She,
Eustace said, was a woman of unusual beauty, with
a quite extraordinary voice, a very pure contralto.
She was a most accomplished musician, and most


people imagined that she would adopt that pro-
fession after the scandal died out.
“It was a most unhappy marriage, and my
husband did not hesitate to think that domestic
troubles drove poor Gerald Oakley to extremes.
Well, the crime was eventually traced to him, and
he was arrested one evening in his home, as his
wife was singing to his father (I should have told
you that they lived with the old gentleman). It
was quite dramatic —the young fellow did not
attempt to resist the officers of the law, he simply
drew a pistol from his pocket and fired—not at
them, but at himself !
“The shock destroyed the old man’s reason, and
he was in an asylum for some time ; but he re-
covered sufficiently to be taken out. Then he
and his daughter-in-law disappeared from society,
and very few heard where they had got to. Only
those ‘in the know,’ knew that, having influences
in high places, Mrs.Oakley—whose Christian name
is Dora, by the way —obtained an appointment in
the Education Department, and was sent to a quiet
country place.
“ I have almost every fact vouched for, and I
consider that I have been exemplary in waiting so
long as this before letting the Happy Valley people
know what kind of a woman is teaching their
children ! Mr. Oakley, senior, had a club foot —
what about Mr. Carlton ? What keeps your dear


friend so persistently from singing in public but
the fact that her voice would rouse suspicion ?
There are not many like it in Victoria ! I wanted
to be quite sure before I made any move, so I
wrote to a young reporter who was an acquaint-
ance of Eustace's in Brisbane, and who was on the
spot at the time of the crime. He was away when
my letter reached Queensland, but to-night I re-
ceived an answer from him. Listen to his descrip-
tion of Mrs. Oakley, and then say who is right ”
But I would listen to no more, I had heard
enough. 1 slipped off the bed and went to my
room, groping my way in the darkness.
The rain was beating against the window in
fierce, driving gusts, and the wind was shrieking
round the house.
There was no moon to-night to show me that
glimpse of the school-house, though I looked with
hot, dry eyes in its direction.
I could not go to her now, but I must seize the
first opportunity to warn her —must put her on her
guard.
Perhaps—perhaps she would go away !


CHAPTER V.
“ IF THE WATERS ROSE ! ”
IT was just a week since the night on which
Nellie Cathcart’s story had been told, yet I had
not been able to pay that visit to the school-house
which I had planned.
For it rained, and rained, and rained, until we
grew fairly desperate ; day after day going by with
scarcely a glimpse of the sun. The roads were all
flooded, water lying where no water ought to be,
the crops tender and green with their } T oung blades
fast dying off, the creek running a banker : while
occasionally little bits of gossip coming our way
would inform us of this or that settler being in a
state of preparedness to remove —if the waters
rose !
“ If the waters rose ! ” I grew to laugh languidly
at the oft repeated phrase, which had come to
mean so little to us. For during our four years’
sojourn at “ Weeanite,” every winter the same
gloomy prophecy had been uttered of floods and
ruined harvests, prophecies which every spring,


glorious with tender growing crops and verdant
slopes, had laughed to scorn.
But it was gloomy in the house, for Hugh’s face
had an added shade of gravity on it which I
shrewdly suspected had nothing to do with the
weather, while he and Brian seemed always in the
saddle, riding hither and thither, as one false alarm
after another reached us from terrified settlers,
whose little all (or so they fancied) was in im-
minent danger.
Nellie Cathcart and Marion were mostly con-
cerned as to the probable postponement of a
dance the latter was giving 5 but their spirits
rose as the evening approached, and they learned
that their guests intended to brave the elements
and enjoy the “Weeanite” hospitality, whatever
might befall. And though Hugh looked exceed-
mgly grave over the whole affair, which was not
at all to his taste, he said very little, having other
things to think of. But he managed to cross their
plans after all. Into the midst of the bustle caused
by their preparations the evening before the
proposed festivities, came Marion with lowering
brow.
“Most annoying of Hugh/' she said crossly.
“ What does it matter to us, anyhow ? ”
Nellie Cathcart looked up, after disposing to more
advantage the palm which she had just directed
the gardener to place in the window recess. “ You


are not very lucid, dear,” she rejoined smoothly.
“ In what has your brother been so unfortunate as
to offend you ? ”
Marion’s eyes flashed angrily at the tone, “ You
may laugh ” she said a little maliciously, “ but just
wait till vou hear. Our dear disguised beauty at
the school has seen fit to contract influenza, or
something equally interesting, and Hugh insists on
one of the maids being sent to stay the night with
her. Just like a man, never to think how hard it
will be to spare one of them, with our dance com-
ing on so soon, and a hundred and one things still
to be done ! ”
Mrs. Cat heart bit her thin lips to conceal her
chagrin. “ Vou might forget it till too late,” she
suggested.
But Marion shook her head.
“ You do not know Hugh, that is very evident, ”
she replied. “He does not often give orders, in
household matters I mean; when he does, he sees
that they are carried out. He is waiting now to
carry whichever one 1 decide to spare down
to the schoolhouse, before he and Brian go
to see the weir for the thirtieth time. Oh, I shall
have to send Bella, 1 suppose, but it is very
annoying. 1 was depending on her to help cook.
Troubles never come singly, and she has seen fit
to scald her hand, and the jellies not even made.
And influenza is such a horrid catching thing.


Ten chances to one Bella will take it, and it will
run through the household for certain.”
And then it was that a brilliant thought
occurred to me. I spoke hastily. “ Spare your
lamentations, Mari, and don’t make such a fuss
over nothing. I will go myself. I am sick to
death of draping and decorating, and I have not
had a breath of fresh air for a week. I hate
parties, and I am not a bit afraid of influenza,”
So it was settled, for though they made a great
pretence of objecting, I held to my intention.
One parting shot Nellie made as she followed me
into the hall, while I donned hat and mackintosh.
“Of course, Kittie, you will respect what I told
you only in confidence the other night—about
Miss Carlton’s shameful past I mean.” But
before I could answer, Hugh's voice sounded
from the eastern verandah —
“ Come, Kittie, Kittie, child ! Whatever is keep-
ing you ? Have you changed your mind ? There
is no time to allow of an elaborate toilette ; every
moment is precious.” And I hurried out to him,
without deigning even a curt answer to the
question.
“No, I am not coming with you,” my brother
said, as he tucked the rugs and water-proofing
round me, and took the reins from the hand of
the stable boy. “ I have a number of things to
see to that I cannot leave, to anyone else. You


might tell Miss Carlton that I was detained. But
Brian will take you instead. It was kind of you
to go yourself, child ; you will be better, under the
.circumstances, than any servant,”
At that moment Brian emerged from the house,
looking more ruffled than I remembered to have
seen him, and his first glance at me was none too
full of welcome. Hugh spoke a few words that
were inaudible to me, muffled up as I was with cape
and furs, but I thought I caught something like this
—“ No danger at present . . . alarm . . . nothing
to be gained by it,” and the lines round Brian's
face deepened. But he took his seat beside me
without a word, yet an odd fancy came to me
that in some way he differed from the speaker’s
opinion, though he only nodded gravely as he
thrust further under the seat a great bundle of dry
bark and pieces of deal carefully prepared for
kindling, and a small tin of what looked uncom-
monly like tar. Then gathering up his reins he
sent the ponies at a brisk pace down the avenue,
and out on the sloppy, sodden road. For a few
minutes we were silent, as the mud splashed high
over the wheels, covering us with small spots of
reddish clay, and even daubing my face with the
same disagreeable stuff ; then at last Brian spoke,
still with clouded brow.
“ Why did you not let a servant come, as Hugh
desired ?” he demanded. “It would have been far


f &±K ■ j?."?^"/*? jBty ». a JjaTJ
vJHB -&,,,// 3B -vHBBml
K\ * aTm^J
wK jlFMiSr j¥f/
H p ** v InA -J
i I .^$55^1
*■' v I | q g| • - MPw I
%l ‘ Jftk 'fil■ ifc k.-
— —— — ——
“ HE took the reins from the hands of the stable boy.”




more sensible, for what can you do ? Miss Carlton
is very unwell, needs nursing. Besides, if ”
And then he fell into silence, while 1 turned my
head away from him, and made no answer.
Just then we clattered across the bridge, and up
the rise, pulling up sharply at last by the school
door.
“ Better get right inside at once,’’ Brian said, as
he lifted me down, seeing that I hesitated. “ Miss
Carlton is lying down in her sitting-room most
likely, and must not come out into the draughts.
So for once don’t stand on ceremony, but go
straight in.’’
I reddened angrily at something new in his tone.
Even when he teased most, there was usually a
gentleness in his manner that robbed his words of
any real sting, —now he was decidedly cross !
For a moment I paused, wishing very heartily that
I had held my tongue and let Bella come in my
stead, even in spite of Hugh’s few words of appro-
bation. It was very evident that Brian at least
wished me miles away —did not consider me even
fit to attend on the woman he loved. And as I
pushed open the door and entered the deserted
school-room, the loneliness and utter dreariness of
the scene struck a chill to my heart. I walked to
the window, and gazed out.
Great inky clouds floated low, water was drip-
ping from every branch of the gum trees that lined


the banks of the creek ; one of them, a veritable
giant, which long ago had been marked by the
woodman as his prey (even from where I stood I
could see the death ring round its whitened trunk)
stretched out its gaunt, wrinkled arms to the lower-
ing sky. I shivered, and turned my gaze inward
to the miserable room where the working hours of
my friend were spent, wondering not a little how
she preserved her quiet cheerfulness in the midst
of such surroundings, as I remembered how we
had moaned and sighed at our imprisonment in
the great, cheery rooms at “ Weeanite.” There
the light came richly through crimson curtains,
and the canaries sang in the great windows, while
fires of shea-oak blazed always on the hearths, and
books and music in abundance tempted us to
forget the long hours and the gloom of the outside
world. I took off my hat, laying it on one of the
bespattered desks, then slipped off my mackintosh
and hung it up on one of the pegs. Then I waited
with a shyness new to me for a sign of life from
the next room, for any welcome that would undo
the effect of Brian’s words and make me feel a
little less of an outsider. But only the moan of
the wind in the shea-oaks and the swish of the rain
came to break the uncanny silence, until at last a
thud and a scatter on the floor of the porch came
with such suddenness that I hurried to the outer
door and opened it.


Brian had evidently not wasted the last few
minutes as I had. He had gathered a number of
small logs from round about and piled them neatly
just outside, while the heap of kindling brought
from “ Weeanite ” lay snugly on the floor of the
porch.
“ You will want plenty of fire if you sit up
to-night,” he explained with a comprehensive’wave
of the hand towards the collection of fuel, “ These
logs are pretty well soaked,” with a grim smile,
“ but they are sound, and once dried, ought to
burn well enough ; and, Kittie, don’t spare the tar,
if you have any bother to get things alight. There
is a full tin of it.” Then, as he paused abruptly,
I saw that he was looking past me, and as my
eyes insensibly followed his, I saw that
the inner door was opened, and that Dora
herself stood on its threshold, looking so white and
worn that I was startled.
“ How unwise of you ! ” Brian said, going a step
towards her. “You must lie down again. Kittie
has come to stay with you ; and if there is any-
thing I can do before I go, you must tell me at
once, for I must not linger. Heaven knows I
would not stir from this spot to-night, but ”
He paused abruptly, for almost as if she did not
see me —and indeed her eyes stared wildly—she
came towards him, such a look of piteous entreaty
for comfort in her face, that I waited breathlessly


for her words. They came at last, a little
gaspingly.
“Am I always to blame ? I ought to have
thought : but these dreary, never-ending days he
has been driving me wild —like a peevish child.
I know I should have remembered all, and
been more patient. But to-day when he yearned
to go out for just ten minutes—l yielded. It
was ,fine then, and I did not dream there was
any risk—l even urged him to go. But the
children tell me that the creek is rising and that
there is danger —and I meant to go in search of
him, but oh, how my head aches ! He has never
come back—oh, if anything has happened to him ! ”
Brian took her hands in his so gently that my
poor foolish heart ached again.
“ What is all this about ? ” he asked kindly. “ Mr.
Carlton has gone for a walk, and not returned yet ?
Why, he has often done that. And you, like the
foolish woman you are, talking and searching for
him, with this heavy cold on you ! Why,
your hands burn like a coal. I will tell you where
your charge is, for I happen to know. He is at
old Dennis Keegan’s cottage, just above the vine-
yards : he followed the children home to see their
grand new daffodil, and they will keep him safely
there till morning.” Then he turned to me with
the first smile I had seen on his face that afternoon,
albeit a grave one, “ Now, Nurse Kittie, get to work


at once ; make this silly girl change her wet
garments ; she has actually been standing out in
the rain watching for the wanderer, who is very
comfortable at this moment beside Denny Keegan’s
fire.”
The colour came back to her white face with a
rush, and a more natural look came into the lovely
eyes. Then without one glance at us, she turned,
shivering a little, and re-entered her own room,
closing the door behind her. Brian looked at me,
a long, long look, so earnest and anxious that it
puzzled me.
“ I wish I dared stay,” he said with a frown,
“ She is a bit light-headed. Kittie, you were wiser
than I. It would not have done for a maid’s
curious ears to listen to her to-night : you at least
are her friend, and a true little girl, with all your
faults.” Then he came nearer, and looked right
into my eyes gravely. “ Are you nervous ?” he said
quickly. “ Would you like anyone else down here
to-night ? Even now it is not too late. I will fetch
someone. I am afraid she is going to be very
ill.”
“ Oh, no,” I said, trying to speak bravely, though
indeed my heart sank at the prospect before me.
“ Hugh will be waiting for you. I will take good
care of her, I will indeed. You may trust me.”
And then a sudden beautiful smile leapt to his
eyes. But he only answered quietly, “ Trust


you ? Why, yes, I believe I can—now
and always, little friend. Then I will say
good-bye; but, Kittie, remember that if danger
threatens —I shall make this place my first
charge.”
Then before I could answer, or even smile my
thanks, he was gone.
As his footsteps died away, and a sudden sough
of wind crept round the building, and sweeping
down the iron chimney, scattered the pale ashes
from yesterday’s dull fire, for the first time I
realised the position, and for one moment was
tempted to rush to the door, and cry to him to
come back, like a frightened child. We were alone
in this tiny building, just at the bend of the creek !
Above us to the direct north was the carelessly
engineered weir, on whose safety our own depended.
I could see that plainly now for the first time. If
the flood waters came down with a rush
no one, however willing, however anxious, could
reach us in time. With a sudden shudder I recalled
how, when the school was being built, the residents
had protested that the position was unsafe in time
of flood —that was, if the weir, which none
of them quite trusted, did not hold ! So an
inspector was sent down after endless delay to
report. He was a superior person altogether, in
fashionable attire, with delicate hands encased in
gloves of the newest shade of kid, and he smiled


superciliously as the horny-handed old men pointed
out somewhat eagerly the great heap of brushwood
and logs that crown the rise whereon the building
was being erected, brought there, as they assured
him, by the great flood of 189 —. Then he scribbled
a few magical words in his notebook, and rode
back to a sumptuous dinner in the hotel at K ,
like a man who had done his duty.
There might be danger, if the weir had not been
there. But then the weir was there. And what
did country bumpkins know of anything bevond
pigs and potatoes !
So the school was built on the rise. And it
laughed at the winter rains, which only, after
all, filled the creek to overflowing, and never
once rose high enough even to lave the bridge
which spanned it just where the waters forked
sharply.
This is just what I was thinking of as I stood
there, and it was far from pleasant. Then the
rattle of wheels dying into silence told me that my
chance was gone—if I called now, ever so
loudly, the wind would toss my voice away in
playfulness that held a touch of cruelty in it. We
were alone.
Hugh believed the weir would weather anv
J
storm—my thoughts would go back to that uncanny
subject—had he doubted that for one moment, he
would not have allowed either of us to be here on


such a night. Brian was more than doubtful, I
had read that in his eyes, in his quick avoidance
of the subject, most of all in his last words to me,
and the glance that had accompanied them. Well,
we should see which of them was correct to-night,
but that thought held little comfort.
Resolutely I made my way to the inner room,
and without knocking, entered. I found Dora
crouched over a few sickly embers, shivering and
stretching out her hands to them. She looked up
to smile a weary welcome at me.
“ This is very rude of me, my dear,” she said,
“ and you were kind indeed to come yourself. I
do not think I could have borne with a stranger.
lam cold and giddy, and I cannot think. When
the children came this morning, I just had to send
them away. And the mails are not even sorted.
1 wonder whether you would mind attending to
them by and by.”
“No one will be here for mails to-night,’’ I said
decisively, as I raked together the poor embers, and
piled on some of the dry wood Brian had brought,
blessing him in my heart the while for his thought-
fulness, as I saw the vigorous blaze that quickly
followed my amateurish efforts at stoking, and
when my furtive glances at my charge showed me
that she shivered less, and that a faint tinge of
colour was creeping into her face. For I had
promised Brian to care for his love. He should


see how well I could keep my word. Then a bright
thought struck me.
“ Dora,” I said suddenly, “ have you had any-
thing to eat to-day ? ”
She shook her head wearily.
“ Nor yesterday, either ?” I ventured. Then, as
she again shook her head, I went on triumphantly,
“You silly, silly girl—no wonder you are
light-headed ! ” Then at the necessity for action, my
vague fears died. I even sang a little as I bustled
about, putting the tiny kettle on the hob, and hunt-
ing in cupboards and on shelves for the necessary
edibles, until at last I proudly carried a dainty
meal to her side, and had the pleasure of coaxing
her to eat a little—to eat, I say with meaning, for
she would have taken one cup of tea after another,
if I had not sternly interfered. “ You shall have
more by and by,” I said, when she pleaded thirst,
“ but not now. Now lam going to pull the sofa to
the fire, and we will prepare for a jolly evening.”
The colour was stealing to her cheek, and her eyes
were fast losing the dazed look that had frightened
Brian. But as the evening wore on, and the rain
began again to pour heavily down, beating against
window and roof with frightful force, she began
to talk rapidly and with pitiful eagerness, and I
almost held my breath as I realised that some
irresistible force was carrying her mind back into
the past.


There would be no need for me to tell her
the cruel story that had been burning my lips
lately —neither now nor in the future. My friend
was going to trust me ! And my heart beat
fast as she began to speak swiftly, yet with a
strange reluctance.


CHAPTER VI.
"LIGHTEN our darkness.”
“ T)ERHAPS you will remember, Kittie, my
-L telling you one evening of a girl who,
through pride, threw away her own happiness ?
We were speaking of it when Mr. Dene came and
interrupted us.”
I nodded, and bent forward to put a bit of wood
on the fire.
“ I wonder whether you guessed that I was
speaking from bitter knowledge. That was my
own history, Kittie,” she went on, flushing deeply
under my surprised glance. " To-night I want to
tell you more about it, if you care to listen. lam
so lonely, and I feel as if the telling would ease
the weight from my heart. It happened more than
six years ago : you are the very first to hear it. I
wonder, Kittie, whether you have any idea what
your friendship has done for me here ? When first
I came, Mr. Dene told me he was sure you would
love me and trust me in spite of all. Somehow I
did not believe him, for the world is so cruel when


one is alone and helpless, until the first time I saw
you, and you came forward and kissed me. Then
I took courage, for it is written in your face, dear,
the fidelity that would make your love well worth
winning. I owned to myself that every word he
had said about you was true.”
So he had spoken to her of me. I felt my pulses
quicken at the thought. At least he had chosen
me as her friend. There was comfort in the very
thought, in spite of the pain that followed it.
But Dora did not notice my confusion. She
was leaning forward, her head resting on her hand,
her beautiful feverish eyes fixed on the blazing
log.
“Yes, that was my own case, Kittle, of which I
told you, so I spoke with meaning. I was very
young, and I cared for someone —but I fancied
that love was unsought. He was not an ardent
lover ; he, too, was shy, and hid that shyness
under a studied indifference. And I, —well, I was
proud too, and he never knew until too late.
“ Perhaps it was not brave of him : he should
have been willing even to risk a refusal, and have
at any rate spoken to me. But he did not, and
cruel tongues finished what our own pride had
begun, and we drifted apart. At last 1 heard
that he was married. Then I plunged into the
maddest whirl of society gaieties, and for a
time enjoyed my poor triumph, —that is hard to


picture, is it not ? But I was admired and flat-
tered, and I tried to assure myself that the old
wound was healing. Someone sought my hand
in marriage, and I was glad,—-glad to think that
Jack should hear of it, and be deceived by it;
the one mad desire in my heart was that he should
never guess that my girlish love had gone out to
him. At last—l married.”
She paused with a gasp, and looked at me. I
think the utter absence of any surprise in my face
puzzled her, while I had room for only one thought :
So she had given her love to another in the days
of her youth. What had she left for Brian , then,
who had given her his all, —Brian, who hid (as I
felt sure) beneath his light manner and gay smile
a heart that would never swerve ?
“Yes, 1 married,” she went on more calmly,
though now her hands were so tightly clasped on
her knee that I could see the veins on them start
out, “ and in that I sinned. I have known that
for a long time. But the punishment, oh, Kittie,
the punishment !
“ Gerald was a gay, handsome fellow, and very
fond of me, and 1 know that I was spoken of as a very
fortunate girl. We gave grand entertainments,
and society petted us both, and for a while I really
was happier, for I had no time to think, and it
seemed good to my sore heart to feel that to one
at least I was all in all. We lived with his father,


who was very wealthy. He was a kindly, eccentric
old man, who, because he had no daughter of his
own, took me to his heart. Yet even in the first
rush one thing used to puzzle me, one only. At
times Gerald would load me with every luxury,
jewels and dainty clothes, at others he was sadly
neglectful, so much so that once his father sternly
called him to task for it in my presence. Then for
the first time he turned on me, accused me of
extravagance, and finally flung himself out of the
room in a pet. Then I knew the mistake I had
made. If I had loved him, I could easily have
forgiven. I nstead of that a dull resentment burned
in my heart, and almost unconsciously I began to
compare him with Jack, to picture how different
my life would have been if ! Kittie, that
way lies ruin and misery untold !
“ Well, this went on. Still I was gay in society.
We met Jack and his wife at every turn, and even
my jealous eyes could see that he at least had
chosen well. She was sweet and good, and he
seemed quietly happy and content. I think men
forget more easily. Sometimes I caught his eyes,
and fancied that there was in them pity for me,
a full knowledge of the mistake I had made. That
maddened me, and to convince him of his error I
laughed, and smiled, and flirted, until even my
husband's father warned me, oh, so tenderly,
of the mistake I was making. ‘ You are innocent


as a child, I know, Dora,’ he said gently, ‘but you
are not living in a world that is, so be careful.’ I
am glad to think that at least I had sense enough
to drop my new role, and save my name from cruel
tongues. One night the awakening came, and I,
who had fancied my cup of sorrow full to over-
flowing, was to learn what misery meant. Kittie,
it is comparatively easy to bear one’s sorrow, while
one can hide it from others. Even that comfort
was to be denied me.
“ I had been playing at a concert, and, tired out,
was sitting in one of the wings, awaiting my next
turn, when two gentlemen paused just near me,
and little guessing how close I was to them began
to talk. And the first sentence made me draw back
further into the shadow, for the speaker was Jack.
“ ‘ She knows nothing. I would swear that,’ he
was saying. Then in response to the contemptuous
remark of the other he added—
“ 1 No, she is no society butterfly. She is a woman
with a heart, trying to forget that she has one. If
she knew how his money is made, I know
enough of her to be sure that she would wear her
fingers to the bone to get a crust, sooner than she
would soil her soul by living on ’
“ Then a burst of music from the stage drowned
the end of the sentence, but I heard the scornful
laugh with which it was received by his companion,
a man who half-an-hour before had been deluging


me with flattery. For a moment I sat trembling,
so that I could scarcely move, then with a sudden
resolve I rose and walked to where Jack stood alone,
and spoke his name timidly.
“ He turned abruptly, and fora moment his eyes
looked into my face with the old smile. Then he
remembered, and greeted me coolly and courteously.
But I was too much in earnest to even remember
propriety, and with fast beating heart poured out
my questions. I remember how his face changed,
and the look of intense pity in his eyes as he tried
to put me off with vague generalities, but at last I
had forced him to tell me what he meant. And
my heart turned to stone.
“ Gerald was a gambler, even worse than that —a
cheat ! The luxuries I had enjoyed, the jewels I was
even then flaunting —how they burned my neck !
The very satins I wore were won at the expense
of ruined men and perhaps starving women and
children. I thought I knew the worst, and could
bear no more, as I stood there, listening to the
voice I loved best an earth, yes, even while it
stabbed me. How unwillingly I guessed, as I saw
his face pale, and his lips set in hard lines, but he
was too true to himself and me to attempt to
deceive me even then. And, Kittie, in that fearful
hour I learned the secret that, if he had told me
in time, would have saved me from the sorrow of
my life. For quite unconsciously to himself,


every word he spoke, every tone of his voice told
me that he loved me, and would have given his
life to shield me. It was too late— too late!
“ Kittie, I told you that 1 fancied I had sounded
the depths into which 1 must plunge. Before
twenty-four hours had gone over my head, I learned
bitterly that I had scarcely reached the shallows.
Oh, child, I can never tell you the end, and yet I
had made up my mind I would.”
“ Dora,” I said tenderly —my heart was thumping
against my chest, and almost choking me —“ you
need not tell me any more, my dear. I knew
more than you think. Your husband’s name
was—Gerald Oakley ! ”
She shrank back from me then, a hunted look in
her lovely eyes.
“ It has come out, then ;it is known even here,”
she said at last. “ I was sure it would, and yet I
have hoped and prayed. You know all, yet you
pity me. I can see it in your eyes. For that God
will bless you. But you must hear all before you
decide, for in God’s eyes 1 know I was not blame-
less. I cannot even hug that delusion to my heart.
For you see it all began in this way. Poor a
character as Gerald was, he loved me, and if I had
loved him, 1 should have been quick to see the
downward path he was treading. And I might
have saved him then. Instead of that, so long as
he left me alone, did not weary me with his


extravagant demonstrations of love, I cared for very-
little else, only snatched at any pleasure that would
help me to forget the old pain. 1 was wrapped in
self-pity for the thing that might have been,
forgetting that I owed my first duty to the man I
had vowed to love.
“ That night, the very night that I heard how low,
how poor a thing he was, he came to me. He
could scarcely have chosen a worse time, for my
heart was bitter, and the old love had leapt up
anew to torment me, so that I pitied myself only
for the hideous mockery that I had made of life.
I had thrown off my jewels with loathing, and dis-
missed my maid, telling her that I could not sleep,
and would read awhile. But when she left, closing
the door softly behind her, my book was closed,
and I sat, scanning my face in the mirror, curiously
and coldly, as if it belonged to another, my eyes
hot and dry with misery, and my cheeks pale as
death. It was thus Gerald found me. He came
straight to where I sat, and taking up a long tress
of my hair that had fallen over the back of the
chair, he laughed in a sort of forced fashion.
“Mt seems a higgledy-piggledy sort of world,
doesn't it, Doll,’ he said gloomily. ‘ Here you are
wasting on another fellow, who doesn’t need it, a
heap of love that might have saved me. Oh, don't
trouble to deny it. Do you think I haven't eyes.
Of course it is nothing to grumble at, I am not


doing that. There are heaps of marriages like
ours, I suppose. But I wish you didn’t hate me,
all the same. You could have saved me, Doll, if
you had loved me as I love you.’ And then,
Kittie, I closed my eyes and leaned back in the
chair, hating myself for the want of self-control
that allowed the colour to flood my face. But I
said nothing, and that angered him more than any
words could have done. He said something cruel
beyond all words, and before I thought I had risen
and faced him, and was telling him what I had
heard only that night! He quailed before my tone,
and the look that I know was in my face, for at that
moment I did, indeed, hate him ! Then he flung
himself out of the room with a muttered oath.
And my chance was gone for ever ! Kittie, I
sometimes think, when I remember what I might
have done that night if I had been more patient,
that I deserved all that followed.
“ ‘Our marriage had been the cruellest mockery/
that is what he said just before going out to meet
his greatest temptation. And I had listened to him
sullenly, forgetting his part in the trial, remember-
ing only that the ring shining on my finger as he
spoke meant to me misery ! The next morning,
as I sat down to a late breakfast, the city was ring-
ing with the news of the awful crime ! And I
read the account aloud to him, wondering at the
grey pallor on his face as he listened."


Her voice had sunk to a whisper, but she spoke
rapidly, as if the very pouring out of the thoughts
which had been maddening her in her solitude,
were an unspeakable relief. But she was trembling
as with an ague, and I leaned forward and took the
poor hot hand in mine. Before I had always felt
myself so much younger than she, so immature,
that I must always yield to her as to a superior.
Now she seemed like a terrified child, and I only
longed to soothe her. I had fancied I knew all
of her story —what a mistake !
“Dora, don’t tell me any more,” I pleaded, “it
is just harrowing you for no good.” But she
almost shook my hand off. “ I tell you it is a re-
lief ; why will you not believe me ? ” she said, so
pettishly, that I wondered, and shrunk back.
“ Weeks after,” she began, “ I was singing in
the gloaming to his father, while he, Gerald, was
pacing up and down the long drawing-room. The
windows were open, I remember, for a thunder-
storm was gathering, and a fearful oppression was
in the air. Now and then the lightning flashed.
I noticed that he was unusually nervous, for he
started at every sound. Once I asked him pet-
tishly if he would not sit down, as the steady
tramp, tramp, was making me nervous. And he
answered half savagely, but still kept on.
“ Then the bell clanged loudly, and two strangers
were ushered into the room.


“ Kittie, you know the rest, —alas, it was common
talk. They had come with his warrant, and he, as
he stood there facing them, dared them to take
him alive. Then came that shot ! All I remember
afterwards was his father’s scream, and the heavy
fall.
“ After that I was ill. His accomplices were tried,
but the case had to be postponed till I was able
to appear. They had hoped (Gerald’s friends) that
I would have been able to prove an alibi , but I
could not. They told me that he was dead after
that, as soon as I was able to bear it, that he would
need no word of mine now to help him. That he
had lived for days, long enough to make his peace
with God. But I turned my face to the wall, for
that meant less than nothing to me then.
“ Did I tell you that it was my successful rival,
Jack’s wife, who nursed me ? Kittie, that was my
salvation. For they were kindness and tenderness
itself, and I learned to love her as a sister. It is
one thing I found to dream of an old love, to nurse
it consciously and to keep it alive, and another to
live in the same house with the one loved, to
realise that his fealty is pledged to another, and
that one worthy of it. Kittie, before strength came
back to me I had learned to call Jack friend, and
to mean that, and that only. He was Kellie’s
husband —and my dear friend, that was all.”
She stopped abruptly, and a rush of colour came


to her fair face at some chance thought, I
wondered what, and the old pain settled on my
heart. Had she told her story for this very reason ?
Did she wish me to understand that she was free
to really love again, in spite of the past. Was it
possible for love to die ? Would I, Kittie Manfred,
be ever telling my secret to another, and say with
that quiet smile, “ He was Dora’s husband—and
my friend, nothing more ? ”
I shivered at the very thought. Somehow I
felt that if ever I did learn to say that, life would
be harder to bear, not easier.
“ They taught me more,” she was saying, when
again I turned to listen. “ They taught me of One
who would never leave me, who could make life
bearable, even happy, whatever came to try or
annoy. I did not realise how much I should need
that friendship while I was surrounded by their
sweet sympathy and tenderness. But oh, Kittie,
afterwards, as I fought my way back to life, only
to find that I was to be hounded from my position
in the world I had courted, shunned and slandered,
not because I had sinned in giving my hand where
my heart was not, then failing my husband when
most he needed me —oh, no, that is too common !
but because I was the widow of a criminal, who
was a general object of execration, things looked
different ! Then in my loneliness and pain I
turned to the One who bore slanders, the curse


of man, and even the curse of God for me. Oh, I
was indeed heavy laden, and He said to such,
‘ Come to'Me,' —and I came! And through all
the dark, dark years that followed, He has never
left me.
“All did not fail me. It was necessary for me to
work. I was well educated, and Nellie’s father was
holding a high position in the Education Depart-
ment in this colony. So I took another name —
Jack advised that, —came over here, passed the
necessary examinations, and at last after one or two
other appointments, I was sent here. Then I
thought that I might rest awhile, and gain
strength for whatever might still lie before me.
And God helped, as He always does.”
Her voice trailed off once again into silence, a
silence I did not care to break. Tears were
blinding my eyes : it seemed to me for the minute
that, above the roar of the elements without, I, too,
could hear the voice of the One who stilled them
with a word.
“ There was another reason, too, that made me
long to rest where we were not known,” Dora
went on more calmly. “ Gerald’s father had been
put in an insane asylum ; the shock had turned
his brain ; but he was so gentle, they said, that
there was nothing to prevent his removal. Only
one precaution the doctor advised, —never to let
him hear music ! The poor feeble brain had


connected that last awful scene with my singing,
and it drove him frantic. That is why I cannot
go to church, Kittie, for he would hear it there,
and of course I cannot leave him and go alone.
So I took him —he has been such a comfort to
me always—and tried to be at least a good
daughter to him, seeing that I could never undo
the past.
“ Now there remains only one thing to tell you.
I said that I had hoped to rest here unknown.
But a week ago I received a letter from Jack,
telling me that someone from this district had been
making stealthy inquiries about me, with the view
to information as to my whereabouts. A reporter,
of whom he knew a little, had even been to him
to pry. Of course he sent him away very little
the wiser, but others, he said, might not; and he
prepared me for the shock of finding myself
once again ill-treated by those who should shield.
Oh, Kittie, it is hard ! Why cannot they let me
alone, while I harm no one ? They need not have
gone so far afield for their information, had they
but known it. There is one person in this neigh-
bourhood who knows me, one who could have
told them all. I had meant to seek advice from
him in this difficulty. Can you fancy how I felt,
coming here to hide, when the first face I saw
was Mr. Dene’s, as he inquired for the mail the
very first evening we were here ? It was well for


me that I knew him so well, knew him to be
utterly incapable of anything but giving help and
protection to a helpless woman, and an old man,
whose only crime is a broken heart.”
“ You —knew —Brian —before you came here ? ”
I stammered in surprise, and Dora answered —
“He was the junior barrister, who cross-
examined me that one awful day, doing it, oh, so
kindly ! Afterwards they told me how fortunate
for me it was that his senior had been indisposed,
and that I had fallen into Mr. Dene’s hands. His
only fault, they said, was the chivalry that would
prevent him seizing on points that might gain his
case at a woman’s expense. I found that true.
He pitied me—and he failed, the papers pointed
out, to follow up one trail that would have meant
honour to him, but to me bitterness. Kittie, as
soon as I learned to pray for myself, I prayed God
to bless him for that. Afterwards I heard that he
had been very ill, and was rusticating somewhere
by the doctor's orders, but I never dreamt that we
were to meet once again till that night. 1 A white
man,’ Jack used to call him. He is far more than
that. He is a humble follower of the Saviour,
who will one day reward him for such gentle
treatment of one of His little ones.”
I rose hastily and hurried out through the
school-room into the night. Thoughts too sweet
for words were filling my heart. Yes, he was


good, the man I loved so grudgingly : for the
moment I gave myself up to that one glad thought,
as I peered out with eyes that vainly tried to see.
The rain had ceased, and only the roar of the
creek hurrying breathlessly along broke the still-
ness, save that once a curlew called mournfully to
its mate across the waste of waters. Suddenly, as
I stood waiting, almost praying for the great black
cloud to part, to allow a little gleam of moonlight
to struggle forth, there came to my ears a dull,
ominous roar as of distant thunder, yet surely no
thunder was ever so monotonous. I stretched
out my hands in mute appeal to the sky —then at
last words came —
“ Lighten our darkness, O Lord,” I prayed half
mechanically, for in that one dread moment I
knew the truth.
The weir had burst. We were face to face with
death !


CHAPTER VII.
A CRY FOR HELP,
DEATH ? Why, I had not planned for that.
For a long sad life, unloved and lonely
often, for this —never !
To think that in perhaps a few minutes I,
Kittie Manfred, with the vigour of youth thrilling
through my frame, with its bloom on my cheek,
might be lying cold and still under the sullen
waters, or dashed helplessly against fallen timber,
and battered cruelly by the floods at their will !
Then the light I had prayed for came at last ;
but oh, merciful heaven, was it in mockery ?
The clouds parted for one brief minute, and the
watery moon shone coldly out —on what a scene !
I saw then the full extent of our danger. The
bridge was gone, swept down the torrent like
matchwood ; and where a gentle rise had been,
bracken covered and timber strewn, were swirling
waters. At the bend of the creek the waters were
piling high barriers of fallen trees, which tossed
their leafy, sodden branches a little restlessly as if


they were being used in the cruel game against
their will. The channel was completely stopped
up ; that meant that the flood waters when they
came would mount higher and higher. With
breathless eagerness I stole to the back of the
school and strained my eyes in the direction of
the north-east, our only way of escape ; alas, the
waters had rushed round there too. We were on
an island. Then once again the moon went under a
cloud, leaving behind it darkness, fraught no more
with unknown terrors, but with certain knowledge
of danger, probable destruction. Every moan
now, every rushing swirl of water would whisper
to me its cruel tale. I crept back to the school-
house.
Dora was leaning back in her chair with the
contented look of a child whose confession is
made, and who has been sweetly pardoned. With
a half sob I knelt beside her, looking up into her
calm, bright eyes. One verse, learned in child-
hood, w r as rushing through my brain again and
again.
“ Teach me to live that I may dread
The grave as little as my bed:
Teach me to die ”
I stopped there, shuddering. No, I had not
learnt to live that way at all, yet death would not
wait now till I had conquered my neglected
lesson.


“ Dora,” I gasped, and, in spite of all resolutions,
a great sob came. But she had started up, and
was listening intently to that awful roar, I fancied,
that could no longer be ignored.
“Hush!” she said peremptorily, stilling me.
“ Was that a cry for help ? ”
“ Help ! ” I laughed hysterically. We, we
were the ones who needed to cry that one
piteous word, and only one of us knew it. Then,
suddenly I, too, started up, as a scream, awful and
thrilling beyond all words, broke the silence.
So horrible and blood-curdling it was, that, fear
forgotten, I staggered to the door, and flung it
wide. The light of the moon was again struggling
dimly behind a cloud, whose inner edges were
tipped with rainbow tints : in that pale radiance I
could see only a white helpless object tossed
hither and thither on the dark foaming waters, as
they rushed round and round a great fallen tree,
and were sucked into some hidden cavity.
I clasped my hands to my heart to still its wild
beating, for I knew now what the scream meant.
A faithful horse lay still in that death stream, and
the waters played with it wantonly, tossing it
hither and thither against sunken timber. Then
a dark shadow on its side turned my pity to
horror. It was saddled ! What of its rider ! I
turned sick and faint, and, clinging to the door,
prayed as I had never prayed before to the


God who holds the waters in the hollow of His
hand.
And just then my hands were gently unclasped
by strong fingers that were icy cold and dripping ;
while the voice that held for me all of earth’s
music in its tones, said, with a little thrill in it,
“ Thank God for this ! Little Kittie, were you
frightened, dear ? Can we keep this from her-—you
and I —for a while ? For we are safe now, quite
safe. Yes, the weir has gone ; but for hours we
have been preparing for that by clearing away the
embankment from that long forgotten channel
into Kennedy’s swamp : while we talk here the
flood waters are rushing down it, a menace to
nobody. Why, Kittie, I thought tears never came
to these bright eyes.”
Then as I sobbed helplessly, he added quietly,
as if to himself, “ Better so, perhaps. They are
tears of joy, after all ! ”


CHAPTER VIII.
ALL THE PUZZLE OF LIFE HAS ENDED FOR HIM.’
HE waited patiently for me to regain com-
posure, and when I next glanced at him I
was conscious of a great change in him. He was
pale and haggard, but though his face in its weari-
ness showed traces of what he had been through,
there was yet about it a calm which was quite new
to me.
He had been face to face with death and had
not flinched —that was what I read in the dark,
steadfast eyes. And somehow his very presence
seemed to give me courage, though I wondered
even then what we were to keep from Dora, and
why he did not go to her at once.
I went to the porch of the school-house where
the children hung their caps and wraps, and open-
ing the door, looked out again.
The rain had ceased, and the wind between
occasional gusts had lulled, but the creek was
hurrying on with tremendous volume, just as it
had been a few minutes before. But the terror


had died out of my heart as I gazed upon it. Had
not Brian said we were safe ? That made all the
difference !
The moon was shining in a sickly manner now,
and though the clouds, black as palls, were racing
past it and obscuring its rays every now and then—
in one clear space of sky a star twinkled coldly.
What connection there could have been I did
not understand at the time, but these words flashed
into my mind with overwhelming force —“When
they saw the star they rejoiced with exceeding
great joy.” It seemed to me a promise, and I bent
my head in silent prayer.
Then, as my eyes turned upon the rushing waters,
I remembered what I had witnessed but a few
moments before, and the deadly faintness over-
powered me again. For I could not help wonder-
ing how I could have lived through it if that
helpless object I had seen had represented a
human life, and I had had to watch idly, utterly
impotent, a few yards away !
And just about that time Brian Dene must
have been making his way to us !
I shivered and closed my eyes, feeling sick and
dizzy, then started a little nervously, for he had
followed me and was throwing a “ cloud ” over my
shoulders.
“ Are you cold, dear ? You trembled then. No !
that is right, for what I have to say I want to say


to you first, you poor, brave little thing," he said
gently. “ I saw Miss Carlton just now and told her
what had been done; her mind is quite easy.
When 1 have told you, you must help me to break
it to her. Sit down on that bench, child, you are
wearied out.”
I obeyed him mechanically, but his words had
roused a new fear.
“The old man —Mr. Oakley,” I gasped, “we
have all of us forgotten him.” He gave me a quick,
searching glance.
“ She has confided in you, then ? ” he asked
with a sad smile ; “ that is better, much better. I
have urged her to do so many a time. And you
will understand now what a change it is for him.
He is enjoying such fulness of life now, living as
he has not lived here for many weary months —
there are no clouded intellects there! It seems
strange to think that he may be looking down
upon this—looking pityingly on us who have pitied
him for so long —he the wise, we, the foolish ! For
all the puzzle of life has ended for him, and we
have still to meet and grapple with it.”
I did not answer at first. It was so unlike Brian
to be speaking of such things, at least to me.
Many a time he must have talked just so to Dora,
or how would she have uttered those words with
such conviction —“‘A white man,’ Jack used to
call him. He is far more than that. He is a humble


follower of the Saviour, who will one day reward
him for such gentle treatment of one of His little
ones.”
I lifted my face to the sky ; the moonlight seemed
to be brighter, and in my heart was a song of
thanksgiving. Oh, yes, I knew what a change it
would be to him ; his knowledge was greater than
ours ; he was above it all-disaster, and sin, and
sorrow. And yet the same Saviour who had
called him into the sunshine of His presence was
with us —Brian, and Dora, and me !
“ She will not fret,” I said slowly. “ I think it
must have been almost unbearable lately; she
must always have feared.”
“ No, she will not fret when she hears all, she
will feel like thanking God for such a death. It
came instantaneously, and he knew that he was
going lam sure of it. For half-an-hour at least
before it happened his mind was perfectly clear.
Wonderful, wasn’t it ? Possibly the shock of the
danger that he saw threatening brought back his
reason, the reason that deserted him when he saw
that other awful sight. It sometimes happens so.”
He stopped, musingly, and, in the silence which
followed, the only thing I could realise was that in
the w ildness of the storm a soul had found its
haven that Christ must have come to meet him
on the waters with the words on His lips which
stilled the fears of the disciples, on that other dark


night when they were toiling in rowing : “ It is I,
be not afraid.”
And he would not fear with that Voice ringing
in his ears !
“ Doesn’t it seem strange ? ” I said slowly ; “you
remember his hatred of music, and now ”
“ Now he is singing the song of the redeemed,”
Brian said dreamily ; “he would not shrink from
J *
that chorus when it met his ears on the other side !
He will not hate music now ! ”
“ Was he drowned ? ” I asked in a low voice.
And Brian Dene went steadily on.
“ He was at Keegan’s cottage this afternoon, and
had tea with them. He was unusually restless,
they say, and at last, in spite of the darkness, and
all they could say or do, he set off to search in the
old channel for something he had lost, he said.
“What they did not see was that little Micky ran
to meet him from the back of the house, and finally
followed him. The old man and he have been
companions in many a ramble, it seems, and the
child would go any distance with him.
“As I told you, Hugh and I soon discovered that
it would be a hopeless task to try to save the
weir, and then someone made the suggestion that
if we could remove the embankment which blocked
up the channel to the swamp in time, we might
divert the water by that method. The men for
miles around turned up, but of course in the pitchy


darkness we were labouring under tremendous
disadvantages, and as often as not got in each
other’s way. We hung lanterns in every available
position, but the wind was so high at times that
many of them were practically useless. The rush
of water was gaining every minute, and if the
catastrophe came one instant before we were ready
—but I would not let myself think of that.”
His voice shook, and the old pain at my heart
stirred roughly. Of course he had been thinking
of the school-house and Dora ! How much he
must have felt those hours of suspense I knew, and
the knowledge brought an added sting.
But he went on slowly, his face turned away
from me.
“ I think I shall never forget it, to be miles away
and powerless ; yet every man was needed, and I
could not have reached here in time, even if I had
tried ; it was the only chance. I felt as if it had
made me years older as the thought came—a silly
one, wasn’t it child ? —that I might never tease you
again as I am so fond of doing ”
Yes, it was silly, —and yet, he had spared a
thought for me, even then. Dora would not grudge
me that. He was looking keenly at me now in the
old way, but the moonlight was not bright enough
for him to see the misery that had been in my face
or the happy flush that came at his words—in that
it was kind !


“ The unimportant things are always what one
thinks about in time of danger, I fancy,” I said
lamely, wishing he would look away again. And
he did so presently, while my eyes riveted them-
selves upon the hurry of the creek, and watched
with dread fascination the logs that were caught up,
and spun round and sometimes sucked under, with
the white lines of froth that broke over them, while
all the time that other scene was vividly before me,
shifting only to come more clearly.
1 was living it through as he told it me.
“ We worked for the most part in dogged silence ;
every stroke must tell, and the water seemed coming
from every side and from above as well; such
drenching torrents of rain I have never been in
before. It seemed to be mocking our feeble efforts,
for while we were working with feverish energy, it
was adding all the time to the force of the water.
It would have been an anxious enough time if there
had been daylight to show the extent of the danger ;
at much we had to guess. And that embankment
had been made dreadfully strong.
“ I think hope had pretty well died out of our
hearts as the minutes went by and so little seemed
accomplished. There were trees to be dragged
away, loads of rotting branches and decayed reeds
and scrub to be disposed of, and just as we were
nearing the end, Mr. Oakley appeared with the
child.


“ I remember that my first feeling was one of
impatience ; every moment was precious, and he
would waste so many for us by getting into
danger or taking Micky into it. I shouted to him
to keep out of the way, and tried by means of
gestures to make him understand the peril. But to
my surprise he came straight to where I was
endeavouring to lever one end of a black-wood
trunk that was lying lengthways along the drain,
and, bidding the boy remain at a safe distance,
quietly lifted a pick which was half out of a pool
of water and tried to steady it in his old, trembling
hands. It was this action which made me cease
work for a moment; I leaned forward and looked
into his face. Kittie, there was the light of
perfect comprehension upon it ! He worked
without a word at first, and his strength seemed
almost superhuman. Then he began to speak—
I think God had let him see that the end was near,
for he talked of the Saviour, and of the ' many
mansions ’ which had been prepared. Through
the gusts of wind and driving rain his words came
to me, and they seemed strange to me then. To
be talking of that other world while we were
fighting so for life —for the lives of those we
loved. Little, loving messages for Dora —how
she will prize them ! Then at last he remained
silent for a long, long time, but with such a light
upon his face.


“ The first rush of water came in from the creek,
and it lapped round the last impediment with a
curious sucking sound which told of great strength
behind. I think we all prayed in that instant. I
shouted out to the men, for I saw what was
coming—what I hoped was coming. They ran
to the banks leaving shovels and spades and axes
just where they were —only just in time.
“ But we had forgotten the child !
“ In his eagerness to see all that was to be seen,
Micky had crept nearer and nearer, a little con-
fused no doubt by the noise and the shouting.
For it came like a prolonged thunder-clap, that
last, mighty roar, as the weir gave way, and the
torrent of water rushed along the channel, carry-
ing with it all we had left of the enbankment,
and drenching us with its spray as it rose in one
mighty wave, mountain high.
“The next moment the drain was running a
banker, overflowing in many places indeed, and
the glow from one of the nearest lanterns flashed
for an instant on a child’s face, and a struggling
hand. And then as we sprang in, we saw some-
thing else too—an old man swimming slowly and
painfully towards the spot where the little head
had last appeared.
“ The current was fearfully strong, and there was
drift-wood—it needed young, vigorous strength to
battle with it, but at length we reached them and


brought them out. The child was unconscious,
but soon came round; Mr. Oakley was quite
dead. A floating piece of timber must have struck
him on the head ; it did its work very mercifully,
Kittie, he did not suffer, child —death would be
instantaneous. There was such a smile on his
lips.
“ They decided that they should carry him to the
church, and kind hands are about him now —we
wished to spare her the shock, and indeed it
would have been well nigh impossible to bring
him here to-night.
“ I was free to start out for the school at once
then —you may picture the journey I had ! Many
times in the darkness and blinding rain I missed
my way; sometimes I even feared I should not
reach you. Often the horrible fear would come
to torture me that, in spite of all, that one rush of
water had come as far as this and done its worst
—I seemed to be able to picture it all vividly, and
it maddened me.
“ I found that the bridge had been destroyed, and
the little gleam of moonlight which came then
showed me how nearly the danger had come ! I
made for the ford by the stepping stones, and
Firefly went in bravely, but when we were half-way
across he was carried off his feet, and hurled
against a floating tree. It broke his leg, I fancy. I
was afraid you would hear him and think —how


“ THE PUZZLE OF LIFE HAS ENDED." gg
you shudder, dear ! The next instant he was swept
from under me, and I saw his body carried swiftly
down the stream.
“ I struck out for the bank, and at last reached it,
and felt firm ground under my feet once more.
Then I saw your face, such a white, terrified face,
Kittie. Now we must go inside and tell Mrs.
Oakley.”
But he stopped abruptly there, for Dora was
standing beside us, and I knew as I looked into
her beautiful face that she had either guessed or
heard !
So I slipped inside, and left him to comfort
her.


CHAPTER IX.
“ YOU TOO ? POOR LITTLE WOMAN ! ”
TWO days later they laid the old man to
rest in the pretty cemetery’ on the slope.
The sun was shining gloriously on a very wet
world, and though the roads for miles around
were almost impassable, the Happy Valley people
(who, after all, were only thoughtless and sen-
sation loving, and not intentionally cruel) turned
out to do him tardy honour.
There was a leading article in the bi-weekly
paper whose every’ sentence made Dora’s eyes glow
with loving pride, and there were letters beside
which echoed —ungrammatically sometimes, but
what did that matter ? —the popular feeling. There
was a trace of remorse in all, I fancied.
Such a steady stream of buggies had never
before been seen at once in the township, and
Hugh said that when they stood beside the open
grave there were many tearful faces. Everyone
knew how and why he had met with his death ;
and Mrs. Keegan, with her hand fast holding


“YOU TOO? POOR LITTLE WOMAN!" ioi
Micky’s small, grimy one, and her broad face red
and disfigured with weeping, told the story over
and over again, and a little differently each time !
They had taken him to the church as Brian had
said, and when Dora first saw him, lying where
the light from the stained window fell across his
peaceful face, I was with her. Ido not think I
shall ever forget the expression in her eyes, the
almost maternal look in them as she smoothed
back his hair with a steady hand, and bent to kiss
his forehead. There was no grief for him in tone
or word, but the long strain of watching over him
had been all too quickly relaxed—she was missing
that.
Her care for him had been so much a part of
her being that she seemed lost, and as if her life
must be purposeless without that sacred charge.
But I knew that would pass ; she had earthly
happiness to enjoy yet, please God. And I was
getting used to the thought,—at least, I was
trying ! And I understood enough of Brian Dene
to know that he would not be long before giving
her the shelter of his name ; his love must have
been hers for long enough.
I was waiting for her to tell me that, wondering
a little that as she had kept nothing else back, she
had reserved this. Had she guessed that it would
give me pain and so kept silence ? That would
be like her.


But when I begged her to let me stay with her
the night after the funeral, she would not hear of it,
and was so decided in her gentle refusal that at
last I gave way. And when, in opposition to my
better sense, which warned me against such an
action, I urged her to come to “ Weeanite,” such
a pallor crept over her face that I felt as if I had
wounded her unknowingly !
The next day was a strange one to all of us.
Hugh had been away most of the morning in the
township and was late in returning, so that lunch
was delayed for a full hour. When he did come,
he looked so unlike his quiet, cheery self, that I
found myself during the progress of the meal
glancing at his face again and again to see what
new meaning I could read in it.
Brian Dene talked on about the building of the
new weir, and Nellie Cathcart chattered feverishly,
with gay bursts of laughter—she had a pretty
laugh—every now and then throwing a furtive look
in my brother’s direction, as if she too noticed his
manner, and was vaguely uneasy.
She was wonderfully handsome that day, with a
rich colour in her cheeks and a bright sparkle in
her eyes. There was an air of conscious triumph
in her whole bearing, and the repressed excitement
of one who has something very startling to relate.
Even she had had the decency—or the cunning—
to reserve news of her discovery till we had all had


time to recover from the shock of Mr. Oakley’s
death. She was bent upon telling it now, of that
I felt certain. She naturally supposed —being
Nellie Cathcart —that now the funeral was over,
things would be just as they had been, and that
there was a clear course for her to commence
operations. The excitement had died down —well,
she would provide a new eight days’ wonder !
But it was Hugh who startled us, not Nellie ;
and she had to be listener instead of speaker !
When the maids had cleared away the dishes,
and placed the tall specimen glasses, with their
pale winter blooms in the centre of the long table
—when they had left the room, and we were
wondering what to occupy ourselves with for the
short afternoon—-Hugh walked to the fireplace,
and looked round upon us all.
“ 1 would like you to remain for a few minutes,”
he said, speaking in a queer, strained voice ; then
stopped abruptly, and leaned his big, clumsy hand
on the mantelpiece. It touched a fragile vase,
which would have fallen and been broken on the
fender, but for Brian’s quick spring forward.
But Hugh had not noticed !
Mr. Dene walked to the window, and turning,
eyed me comically. “Feels like the reading of a
will,” he whispered, with a shrug of his shoulders.
“Or something worse. Kittie, you are about to
be placed on trial in presence of these witnesses.”


But Hugh began to speak just then, and I
listened with fast beating heart, wondering what
w r as coming—what had moved him so deeply. I
can never remember just what he said, after those
first few words which broke up the painful silence.
I felt foolishly irritated with Brian, who was still
looking out of the window. I could not see how
he was taking it, only his fingers played lazily with
the cord of the blind till I was more than half
disposed to snatch it away from him.
He spoke —my brother spoke, I mean—of the
cruel rumours which had been flying round the
township in reference to Miss Carlton. He had
thought them dastardly enough, as applied to a girl
whose friendless position should have rendered
her sacred in the eyes of those who had sheltered
homes—when he had looked upon them as idle
town gossip. Since then, he had discovered the
very painful fact that the source of the worst of
the slanders had been traced to his own house-
hold, that the malicious tongue that had been so
busy had not even been silenced by the great
sorrow which the subject of the gossip had ex-
perienced —that he knew Miss Carlton's sad
history, and that it had only aroused his deep
pity, his sympathy—that she was a brave woman
who deserved and received nothing but respect
from those who had hearts to feel.
And then poor Hugh, with his face growing


"YOU TOO? TOOT LITTLE WOMAN.'" 105
whiter and whiter, told us that though at first it
was simply his indignation as a man that had been
roused by the fact that she had no one to protect
her, it had come to be a personal matter. How
personal we would understand when we knew
that he had asked her to be his wife, and she had
refused ! That was all, but it held a world of
pathos to me, as I saw the pain in his honest eyes.
Brian’s face was still averted, and he was tapping
restlessly with his fingers against the window. I
seemed in that moment to realise just what he
must be feeling as he listened to those words from
Hugh’s lips, I, who alone knew ! Did they bring
certainty of joy to him ? Had he waited to hear
this from my brother before he put his own fate to
the test ? I could understand many things now.
Brian had guessed what had escaped my notice,
and had stood aside for his friend. It was very
clear at last.
Once he turned and looked into my eyes for a
long moment, and I moved my head impatiently
that he might not see the tell-tale colour in my
cheeks. But it faded very quickly, and if it had
not, that fact would have escaped his notice, for he
left the room without a word to anyone, without a
glance.
I leaned my head against the window, with a
dull sense of having lost irrevocably something I
had been dreading to lose for a long time. And


then Nellie Cathcart spoke, in light tones which
shook a little —-
“ After this, Mr. Manfred, I suppose you would
rather that I went from ‘ Weeanite.’ You were
thoughtful enough not to mention names in your
attack, but I cannot doubt that I am the dangerous
gossip you alluded to as possessing a malicious
tongue. That charge I have not merited, but
under the circumstances” —here there was a covert
sneer, which I resented for Hugh by glaring
ferociously at her —“I will forgive you; you are
taking a jaundiced view of things. If you were
not, you would know that I had acted as very few
would have acted who had the same knowledge.
But I am not at all surprised that you have for-
gotten any little services I may have rendered
since I have been with you ; and I will not wish
you ill in any one way, because if you succeed in
your wooing (and even such a paragon as Dora
Oakley will not stand out long against the charms
of the master of * Weeanite'), you will have the
worst punishment even an enemy could desire for
you, and lam very far from that. I shall go at
once, of course ; I have really not been required for
a long time. I would rather have gone sooner, but
that 1 hoped I had made myself necessary to some-
one in the house. As it is— —”
“ Just as you please,” my brother said gravely,
and she rose with crimsoning cheeks.


5K_~~ * n.|
'fv jSK
: “'‘ sn SB * f v -rf*Tl I
j r I
■«h i *"-■.■ ■*& \
>1*»#1 iflHL • w rjm
J 4 la « **’■ II
v
A ,, 3lHHHB
¥%k a !
■
■■' n
■ *7- >V 5*1
“ HUGH HAD OPENED THE DOOR AND STOOD QUIETLY WAITING
FOR HER TO PASS.” [/. 109.




“ You said that they were slanders, Mr, Manfred,
but they are facts ; anyone in Brisbane would tell
you so, and that it was Dora Oakley’s neglect which
drove her husband to desperation ”
But Hugh had opened the door, and stood
quietly waiting for her to pass. Marion followed,
but I saw by her face that Nellie Cathcart would
get no sympathy in that quarter.
Hugh crossed to the window and stood looking
out beside me, a world of trouble in his kind face.
I thought at first that I would slip out of the room ;
then, some impulse prompted me to lay my hand
softly on his arm.
He took my fingers in his own strong ones.
“ You were always her champion, little one,” he
said with a bright smile. “ I can never forget that.”
“ Hugh,” I cried suddenly, “why should you
not win her in the end ? You are so good and
worthy of her. Perhaps, perhaps if you were to be
very patient, Hugh ”
He smiled a little sadly.
“Worthy of Dora?” he repeated, incredu-
lously. “ Oh, child, I could be so patient if that
were all ; if there were the smallest chance that in
the years to come I might win her. But her words
left me no vestige of hope.”
I felt myself growing very still and white. The
reason for that, I knew ! There was someone in
the way, more masterful, more


He looked at me intently, as if he were trying to
read ray thoughts ; as if a new one, which was
yet an old one, had flashed into his head.
“You have been so much together,” he said
musingly, “if anyone knows, you should. Do you
think there is anyone else, Kittie ? ”
“Don’t ask me that, Hugh!” I entreated. And as
if to answer his question Brian Dene crossed the
lawn with the dogs at his heels, going in the direc-
tion of the school-house.
And then I think Hugh saw the misery in my
face, for he said, suddenly and tenderly, as he put
his arm about me —
“ You too f Poor little woman ! ”


CHAPTER X.
“ NINETEEN TO-DAY ! ”
“IF I were a man—and loved a woman ”
I broke off .then in some confusion, for
Brian, who was stretched all his lazy length at
my feet, was eyeing me keenly from under the
brim of his soft felt hat, which was pulled low
down over his brow. And when my eyes most
unwillingly met his, he smiled, and at that smile
my cheeks began to grow very hot.
“ Don't stop there, Kittle,” he entreated. “It is
so refreshing, and I am wide awake, and quite
anxious to profit by hints. Just think now, if you
can put me on the right track, help me to a really
convincing way of putting the question, I might
have cause to be eternally grateful.”
But I shut my lips tight, and looked away from
the handsome dark face, whose every line I knew
only too well ; away from the brown hands that
whittled idly at a stick, then on to the forest
of dull green so near at hand. The air was full of


a drowsy, droning music, and myriads of insects
of every shape and hue seemed in the full tide of
work and enjoyment. But all the while I was
conscious only that those eyes were coolly study-
ing my face and enjoying my very evident
confusion.
“ You see," he went on, drawling out the words
lazily, “ you will soon be having to face these
momentous questions yourself. Marion disposed
of, you are Miss Manfred of ‘ Weeanite/ and there
will naturally be suitors. Let me see—you are
seventeen to-day, are you not ? ”
“ Nineteen ! ” I flashed out indignantly, then
wished I had held my tongue, when I saw his
lips curve into a mischievous smile again.
It was my birthday, and the first day of a new
year. The fierce summer sun was setting in a
purple haze of smoke, and the station hands were
talking wisely already of bush-fires. Looking
down the long slope of the hill to the creek that
crept so softly in and out, it seemed hard indeed
to realise that six short months before we had
dreaded nothing so much as death by water.
The south channel, where poor old Mr. Oakley
had met his fate, was dry again, only the tangled
heaps of brushwood in its bed showing where the
freed waters had rushed that one awful night;
and on its banks the children picked buttercups
and trembling grass, though even the wildest would


soften his voice as they came to the spot where
Dennis Keegan the elder had erected a rude cross,
cut from a wattle tree, to mark where a life had
been given for another. And little Micky and his
sister Kate hung wreaths of everlasting daisies,
rough and shapeless, but full of meaning, on its
outstretched arms.
The months, as they passed, had not been alto-
gether happy ones for us. Brian still lingered,
at Hugh’s earnest request. He—Hugh, I mean—
had become involved in a lawsuit with a neigh-
bouring squatter, which had threatened to drag
on interminably, and might have proved ruinous,
but for the infinite pains Brian took in hunting
up information, and solving knotty points. At
last it was over, and Hugh had won, thanks to his
friend, as he said warmly, though Brian always
laughed at that. He was talking seriously of
making a fresh start in his profession close to us,
and Mr. Camp, our local solicitor, had approached
him more than once with a view to business.
Sometimes, often, I hoped that idea would fall
through. It would be fearful if he settled so near
us. My one hope was that when he went away I
might learn to forget, to live my life peacefully
with Hugh’s love to fill a little of the empty place
in my heart. We would try to be much to each
other, Hugh and I. Did not the bond of common
suffering bind us together ?


Our home, without Nellie Cathcart’s presence,
was far more peaceful, and Marion, freed from
her blighting influence, was fast becoming the
Marion we had known of old, who was sweet as
sunshine, and as true. Someone else was begin-
ning to find this out. Bert Kendall, the young Shire
Secretary from Happy Valley, tied up his pretty
black horse Kelpie so often to the bridle post at
the gate, that when his well-known voice was
heard of an evening, significant smiles would pass
round the circle, and Marion’s cheeks would be
all in a glow by the time that the rider in question
had sauntered round to the verandah, where he
was sure to find us just then. One evening, when
he had taken his leave, with many a backward
glance at the gate where Marion still stood, look-
ing very winsome in her simple frock, as he turned
the bend of the road, and so passed out of sight,
she threw her arm around me and rather breath-
lessly proposed that, the moonlight being so
lovely, we two should go down to the school-house
to see Mrs. Oakley, which we accordingly did.
And though Dora flushed a little at the sight of
her unwonted guest, she did the honours of the
shabby room so prettily that, as we walked back to
“ Weeanite ” afterwards, Marion said enthusiastic-
ally that she did not wonder now at my infatuation.
Dora Oakley was a dear, and she was only sorry
that she had been so horrid to her in the past,


adding, after a moment of silence, that it was a
great shame of Brian Dene to be playing fast and
loose with her.
“ He dare not act in that fashion with a girl in
our own set, so that makes it all the worse,” she
continued, drawing herself up with almost
matronly dignity. “He should ask her to be
his wife, then we could really take her up, and
make a bit of fuss with her, —though to be sure
she has friends enough now and to spare. She
will be quite the fashion. I wish she had loved
Hugh, Kittie. Wouldn’t she have queened it at
‘Weeanite’ when I am gone. For of course,
Kit, you have not a bit of dignity. I don’t know
how you will manage when you have to do the
entertaining : you are so abominably outspoken,
and will offend everyone.”
“ I have no doubt that I shall manage without
disgracing you,” I said loftily, and Marion
laughed.
“ But we were speaking of your beloved Dora,”
she said. “ She is quite the rage, so Brian need
not think she would be looked down on ”
“ Brian thinks nothing of the sort,” I interposed
with blazing cheeks. “Don’t forget that he was
her friend when everyone despised her—long
before you were, my lady.”
‘'True enough,” she returned good-humouredly,
“buti as ,1 was saying, everyone loves her now;


everyone is sorry she had so much to bear at their
hands. Even Mrs. Colter went to see her on
purpose to ask her to take the post of organist at
the church, and actually told her that she was very
sorry for misunderstanding her in the past.”
“ Good for Mrs. Colter,” I said absently. “ She is
a better Christian than I gave her credit for being.
Marion, I wonder if it is always so. I mean
whether perhaps people are not always better than
we fancy them,” but Marion was not listening.
“ Doesn’t it seem ridiculous,” she said with a
merry laugh, fingering the while the rose in her
dress which Bert Kendall had picked from the
arbour, u to think that I once actually fancied
that I was in love with Brian. I feel wild to
think that Nellie Cathcart made such a silly
of me. Because, Kittie, though he is handsome
enough in a wav —I admire fair men most —
he is not the sort of man that a girl could really
care for, with a love that would not swerve —such
a tease, you know, rather malicious even ! Did you
speak ?”
“ Hush,” I said, drawing her aside to listen,
for at that moment an invisible choir of mag-
pies trilled sleepily in the soft weird light ;
and the moon, shining out, sent shafts of quiver-
ing radiance down through the leafy bowers on
to our uncovered heads. Crickets sang shrilly,
and in the distance a faint tinkle sounded drom


where a herd of cows lay, as the leader arched
her neck and rose lazily to seek more sweet
herbage.
But all the while I was telling myself with
mocking meaning that no one could love Brian
Dene with a love that would not swerve—no one !
If a girl fancied she did, why then she must be
deceiving herself, that was all.
But the truth that lay behind her words stung ;
and all the rest of the way home I was assuring
myself that somehow, by some means, Brian must
be roused to a sense of his duty towards the girl
who was so friendless. And in spite of my own
pain, it hurt me to think that he, whom I had
always trusted as one of God’s gentlemen, should
need such reminder ; yet at the same time I re-
solved that, if needs be, I myself would sting him
to manliness.
For Dora, though she never complained, and
always greeted me so brightly, paled a little and
grew hollow-cheeked as the long summer days
dragged slowly by, and still he made no sign. I
could notice too, that on the rare occasions he
allowed himself to see her, Hugh was noting with
pain her evident weariness and heartache, and he
plunged into his work eagerly, growing a little
ste ner, yet, as even I could tell, growing
day by day into nobler manhood. Once, finding
me reading alone in the summer-house, he


asked me quietly, averting his head, to spend
as much of my spare time as possible with my
friend at the school-house.
“ It is bad for her to be so much alone,” he said,
clearing his throat, “ and under the circumstances
she will not feel free to visit us much.”
Then he whistled to his dogs, and walked rapidly
away to the wool-sheds, while I went slowly into
the house for hat and walking boots, and went
straight down to the spot, where, even now, I could
not go without a shudder, passing with my eyes
shut the place where the great tree hung across
the creek high and dry now, but which had once
floated in the dark waters, and had struck with
cruel jagged limb the life from a riderless horse.
There was a hand bridge now, built at Hugh's
expense, and a fine one erected by the council for
horse traffic ; there was even talk of shifting the
school, but that would probably not be done till
some distant day when perhaps a life might have
been given to prove the wisdom of such a course.
I crossed the hand bridge slowly, and sauntered
up the slope to find Dora, with knitting dropped
on her knees, looking aimlessly out into the quiet
evening sky. She started up, flushing, when my
step sounded on the gravel path under the window.
And that evening I asked her a question that I
had long been pondering, watching her wistfully
the while.


“ Dora, is it possible to love more than once—
really love, I mean ? ”
Over cheek and brow the hot colour rushed, till
she looked like a blush rose ; but I had to wait so
long for my answer that, half pettishly, I repeated
it. Then she said, looking away to the sunset —
“ That depends, does it not ? on the one who
loves, and perhaps a little too on the one who is
loved, I think that sometimes, when we are very
young, we are apt to mistake a mere girlish fancy
for love, and we grieve when our hopes are dashed
to the ground. But afterwards, Kittie, there may
come a quieter, more mature love, founded on
esteem ; it does to many, I am sure.’’
I said good-bye a little constrainedly soon after.
I was answered. The old love was forgotten—she
was ready to be happy—to give to Brian the more
mature love that had replaced her girlish fancy.
Well, some people might be like that.
I walked home slowly, with my hand linked in
the collar of my great dog, who trotted demurely
beside me, and he looked up wistfully once or
twice as my grip unconsciously tightened.
Yes, I was answered, more by her tone and the
shy colour in her face than by her words. The
new love had filled her heart. I wondered with
a dull throb of pain whether I should ever be
able to say the same.
That night, when I reached “ Weeanite,” I heard


strange news. Brian’s long holiday was ended.
His uncle in Ireland had died suddenly, leaving
to his unknown nephew in far Australia his large
fortune. The heir must leave for the old country,
at once, almost, to settle up his affairs. I remem-
ber that I congratulated him awkwardly, as he
stood before me, looking so strangely elated ; and
he held my hand for a moment, telling me it was
as cold as my words. Then I went straight to
bed, to sob helplessly in the pillows.
So he was to pass out of my life for ever ! Why
had God ever allowed this cruel thing to happen ?
“If I were God,” I sobbed, “I would not allow
people to meet and just spoil each other s lives, all
to serve no end. If I had never known Brian, I
might have met and loved someone else, who
would have loved me.”
But the wild words ended at last in my jumping
out of bed to say a few piteous words of prayer
to the All-Father, who knew best (yes, thank God
I could say that now from my heart), what His
child needed to fit her for His dear service !
Then I prayed a few broken words for Brian
and the beautiful bride he would take with him.
At least, at least the man I loved would be richer
all his life, though he would never know it,
because Kittie Manfred prayed for him. Then I
crept into bed, comforted. But the old fight with
pain and jealousy that I had fancied ended began


again as the days went by. And I learned the
bitter lesson that the path to heaven means not
only toilsome journeying, but fighting all the way.
Well was it for me that I was learning also to put
my hand in the pierced one of my Guide.
Brian heard from his lawyers that he need not
sail till Easter, so the dreaded parting was post-
poned. And still, though there was nothing to
prevent him now, surely, no word came of his
engagement to Dora. I grew restive, and tried to
persuade myself that I should be heartily glad
when it was settled.
Then came my birthday, a sultry day, and
trying to the flesh and spirit alike. Hugh had
fastened a pretty brooch in my dress with
a few kindly words; but no one else re-
membered even to give me birthday greetings.
Marion was away on a visit to Bert Kendall’s
relations ; she was his betrothed now, and the
evening meal had been a failure from a social
point of view, though I had put on my prettiest
frock, and coiled up my hair in the fashion Dora
says suits me best. Brian had eaten and drunk
coolly, scarcely looking at me, and Hugh as soon
as we rose from the table had left the room with
an abstracted air, and a moment afterwards I saw
his figure vanish at the turn of the road.
So I took my way alone to the lounge under the
great mulberry tree in a decidedly morose frame


of mind. When, a full hour later, Brian appeared,
and flung himself down on the lawn at my feet, I
felt positively waspish, ready and willing to do my
duty by him in the way of rebuke or snubbing.
And when he answered me lightly and carelessly,
at last my wrath fairly bubbled over.
“ I should think it is a very fine thing to laugh
in anyone’s face,” I said loftily. “ But if your
object is to turn me from what I was saying, you
shall not succeed. You are breaking Dora's heart
with your silence.”
“ Did she tell you so ? ” queried Brian with pro-
found interest, and I flushed.
‘‘And —and you are earning for yourself what I
hope you do not deserve —the indignation and
contempt of everyone respectable,” I finished,
lamely, rather taken aback to see, instead of the
flush of conviction on his face, a little comical
smile curve the corners of his mouth. He arched
his eyebrows, and began on a fresh bit of stick
with his well-worn pocket-knife.
“ What would you advise me to do ? ” he said
gravely, “ You speak as if it were the easiest thing
in the world to go and tell your love to the woman
of your choice. That is only because you have
never triedit, Kathleen mavourneen. I being only
‘a mere man' find it extremely difficult to put
all to the touch ! She might refuse to listen, and
then—l should be a very miserable man, Kittie.”


“Go and try,” I said huskily. And he rose.
“ Are you going to wish me God-speed in my
wooing ? ” he asked, quietly, taking my hands in his,
and looking down at me with eyes that held no
fun in their depths now. But I snatched them
away from him and averted my head, seeing
through a mist the shimmer of evening in the
valley below.
“ You will succeed without any wishes of mine,”
I said, and my voice sounded quite unfamiliar to
me. “ But, yes, I will say God bless you —and
her —I will be such a friend to you both —God
helping me.”
I finished inaudibly, as I watched him saunter
away, clenching my hands and whispering little
cries for help for strength to smile, if he looked
back —to wave my hand.
But he did not look back, and as the hedge hid
him, a childish fit of sobbing shook my frame, and
I buried my face in my hands.
A few moments later they were pulled gently
away, and I was lifted to my feet. Brian stood
before me with a look on his face that I did not
quite understand.
“ Listen to me, Kittle/' he said peremptorily.
“ You are crying—why ? ”
“ Because,” I stammered, then waxing wrathful
—“ how dare you question me, Brian ? Let go my
hands I It was only because I have had a horrid


birthday, if you must know—and—and . How
dared you come back and spy on me ? "
“ 1 cam e back to tell you something, Kittle,’' he
said, deliberately watching those wretched tears
pour down my face as if he quite enjoyed it.
“The fact is—l would like to oblige you in this
matter—about Mrs. Oakley, I mean. But I am
afraid that under the circumstances she would
resent it, and there is another reason among many
why it would hardly do, which I shall be glad to
tell you in a minute. You are a very clever child,
Kittie, too clever sometimes; and often clever
people have the unfortunate knack of—following
up the wrong scent ! Sit down here, or, better
still, come and have a ramble in the shrubbery.
Why, if the servants saw us, they might think
even that we were the lovers, and then to prove
I was not a villain, earning the—indignation
(wasn't that it ?) of respectable people, I might
be obliged to propose to yon— you have been
getting a bit thin lately, you see—and think how
horrid that would be ! "
With a new meekness, born of utter exaspera-
tion and shame, I let him draw my hand through
his arm and lead me to the shady under the
boobialla trees. Then he began again in a stagey
whisper.
“ 1 have had an awful shock to-night Kittie. I
went for the mail myself, for I expected a small


parcel that I was not anxious for anyone to see —
for a few hours, anyhow (if you are good I may
presently show it to you,) and I walked up instead
of riding, and my shoes made no sound. It was
thoughtless, of course ; but then, how was I to
dream of such a complication ! Upon my word, I
blush when I think of it ! There was your irre-
proachable friend, Dora Oakley, and beside her,
a masculine figure that looked familiar—and (I
don’t know that it is quite fit for you to hear,
Kittie child ; still, you are seventeen now, —
nineteen, I beg your pardon for the mistake ; two
years is nothing, unless accompanied by ‘ hard
labour’) —anyhow there was a coat sleeve round
her, and I am prepared to swear it was not empty.
I came on this disgraceful scene too suddenly to
allow of retreat, and before I could murmur an
apology and decamp, I am awfully afraid that the
word I caught was Darling —capital D. too, no less.
And your shameless friend, instead of repelling the
insult as she should have done, being you see so
deeply in love with my unworthy self, only looked
very pink and pretty, and said—
“ 1 Oh, Hugh, do you think I shall ever be able
to make it up to you for what I have made you
suffer by my indecision ?’ His answer, Kittie,
was unprintable ! As for me I turned away —it
was high time. Skipper was browsing contentedly
near the door, and the ‘ Weeanite' mail was spilt


holus-bolus on the grass. I don’t think we will
trust Hugh to get it again. I rescued my parcel
from the wreck, jumped on Skipper’s back (our
naughty elder brother will have to walk home, and
serve him right)-—and here lam!”
I looked up shyly, wondering what to say—and
instantly regretted it, for Brian’s smile made me
tremble and flush.
“ Silly little girl,” he said, softly, “to make such
a mistake. Not even to know that I have only
loved once in my life. Why, even your friend Dora
guessed my secret almost from the first, and used
often to comfort me about it, when I had been
snubbed overmuch. Only loved once, did I say ?
yet I think it must have been twice.
“ For the first time it was just a girl, with a long
plait down her back—and a terrible temper. And
when I told her brother, he, like the bully he is, said
I must not tell her till she was nineteen. So I
waited—and fell in love the second time. She
wore a modern dinner dress then, and had the
prettiest coil of hair, still horribly ruffled, by the
way, but expressive of dignity. lam afraid of her
—especially when she is silent, and looks at me
like that ! You are nineteen to-day, Kittie, are you
not ? Darling—l thought this birthday would
never come ! ”


I have written this just for fun on board the
good ship Ormuz, as we steam along. Brian is
horribly curious about it, and declares he will read
it by fair means or foul, which he certainly shall
not !
He wouldn’t wait a day longer for me—told
Hugh that he owed him that reparation for ever
having fancied that his love had swerved, which
Hugh could not deny, though he frowned, and said
I was much too young. But Brian assured him
that that was a fault every day would mend. And
at last Dora, my own sister now, came to the
rescue, and Hugh gave in to her, as he always
does.
So in the “Weeanite” drawing room, a bower
of flowers for the occasion, I gave my life without
a fear into Brian’s keeping. There were no tears
at parting ; for of course we are going back to our
own sunny land when everything is settled, which
we hope will be soon.
There is nothing more to tell, only this—
Dora says a new teacher is settled now in the
little wooden school-house at the bend of the creek
—a male teacher this time !
THE EXD,
HEADLEY BROTHERS, PRINTERS, LONDON ; AND ASHFORD, KENT.


THE SAME AUTHOR.
CLOUDS THAT PASS;
E. GERTRUDE HART.
Crow?i B vo., 320 Tages, fully illustrated.
LONDON:
S. W. Partridge & Co.;
8 & g, Paternoster Row.


I \ H V ’’
IP* ■ - .•
SELECTION FROM
S- IV. PARTRIDGE <& CO.'S
CATALOGUE OF
Popdue Illustrated Book.
ss. each.
CAPN NATS TREASURE:
A Tale of Old Liverpool
ROBERT LEIGHTON,
Author of “The Pilots of Pomona,” etc
Eight Illustrations. Large Crown Bvo.
Cloth boards. ss.
A stirring story of adventure and hairbreadth
escapes in search of an iron-bound box of jewels
and Spanish doubloons hidden in a secret cabin by
an old sea captain. A capital book for boys.
From “ Cap’n Nat's Treasure."
In the fYlahdi’s Grasp. By G. M. Fenn. With Six
Illustrations by Lancelot Speed. Large Crown Bvo. 416 pages. Cloth
boards, gilt edges. ss. each.
Sappers and Miners / or, The Flood Beneath
the Sea. By Geo, Manville Fenn. Illustrated. Large Crown Bvo
320 pages. Cloth boards, gilt edges. ss.
Describes Gwyn Pendarve and Joe Jollivet's Adventures in an old Cornish Mins
Full of Interest for elder boys.
Cormorant Crag: A Tale of the Smuggling
Days. By Geo. Manville Fenn. Illustrated by W. Rainey, R 1
Large Crown Bvo. 416 pages. Cloth boards, gilt edges. ss.
In Honour’s Cause: A Tale of the Days of George
the First. By Geo. Manville Fenn. Illustrated by Lancelot Speed
Large Crown Bvo. Cloth boards, gilt edges. ss.
" Well written, and thoroughly Interesting." —Westminster Gazette.
Steve Young / or, The Voyage of the “Hvalross”
to the Icy Seas. By Geo. Manville Fenn. Illustrated by W. Rainey,
R.I. Large Crown Bvo. 416 pages. Cloth boards, gilt edges. 5s
"A stirring book of adventure with many thrilling passages.”— Liverpool Mercury.


P» . . . ■■
< .Jm t -=®Bfi
r w v - v-*. ' Jj.R l -HE ,|
■ 'H't. k 'tf'- kL IK A
i 'Tb s Sl'&' J^JL
Those Berkeley Girls. By
Lillias Campbell Davidson, Author
of “ Into a Far Country.” Illustrated.
Large Crown Bvo. Cloth boards. 35.6 d.
The story of two delightful girls brought up in
the expectation of a fortune, but suddenly thrown
on their own resources. It describes with much
humour and vivacity their successful experiment ot
running a tea-shop in Nottingham. There is a strong
love interest, and all the characters are vividly por-
trayed.
The Parting of the Ways.
By J. L. Hornibrook, Author of ‘‘ln
the Bonds of Silence.” Illustrated.
Large Crown Bvo. Cloth boards. 35.6 d.
Shows how ayoung man, brought up in a Christian
home, falls to the wiles of an unscrupulous companion,
but in the end regains his self-respect. Illustrates in
convincing manner the truth that “ the way of trans-
gressors is hard.”
The Awakening of Helena
Thorpe, By E Rentoul Esler,
From “ Those Berkeley Girls.”
Author of " A Maid of the Manse,” etc. Illustrated. Large Crown
Bvo. Cloth Boards. 3s. 6d.
The Three-Cornered House. By the Author of
“ Everybody’s Friend,” etc. Twelve Illustrations. Large Crown Bvo.
Cloth boards, gilt top. 3s. 6d.
Casque and Cowl: A Tale of the French Reformation.
By F. M Cotton Walker, Author of "The Lily and Rose,” etc. 364
pages. Four Illustrations. Large Crown Bvo. Cloth boards, gilt
top. 3s. 6d.
Jungle and Stream / or, The Adventures of Two
Boys in Siam. By Geo. Manville Fenn. Four Illustrations by Harold
Piffard. Large Crown Bvo. 416 pages. Cloth boards. 3s. 6d.
A Lady Of High Degree. By Jennie Chappell. Large
Crown Bvo. 320 pages. Illustrated. Cloth boards, gilt top 3s. 6d
The Missing Million : A Tale
of Adventure in Search of a Million
Pounds. By E. Harcourt Burrage.
Large Crown Bvo. Cloth, gilt top, 3s. 6d
Six Stories by Pansy.
Imperial Bvo. 390 pages. Fully Illustra-
ted and well bound in cloth. Six com-
plete Stories in each Vol. Vols. i, 2,
3, 4, and 5, 3s. 6d. each.
Pilgrim’s Progress (The).
By John Bunyan. Illustrated with 55
Full-page and other Engravings, drawn
by Frederick Barnard, J. D. Linton, W.
Small; and engraved byDalzielßrothers.
Crown 4to. Cloth extra, 3s. 6d. (Gilt
pHcypc ec \
The ° Story of the Bible.
Arranged in simple style for Young
People. One Hundred Illustrations.
Demy Bvo. Cloth extra, 3s. 6d. (Gilt
edges, bevelled boards, 4s. 6d.)
From “ The Parting of the Ways.”


l 'CJy A Bihle IVrruftt Boo*
E.S V -
2s. 6d. each.
Following Jesus: A Bible
Picture Book for the Young. Size
13J xlO inches. Contains 12 large
and beautifully coloured Old and New
Testament Scenes, with appropriate
letterpress by D. J. D., Author of
“ Bible Pictures and Stories," etc.
Handsome coloured cover, paper
boards with cloth back. 2s. 6d.
Brought to Jesus : A Bible
Picture Book for Little Readers.
Containing Twelve large New Testa-
ment Scenes, pripted in colours,
with appropriate letterpress by Mrs.
G. E. Morton. Size, i3jby roinches
Handsome coloured boards with
cloth back. 2s. 6d.
Light for Little Footsteps; or, Bible Stories Illus-
trated. By the Author of "A Ride to Picture Land," etc. Size,
13J by 10 inches. With beautiful coloured Cover and Frontispiece!
Full of Pictures. 2s. 6d.
Our Rulers: From William the Conqueror to Edward
VII. By J. Alexander. Foolscap 410. Cloth gilt. 60 beautiful
illustrations. Attractively bound. 2s. 6d.
A Trip to Many Lands. By W. J. Forster, Author
of “Uncle Zeph and his Yarns," etc. With Twenty-six Full-page
Pictures. 4to. Cloth gilt. 2s. 6d.
Bible Pictures and Stories. Old and New Testa-
ment. In one Volume. Bound in handsome cloth covers, with
Eighty-nine Full-page Illustrations by Eminent Artists. 2s. 6d.
Story Of Jesus. For Little Children. By Mrs. G. E.
Morton, Author of "Brought to Jesus," etc. Many Illustrations.
Imperial i6mo. Cloth boards. 2s. 6d.
Crown and Empire, Glimpses of Royal Life, By
A. E. Knight. Crown Bvo. 330 pages. Fully Illustrated. Hand-
somely bound in cloth. 2s. 6d.
Victoria: Her Life and Reign. By Alfred E. Knight.
New Edition. Large Crown Bvo. 385 pages. Cloth extra, 2s. 6d,
(Fancy cloth, gilt edges, 3s. 6d )
My Dogs. By Egerton R. Young, Author of “By Canoe
and Dog Train,” etc. Illustrated. Crown Bvo. Cloth boards, 2s. 6d.
Castleton’s “Prep ” By Charlotte Murray, Author
of " Through Grey to Gold,” etc. Illustrated. Crown Bvo. Cloth
boards, 2s. 6d.
Coral ; or, a Sea Waif and her Friends. By Charlotte
Murray, Author of "Through Grey to Gold,” etc. Illustrated.
Crown Bvo. Cloth boards, 2s. 6d.
Through Grey to Gold. By Charlotte Murray, Author
of " Muriel Malone,” etc. Illustrated. Crown Bvo. Cloth boards, 25.6 d
Muriel Malone /or From Door to Door. By Charlotte
Murray, Author of “ Wardlaugh," etc. Illustrated. Crown Bvo. Cloth
boards, 2s. 6d.


* ’if
EKVfe V r I
••f»w .1 ,-y 1^
ISLry-r y y - ?
N***
2s. 6d. each.
THE “RED MOUNTAIN” SERIES.
Crown Bvo. 320 pages. Illustrated. Handsomely hound in doth. as. 6d. each.
Gold or DrOSS ? By John W. Kneeshaw, Author of
“ Norcliffe Court,” etc.
A story of youthful indiscretions nobly atoned for. Interesting, and of good moral tone
ICG Bound / or, The Anticosti
Crusoes. By Edward Roper, F.R.G.S.,
Author of " By Track and Trail through
Canada.” Eight Illustrations.
The adventures, perils, and experiences of some
shipwrecked persons on this ice-bound island are
graphically described, the book affording capital
reading and much information on the natural and
physical conditions of life in this northern region.
On Winding Waters: A Tale
of Adventure and Peril. By William
Murray Graydon, Author of “The
Fighting Lads of Devon,” etc. Fully
illustrated.
A summer canoeing trip on a North American
creek ; describing, in the form of an exciting tale, the
mishaps, perils and adventures of a party of students
who spent their holiday on winding waters.
Burtons of Burdale (The).
By John W. Kneeshaw, Author of
“ Norcliffe Court," etc. Illustrated.
From “ On Winding Waters."
Grand Chaco (The) : A Boy’s Adventures in an un
known Land. By G. Manville Fenn.
“ Mr. Fenn has lost none of his imaginative power, and the boating adventures of
his boy heroes in South America leave nothing to be desired."— Atheneeum.
First in the Field: A Story of New South Wales. By
G. Manville Fenn.
Loyal: A Story of the Mercantile Marine. By Arthur
Collard. Illustrated.
Two Henriettas (The), By Emma Marshall, Author
of *'Eaglehurst Towers," etc.
Adventures of Don Lavington (The). By G.
Manville Fenn. Illustrated. Large Crown Bvo. Cloth extra.
Crystal Hunters (The) : A Boy’s Adventures in the
Higher Alps. By G. Manville Fenn. Illustrated. Large Crown Bvo.
Cloth extra.
Norcliffe Court. By John W. Kneeshaw, Author of
•• A Black Shadow," “ From Dusk to Dawn," etc.
By Sea-Shore, Wood, and Moorland : Peeps
at Nature. By Edward Step, Author of " Plant Life," etc.
Eagle Cliff (The): A Tale of the Western Isles. By
R. M Ballantyne, Author of ■* Fighting the Flames," etc.


2s. 6d. each.
THE “RED MOUNTAIN” SERIES— Continued,
Edwin, The Boy Outlaw; or, The Dawn of Freedom
in England. A Story of the Days of Robin Hood. By J. Frederick
Hodgetts, Author of " Older England ” etc.
England's Navy: Stories of its Ships and its Services.
With a Glance at some Navies of the Ancient World. By F, M
Holmes, Author of “ Great Works by Great Men," etc.
Qreat Works by Great Men: The Story of
Famous Engineers and their Triumphs. By F. M. Holmes.
Lady of the Forest (The). By L. T. Meade,
Author of “Scamp and I," “ Sweet Nancy," etc.
Manco, The Peruvian Chief. By W. H. G.
Kingston. New Edition. Illustrated by Lancelot Speed.
Roger the Ranger: A Story of Border Life among
the Indians. By Eliza F. Pollard, Author of " Not Wanted," etc.
Red Mountain of Alaska (The). By Willis Boyd
Allen, Author of “ Pine Cones," " The Northern Cross," etc.
True unto Death : A Story of Russian Life and the
Crimean War. By Eliza F. Pollard, Author of " Roger the Ranger."
White Dove of Amritzir (The) : A Romance of
Anglo-Indian Life. By Eliza F. Pollard.


r - A Coi/XRH> SQgmfrg P»crr>o Rnu. - -
. .> Vj
~~
2s. each
Bible Light for Little PH-
grims. A Coloured Scripture Picture Roll,
containing Twelve beautifully Coloured
Old and New Testament Scenes, with
appropriate texts. Varnished cover,
printed in ten colours. Mounted on roller
for hanging, as.
Bible Picture Roll . Contain-
ing a large Engraving of a Scripture
Subject, with letterpress for each day in
the month. Mounted on roller, as.
The Friends of Jesus . Illus-
trated Sketches for the Young, of the
Twelve Apostles, the Family at Bethany,
and other of the earthly friends of the
Saviour. Small 4*o. Cloth extra, as.
Is. 6d, each.
fIBW SERIES OF MISSIONARY BIOGRAPHIES.
Crown B i/o. 160 pages. Cloth extra. Fully Illustrated., is. 6d. each.
James Chalmers, Missionary and Explorer
of Raratonga and New Guinea. By William Robson New Hdjtw,
brought up-to-date by Frank B. Broad, of the London Missionary
Griffith John, Founder of the Hankow Mis-
sion, Central Chfna. By William Robson. New Edition, brought
up-to-date by Frank B. Broad.
Amid Greenland Snows; or, The Earlyi By
History of Arctic Missions. „ Jesse
Bishop Patteson, the Martyr of p age .
Melanesia. , L . .
Captain Allen Gardiner: Sailor amh&unt. By
Jesse Page, Author of ” Japan, its People and Missions etc.
Congo for Christ (The) The Story of the Congo
Mission. By Rev. J. B. Myers, Author of " William Carey, etc.


David Brainerd, the Apostle to the North
American Indians. By Jesse Page.
Henry Martyn ,* His Life and Labours—Cambridge,
India, Russia. By JeSse Page, Author of “ Samuel Crowther,’’ etc.
Japan: Its People and Missions. By Jesse Page.
John Williams, the Martyr Missionary of
Polynesia. By Rev. James J. Ellis.
James Calvert / or, From Dark to Dawn in Fiji. By
R. Vernon.
Lady Missionaries in Foreign Lands . By
Mrs. E. R. Pitman, Author of “ Vestina’s Martyrdom." etc.
Madagascar: Its Missionaries and Martyrs.
By William J. Townsend, Author of “ Robert Morrison," etc.
Missionary Heroines in Eastern Lands. By
Mrs. E. R. Pitman, Author of ‘‘Lady Missionaries in Foreign Lands."
Robert Moffat, the Missionary Hero of
Kuruman. By David J, Deane.
Robert Morrison, the Pioneer of Chinese
Missions. By William John Townsend, General Secretary of the
Methodist New Connexion Missionary Society.
Samuel Crowther, the Slave Boy who
became Bishop of the Niger. By Jesse Page.
Thomas J, Comber, Missionary Pioneer to
the Congo. By Rev. J. B. Myers, Association Secretary, Baptist
Missionary Society.
From Kafir Kraal to Pulpit: The Story of Tiyo
jSoga, first ordained preacher of the Kafir Race.
William Carey, the Shoemaker who became
the Father and Founder of Modern Missions. By Rev J B
Myers.
NEW POPULAR BIOGRAPHIES.
Crown B vo. 160 pages. Maps and Illustrations. Cloth extra, is. 6 d. each
J. Passmore Edwards, Philanthropist. By
E. Harcourt Burrage,
Dwight L. Moody : The Life-work of a Modern Evan-
gelist. By Rev. J. H. Batt.
Noble Work by Noble Women : Sketches of the
lives of the Baroness Burdett-Coutts, Lady Henry Somerset, Miss
Robinson, Mrs. Fawcett, and Mrs. Gladstone. By Jennie Chappell,
Author of “ Four Noble Women," etc.
Four Noble Women and their Work: Sketches
of the Life and Work of Frances Willard, Agnes Weston, Sister Dora,
and Catherine Booth. By Jennie Chappell.
Cana! Boy who became President (The).
T. Gammon. Twelfth Edidon. Thirty-fourth Thousand
David Livingstone: His Labours and His Legacy.
By Arthur Montefiore-Brice, F.R.G.S.
Florence Nightingale, the Wounded Soldier's
Friend. By Eliza F. Pollard.
Four Heroes of India : Clive, Warren Hastings,
Havelock. Lawrence. By F. M. Holmes.


Fridtjof Nansen : His Life and Explorations. By J.
Arthur Bain. ... _ . .. .
Genera! Gordon, the Christian Soldier and
Hero. By G. Barnett Smith. _ . _
Gladstone (W. E.) : England s Great Com-
moner. By Walter Jerrold. With Portrait and Thirty-eight other
Illustrations. ~. .
Heroes and Heroines of the Scottish
Covenanters. By J. Meldrum Dryerre, LL.B., F.R.G.S.
John Knox and the Scottish Reformation.
By G. Barnett Smith.
Philip IVlelancthon, the Wittemberg Pro-
feasor and Theologian of the Reformation. By David J. Deane,
Author of “ Two Noble Lives," etc. . .
s/r Richard Tangye (“One and All ). An Auto-
biography. With Twenty-one Original Illustrations by Frank Hewitt.
(192 pages.) „ _
Sir John Franklin and the Romance of the
North-West Passage. By G. Barnett Smith.
Stanley (Henry M.), the African Explorer.
By Arthur Montefiore-Brice, F.R.G.S. _ . ' .
Spurgeon (C. H.) : His Life and Ministry. By Jesse
Two Noble Lives : JOHN WICLIFFE, the Morning
Star of the Reformation; and MARTIN LUTHER, the Reformer.
By David J. Deane. (208 pages.)
William Tyndale, the Translator of the
English Bible. By G. Barnett Smith,
Queen Alexandra, the Nation’s Pride. The
Life Story of the “ Sea Kings' Daughter. ’’ By Mrs- C. N. Williamson.
Crown Bvo. 160 pages. Eight Illustrations. Cloth gilt, is. .n
King and Emperor: The Life-History of King
Edward VII. By Arthur Mee, Author of •' Joseph Chamberlain
etc. Crown Bvo. 170 pages. Eight Illustrations. Handsomely
bound, with well-executed Portrait on cover, is. 6d.
Canon Barnett, of the Toynbee Settlement.
By W. Francis Aitken. Illustrated. Crown Bvo. Cloth boards, is. 6d.net.
F. B. Meyer, B.A. By M. Jennie Street. 160 pages.
Crown Bvo. Illustrated, is. 6d. net. -
J. Clifford, M.A., B.Sc., LL. 0., D.D. By C. T.
Bateman. Crown Bvo. Frontispiece, is. 6d. net. m
Alexander Maclaren: The Man and His
Message. A Character Sketch. By John C. Garble, Author of
*• The Royal Life.” is. 6d. net. -r.
Joseph Parker, D.D. : His Life and Ministry. By
Albert Dawson. Crown Bvo. 160 pages. Illustrated. Cloth boards.
Genera! Booth: The Man and His Work. By Jesse
Page. Crown Bvo. 160 pages. Illustrated. Cloth boards. n«t.
Hugh Price Hughes. By Rev. J. Gregory Mantle.
160 pages. Illustrated. Cloth boards, is. 6d. net.
10


i « 1 jgy '•y^
Is. 6d. each.
THE “WORLD’S WONDERS” SERIES.
A Series of Popular Books treating of the present-day wonders of Science
and Art. Well written, printed on good paper, and fully Illustrated. Crown
Bt io. 160 pages. Handsome Cloth Covers, is. 6 d. each.
The Conquest of the
Air : The Romance of Aerial
Navigation. By J. Alexander.
With Preface by Sir Hiram
S. Maxim. 160 pages. Fully
illustrated.
Describes the invention of balloons
and the progress made in aerial naviga-
gation since the days of Montgolfier ;
with accounts of Senor Santos Dumont
and his and other air ships.
From “The Conquest of the Air
Surgeons and their Wonderful Discoveries:
Stories of Triumphs in Surgical Skill, and for the assuagement of Human
Suffering. By F. M. Holmes, Author of “The Lifeboat," etc.
The Lifeboat: Its History and Heroes. By F. M.
Holmes, Author of “ Firemen and their Exploits,” etc.
Firemen and their Exploits: With some account
of the Rise and Development of Fire Brigades, o( various Appliances
for saving life at fires, and for extinguishing the flames By F. M.
Holmes, Author of "Engineers and their Triumphs."
Marvels of Ant Life. By W.F. Kirby, F.L.S., F.E.S.,
of the Natural History Museum, South Kensington.
The Romance of the Savings Banks. By
Arch. G. Bowie.
The Romance of Glass-Making: A Sketch of
the History of Ornamental Glass. By W. Gandy.
The Romance of the Post Office: Its Inception
and Wondrous Development. By Arch G. Bowie.
Marvels Of Metals . By F. M. Holmes.
Miners and their Works Underground. By
F. M. Holmes. [ Continued on next Cage.
From " Firemen and their Exploits.”
II


Is. 6d. each.
Triumphs of the Printing Press. By Walter
Jerrold.
Astronomers and their Observations. By
Lucy Taylor. With Preface by W. Thynne Lynn, 8.A., F.R.A.S.
Celebrated Mechanics and their Achieve ■
merits. By F. M, Holmes.
Chemists and their Wonders. By F. M. Holmes.
Engineers and their Triumphs. By F. M.
Holmes.
Electricians and their Marvels. By Walter
Jerrold.
Musicians and their Compositions. By J. R.
Griffiths.
Naturalists and their Investigations. By
George Day, F.R.M.S.
THE BRITISH BOYS’ LIBRARY.
A New Series of is. 6d. Books for Boys. Illustrated. Crown B vo.
Cloth extra.
Well Done ! Stories of Brave
Endeavour. Edited by C. D.
Michael, Author of “ Heroes All!”
Sketches of eminent men who by perseverance
have achieved renown, and risen to positions of
great usefulness. A capital book for youth.
Heroes All! A Book of Brave
Deeds for British Boys. Edited by
C. D. Michael, Author of "Deeds of
Daring,” etc.
Deeds of Daring ; or, Stories
of Heroism in Every-day Life. Se-
lected by C. D. Michael, Author of
"Noble Deeds,” etc.
Thane of the Dean
(The). By Tom Bevan, Author of
"White Ivory and Black."
From 11 Well Done!”
Noble Deeds : A Book of Stories of Peril and
Heroism. By Charles D. Michael.
Armour Bright. By Lucy Taylor.
Old Red School House ( The): A Story of the Back-
woods. By Frances H. Wood.
Ben S A Story of Life’s Byways. By Lydia Phillips,
Author of "Frank Burleigh."
Major Brown / or, Whether White or Black, a Man.
By Edith S. Davis.
The Bell Buoy / or, The Story of a Mysterious Key.
By F. M. Holmes.


Is. Gd. each.
THE BRITISH BOYS’ LIBRARY — {continued)
Jack : A Story of a Scapegrace. By E. M. Bryant.
Hubert Ellerdale : A Tale of the Days of Wiclifte.
W. Oak Rhind
THE BRITISH GIRLS* LIBRARY.
A New Series o) is. 6d. Books for Girls. Illustrated. Crown B*o.
Cloth extra.
Marigold’s Fancies. By L. E. Tiddeman, Author of
“ Grannie’s Treasures,” etc.
Lady Of Grey ham (The) ; or, Low in a Low Place.
By Emma E. Hornibrook.
Gipsy Queen (The). By Emma Leslie.
Kathleen ; or, A Maiden’s Influence. By Julia Hack.
Chrystal Joyce S The Story of a Golden Life. By
Edward Garrett.
ChristabeTs Influence . By J. Goldsmith Cooper,
Author of " Nella."
Maid Of the Storm (The) : A Story of a Cornish
Village. By Nellie Cornwall.
Queen Of the Isles. By Jessie M. E. Saxby.
NEW PICTURE BOOKS.
Pleasures and Joys for
Girls and Boys. By D. J. D., Author
of “ Anecdotes of Animal Sagacity."
With 8 coloured and in other Illustra-
tions. Size 9by 7 inches. Handsoms
coloured cover, paper boards and cloth
back. is. 6d.
Happy and Gay: Pictures
and Stories for Every Day. By D. J. D.,
Author of "Stories of Animal Sagacity,"
etc. With 8 coloured and 97 other
Illustrations. Size 9 by 7 inches. Hand-
some coloured cover, paper boards with
cloth backs, is. 6d.
Anecdotes of Animals and
Birds. By Uncle John. With 57 full-
page and other Illustrations by Harrison
Weir, etc. F’cap. 410. 128 pages. Handsomely bound in paper
boards, with Animal design in 10 colours, varnished, is. 6d.
Stories of Animal Sagacity. By D. J. D. A
companion volume to “ Anecdotes of Animals." Numerous full-pags
Illustrations. Handsomely bound in paper boards, with Animal
subject printed in 10 colours, varnished, is. 6d.


* V
[ ' "W k
Is. 6d. each.
ILLUSTRATED REWARD BOOKS.
Crown B vo. 160 pages. Cloth extra. Fully Illustrated, is. 6 d each
Little Soldiers. By Kate L.
Mackley.
The Golden Doors. By M.
S. Haycraft.
A Late Repentance, By
Hannah B. Mackenzie, Author of
“ Crowned Victor,” etc.
Will; or, “ That Boy from the
Union.” By L. Phillips, Author
of “Frank Burleigh,” etc.
A Red Brick Cottage. By
Lady Hope, Author of “ His Handi-
work,” etc.
Shepherds and Sheep.
By E Stuart-Langford, Author of
“A Measuring Eye,” etc.
Our Phyllis. By M. S. Hay
craft, Author of " Sister Royal,” etc.
From “ Philip’s Inheritance.
Philip’s Inheritance; or, Into a Far Country. By
F. Spenser.
Donald’S Victory. By Lydia Phillips. Author of “In
Friendship’s Name,” etc.
Olive Chauncey’s Trust, By Mrs. E. R. Pitman,
Author of “ Lady Missionaries in Foreign Lands,” etc. 320 pages.
Whither Bound 7 A Story of Two Lost Boys. By
Owen Landor. 320 pages.
Chrissy’s Endeavour. 0
Three People. (By “Pansy.
The Young Moose Hunters. By C. A. Stephens.
Eaglehurst Towers. By Emma Marshall.
A Measuring Eye, By E. Stuart-Langford, Author of
" Miss Sophia’s Repentance,” etc.
Alleen; or, “The Love of Christ Constraineth Us.” By
Laura A. Barter, Author of "Harold; or, Two Died for Me."
Everybody’s Friend / or, Hilda Danvers’ Influence.
By Evelyn Everett-Green.
Fine Gold / or, Ravenswood Courtney. By Emma
Marshall, Author of “ Eaglehurst Towers,” etc.
Hiram Golf’s Religion. By Geo. H. Hepworth, D.D.
in Friendship’s Name : A Story for Boys. By L.
Phillips, Author of " Frank Burleigh,” etc.
Marchester Stories. By Rev. Charles Herbert.
Illustrated. Crown Bvo. Cloth boards.
Neiia / or, Not My Own. By Jessie Goldsmith Cooper.


ILLUSTRATED REWARD BOOKS — [continued)
The Legend of the Silver Cup: Allegories for
Children* By Rev. G. Critchley. B.A. (Small quarto.)
Our Duty to Animals. By Mrs. C. Bray, Author of
M Physiology for Schools,” etc. Intended to teach the young
kindness to animals. Cloth is. 6d. \ School Kdition, is. 3^*
Raymond and Bertha: A Story of True Nobility.
By L. Phillips, Author of “Frank Burleigh.
Satisfied. By Catherine M. Trowbridge.
Ted’S Trust / or, Aunt Elmerley’s Umbrella. By Jennie
Chappell, Author of " Who was the Culprit ? " etc.
Is. each.
ONE SHILLING REWARD BOOKS.
Fully Illustrated. Crown B vo. Cloth extra, is. each
Sunshine and Snow. By
Harold Bindloss. 128 pages.
At the Bend of the Creek :
An Australian Story. By E. Gertrude
and Annie A. Hart. 128 pages.
Donalblaine of Darien.
By J. Macdonald Oxley, Author of
“ Norman's Nugget." 128 pages.
Eon the Good, and other Poems.
By Charlotte Murray.
AH Play and No Work.
By Harold Avery, Author of "The
Triple Alliance," etc.
Bernard or Ben 7 By Jennie
Chappell, Author of “ Raymond’s
Rival,” etc.
From “ Donalblaine of Darien.”
Paul the Courageous. By Mabel Quiller-Couch,
Author of “Some Western Folk, etc.
Uncle Zeph and his Yarns. By W. J. Forster.
Raymond’s Angel : a Story of Two Lives Laid Down.
By Blanche Garvock.
Lost in the Backwoods. By Edith C. Kenyon,
Author of “Brave Bertie," etc.
Roy’s Sister. By M. B. Manwell.
Cola Monti : or, The Story of a Genius. By Mrs.
Craik, Author of "John Halifax, Gentleman." _
Bessie Drew; or, The Odd Little Girl. By Amy
Manifold.


Is. each.
®S^_BHILLINQ^REWARD^JSOOKS —( continued)
“Crown Jewels. ” By Heather
Grey, Author of “ The Furled Banner,”
etc. 128 pages.
Dumpy Dolly. By E. M.
Waterworth, Author of Master Lionel,”
“ Lady Betty’s Twins," etc.
The Pilgrim’s Progress.
By John Bunyan. 416 pages. 47 Illus-
trations.
Always Happy; or, The Story
of Helen Keller. By Jennie Chappell,
Author of " Ted's Trust."
Birdie and Her Dog. By
E. C. Phillips.
Children of Cherryholme
(The). By M. S. Haycraft, Author
of "Like a Little Candle," "Chine
Cabin,” etc.
From “Crown Jewels."
Frank Burleigh : or, Chosen to be a Soldier, By L.
Phillips.
Harold ; or, Two Died for Me. By Laura A. Barter
Indian Life in the Great North-West. By
Egerton R. Young, Missionary to the North American Indian tribes,
North of Lake Winnipeg, Author of " By Canoe and Dog Train,” etc.
Jack the Conqueror / or, Difficulties Overcome. By
the Author of “ Dick and his Donkey.
Jim's Discovery ; or, On the Edge of a Desert. By
T. M. Browne, Author of " Dawson's Madge," etc.
Little Bunch's Charge; or, True to Trust. By
Nellie Cornwall, Author of "Tamsin Rosewarne," etc.
Little Woodman and his Dog Ccesar (The),
By Mrs. Sherwood.
Marjory ; or, What Would Jesus Do? By Laura A.
Barter, Author of “ Harold; or, Two Died for Me."
Our Den, By E. M. Waterworth, Author of “ Master
Lionel, that Tiresome Child."
Raymonds Rival / or, Which will Win ? By Jennie
Chappell, Author of “ Losing and Finding," etc.
Sweet Nancy, By L. T. Meade, Author of “ Scamp
and I,” "A Band of Three," etc.
Who was the Culprit ? By Jennie Chappell, Author
of “ Her Saddest Blessing,” " The Man of the Family," etc.


Is. each
ONE SHILLING PICTURE BOOKS.
Size, ioA by 8 inches. Bound in handsome Coloured. Paper Boards, with
Coloured and other Illustrations, is. each.
Bruno's Prize I Pictures and Stories for Merry and \\ ise.
By D J. D., Author of “ Our Pets’ Picture Book,” “ Dapple and
Dobbin’s Picture Book,” etc. _ .
Three and Grandpa ! A Picture Story Book
*for Little Ones. By J. D„ Author of “ Happy Playmates.” " Butter-
cups and Daisies,” etc. f
Our Pets’ Picture Book. By D. J. D., Author of
•• A Merry Game,” etc. . ,
Happy Playmates : Pictures and Stories for \ oung
Folks. By J. D., Author of “ Buttercups and Daisies, etc.
Bible Pictures and Stories. Old Testament. By
Bible Pictures and Stories. New Testament. By
James Weston and D. J. D.
Pussies and Puppies. By Louis Wain.
A Morrv Game I Pictures and Stories for Little Readers.
By D J D Author of •' Dapple and Dobbin’s Picture Book, etc.
Dapple and Dobbins Picture Book. By D.
J. D., Author of "Happy and Gay.” etc.
Buttercups and Daisies: a Picture Story Book for
Little People. By J. D. Size 9by inches.
Holiday Hours in Animal Land. By Unde
New Edition. 96 pages. Size, 9by inches.
Skinoina Time : A Story Book in Prose and Rhyme.
By C. D. M., Author of “ Holiday Joys," etc. Size, 9by 7J inches.
Rina o' Roses : Pictures and Stories for Little Folks.
By Uncle Jack, Author of " Frolic and Fun,” etc. Fcap. quarto.
Holidav JOVS : Stories and Pictures for Girls and Boys.
By C. D. M., Author of " Merry Playmates,” etc. Fcap. quarto.


- SSSfMffSk 10 '' aow
Is. each.
Father Time. A novel mechan-
ical Toy Book, The cover of this unique
book is tastefully printed in colours, and
shows Old Father Time, with his em-
bellishments of wings and scythe, in
cheerful conversation with two little folks
who are seated on an hour-glass. A clock
dial is given above, with real hands, which
readily turn, and are thus useful in teach-
ing children to tell the time. The reading
matter is both instructive and entertaining,
and the coloured and monotint illustrations
of the games played during each month
are beautifully reproduced, is.
“ Sure to delight the little ones.”— Bookseller.
CHEAP REPRINTS OF POPDLAR STORIES FOR THE YODNQ.
Crown Bvo. 160 pages. Illustrated. Cloth Boards, is. each
Her Two Sons. A Story for Young Men and Maidens.
By Mrs. Charles Garnett.
Marigold. By L. T. Meade, Author of “ The Lady of
the Forest," etc.
Jack’s Heroism : A Tale of Schoolboy Life. By E. C.
Kenyon, Author of “ Lost in the Backwoods," etc.
Rag and Tag : A Plea for the Waifs and Strays of
Old England. By Mrs. E. J. Whittaker.
Through Life's Shadows. By Eliza F. Pollard.
The Little Princess of Tower Hill. By L. T.
Meade.
Ciovie and Madge. By Mrs. G. S. Reaney.
Bible Wonders. By Dr. Newton
Ellerslie House : A Book for Boys. By Emma
Leslie.
Like a Little Candle; or, Bertrand’s Influence. By
Mrs. Haycraft.
The Lads of Kingston : A Tale of a Seaport Town.
By James Capes Story.
Violet Maitland; or, By Thorny Ways. By Laura
M. Lane.
Martin Redfern's Oath. By Ethel F. Heddle.
Dairyman's Daughter (The). By Legh Rich-
mond.
Victoria; The Well-Beloved (1319-1901). By
W, Francis Aitken. Crown Bvo. 152 pages. Eight Illustrations.
Cloth boards, is.


Is. each (not Illustrated).
Keynotes to the Happy Life . By Mrs. Charlotte
Skinner, Author of "For Love’s Sake,” etc. Demy i6mo. Cloth
boards, is.
For Love’s Sake. By Mrs. Charlotte Skmner. Demy
i6mo. Cloth boards, is.
Uncrowned Queens. By Mrs. Charlotte Skinner,
Author of" Sisters of the Master." Small Bvo. 112 pages. Cloth, is.
Sisters of the Pilaster. By Mrs. Charlotte
Skinner, Author of "The Master’s Gifts to Women." Small Bvo.,
cloth, is. ~
The Master's Messages to Women. By Mrs.
Charlotte Skinner. Small Bvo, cloth, is.
Some Secrets of Christian Living. Selec-
tions from the "Seven Rules" Series of Booklets. Small Bvo.,
cloth, is.
Thoroughness I Talks to Young Men. By Thaln
Davidson, D.D. Small Crown Bvo. Cloth extra, is.
Molly and I. By the Author of “Jack,” “At Sunset,”
etc. Long Bvo. Illustrated Title Page. Cloth extra, is.
Cicely's Little Minute. By Harvey Gobel. Long
Bvo. Illustrated Title Page. Cloth extra, is.
9d. each.
NINBPENNY SERIES OF ILLUSTRATED BOOKS.
96 pages. Small Crown B vo. Illustrated. Handsome Cloth Covers.
9 i. each.
Faithful Friends. By C. A. Mercer, Author of “ Rob
and I.” Illustrated. Crown Bvo. Cloth boards.
tt Only Roy. ” By E. M. Waterworth and Jennie Chappell.
Illustrated. Crown Bvo. Cloth boards.
___ Won from the Sea. By E.
C. Phillips, Author of ,r Birdie and her
Dog.” . . --
Aunt Armstrong’s Money.
By Jennie Chappell, Author of " Carol’s
Gift.” etc.
John Blessington's Enemy,
A Story of Life in South Africa. By E.
Harcourt Burrage, Author of “ The Fatal
Nugget,” etc.
Carol’s Gift ; or, “ What Time
lam Afraid I will Trust in Thee.” By
Jennie Chappell.
Cripple George ; or, God has
a Plan for every Man: A Temperance
Story. By John W. Kneeshaw, Author
of “Norcliffe Court," etc.
Cared for; or, The Orphan
Wanderers. By Mrs. C. E. Bowen,
Author of "Dick and his Donkey," etc.
From “Only Roy


9d. each
HIHEPENNY SERIES OF ILLUSTRATED BOOKS— (continued)
A Flight with the Swallows. By Emma Marshall.
Babes in the Basket (The) ; or, Daph and Her
Charge.
Bel'S Baby. By Mary E. Ropes.
Birdie’s Benefits ; or, “A Little Child Shall Lead
Them.” By Ethel Ruth Boddy.
Five Cousins (The). By Emma Leslie.
Foolish Chrissy / or, Discontent and its Consequences.
By Meta, Author of " Noel's Lesson," etc.
For Lucy's Sake. By Annie S. Swan.
Giddie Garland ; or, The Three Mirrors. By Jennie
Chappell.
How a Farthing made a Fortune ; or, Honesty
is the Best Policy. By Mrs. C. E. Bowen.
How Paul's Penny became a Pound. By
Mrs. Bowen, Author of •• Dick and His Donkey."
How Peter's Pound became a Penny. By
the same Author.
John Oriel’s Start in Life. By Mary Howitt
Master Lionel, that Tiresome Child. By E.
M. Waterworth.
Man Of the Family (The). By Jennie Chappell.
Mattie's Home ; or, The Little Match-girl and her
Friends.
Paul t a Little Mediator. By Maude M. Butler.
Phil’s Frolic, By F. Scarlett Potter.
Rob and / / or, By Courage and Faith. By C. A. Mercer.
Sailor’s Lass (A), By Emma Leslie.
Una Bruce's Troubles, By Alice Price. Illustrated
bv Harold Copping.


fRHCH aWAV!
, ) * ' CVtRY DAY -
0
6d. each.
NEW SERIES OF SIXPENNY PICTURE-BOOKS.
Cfotw* quarto. Fully Illustrated. Handsomely hound in paper hoards, with
design printed in Ten colours. 6 d. each.
After the Ball: Pictures and Stories for One and All.
March Away I Pictures and Stories for Every Day.
Little Snowdrop’s Bible Picture Book.
Sweet Blossom : A Picture Story Book for Little Ones.
Sweet Stories Retold: A Bible Picture Book for
Young Folks.
Going A-Sailing : A Picture Story Book for Little
Folks.
Off to Toy land : Pictures and Stories for Little People.
Dollied Schooltime : Pictures and Stories in Prose
and Rhyme.
Birdie's Message : The Little Folks’ Picture Book.
This New Series of Picture Books surpasses, in excelled oj illustration
and careful printing, all others at the price.
NEW COLOURED SCRIPTURE PICTURE-BOOKS.
Beautifully printed in Chromo-Lithography. Size 8J by 6 inches. Stiff
Paper Coloured Covers, with Cloth Backs, 6d. each.
Coming to Jesus : Texts, Verses, and Coloured
Pictures.
The Good Shepherd : Texts, Verses, and Coloured
Pictures.


6d. each
THE “ RED DAYE ” SERIES
New and Enlarged Edition. Illustrated. Handsomely hound in cloth
hoards.
Little Tim and His Picture.
By Beatrice Wray.
Midge. By L. E. Tiddeman
The Conjuror’s Wand. By
Henrietta S. Streatfeild.
Benjamin’s New Boy, By
Jesse Page.
Enemies : A Tale for Little Lads
and Lasses. By Marion Isabel Hurrell.
Cherry Tree Place. By
Lizzie A. Hooper.
A Tale of Four Foxes. By
Eva C. Rogers.
A Little Town Mouse. By
Eleanora H. Stooke
Left In Charge, and other
Stories.
A Threefold Promise.
Two Little Girls, and What
they Did.
The Four Young Musicians.
Joe and Sally; or, A Good
Deed and its Fruits.
The Island House. By F. M.
Holmes.
6 d. each.
Chrissy’s Treasure. By
Jennie Perrett.
Puppy-Dog Tales. By various
Anthers.
Mother’s Boy. By M. B. Man-
well.
A Great Mistake, By Jennie
Chappell.
From Hand to Hand. By C
J. Hamilton.
That Boy Bob. By Jesse Page.
Buy Your Own Cherries.
By J. W. Klrton.
Owen’s Fortune. By Mrs. F.
West.
Red Dave / or, What Wilt Thou
have Me to do.
Dick and his Donkey / or,
How to Pay the Rent,
Lost In the Snow/ or, The
Kentish Fisherman.
Jessie Dyson.
Come Home, Mother.
4d. each.
THE YOUNG FOLKS’ LIBRARY
of Cloth-bound Boohs for the Young. With Coloured Frontispieces. 64
pages. Well Illustrated. Handsome Cloth Covers. 4 d. each.
Ronald’s Reason.
The Church Mouse.
Sybil.
From Shadow to Sunhlne.
A Bright Idea.
Dandy Jim,
The Little Woodman.
A Troublesome Trio,
Perry’s Pilgrimage.
Jacko the Monkey, and other
Stories
Little Dan, the Orange
Nlta / or, Among the Brigands.


The Better Part. By Annie S.
Wise to Win / or, the Master
Swan.
Hand.
The Household Angel. By
Ester Rled.
Madeline Leslie.
Julia Ried.
The Strait Gate. By Annie
S. Swan.
Ester Ried yet Speaking.
Mark Desborough’s Vow.
Echoing and Re-echoing
By Annie S. Swan,
Cunning Workmen.
Her Saddest Blessing.
Tip Lewis and His Lamp.
Miss Priscilla Hunter, and
The King’s Daughter.
other Stories.
Wild Bryonle.
Avice : A Story of Imperial Rome.
Household Puzzles,
The Randolphs.
From Different Stand-
Links In Rebecca’s Life.
point!.
A New Graft on the Family
Those Boys.
Tree.
Christie’s Christmas.
The Man of the House.
4d. each
CHEAP “PANSY” SERIES.
Imperial B vo. 64 pages. Many Illustrations, Cover printed in Five
Colours. 4 i. each
3d. each.
THE TINY LIBRARY.
Books printed in large type.
Little Chrissie, and other
Stories.
Harry Carlton’s Holiday.
A Little Loss and a Big
Find.
What a Little Cripple Did.
Bobby.
Matty and Tom.
Cloth boards. 3 d. each
The Broken Window.
John Madge’s Cure for
Selfishness.
The Pedlar’s Loan.
Letty Young’s Trials.
Brave Boys.
Little Jem, the Rag Mer-
chant.
NEW SERIES OF THREEPENNY PICTURE BOOKS.
Royal 16 mo. Coloured Frontispiece and numerous other Illustrations
Bound in paper hoards with cloth back, with Cover beautifully
printed in Colours. 3d. each.
Playtime Joys for Girls
and Boys.
Dolly’s Picture Book.
By the Sea.
“ Pets ” and “ Pickles. ’
Our Little Pets’ Alphabet,
Bible Stories. Old Testa-
Toby and Kit’s Animal Bible Stories. New Testa-
Book. ment.


ILLUSTRATED MONTHLY PERIODICALS.
THE BRITISH WORKMAN.
One Penny Monthly
An Illustrated Paper containing Popular Articles and Stories on
Temperance, Thrift, etc., and short Biographies of eminent Self-made Men :
also interesting accounts of visits to some of our leading British Industries.
The Yearly Volume, with coloured paper boards, cloth back, and
full of Engravings, is. 6d. ; cloth, as. 6d.
THE BAND OF HOPE REVIEW.
One Halfpenny Monthly,
The Leading Temperance Periodical for the Young, containing Serial
and Short Stories, Concerted Recitations, Prize Competitions, etc. Should
be in the hands of all Members of the Bands of Hope.
The Yearly Volume, with coloured paper boards and cloth back,
full of Engravings, is.; cloth boards, is. fid.
THE CHILDREN’S FRIEND.
One Penny Monthly.
Charming Stories, interesting Articles, Indoor Recreations, beautiful
Pictures, Puzzles, Music, Prize Competitions, etc.
The Yearly Volume, coloured paper boards, cloth back, is. fid. ;
cloth, as.; gilt edges, 2s. fid.
THE FAMILY FRIEND.
One Penny Monthly.
A beautifully Illustrated Magazine for the Home Circle, with Serial
and Short Stories by popular Authors, Helpful Articles, Hints on
Dressmaking, Music, etc.
The Yearly Volume, with numerous Engravings, coloured paper
boards, cloth back, is. fid.; cloth, 25.; gilt edges, 2s. fid.
THE INFANTS’ MAGAZINE.
One Penny Monthly,
No other Periodical can be compared with the Infants' Magazine for
freshness, brightness and interest. Full of Bright Pictures and pleasant
reading to delight the little ones.
The Yearly Volume, in coloured paper boards, cloth back, is. fid.
cloth, 25. ; gilt edges, 2s. fid.
THE FRIENDLY VISITOR.
AN ILLUSTRATED GOSPEL MAGAZINE FOR THE PEOPLE.
One Penny Monthly.
Full of entertaining reading with sound religious teaching in the
form of story, article and poem. Printed in large type and fully Illustrated.
Just the paper for the aged.
The Yearly Volume, coloured paper boards, cloth back, is. fid,
cloth, 25. ; gilt edges, 2s. fid.
8 & 9, PATERNOSTER ROW, EC




4k
.


nf
/mz-z
/PAS'
t-fzitr.
„ ts *•■'
\
pi


