

AT THE FRONT
By “Sergeant Jack”


TO THE
Officers and Men
of THE
Australian Imperial Expeditionary Forces
who HAVE
SO UNSELFISHLY AND DEVOTEDLY
GIVEN OP THEIR VERY BEST.




AT THE FRONT
A Story of Field Service
BY SERGEANT JACK
FOREWORD.
The despatches dealt with extend over a period
of about ten months, from January to October,
1915 —a period that will go down to history as one
of supreme self-sacrifice on the part of our Aus-
tralian soldier-men. The ordeal of temptation, the
call for self-restraint, the need for Christian faith-
fulness began for our men far from the “ fighting
line,” in the seductive glamour of Egypt, from the
first day of landing, and all through the long
months of preparation that soldiers have to face.
The keynote of it all for the men who still kept
their places in the ranks, from a military and
Y.M.C.A. standpoint, was the need for “ disciplined
service ” to God, King, Empire, and to one s com-
rades. Here, then, was the “ Field Service Secre-
tary’s ” opportunity, and the despatches show how
faithful has been the sustained eflfort during all the
weary and anxious months to be of real service to
the men in every humanely possible way. The
Y.M.C.A., in the “ field.” through its devoted repre-
sentatives, makes no claim to infallibility in social
and religious organisation, but it does demand re-
cognition of this fact, that, with all faults and mis


takes given in and allowed for, it is the one
organisation that attempts to give, and does give,
a touch of home life, a measure of social enjoy-
ment, and a practical touch of Christian influence
at the back of the “ fighting line.”
What the “Red Cross Societies,” with their thou-
sands upon thousands of loving helpers, are to the
wounded soldiers, the Y.M.C.A. Field Service aims
to be to the “ strong men ” through their discipline
and training, and throughout the weary and awful
work at the Front. Knowing this, and reading
the pages that follow, it may perhaps come as
an “ inspiration ” to Australian men, the Common-
wealth over, who are too young, too old, or other-
wise debarred from “ active service,” that they,
too, like our Australian Red Cross women, could
form a vast army of “ Field Service ” workers,
which would mean that the National Y.M.C.A.
Executive would have to overflowing the financial
assistance in money and gifts in kind, which would
enable them to despatch more and more “ Field
Service ” workers properly equipped to the front,
thus enabling our lads in khaki to be really and
efficiently helped by the keen and sympathetic
“ Handy Men ” of the Social Service for our sol-
diers.
What this would mean in the way of comfort
and hope to the sorrowing and anxious hearts of
our Australian mothers, fathers, wives and sisters,
AT THE FRONT.


only He who realises and knows the secrets of all
human hearts will ever know, but the Field
despatches ” from end to end bristle with the same
“ ideal,” the same appeal to Australian people for
a mighty awakening of practical interest in the
“ Service ” which touches the Camp and fighting
life of our brave Australian soldier lads, in a
homely, happy, Christian way, and throughout all
the grimness, the ghastliness, and murk of the
battle work tends to keep the “ boys ” themselves
the clean thinkers, clean livers and clean fighters
we all wish them to be.
THE SERGEANT’S STORY.
The bronzed Platoon Sergeant stopped with a
humorous gleam in his eye upon hearing a tall
Gippslander ask a group of his newly recruited
pals, “Say, Chaps! What is this Y.M.C.A. Field
Service at all ? Coming down here in the train I
asked a likely looking sport, but he said it was the
* Young men, come along Brigade,’ and that I had
better join it. I guessed he was pulling my leg, and
told him it wasn’t in the same street with the
AT THE FRONT.


A.1.E.F., and strolled away. All the same, boys,
I’d like to know what this blooming - Y.M.C.A.
means ? ”
“ Well, Bill,” said one of his mates, “ it’s more
than likely the Sergeant here can tell us something
about it.”
“ Well, lads, I have been through the mill my-
self from the first Camps in Broadmeadows and
Egypt, not to speak of months of work at Anzac,
so, as you might say, ‘I know the ropes,’ and it’s
only a fair thing to pass the word along. It will
take a bit of telling, though—more than an evening
or two, and I don’t know as you’ll care to let up
from the picture shows and your sweethearts for
so long, just to hear an ‘old buffer’ of a Sergeant
tell what he knows and thinks of the Y.M.C.A.
Mind, lads, it is no fancy picture I am putting up
to tell you, but the * straight dinkum,’ as we used
to say out at Anzac.
“ Well, what’s the verdict? a bit of the Y.M.C.A.
Field Work for the past 12 months by an ordinary
cuss of a Platoon Sergeant of His Majesty’s
A.I.E.F. that our friend Bill here is proud of. All
in favour signify in the usual way! The Ayes have
it, and we’ll fix the hours for lectures at half an hour
every evening at ‘ smoke, oh! ’ and perhaps it will
make the pipes pull sweeter to hear of some kindly
doings for the brave lads at and near the fighting
line, and for you lads of Australia’s new army,
which is going to show the world that Australia
will be there. Platoon, attention! Sections will
fall in at seven p.m. to-morrow for lecture drill.
Dismiss! ”
AT THE FRONT.


Punctually the next evening the men paraded,
got through their preliminary “ Pipe Drill,” and
with the “ Smoke Easy ” order the Sergeant settled
down to his apparently quite congenial task.
“ Lads,” he started, “I ain’t no ‘’Varsity’ pro-
fessor, and I never went to the ‘ Shop that some
of my good ‘ pals ’ over in the 4 Trenches in Galli-
poli used to tall: about. ‘ Fine mates they were,
too, the finest in the world, and don’t you forget it,
boys. We fellows from everywhere, the back-
blocks, the farm, the mine, the counter, and ‘ every
which, where,’ as the small boys say, are all the
better for putting right in the back of our minds
that we’ll always find in Private X, of the Mel-
bourne University; Corporal T, of the big Public
School, and Gunner Z, the squatter’s son, the best
of tent and trench mates, and a soldier pal you
can bet your boots on in any tight corner. Well,
as I said before, being no ‘ learned Prof.,’ you must
just take my yarns in their own ‘ ship-shape,’ and
make the best of them.
“ Bill over there, last night was wondering what
Y.M.C.A. stood for. To put in a ‘bull’s eye’
shot, as my first sighter, the letters stand
for the ‘ Young Men’s Christian Association,’
which, lads, is known ‘ Wherever the world
is wide.’ Now you boys must not fly off at
a tangent, and label the ‘ outfit ’ churchy, just to
be wrapped up for Sunday use, and very occasional
at that. The Y.M.C.A. folk, without any ‘frills,’
lads, aim at making a ‘ man a man,’ a clean man,
clean thinker, clean liver, clean talker, aye, and
clean drinker, too. And, ‘ hard doer ’ and hard
AT THE FRONT.


case ’ as I am, I am just banging - this eternal fact
up to you fellows, and the rest of Australia’s Army
men, that the Y.M.C.A. are drawing every time
for a “ full hand,” and as we know that * cleanli-
ness is next to Godliness,’ it is up to us chaps to
help the cause along—a cause that means ‘ clean
fighters ’ for the Empire and ‘ white men ’ all along
Australia’s fighting line.
“ Taking a running hop-step-and-jump to the
Y.M.C.A. Field Service work, which is there in
every camp for you lads to make use of, you’ll find
the Y.M.C.A. ‘handy man’ offering you for ‘nix’
a touch of the ‘ old home life,’ a bit of comrade-
ship or ‘ team work ’ in the friendship line, a place
to write to the old folks at home, or to wives,
sweethearts, sisters and bairns. This same ‘ handy
man ’ will provide you with many a pleasant even-
ing of melody and song, and with the various
‘ padres ’ will do his best to guide the men along
the track towards higher and nobler things. Many
a far-off memory of the old church, the bluestone
chapel, and Scottish kirk, will come along, and the
good old hymn tunes coming from a thousand
throats have brought a tear to the eye and a lump in
the throat of many a case-hardened soldier lad. So,
lads, it’s to bring as many glimpses of home * pal-
ship,’ aye, and higher things, into the life of the
fighting man, that the Y.M.C.A. Field Service
stands for, and that’s the most there is to it as far
as you and I need worry. ‘ Red Cross,’ with its
thousands upon thousands working for the
wounded soldiers, and the Y.M.C.A. doing its extra
superfine best to be the day by day friend, and ser-
AT THE FRONT.


vice chum of the ‘fighting man’ in his off duty
hours of ease or weariness.
“ However. I hear Bill over there getting restive
and I got to ; deliver the goods,’ or you chaps will
say T don’t do all my ‘yapping’ on the parade
ground. Well, I remember away back in the earlier
times, in our training in, Egypt, being at Mena
Camp, and one evening a lot of us wandered along
to the Y.M.C.A. tent. Standing room only was
the password at the doors, but we managed to
squeeze in, to find over a thousand officers a,nd
men in a sort of Scotch mixture, and, boys, the
concert they put up to us that evening beat the
band.’ It was good to feel that folks far away in
the home-land had not forgotten us lads away in
the dusty desert, and the hard-worked Y.M.C.A.
Secretary’s heart must have warmed up at the evi-
dent enjoyment of the houseful of Tommy
Browns.’ But here, lads,’ said the Sergeant, I
am holding the floor too much! Corporal Tom
over there can read fine —we’ve tried him before, so
let’s get him to read the best bits of the Field
Service secretary’s despatches,. and at odd times
I’ll throw in a word or two of my own, for those
secretary men are powerful modest about their
work.”
Corporal Tom took up the despatch where the
Sergeant had left off, and about the concert read
Colonel Forsyth enjoyed it more than anyone else, I
believe, and at the close he came up to say good-
night.” “ This is good,” he said, “ much better than
Cairo for our boys.” It was grand to think that this
work is valued so much by the officers. It s still
grander to think that, by the means of these concerts,
at the front.


men are kept from visiting Cairo city, the place
where so many of our bright boys have lost their
j^ es P e £*’ P racticall 7 in one foolish act. An Army
Medical Corporal said to me two nights ago: “If
the Y.M.C.A. only succeeds in preventing one man
from falling into that trap, it will have been worth
all the money, time and thought that the Associa-
tion Army Secretaries have expended.”
‘Stop right there, Corporal Tom,’ said the Ser-
geant, ‘ here’s where my bit of a say comes in.’ The
Colonel was right, the Corporal was right, and
you take it from a man who has been through most
things, and dared the usual “ dares ” that you
harum scarum lads take to, there is only one
darned thing to do if you want to serve your
“ colours ” and your country like a man, and that is
to cut the Cairo,” or any other city plague, out
of your knapsacks, and put up some clean living,
clean talking, and clean drinking, and make good
a decent training as a soldier of the Empire. Eirst,
last, and all the time, boys, the “ white man ” and
the best soldier ” is the clean man. Men out
there in that Eastern Man Pit, good men, too good
to lose, have fallen by the filthy wayside, lost,.with-
out striking a blow for King and Empire. It was
this work of the Y.M.C.A. to save the lads, that
drew me from the ranks of the “careless,” and I,
for one, stand shoulder to shoulder to help save
every one of you youngsters from making unmen-
tionable idiots of yourselves “ over yonder ” be-
fore you reach the “ firing line.” Heave ahead, Cor-
poral Tom,” and the Corporal continued reading
the despatch.
To-night was one of the occasions when the thought
* throu £ h m y mind, I wish Melbourne
Y.M.C.A. men could see us. The Concert Hall was
AT THE FRONT.


practically jammed, the writing tent crowded out
with over two hundred military scribes, and the
Chapel full with an earnest Christian Endeavour
meeting. Each place was ablaze with light* an( l the
whole a social centre, a touch of “ home ’ for the
fighting man, that was a. great practical proof of
the comprehensive spirit of the Y.M.C.A. There
was something to occupy the minds of men of all
turns, but perhaps the .finest thing of all was the
willing help rendered by the men themselves to
keep things square, and keep things going.
The Corporal paused, and the Sergeant, with a
long pull at his pipe, said: “ Yes, boys, I remember
that night, and many another like it. ‘ Bonzer
times,’ but I don’t know that many of us gave the
whole show much of a thought, except to good
naturedly help things move along. But we thought
of those evenings later on in the trenches at Anzac.
You better believe we did —and when we heard
that the Y.M.C.A. Field Service men were barrack-
ing hard to follow us right up to the ‘ firing line,’
which, lads, they are going to do, there was but
one sentiment from all and sundry, ‘good busi-
ness,’ and veterans one and all pledged themselves
to help the cause of the Y.M.C.A. Back of the
‘ firing line.’ Think of it, boys! You’ll know what
it means later, when the ‘hurly-burly’ begins for
you, but think what it means to the man behind
the Y.M.C.A. gun to cheer, to help, and loyally be
a comrade to men like ourselves—Australians all!
Don’t forget all this, boys, in the strenuous times
to come, and now and ever give of your best appre-
ciation a fair twenty shillings in the pound for the
‘ Field Service ' Right oh! Corporal! off again !
on again! Right again, Finnegan! as we used to
at the front.


say to our old railway boss. What’s that, Tom?
Just a few snapshots/ so to speak, to round the
evening off. Right, we’re waiting
Using up ten pounds’ worth of stamps in the tent each
evening.
Post office orderlies were glad to sort the last big
mail from home—ls,ooo letters in offir “ Chapel
Hut.
Scores of men mail between ten and twenty letters per
week, all written on Y.M.C.A. stationery and posted
from our tent.
'Hiose fellows living comfortably at home should stand
behind this work for the comfort and well being
of their absent friends in khaki.
This soldiering business may sound romantic in prin-
ter s ink, but it is not all “ beer and skittles.”
A fellow from the Engineers said to me the other day,
a f ter night we get out our little yellow’
Y.M.C.A. hymn books in the tent, and have a good
sing-song.”
We had another good' service last night—ninety men
remained for communion.
One man I was able to help had deserted his wife and
children seven years ago.
In personal work I have had a continual stream of
men all day long for the past four days.
1 fe A, have never felt 80 str ongly before, that we
Y.M.C.A. men are m the greatest work of the day.
1 Vice is 50 flagrant here that the hearts of decent men
are revolting.
1 found it necessary to lay up for a while last week—
the hrst time for four months. The nervous strain
ot this work alone is considerable.
“ There, Tom,” said the Sergeant, “ we’ll close
down for to-night, and all I can think of, boys, to
say for a ‘ night cap ’ is the words of our old friend
AT THE FRONT.


that there ‘ Sentimental Bloke ’ who talks of what
he calls the ‘ Mooch of Life/ as
Living an’ lovin’, learning day be day,
Pausin’ a minute in the barmy strife,
To find that ’elping others on the way
Is gold coined for your profit—sich is life!
“ Well, boys,” said the Sergeant next evening,
as the smoke of many pipes made circling wreaths
around a contented group, “ I heard Bill over there
talking to-day of that great ‘ team ’ of draught
horses he’d left behind him down in Gippsland. I
guess Bill had a lot to do in the making of that
there ‘ team,’ and I thought of all those ‘ teams ’
we ‘ non-coms.’ are knocking together, or trying to,
and then got a puzzling as to what sort of an Aus-
tralian team they’ll make when they’re all put
through the ‘ wool press of discipline. Next I got
to chewing the end over the great British Empire
team of fighters and workers, and I began to have
my doubts. It ain’t a bit of use in this ‘ war ’ busi-
ness unless you’ve got good team work. Team
work all day and every day, morning, noon, and
night, in our churches, in the Camp, in the firing
line, in the factories, in the Parliamentary work-
shops, and among the unattached units, is going to
win this ‘ war,’ and nothing else. Beats me why
such a nation of ‘ sports ’ as we brag ourselves to
be, can’t seem to drop on to this. We can run and
organise ‘ teams ’ galore, until the world has got
to think of us as a sort of ‘ sport ’ mad lunatics. We
can also settle to a fraction the hours and prices
of labour—and we’re getting down to a fine art
how to get in our taxation body blows, straight
AT THE FRONT.


lefts, and uppercuts, but we are making- a poor fist
in getting a decent, all-round ‘ war ’ team together.
“ What’s that, Corporal? Had a good Anzac
team.
“ Oh, yes! that’s all right. Made a good ‘ sec-
tion,’ but there are hundreds of sections to the
real team. We’re a queer crowd. Started with a
team of 20,000, raised the bet to 50,000, butted
things up with a gasp to 100,000, then to 200,000,
and now think we are doing the real thing with
300,000 men. Trained them, too, in ‘ dribs and
drabs,’ when in the £ eighteen months ’ we could
have given every fit man in Australia a fair bit of
training, and had them ready now for the ‘ final
polish.’ I may be talking in the air if you like,
but Australia is never going to have national safety
until every fit man does his bit of military train-
ing, and until there is, as there ought to be now,
a reserve of arms and ammunition to arm every
man jack of them.
“ What’s all this got to do with the Y.M.C.A.
Field Service? Only this, chaps, that the motto
of this service is to teach you the value of ‘ team
work ’ for yourselves, your mates, your battalion,
your brigade, and your country. Link by link the
Y.M.C.A. man would bind you careless, happy-go-
lucky, irresponsible Australians into a team of
‘ good pals,’ clean livers and clean fighters. The
Field Service man wants to see the Australian
Army realise that the ‘ Salt of Life ’ in the world’s
great crisis is ‘ clean service ’ in the same way as
the trained athlete makes the clean hit or the clean
kick that wins the hard fought game. Before Cor-
AT THE FRONT,


poral Tom gets going again with the despatches,
there is just one thing to put into your pipes and
smoke over, and that is that the Y.M.C.A. Field
Service can look -the whole world in the face, for
it gives every man, with a big emphasis on the
every, a clean inspiration for active service for the
Empire.
“What’s that, Bill? I talk less on the parade
ground! That’s so! so fire away, Corporal, with
the reading.”
This report of my trip to the Dardanelles should have
been sent to you before. Finding so many wounded
men wanting help on the hospital ships, I got trans-
ferred to one of these ships, leaving my colleagues
hard at work in the hospitals at Alexandria. Here
is an extract from my diary of this short trip:—No
provision for Church Parade on Sunday, but I de-
cided to hold an informal service in the evening.
Got a player for the harmonium, and the “ Active
Service Despatches” came in handy as hymn books.
These I asked the men to retain as their own, which
they were glad to do. Shortly before starting the
service, Chaplain Gillison came aboard on business.
He was worn and tired with much work among the
wounded, and in burying the dead “ up the Gully,”
but he more than kindly agreed to preach. After a
prayer that touched every man’s heart, he spoke from
Christ’s words, “ He that saveth his life shall lose it,
but he that loseth his life for My sake shall save it.”
It had struck him, he said, that it should be an easy
thing for a man who had stood the test and trial of
Gallipoli to follow the Master, and ; if needs be, suffer
for doing so. A man in this war had no mother,
father, brethren, or friends. He counts them all
nothing for his country. This is just what Christ
asks of a man. He has done the same thing for us.
Our men went through the fight not knowing
whether they would pull through or not. Christ
went through certain that He was “ going down,” yet
AT THE FRONT.


He did it willingly. For us this meant Salvation.
Surely, going through the ordeal of Gallipoli, a man
could respond to this great claim of Christ, and pay
all the price it might require.” “ I don’t think, of the
150 men present, there was one upmoved. There was
something particularly appealing and winsome in the
tired Chaplain’s appeal—the appeal of a real man to
men. He went off to take dinner at the conclusion,
but I kept the men singing on. We did not leave
many of the numbers unsung.”
“ I wasn’t there,” said the Sergeant, “ but to an
Anzac man it ain’t hard to make the picture. Out
there you get to think of these things, lads! You
can’t get away from them ! And that reminds me
of old ‘Jim Steadfast.’ Wouldn’t wonder if he
wasn’t in that same hospital ship. Jim was a ‘hard
case,’ as you say. Like his name, what he did he
stuck to. If it was work, he worked, and if it was
a ‘ spree ’ it was a mighty big one. The work was
good, but the ‘ sprees ’ began to tell the tale, and
we old pals of his never looked to see him in the
fighting line. You can guess how I jumped one
day up in the ‘dug outs’ near the enemy’s
trenches, when a clean skinned Corporal just in
with the reinforcements for the regiments hailed
me with ‘ Well, Sergeant Jack, you ain’t turned
down an old mate, have you?’ And here was a
different ‘Jim ’ to what we had left behind. Clean
cut. clear eyed, with a soldierly set-up, here was
the ‘ Jim ’ of the old days when we were young, not
the ‘ drink ’ downed ‘ weary Willie ’ we had left be-
hind. My word, he got a great ‘ chevoo ’ from
the boys. ‘ Steadfast,’ you old ‘ Stick it through,’
the battalion’s made when it’s got you,’ sang an old
pal, and Jim’s eyes gleamed as he casually re-
AT THE FRONT.


marked, ‘ Glad you know me, mates. I’ve been
wanting- a bit of an ‘ introduc.’ to myself for quite
a time.’
“ That night I ran Jim into a corner and dug
his story out. Want to know where the old ‘Jim’
came back from, Jack, eh? Hardly know myself,
but one day when I was down, right down, deeper
than any of you old mates of mine will ever know,
some chap said something about Sergeant Jack,
and all you fellows being in Camp in Egypt, and
then they got to arguing about yours being the
best regiment in all the Australian Army, real
fighting stuff and sober, clean, stuff at that. So I
just got out and sneaked away to think. Why am
I out of it? Me who worked with them, chummed
with them, aye, and loved them, if they only knew;
me so low down now that I was not fit to fight with
them! But, ‘ Jack,’ I still had a bit of the old
‘ Steadfast ’ business you used to chaff me about,
and I took a ‘ cling ’ to the sides of the precipice
I was slipping down and dug my nails and feet in
and began a long, long crawl back to decency.
Hard! well old chum don’t talk of it, but I got the
‘ shakes,’ subdued enough to pass the doctor and
was drafted into Camp. My word, I was up against
it then, and nearly ‘ side stepped ’ things many and
many a time, but a grit of the teeth and a clinch of
the jaw, and ‘ I’ll get alongside of my old pals or
die for it.’ set me up time and again. Mind you,
Jack, I had many and many a squeak of being dis-
charged clean out of Camp, but I think some one
saw that I was trying to ‘ grip,’ and little by little
the ‘grip’ held, and here I am. But Jack, old pal,
AT THE FRONT.


the worst time of all was when they were picking
the boys for the reinforcements for your company.
I had sent in my name, but fellow after fellow was
pulled out ahead of me, until my heart got down in
my boots, and I only shuffled in the last man to
fill the last ‘ file.’ I think I’d have gone down for
ever had I missed —thank God I didn’t. Things
weren’t any too easy even then, the darned dirty
habits of years took a lot of cleaning up, but by
the time we reached the land of the Pyramids my
head was just above water, and I was kicking free.
The ‘ padre ’ on the boat, too, had put a nail or
two in, though I didn’t know it, and there was a
cheery Y.M.C.A. man always handy. Never seemed
to worry us chaps, but mighty spry and mighty
helpful dodging around making the ‘old ship’ awful
home-like with his ‘ sing songs,’ ‘ games,’ and such
like. When we got ashore in Egypt I reckoned old
‘ Jim Steadfast ’ had got a pull of things like we had
in the old, old days, Jack. Shows what ‘babies’
we grown men are, for the old pull—the pull
—the strong pull, and the devilish ebb of the city
hells ’ caught us all in the lights and shades of
Cairo town, and many a good man went down. I
hunted and hunted for you boys in every Camp,
hanging on to myself with a muttered, ‘ I got to
reach them boys,’ and was nearly down with de-
spair when orders came to pack up for active ser-
vice, and the ‘ padre ’ called us all together in the
Y.M.C.A. tent for a parting word. I can’t talk of
what he told us, Jack, but we saw that evening as
we never saw before what a ‘ white man ’ ought to
be, and where we ought to be. I ain’t proud of
AT THE FRONT.


what the ‘ gleam ’ showed me, but I saw the track,
yes, lad, I saw the ‘ track.’ I got my bearings, and
I think I’m bushman enough to follow the ‘ gleam ’
and do a soldier’s work as a soldier should.’
“Good business, Jim,” said I, “but you usen’t
to have much opinion of the Y.M.C.A. in the old
days; what about it now?”
“ Serve me right, Sergeant—you remember when
we were boys, and had done something particularly
outrageous, we used to say, ‘ It ain’t a bit of use
for you to run. I’ll tell your mother what you
done.’ Well, you can tell, and you know what hun-
dreds of us careless beggars have done and said be-
fore we came up against this ‘ Empire ’ proposition,
and even now most of us are cross grained enough
to say very little of what we owe to the ‘ padres ’
and the ‘ Field Service ’ men, but we know,
and you know what a big place they have in the
hearts of the Army. I think, I always think, that
the men who stick to us soldiers, many of us, ‘ the
unhappy blokes who have missed the * bus ’ of life,
the men who stick to us through thick and thin, are
like the men the ‘ Bulletin ’ chap wrote of as —
Living and loving, wandering on their way,
Reaping the ’arvest of a kind deed done.
Company, ’shun! the Corporal will proceed.
Rather unique was that service on the ship when one
stops to consider. At the time a German aeroplane
was hovering in the vicinity, submarines were re-
ported to be about, and destroyers and trawlers were
running around us like faithful watch dogs. The
preacher would be interrupted at intervals by the
boom of the big guns of the battleships nearby. But
the service had been “ great ” —so the boys said.
AT THE FRONT.


At Lemnos 1 had some medical work helping the
Doctor with the dressing of the wounds of seventy
men per day. The doctor said I had been a help to
him.
We were enabled to do some good work among the
transports. Many times we went out into the
Harbour in a sailing boat. Spying out a transport
about to depart for the front, we would get in along-
side, have a friendly yarn with the fellows aboard,
hoist up some hand bags of New Testaments for dis-
tribution, and then a straight and brief talk on the
best things. Most impressive were these leave
takings of gallant men, many bound for death
Back again in Camp, and every day we feel that men’s
lives all around us are changing in a strikingly
amazing fashion.
All the hospitals are packed. W’e are going to get
into them, and in touch with the men as often as
the doctors will allow.
At last we got leave to go to Imbros Rest Camp, six
miles from Gallipoli, and Owens has reached there
with 200 cases of our own, and the Red Cross
material, he representing the Red Cross as well. It
is great for the Association Field Service to have
got on so far, and it is grand, too, to be co-operating
with the Red Cross work.
“ There, Corporal,” said the Sergeant, “ it’s great
reading, but the ‘ Field Service ’ men are, as you
see, fighting their way (through all the Army
orders) to be near the man in the fighting line, and
that must keep for another story on another night;
so the Company will come to attention and ‘ Dis-
miss ! *
“ Well, boys,” said the Sergeant, the next even-
ing, “ you know the old saying, ‘ en’uff said.’ When
things talk for themselves it ain’t a bit of use to
argue. I’ve tried the arguing way, as we all do
AT THE FRONT.


until we have had a few bumps against solid facts,
and then we begin to learn common ordinary sense,
and talk less and do more. The Corporal will read
the next ‘ despatch ’ pretty well f in toto,’ and I
guess when it is finished you’ll see that the
Y.M.C.A. Field Service men mean to carry their
work right up to the sound of the guns, and are
going into it with their ‘ coats ’ ofif and with sleeves
rolled up. Now, then, Tom, let them have it.”
The Corporal read as follows: —
I have just returned from the Dardanelles, and find
many matters awaiting me, as you can imagine.
However, I will take time to tell you briefly of my
trip. I left Alexandria on the 7th, and arrived at
M'udros two days later. It was three days before I
could get permission to move forward, but on Thurs-
day, the 13th, I got all my goods transferred to a
trawler, and, after six hours’ sailing, arrived at
Kephalos. I was fortunate in finding the Camp
Commandant, Colonel Hawker, at the landing pier,
and he made me very welcome, ordered my goods to
be taken to the Camp, and introduced me to the
officers’ mess. I saw him again next morning, and,
on his advice, paid a visit to the capital of the island
(Panaghia) to see about procuring supplies, etc. This
was rather a rough journey of two hours on horse-
back. I found prices abnormally high, and very
limited in both quantity and variety, and altogether
beyond our reach for canteen purposes. That even-
ing I dined with Colonel Hawker, and we talked
over the situation, he agreeing to provide me at
once with a small marquee and give me a site in a
very central part of the Camp. We together worded
a telegram which we sent off to Cairo, with instruc-
tions for Owens, one of the Australian Secretaries,
to get marquee, piano, timber for benches, and sup-
plies as quickly as possible, and leave by the first
available boat. He also wired the military authori-
ties to facilitate Owens’ movements and render him
AT THE FRONT.


every assistance possible in getting his supplies
forward.
The next morning (Saturday) saw our small marquee
erected, and, with several tables and benches hastily
knocked together by some Australian friends, we
opened up for business that afternoon. _ It was
almost pathetic to see the eagerness with which
the men viewed our preparations, and the way they
came about the tent. I had brought with me several
cases of tobacco, cigarettes and chocolate for distri-
bution among the wounded and sick, and, as most
of the men about belonged to that class, I had a
busy time distributing these “ comforts.” All day
Sunday 1 was busy giving out stationery, pocket
Testaments, magazines, etc., etc., and in the evening
we had a service outside the tent, which was well
attended, and apparently appreciated.
On Monday I got hold of a Greek baker, who agreed
to erect an oven and run a canteen under our direc-
tion. I arranged to see him again on the Wednes-
day, when a definite arrangement would be entered
into, and sent him oflf to see about supplies.
On Tuesday I left early in the morning for Cape
Helas, where I arrived about nine o’clock. With the
principal Chaplain, I called upon the Camp Com-
mandant, and he quite agreed to our establishing a
Centre within his sphere of influence, providing that
a space could be found us free from shrapnel fire of
the enemy. While we were discussing the possible
situation, the fire from Achi Baba began, shells were
falling about the beach, and in the harbour, and I
was compelled to admit that no place, so far as I
could see, would be out of range of the Turkish
guns. However, I told him that we were quite pre-
pared to go where the men had to go, and would
run the risk if we were allowed to establish our-
selves at any point where the men would be per-
mitted to visit us. Only a very small hut can be
erected, of course, but it will let the men see that
the Y.M.C.A. is standing with them and doing its
best to serve them in these unusual conditions.
AT THE FRONT.


I visited the trenches where the 10th Manchesters, the
sth East Lances, the Lancashire Eusiliers, the Scot-
tish Borderers, and several other regiments are.
Many of the East Lancashire Division recognised
me, .and called out asking if I had brought the
Y.M.C.A. with me. I left a large supply of stationery,
magazines, cigarettes and tobacco for them with
several of the Chaplains, and some of it I distributed
myself, and the men were very grateful I can assure
you. 1 looked up two batteries of Australian Artil-
lery that I had been told about, and took with me
several pounds of Havelock tobacco and some pipes.
To the first of these men I came across I held up
a tin of the tobacco, and asked if it was a friend of
his (Havelock is an Australian tobacco, and very
popular with the Colonials). His eyes glistened,
and then he said; “It is all I have,” holding up a
sovereign, “ but if you give me a pipe with it, I will
be glad to exchange, for I have not had a smoke for
three weeks.” When I told him that the tobacco
and pipe were his for nothing, he was greatly
touched. I went round to about sixty of these men
and made similar gifts. I had many very interesting
experiences, dodging shells and the like, which are
incident to life on the Peninsula, and in the late
evening took trawler back to Kephalos.
Next day I saw my Greek friend, and, with the ap-
proval of the Camp authorities, arranged that he
should at once proceed to erect a kitchen, build a
bakery, and I sent him to buy dishes and cooking
utensils. I also secured a member of the military
police as Orderly for the tent, and he moved his
things to it. and proved a very valuable assistant.
The next morning I started on the early morning
trawler for Suvla Bay, where the new landing re-
cently took place, and from there went to Anzac at
the invitation of General Godley, the G.O.C. of the
Australian and New Zealand Division. To describe
conditions at this place is beyond my time and pen.
Suffice it to say that no part of the beach, and only
dugouts on the hillside, are free from snipers’ bullets
and shell fire. T had several cases of supplies for
AT THE FRONT.


this Camp, and distributed them among the men,
and through the Chaplains, and, instead of twelve
cases I had brought with me, I could easily have
distributed twelve thousand. On Saturday, the 21st,
and Sunday, the 22nd, I witnessed the attack on
Hill W. and the capture of the Susak Wells. It
was a sight T shall never forget. The havoc caused
by the enemy’s shrapnel was terrible, and the lines of
wounded that soon began to come in was a most
pitiful spectacle. T got the consent from General
Godley and General Carruthers to establish a small
centre in one of the gulleys at Anzac just as soon
as we can get the material and the man to put in
charge.
returned to Kephalos on Sunday evening, on Wed-
nesday returned to Mudros, where I met Owens
with his supplies on his way to Kephalos. He had
been held up several days by the authorities, but we
were able to arrange matters so that he would go
forward that afternoon. On the 26th I sailed for
Alexandria, where I arrived on the afternoon of the
30th. I at once came on to Cairo, and have been
quite busy since. To-morrow I go to Port Said, and
on Saturday must be in Alexandria again.
forgot to tell you that the military authorities at
Mudros are most anxious that we open up there
immediately. They offer us every assistance, and
the best site in the military camp, and help in getting
our hut or tent erected, ready for us. They are mak-
ing preparations there for a Hospital of 12,000 beds,
and large Recreation and Concentration Camps. The
weather is very severe during the winter, and I a-
told that it will be necessarv for us to erect wooden
sheds if we are in any way to cope with the weather
conditions. With timber difficult to get, and very
expensive, it is going to be a verv serious considera-
tion, and one that we must meet in some way. We
have permission to start a canteen at this place, and
I have already got the promise of an Aldershot oven
for our use. We need at once for the Dardanelles
work two cinemas and a large supply of films.
AT THE FRONT.


several phonographs, two magic lanterns, with a
good selection of slides, accompanied by written lec-
tures, and it will be almost necessary that we have
a motor boat, although it is just possible that we
may make some arrangements with the Red Cross
for the use of their steam launches, but at present
there is no means of getting about the bay from
shore to shore, or from ship to ship, only as one can
• with great difficulty, make arrangements with the
naval and military authorities. As soon as the mar-
quee arrives, Thompson is prepared to start with i'
at once for Mudros, where I feel sure he will render
an excellent account of himself.
You can easily see from this brief account that work
in the Dardanelles is going to be very costly, and
that we shall need a great deal of money to finance
it. The £250 sent by Sydney, and the iIOO by New
Zealand, came at a most opportune time.
The need of Y.M.C.A. work at Kephalos, Lemnos,
Helas, and Anzac is very great. The men who are
fighting for the Empire having nothing there in the
way of comforts, and no means of getting them,
except by paying two or three times Cairo prices.
They are giving their lives and their health in such
a way as no one can possibly realise, who has not
seen them mowed down by machine gun fire like
grain before a sickle, I am sure that the generous
hearted Australians and New Zealanders will give
liberally, that their boys may have a Y.M.C.A. home
as near the firing line as it is possible to get.”
“ There you are,” said the Sergeant, as the Cor-
poral finished reading, “ that’s the report of a man
who means to get there, and I could give you yet
another sample of the “ Field Service ” man’s
anxiety to get near our ‘ khaki ’ clad boys. Here it
is, ‘ Send out further Secretaries, if the finances
will stand it, for Australian Secretaries are best for
Australian Camps. It won’t be long when either
myself or some one of the Australian group will
AT THE FRONT.


be going- to the front, and it is necessary to have
others to keep up the Australian end here until
their turn comes to go further forward.’ Or take
this one; ‘I want to h^ 1 - the chaps over there on
Gallipoli, so the sooner your Secretaries get here
the sooner you will have the Y.M.C.A. at the front.
The men want us badly over there.’ ‘ I wonder
why the Association does not come in for more
help from the Australian folk. If the public only
could realise what the Association means to the ma-
jority of the soldiers here, and still more at Lem-
nos, Mudros, Imbros and Gallipoli, I am sure the
money required will be given.’
“ There, boys, you see what the Y.M.C.A.
is after, but it’s taken all of eighteen months for a
mere ‘ yardful ’ of Australian folk, and perhaps
quite a small handful of ‘ recruits,’ to get into their
craniums just a faint glimmering of what the
‘Field Service’ means for the soldier. Confound
it, lads, we soldiers are not doing half enough to
shoulder the debt we owe, and that we are going
to owe to these quiet looking, resolute men, who’ll
serve us up hill and down dale, and right to the
bitter end, whether we like it or not. Beats me,
too, boys, why every over-age man, every man
medically unfit, and every lad too young to get
into the fighting line, can’t do his little bit to make
the Australian Y.M.C.A. Field Service the finest
sample of ‘ doing all that can be done for the
other fellow ’ that this war-worn and weary old
world of ours has ever known. Takes a lot of stir-
ring up does our ‘ great Australian public,’ but
though I am only an ordinary ‘ non-com.,’ and not
AT THE FRONT.


a great one at that, yet right here and now I say I
have no use for the man who turns down the one
‘ Association ’ that loyally renders the only ‘ ser-
vice ’ that brings a touch of * home ’ and ‘ higher
things ’ into the lives of our soldier men. I once
heard a parson talking about the * personal touch ’
in men’s lives, but I didn’t give his talk much
thought, lads, until I read these * despatches ’ we
have been talking about. I know now what it
meant, but I want you men, including Bill over
there, to get this thing into your heads. Just listen
to these last words of the “ Field Service man ”;—
“ One man said to me, ‘ I shod the first horse to-day
without swearing, the first time since I joined the
forces.’ Another man said, ‘ I look forward to your
meetings more than pay day.’ A Staflf Sergeant once
said, ‘ Well, I came in to your meeting feeling a
touch of influenza and headachy and tired, and now
I feel as fit as a fiddle.’ ‘ Last night we attempted
something that would not please everybody. Went
into the beer canteen, packed with 300 men, on pay
night, and started a meeting. I asked the Canteen
crowd if they would have the meeting there. They
chorused ‘Yes!’ We got a harmonium in, and, in
spite of a variety of remarks, the whole Canteen was
soon singing, ‘Lead, kindly light.’ To-day the whole
Camp is talking—some criticising, some defending,
still most of the boys seem to be admiring the move.
Heard of the following talk. One man says, ‘What
a place to hold a prayer meeting in; why, I saw one
man with a pot of beer in one hand and a hymn
book in the other.’ Says the second man, ‘ That
won’t do him any harm, any place' is fit to put in
kindly work.’ Last, in case you haven’t heard the
story, I include it here. On the torpedoed transport,
‘ Southland,’ a number of men discovered the hymns
at the back of our Active Service Despatches. A
number started to sing, and were soon joined by a
big number of others. When the torpedo struck the
AT THE FRONT.


ship it was right under the position where the men
were. Most were saved, but some passed on to the
‘ great beyond ’ singing the ‘ Glory Song.’ ”
“ Well, lads,” said the Sergeant, regretfully, ‘ I
have done my best to give you a bit of an idea of
this, to us, new kind of ‘ service,’ and yet a kind
that came in with the great ‘ Commander of all
men.’ Before I ‘ dips my lid ’ and break up ‘ our
yarns,’ I want just to say that you ain’t got no right
to grouse and growl that I’d no need to go pulling
your legs trying to make you believe that these
Y.M.C.A. men, and the Association behind them,
are the real ‘ perfects ’ with the ‘ feathers sproutin.’
No such things, lads! these chaps ain’t perfect, and
they know it—but though they make bloomers at
times, they manage to put in good solid “ team
work ’ all the time—they are out to work for you,
lads, all day and every day, and once more, don’t
you forget. ‘ Ned ’ over there will tell you it takes
more than all sorts to make a real team of ‘working
bullocks,’ and it takes a deal of hard graft, aye,
and a crop of upsets and breakdowns to make ’em
and break ’em. Why the ‘ scraggiest,’ * measliest ’
crowd of ‘ workers ’ I ever struck, which the owner
just as good as gave away, and threw the tackling
in, mind you, turned out with good feeding and
good handling the finest ‘ working team ’ I ever
saw. But they were a mixed crowd at the start,
something like our ‘ grousers,’ ‘ wowsers,’ and
‘white men,’ all jumbled up together. ‘Old Jack,’
the bullocky, got them together, how he did it we
never knew, but for a real pull, a straight pull, and
a strong pull, they never failed, and there were a
strong man’s tears in old Jack’s eyes when the time
AT THE FRONT.


came for he and his team to part. So these
Y.M.C.A. men ain’t butting- in as the ‘ know alls ’
at this time, but as they want to help you chaps in
your ‘ team work ’ for the British Empire, so they
want you lads to see that you are putting in the
best ‘ team work ’ you know how to put up. Even
if they slip, even if they stumble, even if they get
you grousing at them sometimes, just remember
that, like old ‘ Jim Steadfast,’ they have got their
‘ grip,’ and they are going to do their ‘ cling ’ for all
it is worth, and for all they can do for every army
man. I remember once seeing a Sheoak tree, and
a.big Pine tree growing in a seaside garden. At
the butt of the mighty Pine, and on the fork of the
branches of the Sheoak, the birds had dropped
‘ Box Thorn ’ seeds, and both seeds had taken root
and grown. The ‘ Oak ’ and the Pine stood up to
all the winds and storms that blew, but the one
‘ Thorn ’ was always close to the life giving roots
of its towering comrade, and the other ‘ Thorn ’
was ever near to the heart of its ‘ Sheoak Pal.’ It
don’t need no sermonising, boys, to think of these
loyal ‘ Eield Service ’ men as doing good work in
the footsteps of a great army, and as getting very
near to the hearts of our Australian soldier men.
As I call the * company ’ to attention for the last
time, I tell you, boys, that the one hope for the
‘ Empire ’ at this crisis, the one hope for our
armies, our rulers, our workers, and our people, is
to wipe off the ‘ slate ’ every old thing except the
‘ clean fighting,’ ‘clean living,’ ‘ clean thinking,’ and
loyal citizenship that the Y.M.C.A. stands for the
‘wide world ’ over.”
AT THE FRONT.


“I know ‘Sergeant Jack,’ and have read his
pamphlet with great pleasure. ‘Sergeant Jack’
is a man well-known in influential circles, and
among the 'boys’ in our Military Camps, to
whom, I am sure, it will be welcome and
interesting reading, for the narrative is true to
fact, and not simply a created tale. It is my
hope that the pamphlet will cement still further
ties between the Troops and the Association.
(Signed) J. HENRY LANG,
National Secretary Y M C A. ’s
of Australasia.


Y.M.G.A. NATIONAL APPEAL
ARMY AND NAVY DEPT.
"The Y.M.C.A. is invaluable in lime of Peace : in IVar it is indispensable.''
—Lord Derby.
"Three Cheers for the Y.M.C.A." —Australian Officers and Soldiers.
AT HOME
ABROAD
Every Training Camp in the Commonwealth is served
by the Y.M.C.A.
Thirty Secretaries are at work with Australian Troops
in Egypt and elsewhere, and on Transports. Thirty
Additional Secretaries must be sent at once !
The Army and Navy Department of the National
Committee of the Y.M.C.A. of Australia has affirmed
the principal that Australia should send Y.M.C.A.
men and money in proportion to the number of Troops
sent from this country.
Besides additional Secretaries, more buildings and tents, and greatly
increased equipment are urgently needed. One island alone
urgently needs 10 buildings to cost about £350 each and
another to cost £\750, apart from men and equipment.
Millions of letters to homes in Australia have been written in
Y.M C.A. buildings or tents on paper supplied freely.
Funds are urgently needed : Can You Help at Once ?
191
The National Secretary Y.M.C.A., 130 Flinders St., Melbourne.
FOR OUR TROOPS ABROAD AND AT HOME
I send you herewith £ for work
with our Troops.
Sigyiature —
Address—
The Treasurer, National Secretary,
A. H. SARGOOD, Esq., J. HENRY LANG.
238 Flinders St., 130 Flinders St.,
Melbourne. Melbourne.


Wholly Set Up and Printed in Australia by
Peacock Bros. Pty. Ltd. Printing Co.
214-16 Queen St., Mei.bourne


