







HEALTH and PLEASURE
Daily Excursions
On PORT PHILLIP BAY
By the Magnificent Paddle Steamers——
WEEkOONA
HYQEIA
and OZONE.
For Routes, Fares, Etc., see Advertisements
in Daily Papers.
SPECIAL CHEAP TRIPS
(§P EVERY TUESDAY KSSS,
HUDDART, PARKER & CO. PTY. LTD., 466 COLLINS ST.
BAY EXCURSION CO. LTD., 468 COLLINS ST.




HOLIDAY HATS
in almost infinite variety—every shape, size and
style the most exacting holiday maker can desire
Boaters, Panamas, Soft Felts, Straws, White
Lounge Felts, White Washing Hats, Fishing
Hats (made after the Sou’wester style), Tennis,
Cricketing, Yachting and Boating Hats and
Caps, also a full range in Dress Alpines and
Hard Felt Hats from the world’s leading makers.
Skirts, Collars, Ties, Half-Hose, Underwear, Pyjamas, etc.
Shirts and Pyjamas to measure a specialty.
HENRY BUCK & CO.
“Th. Gentlemen’s 74 SWANSTON STREET, MELBOURNE
Fashion Center” (Tourist Bureau Building). l.b.w.


The ‘Crypto” Lens
INVISIBLE 81-FOCAL (Two In One)
THE “CRYPTO” BIFOCALS are made of two
pieces of glass FUSED INTO ONE. They possess the
great advantage of having no edge whatever protrud-
ing around the reading portion, the surface being one
continuous curvature. The reading portion is entirely
sunk into the body of the lens, thus doing away with
the raised edge found in other bi-focals, which is so
troublesome to the wearer. This makes the reading
portion ENTIRELY IMPERCEPTIBLE, not only to the
observer, but to the TOUCH as well. In the ordinary
bi-focal it is impossible to prevent the dust from col-
lecting around the edge of the segment, thus rendering
it more conspicuous.
WE MAKE THESE LENSES AND PUT THEM INTO UP-TO-DATE RIMLESS SPECTACLES AND
EYEGLASSES. OCULISTS’ PRESCRIPTIONS FOR CLASSES OUR SPECIALITY.
EYESIGHT CAREFULLY TESTED. *^3
OPTICI AIM,
/lltron IXmri 145 Collins Street,
Hill CU IIULLj ...MELBOUR
MELBOURNE
(Corner Russell-st.)
Kindly Note : This is our only Address


CADBURY’S
(C.D.M.)
DAIRY MILK
CHOCOLATE
A a
THE CREME DE LA CREME OF MILK CHOCOLATE.




Round Port Phillip Bay
Carrum
Twenty-one and three-quarter miles from Melbourne; has
a fine stretch of sandy beach, shelving gradually into deep water,
and affording splendid opportunities for safe bathing in the open.
In the shelter of the tea-tree scrub, which lines the sea frontage,
many family parties pitch their tents during the summer months,
and enjoy the freedom of a life under canvas.
There are post and telegraph facilities, an hotel, whose
conveyances meet trains, and several boarding houses, with
excellent accommodation for visitors; also a store, at which
camping parties may obtain provisions, fishing tackle, etc.
A frequent and convenient service of trains is run on week
days, and trains are also run to and from Carrum on Sundays.
The cycle pathway formed by the National Touring Associa-
tion, running alongside the main roadway in the shade of the
tea-tea, between Carrum and Frankston, is greatly used and
much appreciated by wheelmen.
Excellent sport is obtainable in the vicinity both for rod
and gun, and boats may be hired for outings on the creek, the
fairway of which extends for some distance inland.
FARES —Seaside Excursion, Ist return 2/-; 2nd return,
1/5.
Sunday Cheap Excursion, Ist return, 1/9; 2nd
return, 1/3.
F rankston
Twenty-six and a-half miles from Melbourne. Trains from
Flinders-street Station on'Week days and Sundays.
Frankston lies on the shores of Port Phillip Bay, and is
a well-built township, whose salubrious climate and nearness
to town constitute it an ideal watering place. The discovery
at Frankston of mineral springs, with waters impregnated with
sulphur and iron, valuable in cases of rheumatic and neuralgic
affections, and as a tonic for anaemia, should tend to render
the town a popular curative resort.
Picknickers desiring a suitable spot for a day’s outing will
find at Frankston every requisite for their enjoyment. It has
a firm sandy beach, from which, as at other points around the
bay, mixed bathing is indulged in to a great extent; a recrea-
tion reserve with cycle track and dressing rooms, etc.; high
For particulars of accommodation mentioned herein see Country Hotel
and Boardinghouse Guido—gratis at Tourist Bureau.
8


cliffs, from which fine views may be had, and a jetty nearly
a quarter of a mile in length. Sailing boats may be hired for
fishing or other excursions.
There are good hotels and ample boarding-house accommo-
dation for visitors, and the excellence of the road to Frankston
makes the trip an enjoyable run for motorists or cyclists.
Fishing in Kananook Creek or in the sea,
Seaside Excursion Fares —Ist class, 3/3; 2nd class, 2/2.
Sunday Fares —Ist class, 2/6; 2nd class, 1/9.
Mornington
Thirty-nine miles from Melbourne, on Port Phillip Bay.
Two trains daily from Flinders-street Station, and an additional
train runs on Saturdays only at a little after mid-day. A
Sunday train is run during the summer months.
This popular seaside resort is also a regular port of call
during the Bay season of the fine steamers of Messrs. Huddart,
Parker and Coy., and the Bay Excursion Coy.
Mornington is one of the most popular Summer trips,
its varied charms attracting large numbers of visitors. Rest-
ing snugly upon the cliffs which fringe the south-eastern shores
of the Bay, it enjoys an ideal climate, the temperature averaging
fully 10 degrees less than Melbourne during the summer months.
Many business men rent houses for the season, and travel
to and fro between Melbourne and Mornington, whilst their
families enjoy a summer vacation at this favourite watering
place. Several excellent hotels, and many well-appointed board-
ing houses cater for the comfort of visitors to this charming
spot.
There is a fine sandy beach, which affords an ideal play-
ground for children, good swimming baths, cliffs, tea-tree walks,
cricket ground, tennis court, cycle track, golf links, and a
Mechanics’ Institute, with library and hall suitable for evening
entertainments and dances.
Within easy walking distance of the local Post Office are
Fishermen’s Point (one mile), and Beleura Hill (| mile), from
either of which points of vantage comprehensive views of the
surrounding panorama may be obtained.
The roads around Mornington are in good order, and
driving or cycling trips may be made to Mount Martha,
Dromana, Rosebud, Sorrento, Hastings, Balnarring or Flinders.
Good accommodation is available at Mt. Martha, four miles
by coach from Mornington, and conveyances meet the morning
train from Melbourne, and later trains by arrangement.
Fishing—Bream in Balcomb’s Creek, and all descriptions
in the Bay. Shooting—Hares and rabbits. Rowing and sailing
boats for hire at reasonable rates.
Seaside Excursion Fares —Ist class, 6/3; 2nd class, 4/-.
Sunday Fares, available for day only—lst class, 3/6; 2nd class,
2/6. Week-end Rail and Boat Combined Tickets are issued by
the Railway Department on Fridays and Saturdays, and by


Messrs. Huddart, Parker and Co., and the Bay Excursion Com-
pany on Fridays, Saturdays and Sundays, available for return
till the following Mondays. Passengers travelling down by Rail
return by Boat, and vice versa. Fare, 6/3 for round trip.
Tickets issued available for the forward journey by rail may,
however, be used for return by rail also, if so desired.
By Bay Excursion Steamer, 2/6 single, 4/- day return.
Special Cheap Trip, 2/6, on days advertised.
Dromana
Fourteen miles along the coast in a south-westerly direction
from Mornington, and reached from that railway station by a
daily coach service, is Dromana, a point of call also for the Bay
Excursion steamei's during the summer season. Owing to its
sheltered position this holiday resort enjoys an equable climate,
temperate alike in summer and winter, and the visitor will find
here enjoyment on the local tennis court or golf links.
Situated in close proximity to the jetty, and overlooking
the Bay, is a first class hotel and several boarding-houses.
There is also a post and telegraph office and telephone bureau.
The beach is one of the best in Victoria, and safe bathing
is assured by the presence of a sand bank running parallel with
the shore at a distance of a quarter of a mile out.
The township lies on the Bay, at the foot of “Arthur’s Seat,”
to the tower upon the summit of which, 1200 feet ab ve sex level,
is a splendid drive, affording many beautiful panoramic views
en route.
Other enjoyable outings are those to the lighthouse at Cape
Schanck, to Flinders and to Sorrento, each 14 miles distant in
different directions.
FARES.
Rail to Mornington (fares see page 9), thence coach, 2/6
each way.
By excursion steamer —single, 2/6; day return, 4/-. Special
cheap fare, 2/6 return, on days advertised.
Rosebud and Rye
Three miles south from Dromana, and reached daily by
coach through from Mornington, is Rosebud, a fishing village
on the south-eastern shore of Poi’t Phillip Bay, with tennis
court, a public library, and postal facilities.
Six miles farther along the coast is Rye, also connected
with Mornington by the same coach service. Here there is a post
office, one hotel, a general store, and a couple of good boarding
houses.
FARES.
Rail to Mornington (fares see page 9), coach thence Rosebud,
3/- each way, Rye 4/- each way. Boat calls at Rye once a
week, as notified in daily papex-s; fares, 2/6 single, 4/- return,
available for one week.
Por particulars of accommodation mentioned herein see Country Hotel
and Boarding-house Ou>de-jjratis at Tourist Bureau.




Sorrento
Sorrento lies upon the sheltered southern shore of Port
Phillip Bay, and is connected with the open beach of the Bass
Strait, or the Back beach, as it is usually called, by a service
of steam trams. This favourite watering place, forty miles
south of the metropolis by water, is a very fashionable resort
during the excursion season. It may be reached all the year
round by coach from the Mornington railway station, 29 miles
distant, or during the Bay season by the Bay excursion
steamers of the Huddart, Parker Company and Bay Excursion
Company, and by trading steamers via Mornington and via
Queenscliff throughout the year.
There is a post and telegraph office, three first-class hotels,
and quite a number of superior boarding-houses, a public
library, fine recreation grounds, and extensive public baths.
FARES.
Rail to Mornington (fares see page 9), coach thence, 5/6
each way. By Bay Excursion steamer (during Bay season),
2/6 single, 4/- day return. Special cheap fare, 2/6 return, on
days advertised. By trading steamer (all the year round), 2/6
single, 4/- week return.
Portsea
Portsea is two miles from Sorrento, near to Point Nepean,
and is the last settlement upon the eastern side of the Bay.
It is a popular watering place, with post and telegraph office,
two hotels, and a comfortable boarding-house.
From the ridge at the back of the township magnificent
panoramic views are obtainable across the Heads to Queens-
cliff, the Barwon Heads and Cape Otway ranges, whilst on the
left hand are Cape Schanck, with its lighthouse, Pulpit Rock
and St. Paul’s.
On the Back Beach the London Bridge caves are a per-
petual attraction. At Point Nepean are the batteries placed
to defend the entrance to Port Phillip Bay. Protected from
the violence of southerly winds by an elevated ridge, Portsea
enjoys a mild climate all the year round.
FARES.
Rail to Mornington (see page 9), thence coach 31 miles,
6/6 each way. By trading steamer (all the year round), 2/6
single, 4/- week return.
Portarlington
On the western side of the Baj lies Portarlington, which
may be reached either via Drysdale railway station, seven miles
distant, or by Melbourne-Geelong boat, running daily, Sundays
included. It enjoys a salubrious climate, and three hotels, a
a coffee palace and several boarding-houses provide ample accom-
modation for visitors. The township also boasts a public library,
post office and telephone bureau, and a couple of general stores.


A commodious jetty from which is shipped the bounteous harvest
of the surrounding fertile district, stretches into deep water
from a splendid shelving sandy beach, on which are also
situated the superior public swimming baths.
Clifton Springs
The great attraction offered by Clifton Springs to visitors
lies in its valuable mineral springs, which are highly recom-
mended by the medical faculty to those suffering from various
forms of rheumatism and dyspepsia. The waters contain
magnesia, seltzer, sulphur and iron, and the springs 'have been
protected from pollution by special cement and glass coverings.
Hot sulphur baths may be taken morning and night, and
massage and electric treatment is also available locally.
The comfort of visitors is studied in the first-class hotel
and two comfortable boarding-houses which cater for public
patronage, and tennis, golf, sea bathing and boating, together v\ ith
picturesque walks and drives in all directions, render it possible
to spend a very enjoyable holiday in this charming locality.
The Springs may be reacned either by rail to Drysdale,
and conveyance thence two miles, or by Geelong boat to
Portarlington daily, thence coach five miles.
St. Leonard’s
A small fishing village, six miles from Portarlington, offers
from its secluded position the opportunity for a quiet and restful
holiday. Amongst its attractions may be mentioned a firm
sandy beach, good fishing and boating by sailing boat or motor
launch.
One hotel and a coffee palace provide the requisite accom-
modation for the visiting public, and there is a post office and
a telephone bureau.
St. Leonards is reached by coach from the nearest railway
station, Drysdale, 14 miles distant, or passenger steamer to
Portarlington and coach thence six miles, or trading steamer
direct.
FARES.
Through rail and coach (summer issue only), Melbourne,
via Drysdale, to Portarlington and Clifton Springs, Ist class
12/6, second class 9/6.
Through boat and coach (all the year round), Melbourne,
via Portarlington, to Clifton Springs, 5/6.
Boat direct to Portarlington, 2/6 single, 3/6 return.
Trading steamer, direct to St. Leonards, 2/6 single, 4/- return.
Queenscl iff
Sixty-eight miles from Melbourne. Rail from Spencer-
street Station. Two trains daily, changing at Geelong. Or 30
For particulars of accommodation mentioned herein see Country Hotel
and Boardinghouse Guide—gratis at Tourist Bureau.


miles by boat. Trading 'steamer all the year round. Bay
Excursion steamer during the season.
Queenscliff stands on a headland overlooking Port Phillip
Bay, like a sentinel posted to guard the entrance to the chief
harbour of the State. The fortifications here and at Point
Nepean, on the opposite side of the strait, place these positions,
it is claimed, amongst the strongest in the world. The town
itself is substantially built and well drained, and ample pro-
vision is made for the accommodation of the hosts of visitors
who flock to this favourite resort at all seasons of the year,
attracted by the mildness of its climate, and by the opportunities
for recreation afforded by the natural advantages of the
locality. Amongst these may be mentioned the wel appointed
pir*s, provided wth tables, seats, etc., for the benefit of
picnickers, the splendid beaches eminently suitable as safe
juvenile playgrounds, the fleet of local fishing boats, sail and
motor, avai able for hire by the hour or day, and the const mt
st ream of shipping of all descriptions which passes through the
troubled waters of the “Rip” on its way to or from the busy
capital of the State. An excellent bowling green, tennis courts
and golf links, are also at the service of visitors. From either
of the two lighthouses at Queenscliff itself an extensive view
may be obtained. A pleasant walk or drive of four miles is
that to the lighthouse at Point Lonsdale, overlooking the reef
upon which many fine vessels have in years past been cast
away.
Many enjoyable drives are available through the surround-
ing country—to Ocean Grove, 8 miles; to Barwon Heads, 9 miles;
to Portarlington, 17 miles; or to Drysdale or St. Leonard’s,
each 12 miles distant.
If desired, excursions by water may be made to Portsea
or Sorrento, upon the farther side of the Bay.
Point Lonsdale is yearly growing in favour, and the local
accommodation, which consists of a comfortable coffee palace,
and several superior boarding-houses, is heavily taxed at holiday
seasons. Of great interest to visitors is Buckley’s Cave,
situated in the cliff just below the lighthouse, and the sea
frontage is a splendid beach. Cabs run frequently between
Queenscliff and the Point.
Rail Seaside Excursion Fares —Ist class, 13/8; 2nd class, 9/1.
Boat Fares —Single 2/6; Day Return, 4/-.
„ „ Special Excursion, 2/6, on days advertised.
Week-end Rail and Boat Co bined Tickets are issued by
the Railway Department on Fridays and Saturdays, and by
the Boat Comp mies on Fridays, Saturdays and Sundays,
av lilable for return until the following Mondays. Those issued
by rail are available for return by boat, and vice versa.
Fare —7/6 round trip.
Off Season. —Ist class only boat and rail combined tickets
are issued on S iturdays only by Messrs. Huddart, Parker and
Coy., at 10/-. Passengers go by boat and return by rail.


Queensellff.


WESTERNPORT WATERING
PLACES.
Flinders
On Bass Strait, at the western entrance to Westernport
Bay, 56 miles from Melbourne, reached by Rail and Motor or
Rail and Coach. From Flinders-street station passengers travel
to Bittern, 42 miles from town, and take motor or coach thence
for the 15 miles’ drive, reaching Flinders in about or
hours respectively.
The beauty of the coastal scenery in the vicinity explains
the ever increasing popularity of Flinders as a holiday resort.
The cliffs in many places rise perpendicularly to the height of
from 100 to 200 feet. Well-known points of interest are West
Head, Bird Rock, Cathedral Rock, Elephant Rock, and London
Bridge. Upon Cape Schanck, 10 miles from Flinders, is erected
a lighthouse, the light upon which is visible 40 miles distant
at sea. Buggies and waggonettes may be hired locally for
various enjoyable drives.
From Flinders to Sandy Point is a fine stretch of sandy
beach, suitable for riding or cycling, and affording opportunities
for safe bathing.
First-class accommodation is obtainable. One comfortable
hotel and several superior boarding establishments cater for
visitors. Excursions may be made by boat to Seal Rock*,
Phillip Island, etc.
Recreations —Tennis and Golf. Flinders links are now
exceedingly popular.
Fishing—Plentiful and varied.
Shooting—Hares, rabbits, wild duck, and quail and snipe
in season.
Seaside Excursion Fare to Bittern —Ist class, 7/4; 2nd class,
4/10.
Through rail and motor fares, Melbourne to Flinders: —
Summer excursion (November 15th to April 30th), 15/4
Ist class, 12/10 2nd class.
Week-end excursion (all the year round), 15/4 Ist class,
12/10 2nd class.
Off season, Ist class, 17/9; 2nd class, 14/5.
Other favoured points of tourist resort on Westernport
Bay are Cowes on Phillip Island and San Remo, upon the
shores of the eastern entrance to Wes ernport Bay, whilst a
considerable number of visitors sp>md their holidays at Rhyll or
Newhaven, upon Phillip Island or at Tankerton, on French
Island. The area of Phillip Island is about 70 square miles,
For particular* of accommodation mentioned herein see Country Hotel
and Boardinghouse Guide—gratis at Tourist Bureau.
16


its greatest length east and west about 14 miles, and its
greatest breadth 6 miles. Owing to the excellence of its roads
vehicular trips may be easily and comfortably made to all the
points of interest which lie within easy reach in all directions,
notably those to “The Nobbies,” Seal Rocks, Swan and Green
Lakes; Forrest’s Caves and Cape Woolamai.
A morning train leaves Flin ; ers-street Station daily for
Stony Point, connecting with the “Genista,” a small steamer
which runs across to San Remo, calling en route at Cowes,
and, if required, at Rhyll and Newhaven. Visitors desirous
of leaving Melbourne by the evening train can obtain accom-
modation from the lessee of the Railway Refreshment Rooms
at Stony Point, and may leave the Point by motor launch
the following day for any desired destination on the shores
of Westernport Bay by writing in advance to Mr. Gus.
Osterlund at Stony Point, the proprietor of the launch.
Cowes
After allowing a reasonable margin of time for the tran-
shipment of passengers from the train arriving at Stony Point
at about 10.30 a.m., the boat leaves for Cowes, six miles dis-
tant, reached about noon. Here are two good hotels, with
reasonable tariffs, and several boarding-houses, where comfort-
able accommodation may be obtained at moderate rates. The
situation and surroundings of Cowes eminently fit it to pro-
vide a restful holiday. It lies upon the sandy beach of the
northern shore of Phillip Island, the calm placidity of which
is in striking contrast to the rugged grandeur of the southern
coast, with its line of lofty cliffs presenting an unyielding
front to the billows of the ocean.
Rhyll lies five miles east of Cowes, and is the next point
of call. The principal occupation of the residents is fishing.
At Newhaven, six miles farther on, are two comfortable
boarding-houses with moderate tariffs, and fishing boats may
be hired for enjoyable outings upon the sheltered waters of the
Bay. The apparatus necessary in the case of shipwreck is
stored at Newhaven, which is the headquarters of the Rocket
Brigade.
The best view of the eastern passage between Phillip Island
and the mainland is obtainable from Newhaven Jetty, where
the current runs very rapidly. The telegraph line crosses here,
and, in order to clear the masts of passing vessels, it is sus-
pended from poles of very great height.
Cape Woolamai, three miles from Newhaven, and about
13 from Cowes, is a bold promontory, the home in the breed-
ing season of myriads of mutton birds, which, arriving from
the 21st to the 26th November each year, deposit their eggs in
short burrows in the sandy soil. Great nujnbers of egg col-
lectors await their coming, and, armed with hooked sticks,


rob the nests. Not infrequently many of the birds offer
determined resistance to such summary spoliation.
There is here a granite quarry well worthy of a visit, from
which was obtained the granite used in the building of the
Equitable Assurance Coy., Collins-street, Melbourne, and other
city edifices.
Other objects of interest lying off the coast of the island
are the Pyramid, an isolated rock of fully 100 feet in height,
on the northern coast; the Nobbies, 11 miles distant from
Cowes, at the north-eastern extremity of the island; and Seal
Rocks, a quarter of a mile from the Nobbies.
The climate is mild both in winter and summer.
Shooting includes hares, rabbits, etc., and the fishing in the
bay whiting, pike, schnapper and flathead, and crayfish on the
ocean beach.
At Cowes, or Rh.\ll, as at Newhaven, boats may be
obtained and the services of experienced boatmen secured, if
desired.
San Remo
San Remo is reached about 1 p.m., after a journey of a
little over 13 miles from Stony Point. It lies upon the main-
land, at the entrance of the eastern passage from Bass Strait
to Westernport Bay.
An alternative route to San Remo is provided by the
branch line junctioning at Nyora on the Great Southern line,
to the State Coalfields at Wonthaggi. A coach meets the train
at Anderson, 4 miles distant, and the through journey from
Melbourne occupies about five and a-half hours.
The township is a very popular summer resort, and is pos-
sessed of many attractions. There are two good hotels, store,
boarding-house and post and telegraph office.
From Griffiths’ Point a comprehensive view may be ob-
tained of the picturesque scenery of the neighbourhood, from
Cape Patterson to Cape Woolamai, and across the Bay towards
Cowes and Stony Point.
Points of interest along the coast are the Caves, two miles
distant, the larger of which is about 150 yards in depth, and
the smaller about 40 yards.
Drives to the Kilcunda Coal Mine or to the State Coal-
fields at the Powlett River will furnish pleasant outings; and
Inverloch, upon Anderson’s Inlet, may also be reached in the
same manner. The fishing is excellent, and the shooting in-
cludes wild fowl, hares, and rabbits, and less exciting sport may
be obtained upon the local golf links.
Combined rail and steamer tickets to Cowes and San
Remo, via Stony Point, are issued at Melbourne (Flinders-
street), Geelong, Ballarat, and Bendigo all the year round at
the following fares (return): —




COWES. SAN REMO.
Ist. 2nd. Ist. 2nd
s. d. s. d. s. d. s. d.
Melbourne (Flinders-street) ... 13 4 10 5 17 10 14 11
Geelong ... ... 21 10 16 1 26 4 20 7
Ballarat ... ... 28 2 20 5 32 8 24 11
Bendigo ... ... 33 7 24 1 38 1 28 7
Also from Tourist Bureau, Melbourne, and all stations to
Mentone inclusive. Available for return for two (2) months.
Passengers for Rhyll book to Cowes; those for Newhaven
to San Remo.
French Island
Visitors to French Island book by the morning train to
Stony Point at Seaside Excursion Fare (Ist class 8/10, 2nd
class 5/11). Passengers are conveyed by the mail boat thence
on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays to Tankerton, by the
mail contractor, to whom application should be made for passage
across, fare 2/6. Intending visitors should also apply in ad-
vance for accommodation to Mrs. M‘Lachlan, the proprietress
of a comfortable boarding-house at Tankerton, or to Miss Small,
who conducts a similar establishment at Long Point.
Boats may be hired for fishing and yachting excursions,
and buggies are available for those desiring to drive.
Sportsmen may reckon on good fishing and shooting, fish
and game being very plentiful.
Tooradin
Thirty-five and three-quarters miles from Melbourne, on the
South-Eastern line, with a daily service of two trains, one in
the early morning, the other in the evening. The township lies
at a distance of about two miles from the railway station, with
which it is connected by a convenient vehicular service.
The fishing at this port, upon the northern shores of
Westernport Bay, is very good indeed, enormous catches of
whiting having been made during the last couple of seasons
by parties hiring the fishermen’s boats for the day’s fishing.
Schnapper, pike, mullet and flathead are also plentiful in the
Bay and bream and mullet may be caught from the saltwater
creek upon which the village lies. Yullock Creek, six miles, in
which are blackfish, and the sandy beach at Cannon’s Creek,
five miles dis'ant, may be reached by driving.
The shooting in season includes duck, quail and snipe.
There are postal and telegraph facilities, and accommoda-
tion may be obtained at the local hotel, and sailing and rowing
boats are available for hire from the resident boatmen.
There are convenient bathing boxes upon the banks of the
saltwater creek.
Fares —Seaside Excursion, Ist class return, 5/5; 2nd class
return, 3/5.


On the Eastern Shoreline
I nverloch
Eighty-six miles from Melbourne, on Anderson’s Inlet.
By rail from Flinders-street Station to North Outirim, 74
miles, thence by coach 12 miles, or to Wonthaggi, thence coach
nine miles, arriving at the inlet in time for lunch by the former
route. Passengers electing to travel via Wonthiggi reach that
station at about noon, and after partaking of lunch may fill
in a little while before the departure of the coach by a visit
to the State coal mine, about three-quarters of a mile distant
from the township.
Inverloch is a popular trip with holiday-makers. Its broad
sandy beach provides a playground for hosts of children, and
the waters of the inlet, protected by the bar at its entrance
from the stormy violence of the outer ocean, have the unruffled
stillness of an inland lake, upon which it is possible to row or
sail in perfect safety and comfort, and in which sea-bathing
may be indulged in with the utmost confidence.
Many pleasant picnic excursions may be made by boat
to the farther side of the inlet, where clams, a favourite
American delicacy, abound upon the ocean beach; or to the
Eagle’s Nest at the mouth of the inlet.
It is possible to travel for some distance up the Tarwin
river by the steam launch which plies from the township,
and this trip provides a very enjoyable day’s outing. The
fishing, both in the inlet and the creeks running into it, is
excellent, and good shooting may be had, especially in wild-
fowl season. Accommodation is to be had at the two local
hotels and a coffee palace, but it is always advisable to write
in advance to ensure rooms.
Combined rail and coach tickets, via Nth. Outtrim —Ist
class return, 21/6; 2nd class return, 16/6; via Wonthaggi—lst
class return, 21/6; second class return, 15/10.
National Park,
Wilson’s Promontory
and Corner Inlet
WILSON’S PROMONTORY has been proclaimed and
reserved as a National Park, and regulations have been framed
to govern the traffic between the Promontory and the main-
land. Visitors desiring to land upon the shore line of the
park and to camp thereon are allowed to do so under certain
conditions, but must first obtain permission from the Director.
Mr. Kershaw, of the National Museum, Swanston-street,
21


Melbourne. Doughboy Island, in Corner Inlet, has also been
similarly reserved. National Park Ranger, J. McLennan,
Yanakie P.O.
The points upon the railway line affording easiest access-
to Corner Inlet are BENNISON, TOORA, WELSHPOOL, and
PORT ALBERT, which lie, respectively, 110, 113, 120 and
136 miles from Melbourne. One train daily leaves Flinders-
street Sta ion in the morning, with an additional train on
Wednesday afternoons.
CORNER INLET may be most easily reached by alighting
at Bennison and travelling thence by tram (fare 6d.) for a
further mile to Bowen, a fishing village built upon the northern
shore of the inlet at the mouth of the Franklin River.
From this point visitors start on boating or fishing
expeditions on the waters of the inlet, or are conveyed by
motor or sailing boats to convenient and picturesque camping
spots on its shores.
Parties desiring to hire boats (the average carrying
capacity of which is about ten persons), for various periods may
do so on very reasonable terms by communicating with the
Secretary of the National Park Tourists’ Association, Bennison,
who will make the necessary arrangements, and also for the
hiring of tents if desired.
Boatmen act as guides inside the inlet, and pitch and
strike tents if camp is near the beach. Fishing tackle (except
whiting lines) are provided free with the boat.
The following fares are quoted by the Secretary of the
National Park Tourist Association:—
1 day. 2 days. 3 days. 4 days. 5 days. 6 days.
Motor Boat £1 10 £3 0 £3 10 £3 15 £4 0 £4 10
Sailing Boat £1 0 £2 0 £2 10 £3 0 £3 10 £4 0
There is a store at Bowen, at which the necessary
provisions may he obtained.
Three miles beyond Bennison is TOORA, a small and well
laid-out township lying about a mile and a quarter from the
inlet, where two comfortable hotels, a coffee palace and a
couple of boarding-houses provide accommodation for visitors,
and several stores cater for their requirements. It has a post
and telegraph office and mechanics’institute and tennis court.
Many beautiful fern gullies lie within easy d stance of
the township in the recesses of the range of hills which rise
to a height of 2000 feet above sea level immediately at the
back of the township and the Agnes River Falls, 80 feet in
height, with a fine volume of water, are only four miles away.
Other falls, those upon the Franklin River and Falls Creek,
are within eight miles of Toora and may be reached on
horseback.
Splendid sport is to be had in the neighbourhood of Toora
—quail, snipe, and wild duck in season, and the fishing in Corner
Inlet and in the Agnes and Franklin Rivers is excellent.
WELSHPOOL lies six miles past Toora, and is a grow-
ing township with one hotel, one coffee palace, a post and




telegraph office, and two or three stores. A horse tram line,
three miles in length, connects with the jetty at Port Welshpool,
conveying passengers between the two points at 6d. per head.
Owing to the depth of water at the end of the jetty, large
boats are able to come right up alongside the pier, and
excursionists may start from this point for any part of the
inlet along the shores of Wilson’s Promontory, or to any of
the islands in Bass Strait. Two boarding-houses here.
Many of the fishermen’s boats have been fitted with oil
engines, rendering them independent of wind and tide, and
several of them are available for hire by excursion parties,
and their owners will convey visitors to Refuge Cove or
Sealer’s Cove on the eastern shore of Wilson’s Promontory, or
to other convenient camping places.
A walk through the ranges at Welshpool opens up equally
as beautiful scenery as may be found at Toora, and the Agnes
River Falls, to which a good road has been made, are within
four miles and may be reached on foot, or if preferred arrange-
ments may be made at the local hotel to hire a buggy and
drive to them. About a mile from the township are the Aber-
feldy Falls, which are also worth visiting.
Continuing on from Welshpool a distance of 17 miles,
PORT ALBERT, the terminus of the Great Southern line, is
reached. It is also a port of call of the trading steamer
“Despatch” on its regular trip between Melbourne and Bairns-
dale. The township stands on the port of the same name at
the mouth of the Tarra River, and as t'-e harbour is almost
entirely landlocked the water is always calm. There are two
hotels, coffee palace, a post and telegraph office and several
stores, and an excellent tennis court.
Extending from Port Albert to Corner In’et, 17 miles
distant, is a chain of islands of various sizes which may be
reached by boat; an up-to-date motor-boat or several sailing
boats owned by local fishermen are available for hire by sporting
parties wishing to visit the islands or Wilson’s Promontory.
A pleasant way of spending a week’s holiday is to hire
a boat from one of the places mentioned and secure the ser-
vices of a boatmin to act as pilot and camp our Provisions
and a complete outfit for the trip may be obtained locally.
The inlet and the ocean in its immediate vicinity are plenti-
fully stocked with fish of various descriptions, including
schnapper, whiting, pike, mullet, perch, etc., and the islands
abound with rabbits, duck, teal, wild pigeons, quail and snipe.
FARES.
Summer excursion (issued November 15th to April 30th
each year):—
Ist class. 2nd class.
Bennison ... ... 22/2 14/10
Toora ... ... 23/- 15/6
Welshpool ... ... 24/3 16/1
Port Albert ... ... 27/7 18/6


* GEELONG
On Oorio Bay, forty-five miles by rail from Melbourne.
Trains run frequently from Spencer-street Station at early
morning, midday, afternoon . and evening, and the journey
occupies approximately an hour and a half. It may also be
reached by a service of steamers starting from Queen’s
Wharf on the River Yarra twice daily (Sundays, mornings
only), as per advertisement. Geelong possesses a double share
of interest to the visitor from the fact that, in addition to its
own charms of climate and situation, it is also the centre of
a district replete with beauty spots easily accessible by
convenient services of daily coaches.
The town lies upon a sloping ridge rising gradually from
the sparkling waters of Corio Bay, and its solid business
premises, built on broad, clean streets, testify to the comfortable
prosperity of the place.
A yearly increasing volume of the trade of the Western
district is finding its way to this port, and to its fine wharves
come mammoth freight carriers of all nations to load cargoes
of grain, wool, compressed fodder, butter, and frozen produce.
The Oriental Timber Coy. import large consignments of logs
from the Siberian forests, and the work of preparing and
dressing the wood provides constant occupation for a large
number of employees.
From the substantial rotunda erected by the Geelong
Progress Association on Heard’s Hill is obtainable a panoramic
view of wonderful beauty, to the north-east towards Williams-
town, eastward over the waters of Corio and Port Phillip
Bays, and southward past Connewarre and Germantown to
Bass Strait. A half-day drive to Ceres and Heard’s Hill,
crossing the Barwon and passing through Highton, forms a
very enjoyable outing.
Beautiful picnic spots will be found in the Queen’s Park,
at the junction of the Barwon and Moorabool Rivers, and the
Botanical Gardens will repay a visit. Facilities in the shape
of swings, hot water and shelter are provided, and the fernery
is considered with justice one of the finest in the Commonwealth,
whilst the adjoining hot-house is also filled with a profusion
of tropical and other blossoms. Close to the Railway Station
lies Johnston Park, six acres in extent, with avenues of fine
trees and well-kept lawns.
On the eastern beach, and in close proximity to the
Botanical Gardens, are the Mineral Springs, famous for the
curative properties of their water.
25


The local “Zoo” is conveniently placed in Kardinia Park, a
splendid reserve with an area of some forty acres. There is
a well-filled monkey house, and the aviary contains many
birds of beautiful plumage and sweet song, v hile the ponds in
the grounds are the home of many rare waterfowl.
There is a broad stretch of firm sandy beach, upon which
is room for the paddling of hosts of tiny toddlers, and hot and
cold sea baths are always obtainable ; boating may be safely
indulged in either upon the river or the bay, and the fishing
is plentiful and varied —trout, perch,, bream and mullet
rewarding the skill of the angler.
Return Fares —Ordinary Ist class, 10/9; 2nd class, 7/3;
Week End, Ist class, 8/6; 2nd class, 5/8. Boat Fares, 2/6
single, 3/6 return.
Visitors need have no apprehension on the score of
accommodation, as there are about thirty hotels and several
comfortable boarding-houses.
Vehicles of all descriptions may be hired at the local
headquarters of Messrs. Cobb and Co. for drives through the
beautiful country surrounding Geelong, and those who prefer
to cycle will find the roads in all directions in capital order.


On the Western Coast
Ocean Grove
This popular watering place, 15 miles from Geelong, is
situated on the eastern bank and close to the mouth of the
Barwon River, here a splendid stream.
A smooth sandy beach stretches eastward from the mouth
of the river to Port Phillip Heads.
There is no hotel, but two coffee palaces and a number of
boarding-houses supply excellent accommodation, and there is
a post office, and telephone communication with Drysdale.
Bathing boxes have been erected at intervals along the
beach, and lovers of bathing may gratify their desire to the
fullest extent either in the sea or river.
In the holiday season numbers of campers pitch their
tents in the tea tree along the river bank, who derive ample
enjoyment from boating, fishing, and shooting in the vicinity,
and they find their wants anticipated at the local general
store.
The boats of local fishermen may be hired at reasonable
rates by the hour or day.
A coach runs daily during the winter months, and an
augmented service is maintained during the excursion season,
conveyances meeting both trains and steamers at Geelong.
Coach from Queenscliff to Ocean Grove leaves after arrival
of steamer, returning in time to catch steamer at Queenscliff.
Through rail and coach and through boat and coach
tickets are issued during the excursion season as per table on
page 30.
Barwon Heads
On the opposite bank of the stream Barwon Heads lies 14
miles south-east of Geelong, and although the road is fairly
good there are a. few sandy patches in the latter half of the
journey.
The township has grown up on the slope of the headland
known as “The Bluff,” from the top of which a magnificent
outlook is afforded southward over the ocean and northward
over the coach route to Geelong, with the Connewarre Lakes
and the winding course of the river in the immediate fore-
ground.
There is a good hotel, with tennis court, golf links, and
other conveniences; a post, telegraph and telephone office, and
two or three boarding-houses. There are also a number of
cottages available for hire during the excursion season.
27


Surf bathing from the rocky ocean beach and river bathing
may be indulged in, and there is excellent fishing and shooting
to be had on the river and at the Connewarre Lakes.
There is a daily coach service during the winter, and
vehicles run more frequently during the summer months, meet-
ing trains and steamers.
Through rail and coach and rail and boat tickets are
issued during the excursion season as per table on page 30.
Torquay
Torquay or Spring Creek, as it was formerly called, is
distant 14 miles from Geelong, and is reached by Cobb and
Co.’s coaches, which run daily in conjunction with trains and
steamers, the journey occupying about a couple of hours.
The necessary accommodation is furnished by one hotel,
a coffee palace, several boarding-houses and a number of
furnished cottages, and postal facilities are also available.
Torquay is situated on a gentle slope overlooking Bass
Strait, and the secret of its great attraction for visitors is to
be found in its rugged coastal scenery and safe sea-bathing,
the rocky caves being admirably adapted for use as dressing
rooms.
Fishing is good in the ocean and in Spring Creek, and
good shooting is to be had in the surrounding districts.
For fare table, for combined rail and coach or rail and
boat tickets, see page 30.
Anglesea
Twenty-six miles from Geelong, 12 beyond Torquay, and
served daily in summer but tri-weekly only in winter by the
same line of coaches, is Anglesea. The road for the latter
portion of the journey is very picturesque, running partly
along the high cliffs overlooking the ocean and partly through
splendid bush scenery. Lying upon the banks of the Anglesea
River, this pleasant holiday resort provides quiet enjoyment
for visitors in search of a restful vacation.
Boating and swimm ng in the river, good fishing—bream,
mullet, sweep and crayfish abound —and rabbits furnish sport
for the gun; whilst those for whom sport has no charm may
find pleasure in the many beautiful walks through the sur-
rounding country, and in exploring the nooks and crannies in
the rocky coast line in the vicinity.
The river is navigable for some distance inland, and boats
are provided by the comfortable local hotel. There are also
furnished cottages available as well as the usual postal facilities.
For fare table, combined rail and coach or rail and boat
tickets, see page 30.
Por particulars of accommodation mentioned herein see Country hotel
and Boardinghouse Guide -gratis at Tourist Bureau.


Anglesee River.
\V. W. Watts, Photo.


Melbourne
... 12/-
9/6
16/-
13/6
21/-
18/6
Ballarat
... 14/6
10/6
18/6
14/6
23/6
19/6
Bendigo
... 29/6
20/-
33/6
24/-
38/6
29/-
Castlemaine
... 26/6
19/-
30/6
23/-
35/6
28/-
Maryborough
... 24/3
17/10
28/3
21/10
33/3
26/10
Colac
... 14/7
11/2
18/7
15/2
23/7
20/2
Airey’s Inlet
The terminus of the Geelong-Torquay-Angiesea coach ser-
vice is found at Airey’s Inlet, nine miles beyond Anglesea
through the bush, and the coach, which runs daily in summer
but tri-weekly only in winter, reaches there at about 7.30 p.m.
There is one hotel, with post office and telephone imme-
diately adjoining, a coffee palace, and several furnished cottages
to let. An object of interest in the vicinity is the Split Point
lighthouse, erected at a cost of £9,000.
The charm of this locality consists in the harmonious
blending of the beauties of its bush setting with the very
varying moods of its ocean frontage. The Airey’s River,
emptying itself into the inlet, is navigable for several miles up
stream, and the fishing and shooting is splendid. Boats are
provided free for the use of visitors to the hotel, and there is
good bathing in the ocean and river.
Amongst the picnic resorts in the neighbourhood are the
Red Rocks, two miles along the coast, a beautiful fern tree gully
three miles distant, and the Big Hill five miles away. Buggies
may be hired for day or half-day excursions, and golf is a
possibility.
For fare table, for combined rail and coach, or rail and
boat tickets see below.
FARES.
(Combined Rail and Coach (Cobb & Co.), issued November 15 to
30th April each year.)
To Ocean Grove, T , n „i paM
„ Barwon Heads Anglesea To Airey’s Inlet
* rom and Torquay via Geelong v ' a G ee ' ong -
Geelong.
Ist. 2nd. Ist. 2nd. Ist. 2nd.
COMBINED BOAT AND COACH
Melbourne, via Geelong, to Ocean Grove, Barwon
Heads and Torquay ... ... ... 8/-
Melbourne to Anglesea ... ... ... 12/-
Melbourne to Airey’s Inlet... ... ... 17/-
Lorne
On Loutit Bay, 105 miles from Melbourne, a morning train
runs daily from Spencer-street to Dean Marsh, 91 miles; thence
by coach, 14 miles. Passengers require to change trains at
Birregurra and arrive at the Dean Marsh station at about


11 a.m., where coach is boarded for the drive through the
ranges. Lunch is partaken of at Benwerrin, the half-way
house, lying at an elevation of 1500 feet above sea level, and
from here a rapid descent is made in the latter half of the
journey to the ocean beach at Lome,
Many things combine to render Lome an ideal retreat from
the cares of business, and the heat and dust of the city. Set
upon the seashore, and with a background of wooded ranges, it
compels the admiration of visitors from the moment it breaks
into view from the last hillside on the coach journey. Loutit
Bay stretches for a distance of twelve miles from the jetty to
Split Head, on which stands a beacon lighting the course of
vessels to and from Port Phillip Heads. Its broad sandy beach
offer-! unbounded opportunities for safe sea bathing.
No visitor to Lome ever thinks of spending any time
within doors. Nature entices everybody into the open air to
view her handiwork. Picnics are the order of the day, and,
for those who return from the daily outing, refreshed and
reinvigorated, social festivities in the shape of dances, musical
evenings, card parties, etc., pass pleasantly the flying hours
between dinner and bedtime.
Amongst the many beautiful falls in the vicinity of Lome
are the Erskine, possibly the most frequently-photographed falls
in Victoria (6 miles), and Straw’s, also on the Erskine River
(5 miles). The height of these two falls is between 130 and
150 feet, which is also that of Splitter’s Falls, on Splitter’s
Creek (5 miles). A shorter trip is that to the Phantom Falls,
80 feet high, on St. George’s Creek (3 miles), really a double
fall. Following the track along its banks the course of the
creek is crossed no fewer than seven times, and it requires an
hour’s walking to reach the spot. Other falls are Kalimna
(Upper and Lower, 6 miles), Margaret (5 miles), and Sheoak
(3 miles). In addition io these there may still be visited the
charming surroundings of the Stony Creek, Wan Wanda, Kyle’s,
Henderson’s, and the Horse Shoe Falls.
Easy walks are those to the Sanctuary and Rapids on the
Erskine River (1 mile), and to Teddy’s Lookout (half-a-mile),
a commanding view-point at the western end of the town
overlooking the pier. Pleasant resting places have been pro-
vided in the shape of a pavilion and seats on the summit, and
other seats at intervals along the way.
More extended excursions are those to Mt. St. George, im-
mediately opposite and 300 feet higher than Teddy’s Lookout,
and to Cumberland Creek and Cave, four miles from Lome by
track over Mt. St. George, or by following the beach. At the
mouth of Cumberland Creek fantastically-shaped cliffs rise to
a height of about 300 feet, and the cave runs for a distance of
about 100 feet into one of them. It may, however, only be
entered at low tide. The Amazon Rock lying still further
along this beach is an additional attraction.
The constant demand for accommodation at Lome has
created a splendid supply of first-class establishments catering


for the comfort of visitors to this, the queen of Australian
watering places. Two up-to-date hotels and many superior
boarding-houses provide a choice of quarters to hosts of guests.
One of the latter establishments has formed asphalt tennis
courts and well-laid-out bowling greens and croquet lawns for
the entertainment of its patrons. Furnished cottages are also
available for hire during the season
Fishing—From the jetty all sorts of Victorian sea-fish may
be caught, and in the Erskine River and Gorge and Cumber-
land Creeks, English trout are to be taken; whilst in the same
streams bream and mullet abound.
Fares (oft season): —Melbourne to Dean Marsh —Ist class,
22/lU; 2nd class, 15/2 (journey may be broken). Coach —Dean
Marsh-Lorne, 5/- each way. Through rail and coach fares
(summer season, 15th November to 30th April)Melbourne to
Lome—lst class, 28/6; 2nd class, 22/5. The journey may be
broken for one day only at Geelong or Birregurra, going and
returning.
Apollo Bay
One hundred and twenty-eight miles from Melbourne. A
train from Spencer-street Station daily, connecting at Forrest
(103 miles), with a coach running on three days a week —
Tuesdays. Thursdays and Saturdays—by which the 25-mile
drive across the Otway Ranges is accomplished.
The road from Forrest to Apollo Bay, for the first few
miles, is comparatively flat and uninteresting, but when once
the rising country has been reached, it passes through some of
the finest forest scenery in the State, and the varied beauty
of the remaining portion of the journey makes ample amends
for its earlier tameness. Lunch is obtained at the half-way
house on Mt. Sabine, which rises to a height of 1938 feet above
sea level, and close to this mount the Barwon and Gellibrand
rivers rise in the ranges. Apollo Bay stretches for a distance
ot twelve miles from Cape Patten, on the north-east, to Point
Bunbury, at its south-west extremity; and the township lying
on the Bay, consists of two comfortable hotels, a similar num-
ber of boarding-houses, a post, telegraph, and telephone office,
a general store, and several private residences.
From Apollo Bay numerous trips may be made to pic-
turesque spots in the ranges—to Stony Creek Falls, to the
Carisbrook Falls, the Ethel May Falls, and to Cawood’s Creek
and the Barrum River.
One of the most interesting outings is that to the Cape
Patten cave, which is situated in the face of a cliff some 12
miles from the township. This may be made the objective
either of a walking excursion, or, if preferred, a conveyance
may be hired locally and driven almost the whole way to the
cave. A sloping pathway has been made to the mouth of
this cavern, which lies at a considerable height above the level




of the beach, and upon entering it is seen that a large portion
of the floor space of the cave, which has a depth of 200 feet
by a width at its broadest portion of 30 feet, is occupied by
a lake of beautifully clear, but ice-cold fresh water.
Here will be found all the charm of natural surroundings
which has made Lome so deservedly popular, and it s only
the comparative difficulty of reaching Apollo Bay which has
hitherto handicapped it in the race for popular favour. The
bathing and fishing, either in the sea or in the stream flowing
into it, are excellent. Through rail and coach fares —Ist class
return, 40/11; 2nd class return, 33/11 (issued during summer
months only).
Peterborough
Port Campbell and
Rivernook
A glance at the map of Victoria will show that fol'owing
along the coast line from Apollo Bay, rounding Cape Otway
with its lighthouse, which signals to Melbourne the arrival of all
incoming shipping, and onward westerly, past Moonlight Head,
four favourite seaside holiday resorts are located at short dis-
tances from each other on the iron-bound coast stretching from
Moonlight Head to Curdie’s Inlet. These are, in geographi-
cal order, Rivernook, Princetown, Port Campbell and Peter-
borough, and must be reached by train to Timboon railway
station connecting with coach services running to the coast.
Through Timboon, 150 miles from Melbourne, access is gained
to this, one of the finest and most picturesque portions of the
coast line of this State. A morning train leaves Spencer-street
station daily for Camperdown, where passengers change into
the branch line service, running four days a week to Timboon
in summer, thrice weekly in winter.
Peterborough
Arriving at Timboon, coach is taken for the twelve-mile
drive to Peterborough, reached in ample time for the evening
meal. This fishing hamlet consists of a superior hotel, 3 board-
ing-houses, a post and telegraph office, and a few private
residences, and lies at the mouth of Curdie’s River, on Curdie’s
Inlet, the bar at the mouth of which prevents any but small
craft from entering.
The river, which is at this point about a mile wide, is
navigable by rowing boat for a distance of many miles above
its mouth.
Excursions of interest along the coast are those to The
Grotto (3 miles), London Bridge (4 miles), The Bay of Islands
For particulars of accommodation mentioned herein see Country Hotel
and Boardinghouse Ouide- gratis at Tourist Bureau.


(5 miles), and to the Loch Ard Gorge, 12 miles distant, whilst
along the course of the river such beauty spots as the Lodge
(4 miles), and Boggy Bridge (10 miles) prove powerful attractions
to picknickers. There is good bathing in the river, and whilst
sport of splendid variety is provided for the gun, excellent
fishing is to be had in Curdie’s River and the Inlet. Boats
and c nveyam es are provided free for the use of their guests
by the proprietors of the houses of tourist accommodation
Port Campbell
Port Campbell, next in order, is a small seaport township
lying on the sandy beach of a pretty little bay, whose en-
trance is protected by rocky ramparts of rugged cliffs.
The drive from Timboon to Port Campbell (12 miles) runs
partly through picturesque bush scenery, and each train during
the week connects with a coach, which arrives at this stop-
ping place at about 5 o’clock in the evening.
A post and telegraph office, school, mechanics’ institute and
free library and police station, together with several private
residences, form the settlement, where excellent accommodation
is obtainable at one hotel and two or three boarding-houses.
The local Progress Association has afforded facilities foi
reaching various points of interest, by forming stairways down
the faces of the more precipitous cliffs, enabling tourists, by
this means, to reach some of the finest fishing grounds, and
to gain points of vantage on lower rocky ledges from which
to view the thunderous onslaughts of the ever restless sea.
Westward, within easy reach, is Two-mile Bay, of special
attraction to fi-hermen, and Point Hesse and Trumpeter Steps
also lie in this direction. Eastward along the coast, the
Sherbrooke River, four miles distant, enters the sea, and a trip
by rowing boat along its course opens up many beauty spots.
A mile farther on a rugged gorge is found, which has been
given the name of “Loch Ard,” to commemorate the awful
wreck of a ship of that name on a May night in the late
seventies. Of the full complement of passengers and crew on
this ill-fated boat, there were but two survivors—Miss Carmichael
and Mr. Tom Pearce, after whom two of the caves in the gorge
are still called. Two miles beyond the Loch Ard gorge, or
seven from Port Campbell, are Gibson’s Beach and the Twelve
Apostles, by which title a group of jagged pinnacles of rock,
rising abruptly from the sea, facing the beach, is known.
There are many other interesting features along the sea front-
age, and amongst the local attractions inland are strawberry
gardens and apple orchards, where in season fruit of superior
quality is procurable.
Special facilities are afforded for safe bathing in the open
ocean, and in the streams flowing into the sea.


Princetown and
Rivernook
Continuing on by same coach service for a further distance
of 12 miles, Princetown, on the coast, at the mouth of the
Gellibrand River, is reached at about 7 p.m. Here are a post
and telegraph office, mechanics’ institute and library, and two
boarding-houses. A c ouple of miles from Princetown is River-
nook House, a first-class boarding establishment, lying midway
between the south bank of the river and the sea coast, and
within ten minutes’ walk of either. Visitors to Rivernook are
met at Princetown by the proprietor of the establishment, and
driven thence to their destination.
Belonging to the house are a motor boat and two or three
rowing boats, which are always at the service of visitors to
Rivernook, and as the stream has been snagged at considerable
expense, and is now navigable for a distance of twelve miles
inland, pleasant excursions up stream may be made by this
means. The coast line in the vicinity of Princetown is studded
with picturesque spots and points of interest, amongst which
may be mentioned Fiji Beach, where, in 1891, a vessel of that
name was wrecked, and Marie Beach, so called on account of
the wreck of the Marie Gabrielle. The rusty anchors of the
two ill-fated vessels may still be seen embedded in the rocks.
Gibson’s Steps, Tunnel Beach, the Cat's Reef and the Grotto,
are all within easy distance along the shore line. Moonlight
Head, four miles to the south-east, presents to the ocean a
solid rock face, with a vertical drop of 480 feet, then slopes
at an angle ot 45 degrees for another 220 feet, rising in all
to a total height of about 700 feet.
The rock fishing in the ocean is exciting sport, and good
hauls of sweep and rock cod are frequently made, whilst in
the river mullet and blackfish abound, and brown and English
trout, introduced by the Colac Shire Council some years ago,
have thriven splendidly, as several fine specimens have been
taken from the stream in recent years.
Game bags may be easily filled, as rabbits, hares and wild
fowl abound on the river and river flats.
Melbourne to Timboon —Seaside Fares —Excursion, 30/4 Ist
class, 20/3 2nd class.
Combined rail and coach:—
Melbourne (via Timboon) to—
Ist class. 2nd class.
Peterborough ... ... 37/10 ... 27/9
Port Campbell ... ... 37/10 ... 27/9
Rivernook ... ... 45/4 ... 35/3
issued during summer season only, and available for two
months’ return. Journey may be broken at Camperdown for
one day, going and returning.




Warrna m bool
One hundred and sixty-six miles from Melbourne. Trains
leave Spencer-street station twice daily, one in the morning
and one in the afternoon.
The town is situated on Lady Bay, and stands on an
elevated and picturesque spot, overlooking the Southern Ocean.
It is well laid out, and its broad clean streets boast of many
substantial public and business premises It is a busy seaport
town, and the Breakwater constructed of huge concrete blocks
to form a harbour for the shipping plying to and from the
port is a fine example of marine engineering. Foremost
amongst the public buildings are the Town Hall, near to which
is the Museum, containing a large collection of relics of the
early days of Victoria, the Art Gallery, and the Mechanics’
Institute, with well-stocked shelves and a billiard room for
the use of subscribers The corporation swi nming baths and
hot sea-water baths are centrally situated, being within a
couple of minutes' walk of the post office or railway station.
They are managed by the town council, and the concrete
swimming baths are, by means of pumps, kept continuously
full of fresh sea water. The hot sea-water baths are of marble,
and are greatly in demand as a tonic in nervous and rheumatic
affections.
Warrnambool is possessed of many fine parks and gardens—■
notably the botanic gardens, in the centre of the town, which
have added to their botanical attractions aviaries of birds and
some kangaroos. Other reserves are the Albert, Victoria and
Friendly Societies’ Parks, and the racecourse, within easy
distance of the town, is claimed to be the best natural
cross-country course in the State.
The coast-line, and the country surrounding the town,
provide numerous interesting excursions, ’buses running
frequently to Shelly Beach, one of the principal features of
the coast, at a nominal fare. Here the comfort of visitors has
been studied by the addition of bridges and pathways, and the
placing of seats in suitable positions.
There is also a convenient ’bus service to the Hopkins
River, two miles from town. Steamers, sailing or rowing boats
may be obtained for trips on the navigable portion of the river,
a distance of some six miles up stream. The Hopkins Falls, a
splendid spectacle when the river is swol en by rain, are about
ten miles from WarrnamDool. Other favourite drives in the
vicinity are to Jubilee Park, Tower Hill, Lake Wangoom, the
coastal caves, the Hermit’s Cave and many other interesting
excursions.
Swimming may be indulged in either in the Hopkins River
or off the long stretch of firm sand on the shore of Lady Bay,
which, shelving gently into the sea, forms one of the finest
and best sheltered bathing beaches in Victoria. Separate
bathing boxes are provided as dressing rooms, for ladies and
gentlemen, and an attendant watches over the safety of bathers.


The fishing and shooting are good, and comprise English
trout, mullet, perch and bream, and wild fowl are plentiful in
season.
Accommodation is obtainable for any number of visitors,
as there are 26 hotels and two coffee palaces.
Visitors desiring of making a sea trip may travel to
Warrnambool by one of the coastal steamers, which leave
Melbourne, as advertised, twice a week, and make the passage
in about sixteen hours.
FARES.
Rail from Melbourne (Seaside Excursion) —Ist class, 33/7;
2nd class, 22/5 (issued during summer months only). 1
Boat Agents—Western District S.S. Company.
Boat from Melbourne —Saloon, single 12/- ; return, 18/-;
steerage (no return tickets issued), 7/6 each way.
Meals are not included in passage money, but may be
obtained on board at 1/6 saloon, 1/- steerage.
Return tickets available three months.
Port Fairy
One hundred and eighty-seven miles from Melbourne. Con-
venient morning and afternoon trains from Spencer-street Station.
Port Fairy is a substantially-built town at the mouth of
the Moyne River, the channel of which is kept clear by means
of training walls, so that vessels drawing 11 feet of water are
able to come up to the wharf. The river offers splendid
facilities for boating and fishing, rowing and sailing boats
being always available.
Near the foreshore, and lying between the eastern beach
and the river, a considerable area has been reserved for a
public pleasure ground, in the centre of which is the cricket
and football oval, surrounded by a double ring of shade trees.
These, together with gardens and lawns, combine to form
splendid picnic grounds, greatly in favour during the summer
as an excursion centre for all parts of the Western district.
The south beach is a charming combination of rocky and
sandy beach, where dressing boxes have been provided for lady
and gentlemen bathers, who find here an opportunity for safe
open sea bathing, possibly unobtainable elsewhere in Australia,
as a reef lying about one hundred yards distant from the
beach provides natural protection against danger from either
breakers or sharks, the area thus enclosed being locally known
as Boarding School Bay.
For the benefit and enjoyment of picnic parties a shelter-
shed, with tables, seats and water tank, together with stone
fire-places, has been provided.
The capitally laid out golf links (a 9-hole course) lie about
5 minutes’ walk from the town, a tennis court and croquet
lawn are situated in the public gardens, and the bowling green
is close to the railway station. Hot and cold sea-water baths
may be taken within the town.


Five miles from Port Fairy, along the beach, are the
Crags, a group of rugged and fantastic cliffs, the frequent
haunt of fishermen in quest of crayfish, trumpeter, and other
choice varieties. The Port Fairy lighthouse is located on
Griffith’s Island, another popular picnic spot, and a bridge has
been thrown across the narrow inlet which separates it from
the mainland. Nine miles north is Tower Hill, with its lake
nestling below, the objective of a pleasant drive. Anglers will
find special attractions at Yambuk Lake and the Fitzroy River,
where the fishing is excellent, and boats, tents, etc., are always
available.
A most enjoyable sail is that to Julia Percy Island, II
miles distant. It has a total area of about one square mile,
and is almost flat on the surface, which rises to a height of
100 feet above sea level, and is the home of thousands of seals,
which disport themselves upon the ledge at the foot of the cliffs,
lying a few feet above water level. On the island are two
caves —one a charming fern cave, with fresh water spring and
tiny waterfall, the other the haunt of huge seals.
In addition to the excellent fishing, good shooting is
obtainable in proper season.
Accommodation is at all times procurable, there being
several good hotels and boarding-houses, with moderate tariffs.
Port Fairy is a port of call of the Western District line of
steamers, which run a frequent service, the journey occupying
about 18 hours.
FARES.
Rail from Melbourne (Seaside Excursion, issued during
summer months only), Ist class, 37/10; second class, 25/2.
Boat from Melbourne —Saloon, single, 12/-; return, 18/ .
Steerage, 7/6 each way (no return tickets issued).
Meals are not included in passage money, but may be
obtained on board at 1/6 saloon, 1/- steerage.
Return tickets available three months—Boat Agents, Western
District S.S. Co.
Portland
Two hundred and fifty-two miles from Melbourne, on Port-
land Bay. One morning train daily from Spencer-street Station.
Portland is one of the oldest settlements in the State, for
in 1834 hither came the Henty Brothers to form the whaling
establishment, which grew by degrees into the present important
town. Here was born the first white child in the State, and
here also was ploughed the first furrow on Victoria’s fertile
bosom. The bay, which in those early historical days sheltered
a whaling fleet, has now, by the erection of the lengthy deep-
water pier, been made available for the accommodation of the
large ocean-going steamers engaged in the export of produce.
It is a substantially-built town, adorned with well-laid-out
botanical gardens, lying a quarter of a mile post


Magnus, Photo, Portland.


office, and containing tennis courts, Swings, and ornamental
lagoons, sheltered from the extremes of hot and cold weather
by well-grown pine trees.
The municipal swimming baths have been brought to their
present state of up-to-date completeness by the expenditure of
large suras of money.
The climate is mild and stimulating, and the constant sea
breezes from the Southern Ocean are refreshing to the jaded
visitor from inland.
The social aspect of life is fostered by pleasant companionship
on the local golf links, tennis courts and bowling greens.
Many picturesque and interesting points in the coastal
scenery will attract the attention of visitors, notably Cape
Grant, four miles distant, where there is splendid fishing in
the rock holes on the coast, and Cape Bridgewater (16 miles).
Near to the latter point are the Bridgewater Lakes, famed for
their boating and fishing ; and the Blowholes, near the same
cape, are magnificent examples of coastal scenery, and the caves
are well worth a visit. Eight miles south-west of Portland is
Cape Nelson, with its lighthouse open to inspection by visitors ;
here picknickers are rewarded by a combination of attractions,
fine scenery, good fishing and shooting. Seven miles west of
the town are the well-known Limestone Caves, in Batt’s
Ridges, containing many fine stalactites and stalagmites.
A sheltered bathing ground on the beach at Lady Bay,
one mile distant, is justly popular with family picnic parties,
and other resorts frequently in favour are Black-nose Point
(3 miles), Fern Tree Gully (3 miles), Flat Rock (4 miles), and
the rivers Surry (9 miles) and Fitzroy (14 miles).
Tourists desiring to visit any of the above attractions may
depend upon securing suitable conveyances at the local livery
stables at reasonable rates, and those wishing to make an
excursion by sailing boat to Julia Percy Island (see also Port
Fairy), may arrange with one of the local fishermen for their
transport.
Good accommodation for visitors is available at two or
three comfortable hotels, and a couple of boarding-houses.
There is a regular steamer service run between Melbourne
and Portland, the trip taking about 22 hours, and as the boats
occasionally go farther on to South Australian south-eastern
ports, it is possible to make the return trip from Portland to
these points of call at a very moderate cost.
FARES.
Rail from Melbourne (Seaside Excursion, issued during
summer months only), Ist class 50/10; 2nd class, 33/11.
Boat from Melbourne —Saloon, single, 14/6; return, 22/6.
Steerage, 9/6 each way (no return tickets issued).
Meals are not included in passage money, but may be
obtained on board at 1/6 saloon, 1/- steerage.
Return tickets available three months —Boat Agents,
Western District S. S. Coy.


SPECIAL ocean excursions...
1350 Miles at Sea.
TEN DAYS’ HOLIDAY—MELBOURNE
TO TASMANIA, EDEN AND SYDNEY.
Regular Fortnightly Round Trips by the Popular S.S. SYDNEY (3000 tons)
Leaving Melbourne every alternate Wednesday, calling at STANLEY, BURNIE and
DEVONPORT (Tasmania), EDEN (Twofold Bay), arriving Sydney early Monday
morning. Leaves Sydney on return Thursday afternoon, calls Eden, reaching Mel-
bourne early Sunday morning.
Cheap Fares —SALOON ROUND TRIP, £5; THIRD CLASS ROUND
TRIP, £2 ss. Full particulars on application.
MELBOURNE STEAMSHIP CO. LTD
OFFICES AT ALL PORTS 25 KING STREET.


Beautiful
Rings
If you are in search of an
engagement or dress ring,
you are sure of satisfac-
tion litre. Every ring we
of.er is iBct. gold; every
stone is real and true to
name. Imitation jewel-
lery is a thing we do not
touch. The fact that we
purchase all our stones
direct from the cutters
and make every ring in
our workrooms enables
us to keep the prices low,
and to guarantee their
quality and workmanship.
Prices range from £i to
£l5O. Write for our Ring
Catalogue, or better still,
call and see the rings
themselves.
NEWMAN’S
VICE-REGAL JEWELLERS (EST «?“
84-86 ELIZABETH-STBEET, MELBOURNE
(One door from Colllns-street). l.b.w,


Melbourne Ferries
PROPRIETARY LIMITED,
375 COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE.
S.S. Williamstown.
Fare 6d. Return.
S.S. “Williamstown” leaves Port Melbourne hourly
for Williamstown. Catch train from Flinders-street
Station, \ to each hour.
Steamers available for Charter for private and
picnic parties from £l2 per day, and £7 per after-
noon or night.
’Phone 967 and 7303 GentraS


AT THE SEASIDE SO REFRESHING!
1 13 »«" 1 18
ALL GROCERS.
WHOLESALE:
PRICE, GRIFFITHS & CO., 516 l, s?r l eet oluws
The Gippsland Lakes.
Combined Rail and Steamer Tickets
Via SALE—7O MILES OF SMOOTH WATER.
25 Miles from Bairnsdale to Cunninghame by
/TS\ Boat.
A DELIGHTFUL TRIP.
Excellent Fishing and Shooting.
laps and Booklets and all Information on application to .
TOURIST BUREAU,
COLLINS and SWANSTON STREETS,
MELBOURNE.


The Popular Trip..
Mi Buffalo
A WEEK’S VISIT FOR
£4 I Os.
ALL TRANSIT, ACCOMMODATION AND OTHER CHARGES
INCLODED.
The Inclusive Excursion
to Healesville
Six Days - - £3 covers all.
RAIL AND HOTEL CHARGES, AND DRAG TRIPS
DAILY.
APPLY
TOURIST BUREAU,
CR. COLLINS AND SWANSTON STREETS,
’i hone 174. MELBOURNE.


Where to Week-end
On the Hills...
Warburton
Healesville
Olinda
Sassafras
Belgrave
Emerald
Daylesford
Macedon
By the Sea...
Mornington
Queenscliff
San Remo
Frankston
Geelong
Cowes
Flinders
Dromana
Rates for Transport, Hotel Accommodation and
general particulars, enquire
TOURIST BUREAU,
Corner Collins and Swanston Sts., Melbourne.
48


3 1508 02009955 7


