

ATHEISM
PHILOSOPHICALLY REFUTED
HUGH JUNOR BROWNE
“ One God and Father of all , who Is above, all, dial throwjh all, and
in you all. ’’—Ephesians iv. 6.
There’s not a blade of grass that grows
From out the humble sod
But proves intelligence therein.
And testifies of God.
GEORGE ROBERTSON & COMPANY
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, ADELAIDE, AND BRISBANE
1887




ATHEISM PHILOSOPHICALLY REFUTED,
That the tendency of modern thought among the more highly
educated classes is towards Atheism, few who are well informed on
the subject will deny. This being the case, I hold it to be the duty
of anyone who has thought out the matter to submit, for the
consideration of others, the reasons which have caused him to adopt
a different opinion thereon, since it is alone by the consideration of
opposite views that truth is arrived at. It is only the narrow-
minded and bigoted who obstinately refuse to give a calm and
dispassionate consideration to opinions which are antagonistic to
their own, thereby showing that they prefer their pet theories to
the truth. The earnest truth-seeker, more rationally and philo-
sophically, carefully compares the opinions of those who differ with
him, in order to ascertain how far bis own views are correct, and,
with the learned Sir Humphrey Davy, he candidly acknowledges
that “ facts are more useful when they contradict than when they
support received theories.” The truly philosophic inquirer divests
himself of all prejudice, and excludes no opinion from his considera-
tion on account of its antagonism with the views which he
entertains. He wisely holds his opinions of to-day as but stepping-
stones on which to rise to higher, nobler, and more correct views on
the morrow. It is, I maintain, through the general stagnation of
thought for many centuries past regarding God and religion, while
during that time wonderful advancement has taken place in the
arts and sciences, that has caused Atheism to become so prevalent
among the more enlightened portion of the community; and unless
in the future a more liberal course is pursued by theologians, who
are mainly responsible for this state of things, and their doctrines
are greatly modified, so as to harmonize with the ascertained facts of
science, the Atheists’ ranks will for a certainty be increased by
much larger accessions than at present. I would respectfully say to
all who are honest, “Why not, instead of trying by sophistry to
reconcile error with truth, look facts straight in the face, and-
endeavour with a good grace to so modify the old as to bring it into
harmony with the new order of things, before, through the force of
circumstances, you are compelled to do so 1 Bear in mind that an
honourable retreat is better than a temporary victory gained with
disgrace.”


There cannot possibly be inharmony between true religion and
science, since the'former is but the higher branch of the latter ; there-
fore, wherever there is the slightest conflict between what is termed
religion and natural facts, we may rest assured that the former is at
fault and requires amendment, and the sooner this is acknowledged
and acted on the better for the cause of religion. The barefaced
torturing of Biblical statements commonly resorted to in order to
endeavour to make them harmonize with the ascertained facts of
science, instead of convincing, only disgusts philosophic minds.
Such tactics only serve to hoodwink the credulous and confirm time-
honoured falsities, and to show how unscrupulous are the men who
profess to do the religious thinking for the masses, and who, as a
rule, whenever their worldly interests are at stake, “ love darkness
rather than the light,” and impudently denounce those whom their
own prevarications have been mainly instrumental in causing to
become atheists. A few of the more liberally minded, however, act
otherwise; for instance, the Rev. David Watson, of Paisley, is
reported to have made the following candid acknowledgment
“ The great, the wise, and the mighty are not with us. That I fear
we must all own to, however much we may grieve to say so; and
the more we read of the history, the poetry, the biography, and the
literature of the age, the more we will think so. The best thought,
the widest knowledge, and the deepest philosophy have discarded
our church. . . . They are not even nominally with us. They
look not for our heaven, they fear not our hell. They detest what
they call the inhumanities of our creed. . . . Why are these,
and such-like men, without the pale of the Christian Church ? Not
that they are unfit—we own that; but we are unworthy of them,
and by the mob-force of our ignorant numbers have driven them
out. They shun us because of our ignorant misconceptions of
heaven, man, and God. They feel our evil communications corrupt-
ing their good manners ; they feel our limited vision narrowing the
infinitude of the horizon; and, therefore, as an indispensable to the
very existence of their souls, they separate themselves from us, and
forsake —and greatly unwilling are many of them to do so—the
worship with us of our common God.”
I may here observe that there are two phases of Atheism. There
is a positive negation, and a milder form that is known by the name
of Agnosticism, which is a tacit denial of the existence of God on
the ground of no evidence. The latter, which implies almost the
same as the former, but is less pronounced, is generally adopted by
the timorous because it is not so unpopular as the former. In
whichever phase it is considered, Atheism is the natural revolt of
enlightened reason against the absurd and contemptible views
regarding God and the destiny of man popularly taught in the
churches—views which all who are unprejudiced must, if candid,
acknowledge are a disgrace to the intelligence of the age in which
we live, and which could have found no place in the mind of any
sane individual unless his judgment had been warped when young,
before he was capable of reasoning.


If this assertion is called in question, let me ask—ls not God
popularly represented as having created man, pronounced him good,
found him bad, repented having created him, resolved to destroy
not only him but the whole vegetable and animal creation;
then repented having done so, and resolved never to do it again,
giving as a sign thereof the rainbow, which science has demon-
strated is simply caused by the refraction and reflection of the
Sun’s rays 1 Also as having made a broad path, leading to destruc-
tion, for the great majority of the race, and a narrow path,
leading to happiness, for a select few who prostitute their
reason at the shrine of folly and believe that which is repugnant
to the moral consciousness in man if it has not been perverted by
false teaching? It is true that these childish representations and the
unphilosophic tria juncta in uno theory of popular theology, in
which the apotheosized Jesus is made the equal of the Infinite, if
not in some respects superior, may suit the credulous and unques-
tioning mind, but they can never satisfy the rational and contem-
plative, whose faith is based on the stern logic of facts and supported
both by evidence and reason.
Another cause for the prevailing tendency of Atheism on the part
of the more intelligent of the community is the persistency with
which the belief in miracles is still maintained by the bigoted, in the
face of palpable evidence in Nature to the contrary. Common sense
points out that in a Universe of law there can be no such thing as
a miracle, as that term is commonly defined to be an exception to,
or a violation of law ; for, as has been truly observed, “ the cosmos
admits no miracle but its own creation—no insoluble mystery but
the existence of God.” What has been related as having taken
place in ignorant and superstitious times and described as miraculous
events, if they actually occurred as narrated, were mere anticipations
of human knowledge—-natural phenomena which, for the time,
exceeded human powers of comprehension, but which will not
always do so. A mystery ceases to be such as soon as the modus
operandi connected therewith becomes known. For instance,
savages seeing an aeronaut descend in a balloon would describe it as
a miraculous event, but no educated person would believe it to be
so, merely on the authority of ignorant people. Miracles are totally
and palpably irreconcilable with the inviolability of law as made
known through Nature’s divine revelations, consequently they are
now ruled out of court by all except the bigoted, who stubbornly
pin their faith to the childish fictions of the dead past, and
persistently ignore the scientific evidence to the contrary of the
living present —for
“ Faith, fanatic faith, once wedded fast
To some dear falsehood, hugs it to the last.”
The blasphemous dogma of eternal torment has also in the past
been the cause of many rejecting the popular theology, and, in its
stead, embracing Atheism. Even theologians themselves have at
last become so thoroughly ashamed of this impious doctrine, which


formerly was one of the leading themes for the clergy to dilate on
from the pulpit, that they have struck the word Hell entirely out of
the Bible, in the latest revised edition, as being too vulgar an expres-
sion for refined ears, and have substituted the more ambiguous word
Sheol in its place. Probably in the next revision of the book the
word Paradise will be adopted in place of Heaven, so that to coming
generations the once familiar terms Heaven and Hell will be
unknown, and thus one incentive to adopt Atheism will be removed.
Human frailty will then, doubtless, be substituted for original sin,
and individual selfishness for a personal devil, of whose existence
many of the adherents to dogmatic theology even now openly express
their disbelief, as being inconsistent with a beneficent Deity.
Most people, on awakening to the utter absurdities they have
been taught under the name of religion, feel so disgusted with the
deception and misrepresentation, conscious or unconscious, of those
whom they were taught to look up to with reverence and respect, and
not less so with their own credulity in believing such absurdities,
that instead of, as they otherwise would have done, examining the
matter dispassionately for themselves, they foolishly throw aside
the whole as being utterly false and totally unworthy of the
slightest consideration. The consequence of this is that they either
become openly avowed Atheists or tacit disbelievers in God and
religion of any kind, and they stubbornly refuse, through pride of
intellect and false prejudice, to listen to those who, while equally
opposed to the false views regarding God and religion taught them
when young, have adopted the more rational course of selecting the
truth from the mass of error with which it has, in the interests
of priestcraft, been mixed up ; thereby adopting the wise and rational
injunction of proving all things and holding fast that which is true
and good.
This utter indifference to truth by many, because it is not confined
within the boards of a book or the teachings of a church, is the
worst form of Atheism, because it is not amenable to reason : as has
been truly observed, “none are so blind as those who wont see.”
On the other hand, those who adhere tenaciously to the dogmatic
beliefs in which they have been brought up, and who shrink from
examining and questioning any doctrine inculcated in the creed in
which they have been reared are unworthy of being called rational
beings ; like parrots, they only repeat what they have been taught,
and while they inconsistently use their reason to its fullest extent
in defence of their conflicting creeds, they foolishly refuse to use it
in the examination as to the rationality and truthfulness of what
they have been taught to believe. Such minds are generally shocked
at any views submitted for their consideration which deviate from
the opinions entertained by them, however superior, truer, and more
rational such views may be to those held by them. They per-
sistently ignore the palpable fact that if truth be an essential
requisite of religion the most expansive exercise of man’s reasoning
faculties are demanded of him in the investigation of that which
is of such vast importance to all. The daily increasing opposition


of science to the popularly taught religious dogmas is, however,
beginning to tell even on the most conservative minds, and as in the
past wherever the discoveries of science have conflicted with the
teachings of the church the latter have had eventually to give way,
so will it be in the future, for error is transient, while truth is
enduring.
Owing to the false teachings of the past, under the name of
religion, to many God is as yet inconceivable to their limited
comprehension of anything beyond the gross material. They cannot
conceive Deity disrobed of the vestments with which ignorance has
encumbered Him. They attribute to the Infinite the passions and
weaknesses of man’s lower nature, cooping Him up in a circumscribed
locality called Heaven, and decorating Him in the questionable
splendour of human invention, totally blind to the fact that the two
ideas of a localized God and of a universally diffused Spirit are
utterly irreconcilable. The time, however, is approaching when,
owing to the irresistible advance of human knowledge, higher and
truer views of God will be adopted than those of the ignorant past,
in which God has been concealed by the mists of ignorance and
superstition. Already the old anthropomorphic conception of Deity
being an immense Oriental despot seated on a great white throne
above the clouds, who blesses the few and condemns the many, is
gradually, by the more liberally minded of churchmen, being-
discarded for a more rational view of God as the Divine presence
imminent in all things, an eternal Energy animating universal
Nature, and manifesting intelligence through all her phenomena.
As showing the inconsistency of the priestly dogmas still popularly
taught in the churches, it has been wisely asked—
‘ Shall man condemn his race to hell
Unless they bend in pompous form—
Tell ns that all, for one who fell,
Must perish in a deathless storm ?
Shall each pretend to reach the skies,
Yet doom his brother to expire,
Whose soul a different hope supplies,
Or doctrines less severe inspire ?
Shall these, by creeds they can’t expound,
Prepare a fancied bliss or woe ?
Shall reptiles, grovelling on the ground,
Forthwith to highest heavens go ?
Shall man confine his Maker’s sway
To Gothic domes of mouldering stone—
Whose temple is the face of day,
Infinite space His boundless throne ? ” *
A theology which is based on an erroneous and irrational concep-
tion of God must sooner or later come to an end, however revered it
may be for its antiquity and however popular it may be for the
respectability which an adherence thereto may carry with it; and
this will take place, notwithstanding the enormous wealth annually
expended in its support, and the indefatigable efforts continually
NOTH.—I have, taken the liberty of slightly varying the Original of the above lines.


being made by an influential and astute priesthood to perpetuate it
in the face of ascertained facts of Nature which clearly and forcibly
contradict and refute it.
It is on the false and unphilosophic conceptions regarding God
and man’s origin and destiny, formed in ignorant and superstitioiis
times, that the divergent and irrational religious superstructures
still popular have been built. And these will continue to exist so
long as men refrain from using their divine faculty of reason in
religious matters as they do in all else, on the false assumption that
Nature has endowed them with such a godless reason that if they
do so it well lead them to Atheism, or to a denial of the Supreme
Source from which their reason is derived. Can anything be more
unphilosophical than this ? Yet such is the irrational assumption
still prevalent even among many who are looked up to by the
public for their philosophical attainments. I may remind you that
the Greek sages were considered wise until following generations
found out they were fools in many of their conclusions. Ido not
know which are the most irrational, those who, on assumed authority,
ascribe to the Infinite the weaknesses and petty passions of frail
humanity, such as jealousy, wrath, vengeance, &c., or those who, on
account of the absurdity of such a conception, rush off to the other
extremity of the pendulum and deny His existence in toto. lam
rather inclined, however, to believe that the former are the more
irrational of the two; for to assume that God has endowed us with
the faculty of reason for the purpose of misleading us in religion is,
I consider, worse than Atheism —for the one is contumely, while the
other is mere negation.
The immutability of law, through the demonstration of natural facts,
is now being acknowledged by many as more worthy of acceptance
than the antiquated notion that everything that occurs in Nature
is the result of a special fiat of the Almighty. To the prejudiced
and unreasoning mind, however, a God fashioned like unto man seems
still to be necessary, while to the philosophical such a conception of
Deity is no longer worthy of his retention. The latter, more
rationally, views the Infinite as pure Spirit, the source of all light,
life, and intelligence—an ever-present living Power diffused
throughout the inconceivable immensity of space and acting
incessantly, not blindly, but with a purpose, in and through all
things. Well might it be asked of old, “ Who is able to build Him
an house, seeing the heaven and heaven of heavens cannot contain
Him ?” and, as the poet has truly stated—
“ From God we spring, whom man can never trace,
Though seen, heard, tasted, felt in every place ;
The loneliest spot, by mortal seldom trod—
The crowded city—all are full of God—
Ocean and lake—for God is all in all,
And we are all His offspring.”
The truly rational thinker holds that all parts of Nature are the
expressions of the Divine soul within, and that, however incon-
gruous many of the operations of Nature may appear to him at


present, they will, through the inevitable law of progress, eventually
harmonize into a perfect whole. He further holds that so infinite
and wonderful is the power of God that, in giving form to the
innumerable Suns and Planets with which space is studded, each of
which may be said to represent a thought of God, He gave to all
certain fixed and immutable laws, which are so transcendently
perfect that they are adapted for every variety of change which
each may undergo during the countless ages necessary for their
development. He discards as unworthy of his acceptance the old
doctrine of miraculous Divine intervention, because this involves
the necessity of amendment of natural law as occasion may require,
thereby implying imperfections on the part of God, with whom there
is neither variableness nor shadow of turning. The manifestations
of Nature everywhere reveal a system of inviolate order, and not,
as popularly taught, one subject to variations by special fiats of Deity.
A Universe divinely animated throughout, and gradually evolving
by fixed and perfect laws, is, I maintain, incomparably superior to
one the development of which is supposed to be dependent on the
intervention of a capricious and changeable Ruler. As has been
truly observed —“ Through every star, through every blade of grass,
and through every living soul, the glory of a present God still
beams.” “ All Nature is sanctified by the Deity made manifest
therein.” Also, there is “ one God and Father of all, who is above
all, and through all, and in you all ” (Paul must evidently have
been a Pantheist when he wrote this). As the poet has truly
written—
“ Creation’s wondrous works and laws
Denote God’s presence there :
The Infinite, th’ Eternal Cause
Revealing everywhere
A wondrous chain through Nature runs,
Which shows one grand design,
Through mind and matter, worlds and suns,
Proclaiming Power Divine.”
Man being finite he can only have finite conceptions of the
Infinite. He cannot demonstrate to others the existence of God
any more than he can solve the problem of infinity, measure the
Cause of causation by figures, or fashion the Infinite through words ;
he can merely state his imperfect conceptions of Deity for the con-
sideration of his fellow men. The mind of each individual being
different from all others, owing to varying capacities, experiences,
and knowledge, the conceptions regarding God of no two men can
absolutely agree. The one who entertains the most reasonable
views of Deity, must, however, be the neai'est to the truth ; for,
although human reason is not infallible, it is the only arbiter
between truth and error which we possess, and therefore must be
our highest authority. Man’s conceptions of God, unless blinded by
superstitious prejudice, must, like his conceptions of Nature, advance
as increased knowledge is gained, though his highest ideality of Deity
must always fall infinitely short of the reality.


The nature and attributes of God, it is true, are only to be learnt,
as far as the human faculties are capable of comprehending them,
by the observation and contemplation of the varied phenomena
manifested in Nature, in the study of which we observe combination,
selection, growth, evolution, purpose, &c. These prove that the
Divine Essence which vivifies all is not working blindly, but that
there is a method in Nature’s laws; and method, I maintain,
implies intelligence, and intelligence implies mind, because without
intelligence there could be no method. I also maintain that the
regularity of the motion of the numerous orbs of our solar system, as
is proved by the exactitude with which astronomers can prognosticate
eclipses, is evidence of the existence of method, and this of itself
annihilates the materialistic theory of blind chance, which implies
irregularity and confusion. That all phenomena occur by the action
of the natural and fixed laws of God, and are not the result of
special fiats of the Deity, we have evidence on all sides ; and all
scientific discovery points to the fact of incessant progress through
ever-changing forms to a deeper question, a more profound reality,
than mere physical evolution. Even Herbert Spencer, notwith-
standing his leaning towards Agnosticism, candidly acknowledges, in
the Nineteenth Century of January, 1881, that “ the searcher after
truth, in contemplating the Universe, will find that amid the
mysteries, which become the more mysterious the more they are
thought about (1), there will remain the one absolute certainty that
he is ever in presence of an Infinite and Eternal Energy, from
which all things proceed.” That this Energy is all-pervading, and
that it manifests intelligence in every phenomenon, we have
incontrovertible evidence, for throughout all Nature is visible the
operation of an intelligent Power ; the action of Perfection on
imperfection ever tending to develop higher and still higher forms
of life, until man, the crowning work of development, appears
endowed with God-like intelligence. Thus it is palpable that the
doctrine of materialistic evolution is deficient, and requires a Divine
Evolutor to complete it, for even
“ Every drop of water,
Every grain of sand,
Proclaims, within, its Maker—
An unseen, loving hand.”
A believer in evolution cannot, I hold, consistently say he does not
believe in a directing Intelligence; for, if natural selection results in
the “survival of the fittest,” it is self-evident that intelligence is
manifested in the selection, and that intelligence, I maintain,
must have a source, unless the old Latin adage Ex nihilo nihil fit
is proved to be false. Most people are misled by the outward
manifestation, and overlook the actuating, directing, and enduring
principle within. They foolishly ignore the fact that everything
which they behold is but the outward and visible sign of an inner
reality, of which the physical is but the external manifestation.
That a finite cannot co-exist with an infinite is an argument


frequently employed by a certain class of Atheists to disprove the
existence of God. They might just as reasonably assert that a part
cannot co-exist with the whole. It has also been urged that if
intelligence and goodness indicate a source, on the same principle
ignorance and evil must likewise indicate a source; but this is
fallacious, because the former, like light, which has a source, are
absolute; while the latter, like darkness, which is merely the
absence of light, are relative, for as soon as rays of light are
admitted, darkness is dissipated; so in like manner knowledge
dispels ignorance and goodness vice. Another common assertion by
Atheists is that force is but an attribute of matter; but they
studiously omit to inform us whence the intelligence manifested in
force is derived. They say that the grey pulp of man’s brain
secretes thought, which is as unreasonable as to assert that the
telegraph wire secretes intelligence; yet they shrink from main-
taining that the course of history and all that are called human
affairs are due to purely molecular agency and that we are what we
are and do what we do as the atoms form and guide us, thereby
indicating that secretly they suspect that there is something beyond
the soulless philosophy which they uphold. If they would only
open their eyes and look on the works of Nature around them they
would find that
“ There’s not a place on Earth’s vast round,
In ocean’s deep, or air,
Where skill and wisdom are not found —
For God is everywhere.
Around, beneath, below, above,
Wherever space extends,
There God displays His boundless love,
And power with mercy blends. ”
The man who, because he cannot comprehend the Infinite, denies
the existence of Deity, and declares that there is no room for God
in the Universe, is unworthy of argument, for the very power by
which he is enabled to rnake this assertion is, in itself, proof of the
existence of intelligence in him, though it may not be of a very
high order; and this intelligence must, like everything else in
Nature, have a source. I might as rationally declare that, whilst I
speak, there is no life in me. As said of old, “ The heavens declare
the glory of God, and the firmament showeth His handiwork.” Go
study the skies and the stars therein ; mark the Sun, the Moon,
and the Planets, as they roll on, day by day, in their several orbits ;
meditate on the depths of the Earth, with its stores of minerals ;
gaze on the vast expanse of waters, with their hidden treasures;
behold the wonders of Nature in the vegetable world ; examine the
birds, the beasts, the most insignificant insects; yea, read the
wisdom of the great Evolvcr of the whole, His mighty power, and
His rich and varied goodness; and say if these do not proclaim
with silent eloquence a Divine Energy—an Eternal Cause through
all and in all. As the poet has truly said in the old familiar
lines—


“ The spacious firmament on high,
With all the blue ethereal sky
And spangled heavens, a shining frame,
Their Great Original proclaim.
“ The unwearied Sun, from day to day,
Does his Creator’s power display,
And publishes to every land
The work of an Almighty hand.
“ Soon as the evening shades prevail
The Moon takes up the wondrous tale,
And nightly to the listening Earth
Repeats the story of her birth.
“ While all the stars that round her burn,
And all the planets in their turn,
Confirm the tidings as they roll,
And spread the truth from pole to pole.
“ What though in solemn silence all
Move round yon bright celestial ball,
What though no real voice nor sound
Amidst those radiant orbs be found—
“ In Reason’s ear they all rejoice,
And utter forth a glorious voice,
For ever singing as they shine,
‘ The hand that made us is Divine. ’ ”
The Universe is, in fact, the external expression of the One
Existence, that indwelling and ever-present Power whom we call
God, who is therefore multiform, as being in all things, and unity,
as comprehending all ; for if God does not include all, He must only
be part, and if so, He cannot be infinite. Matter is but the garment
of the Deity, who is not a naked Soul, or a Spirit without a body, as
falsely taught j and all phenomena are modes of God and manifest-
ations of His presence. Every atom that exists is, consequently, an
infinitesimal part of the garment of infinitude, and the unerring
precision with which every atom is moved demonstrates that intelli-
gence is manifested throughout all matter. Atoms being atomic
centres of force —mediums through which intelligence flows—it
follows that all external Nature is but the materialized expression
of the invisible Soul therein, which gives to every atom an inherent
power of operation ; consequently there is no such thing as inert
matter.
The most learned scientists have to admit that matter is only
known through its force, and that the latter is only known by its
effects; also, that matter, in its ultimate nature, is as incompre-
hensible as that ever-present Power by which it is energized. All
scientists are agreed that matter is indestructible, and if this be the
case, it must of necessity be eternal; and surely if the garment is
everlasting we are justified in concluding that the indwelling Power
which gives to matter its form is equally enduring. The effect of
the action of this ever-present Energy on matter is progressive
change therein, an ever-working towards what is good, so as to bring
the imperfect garment nearer to the perfection of its indwelling,


though unseen, Power. While, therefore, change and development
are continually going on in matter, “ the Great Spirit,” its incom-
prehensible Evolver, remains the same, yesterday, to-day, and for
ever. As Mrs. E. L. W T atson has wisely written—
“ The heart of Nature is not cold,
But throbs with love’s electric fire,
That shapes the soft material mould
To meet the Spirit’s swift desire.
“ She spreads her shadow-wings at night,
And men with awe the act behold ;
When lo ! her countless spheres of light
Sift down their beams of starry gold.
“ She piles the heavens high with storm ;
We question her with kite and key,
And lightning couriers straightway swarm
To bear our thoughts o’er land and sea.
“ What we call matter is not free,
’Tis subject to the law of mind—
The garment of infinity,
Or God and Nature e’er combined.
‘ ‘ And every need of human life
Is but the will of God expressed ;
And all the realms of space are rife
With thoughts of God in matter dressed.”
Pantheism, which is the happy mean between Superstition and
Materialism, acknowledges that God is the infinite Soul of universal
Nature, not outside and apart from it—the all-sustaining principle
pervading all forms of matter and occupying all space—-the living
power of good personified everywhere, making all things divine
through His presence—the Great Spirit, who permeates and controls
all things, who is self-existent, yet is dependent on matter in some
state for expression, consequently mind and matter are inseparably
connected together —the One Existence who is in and around us,
acting through all things, at all times, and in all places, ever
changing in the external, but in the internal for ever remaining the
same, without increase or diminution —the Supreme Power, who is
both personal and impersonal, and who finds expression more
perfectly through the human organism than in any of the lower
forms of matter, though manifesting in all according to their nature.
As an evidence of this One Existence and the unity of purpose in
all phenomena, Pantheism points to the correlation and transmuta-
tion of forces and to the fact that every form of matter is connected
with all other forms, thereby proving that there is a reciprocity of
action throughout all Nature.
I may here parenthetically observe that I have, in referring to
the Divine Essence which animates universal Nature, frequently
employed the masculine gender. I have done so solely from want
of a word in the English language that comprises not only the
masculine and feminine genders but also the neuter. Since there is


but one Existence, of which, as I have remarked, the Universe is
the outward manifestation, that Existence must comprehend all
genders, as well as everything else.
The fact that man possesses intelligence and power, even though
these be limited, is evidence of the existence of a Source from which
these are derived, and every effect, it must be admitted, must have
its adequate and commensurate cause. The consciousness that the
human mind is capable of conceiving ideas and thoughts tran-
scending the power of expression testifies to its owing existence to a
Power higher and beyond itself. And further, as man, the highest
development of matter, possesses life, consciousness, and intelligence,
and as all that is in him is derived from the Universe, there must
consequently be in the Universe not only matter, but life, conscious-
ness, and intelligence. A dead Universe is a palpable absurdity; for
energy and law are everywhere manifest. It is therefore a logical
necessity, from evidence patent to our senses, to admit that there is
in the Universe an intelligent, ever-present Power, whatever name
may be employed to express that Power. On the other hand,
it is illogical to ignore the existence of a Divine Mind animating
the Universe merely because it is invisible, since the existence
of a finite mind in man is acknowledged although it is equally
invisible. It is also illogical to deny the existence of God merely
because as finite beings we cannot comprehend and depict the
infinite, and are only able to apprehend an infinitesimal portion of
the wondrous whole.
The fact, also, that man possesses a moral nature, and that in each
individual there is a sense of duty which reproves him when he does
wrong and approves his actions when he fulfills his sense of right,
testifies to the existence of a Power which inspires mankind with
this innate sense of duty. It is true that by false education man’s
judgment may be warped, and thereby his sense of duty may be
perverted, but this in no way disproves my statement that he
possesses an innate sense of duty, for as soon as man exercises his
reasoning faculties to their fullest extent erroneous ideas are
dispelled. And, further, the fact that there is no such thing as
inert matter, seeing that in all objects of which we are cognizant
certain properties and qualities are manifested which determine their
mode of action, and all bodies reciprocally act on each other by
virtue of these properties and qualities, demonstrates an intelligent
Power working unceasingly in all things. And, as Pope the poet
truly wrote—
“All are but parts of one stupendous whole,
Whose body Nature is, and God the soul.”
The most obdurate of Atheists must, I believe, if candid, admit that
he has, in the hours of the deepest anguish, felt that there was
something wanting in his soulless philosophy ; for it stands to
reason that a blank negation, which crushes hope and tends to the
gloom of endless night, can never satisfy the silent aspirations of a
human soul, however steeped it may be in the chilling atmosphere


of materialistic metaphysics, and however repulsive the popularly
accepted theories regarding God and man’s destiny may be to a
rational and philosophic mind.
It is only through the manifestations of an intelligent Power in
Nature that we can form ideas of God, and the crude representations
of the Deity that satisfied us when young will not do so, if we are of
a contemplative and philosophic turn of mind, when we grow old. The
God-idea of one age must give place to higher and more rational
conceptions of Deity in succeeding ages. This is illustrated even in
the Bible, the God-idea of the New Testament being in many
respects much superior to that of the Old Testament. It is the
height of presumption on the part of finite man to say, on an assumed
authority, what God can or will do. We can only judge of God by
what He does; and from what Nature discloses it is evident that
He does not act regardless of conditions, consequently He appears
to be only omnipotent within His own laws, for, considering the
cruelties witnessed in Nature (take, for example, one animal living
on another, and the larger fish devouring the smaller ones), if God
were absolutely omnipotent He would not permit such cruelties to
take place ; and surely if God were both benevolent and absolutely
omnipotent He would have precluded the possibility of evil. If He
could prevent evil and would not, He cannot be benevolent • and if
He would and could not, He cannot be absolutely omnipotent. I
have been forced, therefore, in the interests of truth and reason, to
come to the conclusion that God is only omnipotent within the laws
by which He operates, which we term “ Nature’s laws.” Con-
ditional omnipotence may sound novel, but to me it seems the only
philosophical conclusion, under the circumstances, which an unbiased
and rational mind can arrive at ; and it is certainly preferable to
partial benevolence on the part of the Source of all goodness ; evil,
as I have observed, being like darkness, merely relative, while good-
ness, like light, is absolute and enduring. Conditional omnipotence
is not, however, so novel an idea as at first sight it appears, for it is
popularly taught that God could not possibly have forgiven the sins
of the world without a condition of a very questionable character—
namely, the shedding of blood of the worthy Jesus, without which,
it is said, there can be no remission of sins. At the same time it is
inconsistently declared that “all things are possible with God.”
But this is a mere assertion, devoid of proof. On the contrary, the
evidences we have in Nature are against it, for no one has ever seen,
or can we conceive of two hills without a valley between them, a
stick with only one end, a six-foot man swallowing a ninety-foot
whale, or 2 added to 2 making more or less than 4 ; and, as has
been wisely declared, “ any statement, whether revealed or otherwise,
which plainly contradicts ascertained facts of Nature cannot be true
or worthy of our acceptance.” Also, “ what is nonsense on a prin-
ciple of reason can never be sense on a principle of religion.” If I
have misstated the case under consideration I am open to correction,
the object I have in view being the elucidation of the truth, and not
the gaining of victory for the views I hold. I give and ask for no


quarter in the cause of truth. Every doubt, I hold, is a prayer to
God for more light, and thought is the lever that moves the
world.
In conclusion I may observe that, evidently, in accordance with
the fundamental law of evolution, Nature is ever striving for good,
conflict and pain being the inevitable accompaniments of develop-
ment. That this is the case cannot be gainsaid, but why it is so
will, I believe, remain a mystery as long as man is unable to account
for all the manifestations, unfoldings, and intricacies of Nature I
believe that everything in Nature has its use, and that even what
appear to us to be our greatest misfortunes are but blessings in
disguise eventually; I am, therefore, a Pantheistic optimist. 1
have stated the evidence which caused me to adopt Pantheism On
another occasion I shall give my reasons for becoming an optimist,
believing with the writer of old that each of us should be ever ready
to give a reason for the hope that is in us. Owing to a false
prejudice, Pantheism, I am well aware, is looked upon with utter
abhorrence by those who have never carefully considered the subject
Horn a rational and unprejudiced standpoint; but, being true, and in
accord with natural facts, it must eventually be accepted by all who
love the truth for its own sake, who are candid enough to acknow-
ledge that there can be no religion higher than truth, and who
therefore look “through Nature up to Nature’s God.”
“ Oh, not through seemly forms or creeds,
By man with skilful thought designed,
To me He comes, the primal God,
The sovereign Force, the central Mind.
The tidal pulse of ISTature’s heart,
He buds and blooms in summer hours ;
He comes in Autumn’s flush and fruit,
In Winter’s crown and hoary flowers.
He floods the morn with orient tides,
His golden glory noon unbars,
In sunset’s flaming car He glides,
He wheels through night in pomp of stars ;
A Power to will, to plan, to guide,
He works throughout the world to-day,
To animate, inspire, provide.”
16


TO THE ONE EXISTENCE,
The Infinite Soul op Universal Nature.
“ Not in the church by thousands trod
Seek I and find Thee, 0 my Cod !
Not where the swelling anthems rise,
And lifted eyes salute the skies ;
Not where hired priests alone may dare
To speak aloud—to lead the prayer,
And crowded congregations stand
To talk with Thee at second-hand ;
For there come human pomp and pride—
Fashion and vice stand side by side ;
The hypocrite, with smiling face,
And the backsliding saint embrace ;
Dark hearts and sin-stained hands are there—
Souls dead to truth, ears deaf to prayer ;
Men who their brethren rob and cheat,
And who the needy oft illtreat;
Men who on gold their hopes have built,
Who talk of sin, yet wink at guilt;
Men who on sensual visions gloat,
While prayers and praises till the throat;
And there the preachers—richly fee’d—
Their empty declarations read—
Set prayers pronounce, set forms go through,
And talk the good they ought to do.
“Not there, my God—l come not there
Thy Presence and its joys to share ;
Not there my spirit feels Thee near,
Not there Thy still small voice I hear,
Not there my breast with love swells high,
Not there I learn to live and die,
Not there the inward strength is given
To conquer Earth and enter Heaven ;
But ’neath the broad o’erarching sky,
In the free winds that hurry by,
In the bright orbs that shine above,
In all things that have life and move,
In the deep sea’s resistless might,
In the still watches of the night,
In songs of birds and laughing rills,
In cultivated vales and wood-crowned hills—
In all that greets my wondering eye,
I feel, I own that Thou art nigh.
“ No mediator there I need—
His child will not my Father heed ?
Freely my spirit soars and glows,
Freely God’s love descending flows ;
Voiceless before His boundless throne
I bend, and pray in heart alone ;
For words are vain, and speech is naught,
To Him who knows our inmost thought;
Seraphs a fitting song might raise,
Biit silence is man’s noblest praise,”
17


