

ATHIRST FOR GOD
“ My soul thirsfeth for God , for the
living God; when shall 1 come and appear
before God ? ” — Psalm xlii. 2.
This verse in the Hebrew Psalter (which the Christian Church
has selected for its Prayer-book) expresses the Attitude and the
Mission of the Church. Its Attitude : For what is the position of the
Christian Church ? In a world complicated with difficulties and
overcrowded with sorrow, what are the struggles of Christian souls
hut to rise high above the thought of evil, and to cry for God ? And
its Mission: Is it not to help men and women in their struggles and
their sorrows to forget their pettinesses and degradation,—to rise to
better things, and to cry for God ? And if that be the attitude and
the mission of the Church, then I hold that it is the justification -of
such noble efforts as have been made to enable so great, so sinful a
city as London to have at least a few moments’ relaxation from its
great weariness, and, pausing in the pursuit of its sin, to pass in for
a little while among the ministrations of religion.
Again: In this verse, and in this cry for God, you have one
of the highest proofs of sacred Scripture. When your shallow thinker
or profound philosopher cast the Bible from them, because they do not
like the measure of Noah’s ark, or the exact authority of Jonah’s
“great fish,” say to them, “There may be things in the Bible I can-
not explain, but there ii no book but the Bible that expresses that
deep, inner, serious fact of my being, of my soul, of myself; the fact
that lives when other facts are dying; that comes up when the noise
Adapted from Sermon by Kev. W. J. Knox-Little, M.A.


of Hie world is still—in the dark night, when conscience stalks out
before me and uobraids me for things J cannot contradict; —there is
no book that speaks to that fact of facts—that thirst, that longing,
that desolation, that desire, that hope,—there is nothing but the Bible
does that.” Hence thoughtful men are falling back upon the Bible.
For the Bible everywhere asserts, what you and I, in our better ,
moments, strongly say Amen to. that our soul is athirst for God,
In order to realise this thbst for God, let us put it in contrast
with some other things which we thirst for.
There is, first, the attraction of Natural Beauty. When jtou hiisi - a
ness men escape from the toil and noise of your work, and the dust
and confusion of city-life, and go away to gaze upon the snow-crowned
Alps, sparkling in the brightness of the summer sun ; or when you
watch Niagara rolling grandly to its fatal plunge; or—preferring
homelier scenes—when you look upon our own chestnuts in spring or
the great elms of Worcester in their autumn garb,—what a delight
you feel as you gaze upon these glorious shows of Nature! How
beautiful they are! Ah, yes.— But while you are delighted by them,
stimulated, perhaps comforted, there is one thing which you are not —
you are not satisfied.
Next, there is the attraction of Activity,—the splendid attraction
of political achievement ; the power of a human mind, moulding the
destinies' oT an~enipire and clfangiug the currents of timey or thrr —*
activity of the Loudon merchant—sending out the force of the life
that is in him to the ends of the earth—whose sayings are quoted
throughout the markets of the world, and his doings determine the
doings of men whom he has never seen—never shall see. Certainly
there arc some who thirst for the excitements of such prodigious
activity. And no doubt it will stimulate, will delight, will intoxicate;
hut still there is one thing it will not do, I am bold to say—it will
not satisfy them.
Then there is the alluring region of pure Intellect—the powers
and activities of human thought. But here, too, there is a limit. >
Intellect attracts—enchains, exalts—but the one thiug about it that
is to me perfectly appalling, is, that it does not satisfy.
Finally, there is the world of the A flections, in which we live
when we are young, and form great friendships. There is the sweet-
heart—the wife—the child—the dear expressions of the strong heart
that beats within us. But here, too, the old strange law prevails.
These can animate, support, enrapture us ; but, even at their fullest,
they cau neither fill nor satisfy our souls.
Because you and I arc born, not for a moment, but for infinite
moments —uot for the struggle of Time, but for the career of Eternity,
never, if we are true to ourselves, shall we pause uptil we find, ana
embrace, and love that which satisfies. There are many things given
us—very attractive, very pleasurable; but there is only one thing
that satisfies our immortal souls. “My soul is athirst for God,
for the living God—when shall I come and appear before God.”


& 'A
- NOVi992 "|
-%v * ,
But now let ns bo quite practical. What do I mean by the
thirst for God ? To begin on the lowest ground, 1 mean —desire for
moral truth,—for the satisfaction of the moral instincts- Turn to the
Ten Commandments. They require reverence for parents ; for life ;
for personal purity; for the rights of property ; for your neighbour’s
good name ; and an unmurmuring contentment with the allotment of
Providence. But, before these things, they require you to remember
that there is but one God Avhom you are to woiship, whose Maine you
are to honour—and are not to grudge the time He demands for your
A Day of Best. These are the outlines of the grave moral law that
runs deep into the heart of the Christian. The thirst for God means
the thirst within me to reach up to and fulfil that great moral law.
But that would only give you a Skeleton. You want Life. The
outlines of a picture—colourless, shadowless, without the touch of
Life— do not make a picture. And so here. Therefore if the preacher
says to you, “ Accept the moral law—adhere strictly to every letter
of it—restrain your passions, and do no wrong to your neighbour—
you need nothing more,” ask him, “ And when. I have done all these
things, what am I ? —still but a commonplace creature, and, in truth,
a very sinful one.” —Because the law is not good ? JN'o. But’because
your obedience wants the touch of Divine Life—the thirst after good-
ness; —the desire, the love, the enthusiasm, the ambition of doing
right because it is right. U, my friends, I submit that this is an
ambition worthy of our highest effort. Certainly we are not dreamers.
Certainly God has given us practical activity. Whatever we misun-
derstand, certainly we can understand that the thirst of the soul for
God is the thirst to love goodness because it is good—because it is of
God. And “there is none good but God.”
There is one thing more. When wo read the New Testament—
so simple, so straightforward, so true, so beautiful, with no difficulties
for a childlike heart—we are brought face to face with the Teachings
of Christ. Who can read those wonderful teachings without feeling
that Time will not suffice for their fulfilment. They demand Eternity."
And if my soul is athirst for God, it is thirsting for those splendid
practical Lessons which I may begin to learn in this narrow school,
but shall only and fully accomplish in the great land beyond the
grave. But even these Lessons, either in part or in full, would not
satisfy. If we know the human heart—in its widest, deepest long-
ings—it can find its perfect satisfaction only in a personal Being—
only in the living God.
You say that you cannot know God. That is the common answer
just now of the human sinning heart, that covers its Atheism with the
less odious term of Agnosticism. And it is true that you cannot
know God with the knowledge of sense, but you can know Him with
the knowledge of belief— and that is the only kind of knowledge
which you possess, and on which you act, in regard to the vast
majority of things with which you have to do. The human intellect ac-
cepts and acts, habitually, upon ideas that are perceived to be true
M335>T/F


t(6 (Jo
f (I &&0 ±
N.
although they may be indistinct—darkly mysterious and altogether
unintelligible. You believe—you act —in space, in time. You speak
of cause &c. But you know nothing of space, or time, or cause. You
are acting in consistency with the laws of your own nature when you
accept Christ as a real—albeit a mysterious—Being ; —a real Being,
because He entered into human history, and expressed the ideas that
fire in the brain and heart of us all ; —an indistinct and mysterious
Being, partly because twenty centuries have separated us from His
actual historic life, but chiefly because He was God manifest in the
flesh. But He is a fact to those that seek Him—He makes Himself
an inward gift to the humble soul. His Divine presence and activity
are such that He meets us when we meet in His Name ; meets us in
the Word and Sacraments, and in moments of sorrow and prayer ;
meets us and breathes upon us that other Comforter—the Holy Ghost.
Oh, you are not driven to distant infinity. Oh, you are not asked to
rest upon a shadow —you are not left to play the Dreamer and the
Sentimentalist. When you think about God you are asked to remem-
ber the fair, sweet vision of the Man, who, while He loved the poor,
did not despise the great;—of the Man who was so strong that He
could face the angry multitude, and so tender that He could raise the
lost woman so gentle that the little children gathered their arms
round His neck of the Man at home with the fisherman and high-
born alike—with thoughts go simple that the Galilean peasants
received them, and yet so deep that they are still governing the
world the One on whom we rest, by whom we hang, in whom we
hope,—who sympathises with our best desires, —who does not de-
nounce us, but only intercedes and pities ; —the Man who feels with
the child, the boy, the man, the woman —the Man of men, the crown
of our humanity,—the God in Man—the Man in God; —the Substance
of the Sacraments, the Seal of the Promises, the Pattern and the
Power of Prayer,—the sweet dear Friend, who never misunderstands,
never forsakes us, —never is hard upon us; —the wonderful, the
glorious Saviour, who loved us and gave Himself for us. My friends, it
is your privilege and mine,beyond the privileged'the Psalmist,to know
God in this wondrous, divine way—God in Christ. Are you thirsting
for God—the living God ? (/come to Him in that new and living
way. If you come in penitence—in faith and desire—you shall find
rest for your weariness, and lull and everlasting satisfaction for your
thirsty souls.
“In the last day of the feast , Jesus stood and cried , saying ,
If ANY MAN THIRST, LET HIM COME UNTO Me AND DRINK. ’’
“ Jesus answered and said unto her , Whosoever drinketh of this
water shall thirst again; hut whosoever drinketh of the water that I
shall aive him shall never thirst ; hut the water that I shall give
him shall he in him a tvell of water syringing up to everlasting life."
G. Mercer, Printer, Malop Street, Geelong.
