

ATLAS
OF
INDIA
W.& A.K. JOHNSTON
EDINBURGH AND LONDON






FRONTISPIECE.




ATLAS OF INDIA
CONTAINING
SIXTEEN MAPS & COMPLETE INDEX
WITH AN INTRODUCTION
BY
SIR W. W. HUNTER, K.C.S.I.
AUTHOR OF THE “ IMPERIAL GAZETTEER OF INDIA
W. & A. K. JOHNSTON
EDINBURGH AND LONDON
1894


Area
in
Sq. Miles.
Population.
Average
Population
Per Sq. Mile.
British India ....
9 6 5»°5 1
221,434,862
229
Feudatory or Native States
644,717
66,908,147
104
Portuguese Settlements (1887) .
1,605
561,384
349 lli
French Settlements (1891)
203
282,923
1,393 5
Total for all India,
including Burma .
1,611,576
289,187,316
179
PREFACE.
'THE plan of this Atlas is to exhibit the British Empire of
India in fourteen geographical sections. 1 hese sections
have been arranged so as to conform as nearly as possible
to the political administrative divisions. The introduction to
each section forms, therefore, a general account of some British
Province of India or some group of Native States. The fol-
lowing table gives a bird’s-eye view of the whole area and
o O '
population dealt with :
INDIA IN 1891.
As the railways of India form part ol a united system,
chiefly under the control of the Supreme Government ol
India, it has not been found profitable to occupy space in
the letterpress by a description of the lines, or sections of
lines, running through the separate provinces. The lines,
will, however, be found marked on the Maps. Biiell)
described, the railway system of India connects the three
Presidencies of Bengal, Bombay, and Madras by trunk lines,


which ultimately converge for strategical purposes on the
North-Western Frontier. These trunk lines have themselves
become the main arteries of minor systems or net - works of
railway for each of the larger provinces and more important
groups of Native States. They form the commercial high-
ways between the interior and the sea-board. Burma is not
yet connected by railway with India (1893), hut it has a
small railway system of its own uniting Upper and Lower
Burma.
The introductions to the separate Maps, while based on a
uniform plan, endeavour to give prominence to the special
characteristics of the province dealt with. As several ol the
Maps comprise two or more territorial divisions, it has been
found expedient to allot a larger space to the letterpress
explanatory of them, than in the case of Maps dealing with
a single political jurisdiction, although in itself more exten-
sive. Thus the populous, but compact and often described
Lieutenant-Governorship of Bengal, shown in Map 1., is
treated more briefly than the less important, but widely dis-
tributed and more recently acquired Provinces, stretching
from Assam through Upper and Lower Burma to the
Nicobar Islands, in Maps XIII. and XIV. The Publishers
believe that this elasticity in the scale of the introductions
will be found of practical convenience to those who use the
Atlas, whether for educational purposes, or for general
reference. F'or a complete and comprehensive account of
the subjects here summarily dealt with, they would refer to
Sir William Hunter’s Indian Empire: Its History , Peoples ,
and Products.
PREFACE.


CONTENTS.
INDEX MAP ------- Frontispiece.
INTRODUCTION BY SIR W. W. HUNTER, K.C.S.I. - pp. i to 38.
PLATE I. LOWER BENGAL.
„ 11. NORTH-WEST PROVINCES, OUDH, AND NEPAL.
„ 111. PUNJAB (EAST), AND KASHMIR.
„ IV. PUNJAB (WEST), BRITISH BALUCHISTAN, AND NORTH-
WESTERN FRONTIER.
„ V. RAJPUTANA, AND AJMERE-MERWARA.
„ VI. CENTRAL INDIA.
„ VII. CENTRAL PROVINCES.
„ VIII. HAIDARABAD, AND BERAR.
„ IX. BOMBAY (NORTH), AND BARODA.
„ X. BOMBAY (SOUTH).
„ XL MADRAS (SOUTH), MYSORE, AND COORG.
„ XII. MADRAS (NORTH), SOUTH ORISSA, AND CEYLON.
~ XIII. BRITISH BURMA (NORTH), ASSAM, AND MANIPUR.
„ XIV. BRITISH BURMA (SOUTH), ANDAMAN, AND NICOBAR
ISLANDS.
„ XV. PLANS OF CALCUTTA, MADRAS, AND BOMBAY, AND
ALSO INSETS OF ADEN AND ENVIRONS, AND
PERIM ISLAND.
COMPLETE INDEX TO ALL PLACES MENTIONED IN ATLAS.


MAP I.
LOW E R BENG A L.
LOWER Bengal, or as it is officially designated the Lieutenant-
Governorship of Bengal, is the largest and most populous of the twelve
local Governments of British India. The Lieutenant-Governorship of
Bengal comprises the lower valleys and the deltas of the Ganges and
Brahmaputra shown in this map, together with the coast strip of Orissa
on the Bay of Bengal, shown in Map XII. Total area of the Lieutenant-
Governorship (including the Native States under its control), 187,377
square miles; population 74,643,366 in 1891 of whom 47,824,014 were
Hindus and 23,658,347 Muhammadans ; the remainder consisting of hill
races, wild tribes, Christians and others. Lower Bengal divides itself
geographically into four great provinces ; Lower Bengal Proper, or the
combined deltas of the Ganges and Brahmaputra on the south ; Behai*
or the drier plains of the Ganges on the north of the delta ; Orissa, or the
delta of the Mahanadi River on the south-west of the Gangetic sea-
board ; and Chhota or Chutia Nagpur, a mountainous region on the west
which separates Lower Bengal from the Central Provinces.
P'or administrative purposes Lower Bengal is arranged into 49 British
districts, and 4 groups of Native States under the political control of the
Lieutenant-Governor. Its principal cities are Calcutta with its suburbs,
pop. 845,064 in 1891; Patna, 165,192; Dacca, 82,321; and Cuttack,
47,186.
The most distinctive feature of Lower Bengal is its rivers ; the Ganges
and the Brahmaputra, together with their numerous confluents, from the
Himalayas on the north and from the hill regions which shut in Bengal
on its eastern and its western frontiers. These untaxed highways bring
down, almost by the motive power of their own currents, the crops of
Northern India to the Bengal seaboard—an annual harvest of wealth to
the trading classes. Bengal exhibits the two typical stages in the life
of a great river. In the northern districts, the rivers run along the
valleys, receive the drainage from the country on either side, absorb
broad tributaries and rush forward with an ever-increasing volume. But
near the centre of the Provinces where the country becomes very flat,
they enter upon a new stage in their career. The stoppage of their
current causes their main channels to bifurcate, and each new stream so
created throws off its own set of distributaries to right and left. The
country which they thus enclose and intersect forms the Delta of Lower
Bengal. Originally created by fluvial deposits, the Delta now stretches
out as a vast dead level, in which the rivers find their velocity checked.
The diminished force of their currents ceases to carry along the silt which
they have brought down from Northern India. The streams, accordingly,
deposit their alluvial burden in their channels and upon their banks, so
that by degrees their beds rise above the level of the surrounding country.
( 1 )


In this way, the rivers of the delta slowly build themselves up into high
level canals, which every autumn break through or overflow their margins,
and leave their silt upon the adjacent flats. Thousands of square miles
in Lower Bengal thus receive each year a top-dressing of virgin soil,
brought free of expense from the Himalayas a system of natural
manuring which defies the utmost power of over-cropping to exhaust its
fertility.
As the rivers creep further down the delta, they become more and
more sluggish, and their bifurcations and interlacings more complicated.
The last scene of all is avast amphibious wilderness of swamp and forest,
amid whose solitudes the network of channels insensibly merges into the
sea. Here the perennial struggle between earth and ocean goes on, and
all the ancient secrets of land-making stand disclosed. The rivers finally
checked by the dead weight of the sea, deposit their remaining silt, which
emerges as banks or blunted promontories, or, after years of battling with
the tide, adds a few feet, in places only a few inches, to the foreshore.
The principal mineral products of Lower Bengal arc coal in the
western districts and particularly around Raniganj ; iron, limestone; and
salt manufactured on the coast from sea water. The disadvantage of the
Bengal coal is its high proportion of ash, which averages from 10 to 20
per cent, as against about 3 per cent, in English coals. Small quantities
of gold have during ages been washed out of the river beds in the Chhota
Nagpur division, and companies arc now formed to work its auriferous
strata by modern machinery. Diamonds and other precious stones were
anciently obtained from the same western districts ; and a search is again
being made for them with the aid of geological science. In regard to
vegetable productions, Lower Bengal is one of the richest regions of the
world. Its river valleys or hill frontiers produce tea, indigo, turmeric,
the opium poppy, innumerable grains and pulses, pepper, ginger, betel-
nut, the cinchona which yields quinine, many costly spices and drugs, oil-
seeds of various kinds, cotton, the silk mulberry, inexhaustible crops of jute
and other fibres ; timber, from the feathery bamboo and coroncted palm to
the iron-hearted sal tree—in short, almost every vegetable product which
feeds and clothes a people, and enables it to trade with foreign nations.
The land of Lower Bengal is let out in perpetuity by the Government
to large proprietors or zamindars, who pay a fixed land-tax under the
Permanent Settlement of 1793. A series of intermediate tenure-holders
have grown up between the zamindars and the actual cultivators. But
the actual cultivators are protected from excessive enhancement of their
rents by occupancy rights, and legislative enactments in their favour.
The history of so large a province as Lower Bengal forms an integral
part of the history of India and can be here summarised in only a few
words. Its northern division, Behar, ranked as a powerful kingdom in
Sanskrit times. Patna, the chief town of Behar, is identified as the
Palibothra of the Greeks, and the Pataliputra or capital of the Buddhist
of Asoka. The delta or southern part of Lower Bengal lay
beyond the ancient Sanskrit polity, and was governed by a number
of local kings belonging to pre-Aryan stocks. The Chinese travellers,
P'a Hian in the sth century, and Hiucn Tsiang in the 7th century, A.D.,
found the Buddhist religion prevailing throughout Lower Bengal, but
already in a fierce struggle with Hinduism—a struggle which ended
between the 9th and 1 ith centuries in the general establishment of the latter
faith. Until the end of the 12th century, Hindu princes ruled over the
( 2 )


lower valley of the Ganges. In 1199 A.D., Muhammad Hakhtiyar Khilji
was appointed by the Delhi sovereign to lead the first Musulman invasion
into Lower Bengal.
The Muhammadan conquest of Behar dates from 1200 A.D., and speedily
spread southwards into the Bengal delta. From this date until 1336,
Lower Bengal was ruled by governors appointed by the Muhammadan
Kmperors in the north. From 1336 to 1539, its Musulman governors
of Bengal asserted their independence, and arrogated the position
of sovereigns on their own account. From 1539 to 1576, Lower Bengal
passed under the rule of the Pathan or Afghan dynasty, which commonly
bears the name of Shcr Shah. On the overthrow of this house by Akbar
the Great, Lower Bengal was incorporated into the Mughal Empire, and
administered by governors appointed by the Delhi Emperor, until the
grant of 1765, which placed Lower Bengal, Behar, and Orissa under the
administration of the East India Company'. Down to 1854, Lower
Bengal remained under the Governor-General of India as Governor, his
place being supplied, during his absence in other parts of India, by a
Deputy-Governor of Bengal appointed from among the members of his
Council. By' the statute 16 and 17 Viet., cap. 9s, the Governorship of
Lower Bengal was separated from the Governor-Generalship of India,
and was erected into a Lieutenant-Governorship. The first Lieutenant-
Governor was appointed in 1854 ; and the constitution of the Govern-
ment of Lower Bengal still continues on this basis.
( 3 )


MAP 11.
NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES, OUDH AND NEPAL.
The Lieutenant-Governorship of the North-Western Provinces and
Oudh lies to the north-west of Lower Bengal, and separates Lower
Bengal from the Punjab. It thus occupies the whole middle basins of
the Ganges, the Jumna, the Gogra, and the Gumti rivers. Until 1877,
the North-Western Provinces, comprising the plains of the Jumna and
the Ganges, were under a Lieutenant-Governor ; while Oudh, which
consists broadly speaking of the valleys of the Gogra and the Gumti,
were under a separate Chief Commissioner. In that year they were
formed into a united Lieutenant-Governorship, with an area, including
their Feudatory States, of 112,612 square miles and a population of
47)697*576 in 1891, of whom 40,951,803 were Hindus, and 6,589,183
Muhammadans ; the remainder being made up of various sects and
tribes, Christians and others. I'or administrative purposes the North-
Western Provinces are divided into 37 British Districts and Oudh into
12. Two Native or Feudatory States, Rampur and Garhwal, are also
under the political control of the Lieutenant-Governor of the North-
West. Ihe chief cities are—Benares, the ecclesiastical metropolis of
Hinduism, pop. 219,467 in 1891; Cawnpur, 188,712; Allahabad, the
modern capital of the North-Western Provinces, 175,246; Agra, for a
time the capital of the Mughal Empire of India, 168,662 ; and Lucknow
the capital of Oudh, 273,028.
Taken as a whole, the Lieutenant-Governorship includes the richest
wheat-bearing country in India. The North-Western Provinces arc
irrigated both naturally by the rivers which take their rise in the
Himalayas, and artificially by magnificent systems of canals and distribu-
taries, most of which have been constructed by British enterprise. The
Lieutenant-Governorship contains many cities famous in Indian history,
and it is studded at the present day with thriving villages, interspersed
at greater distances with commercial towns. Except during the hot
weather months from May to July, when the crops are off the
fields, the general aspect is that of a verdant and well-tilled but
monotonous plain, merging into hilly or mountainous country at the
edges on the south and north. The courses of the great rivers mark the
prevailing south-eastward slope of the land, which falls away from the
Himalayas, the Rajputana uplands, and the Vindhyan plateau, south-
eastwards towards the Bay of Bengal. The chief natural features arc
thus determined by the rivers, whose alluvial deposits in primaeval
periods formed the central portion of the North-Western Provinces
out of a great lake-region. Ihe river-currents afterwards cut for them-
selves deep channels through the detritus which had thus been brought
down from the ring of hills or uplands on the north, south, and west.
The northern or Himalayan tract of the North-Western Provinces
( 4 )


comprises the Native State of Tchri or independent Garhwal, together
with the British districts of Dchra Dun, Garhwal, and Kumaun. These
mountainous regions include some of the wildest and most magnificent
scenery in the world, and among their snow-clad peaks the sacred streams
of the Ganges and the Jumna take their rise. Many famous temples
and places of pilgrimage lie on the upper banks of the Ganges, and thou-
sands of Hindus annually repair from all parts of India to its holy
source. Several of the higher peaks attain a height exceeding 20,000
feet; while Nandi Devi, on the borders of British Garhwal and Kumaun,
rises to 25,661 feet above sea-level. Beautiful and romantic landscapes
abound, especially near the lake and sanitarium of Naini Tal, and in the
valley of Dchra Dun. The economic value of the mountains is almost
entirely confined to the growth of tea in Kumaun, and to the export of
forest produce to the plains. A sparse Hindu population lies scattered
among the mountain valleys. In the northernmost passes, towards
Chinese Tartary, the people belong to the Tibetan race and profess
the Buddhist faith.
The Himalayan tracts under the Government of the North-Western
1 rovinces form only a small portion of the immense geological region
to which they belong, but they include part of one of the best and most
widely known of Indian rock formations (the gncissic). Their exterior
ranges rise sometimes abruptly and sometimes gradually to a height of
7000 or 8000 feet. After passing a second range, the elevation increases
till 10,000, and 11,000 feet arc attained. We then meet the peaks of the
Trisul or trident mountain (23.382 feet), Nandi Devi (25,661 feet), and
Nandi Kot 22,538 feet). 1 hese arc all situated to the south of the great
central axis of the Himalayas, which has a mean height of from 18,000
to 20,000 feet.
South of the Himalayas and the Tarai tracts, the Siwalik range,
a mass of detritus from the greater chain, slopes downward to the
plain of the Doab. It runs parallel to, and is separated from, the
Himalayas by the valleys known as the eastern and western duns
Dchra Dun District). Under the name of Doabs (“ two waters ”) are
included the extensive wedges of land enclosed between the confluent
streams of the Ganges and the Jumna or their tributaries. Each of these
Indian uiesopotamias slopes gently upwards from the river banks, and
necessitates a system of irrigation by which the streams arc tapped
in their upper sections, and their waters arc led by artificial channels to
fertilise the Doabs lower down.
One of the most important features of the North-Western Provinces is,
therefore, the canals. Eleven such systems of irrigation works have
been undertaken by the British Government in the North-Western Pro-
vinces and Oudh ; the four most important being the Ganges Canal, the
Eastern Jumna Canal, the Agra Canal and the Lower Ganges Canal.
Up to 1891, the total outlay upon these four works alone was nearly
seven and a half million sterling, while the gross income to the State
derived from them in that year was over half-a-million. The area
irrigated in 1891 by canals exceeded two million acres in the North-
Western Provinces. Together with water supplied from wells, tanks,
lakes, and other private works the total area artificially irrigated in the
North-\\ est and Oudh is about ten million acres. 1 his enormous
system of irrigation is rendered necessary chiefly by the aridity of the
high level of the Doabs, signifying the districts lying between two rivers.
( 5 )


Unlike Lower Bengal, the land in the North-Western Provinces is
not as a rule possessed by great proprietors, but is let out by Government on
thirty years’ leases to village coparcenary bodies, or to small holders, or to
hamlet brotherhoods, or to the cultivators themselves who pay the land-
tax through their head man. In Oudh the descendants of the former
native chiefs still hold large estates direct from the Government, and are
known as Talukdars.
In ancient times the North-Western Provinces formed the centre of
Indo-Aryan civilisation. The Chinese travellers record the existence of
powerful Buddhist kingdoms during the first eight centuries of the
Christian era. P'rom the eleventh to the eighteenth century A.D., the North-
Western Provinces were ruled by successive Muhammadan dynasties,
and the great city of Agra became for a time the capital of the Mughal
Empire. From the latter half of the eighteenth century the North-
Western Provinces began to pass under British rule, and they furnished
the principal arena for the Mutiny of 1857.
NEPAL, also included in Map 11., is an independent native king-
dom occupying the southern ranges of the Himalayas, beyond the
northern boundary of British India. Its princes are extremely jealous
of foreigners, and Nepal practically remains closed to British subjects
except for hunting expeditions on its outskirts, or by special permission.
Its area is computed about 54,000 square miles; and its population
is variously estimated from 2 to 5| millions, among whom arc the
gallant little Gurkhas who supply some of the staunchest regiments to
the British Indian army. Nepal is a land of mountains, valleys, and
elevated plateaux. Among its lofty summits rises Mount Everest,
29,002 feet : the highest measured peak on the globe. Its inner
mountain ranges lie above the level of perpetual snow, but the lower
districts of the Tarai , which separate it from British India, produce crops
of rice, millets, opium, rape, linseed, and tobacco. The hill-forests of
Nepal abound in sal for railway sleepers, and in oak, pine, and rhodo-
dendrons which here attain the dimensions of a high tree.
( 6 )


MAPS 111. AND IV.
THE PUNJAB, KASHMIR, THE N.W. FRONTIER AND
BRITISH BALUCHISTAN.
We now pass from the basin of the Ganges to the broad plains of the
Punjab watered by the Indus and its confluents. The Lieutenant-
Governorship of the Punjab forms the frontier province of North
Western India, with a total area (including its Feudatory States) of
148,966 square miles, and a population of 25,130,127 in 1891. Of these,
12,915,643 were Muhammadans, 9,102,981 Hindus, and 1,870,481 Sikhs,
the remainder being made up of various sects and races. For admini-
strative purposes it is divided into 31 British Districts and 36 Feudatory
States. Geographically, the Punjab is bounded along the greater part of
its eastern boundary by the Jumna and its tributary, the Tons, both of
which belong, however, to the river system of the Ganges. The levels
gradually ascend from the western bank of the Jumna into the Punjab
watershed between the Arabian Sea and the Bay of Bengal. The rivers
rising to the west of this watershed either find their way via the Indus into
the Arabian Sea, or lose themselves in the deserts of Rajputana and other
arid tracts. The Eastern Punjab, literally the Land of the P'ive Rivers,
is watered by the Jehlam, the Chenab, the Ravi, the Beas and the Sutlej,
all issuing from the Himalayas. The Western Punjab is fertilised by
the Indus, which also issues from the Himalayas, and by its great affluent
the Kabul river which brings down the drainage of Afghanistan.
The local rainfall is on the whole scanty, and the Himalayas are thus
a most important source of water supply to the Punjab. In the winter
the streams dwindle away. But as the mountain snows melt on the
approach of the Indian summer followed by the rainy season, the waters
rise and overflow the surrounding country, at places to a distance of
several miles on either bank. When the cold weather returns at the
close of the rainy season, the waters recede, leaving wide expanses of
fertile loam or less fertile sand, moist for the plough of the cultivator.
The plains of the Punjab arc of alluvial formation. Stones are almost
unknown on them except near the hills, but the nodular accretions of
limestone, called kankar , widely occur. The country is deeply scored bv
gullies or eroded channels formed by the beds of the ever-shifting rivers,
and there is a double slope of the levels southwards from the Himalayas
towards the sea, and westwards from the Jumna watershed towards the
Indus valley. The combined result from the two slopes is a gentle fall
in a south-westerly direction, seldom exceeding two or three feet in the
mile. The soil is a singularly uniform loam, and its quality is deter-
mined by the greater or smaller proportion of sand.
In localities which are waterlogged or deficient in drainage, the salts
natural to the soil become concentrated on the surface by continuous
evaporation, and cover the ground, often for square miles, with a saline
efflorescence, reh , fatal to vegetable life. But where neither reh nor sand
prevails, the soil is fertile if only the rainfall be sufficient or means of
irrigation exist. Throughout large tracts, however, neither of these
conditions is yet fulfilled, and wide steppes of intrinsically fertile
soil are used only as grazing grounds for herds of camels and cattle.
( 7 )


The principal crops of the Punjab are millets, wheat, pulses, and
where water can be depended on, sugar-cane. In the north-western
corner of the Punjab, the Safcd Koh and Sulaiman ranges continue the
mountain barrier southwards from the Himalayas, and form the frontier
between British India and Afghanistan. The Salt Range tract in this
region supplies almost the whole salt used in the Punjab.
The Punjab has from time immemorial been the main line of
invasion into India. At a prehistoric period the Aryans of the Veda
penetrated Hindustan by this route. Alexander the Great entered with
his Greek army by the same line in 327 B.C. Successive hordes of
Scythians and Gneco-Bactrians followed. The Muhammadans from
Central Asia began to make their appearance in force in the Punjab
about 1000 A.D., and the Mughal Empire (sixteenth to eighteenth
centuries), claimed sovereignty during its prime alike over India and
Afghanistan. In the 18th and 19th centuries the religious sect of the
Sikhs or reformed Theistic Hindus grew into a powerful military con-
federacy in the Punjab. After culminating in the rule of Ranjit Singh,
the Sikh power succumbed to the British arms in 1846 and 1849. In the
latter year the Punjab became a British province, and under the strong
administration of Sir John Lawrence helped to turn back the tide of
the Mutiny in 1857. On the Ist of January 1859 the Punjab and its
dependencies were constituted a Lieutenant-Governorship Sir John
Lawrence who had formerly been its Chief - Commissioner being
appointed the first Lieutenant-Governor.
The five chief towns of the Punjab are intimately associated with its
dynastic history. In the extreme west, and within sight of the frontier-
hills, Peshawar (population 84,191 in 1891), was for long an outpost of
Afghanistan, and almost until the advent of British rule continued to be
a bone of contention between the Afghans and the Sikhs. Further east,
towards the middle of the Province, Lahore, (pop. 176,854), formed the
centre of the Sikh sovereignty and is now the British capital of the
Punjab. A little further to the east, Amritsar (pop. 136,766) was the
religious metropolis of the Sikh faith, and is the site of its most famous
temple. In the extreme cast of the province on the Jumna river, Delhi
(pop. 192,579) formed the capital of successive Muhammadan dynasties
and the magnificent court of the Mughal IGuperors during the greater
part of their rule. In the south-west, Multan (pop. 74,562) dominated
the plains on which the five rivers of the Punjab eventually converge
into the Indus near the borders of Sind.
KASHMIR is a semi-independent State shown on Map 111., lying to the
north of the Punjab beyond the British frontier. It comprises a great
Himalayan region of mountains and gorges, with the picturesque valley
of Srinagar its capital. Area 80,900 square miles: population 2,543,952
in 1891, of whom 1,793,7 !0 were Muhammadans, and 691,800 were
Hindus. The beauties of Kashmir formed a theme for Moore in his
Lalla Rookh, and its cool plateau furnished a health resort for the
Mughal Emperors, as it still does for the British officers of the Punjab.
The main valley of Kashmir is an extensive basin, about 5200 feet
above the sea, and encircled by lofty mountains. The alluvial tract in
the centre of the basin is intersected by the Jehlam and its tributaries,
which flow down from the alpine regions, and find their way through the
Baramula Pass to the plains of the Punjab. This Switzerland of Northern
( 8 )


India is governed by a Hindu Maharaja with the advice of a British
Resident. The Maharaja of Kashmir loyally maintains a body of
trained troops at his own expense as an Imperial contingent at the
disposal of the British Government.
The North-Western Frontier shown on Map IV. consists of
successive ranges and spurs of the Himalayas, the Safed Kohs, and the
Sulaimans. It runs southwards in a direction roughly parallel with the
course of the Indus. These massive barriers culminate in the Takht-i-
Sulaiman, or Throne of Solomon, 11,317 feet above the level of the sea.
But the mountain wall is pierced at the corner where it strikes southward
from the Himalayas by openings through which the Indus and the Kabul
rivers flow into India. Another opening near the north-western angle,
the Khaibar Pass (3400 feet above the sea-level amid neighbouring
heights rising to 6800 feet), with the Kuram Pass on the south of it, the
Gwalari Pass near Dera Ismail Khan, the Tal Pass debouching near
Dera Ghazi Khan, and the famous Bolan Pass (5800 feet) still farther
south, furnish, together with other less known passes, the gateways
between India and Afghanistan. The Hala, Brahui and Pab mountains
form the southern hilly offshoots between Sind and Baluchistan ; but
they have a much less elevation than the Safed Koh or the Sulaiman
ranges.
For military purposes the most important of the Punjab gateways
into India are the Khaibar Pass on the north leading from Kabul, and
the Bolan Pass in the south leading from southern Afghanistan and
Baluchistan. The Khaibar route is dominated by British fortifications
within the Pass, by our great military cantonment of Peshawar near its
mouth, by the strongly held position of Attock which commands the
passage of the Indus, and by the quadrilateral at Rawal Pindi which,
with its supports, forms the base of the British defences against invasion
by the Khaibar route. The southern or Bolan Pass is in like manner
guarded by strong positions at Quetta and Pishin, protecting the
entrance from Baluchistan.
British Baluchistan, also shown in Map IV., consists of certain
northerly districts of Baluchistan Proper, chiefly made over to the British
by the Khan of Kelat. The most important of these tracts is the Quetta
valley, about twenty miles long by five broad. Population of Quetta only,
27,275 in 1891 ; of whom 11,699 were Hindus and 11,368 were Muham-
madans ; the remainder being largely made up of British troops. Quetta
district has been administered by British officers since 1877, At first its
revenues were accounted for to the Khan of Kelat, but in 1882 it was
arranged that the district should be leased by the Khan to the British
Government for a fixed annual rent of It forms part of the
charge of the Political Agent of Quetta and Pishin, under the control of
the Governor-General’s Agent in Baluchistan. Quetta district is fertile
and well watered, with many villages and orchards. Its inhabitants
are principally Afghans. The main route via the Bolan Pass from
Kandahar traverses the valley, and, as already mentioned, is strongly
held against invasion by the fortified positions of Quetta and Pishin.
The latter tract, Pishin, may be generally described as an extensive
thinly - peopled plateau (5000 feet above sea-level), growing wheat,
barley, and millets, and surrounded on three sides by lofty peaks.
( 9 )


MAP V.
RAJPUTANA AND AJMERE-MERWARA
Tins and the following Map pass out of the British possessions and
deal with two great groups of Feudatory States which occupy the
central regions of India. Rajputana, the most northerly of the three
groups, is the official name given to a territorial circle of twenty Native
States, each having its own autonomy and separate Chief. The
Chiefs rule with the advice of British Political Agents stationed at their
respective courts, and the Governor-General’s Agent for Rajputana
supervises the whole. Rajputana, thus defined, is bounded on the north
and cast by the Punjab and the North-Western Provinces, on the west
by Sind, and on the south by an irregular line which separates it from
the Feudatory States of Central India. Area 130,268 square miles;
population 12,016,102 in 1891; of whom 10,192,829 were Hindus, and
only 991,35 1 were Muhammadans ; the remainder being made up of wild
races and non-Hindu sects or tribes.
The Aravalli Mountains intersect the country in a line running nearly
north-east and south-west. The heights of Mount Abu (5653 feet above
sea-level) rise at the south-western extremity of the Aravallis, while at
their opposite or north-eastern end, the range breaks down into the broken
line of rocks and ridges which are continued towards Delhi. As a whole,
Rajputana is a country of hills and deserts, dotted with cultivated tracts
which form green oases in the midst of waterless wastes. The intersecting
range of the Aravallis divide the States into two well-marked groups. The
part of Rajputana which lies to the north of these hills is fairly fertile in
the east, but becomes more sandy and rocky as it rolls westward, until it
ends in the Great Desert which separates Rajputana from Sind. The
people in that barren region are few in number, and pasture their cattle
around little pools or wells which dry up during the hot weather. They
then shift their village to some other spot where they can find water.
I he part of Rajputana to the south of the Aravalli Mountains is more
fertile. It contains many ranges of hills and long stretches of wood-
land. Between these hills run a number of little rivers, which supply
moisture for raising crops in their valleys. Rajputana has a very scanty
rainfall.
It will be easily understood that so barren a country is thinly inhabited.
While Rajputana is larger in size than the North-Western Provinces,
it supports only one-fourth of their population. But although Rajpu-
tana is thinly inhabited, its people are a brave and noble race. They
are known as the Rajputs. Many of their tribes were driven south-
wards into this inhospitable country when the Muhammadans seized
the Punjab and the North-Western Provinces. They long fought against
the Musalman invaders. At length the great Mughal Emperor Akbar
tried to reconcile the Rajputs by Imperial intermarriages with the
( 10 )


daughters of their chiefs, and by giving their leaders high posts in
his service. Under his bigoted descendant, Aurangzeb, the Rajputs
rebelled, and suffered long and terribly in their struggles for independence
against the Delhi throne.
On the disruption of the Mughal Empire in the eighteenth century
Rajputana fell a prey to various adventurers. In 1803 most of its
States, excepting in the north-west, had been brought under the heel of
the Marathas who exacted tribute, held cities to ransom, annexed
territories, and extorted subsidies. The Maratha leaders, Sindhia and
Holkar, were deliberately exhausting Rajputana, lacerating it by
ravages, or bleeding it scientifically by relentless tax-gatherers ; while
the fields had been desolated by thirty years of incessant war. Under
this treatment the whole group of ancient chieftainships was verging
towards destruction, when Lord Wellesley struck in. The victories
of Generals Sir Arthur Wellesley and Lord Lake permanently crippled
Sindhia’s power in Northern India, and forced him to loosen his hold on
the Rajput States in the north-east, with whose Chiefs the English made a
treaty of alliance against the Marathas. Holkar, too, after various turns
of fortune, was compelled in 1805, to sign a treaty which stripped him
of some of his annexations in Rajputana. Upon Lord Wellesley’s
departure from India, the chiefs of Central India and Rajputana were
in 1805 left to take care of themselves. The Maratha leaders again
plundered at their pleasure through the States thus abandoned to them,
and became arrogant towards the British power. This anarchy lasted
for above ten years, and Rajputana became a waste place.
The roving bands increased and multiplied into the Pindari hordes.
In 1814, their leader Amir Khan was living at free quarters in the heart
of the Rajput States, with an army estimated at 30,000 horse and foot, and
a strong force of artillery, The two principal Rajput chieftainships of
Jodhpur and Jaipur had brought themselves to the brink of extinction
by a famous feud between their rulers for the hand of a princess of
Udaipur ; while the plundering Marathas and Pathans aided the two
chiefs to ruin each other, until the dispute was compromised upon the
basis of poisoning the girl. In 1811, Sir Charles Metcalfe, Resident at
Delhi, reported that the minor Rajput chiefs urgently pressed for British
intervention, on the ground that they had a right to the protection of the
paramount power whose business it was to maintain order. At length,
in 1817, the Marquis of Hastings was able to carry into action his plan
for breaking up the Pindari camps, extinguishing the predatory warfare,
and organising a political system which should effectually prevent its
revival.
By the end of 1818, all the Rajput States, except Bhartpur, had
executed treaties with the paramount Power. There was a general
restoration of plundered Districts and rectification of boundaries. Sind-
hia gave up the Province of Ajmere to the British, and the pressure of
the Maratha aggressors upon Rajputana was permanently withdrawn.
Bhartpur was eventually taken by a British force in 1827, but was
permitted to continue under its native chiefs as a PAudatory State.
Ajmere-Merwara is an isolated British Province under a Commis-
sioner. It is surrounded by the Rajputana Native States, Area 2711
square miles, population 542,358 in 1891 ; of whom 437,988 were Hindus
and 74,265 were Muhammadans. The district or little province of
(11)


Ajmere-Merwara occupies the crest of the great Rajputana watershed.
The Aravalli range passes through it, and Ajmere is thus the highest
point on the plains of Northern India or Hindustan. The rain which
falls upon one side of the Ajmere hills finds its way by the Charnbal
river, the Jumna, and the Ganges, eastwards into the Bay of Bengal ;
while the rain that falls on the other side of its hills, struggles south-
westwards towards the Gulf of Cutch on the western side of India.
The water-supply is, however, very scanty, and the cultivation of the
crops is carried on with difficulty. Artificial irrigation is almost every
where required, and when the rains fail, great suffering results to the
people. Ajmere-Merwara has from ancient times been notorious as a
country of famines. Its principal towns are Ajmere the capital (popu-
lation 68,843 i' l 1 891); and Nasirabad (population 21,710) which contains
a garrison of British troops. Its most famous place of pilgrimage is
Bokhur, or more properly Pushkar, meaning the Lake, not far from
Ajmere city. Pokhur contains shrines to all the principal Hindu deities,
and is almost the only place in India where there is a separate temple
dedicated to the supreme god Brahma. No living thing may be put to
death within the limits of the town.
( 12 )


MAP VI.
CENTRAL INDIA
CENTRAL India is the designation conveniently applied to nine groups
of Peudatory States and their dependencies, under the supervision of
the Governor-General’s Agent for Central India. Each of these States
has a local autonomy under its chief, or chiefs, who, as in the case of the
Rajputana States rule with the advice of Political Agents stationed at
their respective Courts. The States under the Central India Agency
arc as follow : Indore, the Bhil Agency or Bhopawar, the Deputy Bhil
Agency, the \\ estern Malwa Agency, Bhopal, Gwalior, Guna, Bundel-
khand and Baghelkhand. Most of the States have also numerous de-
pendencies, or 1 hakurates, whose subordinate rights are guaranteed by
the British Government. This extensive region of Feudatory States lies
to the north of the British Central Provinces, and is bounded on the
north-east by the North-Western Provinces, on the north-west by
Rajputana, on the west and south-west by the Bombay Presidency, and
on the cast by a heudatory State under the Lieutenant-Governor of
Bengal lotal area, 77,808 square miles; population, 10,318,812 in
1891, of whom 7,735,246 were Hindus, and 568,640 were Muhammadans;
the remainder being made up of Bhil or other aboriginal tribes, and
non-Hindu sects and races.
Ihe States under the Central India Agency arrange themselves
geographically into two divisions : Bundelkhand and Baghelkhand on
the cast, and the seven States of Central India Proper on the west.
1 he Bundelkhand and Baghelkhand portion, on the eastern part of the
great triangular plateau of Central India, is watered by the rivers Dhasan
and Ken flowing into the Jumna, and on the east by the Son flowing
into the Ganges. The Khaimur range of hills—a continuation of the
\ indhyas—rises from the upper Son valley. The Panna range also, with
deep ravines and isolated crags on its north-western face, traverses this
eastern division of Central India, and there is a broken plateau between
the Panna and Khaimur ridges watered by the south-western Tons,
a tributary of the Ganges. To the north, the Bundelkhand division
terminates in an amphitheatre of precipices shaping the country below
into a bay bounded by sandstone cliffs.
The western division of Central India has the great range of the
Vindhyas along its southern margin, abruptly overhanging the valley of
the Narbada (Nerbudda) and presenting the appearance of a weather-
beaten coast-line. From its summits, varying in height from 1500 to
2500 feet, the northern slope to the Jumna commences, the whole region
consisting of an elevated country, broken by ranges of hills. It is watered
by the river Chambal, together with its tributaries the Kali-Sind and
Parbati, and by the Sind and Bctwa, all flowing into the Jumna, and
at places descending from the high table-lands in magnificent cascades.
( 13 )


The mineral resources of the country are considerable. Iron, coal,
copper, and limestone abound. In the Bundelkhand portion, about
12 or 15 miles north-east of the town of Panna, the capital of the
State of that name, is an adamantiferous tract from which diamonds are
extracted to the value of several thousand pounds sterling a year. The
mines are less prosperous now than formerly ; but it is believed that
inexhaustible diamond-producing strata exist in this locality, and that, if
the mines were properly worked, their productiveness would be greatly
increased. Most of the territory included under the Central India
Agency is well cultivated. In particular, the Malwa plateau is extremely
fertile, and produces abundant harvests of wheat, rice, millets, and other
grains and pulses, sugar-cane, cotton, and especially opium. Tobacco of
an excellent quality is also grown.
The northern part of Central India has a temperature partaking of
the torrid character of the neighbouring tracts of the North-Western
Provinces and Rajputana. In these parts, the climate during the
rainy season, and for a short time after, is unhealthy. During
those months fevers are rife in consequence of the moisture imbibed by
the superficial alluvial soil being prevented from passing off by an
impenetrable substratum of sandstone. During the dry and hot seasons
the climate is not unhealthy. The middle, the southern and the western
parts, or those lying within the Malwa tract, have a mild and rather
equable climate, resulting from their greater elevation. The cool season
comprises the period from November to February, the hot season
succeeds and continues to the middle of June, when the tropical rains set
in and last to the close of September, the average fall being about 50
inches. During the wet months the thermometer has a moderate range,
rarely more than from 72 0 to 85° F.; in the winter it sometimes falls to three
or four degrees below freezing point. During the sultry season the hot
winds are comparatively mild, and of short duration in the Malwa tract.
The thermometer rises to nearly ioo° during the day, but the nights arc
often cool and refreshing.
The highest representative of the paramount Power in Central India
is the Agent to the Governor-General. He resides at Indore. His
authority is the unifying principle which pervades the administration of
the many States of Central India committed to his care. He is the
friend and counsellor of the ruling chiefs; the guardian of young
chiefs during their minority ; and the medium of communication between
the Imperial Government and the native Durbars. He is, moreover,
a minister of war for Central India, having large bodies of troops at his
disposal. He discharges the functions of a High Court of Judicature,
original and appellate, within the limits of the British Residency
and Cantonments. He exercises a supervision over the opium-tax, with
the designation of the Opium Agent; over the payments of tribute,
and other feudal charges to which the protected States are liable ; and
over the various officers superintending Political Agencies in Central
India.
( 14 )


MAP VII.
THE CENTRAL PROVINCES.
The Chief Commissionership of the Central Provinces comprises the
British territories in the heart of India, as distinguished from the
central P'eudatory States which form the subjects of the two pre-
ceding Maps and of the following one. On the north-west and
on the south, the Central Provinces are hemmed in for the most part by
Native States, on the east they slope down towards the valley of the
Ganges in Lower Bengal, and on the south-east they are bounded by
the Madras Presidency. The great central region, thus enclosed, forms
an elevated table-land intersected by the Vindhya mountains and their
continuations from west to east, broken by spurs and outliers of the
Satpura range, ploughed by river-beds, and expanding into plateaux.
For administrative purposes this diversified region is divided into 18
British Districts and 15 Feudatory States or groups of States under the
political control of the Chief Commissioner, Area, including the Feu-
datory States, 115,936 square miles; population 12,944,805 in 1891, of
whom 10,489,620 are Hindus, and 309,479 Muhammadans, the remainder
being chiefly made up of forest tribes and hill races. Chief towns ;
Nagpur the provincial capital, with a population in 1891 of 117,014;
Jabalpur a great railway centre of their Northern Districts, pop. 84,481 ;
Sagar, an important cantonment in the extreme north, pop. 44,674 ; and
Kampti, pop. 43,159.
The physical features of the Central Provinces are mainly determined
by their hill-ranges. On the north the Vindhyas rise from 1500 to 2000
feet, surmounted by peaks from 3000 to 4000. Their confused mountain-
ous masses form as it were the northern wall and buttresses which support
the Central table-land. Now pierced by roads and railways they stood in
ancient times as a barrier of mountain and jungle between northern and
southern India, and presented one of the main obstacles to the Delhi
dynasties in their attempts to weld the Indian continent into a united
empire. They consist of a vast congeries of ridges and forests, cut into
by cultivated tracts of the rich cotton-bearing black soil, picturesque
river-valleys, and high lying grassy plains. Among the Satpura ranges
to the south of the Vindhyas, grand alternations of scenery are frequent.
The hills are more abrupt, the black cotton soil formed from the detritus
of their trap-rocks is deeper, and the water supply more abundant. Amid
their dark rolling plateaux of basalt lurk bright green hollows, cultivated
like gardens with sugar-cane and other irrigated crops.
The rivers, with their rapid streams of clear water tumbling over
rocks and down their stony beds, give a peculiar charm to the Central
Provinces. Such is the sacred Narbada, as it dashes through its glens,
and leaps in wild waterfalls from the heights of Amarkantak, its bright
waters glistening against the black basaltic rock; or as it winds along the
( 15 )


narrow channel between the Marble Rocks, or works itself into the
whirlpool of Makrai. Such are the Wardha and Wainganga, foaming
after the rains in torrents along their deep and rocky beds. Such too
is the Godavari, where it forces a passage through the heart of the moun-
tains which formerly marked the frontier of the Central Provinces. At
this point the Godavari may justly claim the title of the Indian Rhine.
Pent in for a course of 20 miles between the hills, the river flows in
a deep and narrow channel, with a fierce current that sometimes lashes
itself into boiling whirlpools, till, escaping from its prison, it spreads
itself into a broad smooth surface, and, flowing on in a mighty stream,
leaves the Central Provinces behind. To the east, in Bhandara and parts
of Chanda District, lies the lake country of the Central Provinces.
“There,” says Sir R. Temple, “an irrigation tank is not a piece of
water with regular banks, crowned with rows or avenues of trees, with an
artificial dyke and sluices, and with fields around it, but it is an irregular
expanse of water. Its banks arc formed by rugged hills, covered with
low forests that fringe the margins where the wild beasts repair to drink ;
its dykes, mainly shaped out of spurs from the hills, are thrown athwart
the hollows, a part only being formed by masonry ; its sluices often
consist of chasms or fissures in the rock ; its broad surface is often, as
the monsoon approaches, lashed into surging and crested waves.”
Nawagaon, the largest of these lakes is 17 miles in circumference, with a
depth in places of 90 feet. Nor have the Hindus failed to appreciate the
beauties of the country. Wherever, as at Bheraghat, a splendid view
unfolds itself; wherever, as at Muktagiri, the plash of a waterfall echoes
through the trees, —there in all likelihood rises an ancient temple. The
spirit of the old nature-worship yet lives in the legends that consecrate
these lovely scenes.
The Central Provinces cover an area of 115,936 square miles, of
which little more than one-third is under cultivation. Yet the forests
are not so important as might have been expected. The greater part of
the waste land is covered by scrub jungle, and produces but little
valuable timber. Nature may have doomed the stony highlands to
barrenness, but the improvidence of man has desolated many of the
fertile tracts. Each most valuable tree has had its special enemy. The
teak fell before the ravages of the charcoal-burner, who found that its
close-grained wood produced the most concentrated fuel. The sal
(Shorea robusta), when tapped, supplies an excellent resin ; and many
a noble tree has consequently been girdled and left to perish. But still
more destructive has proved the practice of dahya or nomad cultivation
now fortunately on the wane, by means of which clearances are made by
firing the forest and jungle. At present, the northern part of the
Province is almost destitute of tree forests. In the south, amid the
scanty population in the hill chiefships which border the Nagpur and
Chhatisgarh plains, the forests have suffered least. Under the system of
forest-conservancy introduced in iB6O, considerable progress has been
made in arresting the course of destruction. The reserved forests are
now under the control and management of the Forest Department.
The Central Provinces contain large coal-fields, and the excellence of
its iron ores holds out promise of a great mineral industry in the future.
The coal however, contains a low percentage of carbon and a high
percentage of ash. The principal food-crops are millets, Indian corn,
pulses, wheat. Extensive areas of black soil are under cotton, sugar-
( 16 )


cane, spices, tobacco, and even rice where a sufficient water-supply can
be depended on.
The Central Provinces continued from time immemorial until
nearly the middle of the 18th century under the rule of the so-called
aboriginal races, among whom the Gonds were the most prominent.
The Gond princes owned the nominal supremacy of the Mughal
Emperors, a supremacy which those Emperors were too sagacious
to strictly enforce. The country seems to have prospered under
a rude feudal system, with indigenous chiefs at the head of it.
Extensive ruined tanks, tombs, palaces, and battlemented stone walls
during many generations too wide for the shrunken city within, still
testify to an early civilisation which, about ii centuries ago, was swept
away by Maratha hordes from the south. In the ten years from 1741
to 1751, the Maratha family of the Bhonslas established its dominion
over the three old kingdoms of Dcogarh, Chanda, and Chhatisgarh.
The last of the Gond dynasties fell before the Maratha invaders in 1781.
The Marathas in the Central Provinces soon developed the vices of purely
military conquerors, and after a long period of callous oppression, their
Bhonsla dynasty ended in a half-crazy debauchee who died childless in
1853. His dominions then lapsed to the British Government and were
formed, together with other territories, into the Chief Commissioncrship
of the Central Provinces.
( 17 )


MAP VIII.
HAIDARABAD AND BERAR
This map comprises the great Feudatory State of Haidarabad, and
certain northern districts known as the Bcrars, formerly belonging to it.
but now placed by treaty in the possession of the British Government.
The whole forms a compact geographical division, occupying the
southern converging part of the central table-land of India ; bounded on
the north by the Central Provinces, and on the three other sides by the
Presidencies of Bombay and Madras. l 7 or administrative purposes the
two sections are quite distinct, and must here be dealt with apart.
HAIDARABAD, the premier Muhammadan State in India, consists
of the Dominions of the Nizam. It is made up of extensive plateaux
averaging over 1200 feet above sea-level, with granitic hills and peaks
rising to 2500 feet. Area 82,698 square miles; population in 1891
returned at 11,537,040; of whom 10,315,249 were Muhammadans, and
1,138,666 Hindus. The Nizam’s dominions form part of the great slope
eastwards from the Western or Bombay Ghats to the Madras sea-board
on the Bay of Bengal. The heavy rain-fall which descends on the moun-
tain wall that rises abruptly from the Bombay coast thus finds its way,
amid endless twistings and obstacles, across the State of Haidarabad till
it reaches the eastern Presidency of Madras. The two main lines of
drainage are represented by the Godavari and its confluents in the
northern and central regions of the State ; and by the Kistna river-system
in the south. The united channel of the Kistna, together with its upper
waters known as the Tungabhadra, forms the southern boundary of the
Nizam’s Dominions,
This wide expanse of table-lands and river valleys presents great
varieties of soil and scenery. In some parts Haidarabad is mountainous,
wooded, and picturesque ; in others, flat and undulating. The champaign
lands include wide stretches of rich crop-growing plains, together with
much land not yet brought under the plough, and numerous tracts too
sterile for cultivation. The mineral resources resemble those of the
Central Provinces. Coal-fields of a not superior character, iron ores with
undeveloped capabilities, kankar or nodular limestone, sandstone, basalt,
trap, and gneissic formations, occur in the different sections of the State,
At Shahabad, near the junction of the Great Indian Peninsula Railway
with the Nizam’s State Railway, quarries of excellent limestone
are worked for a considerable distance along the latter railway
line. The blocks are of two colours, grey and black, taking a polish
almost equal to marble and easily wrought for building on account of
their regular cleavage. The main crops are maize and millets of several
kinds, oil-seeds, wheat, cotton on the black soil, indigo, sugar-cane and
patches of rice. Among the principal trees are the toddy palm, the
( 18 )


mango, and the tamarind. The tasar silk of the uncultivated cocoon,
lac resin and dye, wild honey, and valuable tree-fibres for cordage and
other purposes, are obtained in abundance from the jungles.
The present territories of the Nizam formed the southern provinces
of the Mughal Empire of Delhi. On the breaking up of that Empire
after the death of Aurangzeb in 1707, the ancestor of the present Nizam
was in 1713 appointed Viceroy of the Deccan (i.e., “The South”),
with the title of Nizam-ul-Mulk or Regulator of the State which
has become hereditary in his family. Amid the general confusion
he asserted his independence against the degenerate successors of
Aurangzeb, and before his death in 1748 had firmly established himself
as an independent sovereign. During the half century of war which
followed, his descendants usually managed to fight on the winning side :
at one time in confederacy with the Hindu Marathas ; at another in
compact with the Muhammadan usurpers of Mysore ; the head centre of
French military adventurers when French influence was in the ascendant;
but finally settling down to a firm alliance with the British when we
had shown ourselves the victorious Power. By the treaty of 1800 the
Nizam agreed to furnish us in time of war with 6000 infantry and 9000
cavalry, and to use every effort to bring into the field the whole force of
his dominions to co-operate with the British army. But his troops
proved inefficient, and after various unsuccessful efforts to reform them,
the British Government had to partially undertake the maintenance
of the contingent. By the middle of the 19th century, Haidarabad
had sunk into a condition of chronic deficit and was practically a
bankrupt State.
At length in 1853, a new treaty provided that the British should entirely
maintain the auxiliary force, and provide for certain of the Haidarabad
pensions, obligations, and interest on debt: the Nizam on his part making
over to British management certain Districts (“ the Berars ”) yielding
a revenue of .£500,000 a year. During the Mutiny of 1857 the Nizam
remained loyal. In iB6O, he was rewarded by territorial acquisitions and
renditions, and by the cancelment of a debt of £500,000. Sir Salar Jung,
one of the most eminent Indian statesmen of modern times, was for long
its Prime Minister: and the Nizam was conspicuous in his loyal offers
of aid to the British Government after the Penjdch incident in 1885.
His Highness now maintains an Imperial Contingent at the disposal of
the Suzerain Power, and his Court is one of the most attractive resorts
in India for princely and royal visitors from Europe. The Haidarabad
nobility, together with a portion of the people, profess the Shiah form of
faith ; and the custom of still wearing arms gives a picturesque bearing
to the population which strikes a new-comer from the peaceful provinces
of British India,
Berar comprises the territory in the north of the Nizam’s dominions
which was made over to British management in 1853, less the two
Districts of Dharaseo and the Raichur Doab returned to the Nizam by
the treaty of iB6O. They are officially designated the Haidarabad
Assigned Districts and are administered by a British Commissioner, with
a staff of British Deputy Commissioners and Assistant Commissioners for
each District. The British Resident at Haidarabad, under the additional
title of Chief Commissioner of Berar, controls the whole, in direct
communication with the Government of India. Area 17,718 square
( 19 )


miles, with a population in 1891 of 2,897,491 ; of whom 2,531,791 are
Hindus; 207,681 Muhammadans ; the remainder being chiefly made up
of hill and forest tribes. For administrative purposes Berar is divided
into six Districts and as regards internal arrangements it may be
considered as one of the Non-Regulation British Provinces.
Berar is, in the main, a broad valley running east and west, lying
between the Satpura range on the north and the Ajanta range on the
south. The old local name of the valley at the base of the Satpuras
was Berar Payanghat; that of the tracts situated among the uplands and
hills of the Ajanta range being Berar Balaghat. The real wealth of
the Province is found in the valley at the base of the Satpuras. This
valley is watered or drained, as the case may be, by the Puma (an affluent
of the 1 apti) and by a network of streams descending into the main
river, both from the hills in the north and from the hills in the south.
Its soil is one broad superstratum of black loam overlying trap and
basalt. Its rainfall is regular and copious ; nearly the whole surface is
covered over at harvest time by a sheet of crops. Its population is
dense, and consists of Kunbis and other hardy and industrious agri-
cultural castes. It is traversed from west to east, for the greater part of
its breadth, by the railway from Nagpur to Bhusawal and Bombay. It
possesses one of the richest and most extensive cotton-fields in India,
and several cotton marts of the first rank. Its other products, especially
millets and oil-seeds, arc also excellent. Altogether, it is one of the
most promising regions in India ; and in respect to agricultural and
commercial development, Berar is now outstripping almost any other
tract in the Central Provinces or the Deccan.
( 20 )


MAPS IX AND X.
BOMBAY AND BARO D A.
The two following Maps exhibit, in a northern and southern section,
the western maritime tract and high-lying inland districts which form
the Bombay Presidency, together with the Sind Valley which has
been incorporated under its government. The political feature of the
Governorship of Bombay is the large number of Feudatory States under
its control, and the intricate manner in which many of those States are
interlaced with the British territories. P'or administrative purposes the
Presidency (including Sind and Aden) is divided into 22 British
Districts with an area of 125,144 square miles, and a population in 1891
of 18,901,123 : together with 19 chief Feudatory States, or rather groups
of States, having an area of 69,045 square miles, and a population in
1891 of 8,059,298. Total area of the Bombay Presidency, including
Sind, Aden, and the Feudatory States, 194,189 square miles: total
population, 26,960,421 in 1891 ; of whom 21,440,991 were Hindus, and
4*390.995 Muhammadans; the remainder being hill - tribes, Parsis,
Christians, and other non-Hindu sects or races. It will thus be seen
that nearly one-third of the population, and considerably more than
one-third of the territories dealt with by the two following maps, remain
under Native Rule. The most important and most populous of these
Feudatory States is Baroda which will receive separate notice-.
From the geographical and historical points of view, the Bombay
Presidency may be divided into a northern and southern section, with
the Narbada (Nerbudda) River as the dividing line. This arrange-
ment has been adopted in the two following Maps. To the north of
the Narbada, lie the Province of Gujarat, the peninsulas of Kathiawar
and Cutch, and the Province of Sind ; to the south of the Narbada lie
the Maratha country, the Deccan, the Karnatic, and Konkan.
Gujarat (Map IX.) is a low plain of alluvial origin. In Southern
Gujarat the valleys of Tapti and Narbada form sheets of unbroken culti-
vation. But in Northern Gujarat the soil becomes sandy and the rainfall
deficient; cultivation is largely dependent either upon artificial irriga-
tion or on the natural humidity caused by the neighbourhood of the
ocean. In Sind (above the delta of the Indus), the surface is a wide
expanse of desert, interrupted only by low cliffs or undulating sand-
heaps. The geological formation of the northern or Gujarat section of
the Bombay Presidency is distinct from that of the rest of the Indian
peninsula. It is largely made up of limestone rocks, continuous with
those found in Persia and Arabia.
Bombay, south of the Narbada (Map X.), consists of a level coast
strip, rising into an upland country. Mountains furrowed by gorges
intercept the rain clouds of the Monsoons, and are covered with tropical
vegetation. The geological formation is composed of nearly horizontal
( 21 )


strata of basalt and similar rocks, which break into steep terraces
and hog - backed ridges, and produce by their decomposition the
famous “ black cotton soil,” unsurpassed for its fertility. Perched upon
these rugged eminences stand the impregnable hill forts famous in
Maratha history. The Deccan, the Karnatic and the Konkan are each
marked by special features of its own. The Deccan, including Khan-
desh District, is an elevated plateau behind the Western Ghats. It is
drained by several large rivers, along whose banks are tracts of great
fertility ; but for the rest, the air is dry and the rainfall uncertain. The
Karnatic, or country south of the Krishna (Kistna) river, is a plain of
lower elevation, and contains wide expanses of black soil under con-
tinuous cultivation. The Konkan is the name of a narrow strip of land
lying between the base of the Ghats and the sea. As a whole, the
Konkan is a rugged and difficult country, intersected by numerous
creeks, and abounding in isolated peaks and detached ranges of hills.
Its cultivation chiefly consists of rich plots of rice-land and groves of
cocoa-nut. The rainfall is excessive.
The chief rivers of Gujarat are the Narbada and the Tapti. But the
Narbada spends only a short part of its course, of 800 miles from
Central India, within the British Districts of Bombay. The alluvial
plain of Broach, which it has silted up near its mouth, forms, however,
one of the richest Districts of the Presidency, The Tapti, although
inferior in length and size, plays a more important part in the Bombay
Districts. After 150 miles among the Satpura Ranges of the Central
Provinces, the Tapti waters, during its next 180 miles, the uplands of
Khandesh in the Bombay Deccan. At the narrow passage of the Deer’s
Leap it descends by a wild course of rapids and deep basins, crowned by
high cliffs, through the Dang forests into Gujarat. It gives fertility to
the rich central plain of Surat, and falls into the sea at the ancient, but
now silted up, harbour of Surat city. Two minor streams, the Sabar-
mati and the Mahi also water the Province of Gujarat.
While the northern provinces of Bombay are thus abundantly supplied
with rivers, the southern division is destitute of great streams. The
Ghats stand as a wall against the monsoon. The drainage, which rushes
down their western escarpment and across the narrow strip to the sea,
forms destructive torrents in the rainy season, and leaves dry beds of rock
and sand in the hot weather. The drainage from the Ghats to their
inland or eastern side supplies the head waters of the Godavari and the
Kistna. But these mighty rivers do not attain their full dimensions till
they pass beyond the eastern boundary of the Bombay Presidency, on
their long course towards the Bay of Bengal. Together with their
tributary streams such as the Bhima, the Tunga, the Bhadra, and the
united 1 unga-bhadra, they form the somewhat scanty water-system of
the Maratha country and the Deccan.
The agriculture of the Presidency is determined by the physical
features thus described. The well-watered province of Gujarat in the
north produces abundant and valuable crops ; the narrower coast strip in
the south is subject to an over-whelming rainfall and to the torrents from
the Ghats ; the dry inland districts of the Deccan beyond the Ghats have
from time immemorial been subject to scarcity and famine. Taking the
Presidency as a whole, the two most important food crops are bajra or
the great millet, and joan or the spiked millet especially in the Deccan
Districts; rice in the low lands of the Konkan coast strip and in
( 22 )


Gujarat , wheat and barley in Gujarat and Sind. Sugar-cane, tobacco
and spices yield a lucrative return : cotton is the great fibre-crop of the
Presidency and particularly of the inland districts ; bamboo, cocoa-nuts,
the toddy-tree and other palms fringe the coast; primeval forests of
\ aluablc timber clothe the Ghats, and their conservation forms a special
subject of the attention of the Bombay Government.
The Bombay Presidency is made up of the cUbris of ancient Hindu
and Buddhist Kingdoms, which after a period of more or less loosely
enforced Muhammadan conquest from the 13th to the 18th centuries,
passed under the Hindu or Maratha Confederacy upon the breaking up of
the Mughal Empire. Throughout the 18th century the Marathas were
the most important power in South-Western India, and it was not until
1 h 18, aftei thiec Maratha wars, that the Bombay Presidency was con-
stituted in its present form under British rule. Sind, or the lower valley
of the Indus, was conquered by us from its Muhammadan Princes or Mirs
(Amirs) in 1842, and now forms a Commissionership under the Bombay
Government.
The territorial divisions of the country during ancient native rule arc
still marked by the vernacular languages of the people. Sindhi is
spoken in the Indus valley; Gujarathi in the northern division of the
Presidency proper ; Marathi in the southern division and the Deccan ;
two minor dialects, Kanarese and Konkani, prevail along the strip
between the Ghats and the sea.
The Bombay Presidency contains some of the most keenly mercan-
tile, and most skilful industrial, races of India. In very ancient times
they developed a sea-going trade and were famous for their beautiful
art work in woven fabrics, embroidery, dyes, wood-carving, and metal
work. Under British rule they have advanced rapidly in commerce and
manufactures by steam-power. Their cotton-mills compete with those
of Manchester, and they have created so many important centres of
industrial enterprise that the briefest enumeration of the six largest is
all that can be attempted. Bombay city, obtained by England as part
of the dower which Katharine of Braganza brought to Charles 11. in
166 r, is the capital of the Presidency, and forms one of the most mag-
nificent seaports and trading emporia in the British Empire ; population
821,764 in 1891. Poona, the capital of the Maratha country, pop.
161,390; Ahmadabad, the capital of Northern Gujarat, pop. 148,412;
Baroda, the chief town of the State of the same name, 116,420; Surat,
the port of southern British Gujarat, 109,229 ; and Karachi, the rising-
capital of Sind, and great maritime city of export for the Indus Valley,
105,199.
Baroda, the most important of the Feudatory States in the Bombay
Presidency, and the premier Hindu State of the British Empire of India,
includes all the scattered territories of His Highness the Gaekwar in
the Province of Gujarat. Baroda is a non-tributary State, in direct
relations with the Supreme Government of India, and its ruling Prince
exercises the powers of life and death within his dominions. It is
divided into four administrative divisions, each containing a number of
sub-districts. One of the divisions, Amreli, is in the peninsula of
Kathiawar; the other three occupy the northern portion of Gujarat,
and are much intermingled with the British territories. Area of the
whole 8226 square miles; population 2,415,396 in 1891, of whom
( 23 )


2,137.568 are Hindus, 188,740 Muhammadans, the remainder being
made up of Parsis and various other sects.
The Baroda districts of Gujarat form a wide plain, drained by the
rivers Narbada, Tapti, Mahi, and several smaller streams. The surface
consists chiefly of regar, or black cotton soil, and a light-coloured soil
locally known as goraru. The natural fertility of the black cotton soil
is celebrated. The goraru soil is also fertile when manured and
irrigated ; in dry weather when subject to much traffic, as along roads,
it forms deep, heavy, and almost impalpable sand, which again after rain
becomes tolerably compact. The roads are generally lined by hedges
of cactus, irregularly planted. Deserted towns, ruined temples, and
tanks now partly filled with mud, bear testimony to former devasta-
tions of the country. Okhamandel, or the extreme north-west Division
of Baroda in the peninsula of Kathiawar, is surrounded on three sides
by the sea or by the Gulf of Cutch. It partakes of the general appear-
ance of the Province of Cutch (Kachchh), being everywhere sandy and
covered with loose stones. The Amreli Division resembles the rest of
Kathiawar; the country open, the soil good, and well watered with
perennial streams. The central Division, surrounding the city of
Baroda, is perfectly flat, extensively planted with trees, the soil fertile,
highly cultivated, and yielding crops of the best cotton. The fourth or
southern Division, including the lands that intermix with the British
District of Surat, is also fertile and well cultivated, especially in the
neighbourhood of the town of Navsari.
( 24 )


MAPS XL and XII.
MADRAS, MYSORE AND COORG.
The Madras Presidency comprises the whole eastern coast of India from
boundary of Orissa to Cape Comorin and stretches across the southern
part of the peninsula to the western coast of Malabar. The I 7 eudatory
State of Mysore occupies a central portion of the area thus defined, and
will receive a separate notice in this article. For administrative purposes,
Madras, or as it is officially designated the Presidency of I'ort St. George,
is divided into 21 British Districts and 5 P'cudatory States under its
political control. Area 150,798 square miles; population 39,331,062 in
1891 ; of whom 34,757,520 were Hindus, and 2,475,864 Muhammadans,
the remainder being made up of hill-tribes, native Christians, and various
non-Hindu sects and races. Madras is still essentially an agricultural
Presidency, and, unlike Bombay, has developed few modern centres of
manufacture or trade. Its only great city is Madras town, the capital
of the Presidency, pop. 452,518 in 1891; followed lougo inter-vallo by
Trichinopoli, pop. 90,609; Madura, pop. 87,428; Salem, pop. 67,710;
and Calicut, pop. 66,078. This absence of large centres of commerce is
partly due to the unsheltered character of the coast-line. Madras city
is itself an open road-stead, and no harbour safe for ships of deep
draught throughout the whole twelve months of the year exists between
Calcutta and Bombay.
Geographically, the Madras Presidency may be divided into three
regions ; first, the long and broad eastern coast ; second, the shorter and
narrower western coast; third the table-lands in the interior. These
three divisions are determined by the two great mountain ranges of the
Eastern and Western Ghats, which give the key to the configuration of
all Southern India. The Eastern Ghats lie entirely within the Madras
Presidency, and form a continuation of the confused hill system of
Chutia Nagpur. They run in a succession of ranges in a south-westerly
direction down the whole eastern coast of Madras, until they lose them-
selves in the Nilgiris, and there join with the Western Ghats. Their average
height is only 1 500 feet, and for the most part they leave a broad expanse
of low land between their base and the Bay of Bengal. The Eastern
Ghats are pierced by three great rivers, the Godavari, Krishna (Kistna),
and Kavcri (Cauvery), as well as by minor streams, so that they do
not perform the part of a watershed. These hills may, from one point
of view, be regarded as the broken eastern cliffs of the southern and
central plateau.
The Western Ghats, on the Bombay side, stretch southwards along
the shore of the Arabian Sea and the Indian Ocean, from the north
of Bombay, and satisfy all the characteristics of a mountain water-
shed. The line is only broken by the Palghat gap ; the northern section
measuring about 800 miles in length and the southern section about
( 25 )


200 miles. Rising steeply at a distance of 30 to 50 miles from the
coast, the Western Ghats catch almost the whole rainfall of the monsoon,
and in the south not a single stream breaks through their barrier. Their
eastern face gradually slopes down to the table - land of the central
plateau. Some of the hills in the Madras Presidency attain an elevation
of more than 8000 feet. The highest peak of the Nilgiris (the connect-
ing link between the Eastern and the Western Ghats) is 8760 feet in
height, while the loftiest point of the Anamalai hills is nearly one
hundred feet higher. The Palghat gap affords a remarkable passage to
the wind, which is elsewhere barred by the continuous range. The
country immediately east of the gap receives the rainfall of the south-
west monsoon; and during the north-east monsoon, ships passing
Bcypur (near the mouth of the Palghat gap) meet with a much stronger
wind from the land than is felt elsewhere along the western coast.
Between the ranges of the P2astern and Western Ghats lies the
central table-land with an elevation of from 1000 to 3000 feet. This
inner table-land includes Districts of the Bombay Presidency, the
Central Provinces, the Berars, the Nizam’s Dominions, many Districts
of the Madras Presidency, and the whole of Mysore. Its outline follows
the triangular shape of the peninsula. The depressions in its surface
coincide with the valleys of the rivers and their chief tributaries.
Each of the eastern, central, and western divisions of the Madras
Presidency presents strongly marked features of its own. The eastern
coast has the deltas of the great rivers, where artificial irrigation
combines with natural fertility to reward the toil of the husbandman.
On the west coast, the rainfall never fails ; but cultivation is hemmed
within narrow limits between the mountains and the sea. In the central
plateau, the country is generally bare, the rainfall light, and the means
of irrigation difficult. But it contains many tracts of fertile soil, and
the cultivator does his best to store in tanks the scanty showers which
the monsoons bring to him from either coast.
The three principal rivers of Madras are the Godaveri, Kistna or
Krishna, and Kavcri (Cauvery), each with a large tributary system of
its own. All these rivers have certain uniform features. They rise in
the Western or Bombay Ghats, and run across the peninsula in a south-
easterly direction into the Bay of Bengal. They drain rather than
water the upper country through which they flow, and are there com-
paratively valueless either for navigation or irrigation. But, like other
rivers which fall into the Bay of Bengal, all of them spread over alluvial
deltas before they reach the sea, and become capable of being utilized
by the agriculturist and engineer. The other rivers on the Madras
coast, of similar character but smaller dimensions, are the North and
South Penner or Pinakini, the Palar, the Vaiga, the Vellar, and the
Tambraparni.
The principal lake in the Presidency is Pulicat, on the east coast,
37 miles in length from north to south, and from 3 to 11 miles in
breadth. Pulicat Lake forms an important back - water for inland
communication between Madras City and the Northern Districts. The
Lake is supposed to have been caused by the sea breaking in through
the low sandy beach. On the western coast, the perpetual antagonism
between the mountain torrents and the ocean has produced a remark-
able series of back-waters or lagoons, fringing the entire seaboard of
Kanara, Malabar, and Travancore. The largest is the back-water of
( 26 )


Cochin, which extends from north to south for a distance of 120 miles.
These back-waters are also used for inland navigation. Continuous
water communication is thus provided between Cochin and the capital
of Travancore, and is thence prolonged southwards almost to Cape
Comorin by an artificial canal.
The principal agricultural products of the Madras Presidency are
millets, rice, tobacco, of especially good quality on the red loam soil of
Dindigul, coffee, tea, cinchona, spices of many sorts, oil-seeds, cotton
and other fibres. The land throughout the greater part of the Presi-
dency is in the hands of peasant proprietors, who pay rent direct to
Government. Irrigation is largely resorted to from wells, tanks or
artificial lakes, and Government canals.
dhe southern Districts of Madras have been the strongholds of
Christianity in India. Apart from the so-called Saint Thomas
Christians, who may date from the end of the 2nd century A.D. on the
Malabar Coast, the Roman Catholics have been at work in the southern
Districts since the 16th century; and the Protestants since the 18th.
There is now a Christian population of about millions in and around
the Madras Presidency; the great proportion being Roman Catholics.
Of the Protestants nearly two-thirds are claimed by the Church of
England. The Madras Presidency contains the oldest of the British
territorial possessions in India; but was for the most part acquired
during the second half of the 18th century.
MYSORE is an important Feudatory State in the centre of the
Madras Presidency (Map XII.). Area 27,936 square miles; popula-
tion 4,943,604 in 1891, of whom 4,639,127 are Hindus, and 252,973
Muhammadans, the remainder being of various races and creeds. Chief
towns : Bangalore, pop. 180,366 in 1891 ; and Mysore, pop, 74,048.
Geographically, Mysore consists of an undulating table-land, broken
by ranges of rocky hills and scored by deep ravines. It occupies the
angle where the Eastern and Western Ghats converge into the lofty
group of the Nilgiri Hills. The general elevation of Mysore increases
from about 2000 feet above sea-level, along the northern and southern
frontiers, to about 3000 feet at the central water-parting which separates
the basin of the Kistna (Krishna) from that of the Kaveri (Cauvery).
1 his line of water-parting divides Mysore into two nearly equal parts ;
and various chains of hills, running chiefly north and south, subdivide
the country into numerous valleys widely differing in shape and size.
An interesting feature of Mysore, and one of great importance from
an historical point of view, is the large number of isolated rocks, called
droogs or drugs (from the Sanscrit durga “ difficult of access ”), which
sometimes rear their heads as stupendous monoliths to the height of 4000
or 5000 feet above the level of the sea. These rocks, from the circum-
stances that their summits frequently afford a plentiful supply of good
water, were in former days used as hill fortresses to dominate the
adjacent plains.
In regard to its productions, Mysore is divided into two regions of
distinct character—the hill country, called the Malnad, on the west,
confined to the tracts bordering or resting on the Western Ghats ; and
the more open country, known as the Maidan, comprising the greater
part of the State, where the wide - spreading valleys and plains are
covered with numerous villages and populous towns. The Malnad is a
( 27 )


picturesque land of hill and forest, presenting diversified and beautiful
scenery. The Maidan comprises the cultivated parts of Mysore. Its level
plains of black soil in the north grow cotton or millets ; the tracts in
the south and west, irrigated by channels drawn from rivers, are covered
with plantations of sugar-cane and fields of rice ; those irrigated from
tanks are studded with gardens of cocoa-nut and areca palms ; the high-
lying tracts of red soil, in the east, yield inferior millets ; the stony
pasture-grounds, in the central portions of the country, are covered with
coarse grass, and occasionally relieved by shady groves. Coffee, tea,
and cinchona are grown on a large scale by European planters in the
Mysore hills ; and the gold fields of Mysore are now being developed by
companies working with modern appliances. It is not yet safe to pre-
dict the future of these mining operations, but Mysore may possibly be
destined to become one of the gold-yielding regions of the world.
Mysore was the seat of pre-historic Buddhist and Hindu dynas-
ties ; it fell a prey to the arms of the Mahammadan military adventurer
Haidar Ali, in the 18th century, and was restored by the British to a
representative of its ancient Hindu line on the downfall of Haidar’s
successor Tipu Sultan in 1799. A period of cruel oppression and
misrule by its native prince was put an end to by the British assuming
the administration on his behalf in 1831 ; but the country was duly
restored to his adopted son, the present chief, on his coming of age
in 1881. Mysore is now in many respects a model Feudatory State,
with a representative Legislative Assembly, and a Prince just and
enlightened in his internal administration, and loyal to the Suzerain
Power.
COORG, meaning The Steep Mountains, is a small British province or
territory in the south-west of the Madras Presidency ; but politically,
under the administration of the Supreme Government of India, through
the Mysore Resident who is also Chief Commissioner of Coorg. Area
1583 square miles; population 173,055 in 1891, of whom 156,845 are
Hindus, and 12,665 Muhammadans; the remainder being chiefly made
up of hill and forest tribes. The importance of Coorg as a field for
European enterprise, particularly in coffee-planting, compels a longer
description of it than would be warranted by its geographical
dimensions.
Coorg lies immediately to the east of the mountain chain of the
Western Ghats, which separate it from the Madras west-coast Districts
of Malabar and South Kanara. The western slopes of the Ghats drop
in a series of terraces and precipices towards the sea, but to the east
they form a confused network of spurs, ridges, valleys, and lofty plains.
This confused elevated region is Coorg. Its chief town Merkara, with a
population of about 10,000, is situated on a table-land, about 3500 feet
above sea-level. But even this plateau is broken by hills and steep
valleys, leaving but little space for cultivation. The main rivers of
Coorg arc the upper waters of the Kaveri (Cauvery) and its tributaries.
They flow in narrow valleys, usually through dense jungle ; and they
are little used for artificial irrigation. The geological formation of the
mountains belongs to the metamorphic class of rocks, chiefly granite,
syenite, and mica schist. The weathering of these rocks, under the
influence of rain, wind, and sun, has produced a deep surface soil of great
fertility, which is annually renewed by the decomposition of the virgin
( 28 )


forest. Stone and laterite are quarried for building purposes and gold
has been found. In Coorg Proper, cultivation is confined to the numerous
valleys between the eastern spurs of the Ghats and to the banks of the
river Kaveri and its confluents. Even the narrowest glen, wherever
the plough can reach the soil, is patiently laid out in terraces for the
rice crop.
After a heroic resistance to the aggressions of Haidar Ali and
Tipu Sultan in the last century, in which the whole Coorg race and
its Hindu rulers narrowly escaped deportation or slaughter, the
country fell under the curse of oppressive princes whose senseless
ferocity almost seemed the acts of insanity. Repeated remonstrance
from the British Resident at Mysore proved ineffectual, and at length
ended in armed intervention. The Raja, after a brave stand by the
Coorg militia, surrendered to the British Political Agent, who issued a
proclamation, dated 7th May, 1834, announcing that, in accordance with
the general wish of the inhabitants, Coorg was transferred to the Govern-
ment of the East India Company. Its population forms a striking
example of a brave and intelligent race, ruled by British officers with
the least possible amount of internal changes or interference. They have
steadily advanced in material prosperity under the influence of a settled
government, and of the British capital brought into the District for the
coffee cultivation.
( 29 )


MAPS XIII. AND XIV.
ASSAM, MANIPUR, BURMA, AND ISLANDS.
The following two Maps have for their main subject the long strip of
territory which separates British India on the east from the Chinese
Empire and Siam. Beginning with the north-eastern angle of the
British dominions, Map XIII. exhibits the fertile valleys of the Brahma-
putra and Surma rivers, which constitute the Chief Commissionership of
Assam. It proceeds southward through the Native State of Manipur,
and the confused intermediate region of hill tribes, to the middle valley
of the Irawadi and its confluents, which was annexed in 1886 under the
name of Upper Burma. Map XIV. forms its continuation, and delineates
the lower valleys and delta of the Irawadi and the narrow maritime
strip along the south-eastern coast of the Bay of Bengal, which, until
1886, made up the greater part of the British province of Lower
Burma. It also exhibits the two archipelagos of the Andaman and
the Nicobar Islands. For geographical purposes it is convenient first
to treat of the northern section including Assam, Manipur, and certain
of the Hill Tracts ; and then to devote a separate introduction to Upper
and Lower Burma as a whole, concluding with a brief notice of the
Andamans and Nicobars.
Assam and Manipur.
ASSAM forms the north-eastern province of British India, walled in
by the Himalayas and their offshoots along its northern and eastern
frontiers, and bordered on the west by the low-lying tracts of the
Lieutenant-Governorship of Bengal. It comprises the valleys of the
Brahmaputra and of the Surma known in its upper course as the Barak,
together with the mountainous watershed which intervenes between
these two river-systems. For administrative purposes Assam is divided
into 9 Districts of the Plains and 4 Hill Districts. Total area 49,004
square miles; population 5,476,833 in 1891, of whom 2,997,072 were
Hindus, and 1,483,974 Muhammadans; the remainder being chiefly
made up of hill and forest races. Chief towns or administrative head
quarters: Shillong, the hill residence of the Chief Commissioner;
Goalpara, Gauhati, Dibrugarh, and Sadiya on the Brahmaputra ; Sylhet
on the Surma, and Silchar on its upper channel the Barak. The
population of these towns, or rather clusters of villages, is too small to
require specification.
Assam, as already indicated, consists of three tracts which are
distinguished by strongly marked physical characteristics: Assam
proper or the valley of the Brahmaputra ; the Surma valley ; and the
central hill tract region between them. Assam Proper, or the valley of
the Brahmaputra, is an alluvial plain, about 450 miles, with an average
breadth of 50 miles. On all sides but the west it is shut in by junglc-
( 30 )


covered ranges or lofty mountains. From east to west it is traversed by
the main stream of the Brahmaputra ; and the strips of land along each
bank of the great river arc intersected by numerous minor streams.
The main stream of the Brahmaputra, although confined at places
by isolated hills or by spurs from the great ranges, wanders for the
most part over the broad bottom of its valley, and has changed its
course many times within the memory of man. A strip of land, varying
from six to twenty miles in breadth, liable to annual inundations or
eruptions of new channels, is thus abandoned to a wild overgrowth of
reeds or grass-jungle, and is incapable of permanent habitation. It is
not till the ground begins to rise gradually towards the hills that
regular agriculture becomes possible. The almost uniform level of the
valley is broken at intervals by low conical hills, which arc scattered in
isolated mounds or in clusters throughout the plains. In some parts the
hills throw forward spurs almost to the river-bank.
rhe valley of the Surma and of its upper channel known as the Barak
consists of a shallow basin, and is being filled up by the silt that
the enormous rainfall washes off the southern slopes of the Khasi Hills.
This detritus is deposited along the river banks, which are thus gradu-
ally raised above the surrounding level and form the highways of the
country, hrom each tributary the level recedes, sinking 20 or 30 feet
below the crest of the bank, when it again rises to the bank of the
next stream. These great hollows or river troughs, locally known as
haors, arc a peculiar feature in Sylhet. The District of Cachar is crossed
by hill ranges running transversely to the main river, and in Sylhet
the valley gradually expands until it merges into the wide flats of
Eastern Bengal.
The central hill tract between the Brahmaputra and the Surma
valleys, comprises the Districts of the Naga Hills, Khasi and Jaintia Hills,
and the Garo Hills. It forms a long, projecting outwork of the mountain
system which intervenes between the watersheds of the Brahmaputra
and the Irawadi. This outwork consists, not of one hill range, but of a
number of ridges and plateaux, separated by deep valleys. The
character of a plateau, deeply furrowed by torrents, but still having a
general equality of level, is maintained throughout the Khasi and
Jaintia Hills, and in the eastern portion of the Garo Hills, but is lost
in the country west of the Sameswari River. The highest point in
British territory is the peak of Japso, 9890 feet. Farther east, beyond
British territory, this elevation is considerably exceeded, the maps showing
several peaks over 10,000, and one over 12,000 feet. In the Khasi
Hills the range above Shillong rises to 6449 feet, while the Garo Hills
have no point above 4700 feet. The ascent from the plain is very
abrupt, especially on the southern side of the Khasi ranges, and each
separate ridge or plateau is marked by precipitous outlines.
The soil of the Brahmaputra valley is for the most part a rich black
loam, reposing on grey sandy clay, and in some tracts a light yellow
clay appears on the surface. The mountains on the north and east are
composed of primitive limestone. The Naga Hills begin on the east
with sandstone; but in the neighbourhood of Samaguting granite
appears, which runs westward continuously to the end of the Garo
langcs. In the Khasi and Jaintia Hills, stratified rocks of sandstone,
limestone, and shale occur ; and talc in the Garo Hills. Over the greater
part of the hill tracts, the surface soil is a red ferruginous loam.
( 31 )


The hills of Assam abound in mineral resources, including coal, iron
and limestone. The existence of coal was discovered in 1825, and several
attempts at working the seams have been conducted by European
capital. The beds at the foot of the Naga Hills in Lakhimpur and
Sibsagar Districts were reported on by Mr. Mallet of the Geological
Survey in the years 1874-75 and 1875-76, These coal-fields are six in
number, extending over a tract 110 miles long, and are computed to
contain an aggregate of 40 million tons. There are also several small
beds in the Khasi and Jaintia Hills. The quality of the coal in both
cases is excellent, but the difficulty of transport has as yet prevented it
from largely competing with the coal of the Bengal mines. Petroleum
is found in abundance near the out-crop of the coal-measures at Makum,
but attempts to introduce the oil as an article of commerce have
hitherto proved unsuccessful. Iron also occurs along the whole line of
the hill tracts. In former times the Khasis supplied the plains of
Eastern Bengal with smelted ore and iron implements, but now the
industry has almost died out under the competition of the cheaper
English article, and is only confined to a few villages in the Khasi Hills.
Forests form a second source of natural wealth in Assam, and
they have recently been placed under a system of conservancy
and of economic working. Wood-cutters from Bengal have as yet
hardly penetrated half way into Kumrup, and there is a vast quantity
of timber to be worked in the Eastern Dwars, as well as in South Kam-
rup. East of Kamrup, the forests are practically untouched. The
manufacture of canoes or “dug-outs” is here the only use to which large
trees are put, and charcoal is the main object of demand.
The staple grain-crop of Assam is rice, and in the rich alluvial soil of
the Brahmaputra and Surma valleys, three crops (although not from
the same fields) are raised each year. The other crops include mustard
seed in large quantities, sugar-cane, Indian-corn, betel-nut, the betel-
leaf, tobacco, and most important of all, tea. The soil is very fertile
neither manure nor irrigation being required, as the rivers rarely fail to
overflow their banks and to deposit a fresh top-dressing of silt each year.
There is still abundance of waste-land awaiting the increasing population
of Assam.
The cultivation and manufacture of tea, conducted with European
capital and under European management, occupies a small area but
forms the one great commercial industry in Assam. The tea-plant was
found growing wild in Upper Assam, then part of the Burmese dominions,
by Mr. Robert Bruce in 1823. After the cession of Assam to the British
in 1826 further inquiries and Government experiments were made. In
1835 the first tea-garden was opened out at Lakhimpur by the East
India Company; and in 1838 the first twelve chests of Assam tea
reached England. From 1839 onwards, mercantile firms and associations
took up the enterprise, and in 1840 the Government made over its
experimental plantation to the Assam Tea Company, Since then the
tea-industry has rapidly advanced in Assam, and notwithstanding a
serious check from over-speculation in 1866 it is still progressing. In
1891 there were 867 tea-estates in Assam, producing 94-i million pounds
of tea : average out-turn, 409 lbs. per acre of mature plant. The industry
is chiefly carried on by coolies recruited among the landless low-castes
and hill and forest races of South-Western Bengal, and from Bchar. The
local peasant in Assam is too well off, and has still sufficient land of his
( 32 )


own, to care to hire himself out as a labourer. Indeed, a large import of
rice from Bengal is required to feed the coolie immigrants on the tea
plantations.
The population of Assam is made up of a diversity of elements,
varying from the Hindu new-comers from Bengal, to tribes of a Tibcto-
Chinese type on the north and eastern frontier, and the hillmen on the
south who are allied to the aborginal races of the Upper Burma frontier.
There is nothing approaching to an Assamese nationality ; and the
Assamese language is merely a modern variant of Bengali with local words
of non-Aryan origin embedded in it, and subjected to dialectical changes
of certain vowels and consonants. The post-mythic history of Assam
records the advance and conflicts of two races of invaders from opposite
directions. The Ahams from the cast and south-east began to make
their conquests in the Assam Valley in the thirteenth century; the
Muhammadans entered it from the west and north-west in the seven-
teenth. A long period of misery and misrule led to the Burmese being
called in from the south as arbitrators in the eighteenth century : and
the Burmese having once established themselves ruled the natives with
a rod of iron. Whole districts arc recorded to have been depopulated
by internecine struggles, and by the exactions and barbarities of the
Burmese. In 1824, the Burmese having extended their insults and
aggressions to the British districts on the Bay of Bengal, war was
declared by Lord Amherst against the kingdom of Burma. As an
incident of the campaign Assam was occupied by a British force, and in
February 1826 it was ceded to the East India Company by the treaty
Yandaba (Ycndaboo) which terminated the war.
MANIPUR, a petty hill State on the south-east of Assam, area about
8000 square miles, population 221,000. The State consists of an exten-
sive valley, situated in the heart of the difficult and mountainous
country which stretches between Assam, Cachar, Burma and Chittagong.
Dense forests cover many of the surrounding hills, and the State has no
external commerce except in polo ponies, bees-wax, ivory, jungle-
produce, and hockey-sticks; for which it takes payment chiefly in
cotton and woollen goods, metals, tools, tobacco, and spices. Manipur first
came within British cognisance by a treaty granted to it in 1762.
During the next century its history discloses a scries of raids, revolutions,
and dynastic murders, broken by intervals of peace and prosperity.
In 1835 a British Political Agent was appointed to Manipur. It derived
some passing importance from a palace intrigue in 1891, which, under
the mismanagement of the local political authorities, culminated in a
treacherous massacre of certain British officials including the Chief
Commissioner of Assam, and the stampede of his escort under two
young officers left in charge of it. The Government of India after a full
enquiry dismissed the two unhappy youths from the army, punished the
native intriguers of the reigning family who were responsible for the
massacre, but refrained from annexing the State. It took effectual
precautions, however, to secure a better rule in the future.
Burma and the Islands.
Burma, as constituted since 1886, includes the middle and lower valleys
of the Irawadi river, together with its delta, and the territories which
stretch eastwards and westwards from the central Irawadi valley. It
( 33 )


is bounded on the north by the hill-tracts which separate it from Bengal
and Assam ; on the east by Shan and other semi-independent states,
and by the Chinese Empire and Siam ; on the west by the Bay of Bengal ;
while on the south a narrow coast strip continues the Chief Commis-
sionership of Burma to the 10th degree of latitude. Total area, 171,430
square miles in 1891 ; population, 7,608,552; of whom 6,888,250 were
Buddhists ; 173,432 Hindus ; and 253,640 Muhammadans ; the remainder
being made up of hill races and various sects. The special circumstances
of Burma demand a fuller treatment than that accorded to older
provinces.
The Irawadi valley constitutes the fertile central region of Burma
and runs down it from north to south. On the western bank of the
river, the country rises into a series of high ranges, and then falls into
the narrow coast-strip of Arakan along the eastern shore of the Bay of
Bengal. These high ranges, known as the Yoma (Roma) Mountains, are
covered with dense forests, and separate the Irawadi valley from the strip
of coast. The Yomas have peaks exceeding 4000 feet, and culminate
in the Blue Mountain 7100 feet. They form a sort of backbone to the
more level regions of Burma on either side of them, but are crossed by
passes, one of which the An or Aeng rises to 4517 feet above the
sea-level. Turning to the eastern side of the Irawadi, the country
rises into the mountainous regions of the Shans and other races, dwelling
in the little-explored highlands which separate Burma from the frontier
states of the Chinese Empire. Below the Irawadi delta, a long narrow
strip, known under the comprehensive name of Tenasserim, runs south-
ward between the Bay of Bengal and the Siamese dominions, as far as
Point Victoria.
Burma consists therefore of five well-defined tracts, the valley of the
Irawadi, including Upper and Lower Burma, in the centre ; the backbone
of the Yoma Mountains on the western margin of that central valley ;
the hill country of the Shans and other wild tribes on the opposite or
eastern edge of the central valley ; the coast-strip of Arakan, between
the Bay of Bengal and the Yoma Mountains; and the long isolated
southern coast-strip of Tenasserim, lying between the Bay of Bengal and
the Siamese dominions. The central valley and the two coast-strips are
extremely fertile. The outskirts of the hilly tracts are rich in teak and
other valuable trees, and forest produce. A thousand creeks indent
the seaboard ; and the whole of the level country, on the coast and in
the Lower Irawadi valley, forms one vast rice-field. The rivers float
down cheaply the teak, bamboos, and timbers from the north. Tobacco,
of an excellent quality, supplies the cigars which all Burmese (men,
women and children) smoke and affords an industrial product of
increasing value. Arakan and Pegu the two provinces of the coast, and
also the Irawadi valley, contain mineral-oil springs. Tenasserim is rich
in tin mines, and yields iron-ores equal to the finest Swedish ; besides
gold and copper in smaller quantities, and a very pure limestone. Rice
and timber form the staple exports of Burma; and rice is also the universal
food of the people. Burma is fortunate in still possessing wide areas of
} ct uncultivated land to meet the wants of its rapidly increasing people.
Por administrative and historical purposes the Chief Commissioner-
ship of Burma must be considered under two sections : one dealing with
Lower Burma, the other with Upper Burma. Lower Burma includes
the Arakan, Pegu, Irawadi, and Tenasserim Divisions, and is divided
( 34 )


into 20 British Districts, Area, 87,957 square miles in 1891 ; popula-
tion, 4,658,627, of whom 4,043,506 were Buddhists ; 142,522 Hindus ;
and 210,649 Muhammadans ; the remainder being made up of Christians
and Non-Hindu sects. The Burmans are a light-hearted prosperous
people, fond of festivities, subject to sudden fits of passion which some-
times end in domestic atrocities or murder, but, as a rule, enjoying life
calmly, and leaving their women to do much of the work especially
among the trading classes. In the deltaic and other moist regions of
Burma the houses are built on platforms raised on poles well above the
ground. Next to the Burmans proper, the Karens are the most numer-
ous race in Burma. They inhabit both the hills and the adjacent
lowlands. The Karens of the hills dwell in long bamboo structures
called tehs, with a narrow central passage inside running from end to
end. On either side of the common passage are ranged the rooms, in
which as many as twenty different families live. Under the populous
structure dwell the pigs and fowls of the whole establishment amid
constantly accumulating heaps of filth. Fortunately the Karens houses
are shifted annually. The Karens have become converts to Christianity
in large numbers. They are supposed to have been originally located in
the north-west of China. Thence the Karens, pressed by movements of
population from Central Asia, migrated south towards Yunan. But
finding that country already occupied by the Shans, they turned off to
the south-west, along the Si Haung and Salwin Rivers, and settled into
their present habitats about the sixth century, A.D. Long and cruelly
oppressed by the Burmans, the Karens now form a hopeful element of the
population, not only from their tendency to accept the Christian faith,
but also for the rude virtues which enable them to be enlisted in police
and local corps. There are now about 560 Christian Karen parishes,
most of which support their own church, their own pastor, and their own
parish school ; while many of them also subscribe considerable sums
for missionary work among the non - Christian Karens and other
hill races.
The almost universal religion of Lower Burma is Buddhism. Every
township or village had its Monastery, where the boys were taught to
read and write, and were instructed in religion, by the monks. These
monks do not officiate at pagodas, or discharge the duties of parish
priests. Their functions are to set an example by their pious lives and
to instruct the young. Such monastic schools have been wisely incor-
porated, as far as possible, into the British system of public instruction
in Burma.
Rice is the staple of Lower Burma, and the production and distri-
bution of this universal crop gives employment to three-fifths of the
population. Both in Lower and Upper Burma agriculture is conducted
on two systems : by permanent tillage of the fields as in the rest of
India, but also to some extent by a nomadic cultivation known as
taungya or jum. This latter system consists in roughly clearing a patch
of forest land, setting fire to the demolished jungle, and then sowing
among the ashes a mixed crop of cotton, rice, pumpkins, or other vege-
tables, which ripen in about five months. After exhausting the first
fertility of the new soil, the taungya cultivator moves away and repeats
the process on another patch of jungle. A similar system of nomadic
cultivation is carried on around Assam and in the hill countries shown
in Map XIII. The Government rent or land tax on such nomadic
( 35 )


cultivation is generally raised by means of a poll-tax on the nomadic
husbandman, or on his house, irrespective of the amount of his clearing.
As population increases, this taungya or nomadic cultivation tends to
give place to regular plough husbandry. In Burma the Government is
the sole proprietor of the soil, without any intermediate holders between
it and the actual cultivator. The cultivators thus form practically a
peasant proprietary holding direct from the Government, at an average
assessment of about three shillings an acre. Their holdings are as a
rule about eight acres a-piece.
The Kingdom of Burma, after centuries of revolution and oppression,
provoked a war with the British Bower in 1824. The provinces of
Arakan and Tcnasserim passed under British administration by the
Treaty of Yandabu in 1826. In 1852 the King of Ava or Burma again
forced the British into hostilities by his persistent insults and contemp-
tuous refusal of redress. The two remaining provinces of Lower Burma
(Pegu and Martaban) were annexed by proclamation to the East India
Company’s dominions in 1852, as the result of the war. In 1862 the four
provinces of Lower Burma were constituted into a Chief Commissioner-
ship. In 1885 the King of Ava, by another series of insults and refusals
of redress, brought on the third and last Burmese War. His territories,
including all Upper Burma, were annexed to British India on the Ist
January 1886, and the King was dethroned and removed on a liberal
pension to southern India. Upper and Lower Burma were thus united
in 1886 into one British province. For a time the new territories in
the middle and higher valleys of the Irawadi were distracted by bands
of dakaits, formed out of the broken army of the late King, and from
the elements of disturbance and lawlessness which had been powerful
during his period of misrule. But they gradually settled down under
a firm British administration. Upper Burma is believed to possess great
mineral wealth in its jade and ruby mines. Its teak forests supply
in the meanwhile the chief product of commercial value. Cultivation
in Upper Burma is more backward and less certain than in the well-
watered districts of Lower Burma ; and Upper Burma still continues to
import rice from the Irawadi Delta. An important problem in the
administration of Upper Burma arises from the old established preda-
tory habits of the hill races which surround it on the north and cast.
But with the advance of the railway into Upper Burma, the spread of
roads, and the establishment of British stations in and near the hills, this
difficulty is being gradually overcome.
THE ANDAMANS arc a group of islands on the eastern side of the
Bay of Bengal, 590 geographical miles from the mouth of the Hugh
river and 160 miles from Cape Negrais. They consist of the Great and
Little Andaman Groups, surrounded by a number of smaller islands.
Port Blair, the principal harbour, is situated on the south-eastern shore
of the southern island of the great Andaman Group, It is one of the
finest harbours in the world, and half the British navy might ride in it ;
while its central position in the Bay of Bengal gives it immense advan-
tages as a place of rendezvous for a fleet. The East India Company
used Port Blair as a convict settlement as early as 1789, but had to
abandon it in 1796 owing to the deadly malaria of the jungles, the
hostility of the aborigines, and the difficulty of bringing regular supplies
from the mainland. The present convict settlement at Port Blair was
( 36 )


re-established in 1858, and became the scene of the murder of the Earl
of Mayo when on a tour of inspection in 1872. I’ort Blair had a popula-
tion of 15,609 in 1891, of whom 9433 were Hindus and 3980 Muham-
madans. The other ports of the Andaman Group are—Port Campbell,
on west coast of South Andaman ; and Port Cornwallis, on the east
coast of North Andaman.
The most conspicuous geographical feature of the islands is a central
range of mountains in the Great Andaman group, the highest point of
which, Saddle Peak, reaches an elevation of about 2400 feet, with an
escarped side towards the east and a sloping declivity towards the west.
There are many other little hills, most of them covered with jungle. On
the east coast, as far south as Long Island, there is a great deficiency of
fresh water. The scenery is beautiful. Graceful forest trees shoot up to
a height of more than 100 feet, with large clumps of bamboos from 30 to
35 feet high ; palms abound. The banian and the almond, the ebony,
the sundri and the poplar, the red-wood, and the iron-tree which turns
the edges of the axe, are all found in the Andaman forests, mixed in
beautiful confusion with cotton-trees, screw pines, and arborescent
euphorbias. The mangrove is abundant in the low-lying pestilential
swamps between the hills, and gives shelter to lovely orchids. In most
parts a dense undergrowth renders the jungle impenetrable by man
or beast. Innumerable creepers, stretching from tree to tree, prevent
the escape of malarious exhalations. The Arab geographers described
the Andamanese as “savages who eat men alive; black, with woolly
hair ; in their eyes and countenances something frightful ; who go
naked, and have no boats —if they had, they would devour all who
pass near.” These old-world islanders are dwindling in numbers, and
are now harmless. The British administration refrains as much as
possible from interfering with them, but provides hospitals and medicine
for their infirm and sick people. Agriculture is unknown to the abori-
ginal population ; and with the exception of patches which have been
cleared by the convicts, the islands are almost uncultivated.
1 HE Nicobars are a cluster of islands lying to the south of the
Andamans, in the Bay of Bengal. The area of the whole archipelago
amounts approximately to 426 square miles, and the population to about
6000 souls. The group consists of 8 large and 12 small islands. The
fine harbour of Nancowry is formed by the islands of Nancowry and
Camorta. Many of the channels separating the islands afford safe
passages for ships, Most of the islands are hilly, and some of the peaks
attain a considerable height. Others are quite flat, and covered with
forests of cocoa-nut trees. All of them are well wooded. In certain
of the islands, particularly Camorta and Nancowry, the forests alternate
with extensive undulating plains covered with a long coarse grass, which
would yield excellent pasture for cattle. The valleys and sides of the
hills, to a considerable height, are so thickly covered with trees that the
light of the sun never penetrates through their foliage. Among the trees
are the cocoa-nut and areca palms, the mango, the larum or viellori , and a
timber tree which grows to an immense height, and would afford good
material for building and repairing ships. Tropical fruits grow in great
abundance, and yams of fine quality and size. The domestic animals
are dogs, pigs, and a few fowls. Of birds the Nicobar swallow is the
chief. It is the builder of the edible nests so highly valued by the
( 37 )


Chinese. Many kinds of fish abound in the waters around the islands,
and shell-fish arc found in great quantities. The soil on the sea-shore is
composed of sand, coral, lime, and vegetable mould, more or less thick ;
the hills are red clay ; and the rocks lime, sandstone, and slate. Speci-
mens of coal have been found in various parts of the Nicobars, and seem to
indicate the existence of a great coal-bed extending through the islands.
Field agriculture is quite unknown on the Nicobars. A few plantains,
sweet limes, yams, and other vegetables for local consumption arc,
however, raised. In 1869, the Nicobars were annexed by Her Majesty’s
Indian Government, and were placed for administration under the
Superintendent of the Andaman Islands.
( 38 )


LOWER BENGAL. 1




NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES—OUDH & NEPAL. 2




PUNJAB (East) & KASHMIR. 3




PUNJAB (West) BRIT. BALUCHISTAN & N.W. FRONTIER. 4




RAJPUTANA & AJMERE-MERWARA. 5




CENTRAL INDIA. 6




CENTRAL PROVINCES. 7




HAIDARABAD AND BERAR 8




BOMBAY (North) AND BARODA. 9




BOMBAY (South). 10




MADRAS (South), MYSORE AND COORG. 11




MADRAS (North), SOUTH ORISSA AND CEYLON. 12




BRITISH BURMA (North), ASSAM & MANIPUR. 13




BRITISH BURMA (South), ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS. 14




CALCUTTA, BOMBAY, MADRAS & ADEN. 15




INDEX
Abbreviations.— arch, Archipelago, b, Bay. c, Cape, can, Canal, chan, Channel, cr, Creek, ctry, Country, dist, District
dir, Division, ft, Fort, gr, Group, h, Hill, hs, Hills, harb, Harbour, hav, Haven. hd, Head. i, Island, is, Islands.
ini, Inlet. I, Lake. mt. Mountain. mis, Mountains. pas, Passage, pen, Peninsula, p, Port, pk, Peak, pi, Plain.
plat, Plateau, prov, Provinces, pt, Point, r, River, rf, Reef, rk, Rock, spr, Spring, st, State, sin, Station, sir, Strait.
v, Vale or Valley, vol, Volcano.
ABA
ASH
Map.
Abarba 13 P g
Abazai, ft 4 D b
Abbottabad 3 E b
Abdu 9 0 f
A be 14 Q k
Abhana 7 H li
Ab-i gum 4 B e
Abiraman 11 H p
Abji 9 B f
Abu 5 E g
, nit 5 E g
Achalda 2 H f
Aclialgarh <5 H g
Achanta 12 I 1
Achenkoil 11 G p
, r 11 G p
Achilgbar 5 E g
Acbine 5 E f
Achipur 1 N h
Achnera 2 G f
Achota 7 1 i
Achra 10 E 1
Achraol 6 F f
Adala 2 H d
Adalpur 9 C f
Adamkota 7 I k
Adampur 3 F d
Adams Bridge 12 H p
,pk 12 I q
Adavad 10 F i
Adbaci 12 K k
Addanki 11 Hm
Adegaon 7 H h
Aden and En-
virons 15 F c
Salt Golas 15 E b
Signal Hill 15 F c
, gin 15 G c
Steamer, pi 15 E c
Sugar Loaf 15 E c
Adesar 9 D h
Adjai, r 1 M h
Adkot 9 D h
Adlnr 8 H k
Adoli 12 K k
Adoni 11 G m
Adrarapet 11 H o
Adsar 5 P e
Adulur 8 H 1
Adyar, r 15 A i
Afzalpur 8 G 1
Agai 2 I g
Agar 6 P h
Agarosundur 1 O g
Agarpura 1 M i
Agartala 1 O h
Agashi 10 E k
Aghil, pass 3 G a
Agia 13 O f
Agla 2 K e
Agori 2 K g
Agra 2 H f
6 G h
, dist 2 G f
, div 2 H f
Agradwip, i 1 N b
Agrahara Valla-
lur 11 G o
Agri 9 C g
Agroha 3 F e
Aguada, b 10 E m
,hd 10 E m
Agunibi 11 F n
Agurni, r 10 F 1
Agurwada 15 G d
Ahar 2 H e
Ahira 10 E k
Ahiri 7 H k
Ahirwari 10 F 1
Ahma Dnagar,
dist 10 F k
Ahmad Sindi 4 D d
Map.
Ahmadabad 3 E c
9 E h
9 B i
, dist 9 B h
Ahmadnagar 2 I e
9 B h
lO F k
Ahmadpur 1 M h
4 I) d
4 D e
4 D e
Ahobalam 11 Hm
Ahor 5 E g
Ahraura 2 K g
Abu, r 6 P g
Aidaha 2 I g
Aili, r 6 G g
Ailwali 3 E d
Aita 8 H k
Ajaigarb 6 I g
,si 6 I g
Ajanta 8 F i
Ghats 8 P i
Ajanur 11 F n
Ajenwe, r 14 R 1
Ajeraka 5 G f
Ajgain 2 1 f
Aji, r 9 D b
Ajimpur 11 F n
Ajmala 3 F d
Ajmere 5 F f
Merwara,
prov 5 P f
Ajodhya 2 K f
Ajra 10 P 1
Akalgarh 3 P e
Akalkot 10 G 1
, gt 10 G 1
Akbarpur 1 L f
2 I f
2 K f
Akhegarh 5 G f
Aklaj 10 P 1
Aknur 3 P o
Akola 5 F g
8 G i
lO E k
, dint 8 G i
Akora 4 E c
Akot 8 G i
Aktagh 3 H b
Akulgarh 3 E c
Akuressa 12 I q
Akyab 14 P i
, dist 14 P i
Akyaw 14 Q 1
Aladand 4 E b
Alagar, h 11 H o
Alahdad Jatli 9 B f
Alaknanda, r 2 H d
Alambadai 11 G n
Alamben 12 I p
Alambie) • 12 I p
Alamparai 11 L n
Alandi 10 F k
Alapur 2 H f
Alattur 11 G o
Alaut 6 P h
Alawalpur 3 F d
Albaka 7 I k
Albany, c 14 P g
Alenkulam 12 I p
Aleywa 13 Q h
Algam 12 K k
Algoul 8 G 1
Alguada, rf 14 Q m
Ali Bandar 9 C g
Rajpur 6 F h
, ft 6 F h
Alibagh 10 E k
Aliganj 2 H f
2 I e
Map.
Aliganj Sewan 1 L f
Aligarh, dist 2 H f
Kuil 2 G f
Rampura 5 G g
Aligaum 10 F k
Alinagar 13 O g
Alingar or Kao, r 4 D b
Alipur 1 N f
4 D d
4 D e
7 H i
, dist 15 C e
Alipura 6 H g
Alittana 12 I p
Aliwal 3 P d
Allahabad 2 I g
4 D e
, ilist 2 1 g
, div 2 I g
Allan-myo 14 Q k
Alleppi 11 G p
Alliganj 1 O h
Allur 8 G 1
Him
Almelch 10 G 1
Almora 2 H e
, dist 2 H e
Alon 13 Q h
Altnma 12 L i
Alupota 12 I q
Alur 11 F n
Alutnuwara (Bin-
tenna) 12 I q
Alvarkurichchi 11 G p
Alwar 5 Q f
, div 5 G f
Alwaye 11 G o
Am, r 7 I i
Amalapuram 12 K 1
Amalner 10 P i
Amalsar 9 B i .
Amalyara 9 E h
Aman Becban 9 C f
Amanat, r 1 L g
Amarapara 13 R i
Amarkantak 6 I h
Amarpur 1 M g
Amarwara 7 H h
Amb 3 G d
Amba 6 P h
10 E k
Ambad 8 P k
Ambah 6 H f
Ambahta 2 G e
Ambajogai 8 G k
Ambala 3 G d
, dist 3 G d
, div 3 G d
Ambalangoda 12 II q
Ambalantotta 12 I q
Ambasamudrnm 11 G p
Ambatpali 8 II 1
Ambepussa 12 H q
Amber 5 F f
Ambernath 10 E k
Ambgaon 7 I k
Ambika, r 10 B i
Ambo 12 M i
Ambulnpali 11 G p
Ambur 11 H n
Amet 5 E g
Amethi 2 1 f
2 I f
Amgaon 7 1 i
Amherst 14 R 1 .
Amilia 6 I h .
Amingarh 10 G 1 .
Amirpur 2 M f .
Amjhar 6 I h .
Amjhera 6 F h ,
Amjori 1 M i .
Amkhut 6 F h .
Map.
■Amla 3 G d
7 H i
Amlitkhon 13 P g
Ammanayanaya-
kanur 11 G o
Ammapet 11 II n
Arnner 8 G i
Amod 10 E i
Amola 6 G g
Amorha 2 K f
Ampha 14 8 1
Amraoti 8 G i
, dist 8 G i
Amrapur 10 P k
ll G m
Amravati 11 L 1
, r 11 H o
Amreh 9 D i
Amri 9 C f
Amritsar 3 F d
, dist 3 F d
, dii) 3 F d
Amroha 2 H e
Amru 9 B f
Amsin 2 K f
Amsterdam, i 12 H p
Amta 1 N h
Amwa 2 L f
Amya 14 S n
Amyen 13 Q i
An, r 14 Q k
(Aeng) 14 Q k
Anadra 5 E g
Anajipur 8 H 1
Anakapalle 12 K 1
Anamalai 11 G o
Anamalais 11 G o
Anamasamudram-
pet 11 Hm
Anand 9 E h
Anandpur 1 L h
1 M i
3 G d
9 D h
Anantapur 11 F m
ll G m
Anantapur, div 11 Gui
Anantasagaram 11 Hm
Anas, r 9 E h
Ancbittia 11 G n
Andaman, is 14 P o
, pt 14 P n
or
Middle, sir 14 P n
Andar . / 11 P n
Anderi, r 5 G g
Andhari, r 7 H i
Andhra 12 K k
Andipatti 11 G o
Andiyur 11 G o
Andol 8 H 1
Andola 8 G 1
Andrew, h 14 Q k
Anekal 11 G n
Angadipuram 11 G o
Angai 5 Q f
Angdaphorang 1 N f
Angrazabad 1 N g
Angul 12 L i
, dist 12 L i
Anjana 11 G o
Anjangaon 8 G i
Dari 8 G i
Anjanwel 10 E 1 .
Anjar 9 D h
Anjediva, i 10 Pm
Anjengo 11 G p
Anji 7 H i
Anjuman, pt 4 D b .
Ankles war 10 B i .
Ankoda 6 G g .
Ankola 10 Fm .
Map.
Anna 10 F k
Annamaduwa 12 I q
Annawassel 11 H o
Annigeri 10 F-m
Anshinhal 8 G m
Ansing 8 G i
Antadhura, pass 2 I d
Antagarh 7 1 i
Antarla 12 K 1
Antravedi 12 I 1
Antri 6 H f
i Anu 13 P i
Anundpur 10 P 1
Anupgarh 5 E e
Anupshahr 2 H e
Anuradhapura 12 I p
Anwr 9 C f
Aonla 2 H e
Aoundhi 71 i
■Apazai 4 C d
Apyauk 14 Q 1
Arabia, dist 15 F a
Arakan, r 14 P i
Hill Tracts,
dist 13 P i
fMr-
ohaung)l4 P i
Yoma, j)i<«l4 Q k
Arakere 11 G n
Arampur 8 H k
Aramra 9 C h
Aran, r 8 G i
Arang 7 I i
Arariya 1 M f
Araun 6 G g
Aravakurichi 11 II o
Aravet 12 Q k
Arazi 9 B f
Arbela, h 13 O g
Archalur 11 G o
Arcot 11 H n
Arde, r 9 B g
Ardhapur 8 G k
Argarh 2 K g
Argaum 8 G i
Ariapad 11 G p
Arikkod 11 G o
Arippu 12 II p
Arkalgad 11 G n
Arkavati, r 11 G n
Arki 3 G d
Arkonam 11 H n
Arleh 10 E 1
Armagaon (Durg-
arayapatnani) 11 I n
Armori 7 II i
Arnala, i 10 E k
Arnaoti, r 8 G i
Arnawai, r 4 D b
Arni 11 H n
Arnu 5 G f
Aroli 5 F g
Aror 9 C f
Arpa 3 G c
, r 7 K h
Arpalli 7 H k
Arrah 1 L g
Arrambur 11 H o
Arsikere 11 G n
Arthuna 5 F h
Arun, r 2 M f
Aruppakotai 11 H p
Arvi 7 H i
Arwal 1 L sr
2 H f
Aryalur 11 H o
Asafpur 2 H e
Asalah 15 F b
Asalu 13 P g
Asan, r 6 G f
Asansol 1 M h
Ashil, range 3 G a


ASH
BAS
Map.
Ashta 6 G h
8 G k
lO F 1
Ashtagram, div 11 G n
Ashti 7 II i
8 F k
Asin 5 P g
Asirgarh 7 G i
Aska 12 L k
Ask ole 3 P b
Asmar 4 D b
Asolai 6 E f
Asop 5 E f
Aspari 11 Gm
Assaye 8 F i
Astaran (Kan-
arak) 12 M k
Astor 3 F b
, r 3 P b
Asun, r 2 G d
Aswaraupeta 8 1 1
Aswon 14 8 1
Atanur 8 H k
Atar 8 H k
Atasarai 1 L g
Atharanhazdri 4 E d
Atbgarb 12 L i
Athirala 11 Hra
Athmallik, st 12 L i
Athni 10 P 1
Atia 1 N g
Atmakur 11 Hm
Atner 7 G i
Atpadi 10 F 1
Atrai 1 N g
, r 1 N g
Atrauli 2 H e
2 K f
Atri 1 L g
Atro 5 G g
Attankarai 11 H p
Attaran 14 U 1
, r 14 H 1
Attikuppa 11 G n
Attili 12 I 1
Attock 4 E c
Atuli 3 G c
Atur 11 G o
ll II o
Atzalgarh 2 II e
Auckland, b 14 8 n
Augasi 2 I g
Auktaung 13 Q h
Aue 12 M i
Aunaneysbutt-
rum 11 II o
Aundh 10 F 1
Aundha 8 G k
Aung 13 Q i
Annul 8 G k
Auraiya 2 H f
Aurang 12 L k
Auranga, r 10 E i
Aurangabad 2 G e
8 F k
,st 8 F k
Aurangabad 1 L g
Ausa 8 6 k
Ausgram 1 M h
Austin, sir 14 P n
Auvadeareovil 11 H o
Ava 13 Q i
, pt 15 F c
Avani 11 H n
Avanjah 8 H 1
Avisawella 12 I q
Awadban 3 F e
Ayakotta 11 G o
Ayakudi 11 G o
Ayodaung 14 R k
Azalea, pt 15 G c
Azamgarh 2 K f
, disl 2K g
Azimganj 1 N g
1 N g
Azmeriganj 13 O g
Baba Budangiri,
nit 11 F n
Babai 7 G h
Baberu 2 I g
Babhar 9 D g
Babra 9 D i
Babuk 2 L e
Babulgaon 8 II i
Bachhraon 2 II e
Bachhrawen 2 1 f
Bachireddipalem 11 Ilm
Back, 6 15 E h
, b 15 F i
Badagara 11 F o
Badahu 9 C g
Badamak 4 D b
Badami 10 F m
Badani 9 C e
Badarganj 1 N g
Badarwas 6 G g
Map.
Badausa 2 I g
Baddagaon 3 F d
Baddegania 12 II q
Badesar 5 F g
Badhber 4 D c
Badi, r 5 G f
Badin 9 C g
Bad nawar 6 F h
Badnera 8 G i
8 G i
Badnur 7 G i
Badra 9 C f
, r 4 B e
Bad raj un 5 E g
Badrawar 3 F c
Badrinath 2 II d
, pks 2 II d
Badshabpur 2 K g
Badulla 12 I q
Badvel 11 II m
Baduria 1 N h
Baffa 3 E b
Baga 2 K e
Bagaha 1 L f
Bagain, r 2 I g
Bagalkot 10 F 1
Bagasra 9 D i
Bagaund 6 F b
Bagdega 1 L h
Bagehwari 10 F 1
Bagepalli 11 G n
Bagesar 2 H e
Bagh 0 F h
Bagha Parana 3 F d
Baghar, r 9 B g
Baghdanga 1 X b
Baghdogra 1 N f
Bagbelkband, div 0 I li
Baghera 5 P f
Bagherbat 1 N b
Bagbmara 1 N g
Bagbmari 1 51 b
Baghmati, r 1 L f
, r 2 L f
Bagbmundi 1 51 h
Bagbo 71 i
Bagbua 1 N g
Bagbunatbpur 1 51 h
Bagli 0 G b
, st 0 G h
Bagor 5 F g
Bagoro 1 51 i
Bagpat 2 G e
Bagrasi 2 H e
Bagri 5 E g
Bagribari 13 O f
Bagroudih I K h
Bagru 5 P f
Bagula 1 N h
Bagwanpur 1 L g
Baba, r 6Gb
Babadran 5 F e
Bahadur 9 C g
Kbel 4 D c
Bahadurganj I 51 f
Babadurgarb 3 G e
Bahadurpur 9 E b
l3 P g
Baharagarb 1 51 h
Baharda 1 51 i
Bahardipur 9 C g
Bahawalgarb 3 E d
Babawal pur 4D e
,si 4I) e
Babe 13 Q g
Bahera 1 51 f
Baheri 2 II e
Bahilpur 2 I g
Bahmanan 9 C f
Babraich 2 1 f
, dist 2 1 f
Babram Kbel 4 D c
Bahramgbat 2 1 f
Bahranipur 2 1 f
Baidyabati 1 N h
Baidyanatb 1 51 g
Baikola 1 L i
Baila Bbela 2 1 f
Bailgaon 10 B k
Baindur 11 P n
Bairagarb 8 G i
Bairagnia 1 L f
Bairatb 6 G f
Bairibawa 2 K f
Bairnia, r 6 II g
, r 7 H b
Baisaki 6 K h
Baitagagbati 1 N h
Baitalhari 8 P i
Baitarani, r 1 L i
Baitbari 2 I e
Baizapur 8 P k
Bajana 9 D h
Bajauria 3 G d
Bajgarh 5 P f
Bajitpur 1 O g
Bajna 6 F h
Map.
Bajole 3 G c
Bajwara 3 F d
Bakarganj 1 O h
, disl 10b
Bakasir 5 D g
Bakbani 5 G g
Bakhtgarh 6 F b
Bakhtiarpur 1 L g
Bakia, r 2 L f
Tola C I g
Bakkayasa-
mudrani 11 G m
Baklob 3 F c
Bakor 9 B b
Bakrani 9 C f
Baksar 2 1 f
Balaganj 13 O g
Balagapur 8 G in
Balagarb 1 X b
Balaghat, dist 7 H i
, range 8F k
, range 8 G i
Balakot 3 E b
Balan, r 1 51 f
Balangoda 12 I q
Balangur, pass 2 K e
Balapit slodara 12 II q
Balapur 8 G i
Balarampur 1 51 g
Balasinor 9 E b
Balasor 1 51 i
, disl 1 51 i
Baldes 3Gb
Baleswar, r 1 N h
Balet 13 Q b
Balfe, pt 15 F e
Balgoma 13 O f
Bali 1 51 b
I N h
Baliapal 1 51 i
Balibond 1 L i
Balibri 7 1 b
Balkonda 8 II k
Ballabhgarh 3 G e
Ballalpur 7 H k
Ballia 2 H e
2 L g
, disl 2 L g
Balmer 5 D g
Baloda 7 I i
7 K h
Balotra 5 E g
Balrampur 1 N f
2 K f
Balsamand 3 F e
Baltbar 1 L f
Balti Brangsa 3Gb
Balua 1 51 f
Balmnath 1 L h
Bamangaon 1 N g
Bamangbata 1 51 b
Banian pali 8 II 1
Bambani 1 O h
Banibban, r 9 D b
Bambai 3 F b
Bainmauk 13 Q g
Banini 7 1b
7 I h
, r 6 F g
Banmolee 15 F e
Bamnora 6 11 g
Bamora 6 II g
Bamori 6 II b
Batura, st 7 L i
Bun II Q k
Banaganapalli 11 Ilm
disl 11 Ilm
Banar, r 1 O g
Banas 5 E g
, r 1 L g
, r 5 G f
, r 81 li
, r 9 D h
Banavar 11 G n
Banavasi 10 F m
Banbasa 2 I e
Banda 2 I g
7 H g
, dist 2 1 g
Bandamurlanka 12 I 1
Bandar 12 I 1
Feikam 15 E c
Tawayib
or Back, 6 15 F c
Bandarban 1 O li
Bandarulanka 12 K 1
Bandgaon 1 L h
Bandhogarh 6 I b
Bandi, r 5 E g
Bandiku 5 G f
Bandli 9 C f
Bandra 10 E k
Bandri 5 C f
Banga 3 F d
Bangaduni, r 1 X i
Bangali, r 1 N g
Map.
Bangalore 11 G n
, disl 11 G n
, div 11 G n
Banganga, r 5 G f
Bangi Khan 4 D c
Bangsadara, r 12 K k
Baniachang 13 O g
Banjar, r 7 I b
Banka 1 M g
Bankheri 7 II h
Bank! 12 L i
, dist 2 1 f
Bankipur and
Patna 1 L g
Bankomunili 12 L i
Bankot 10 E 1
Bankura I M h
1 M b
Banna, r 0 G b
Banni, pen 9 C b
Bannu, dist 4 D c
(Edwardesa-
bad 4 D c
Bannur 3 G d
Banpur 7 I k
Bansa 2 1 f
7 H h
Bansa taw 13 R k
Bansbaria 1 N h
Bansda 10 E i
Bansdih 2 L g
Bansgaon 2 K f
Banshi, r 1 O g
Bans! 2 K f
5 F g
Bansloi, r 1 M g
Bans ura 2 1 f
Banswara 5 F h
, st 5 F h
Banta 5 E g
Bantwa 9 D i
Bantwal 11 F n
Baola 9 E b
Baonri 5 E f
Baordbig, r 7 I k
Baoria 6 G h
Bap 5 E f
Bapatla II Lm
Bar Dikiai, r 13 P f
Samari 4 D c
Bara 2 I p
, disl 2 1 f
, r 1 O b
Banki 21 f
llaldibari 1 N f
(Kuiniria) 1 O h
Lacba, pass 3 G c
(Maskbal) 1 O i
Barabar, hs 1 L g
Barachati 1 L g
Baragai, nit 1 L h
Baragaon 1 L f
2 I f
2 K g
Baragua, pt 14 Q in
Barah 2 K g
Barababbuni 1 51 b
Barai, r 1 N g
Barak, r 13 P g
Barakhan 5 E g
Barakhar 1 51 b
, r 1 L g
Barakbati 1 N f
Baraliya, r 13 O f
Barauia ti 10 P k
Baramba 12 L i
Baranipnr 1 51 f
Baranmla 3 F b
Baran, r 9 B g
Barantal 3 E b
Baran wari 8 G k
Baraoli 1 L f
Barasand 1 L h
Ha rasa t 1 N h
Baraud 6 P h
Baraudia 6 G h
Barbaspur 7 I i
Barberyn 12 H q
Barbil 13 Q f
Barda, hs 9 C i
Bardalia 1 51 g
Bardghata C K h
Bardol 10 P 1
Bardoli 10 E i
Bardwan 1 51 h
, disl 1 51 b
-, div 1 51 h
Bareilly 2 H e
, disl 2 H e
Barela 7 I h
Bareli 6 H h
Barenda 1 K h
Barewaro 9 C f
Bargaoan 7 I h
Bargarh 7 K i
Bargawa 6 K g
Bargi 7 H h
Map.
Barb 1 L g
Barba 7 II h
Barbaj 2 K t
Barbalganj 2 K f
Barhaiupur 1 X g
Barharwa 1 51 g
Barhiya 1 M g
Bari 2 1 f
5 G f
6 H h
Baria 9 E h
Bariarp 1 51 g
Baripada 1 51 i
Barisal 1 O h
Barkal 1 P h
Barkalia 1 N b
Barkbola 13 P g
Barkur 11 F n
Barlu 5 E f
Banna, r 2 H g
Barniaur 3 G c
Barmdeo 2 1 e
Banner, r 7 I h
Barmudin, i I O h
Barnaul 12 L i
Barn, i 14 8 o
Barna, r 2 K g
Barnadi, r 13 O f
Barnagar 6 F h
Barnali 3 F c
Barnar 12 L i
Barnarikolla 13 O f
Barod 0 G g
7 K h
Baroda 3 G e
d G g
9 E h
Baronga, W., i 14 P k
Baropal 5 F e
Barot 2 G e
Barpali 7 K i
Barpani, r 13 P g
Barpeta 13 O f
Barrackpur 1 N h
, disl 15 C a
Barringhy 12 K k
Barsad 6 G g
Barsbor, <• 4 B d
Barsi 10 F k
lO F k
Sakla 8 G i
Baiooi 1 51 g
Barsur 7 I k
Barta 3 G 1>
Bartal 13 P f
Bartano 7 I h
Bam 5 1) f
Barua 1 L h
Baruipur 1 N h
Barungia, r 12 L i
Barunj 4 C d
Barur 8 H i
Barut 8 G k
Barwa 12 L k
Sagar 2 II g
Barwabi lib
0 I h
Barwai 6 O h
Barwala 3 P e
9 D h
Barwan 2 1 f
Barwani 6 F h
, e F i
Barwara 5 G f
Barwoy 12 L k
Basantia 1 N b
Basantpur 1 L f
1 N h
Basari 6 H g
Basgaon 2 H e
Basbabr, st 3 G d
Basi 3 G d
3 G d
5 F g
Basia 1 L h
Basini 8 G i
, dist 8 G i
Baskari 2 K f
Basniat 8 6k
Basoda 6 G h
Basohli 3 F c
Basra 1 N h
Bassein 10 B k
l4 Q 1
,disl 14 Q 1
, r 14 Q in
Bastar 7 I k
, st 7 I k
Basti 2 K f
, dist 2 K f
Bazdar 4 D d
Kazi 4 D d
Basti kot 2 1 e
Basudebpur 1 51 i
Basurhat 1 N h
Basvada 8 G k
Baswa 6 F f
2
INDEX,


BAS
BOM
Map.
Baswa 6 G f
Batabari 13 O f
Batala 3 P d
Batch ia 1 O g
Batchow 9 D h
Batchur 8 H 1
Batiot 4 E c
Batlapali 8 H 1
Batoli 2 K f
Batsul 4 C c
Batti Malv, i 14 P p
Batticaloa 12 I q
Battul Oya 12 II q
Bangley 10 F i
Banhunadi, )• 11 H n
Bauliali 9 B h
Bannggya 13 Q h
Bauphal 1 O h
Ban si 1 M g
Bavia 10 B 4
Baw 13 Q h
Bawal 3 G c
Bawarna 3 G c
Bawgata 14 R h
Bawlay 14 Q 1
Bawmi 14 Q 1
Bawni 14 R 1
, r 14 R 1
Bawsaing 13 R i
Baxa 1 N f
Baxar 1 K g
Baxwaho 6 II g
Bazarak 4 C b
Bazipur 1 L g
Beas, r 3 G d
, r Old bed of 3 E d
Beauleah 1 N g
Beawar 5 P f
Beda 15 P a
, r 6 P i
Bedi 9 D h
Bednor 5 F g
Began) ganj 1 O h
Begari Wall, cun 9 C e
Begum 5 F g
Beguserai 1 M g
Bebali 13 P f
Bebar 1 L g
1 N f
, div 1 L g
Behir 7 I b
Behri 2 II g
Bebi or 5 G f
Beila 9 D h
Beini 7 I i
Beji, r 4 C e
Bejirakol 1 L i
Bekal 11 F n
Bela 1 L f
1 L g
2 K g
7 H i
Dila, hs 71 k
Belan, r 2 K g
Belaor 3 F c
Belapnr 10 F k
Beldanga 1 N h
Belgacbbi 1 N b
Belgaum 10 F m
, disl 10 Fm '
Belgi 10 F 1 :
Belgodi 2 1 e •
Belha 2 K g
Bella 6 I h
ll F o ]
Beliapatam, r 11 Fo .
Belikeri 10 P m ■
Belknchi 1 N g 1
Bellagnpa 11 Gm 1
Bellamkonda HUM
Bell ary 11 Gm 1
, div 11 Gm 1
Bellavi 11 G n 1
Bellpat 4 C e
Belma 7 I k 1
Belo 9 C g I
Belona 7 H i .
Belpur ('Villupu-
lara) 11 H o 1
Belsianagar 1 L h I
Beltangadi 11 F n 1
Belucb, r 5 F g 1
Bebir 11 F n 1
Bemli 8 G k 1
Benares 2 K g 1
, disl 2 K g 1
, div 2 K g 1
Bendapiuli 12 K 1 1
Bendh Vera 9 C g -
Bengale 12 H p 1
Bengalproper, 1
div 1 N h 1
Beniganj 2 1 f
Benniballa, )• 10 F m J
Bentinck, i 14 R o 1
,sd 14 R m ]
Bentotta 12 II q 1
Map.
f Bepari Bazar 13 P h
f Bera 5 E e
1 Berani 9 D g
; Berari 9 C g
i Beresford, chan 14 P p
1 Berhampur 12 L k
s Beria 6 F h
1 Berio 3 G e
f Bernardmyo 13 R h
5 Bersad 9 E h
) Bersia 6 G h
I Berul 7 H i
1 Berur 11 P n
i Besalpur 7 G h
i Besari 2 M f
i Besli, )• 6 H f
i Betam, r 0 F g
i Beta wad 10 P i
' Bethel 1 M h
1 Betigeni 10 P m
i Betman 6 P h
j Betmangala 11 H n
: Bettadpur 11 G n
i Bettia 1 L f
1 Betul 7 G i
I , disl 7 G i
. Betwa, r 2 H g
, r 6 G h
Bewal 3 E c
' Beypur 11 F o
, r 11 F o
Beyt, i 9 C h
i Bezwada 11 L 1
Bhabua 1 K g
Bhadar, r 9 C i
Bhadarsa 2 K f
Bhadaur 3 F d
Bhadaura 6 G g
Bhader, »• 9 D h
Bhadgaon 10 F i
Bbadlo 9 C g
Bbadra, r 11 F n
Bhadrachalam 12 I 1
Bbadraph 12 M i
Bbadreswar 1 N h
9 G h
Bhadron 9 E h
Bhadui 2 K g
Bbadura, i 1 O h
Bhaga, r 3 Q c
Bhagabanpur 1 M h
Bhagalpur 1 M g
, disl 1M g
, div 1 M g
Bbaghaia 6 K g
Bbagiratbi 1 i\ g
r 1 N h
, r 2 II d
Bbagsu 3 G c
Bhagwangolo 1 N g
Bhagwantgarb 5 G f
Bbai 2 I f
Bbainsaud 6 F g
Bbainsia Tar 2 M f
Bhairab, r I N h
Bazar 1 O g
Bhakarma 1 K h
Bhakkar 4 D d
Bhal 3 F e
Bhamgarh 7 G i
Bbamo 13 R g
, dist 13 R g
Bhamragarh 7 I k
Bban 9 B f
Bhandak 7 H i
Bbandara 7 H i
, dist 7 H i
Bhandaria 1 O h
Bhander 2 H g
Bhandup 10 E k
Bhangarhat 1 N b
Bbangba 21 f
Bbanpur 12 L k
Tbana 2 K f
Bhanpura 0 F g
Bhanrer, hs 7 H b
Bbansar 2 K e
Bbansrorgarb 5 F g
Bbanwad 9 C i
Bhao, r 10 E 1
Bharawan 2 I f
Bhardura 9 11 g
Bhareh 2 H f
Bbargav, r 12 L k
Bharno 1 L h
Bharoch 4 E b
Bharthna 2 H f
Bhartpur 1 N h
5 G f
Bhaskel, r 12 K k
Bbataria 1 N h
Bhatgaon 2 L f
7 K i
Bbatia 9 C h
Bbatkal 10 P m
Bhatkot 2 H e
Bbatkuli 8 G i
Map.
Bbatnair (Hanu-
mangarh) 5 F e
Bhattinda 3 P d
Bhattu 3 F e
Bhatusna 9 E h
Bhaul 10 F i
Bhaun 3 E c
Bhaunagar 9 B i
Bhavani 11 G o
, r 11 G o
Bbawaniganj 1 N g
Bhawanipura 6 E e
Bhawi 5 E f
Bhayawader 9 D i
Bhedan 7 K i
Bhelani 9 C f
Bheling, r 2 H d
Bhensdebi 7 G i
Bhera 3 E c
Bberagbat 7 H h
Bheri, r 2 K e
Bhiki 3 P d
Bbilapur 9 B h
Bhilauri 10 F 1
Bhilsa t> G h
Bliiltvara 5 F g
Bhima, r 8 G J
, )• 10 F k
Bhimar 5 D f
Bhimbandh 1 M g
Bhimbar 3 P c
Bhimlath 71 h
Bhimpur 1 M h
lO E i
Bhinae 5 F f
Bhind 6 H f
Bhindar 6 F g
Bhingar 10 F k
Bhinmal 5 E g
fihiogarb Tumsar 7 H i
Bhir 8 F k
, st 8 F k
Bhira 2 I e
Bhiria 9 C f
Bhisi 7 H i
Bhitarwar 6 H g
Bhitiaro, cr 9 B h
Bbiwani 3 G e
Bhiwapur 7 H i
Bhiwindi 10 E k
Bhoewada 15 F e
Bhogarmang 3 E b
Bhogawai, r 9 D h
Bbognipur 2 H f
Bhojipura 2 H e
Bhojpur 2 I f
Bhojra-*ar 5 E e
Bhokardban 8 F i
Bhokra 4 I) c
Bhola 1 O h
Bhongaon 2 H f
Bhongir 8 II 1
Bhonria 2 K e
Bhopal 6 G h
, div 6 G h
Bbopalpatnam 7Q k
Bhopawar, div 6 F h
Bhor 10 E k
Gbat 10 E k
Bbora 6 H g
Bhori 7 H k
Bboroli, r 13 P f
Bhosar Ghat 2 K f
Bhotia Ko»i, r 2 L f
Bhuj 9 C h
Bhujpur 9 C h
Bhukarher 2 G e
Bhukbi, r 9 C h
Bhukia 5 F h
Bhulaa 1 O h
Bhule Kban
Tbana 9 B g
Bhum 8 P k
Blitinderwada 15 F d
Bhutan, st 1 N f
Bbusawal 10 F i
Bbuvaneswar 12 L i
Biadgi 10 F m
Biana 5 G f
Biaora 6 G h
Bias, )• 6 G h
Bichabhera 5 E g
Bicbkunda 8 G k
Bicbor 6 F g
Bicbrod 6 F h
Bidada 9 C h
Bidar 8 G 1
, st 8 G k
Bidesir 5 F f
Bidjaigarh 2 K g
Bidou, i 1 O h
Bigga 6 F e
Bibar 2 I g
> r 6 I g
Bihat 2 H g
Bihiya 1 L g
Bihta 1 L g
Map.
Bijagarh 6 F i
i Bijapur 1 M g
lO P 1
l2 K k
, disl 10 F 1
Bijapura 6 Q g
Bijawar 6 H g
Bijbharu 3 P c
Bijepur 5 F g
6 G f
Bijeraghogarh 7 I g
Biji 3 F c
7 I k
Bijipur 12 K k
Bijna 6 H g
Bijnaur 2 G e
2 I f
, dist 2 H e
Bijni 13 O f
Bijoipur 1 O b
Bijurpali 7 H k
Bikampur 5 B f
Bikaner 5 B e
, div 5 E e
(Sujan-
garb), st 5 E e
Bikiya 2 H e
Bikkavole 12 K 1
Bikrampur 1 O h
Bilaigarb 7 K i
Bilandarpur 5 P f
Bilari 5 E f
Biiaspur 1 L f
2 G e
2 H e
3 G d
7 I b
, disl 7 I h
Bilga 3 P d
Bilgram 2 1 f
Bilbari 2 1 e
Bilbaur 2 I f
Bilimora 9 B i
Bilin 14 R 1
, r 14 R 1
Bilk bet 2 I e
Billoli 8 G k
Bilot 4 D c
Bilpank 6 F h
Bilsazar 13 P g
Bilsi 2 H e
Bilu Gywon 14 R 1
Bimaram 8 I k
Bimlipatam 12 K 1
Bimpur 8 H k
Bina 7 H g
, r 7 H g
Binatbora, r 8 G 1 <
Bindki 2 1 f
Binjbaila 5 B e
Binka 7 K i
Binlaing, r 14 R 1
Bintenna (Alutnu-
wara) 12 1 q
Binyaktauta 14 R 1
Bioka 13 O f
Bipuria 13 P f
Bir Ahmed 15 E c
Mahait 15 F c
Birampur 1 N g
Birbhum, disl IMi
Biria 2 L g
Birijpur 6 I g
Birkul 1 M i
Binnal, st 4 C c
Birnagar 1 N h
Birnandi 8 H k
Birsil 5 E e
Biru 1 L h
Birul 7 H i
Birupa, r 12 M i
Bisa 13 Q f
l3 R f
Bisalnagar 9 E h
Bisalpur 2 H e
5 E g
5 F g
Bisauli 2 H e
Bishanpur 1 M g
Bishenpur 13 P g
Bishnatbpaura 6 I g
Bishnupur 1 M b
Bisimkheri 6 G h
Bisone 2 H d
Bisoul 1 M f
Bisranpur 1 K h
Bissau 5 F e
Bissemkatak 12 K k
Biswan 2 1 f
Biswanath 13 P f
Bithnok 5 E f
Bithur 2 1 f
Bitkuli 7 K h
Blair, p 14 P o
Blanga 2 K f
Blue, vit 13 P h
Blunts, i 14 R o
Map.
Boara 5 P g
Bobbili 12 K k
Boblad 10 P 1
Bod 12 L i
, st 12 L i
Bodapalem 12 K 1
Bodapali, pk 7 L i
Bodhan 10 E i
Bodinayakanur 11 G o
Bodo Kasiria 1 M i
Bodwad 10 P i
Bogawati, r 10 E 1
Bogor 7 K i
Bogra 1 N g
, disl 1 N g
, pt 4 B d
Bobagaon 13 P f
Bohara 9 B g
Bojali 13 O f
Bokobal 7 K i
Bokomdi 1 L b
Bolan, pass 4 B e
, r 4 B e
Bolangir 7 K i
Bolapilly 11 Hm
Bolaram 8 H 1
Bolpur 1 M b
Bom 12 L i
BomalH 12 L k
Boman 13 P h
Bombay 10 E k
and En-
virons 15 G i
Apollo Basin 15 P h
Bunder 15 F h
Arthur Basin 15 F i
Bamart Row 15 E h
Battery 16 G e
Bombay Har-
bour 15 F h
Breach Candy 15 E g
Byculla StationlS P f
Carnac Basin 15 F g
Castle 15 P h
l5 G i
Cemetery 15 E i
Cbor Im ran 15 E c
Church Gate
Street
Station 15 E b
Churney Road
Station 15 E g
Clerk Basin 15 F g
Clinch poogly
Station 15 E f
Cross I. Battery 15 P g
Dadur Station 15 F e
Dolphin Light 15 F i
Elphinstone
College 15 E f
Esplanade RoadlS E b
Frere Basin 15 F g
Government
Docks 15 P h
Government
House 15 D h
Government
House 15 P e
Gowalee Tank 15 E g
Grant Road
Station 15 B g
Hindoo Burial
Ground 15 E f
Hospital 15 B i
Khaur 15 F e
Kolaba Station 15 E i
Kussara Basin 15 F g
Lowjee Castle 15 F f
Lunatic
Asylum 15 E e
Mabaluxmee
Temples 15 B f
Mabim Station 15 F d
Malet Basin 15 P g
Marine Lines
Station 15 E h
Middle Ground 15 F i
Museum 15 F f
NaigaumTank 15 P e
Observatory 15 E i
Pakde Creek 15 G e
Parell Convent 15 P e
Station 15 F e
Tank 15 F e
Prince’s Dock 15 F g
Race Course 15 B f
Saint Michael’s
Church 15 F d
Salt Pans 15 G d
l5 G e
Scottish
Orphanage 15 F d
Sewree Ceme-
tery 15 F e
Shoal 15 P i
Towers of Sil-
ence 15 D g
3
INDEX,


ROM
cm
Map.
Bombay— continued.
Victoria Basin 15 E i
Dock 15 F g
Gar-
dens 15 F f
Station 15 F h
Wellington
Pier 15 F h
Bombay, i 15 F i
Bomperthat 13 O g
Bompoka, i 14 P p
Bon Paia 1 P h
Bonai, st 1 L i
Bonaigarh 1 L i
Bonaikala 8 1 1
Bonakalur 8 II 1
Bondar 1 M i
Bondari 12 K k
Bondisor 7 K k
Bondugola 8 II 1
Bongong 1 X h
Boparam 8 II k
Bor, r 10 F 1
Boragari 1 N f
Boraghat 7 L i
Borai 7 1 i
Borasamar 7 K i
Borgaon 7 G i
7 K i
Borgarh 6 F i
Bori 6 I g
6 F h
7 H i
8 H k
, r 10 F i
, st 4 C d
Boria 10 E 1
Borkani 7 K i
Boria 7 I h
Borpata 13 O g
Boruah, r 1 M g
Bosagaon 13 P f
Bosan 4 D d
Bostan 4 B d
Botad 9 D h
Bowringpet 11 H n
Boyapad 12 K 1
Brahmakuni 13 R f
Brahinagiri, ml 11 F o
Brahmanakaka 11 II m
Brabmanbaria 1 O h
Brahmani, r 1 L h
Brahmapuri 7 H i
Brahmaputra, r 13 P f
Brindaban 2 G f
British Protect-
torate 15 F b
Broach 10 E i
, disl 10 E i
Broken, pi 14 Q 1
Brothers, is 14 P o
Bu 13 Q i
Bubak 9 B f
Bucheke 3 E d
Budaguda 12 K i
Budaun 2 II e
, disl 2 H e
Budge Budge 1 X h
Budh Gaya 1 L g
Budha Khan 9 B f
Budhana 2 G e
Budhlada 3 F e
Budihal 11 G n
Budlapur 10 E k
Buff, c 14 Q 1
Buffalo, rks 14 Q 1
Bugti, st 4 C e
Buliinah 2 H g
Bujar 4 E c
Bukari Suket 5 G g
Bukera 9 C g
Buki 13 P i
Bukira, I 2 K f
Bukkapatnam 11 Gm
Buklang Tong 13 P i
Bui Tul 3 F b
Bulandshahr, disl 2 G e
Bulandshahrbaran 2 G e
Buldana 8 G i
, disl 8 G i
Bulehnomahir 9 C f
Bulhari 9 C g
Bulsar 10 E i
Bultiatan, disl 3 F b
Bund 3 G e
Bundala 3 F d
Bundelkhand 2 H g
, ilir 6 H g
Bundi 5 P g
, div 5 F g
Bundu 1 L h
Bunera 5 F g
Bungbung 21 e
Buni 1 L f
Buni 4 E a
Bunji 3 F b
Map.
Bunkapur 10 F m
Burabah 9 D g
Burabalang, r 1 M i
Buray, r 10 F i
Burdai 6 G g
Burdepad 8 H m
Burghat 7 H h
Burghur 11 G o
Burgila, pass 3 F b
Burba 7 1 i
Burhanpur 7 G i
Burhi 1 L g
Buri Dihing, r 13 Q f
Gandak, r 1M g
Rapti, r 2 K f
Buria 3 G d
Gandak, )• 2 L f
Buripur 2 I e
Burj 4 B d
Burkumta 1 O h
Burma 3Gb
Burzili 3 F b
Butana 3 G e
Butchers, i 15 G i
Butelli 12 K k
Buthidaung 14 P i
Buttale 12 I q
Buzdar 4 D d
Bwe 14 Q k
Bya, r 1 L g
Byangvi 14 Q i
Byinhmwa 14 Q k
Bylur 10 F m
Byohari 6 I g
Byramgarh 7 Q k
Byu 14 R k
Cabusa, i 14 R n
Cachar, div 13 P g
(Silchar) 13 P g
Cadamom, hs 11 G p
Cadara 10 P m
Cadiapatam 11 G p
Calcutta 1 N h
and
Environs 15 C c
Alipur Jail 15 C e
Balyganj Cricket
Ground 15 D e
Bandar Imran 15 B c
Belvidere 15 B e
Benares Road 15 C b
Birjee Tank 15 C d
Bishops College
Sand 15 A d
Body Guard
Lines 15 D e
Botanical
Gardens 15 A d
Calcutta Dock 15 C c
Campbell
Hospital 15 D d
Castle Rainey 15 D e
Cemetery 15 D d
Chitpur Bridge 15 D b
Terminus 15 D b
Circular Canal 15 D c
Road 15 D d
Civil Engineer-
ing College 15 B d
Dewanjeer
Dighee 15 C a
Dock 15 D b
No. 1 15 B d
No. 2 15 B e
Dumdum Road 15 D a
East Indian Rail-
way 15 C b
Eden Gardens 15 C d
Ellenborough
Course 15 C d
Elliott’s Tank 15 C d
Floating Stage 15 1) a
Garden Reach 15 A d
Gas Works 15 D c
General Hosp-
ital 15 C d
General’s Tank 15 C d
Ghoosry Sand 15 C b
Gossipur Post
Office 15 D a
Government
Dock Yard 15 B d
Government
Gun Factory 15 D a
Government
House 15 C c
Half Tide Basin 15 B d
Horticultural
Gardens 15 C e
Hospital 15 C c
l5 D e
Howrah Dock 15 C b
Railway
Station 15 C c
Hugli Bridge 16 C c
Map.
Calcutta— continued.
Hugli Dock 15 C b
Insane Hos-
pital 15 C e
Jail 15 C c
Jetties 15 C c
Jetty 15 D b
, P. and O.
Company’s 15 B d
Jute Mills 15 C a
Lunatic
Asylum 15 C e
Magazine 15 D e
Mayo Native
Hospital 15 C c
Military Hos-
pital 15 C e
Motee Jheel 15 D a
Mutla Station 15 D c
New Canal 15 D b
Observatory 15 B e
Old Course 15 C d
Orphanage 15 D d
Presidency Jail 15 C d
Race Course 15 C d
Rope Factory 15 C a
l5 C b
Saint James
Church 15 D d
Paul’s
Cathedral 15 C d
Scotch Burial
Ground 15 D d
Sealdah
Station 15 D c
Seebpur Sand 15 C c
Sepoy Lines 15 B e
Serpentine
Tank 15 C d
Six Temples 15 C b
Thakron’s
Pookur 15 C a
Theatre Road 15 C d
Union Dock 15 C b
Zoological
Gardens 15 B e
Calicut 11 F o
Calimere, pt 11 H o
Calventuras 14 Q 1
Cambay 9 E h
1 y 9 E i
, st 9 B h
Camel’s Hump 11 F o
Camoita, i 14 P p
Campbell, 6 14 P q
, p 14 P o
Campbellpur 4 E c
Campoli 10 E k
Canacona 10 F m
Cannanore 11 F o
Car Nicobar, i 14 P p
Carhwal, disl 2 II e
Carnatic, dry 11 G p
Can very, r 11 F n
Cavern, i 14 R o
Cavitapollum 12 L k
Cawnpur 21 f
, disl 2 I f
Central, div 8 G 1
, div 10 F b
, div 13 Q h
, prov 12 1 q
Chachra 9 D g
Chachuran 4 D e
Chagdah 1 N h
Chagulmurry 11 Hm
Chaibasa 1 L h
Chainpur 1 K g
1 K g
2 L f
2 M f
Chaitpet 11 II n
Chakai 1 M g
Chakaldi 4 G h
Chakand 1 L g
Chakar, r 4 C e
Chakardharpur 1L h
Chakaria 1 P i
Chakesar 3 E b
Chakla 1 N f
Chaklasi 9 E h
Chaklia 6 F i
Chakrata 2 G d
Chaktalao 6 F h
Chakultor 1 M b
Chakwal 3 E c
Chalan Mar li 1 N g
Chalgali I K Ii
Chalinal I L h
Chalisgaon 10 F i
Chalur 8 G m
Chaman 4 B d
Chamargam 10 E i
Chamarlakota 12 K 1
Chamba 3 G c
, st 3Gc
Chamba], r 5 Q g
Map.
Chambal, r 6 F h (
Chambar 9 C g (
, r 6 F g (
Chamla, r C F h (
Chamomeril, I (
(Tso Moriri, I) 3IT c (
Champa 7 K h (
13 O f <
Champaner 9 B h (
Champarau, disl 1 L f <
Champawat 2 1 e (
Champhai 13 P h (
Chamrajnagar 11 G o
Ghamn 5 F f (
Chamundi 11 G n -
Chamursi 7 H k h
Ghana 3 6 e h
Ghana! 8 H k (
Chanar 2 K g I
Chanaud 5 E d <
Chand 1 K g | (
7 II i (
Chanda 7 H k (
, disl 7 1 kll
Chandan 9 C g '
Chandarnagar 1 X h j ■
Chandarpur 7 K i -
Chandausi 2 11 e 1
Chandavolu 11 L 1 (
Chandawal 5 E f I
Chandbali 12 M i <
Chanderi ti II g 1
Chandgarh 7 G h M
lO F m 1 1
Chandgiri 12 L k ! 1
Chandhwan 4 D d|(
Chandia 8 1 It <
Chandie 1 M h
Chandkhali I N li
Chandod 9 B i
Chandchan 3 F d 1
Chandol 8 G i
Chamlor 10 F i '
Ctiandpur 2 II e 1
7 II i
8 G i i
Chandra, r 3 G c 1
Chandrabhaga, r 5 F g 1
Chandragiri 11 F n
ll II n *
, r 11 F n 1
Chandrakona 1 M h (
Chandu, I 2 K f (
Chanduni 5 D f <
Chandur 8 G i <
8 H i (
Chand wa 1 M h (
Chandwara 1 L h <
(3 F g i
Chand was 3 G e '
Chang Bhakar, it 1 I h 1
Cheum •, r 3 H b 1
Changa 3 E d
Changalari 8 G 1
Chanji 9 C f
Channagiri 11 F m
Channapatn
(Sukravarpet) 11 G n
Channigote 4 D e
Cliannu 4 E d
Chan ray patna 11 G n
Chansama 9 E h
Chantapilli 12 K k
Chaomuk 3 E c
Chaoparan 1 L g
Chapai 13 P f
Chapartala 7 I h
Chapora 10 Em
, r 10 E m
Cbappar 3 G e 1
Chapra 1 L g 1
2 II d
Chaprat 3 K a 1
Chaprauli 2 G e 1
Chaprial 4 E b 1
Char 3 G c i
Charadwa 9 t) h
Charakgat 8 H 1
Charakhari, si 6 I g 1
Charand 5 G g
Charghat 1 N g
Charka 2 K e
9 D i
Chaik hari 2 II g
Charsadda 4 D b
Chartliawal 2 G e
Obarwi 6 F i
Chashmi 4 D c
Chasnanda 1 M h
Chata 2 G f
Chatani 1 M h
Chatari 2 II e
Chataroye 12 I 1
Chathathang 3Gb
Chatmohur 1 N g 1
Cliatna 1 M h
Chatr 6 F 1 (
Map.
Chatra 1 L g
Chatrapar 12 L k
Chatrapati 11 G o
Cliatri Ghat 2 K d
Chatria 2 M f
Chatsu 5 G f
Chaubara 4 D d
Chaudandi 2 M f
Changhat 11 G o
Chauka, r 2 I f
Chaukandi 1 N g
Chauki 2 L f
7 I i
Chaul 10 E k
Khoya, r 13 O f
Channggwa 13 Q i
Chaungu 13 Q h
Chaimtra 3 E c
Chausa 1 K g
Chavakachcheri 12 I p
Chawindah 3 F c
Chaya 9 C i
Chebatn 13 P h
Chechat 5 F g
Cheduba 14 P k
, i 14 P k
, sir 14 P k
Chedura 13 P g
Chegar Serai 4 D b
Cheinpur 6 F i
Chelar 9 C g
Chellakere 11 G lit
ChellapaUi 11 L 1
Chemboor 15 G h
Chemichenmo 3 G c
Chen (Than) 18 Q t
Chenab, r 3 F c
, r 4 D d
, r, Old bed
of 3 E d
Chengalpat 11 H n
, die 11 H n
Chengama 11 II n
Chennupilly 11 Hm
Chennur 8 H k
Cherakal 11 F o
Cherat 4 D c
Cherla 7 I k
8 H 1
Cherpulcheri 11 G o
Cherra Punji 13 O g
Chetvai 11 G o
Cheyair, r 11 H n
Chhabra 5 G g
Chhacbranli 36 d
Chhagan Gobra 12 L i
Chhanuya 1 U i
Chhaoni 5 G g
Chhapara 7 I h
Chhapi 9 E g
Chhatak 13 O g
Chhatarpur 1 L g
6 H g
, si 6 H g
Chhatisgarh, dir 7 K i
Chhibramau 2 H f
Chhindipada 12 L i
Chhindwara 7 H h
7 H h
Chhini 9 13 f
Chhipaner 6 G h
Chhota Udaipur 9 E h
Chhotota Tawa, /• 7 G i
Chhuri 7 K h
Chicacole 12 K k
Chichawatni 4 E d
Chichgarh 7 I i
Chichli 1 K h
7 H h
Chicholi 8 G i
Chikalda 6 F h
8 G i
Chikara 5 F g
Cbikballapur 11 G n
Chiketti 12 L k
Chikhli 8 G i
lO E i
Chikmagalnr 11 F n
Cbiknayakan-
halli 11 G n
Chikni 8 G i
Cbikori 10 F 1
Chiksngnr 8 G 1
Chilabanda 13 P f
Cliilas 3 F b
Chilaura 13 O g
Chilaveturei 12 II p
Chilaw 12 H q
Chilianwala 3 E c
Chilka, I 12 L k
Chidambaram 11 H o
Chillivalasa, )• 12 K k
Chilpi 3 E a
Chihvani 6 G g
China tana 10 F i
Chimulga 10 F 1
Chiraur 7 IM
4
INDEX.


CHI
DIM
Map.
China Bakir, r U R 1
Chinaboga 1 L i
Chinamandem 11 II n
Chinchni 10 B k
Chincholi 8 G 1
Chinchvad 10 B k
Chindwin li Q g
, r 13 Q h
Chineni 3 F c
Chingan 13 Q f
Chingri, r 1 O h
Chiniot 3 E d
Chinuij r 11 Gm
Chinsikea, mt 11 P i
Chinta, r 7 Q k
Chintalapudi 12 I 1
Chintalpalam 12 K 1
Chintanianipet 11 H n
Chintapali 8 H 1
Chintapilli 11 L 1
Cliintulnar 7 I k
Cliiplun 10 E 1
Chipurupille 12 K 1
Chiralkand 1 K h
Chiraud 6 6 h
Chirawa 5 F e
Chirgaon 2 II g
Chitaldrug 11 G m
, dust 11 G m
Chitapur 8 H k
Chitial 8 H 1
Chitnor 0 D h
Chitor 5 F g
Chitosi 1 O h
Chitral 4 D b
, st 4 1) a
Chitravati, r 11 G m
Chittagong 1 O h
, dist 1O h
, div 1 O h
Hill
Tracts, dist 1 O h
Chittar, r 11 G p
Chittawad'gi 11 6 m
Chitterkot 7 I k
Chittivalasa 12 K 1
Chittur 11 G o
ll II n
t hit wail 11 Hm
Chobepur Gig
Chok 9 D i
Choka 6 H g
Chokang 2 L e
Choki 10 E i
Chola 2 G e
Chuli 4 D e
Chomiomo, mt 1 N f
Chopari 12 K k
Chopra 10 F i
Chor 9 C g
Chora 9 D h
Chorbari 6 I g
Choreya 1 L h
Chorwan 9 D i
Chota Dongar 7 I k
Pheni, r 1 O h
Chotan 5 I) g
Chofali 4 C d
Chotila 9 I) h
Cliouii 6 I h
Chowry, i 14 P p
Chrar 3 F c
Chuadanga 1 N h
Chugurpo 3 G c
Chnlban, r 7 H i
Chuinar 3 H c
Chumathang 3 H c
Chuna 21 e
Chnndikkulani 12 I p
Chundka 9 C f
Chung Sash 3 II b
Chungtani 1 N f
Chuniau 3 E d
Chura 7 K i
Churabhandar 1 N f
Churaman 12 M i
Churi 7 H h
Churni, r 1 N h
Churn 5 P e
Chutianagpur, ’to 1 K h
C lutran 3 P b
Chypo Tongt 13 P i
Cinque, is 14 P o
Clara, i 14 R o
Cleugh, pas 14 P n
Closepet 11 G n
< 'ocanada 12 K 1
Cochin 11 G p
, st 11 G o
Codaehayri 11 G o
Coimbatore 11 G o
, div 11 G o
Coleroon, r 11 H o
Colgong 1 M g
Collegal 11 G n
Colombo 12 H q
Colonelganj 2 1 f
Map.
Colwada 15 G d
Combermere, b 14 P k
Comillah 1 O h
Comorin 11 G p
, c 11 G p
Condul, harh 14 P q
Conjevaram 11 H n
Connaught, c 14 P q
Contai 1 M i
Coonoor 11 G o
Coorg, prov 11 F n
Cooum, r 15 A h
Gorakhpur, dist 2 K f
Coringa 12 K 1
Cornwall!*, p 14 P n
Coromandel Coastll H p
Coronge, i 14 Q 1
Cotteliar, r 11 H n
Couitullum 11 G p
Covelong 11 L n
Covilpulh 11 H o
Coweallv (Geon-
khali)' 1 M i
Cox’s Bazar 1 P i
Crnss, i 15 G i
Cuddalore 11 H o
Cuddapah 11 Hm
, div 11 Hm
Cuddelur 11 P o
Cumarwaddo 10 F m
Cumbaconam 11 H o
Cumbum 11 G p
ll Hm
Cutch, g of 9 O h
, rann of 9C g
, st 9 C h
Cuttack 12 L i
, dist 12 M i
Dabgaon 12 K k
Dabha 7 II k
Dabhari 8 P i
Dabheji 9 B g
Dabhoi 9 E li
Dabhol 10 B 1
Dabka 9 E h
Daboh 6 H I
Dabongloug 13 P g
Dabri 5 E f
Dabwali 3 F e
Dacca 1 O h
, dist 1 O It
, die 1 O h
Dachor 3 G e
Dachur 11 Hm
Dadah 9 C g
Dadar 1 L g
Dadpur 7 K k
Dadri 2 G e
3 G e
Dadu 9 B f
Daera Dinpanah 4 D d
Daflapur 10 F 1
Dag 5 F It
Dagshai 3 G d
Daha, r 1 L g
Dahamu 10 E k
Dahar 3 G e
Dahimal 3 E a
Dailak 2 1 e
Daikola 1 L h
Dain, r 5 F f
Daipa 5 E g
Daisalpur 9 D h
Dajal 1 D e
Dajhi 4 C c
Dakaiia, r 40 h
Dakpa li 12 L i
Dakshiu 1 O h
Data, r 14 Q 1
Dalat 14 P i
, r 14 P i
Dalekme 13 P i
Dalhousie 3 F c
, i 1 N i
Dalingkot 1 N f
Dallagat 3 P c
Dalman 2 1 f
Dalmi, ruins 1 M h
Dalsingh 1 L g
Daltonganj 1 L g
Dalu 13 O g
Dalujal 4 C e
Dalwal 4 B c
Damalcheri 11 H n
Daman 10 E i
Damanganga, r 10 B i
Dambar 9 B g
Dambulla 12 I q
Damnagar 9 D i
Damn! 8 G i
Damodar, r 1 M h
Damoh 7 H h
, dist 7 H h
Damukdia 1 N g
Dan Bhansar 2 K e
Dandi 10 E i
Map.
Dandnagar 1 L g
Dandridi 1 M g
Dangarwa 9 B h
Dangma Chu, r 13 O f
Dangs, The, st 10 E i
Dankar 3 H c
Dankaur 2 G e
Dankia, mt 1 N f
Danta 5 F f
9 B g
Dantewara 7 I k
Danthi 13 Q i
Dantiwara 9 E g
Dantun 1 M i
Dan wan, r 14 Q 1
Dan war 1 L g
Daorah 1 O h
Daphabum, mt 13 R f
Dapoli 10 E 1
Daraban 4 D d
Darakasa 7 1 i
Darapur 3 B c
Darauli 1 L f
Darbhangah 1 M f
, dist 1 L g
Dargauti, r 1 K g
Daria Khan 4 C e
Dariawad 5 F g
Darjang 1 L i
Darjiling 1 N f
, dist INI
Darna, r 10 E k
Darndih 1 K h
Daro 9 C g
Daroji 11 G m
Darpangia 12 L i
Darrang, die 13 P f
Darrangiri 13 O g
Darroy 13 P g
Darsi 11 Hm
Darur 8 G k
Darwa 8 G i
Darwani 1 N g
Darwazi 4 B e
Darya Khan 4 D d
Daryabad 2 1 f
Daryapur 8 G i
Dasarazupa’li 11 L m
Dasada 9 D h
Dasawani 7 II h
Daska 3 F c
Daspalla 12 L i
Daspur 1 M i
Dastott ) 12 I q
Dasuya 3 P d
Datia 0 H g
, st 6 II g
Datma 13 O f
Daudkhandi 1 O h
Daulat Khan 1 O h
Daulattbad 8 P k
Daulat pur 6 6 h
9 B f
Daus, r IMg
Dausa 5 G f
Davangere 11 P m
Davis, i 14 R o
Davunkonda 11 G m
Dawa 71 i
Dawer 5 B d
Dawlan 14 R 1
Dawna. rang" 14 8 1
Dayabang, ml 2 L e
Dayang • r
Doyong, r 13 P f
Debar, t 5 P g
Debhata 1 N li
Debi Patau 2 K f
Debipur 1 M g
Debkourah 6 1 g
Debra 1 M h
Debut a 2 K f
Dechauti 2 II e
Dedan 9 D i
Dedaye 14 Q 1
Degaon 8 G 1
Deglur 8 G k
Degh, r 3 E d
Deharighat 2 K f
Dehoj 10 B i
Dehlon 3 F d
Dehr 10 P i
Dehra 2 H d
Dun, dist 2 G d
Dehri 1 L g
Dehvau 9 B h
Deji 9 C f
Dekan 6 P g
Delhi 3 G e
, dist 3 G e
, div 3 G e
Delly, mt 11 F m
Deluti 1 N h
Del ware 9 D i
Demagiri 1 P h
Dental, r 9 D h
Denaikanko'ai 11 G n
Map.
Dcngro Wait, can 9 C f
Denvta, r 7 G h
Deo 1 L g
Deoban, mt 14 P g
Deoband 2 G e
Deobhog 7 K k
Deocha 1 M g
Deoda- 9 D g
Deogaon 1 L h
2 K g
Deogarh 1 M g
5 E g
7 II i
7 L i
, ph 1 K h
Deoha, r 2 H e
Deokhur, v 2 K 1
Deolali 10 B k
Deolgondi 12 I 1
Deoli 5 P g
7 H i
9 C e
Deolia 6 F g
Deoniaguh 2 K f
Deoprayag 2 II d
Deora 6 K g
Deorca 2 H e
Deori 7 H h
7 K i
Deoria 2 K f
Deosai, p's 3 F b
Depaguda 12 K k
Deprakhera 6 G g
Depsang, p s 3Gb
Dera 4 C d
Bugti 4 C e
Fatah Khan 4 D d
Ghazi Khan 4 D d
dist. 4 D e
Gopipur 3 G d
lsmail, dist 4D d
Khan 4 D d
Jat, div 4 D e
Derampuri 8 H k
Derapur 2 II f
Derawar 4 D c
Derband 3 E b
Derje 10 B k
Hero Nanak 3 F c
Desar 9 B h
Deshnok 5 E f
Desku 3Gb
Desuri 5 E g
Deulgaon Raja 8 G i
Deulghat 8 G i
Devadrug 8 G 1
Devala 11 G o
Devanhalli 11 G n
Devarakonda 8 II 1
Devarakadra 8 G 1
Devgadh 10 E 1
Devi, r 12 M k
Devikota 11 H p
Devipatnam 11 II p
Devipura 6 G li
Devulpallo 8 H 1
Dewalman 7 H k
Dewalwara 7 H i
Dewas 6 G h
—, st 6 G h
Dltab S.mthaika 3 B c
Dhadhar, r 10 E i
Dhadka 1 M h
Dhaktee 15 P e
Dhala 15 F b
Dbalai, r 1 O g
Dhaleswari, r 1 O h
, r 13 P g
Dhalgaon 10 P 1
Dhalki.son, r 1 M h
Dhalowri 10 P 1
Dharaid 1 O h
Dhamarka 9 D h
Dhainda 7 I i
Dhandhuka 9 D h
Dhandi 9 C 1
Dhandkua 2 II g
Dhaneswari 13 P f
, r 13 P g
Dhang, rage 2 K e
Dhangain 1 L g
Dhangaon 7 I h
Dhaniakali 1 N h
Dhanikhoila 1 O g
Dhanku 2 K e
Dhankuta 2 M f
Dhannno 5 D f
Dhantrawardi, r 9 D i
Dhanu, r 1 O g
Dhanu Mari 9 C g
Dhamoni 7 H g
Dhampur 2 H e
Dhamra 12 M i
, r 12 M i
Dhamtari 7 I i
Dhamunse 10 E 1
Map.
Dhana 7 H li
Dhanas 5 E g
Dhanaura 2 II c
Dhanauti, r 1 L I
Dliand 2 K c
Dhandhi 9 C g
Dhaon 5 G 1
Dhapaiwara 7 H i
Dhar 6 P li
8 O i
, st 0 F h
Dharampur 10 B i
Dharangaon 10 P i
Dharapuram 11 G o
Dharasiv 8 G k
Dharavee 15 F d
Dharla, r 1 N f
Dharraa Pass 2 I d
Dharmapatam 11 P o
Dharmapuri 1 1 II n
Dharmashala 12 M i
Dhannayaram 11 G m
Dharmkot 3 F d
Dharmpuri 6 P h
Dharmsala 3 G c
Dharupur 2 I g
Dharur 8 G 1
Dharwar 10 F m
, dist 10 F in
Dhasan, r 2 II g
, r 7 II li
Dhata Khas 2 I g
Dhauaipani 7 I h
Dhaula, r 2 I d
Dhaulagiri, mt 2 K e
Dhauli, r 2 II d
Dhaund 2 II e
Dhaurahra 2 I e
2 I f
Dheburna 2 K f
Dheknaboi 13 O t
Dhenkamd 12 L i
, U 12 L i
Dhergaum 10 P i
Dhi Sufal 15 E b
Dhie 6 F h
Dhi lo 9 D g
Dhola 9 D i
Dholeia 9 E h
Dholka 9 E h
Dholpur 5 G f
, div 5 G I
Dhond 10 P k
Dhone 11 Gm
Dhor, r 4 B e
Dlioraji 9 D i
Dhorghoshi 2 L e
2 L e
Dhrangadra 9 D h
Dhrole 9 D h
Dhubri 13 N f
Dhudhial 3 E c
Uhula 10 P i
Dhuma 7 II h
Dhum , r 5 F f
Dhunpur 2 II d
Dhupa 6 P i
Dhuraui 5 E f
Dhurmanpur 2 I e
Diagaon 7 K i
Dlah 2 K g
Dialgarh 3 P d
Diamond, hart) 1 N h
, i 14 Q m
Diawara 6 F i
Dibai 2 H c
Dibang, r 13 Q f
Dibru, r 13 Q f
Dibrugarh 13 Q f
DiddinipoPa 12 I q
Didwana 5 F 1
Dig 5 G f
Diggi 5 F f
Dighori 7 II i
Dighuchi 10 F 1
Digi 1 M g
Digrana 6 E t
Digrns 8 G i
Digwara 1 L g
Dih 2 I f
Dihang, r 13 Q f
Dihing Bridge 13 Q f
- , r 13 Q f
Dihingia 13 P f
Dihir 3 G d
Dikharu, r 13 P f
Dikhu, r 13 Q f
Diksul 10 P k
Dikthan 6 P h
Dildar 9 D g
Diligent, str 14 P n
Dilli, r 13 Q f
Dilmagiri 13 O g
Dilpa 2 M f
Dilwara 5 E g
Dimapur 13 P g
Dimaiugaon 13 P f
5
INDEX


DIM
GOK
Map.
Dimla 1 N f
Dimra, r 1 M f
Dinajpur 1 N g
, die 1 : 1 N g
Dinaongar 3 P c
Dinapur 1 L g
Dindi, r 8 H 1
Dindigal 11 G o
Dindinga 18 N f
Dindori 10 B i
Dinga 3 B c
Dirgarh 4 D e
Dingi 3 B d
Dinhata 1 N f
Dinyer 3 E b
Dipalpur 3 B d
6 F h
Dipla 9 C g
Dir 4 E b
Dirdjag 15 F b
Dirga 1 K h
Disa 9 E g
Disang, r 13 Q f
Disoi 13 Q f
Diu 9 D i
, i 9 D i
Diwanganj 1 N g
1 O h
Diwangiri 13 O f
Diyang, r 13 P g
Diyebauk 14 Q 1
Diyun, r 13 R f
Diyung 13 P g
Dod Balia pur 11 G n
Uoda 3 F c
Dodabetta, ml 11 G o
Dod bah 4 D b
Doderi 11 G ni
Dodlapad 8 H 1
Dndra 12 K k
Dogora 6 H g
Dogupudi 12 L k
Dogyaung 13 K h
Dohad 9 B h
Doisa 1 L h
Dokka 15 B b
Dokong 13 P g
Dolongiri 13 O g
Dolphin's Nose 12 K 1
Dolwmi 9 E i
Domariahganj 2 K f
Doinel, i 14 8 o
Doineli 3 E c
Doiuor 1 N f
Don, r 10 O 1
Douabyu 14 Q 1
Dondami 14 R 1
Dondra, hd 12 I r
Donga rgarh 7 I i
Dongaria 7 H li
Dongia 7 K k
Domna 2 H g
Doni 2 K e
Donmanick, is 1 O i
Dora, p 4 D a
Doranda 1 L h
Dorenall 11 H m
Dorkhula 4 C c
Donna 1 L h
Dost Ali 9 B f
Dostpur 2 K f
Dotani Kot 4 G c
Doti 2 I e
Double, i 14 Rm
Dounggyi 14 Q 1
Dowlaishvaram 12 I 1
Doya, r 12 L i
Dozan, mt 4 B d
Drabhar 9 D g
Drapna 9 D i
Dias 3 F b
, r 3 F b
Drug 4 D d
7 I i
Dry Salt, I 5 B f
Dubari 2 K f
Dubidhar 13 P g
Dublana 5 P g
Dubrajpur 1 M h
Dndh Kosi, r 2 M f
Dudhado 8 H k
Dudhganga, r 10 F 1
Dudhi 1 L h
Dudna, r 8 F k
Dudneh 10 G 1
Dudu 5 F f
Duhara C II g
Duhror 5 1) f
Dujana 3 G e
, st 3 G e
Duke 14 R 1
Dukhia 13 P f
Duki 4 C d
Dalai 1 N h
Dulchasar 5 F e
Dulhi 2 I e
Dull 1 L g
Map.
Online 13 P g 1
Dulla 3 E c 1
Dum Dum 1 N li 1
Dutnagudam 12 I 11
Dumardih I I h I
Duinaria 1 Nh I
Dunduiu 13 Q f -
Dumjia 2 L f •
Duinka 1 M g 1
Dumraon 1 L g 1
Dumsum 3 G b 1
Duncan, pas 14 P o 1
Dundwa, range 2 K f
Dundwaraganj 2 H f •
Dungagali 3 E b
Dungarpur 5 B h ■
, st 5 E h
Dunglang 2 L e
Dungrakot 2 I e ■
Duni 5 P g
Dunlong, r 3 G c
Dunyapur 4 D c
Dupur 4 D c
Duraiha 6 G h
Durani 4 D c
Durawdro 9 C f
Durgnrayap.it-
nam 11 L n
Durian 3 F b
Durimana 5 D g
Duruk 2 1 e
Dusarno 5 E f
Dushkin 3 F b
Dnsinatpur 12 K k
Dutch, b 12 H p
Dwarka 9 G h •
East Nara, r 9 C g
Eastern, dio 8 H 1
,dv 13 Q i
, i run 12 ! p
Ghats,
mt 11 G o 1
Rajpu-
tana, div 5 P f
Echwaro 6 6 g
Bdalabad 8 H k
Edar 9 B h
Bdawanna 11 P o
Edinburgh, c 14 P g
Bdwaidesabad 4 D c
Ehshuiali 1 O h
Ekalsinga 5 P g
Bkka 5 D f
Eklingji 5 E g
El Banna, r 15 F a
Djible 15 B a
Ghoder 15 G b
Hota 15 E b
Jelilc 15 F b
Bla 13 R k
El gann 8 G k
Blattur 11 P o
Elavarasanandal 11 G p
Elephant, pt 1 P i
,pt 12 I p
, ,t 14 R 1
Elephants, i 10 E k
Ella 12 I q
Bllantur 11 G p
Ellenaliad 3 F c
Bllichpur 8 G i
, diet 8 G i
Bllora 8 F i
Ellore 12 I 1
Blphinstonc, i 14 R n
Elpit 8 H k
Eminabad 3 P c
Engsbu 14 Q 1
Engbon 14 8 n
English Bazar 1 N g
Bngte 14 Q 1
Bninaeng 14 Q k
Bnnore 11 L n
Eppawala 12 I p
Erandol 10 F i
Erao, r 5 P h
Branr 12 I q
Brinpura 5 E g
Ernakolam 11 G p
Ernie 1 ll G p
Eruing, r 13 P g
Es Seida 15 E b
Etah 2 H f
, diet 2 H f
Etaiyapurain 11 H p
Eta wah 2 H f
, dst 2 H f
Btma 6 I g
Etwa 6 I g
Everest, mt 2 M e
Expedition, harb 14 P p
Byles, i 14 8 o
Fagu 14 R 1
Faizabad 2 K f
, dist 2 K f
Map.
Faizabad, div 2 1 f <
Faizpur 10 P i <
Fakhrpur 21 f i
Falaili, r 9 C g «
Falam 13 P h (
False, h 15 G c <
, ha b 12 M i (
, pt 12 M i
Falta INh
Farah 2 G f 1
Farddnagar 1 O h '
Faridabad 3 G e i
Faridkot 3 P d '
, st 3 F d
Faridpur INh l
2 H c
, diet INh l
Farnkhabad 1 N g
2 H f
, did 2 H f
Farukhnagar 3 G e
Fata 4 D d
Fatahpur 3 E d
4 E e
Fab habad 2 H f
3 F e
0 P h
Fatehganj, East 2H e
Fatehgar 3 F d
Fatfhgarh 2 H f
(5 G g
Fateh jang 3 B c
Fateh khelda 8 O i
Fatehpur 2 G f
2 I f
2 I g
5 F f
7 H g
7 H h
, diet 2 I g
Father, i 14 R o
Fatiagad 9 D h
Fatoksir 3Gb
Fatwa 1 L g
Fazilka 3 P d
Fazilpur 4 D e
Fenchuganj 13 O g
Fife, I 10 B k
Firazabad 2 H f
Firozabad 8 G 1
Firozpur 3 F d
3 P d
, diet 3 P d
Ghiika 3 G f
Firozshah 3 F d
Flat, i 14 P k
Forbes, i 14 8 o
Forrest, jas 14 R o
Fort Saint David 11 Ho
George 15 C g
White 13 P h
Willi in 15 C d
Fortified or
Sirah, i 15 F c
Foul, i 14 Q k
, pt 12 Ln
Fraserpi t 11 F n
Frode 11 G o
Furi, lit 12 L k
Gachero 9 B f
Gadalguta, hs 7 I k
Gadarpur 2 H e
Gadarwara 7 H h
Gadh Hinglai 10 P 1
Gadhagra 9 D i
Gadhara 9 D i
Gadkol 8 H k
Gadra 9 D g
9 D h
Gadval 8 G 1
Gafurgaon 1 O g
Gagroni 6 G g
Gagunda 5 B g
Gahargarh, mt 4 D c
Gaiabandha 1 N g
Gaintha 5 G g
Gairatganj 6 H h
Gajani 4 D d
Gajapatinagat 12 K k
Ga.jilabadi 12 L k
Ga.jner 5 E f
Gajusar 5 P e
Galaothi 2 G e
Galatea, b 14 P g
Galgaon 7 I k
Galiakot 5 E h
Gal mar 2 K g
Galund 5 P g
Gambhir 5 G f
Gamhardih 1 K h
Gamnarai 12 K k
Oanda Madan 1 L i
Gandai 7 I i
Gandak, r 1 L f
Gandaki, r 1 L f
Gandapur 8 F k
Map.
Gandava 4 B e
Gandevi 9 B i
Gandhari 8 H k
Qandhera 4 C d
Gandial 2 H d
Gandikot 11 Hm
Ganga 4 D e
8 G i
, r 7 G i
Gangaikand'pnr 11 II o
Gangajalghati 1 M h
Gangan, r 2 H c
Uangapur 5 P g
5 O f
Gan gar 5 F g
Gangavati 8 G m
Gangaw 13 Q h
Gangawali 10 P m
, r 10 F in
Ganger, r IMg
Gangeru 2 O e
Ganges, harb 14 P q
, r 2 H d
, r, Mouths
of the 1 N i
Gangoh 2 G e
Gangotri 2 H d
Gangpur, st IK h
Gangrar 5 F h
Gangri, r 1 L f
Ganja 2 I e
Ganjal, r 7 G h
Ganjani 12 L k
, dio 12 L k
Ganora 5 F h
Gantapara 12 K i
Ganutia 1 M h
Gan wan IMg
Gaoligarh 10 F i
Gap 11 G o
Garag 10 F in
Garbeta 1 M h
Garbyang 2 I d
Gardem 12 K k
Garesia 4 B e
Garha 7 H h
Garhakata 7 H h
Garhauli 2 H g
Garhbori 7 H i
Garhchiroli 7 1 i
Garhdiwala 3 F d
Garhgaon 13 Q f
Garhi 5 F h
6 H h
Mukhtiyar
Khan 4 D e
Garhi Yasin 9 C f
Garhshankar 3 G d
Garhvi, r 7 I i
Garhwal, st 2 H d
Gariadhar 9 D i
Garispur 6 H h
Garla 8 I 1
Garladinnr 11 G m
Garmukhtesar 2 H e
Garnimetta 11 H n
Garo Hills, div 13 O g
Garotha 2 H g
Garpas 7 L h
Garrauli 6 II g
Garteni 6 G g
Garudanadi, r 11 H o
Garwa 1 K g
Gasainganj 2 K f
Gatlar 3 F b
Gatriya 3 E c
Gat wall 4 E d
Gauhati 13 O f
Gaulna 10 F i
Gaur, ruins 1 N g
Gaurandi 1 M h
Gaurapali 8 H 1
Gauri Bazar 2 K f
Gaurihar (lip
Gauripur 13 N I
Gaurnadi 1 O h
Gaw, cr 15 G e
Gawanza War i
Pass 4 B d
Gawilgarh 8 G i
Gaya, diet 1 L g
(Sahibganj) 1 L g
Gazan 4 B e
Gazi Ghat 4 D d
Gazipur 2 K g
Ge.j, r 1 K h
Genria 2 K f
Geonkhali 1 M i
Gersoppa 10 F m
Gevrai 8 P k
Ghapgar, r 3 F e
Ghaghat, r 1 N g
Ghajol, r 4 B e
Ghal 3 F d
Ghanpura 8 H 1
Ghar, hs 9 C f
Ghari Hasan 9 C e
Map.
Gharo 9 B g
Ghas Bhansar 2 K e
Ghat 4 C e
Ghatal 1 Mh
Ghatampur 2 1 f
Qhati, range 2 L f
Ghatiparli 8 H 1
Ghatprabha, r 10 K I
Ghatsila 1 M h
Ghauspur 9 C e
Ghazi Klian 4 B e
Ghaziabad 2 G e
Ghazipur 21 g
, diet 2 K g
Gherdi 10 F li
Gheria 1 N g l
Ghhindwara, diet 7 H i
Ghi, r 9 C h
Ghiabi Dcro 9 B f
Ghiriang 2 M e
Glaring 2 K f
Ghod, r 10 E k
Ghodnadi 10 F k
Ghogarpali 1 K h
Ghogharo 9 B f
Gholwad 10 E i
Ghor, r I*l F k
Ghorautra, r 1 O g
Gborawal 2 K g
Ghorliandur 10 E k
Ghorebari 9 B g
Ghorizai 4 B e
Ghost, st 4 C c
Ghot 7 H k
Ghoti 7 1 i
Ghotki 9 C f
Ghugri 7 I h
, r 1 M g
Giant's Tank 12 I p
Oidar 4 B e
Gidari, nit 4 C e
Giddalur 11 H m
Gidhaur I Mg
Oilawala 4 D e
Gildigura 12 K k
Gilgaon 7 1 i
Gilgit 3 F b
, r 3 E a
Gin Ganga 12 1 q
Gingi 11 H n
Gintara 12 I q
Girar 7 H i
Girdabadi, h 12 L k
Girdharpur 5 F g
Girgaon 8 G k
Giri, r 3 G d
Giriilih IMg
Girja, r 8 F i
Girna, r 10 F i
Girnar, As 9 D i
Girot 4 E c
Gisgarh 5 G f
Giwarda 7 1 i
Guabalon 13 R h
Gnaream, ml 1 N f
Goa 10 B m
Goalanda 1 N h
Goalpara 13 O f
, din 13 O f
Qoanhal 8 G 1
Gob irdanga 1 N h
Qobardhan 2 G f
Gobindganj 1 L f
l3 O g
13 O g
Gobi nd pur 1 M h
Qodagari 1 N g
Godairy 12 K k
Godakoggala 12 I q
Godavari, die 12 I I
, r 7 I k
, r 8 G k
, r 10 F k
, r 12 I 1
, r, Mouths
of the 12 I 1
Godda 1 M g
God lira 9 E h
Godna it Revel -
ganj 1 L g
Godwin Austen,
mt 3Gb
Gogi 8 G 1
Gogo 9 B i
Gogra, r 2 1 f
Gohad 6 H f
Gohana 3 G e
Gohardhanpur 12 M i
Gohela 3 G d
Gohelwar, st 9 1) i
Gobpur 13 P f
Gohuu 3 P c
Goila 1 L h
Goilari, p 4 D c
Goinia 10 B i
Gokak 10 F 1
Ookarn 10 Pm
6
INDEX


GOK
IYL
Map.
Gokarnath 2 I e
Gokhar 2 L e
Gola 1 L h
2 I e
2 K f
5 F f
Golaghat 13 P f
Golconda 8 H 1
Goleh, cr 15 G e
Golgonda 12 K 1
Gollapilli 12 I 1
Golra 3 B c
Gomawali 5 B e
Gompola 12 I q
Gonamal 7 K i
Gonda 21 f
2 K g
2 K g
, dist I f
Gondabaliali K i
Gondal 9 D i
Gonwara 1 M g
Goona 6 G g
, div 6 G g
Gooty 11 Gm
Gop 12 M k
Gopalganj 1 L f
1 N h
7 H i
Gopalgarh 5 G f
Gopalnagar 1 N h
Gopalpur 6 G g
l2 L k
Gopalsamibetta,
mt 11 G o
Gopalur 12 L i
Gopamau 2 1 f
Gopat, r 6 K g
Goplballabhpur 1M h
Gopnath, pt 9 B i
Gora 2 K f
Gorakhpur 2 K f
Goregaon 10 B k
Gorelianiurf Mir-
wali 9 C g
Gorhjhamar 7 H li
Gori 7 K h
, r 2 I d
Goribidnur 11 G n
Gorna 7 K i
Gorta 8 G 1
Gosotmii 13 Q g
Got Borejo 9 H f
Pandiah 9 C g
Goteh 10 F 1
Goti 7 I k
Gotul 10 F m
Gouasin 7 G h
Govindapur 8 I k
Govindganj 1 N g
Govindpili li K k
Gowai, r 1 M h
Gowaree 15 G e
Great Khirthar,
range 9 B f
Nicobar, i 14 P g
Ranjit, r 1 N f
Gualpukhar 1 M h
Guarani 9 C f
Guasuba, r 1 N i
Gnbbi 11 G n
Gmlgnnta 8 G 1
Gudha 5 F f
Gudiam 12 K 1
Gudiatham 11 H n
Gudiband i 11 G n
Gudiwara 11 L 1
Gudur 11 Hm
ll H in
Gugera 3 B d
Guguwa 13 P f
Gumti, r 2 I e
Gujar Khan 3 E c
Gujarat, ctry 9 D i
Gujranwala 3 F c
, dist 3B c
Qujrat 3 P c
dist 3 E c
Gujria 3 P b
Gujvel 8 H 1
Guladapa 1 O h
Guledgarh 10 P 1
Gulganj 6 H g
Gulikalmala, h 11 G o
Gulistan 4 B d
Gulmarg 3 F b
Gulmi 2 K e
Gulsakhali 1 O h
Gumal, r 4 C c
Gumbat 4 D c
Gumda 12 K k
Guraeachati 1 L li
Gumgaon 7 H i
Gumharia 1 M h
Gumsa 7 K i
Gumsur 12 L k
Gumti 2 K g
Map.
Gumti, r 1 O h
, r 2 I f
Gundacul 11 Gm
Gundala 8 1 1
Gundar, r 11 H p
Gundardelu 7 1 i
Gundi 1 Mg
Gundlakamma, r 11 H m
Gundlupet 11 G o
Qundredu 12 K k
Gunganr 6 I h
Gunjalt, r 6 P g
Gunnaur 2 H e
Gunsaungi 8 F k
Guntur 11 L 1
Gura 12 K k
Gum is 3 F b
Gurdaspur 3 F c
, dht 3 F c
Gurgaon 3 G e
, dist 3 G e
Gurgina, r 1111 in
Gurha 5 D g
6 I g
Gurbagarh 3 F c
Guripura 1 O h
Gurjal 11 H 1
Gurkha 2 L f
Gunnatkal 8 G 1
Gurramkonda 11 H n
Gursarai 2Hg
Onrteru 12 I 1
Gurugodu 11 G m
Gurnpala, r 13 N f
Gusherbrum, mt 3Gb
Gutgaon 1 L i
Guthni 1 L f
Guwha 10 F k
Guyabala, r 5 E g
Gwajha, p 4 B d
Gwal 4 C d
Gwalior 6 H f
, die 6 G g
Gwebin 13 R i
Gwegyi 13 Q i
Gyaing 14 R 1
Gyimshet 13 Q h
Gyobin 14 R k
Gyobingauk 14 Q k
Hab, r 9 B g
Habarana 12 I p
Habiganj 13 O g
Habra 1 N g
1 N h
Hadgaon 8 G k
Hadoti 5 G f
Hatizabad 3 B c
Haiatpur 1 M g
Haidarabad 4 D d
8 H 1
9 C g
, dist 9C g
, st 8 H 1
Haidargarh 2 1 f
Hailakandi, 13 P g
Hailsi 2 M f
Hajamro, mouth 9 B g
Hajee Haya 15 E f
Haji Khan 9 B f
Hajiganj 1 O li
Hajipur I L g
3 F d
Hajo 13 O f
Halal, st 9 C h
Halain 9 C f
Haldi, r 1 M li
Haldwani 2 H e
Halghatgi 10 F in
Halia, r 8 H 1
Halibhit 7 G i
Haliyal 10 F m
Halli 8 G k
Halloaghat 1 O g
Halukpre 14 P i
Halwad 9 D h
Hamal Kachiri 9 B f
Hainbantota 12 I q
Hamirgarh 3 F d
5 F g
Hamirpur 2 I g
3 G d
, dist 2H g
Hamp, r 7 I i
Ham pi 11 G in
Hampsagra 11 6m
Hamsur 2 K f
Hanamkunda 8 H k
Handa 2 K g
Handia 7 G h
Hangal 10 F in
Hangan 14 R m
Hangu 4 D c
Hanle 3 H c
, r 3 H c
Hanomil 3 G c
Hansi 3 P e
Map.
Hanskhali 1 N h
Hansot 10 B i
Hansua 12 M i
Hanta 13 P h
Hanthawadi, dist 14 Q 1
Hanumangarh
(Bkltnw) 5 F e
Hanwella 12 I q
Hanza 13 R i
Haputale 12 I q
Hardia 7 H h
Haramuk, vit 3 F b
Haran Chauki 4 C e
Haranpnr 3 E c
Harappa 3 E d
Harda 7 G h
Hardia 2 L f
Hardoi 2 1 f
, dist 2 1 f
Hardua 6 I h
Harduaganj 2 II f
Hard war 2 H e
Harek 3 F d
Hargam 2 1 f
Harha 2 1 f
9 D g
Hariajan 13 P f
Hariana 3 F d
9 D h
Hariar 6 G g
Haribong, r 12 L k
Harichpur 12 M i
Hariharpur 11 P n
Haringliata, r 1 N i
Haripr.r 3 E c
3 G d
3 G d
Harnai 4 B d
lO B 1
Harnhalli 11 G n
Haro i 1 N h
Haroh, r 3 E c
Harowar 6 1 h
Harpanahalli 11 G m
Harpatto 4 D e
Harraild 4 D e
Harriet, mt 14 P o
Harthar 11 F m
Harur 11 Hm
Hasan Abdal 3 E c
Hasanar 11 O o
Hasanjoi 4 B e
Hasanpur 2 H e
2 I f
Hasdu, r 7 K li
Hassam 15 F b
Hassan 11 G n
, dint 11 G n
FTastinapur 2 H e
Hastings, ft 2 I e
, harb 14 S o
Hasua 1 L g
Hata 2 K f
Hat.iuur 8 H 1
Hatliazari 1 O h
Hathi 1 K li
Hatliimora 13 O f
Haiiikhumbe 10 E I
Hathmati, r 9 E li
Hathras 2 H f
Hatia 1 O li
1 O h
2 M f
Hatod 6 F h
Hatta 7 H g
7 1 i
Hatti. r 7 K k
Haitian 3 E b
Hatton 12 I q
Hattras, pas 14 R n
Hatwa 1 L f
Haungtharaw, r 14 S 1
Hantba 15 G b
Hauwar 15 G V)
l5 G b
Havelj 3 E d
Havelock, i 14 P o
Haveri 10 P in
Hawaii 4 B d
Hawalbagh 2 H e
Hazara, di>t 3 E b
Hazaribach 1 L g
, dial 1L g
Hazro 3 B c
Heanzay Basin 14 R m
Hebbale 11 F n
Hebli 10 Pm
Heggadaevankot 11 G n
Heinsur 11 G n
Hemtabad 1 N g
Henaratgoda 12 H q
Henavati, r 11 F n
Henegamwa 12 I q
Heniina 13 P g
Henry Lawrence,
i 14 P n
Henzada 14 Q 1
Map.
Henzada, dist 14 Q 1
Heramundalum
Teckali 12 L k
Hetaura 2 L f
Hianinanaing 14 R 1
Hilba 3 F b
Hili 1 N g
Hill Tipperah, st 1 O h
Hilsa 1 L g
Hinia, r 2 M f
Himalaya, mis 3 F b
Himburawa 12 I q
Himis 3Gb
Himmar 9 G g
Hindan, r 2 G e
Hindauu 5 G f
Hindol 12 L i
Hindoli 5 P g
Hindri, r 11 G in
Hindu Kush, mts 4 C b
Hindupur 11 G n
Hinganghat 7 H i
Hingir 1 K i
Hinglajgarh 6 F g
Hingni 7 H i
Hingola 5 E f
Hingoli 8 G k
Hiniskut 3Gb
Hipurgeh 10 G 1
Hiran, r 7 H h
Hirangaon 6 G h
Hiranpur IMg
Hirehalli 11 G m
Hiriyur 11 G n
Hirode 11 G n
Hisap 9 C f
Hishwa 15 E c
Hissar 3 F e
, dist 8 F e
, div 3 F e
Hiwarkhed 8 II i
Hiwarkher 8 G i
Hlaing 14 Q 1
, r 14 Q 1
Hlaingbhwai 14 R 1
Hlaingbwe, r 14 R 1
Hlaingdet 13 R i
Hlawga 14 R 1
Hlegu 14 R 1
Hlegya 13 R h
Hluttaik 13 Q h
Hmawbi 14 R 1
Hodal 3 G f
Hodipur 12 L i
Hoinar 7 I k
Holalkere 11 G m
Hole Honnur 11 F in
Hollia 2 K g
Hoinalin 13 Q g
Hoinbul 10 F in
Homphrays, str 14 P n
Honali 11 F m
Honawar 10 F in
Hondelia 12 I q
Hongal 10 F m
Hon war 10 F 1
Hope Town 1 N f
Horace, pt 14 P ])
Horgati 13 P f
Horrowapotham 12 I p
Hoitl 10 F 1
Horton, pi 12 I q
Hosangadi 11 F n
Hosdrug 11 F n
Hosdn, r 1 P i
Hosdnrga 11 G n
Hosedar, r 4 B e
Hoshangabad 7 G li
, dist 7 G h
Hoshiarpnr 3 F d
,d st 3F d
Hoskot 11 G n
Hospet 11 G in
Hosor 11 G n
11 G n
Hoti Manlan 4 E b
Howrah 1 N h
, dist 1 N h
, dist 15 C c
Hpyn, r 14 R k
Htan, mt 14 S in
Htanka 13 P h
Htantabin 14 R k
Hteangon 14 Rm
Htoneing 14 R 1
Hubli 10 F m
Hudikeri 11 F m
Hugh 1 N h
, did 1 Nh
, r 1 M i
, r 15 C d
Hugri, r 11 G m
llujra 3 E d
Hukul 8 H 1
Huliyar 11 G n
Hulsungl 10 F 1
Humbher 5 G f
Map.
Humcha H F n
Hummeit 9 D g
Humnabad 8 G 1
Hundapa 12 L i
Hungund 8 G 1
lO G 1
Hunterganj 1 I g
Hunters, b 14 P k
Huuza 3 F a
, r 3 F a
Hnrdi 1 L f
Hut, b 14 P o
Huighur 10 E i
Hutgi 10 G 1
lb, r IKh
Ibb 15 E a
Ibrahim Mahr 9 C f
Ibrahimpatau 8 H 1
8 H 1
Ichak 1 L g
Ichapur 12 L k
Ichauli 2 1 f
Ichawar 6 G h
Ichhainati, r 1 N h
Igatpuri 10 B k
Iglas 2 G f
llitimadpur 2 H f
Ikauuah 21 f
Ikenywewa 12 I p
Ikur 8 G 1
Ham 2 M f
Ilambile 8 11
llkacherta 8 G 1
Illipur 11 H o
Illupalkadavai 12 I p
Imad 15 F b
Imamghar 9 C f
l3 R i
Imphal 13 P g
Inapur 8 G k
Inchalkaranji 10 F 1
Indapur 10 F k
Indargarh 6 H g
Indarpal 8 G e
Indas 1 M li
Indaung 13 Q h
Indawgyi, I 13 R g
Indi 10 F 1
Indian Ocean 15 E c
Indin 13 Q h
Inding 13 B f
Indor 8 G k
, st 8 G k
Indore 6 P h
, div 6 F h
Indra 1 L h
Indravati, r 7 K k
Indrayani, r 10 E k
Indrayati, r 12 K k
Indreokim 13 P g
Indurkhi 6 H f
Indus, r 3 F b
, r 4 D e
, r 9 C f
, r Mouths
of the 9 B g
Ingoie 14 P o
Inhauna 21 f
Injaram 12 I I
Inle, I 13 R i
Insei 14 R 1
Inshin 3 F o
Interview, i 14 P n
Investigator,c/if(/il4 R o
Inzauk 14 S n
Irampeikkulam 12 I p
Irawadi, div 14 Q 1
, r 13 R g
, r 14 Q I
, r Mouth
of 14 Q m
Ircherla 8 H k
Irenetivu, i 12 II p
Irich 2 H g
Irwa 5 F f
Isagarh 6 G g
Isak 4 1) c
Isakapalli 11 L m
Isakhel 4 D c
Isan, r 2 H f
Isarda 5 G I'
Isardo 3 P b
Ision, div 10 E k
Islambad 3 F c
Islaragarh 4 D f
Islainkot 9 D g
Islamnagar 2 II e
Islampur 10 F 1
Ismaila 4 E b
Iswaripur, ruins 1 N h
Itarsi 7 G h
Itchapur 12 K k
Itchora 8 H k
Itkhuri 1 L g
Ittamukkala 11 L m
lyhir 11 H o
7
INDEX


JAB
KAM
Map.
Jabalpur 4 D c
7 H h
, dist 7 II h
Jackson, cr 14 P o
, div 7 H h
Jacobabad 9 G e
Jael 5 P f
Jafar 9 C g
Jafarabad 9 D i
Jaffarginj 1 N h
Jaffna 12 H p
Jaflrabad 9 0 e
Jagadhri 3 G d
Jagalur 11 Gm
Jagan 9 C e
Jaganadhapur 12 K 1
Jagannath 12 L k
Jagannathpur 12 M i
Jagarnath 1 O h
Jagati 1 N h
Jagatsingpur 12 M i
Jagawaram 8 1 1
Jagdalpur 7 K k
Jagdispur 1 L g
2 I 1
Jaggayyapct 12 1 1
Jagner 2 G f
Jagraon 3 F d
Jahanabad 1 L g
1 M h
2 H e
2 11
Jahangirabad 2 II e
2 I 1
Jahrampad 8 H k
Jai Tuma 13 P h
Jaiam k < mda (Sola-
puram) 11 II o
Jaigaih 10 E 1
Jaighat 2 K f
Jaimal 5 E f
Jaiuagar 1 M f
1 N h
Jaintia Hills, div 13 P g
Jaintiapur 13 P g
Jaipur 1 L g
1 M h
1 N g
6 P f
8 G i
8 G k
l2 K k
l3 Q 1
, st 12 K k
Jais 2 1 1
Jaisalraer 5 D f
,st 5 D f
Jaisanghn g r 7 Hh
Jaisingh 3 E d
Jaitapur 10 E 1
Jaitgarh 7 II i
Jaitpur 2 H g
Jaitupura 6 I g
Jaji Maidan 4 D c
Jajpur 5 F g
Jajur 11 G m
Jakam, r 5 F g
Jakhau 9C h
Jalala 4 D b
Jalalabad 2 G e
2 H f
Jalali 2 H f
Jalalpur 2 H g
2 K f
3 E c
3 F c
4 D e
Jalandhar 3 F d
, d'st 3 F d
, div 3 P d
Jalanji, r 1 Nb
Jalar 3 G d
Jalauu 2 H f
, dist 2 H f
Jalbhaii 13 Q f
Jaldkaka 1 N f
, r 1 N f
Jaleswar 1 M i
Jalgaon 7 H i
10 F i
Jambod 8 G i
Jalgawan 6 H g
Jalkot 3 E b
Jalua 8 F k
Jalor 5 B g
Jalpaiguri 1 N f
, dist 1N f
Jalpesh 1 N f
Jam 7 1 li
Jamai 7 H h
Jamalabad 11 P n
Jamali 9 C e
Jamalpur 1 11 g
1 N g
Jaraan Hindu 9 B g
Jamaniya 2 H e
Jamarga 1 K h
Map.
Jamboti 10 F m
Jambughora 9 E h
Jambulghata 7 II i
Jambusar 10 E h
Jamda 1 L h
James, i 14 Q n
Jamgaon 12 K k
Jamgarh 4 E e
Jamgari 6 K g
Jami 12 K k
Jamira, r 1 N i
Jamirapat, plat 1K h
Jainjo Tando 9 C g
Jamkher 8 F k
lO F k
Jainki 3 F c
Jamlera 3 E d
Jammalamadugu 11 Hm
Jammu 3 F c
, dist 3 F c
Jamnagar (Nawa-
nagar) 9 D h
Jamner 6 G h
lO K i
Jamni, r li H g
Jamod 8 G i
Jampang 13 Q f
Jam pur 4 U e
Jamtara 1 M li
Jamui 1 Mg
Jamnn, r 13 P f
Jauiuin, r 1 N h
Jaiuunagaon 13 P f
Jamunpani 7 H h
Jauagaou 8 H k
Janakpiir 1 I h
Janbatai 4 D b
Jand 4 E c
Jandanwala 4 D c
Jandhbari 3 G d
Jandial i 3 F d
Jangi 9 C g
Jangipur 1 N g
Jani Kliel 4 1) c
Janikbaudi 10 P 1
Janikpur 2 M f
Janji 3 E c
Stage 13 Q f
Janjir.i 10 E k
Janaath 2 G e
Jantirainpara 1 O li
Jaora 6 F h
, st 6 F h
Japvo, pk 13 P g
Jarhadih 1 K h
Jarra 1 L g
Jarwal 2 1 f
Jasdan 9 D h
Jashpur, st 1 K h
Jashpurnagar IKb
Jasma 5 F g
Jaso 6 I g
Jasol 5 E g
Jaspnr 2 H e
Jasrasar 6 E f
Jasrota 3 P c
Jaswantnagar 2 H f
Jaswantpura 5 E g
Jat 6 F g
Jath 10 F 1
Jatoi 4 D e
Jatrapur 1 N g
Jaunampet 8 H 1
Jaunpur 2 K g
, dist 2 K g
Javla 10 F I
Jawadi, hs 11 H n
Jawala Mukhi 3 G d
Jawalapur 2 H e
Jawar 6 G h
Jawas 5 B g
Jawhar 10 E k
, st 10 B k
Jawud 6 F g
Jayraai 1 L h
Jebel el Hamma 15 E a
Har •mi 15 F b
Haras 15 F b
llisan 15 E c
Jaffa! 15 F b
Kharas 15 E c
Mirsa 15 E c
Sab r 15 E b
Shunt Shumls F c
Jebanabad 1 K g
Jehlam 3 E c
, dist 4 E c
, r 4 E d
Jehwur 10 P k
Jeora 6 H g
Jepiri 10 F k
Jerai 12 K 1
Jergaon 12 K k
Jerimalta 11 G m
Jerjerlah 8 H 1
Jerruck DC g
Jerur 8 P j
Map.
Jessor 1 N h
, dist 1 N h
Jetalsar 9 D i
Jetch Doab 4 B d
Jetpur 9 D i
Jewar 2 G e
Jeysingderh 6 D g
Jhabua 6 P h
, st 6 F h
Jhajhar 2 G e
Jhajjar 3 G e
Jhajju 5 B f
Jhaknauda 6 F h
Jhakaora 2 H g
Jhal 4 B e
Jhalai 5 G f
JhalakaH 1 O h
Jhalawan, st 4 B e
Jhalawar, div 5 F g
, st 9 D It
Jhalbeda 1 L h
Jhalida 1 L h
Jhalnachara 13 P g
Jhalod 9 E It
Jhalra Patau 6 G g
Jhalu 2 H e
Jhang, dist 4 E d
Maghiana 4 B d
Jhangir 9 B f
Jhanidnh 1 N h
Jhanjhana 2 G e
Jhanjhmer 9 E i
Jhansi 6 H g
, dist 2 H g
, div 2 H g
Jhar 61 g
Jharapapra 7 I i
Jharol 5 E g
Jhawani 2 L f
J bavarian 3 E c
Jhilmilli 1 K h
Jhimpir 9 C g
Jhinjhuwara 9 U li
Jhiri 6 G g
, r 13 P g
Jhirna, r 2 G f
Jhok Shama 4 U e
Jhorega 10 F i
Jhuga Tarpia 9 B g
Jhuniar 3 F e
Jhunjhnu 5 F e
Jhusi 2 I g
Jia Dhaneswari 13 P f
Jiaganj IN g
Jia wan 0 K g
Jiggergonda 7 I k
Jigni * 2 H g
Jilo 5 F f
Jimra, r 2 K f
Jind , 3 G e
, st 3 F d
, st 3 Q e
, st 3 G e
Jintur 8 G k
Jira 13 O g
Jiran (i F g
Jisu 6 D f
Jitpur 2 L f
Jitpura 5 F e
Jobat 6 F h
,st 6 F h
Jodhpur 5 B f
(Mai war), st 5 E g
Jodia 9 D h
Jogdaha 2 M f
Jogigarh, i 7 G h
Johaikela 1 L i
Joharpati 2 L f
Jolii 9 B f
Johilla, r 7 I h
Jolapali 8 H k
Jollarpet 11 H n
Jong, r 7 K i
Jonka 1 K h
1 L li
Jorhat 13 Q I
Jorigura 12 K k
Joshimath 2 H d
Jowai 13 P g
Jowali 5 B d
Juari, r 10 E m
Jubang 2 M f
Jubbugaum 9 E i
Juddengi 12 K 1
Juggenuunpur 2 II f
Jugni 13 O g
Jugumpet 12 K 1
Julwana 6 P i
Jumla 2 K e
Jnniraa 9Cl'
Jumna, r 2 H f
Jumnotri 2 II d
Junagar 7 K k
Junagarli 9 D i
Jmushahi 9 B g
Junnur 10 E k
Jur 4 A e
Map.
Jura 5 B g
Juradah 12 L k
Kabadak, r INI:
Kabarigdon 13 P f
Kabaung, r 14 R k
Kabbah lurgi 11 G n
Kabkob 1 P h
Kabrai 2 H g
Kabul, r 4 D b
Kabula, r 4 B e
Kabur, i 1 Mg
Kachgal, r 3 F c
Kaehhi, st 4 C e
Kachhla 2 H f
Kachni 2 K f
Kacholn 5 F g
Kachor Re was, I 5 F I
Kachra 6 I g
Kachua 1 N h
Kadaba 11 G n
Kadaiyanallur 11 G p
Kadalvandi, r 11 G o
Kadam, r 8 H k
Kadambnr 11 G p
Kadana 9 E n
Kadanai, r 4 B d
Kadi 9 E h
Kadirabad 3 B c
8 F k
Kadirganj 2 H f
Kadivi 11 H m
Kadirpur 4 E d
Kado 14 R 1
Kadonbaw 14 H 1
Kadugaunawa 12 I q
Kaduma 13 Q h
Kadur 11 F n
ll H n
, dist 11 F n
Kadua IMg
, r 10 B i
Kadwe 14 S n
Kafara 2 I e
Kal'nistan, st 4 D b
Kag 3 F c
, r 10 P i
Kagal 10 F 1
Kagan 3 B b
Kagbeni 2 K e
Kaget 13 Q g
Kahan 4 C e
Kahanuwa 10 E h
Kahar 1 K h
Kahelia 2 H f
Kahror 4 I) e
Kai 2 K e
Kaida 7 G h
Kailang 3 G c
Kailwara 56 g
Kaim Rajar 9 O f
Kaimdhra 2 1 f
Kainiganj 2 H f
Kaimgul 4 D b
Kaiinur, hs 1 K g
,hs 6 1 g
Kaimwaha 6 Q g
Kaing 13 Q h
Kaira 9 E li
, d 'st 9 E h
Kairana 2 G e
Kaisa'garh 4 C d
Kaispur 2 H e
Kaithal 3 G e
Kaithan 5 F g
Kaitu, r 4 D c
Kajra 1 M g
Kakadungo, r 13 Q f
Kakar 9 B 1
9 D g
Kakara 6 I g
Kakarati 0 I g
Kakhundki 10 F 1
Kakler 7 I k
Kakora s 2 H f
Kakori 2 1 f
Kakrala" 2 H f
Kaksa 1 M h
Kakumar 7 L h
Kala Abdullah
Khan 4 B d
Babar 4 B d
Dost
Muhamd. 4 C d
Drasau 4 E a
Drash 4 D b
Haji Khan 4B d
Oya 12 I p
Par Serai 4 E e
Shah Julian 4 C d
Kaladgi 10 F 1
Kaladhungi 2 II e
Kalagarh 2 H e
Kalagastota 12 I q
Kalagwe 13 R h
Kalahandi
(Karond), st 7 K k
Map.
Kalai 10 E i
Kalakad 11 G p
Kalakund 6 P i
Kalalot 3 F b
Kalam 3 E b
Kalamatt t, b 12 I q
K ilamb 8 G k
8 H i
Kalamoa 1 N h
Kalanaur 3 F d
3 G e
Kalang 3 G c
, r 13 P f
Kalangpnr 13 P f
Kalapaii/.iu 14 P i
Kalasu 11 F n
Kaiasar 5 E e
Kalat Tong
(Taungtlion-
lon) 13 Q g
Kalawewa, tank 12 1 q
Kaldoba 13 N f
Kaldurki 8 G k
Kalegauk, i 14 R m
Kalemyo 13 P h
Kalewa 13 Q h
Kaljarh 4 D c
Kalgliurnni 3 F d
Kalhora 9 C f
Kali, r 2 II f
Gandak, r 2 K f
Sind, r 5 F h
, r 6 G h
Kalia Chak 1 M g
Kheri 6 G h
Kaliabar 13 P f
Kaliaganj 1 N f
Kaliani 8 G 1
, r 13 P f
Kalian pur 2 G d
KaliganJ l Nh
INIi
KaMgary 1 N g
Kalikaeho 1 O g
Kallkulam 11 G p
Kalimaro 2 1 e
Kalimpong 1 N f
Kalinadi, r 10 F m
Kalindi, r I Mg
Kalingapatam 12 L k
Kalinjra 5 F h
Kaltpal 1 M h
Kaljani, r 1 M g
Kalki 3 G d
Kalladakurichi 11 G p
Kallakurchi 11 H n
Kallander 9 C f
Kallar 3 E c
3 E c
Kalliandrug 11 G in
Kalliark il 11 Up
Kalin, r 10 E k
Ganga 12 I q
Kallur Kot 4 D c
Kallwa 11 Hm
Kalmeshwar 7 H i
Kalna 1 N h
Kalnai 1 K h
Kaloday 12 I q
Kalodia 1 M i
Kalol 9 E h
Kalowal 3 B d
Kalpagur 8 G 1
Kaljiatti II G p
Kalpi 1 N li
2 H f
Kalpitiya 12 II p
Kalrayan, hs 11 H o
Kalsi 2 G d
Kalsubai, h 10 E k
Kalubhar, r 9 D i
Kalur 8 1 1
Kalutara 12 H q
Kalvakurthi 8 II 1
Kalwa 5 F f
Kalwan 10 F i
Kalyan 10 B k
Kama 14 Q k
Kamakalok It R 1
Kamalap iram 11 G m
Kamalganj 2 II f
Kamalpur l O g
Kamamat 14 U t
Kamamet 8 1 1
, st 8 H 1
Kaman 5 G f
Kamar 7 K i
Kamargaon 13 () f
Kamarmashum 4 1) <-
Kamarwa 6 I h
Kamase 14 R 1
Kamaule 4 R 1
Kamawet 14 R 1
Kamba 9 B g
Kambajari 8 H k
Kambar 9 B f
| Kanibe 14 Q 1
8
INDEX.


KAM
KIB
Map.
Kambyo 13 Q h
Kamdebpur 1 N g
Kamgarum 4 C c
Kamjong 13 Q g
Kamla, r 2 L f
Kamlabari 13 Q f
Kamlapur 7 I k
Kamlen, h 13 R g
Kamlung, r 13 R f
Kamoke 3 P d
Kamor 4 U c
Kampil 2 H f
Kampli 11 G m
Kamrej 9 E i
Kamrup, die 13 O f
Kamta 6 I g
Kamtha 7 I i
Kamthi 7 H i
Kamulapur 11 H m
Kanad 8 F i
Kanak 4 B e
Kanandagudi 11 H o
Kanar, r 6 G h
Kanarak (Asta-
ran) 12 M k
Kanauj 2 11 f
K manng 14 Q k
Kanauta 5 P f
Kanchanjauga, mt 1 M f
,mt 2 M f
Kanchi, r 1 L h
Kanchiang, r 13 O g
Kand 4 B d
, p 4 B d
Kanda 4 B e
Kandaka 12 L i
Kan dan 3 G d
Kandapu 11 P n
Kandelay 12 I p
Kandhala 2 G e
Kandhkot 9 C e
Kandi 1 N h
Kandia 9 C f
Kandiam 3 6 d
Kandiara 9 C f
Kandikonda 8 H 1
Kando 3 G d
Kandri 1 K h
Kandrika 12 I 1
Kandukur 11 Hm
Kandy 12 I q
Kanera 5 F g
Kaneti 4 B e
Kangan 3 F b
Kangayara 11 G o
Kangi 3Gb
l2 1. k
Kangiri 11 Hm
Kangra 3 G c
, dist 3 G c
Kangshangknl 13 P g
Kangyidaung 14 Q 1
Kanban, r 1 K h
, r 7 11 i
Kanhar, r 1 K g
Kanhaur 3 G e
Kanhiwara 7 H h
Kanhur 10 P k
Kan.jarapa'li 11 G p
Kanjaria 2 I e
Kanjer 0 P i
Kanjia 7 H g
Kanjikovil 11 G o
Kankai, r 1 M f
Kankanhalli 11 G n
Kankasanturia 12 H p
Ranker 7 I i
,st 7 I i
Kankhal 2 H e
Kankri 7 H h
Kanlakur 8 H 1
Kanni 13 Q h
l4 B 1
l4 8 1
Kanor 5 P g
Kanound 3 G e
Kanpali 8 I k
Kanpat 13 Q h
Kanroli 5 E g
Kansat INg
Kantai 1 L f
Kantal 8 II 1
Kantaphor 6 G h
Kant ha 2 1 f
Kantilo 12 E i
Kantkot 9 D h
Kantla 1 L i
Kantlam 8 1 1
Kanu 14 S m
Kanur 5 D f
Kanyan 14 Q k
Kanzam Pass 3 G c
Kao or Alingar, r 4 D b
Kaoki 8 1 1
Kap 2 L e
Kapa 14 S m
l4 S n
Map.
Kapadwanj 9 B h
Kapalu 3Gb
Kapasan 5 P g
Kapasia 1 O g
Kapiang 4 D e
Kapileswapuram 12 I 1
Kapili, r 13 P g
Kapilmoni 1 N h
Kapurthala 3 P d
8 P d
, st 3 P d
Kara 15 P a
Karachchi 12 L p
Karachi 9 B g
, dist 9 B g
Karad 10 P 1
Karagolah IMg
Kavai, r IMg
Kavaimadai 11 G o
Karajgaon 8 G i
Karakal 11 P n
Karakash, r 3 H b
Karakorum, mts 3 P b
, pass 3Gb
Karakprasad 12 L i
Kavamnasa, r 1 K g
Karampur 9 C e
Karandikapa 0 I h
Karang 3 E b
Katanguli 11 H n
Karanja 7 H i
8 G i
, i 10 K k
Karatagh, pass 3 II b
Karativo, i 12 H p
Karatoya or
Phul.jur, r 1 N g
Kaurauli 5 G f
, div 5 G t
Karb K..t 4 C c
Karchhana 2 I g
Karda 8 II i
Karehra 0 II g
Karenni, dist 13 R k
Karera 5 P g
Karetivu 12 I q
Kargaon 7 I k
Kargil 3Gb
Karlia, r 10 F k
Karhal 2 H f
Karhaibari 1 M g
Karho 5 D f
Kari Bhit 9 D g
Karigond 7 I k
Karikal 11 H o
Karimganj 13 O g
Karimpur INg
Karimungi 86 k
Karin 9 D h
Kariat 10 E k
lO F k
Karkari, r 1 L h
Karkeri 5 P 1
Karki 0 I h
Karkona 13 P g
Karli 30 E k
Karma 2 I g
Karmala 10 F k
Karmat 7 K k
Knrmatar IMg
Karnal 3 P e
3 G e
, d’st 3 G e
Karnala 10 B k
Karnali or
Kauriala. r 2 I e
Karnaota 5 F f
Karnaphnli, r 1 O h
K arnprayag 2 H d
Karnul It Hm
, div 11 11 m
, st 8 H 1
Karond, st 7 K k
Karor 4 D d
Karpattemoori-
poo 12 I p
Karra 2 I g
8 P k
lO P k
Karsal 7 K i
Karsawan 1 L h
Karsiang 1 N f
Karsinda 3 G e
Karsul 10 E i
Kartarpur 3 P d
Karthowa 6 K g
Karto, r 1 N f
Kartse 3Gb
Kama 1 K h
Karumaltur 11 6 p
Karumattampattill G o
Karurabhar, i 9 C h
Karun, r 7 I i
Karuprolu 12 K 1
Karur 11 H o
Karvir 10 P 1
Karwar 10 P m
Map.
Karwi 2 I g
Kasai, r 1 M h
Kasaitu 1 L h
Kasalang 1 O h
1 P h
Kasanapali 8 1 1
Kasaragod 11 P n
Kasauli 3 G d
Kasha IMg
1 M h
1 M h
1 M h
Kasganj 2 H f
Kashmir, di t 3 P b
(Sr uagar)3 F b
Kashmore 9 C e
Kashwau 5 P f
Kasim 9 0 1
Kasimbazar 1 N g
Kasimkora 12 K 1
Kasimpur 8 G k
Kasipunam 12 K k
Kasipur 8 H k
Kasir 1 L h
Kasraar 1L h
Kasvjod 6 P h
Kasya 2 K f
Kataba 15 B b
Kafabagh 4 D c
Katahasti 11 H n
Katahra 2 H g
Kataklik 3 H b
Katangi 7 H h
7 H i
7 K i
Katar 4 D b
Katauria IMg
Katchall, i 14 P q
Katgala 3 E b
Katgodom 2 H e
Katha, d'st 13 Q h
Kathiawar, div 9 D i
Kathirur HP o
Kathiwara 6 P h
Kathna 3 P c
Kathori 5 U f
Katigora 13 P g
Kati Sind, r 6 P h
Katihar IMg
Katknr 8 H k
Katlang 4 B b
Katne 7 I h
Katohbum 13 R f
Katol 7 H i
Katoli 5 P f
Katosau 9 B h
Katra 2 H f
Ghat 2 K g
Kattaragam 12 I q
Katwa " . 1N h
Kaudali 11 G n
Kaulas 8 G k
Kaulur 8 G 1
Kaum, r 8 F k
Kaundha 21 f
Kaungton 13 R g
Kauniya 1 N g
Kanrampet 8 II 1
Kauria 7 K i
Kauriala, r 2 I e
or Kar-
nali, r 2 I e
Kauriya 7 H h
Kavai 11 P n
Kavali 11 Hm
Kavaripatam 11 II n
Kaveri, r 7 G h
Kaveripak 11 H n
Kaveripnram 11 G o
Kavi 10 E h
Kawa 13 P h
l4 R 1
Kawarda 7 I h
Kawardha, st 7 I h
Kawari, r 1 M h
Ghat 2 I e
Kawas 4 B d
Kawe 13 Q h
Kawkareit 14 S 1
Kawlin 13 Q h
Kayal 11 H p
Kayaledurga, mis 11 P n
Kayalpatnam 11 II p
Kayar 8 H k
Kayatha 6 G h
Kayayit Sakh-n 13 P h
Kayenkolam 11 G p
Kazaing 14 R 1
Kazika Got 9 C f
Kedar Kanta 2 H d
Kedarnath 2 H d
, pk 2 II d
Kegalla 12 I q
Keitha 2 H g
Kej 8 G k
Kckrl 5 P g
7 K k
Map.
Kekrima 13 Q g
Kelani Ganga 12 1 q
Kelapur 8 H k
Kelia 12 K k
Kelod 7 II i
Kelsi 10 E 1
Kelu, r 7 K h
Kelva 10 E k
Kelwara 5 E g
Kem 10 F k
‘Ken, r 2 I g
, r 6 I g
Kenchengudda 11 G m
Kenda 7 K h
Kendali 1 H h
Kendrapara 12 M i
Kenoma 13 P g
Keokchuk Tong,
mt 13 P h
Kera 9 C h
, r 10 P k
Kere 14 R 1
Keri 8 P c
Kerko 3Gb
Keromihumi 13 Q f
Kerur 10 P 1
Kesariya 1 L f
Kesha bpur 1 N h
Keshpur 1 M h
Kesod 9 D i
Keti 9 B g
Ketil, r IMg
Keunjhar 1 L i
—-, st 1 L i
Khachraud 6 F h
Khadi 2 1 g
Khadrang 2 M f
Khaga 2 1 g
Khagrapara 13 O f
Khaibar, p 4 D b
Khair 2 G f
Khaira 2 K g
6 1 g
6 I h
T.aghari 9C g
Khairabad 2 1 f
4 B c
Khairagarh 7 I i
,st 7 I i
Khairgarh 4 D e
Khairi 7 I h
Khairigarh 2 I c
Khairpur 4 D e
4 E e
9 B 1
9 C f
9 C f
, *{ 9 O f
Dharki 9 C e
Khaiwara 5 B h
Khajauli 1 L f
Khajuha 2 1 f
Khajura 1 N h
Khajurahu 6 H g
Khalar 5 F 1
Khalbaro 2 I e
Khalukthcik 14 Q 1
Khamadhana 6 H g
Khamaria 6 I h
Khamba Tong 13 P i
Khambhalia 9 C h
Kharagaon 8 G i
Khami 1 L h
Khamidal 6 I h
Khamiso 9 G g
Khamlai 6 G h
Khamor 5 F g
Khamoung 1 P i
Khan, dist 4 D d
Khel 4 D c
Khanai 4 B d
Khanakul 1 M h
Khanangphung,
pk 13 Q g
Khanapur 10 P 1
Khanau, r 2 H e
Khanbaila 4 1) e
Khandauli 1 M f
Khandela 5 P f
Khandesh, dist 10 P i
Khanditar 12 M i
Khandpara 12 L i
Khandu 5 P h
Khandwa 7 G i
Khanewal 4 D d
Khangarh 4 D e
Khangwa, r 2 M f
Khanna 3 G d
Khanpur 4 D e
9 C e
Khanu 1 M h
Khanwah 4 D e
Khanwahan 9 C f
Khaor 4 E c
Khapa 7 H h
7 H i
Khar 4 D b
Map.
Kharagdiha 1 M g
Kharaghora 9 D h
Kharaila 2 H g
Kbarakiur IMg
, hs IMg
Kharap, or 15 G e
Kharar 3 G d
Kharba 1 N g
Kharda 10 P k
Kharepatan 10 E 1
Khargaou l K h
6 F i
l3 O f
Khari 1 N h
5 P f
, r 5 F g
, r 9 E h
Kharia 6 G h
, r 1 O g
Kharial 8 F d
Khariar 7 K i
Kharkhauda 8 G e
Kharki 4 D b
, h 7 H i
Kharoti 4 C c
Kharra 15 G d
Kharro 5 E e
Khartaksho 3Gb
Kharu 3Gb
Kharaha 6 I h
Kharwa 5 P f
Khasaura 2 H f
Khasi Hills, div 13 O g
Khatai 6 Kg
Khatang 13 Q f
Khatauli 2 G e
Khatkhari 6 K g
Khatmandu 2 L 1
Khatoli 5 G g
Khaungyi 13 P i
Khawasa 6 F h
Khebrani 9 C g
Khed 10 E k
lO B 1
lO P k
Kliedbramba 9 E g
Khekera 2 G e
Khelat 4 B e
Khem Kara 8 P d
Khenju 9 C f
Kher 8 G k
Kheralu 9 E h
Kheigaon 13 Q f
Kheri 2 I f
7 G i
, dint 2 I e
Kherkheiia 13 O f
Kherkutia, r 13 Q f
Kherta 1 K h
Khesar 9 D g
Khetri 5 P e
Kheura 3 E c
Khewan Tal 2 K e
Ehilchipur 6 G g
, st 6 G g
Khimlasa 7 H g
Khipra 9 C g
Khirka 2 I g
Khiital 5 G f
Khiston 6 H g
Khizrabad 3 G d
3 G d
Khodale 10 E k
Khokhva 6 G h
Kholapur 8 G i
Kholla 13 P f
Khond 1 K h
Kht.njiron 13 P g
Khor Moksar, cr 15 P c
Khorsi, r 7 K i
Khowang 13 Q f
Khubr 15 G b
Khudi, month 9 B g
Khudiau 3 F d
Kbuitea IMg
Khulali 0 K g
Khulna 1 N h
, dist INli
Khun 9 B h
Khnntaora 9 D i
Khurai 7 H g
Khurdha 12 L i
Khuria, p’nt 1 K h
Kburja 2 G e
Khurna Kur 3 G c
Kbursa 6 I h
Khusdil 4 B d
Khushab 4 B c
Klmslialgarh 4 D c
Khusbnob 4 C d
Kb utahan 2 K g
Ktintar 2 I e
Khutgaon 7 1 i
Khyra Dero 9 C f
Kiadgiri 8 G 1
Kiar, r 8 G k
Kibber 3 H c
9
INDEX.


LAL
KIC
Map.
Kicbail 2 I e I
Kidderpur 15 B e I
Kila Didair Singh 3 P c I
Kilakarai 11 H p I
Kilanguda 12 K k 1
Kilapat 3 G e 1
Kilar 3 G c -
Killing, r 13 P g 1
Kim, r 10 E i 1
Kinarsini, r 8 111
Kiubira 1 L h 8
Kindat 13 Q h 1
King, i 14 S n 1
Kingri 4 C d 1
Kinhi 7 1 i 1
Kirakat 2 K g I
Kiratpur 2 H e ■
Kiri Shamozai 4 D d 1
Kirigalpotta, mt 12 I q 1
Kirijalle 12 I q
Kirinda 12 I q :
Kirindu Oya 12 I q
Kiris 3 P b
Kirki lib:
lO E k ;
Kirnapur 7 1 i
Kirri Kbaisor 4 D c
Kirta 4 B e
Kirthal 2 G e
Kisbanganj 5 G g
Kishangarii 5 P f
,st 5 F f
Kisbanpun 1 L g
Kisben Ganga, r 38' b
Kishenganj Ulg
Kishengarh 6 II g
Kishengurh 5 D f
Kishni 2 H f
2 1 f
Kisoriganj lO g
Kissering, i 14 8 o
Kistawar 3 F c
Kistna, delta 11 L m
, div 11 H 1
, r 10 F 1
, r 11 II 1
Kistnapur 8 II 1
ll G p
Kitbapali 8 H 1
Kittulouta 12 I p
Kittur 10 P m
Kitulkota 12 I q
Kiwai 2 K g
Kizil Jilga 3 H b
Knardo 3 F b
Kocbcrlaeotah 11 Hm
Kochra 1 L b
Kod 10 F m
Kodacbadri, mts 11 F n
Kodaikanal, pk 11 G o
Kodamiala 8 18 1;
Kodangal 8 G 1
Kodari 2 L f
Kodarma 1 L g
Koddiyarap 12 I p
, h 12 I p
Kodban 4 E d
Kodinar 9 D i
Kodlipet 11 F n
Kodoradbi 1 L li
Kodugwe 14 8 m
Kodumur 11 G m
Kodungalur 11 G o
Kodur 11 L m
Kobala 3 E b
Kohar 3 E c
Kohat 4 D c
, dist 4 D c
—,r 4 D c
Kohima 13 Q g
Kohir 8 G 1
Kohoisib 1 P li
Koie 4 B b
Koilibedo 7 I k
Koilkuntla 11 H m
Koilwar 1 L g
Koina, r 10 B 1
Koiri 2 K g
Kokabae 12 I p
Kokelay 12 8 p
, b 12 I p
Kokila 13 Q f
Kokpada 1 M h
Kokutnur 10 P 1
Kola Tong, mt 13 P h
Kolab, r 7 I k
Kolaba 15 F i
, dist 10 E k
Kolabera 1 L h
Kolabira 7 L i
Kolachei 11 G p
Kolack 10 E i
Kolak, r 10 B i
Kolar 11 II n
, dist 11 H n
, I 12 I 1
, r C G h
Map.
Kolaras 6 G g 8
Kolatur 11 H o 8
Kolo 10 F 18
Koleng 7 I k 8
Kolewur 15 G i 8
Kolhapur 10 F 1 - ,
, st 10 F 1 I
Koliapoto 7 K i I
Kollainalais 11 H o 1
Kolleti Kota 12 I 1 -
Kollur 11 F n 1
Kolodo 14 K k 1
Kolonne 12 I q 1
Kolu 5 D f -
Koludi 6 I g -
Kolur 7 I k 1
8 G 1 -
Komagbat 12 K i
Kombai 11 G p J
Komitipali 8 H k I
Kon 2 K g 1
Kona 3 E c 1
Konada 12 K k 1
Kondakambru 12 K k
Kondapada 12 L i
Kondapalli 12 I 1
; Kondarum 8 1 1
i Kondari 8 G k
: Kondavir 11 L 1
; Kondayapollam 11 Hm
Kondiwre 10 B 1
: Kondka 7 I i
; Kongma 13 Q b
i Kongnoli 10 8’ 1
; Koni 61 g
; Konjori, r 1 L i
\ Konkan, dry 10 E k
f Konkwa 13 R h
f Konlur 12 I 1
; Konnur 10 G 1
i Kopaganj 2 K f
‘ Kopargaon 10 8' k
i Kopari 1 M i
1 Koppa 11 F n
1 Kopra, r 7 H li
I Korabaga 7 K i
[ Korabar 5 B g
> Koracha 7 I i
1 Korada 12 L k
> Korah 9 C li
i Knral 5 D f
1 Korame 1 li b
5 Koraoni 6 H g
> Korapeli 7 18
> Korapili 12 K k
i Koratagiri 11 G n
i Korba 7Kb
i Korea, st 1 K b
i Korehgaon 10 F 1
) Korekonda 12 I 1
; Korlii 6 I h
1 Kori, cr 9 C h
f Korigaum 10 F k
; Koringemoono 12 I q
) Korkaclii 1 M h
3 Itorkai, r 1 Mb
I Korkop 10 F 1
i Korren 13 Q g
i Korti 10 8' k
i liorutti 18 G o
i Kosa Nag, r 3 F c
i Kosi 2 G f
3,r 2 M f
i Kosigi 11 Gin
a Kosom 13 Q g
c Kot 2 II e
B Adu 4 D d
E Isa Shall 4 B d
e Kamalia 3 B d
y 4 E d
1 Kapura 3 8’ d
1 Kasim 5 G e
b Lain 9 0 f
t Putli 5 G f
a Rum 4 D e
g Sarae 0 B b
1 Sultan 4 1) d
g —Tagga 4 D d
p Kota 8 II i
p Kotagiri 11 G o
p Kotah 5 P g
f , div 5 F g
b Kotalpur 1 M li
1 Kotapalli 7 I k
b Kotappakonda 11 L 1
k Kotar 11 G p
i Kotari, r 5 P g
k Kotayam 11 F o
b 11 G p
i Kotchandpur 1 N h
p Kotebetta, pk 11 P u
i Kotericho 9 B g
i Kotgal 7 I i
n Kotgar 12 K k
n Kotgarh 3 G d
1 Kotli 9 B h
h Kothapali 8 H 1
Map.
Kothapali 12 I IK
Kothapili 12 I IK
Kothar 10 F k K
Kothara 9 C h K
Kothi 6 I g
6 K h K
Kotipatti 12 I IK
Kotla Dad 4 D e K
Kotli 3 E c K
3 8’ c K
Kotori 8 H k K
Kotpad 12 K k K
Kotra 2 H g 8
5 D f 8
5 E g 8
Kotri 9 B g 8
9 0 g 8
, r 7 I k 8
Kottakota 12 K 18
Kottapatnam 11 Lin 8
Kottaum 12 K 1 8
Kotteikattaru 12 I q 8
Kottur 11 G o 8
l2 I 1 8
Kotul 10 8' k 8
Kotwal 6 H f 8
Kotwara 2 H e 8
Kouria 0 I li 8
Kovur 11 Hm 8
l2 I 1 1
Kowjulgi 10 F 1 1
Ko\ ab, mt 14 P o I
Koyalkonda 8 G 1 8
Krananur 11 G o I
Krimchi 3 F c 1
Krishna 8 G 1 1
Krishnagani 1 N li I
Krishnagan.j 1 M f I
Krishnagar 1 N li I
Krishnagiri 11 Hn -
Krishnai, r 13 O g I
Ksarkamb 10 F 1 1
Kuana, r 2 K f I
Kuarpur 1 I h I
6 H g 1
Kuch 1 N f 1
Bebar, st 1 N f 1
Kuchaman 5 F f 1
Kuchcheveli 12 I p 1
Kuchera - 5 E f I
Kucbmala, pk 11 Go 1
Kudal 10 B 1 1
Kudaw 13 Q h 1
Kudderwur 11 II o 1
Kudilini 11 Gin 1
Kudliglii 11 Gni 1
Kudiimoatl S G m -
Kuduremukha.pfc 11 8’ n 1
Kudus 10 E k I
Kufelang 3 G a I
Kuban 4 B e 1
Kuiua Ghat 2 I e J
Kuka 3 G c -
Kukeri 10 F 11
Kukrar 7 K i 1
Kuksi 6 8' b I
Kukulegama 12 I q 1
Kukulubab 12 L i 1
Kukurrnunda 10 8' i 1
Kulacbi 4 D d I
Kuladan 14 P i I
■ , r 13 P li 1
Kulan 2 II e
Kulasekbarapat-
nam 11 H p 1
Kulbargab 8 G 1 I
,si 8 G 1 1
Kulhan, r 7 11
Kulik, r 1 N g ■
Rulitalai H II o ■
Kulkeri 10 G 1
Kulmili 12 I k
Kuluo 13 P g
: Kulpahar 2 II g
i Kulsi, r 13 O f
Kulsokati 1 O b
Kulsuli 10 E 1
Kulutzai 3Gb
i Kumal 2 L e
i Kurnala 11 G p
; Kumalgarh 5 E g
; Kumana 12 I q
i Kumarganj 1 M g
:1 N g
[ Kumarkbali 1 N b
> Kumaun, div 2 II c
; Kumbalahill 15 E g
> Kumbar 4 D b
) Kumbbakamdrug,
i mt 11 H n
i Kunibharla Ghat 10 E 1
: Kumbukgam Aar 12 I q
i Kumbarsain 3 G d
: Kuiniri 1 L i
1 Kumiria 1 O h
i Kumki 13 R f
1 Kumlagarb 3 G d
Map.
Kumraj 6 G g K
Kurata 10 F m K
Kumuna 7 K i K
Kun 13 Q h K
, r 14 11 k K
Kuna 6 F g K
Kunakanpa 12 L i 8
Kuuar, r 1 L h K
Kunatgi 8 G m K
Kunch 2 H g 8
Kuncla 6 K h 8
Kundaganj 2 H e -
Kundal 4 D c 8
Kundar, r 4C d 1
Kundari 11 6 p -
Kundarkhi 2 H e 1
Kundas 11 G o 8
Knnder, r 11 Hm 8
Kundgol 10 F m 1
Kundi, r 6 F i -
Kundiau 4 D c 1
Kundla 9 D i 1
Kungnung 13 P h 1
Kunhar, r 3 E b 8
Kunigal 11 G n I
Kunjah 3 B c 8
Kunjara 1 L i 8
Kunjpura 3 Q e 8
Kunke 13 Q g 8
Kunnankulam 11 G o 8
Kunsa 2 1 f 8
Kunse 13 Q h 8
Kunton 13 K g 8
Kuuu, r 0 G g 8
Kunur 10 F 18
Kupili 12 K k 8
Kurajgi 10 F m 8
Rural 3 F c 8
Kuram, ft 4 D c 8
, r 4 D c 8
Kurangi 3 E b 8
Kuraputi 12 K k 8
Kurara 2 I g 8
Kurasarh 2 1 t
Kurauli 2 II f I
Kurgiakb 3 G c I
Kurgose 3 G c I
Kurha 8 H i I
Kurhad 8 H i I
Kurigram 1 N g I
Kurivikulam 11 G p I
Kurla 10 E k I
Kurra 7 1 i I
Kurrim 3 F b I
Kursarda 2 G f I
Kursat 2 1 f I
Kalan 2 1 f I
Kurseli 2 1 f I
Kursha 3 G c I
Kursi 2 1 f I
Kurtkoti 10 B’m I
Kuru 1 L h I
Chu, r 13 O f I
Kuruckwaul 10 E i -
Kurujgi 10 F 1 -
Kurukelmadein 12 I q I
Kuruudwad 10 F 1 I
Kurunegala 12 I q I
Kurupam 12 K k I
Kunvai 0 II g 1
Kusalgarh 5 F h 1
Kusanagarapura, 1
ruins 1 L g I
Kusbah 1 O h ]
Kushta 1 M i 1
Kushtagi 8 G m -
Kushtia 1 N h ]
Kusi, r 1 M g ■
, r 2 II e •
, r, Old bed of I M f 1
Kustara, r 13 P g 1
Kutabdia, chan 1 O i - ,
, i 10 i ■
Kutakuti 13 O g -
T Kuti 2 I d ]
i Kutiyana 9 C i 1
i Kutuiuba 1 L g J
i Kutra 7 I k ]
s Kuttipuram 11 F o !
i Kuwar 9 D b 1
; Kuwari, r 6 H f ■
l Kuwarka, r 9 1) h
; Kwa(Gwa) 14 Q 1
: , r 14 Q 1
i Kwahl, r 13 O g
s Kwang Tung,
; hnrb 14 P n
i Kwinlila 14 Q 1
Kwonchangon 14 Q 1
i Kyaeng 14 R 1
1 Kyakko 14 R 1
1 Kyaiklat 14 Q 1
[ Kyaikpyi 14 Q m
i Kyaikto 14 U 1
i Kyaktaw 14 Q 1
f Kyan Hnyat 13 R li
1 Kyankin 14 Q k
Map.
Kyauk Kalat 14 Q k
Kyaukchaunggyil4 Q 1
Kyaukgyi 14 R k
Kyaukbron 14 8 m
Kyaukmyaung 13 Q b
Kyauk net 13 R i
Kyauknimaw 14 P k
Kyaukpadaung 13 Q i
Kyaukpyauk 13 Q li
Kvaukpyintba 13 Q h
Kyaukpyu 14 P k
, dist 13 R i
Kyauki-arit 14 R 1
Kyaukse 13 R i
, dist 14 P k
Kyauksin 14 8 n
l3 R h
Kyauktaga 14 R k
Kyauktaw 13 R h
l4 Q 1
Kyauktayan 14 Q 1
Kyauktongyi 13 R h
Kyaukye 13 Q i
Kyaukywa 14 Q 1
Kyaung-u 14 Q k
Kyausendwin 13 R g
Kyaw 13 Q i
Kyawbu 14 8 1
Kyawtha 13 R h
Kyenkadon 14 Q 1
Kyettagaung 13 R h
Kyidaungan 13 R k
Kyithe 11 Q k
Kylaskotta 12 K k
Kyndaw w Q l
Kyongou 14 R k
Kyunbin 14 R 1
Kyundawgyi 13 R i
Kyungale 14 Q k
Ky unpat, r 14 Q 1
Kyunpyatbat 14 Q 1
Kyunpyaw 14 Q 1
Kywebwe 14 R k
Labutta 14 Q 1
Lachcn,r 1 N f
Lachhmangarb 5 F f
Lacbiiungl >ngo 3G c
Lachmungarh 5 G f
Laclmng, r 1 N f
Ladakh, dist 3 G c
tad ha 9 B g
Ladhia, r 2 I e
Ladhma 1 L h
Ladhurta IMh
Ladnun 5 F f
Ladole 9 E h
Ladwa 3 G e
Lahapara 13 O f
Lahar 4 B e
labara 1 L i
Laharpur 21 f
Lahore 3 F d
. dist 3 F d
, div 3 F d
Laichanpur 1 M i
Laingarh 1 L h
Laira 7 L i
Lak 4 D d
Lakandi, r 2 L f
Lakgeda 12 K 1
Lakhanpur 1 K h
lakbapadar 9 D i
Lakbasar 5 E e
Lakhi 9 B f
9 C f
Lakhimpur 2 1 f
13 Q f
, div 13 Q f
Lakliin 3 B d
Likhipur 1 N i
1 O h
l3 O f
l3 P g
Lakhmia, r 1 O h
Laklina 2 H f
Lakhnadon 7 11 h
Lakhnauti 2 G e
Laklitar 9 D b
Laki 4 D c
, r 4 B e
Lakkundi 10 B'm
Lakman 5 D f
Lakpat 9 C li
Lakshatn 1 O b
Laksbtneswar 10 F m
Lakvalli 11 P n
Lala Musa 3 E c
Lalganj ILg
2 I f
2 K g
Lalgarh 5 P e
Lalguli Falls 10 F m
Lali 9 B f
Lalitpur 2 H g
•, dist 2 H g
Lallkua 2 II e
10
INDEX.


LAL
MAL
Map.
Lalmai, hd 1 O h
Lalpur INg
Lalpura 3 P b
Lalsot 5 G f
Lamaing 13 R h
13 R i
Lamakhera 6 G g
Lamba 9 C i
Lambda 9 E g
Lamgaondi 2 U d
Lamia 5 P g
Lamsingi 12 K 1
Lana 14 R k
Lanak 3 H b
Landaur 2 H d
Landaura 2 H e
Landejulana 12 I q
Landfall, t 14 P n
Landi 9 B g
Langai 13 P g
—. r 13 P g
Langaira 3 P c
Langai iya, r 12 K k
Langar Bazar 13 O g
Langleng 13 P g
Langrnohan 13 P g
Languliya (Naga-
vali), r 12 L k
Lanji 7 1 i
Lanme 14 Q 1
Lao ber-sat, mt 13 O g
Laoria 1 L f
Laphabum 13 R f
Laphagarh 7 K h
Largi 3 G d
Larkbana 9 C f
Larkhcd 8 G i
Lashkarpur 13 O g
Laspur 3 B a
Laswari 5 Q f
Lat 8 G k
Lathi 9 D i
Latiahar 1 L h
Latu 13 P g
Laungpu 13 R g
Laungsho 13 Q i
Lauri 0 I g
Lavara 86 k
Lavrnne 12 I q
Lawa 4 D c
5 F f
Lawana 4 E d
Lawrencepur 3 E c
Lebung, pas 2 I d
Ledum 13 Q f
Lee, pt 15 G c
Legaing 13 Q i
Legnya 14 8 o
, r 14 8 o
Leh 3Gb
Lehri 4 C e
, r 4 C e
Leiah 4 D d
Leiktho 14 R k
Lemro, r 14 P i
Lemru, r 13 P i
Lemyethna 14 Q 1
Leo 13 Q i
Lera Dargai 4 G d
Letpadan 14 Q 1
Lewe 13 R k
Leyden, i 12 I p
Lhobruk, r 13 O f
Lhoksar 2 H e
Liara 4 D f
Lidor, r 3 F c
Likbu Kosl, r 2 M f
Liktha 13 Q g
Lilajan, r 1 L g
Limbola 8 G k
Limri 9 D h
Lindsay 4 B e
Lingsagar 8 G 1
, st 8 G m
Lingtsi 13 O f
Lingumpnru 12 K 1
Lingzi Thang,
plains 3 II b
Litepal 7 I k
Little Aden 15 B c
Andaman,i 14 P o
Bab-el-
Mandeb, str 15 G c
Baghmati, r 1 L f
Gandak, r 2 K f
Nicobar, is 14 P g
Ran 9 D h
Tibet, dist 3 F b
Torres, i 14 R o
Lobang 2 M f
Lobenga 7 K i
Lobha 2 lid
Lobrinth, is 14 P o
Lodhika 9 D h
Lodhikhera 7 H i
Lodhran 4 D e
Logtak, i 13 P g
Map.
Loh Mantang 2 K e
Lohagara 1 N h
Lohan, st 4 B d
Lohara 7 I i
7 I i
Lohardaga 1 L h
, dist 1L g
Lohavi 7 K h
Lobam 3 P e
, 3 F e
Lohawat 5 E f
Lohghat 2 I c
Lob it, r 13 P f
Lohsal 5 P f
Loh-tod 2 K c
Lohwan 5 G f
Loimut 13 R 1
Lokarinaig Falls 2 II d
Lokcati 14 R 1
Lokhuni 2 M f
Lokong 3 H c
Lolki 1 K h
Lonar 8 G k
, I 8 G k
Lonauli 10 E k
Londa 10 F m
Long, i 14 P n
,i 14 Q 1
Longi 13 Q i
Longkalha 13 P f
Longsa 13 Q f
Loni 2 Q e
8 F k
l.onta 13 P h
Lonwa 13 P i
Lonwai 13 R i
Lopha 13 Q g
Loralai 4 C d
Lorainela 4 D c
Loran, r 1 M g
Lori an 13 Q f
Losar 3 G c
Lota 13 P h
Lotsing 7 K i
Lotum 2 K f
Loughborough, i 14 R o
Loukaha 1 M f
Lowa 21 f
Lower Chindwin,
dist 13 Q h
Luali 12 M i
Lucknow 21 f
, dist 2 I f
, dio 2 I f
Luckonda 12 1 1
Ludhiana 3 F d
, dist 3 F d
Lughasi 6 II g
Luka 13 P g
, r 13 P g
Lukeeserai IMg
Lukhatulao 4 1) c
Luna 9 C h
Lunawara 9 E h
Lund 9 C f
Lunda 3 E c
4 D d
Lundai, r 4 D b
Luni 4 D d
5 E f
, r 4 D d
, r 5 E f
Lunidhcr 9 D i
Lunki 9D g
Lushai, hs 13 P k
Hi 11 Tracts,
dist 13 P h
Lushington Falls 10 F m
Lutchimpuram 12 L k
Mabarakpur 3 E c
Mabein 13 R h
Machalpur 6G g
Machand 6 H f
Machhgaon 12 M i
Machhlishahr 2 K g
Machida 7 K i
Maehiwara 3 G d
Machkund, r 12 K k
Machna, r 7 G i
Machu, r 9 D h
Machundri, r 9 D i
Macburla 11 H 1
Mackcson, ft 4 B c
Macpherson, Ur 14 P o
Madahpura IMg
Madak Sira 11 G n
Madampe 12 H q
Madanapalli 11 H n
Madanpur INli
Madanur 11 F n
Madapollam (Nar-
sapur) .12 I 1
Madarganj 1 t) g
Madaria 2 K f
Madaripur 1 O h
Madarpur 1 N g
Map.
Madawachchiya 12 I p
Madbide H P n
Madder 7 I k
Maddikera 11 G m
Maddur 8 G 1
ll G n
Madgiri 11 G n
Madgula 12 K 1
Madha 10 P k
Madbapur 5 P f
9 C i
Madhepur 1 M f
Madhian 9 B g
Madbira 8 I 1
Madhogarh 6 I g
Madhopur 1 M h
Madhorajpura 5 F f
Madbubani 1 L f
1 M f
Madhugarh 2 H f
Madhuinati, r 1 N h
Madhupur IMg
1 N g
Madimadagu 8 H 1
Madlapad 8 11
Madiak 2 H f
Madram 15 E b
Madras 11 L n
, r 11 H n
and En-
virons 15 C i
Anderson’s
Bridge 15 B h
Black Town 15 C g
Brodie Castle 15 B i
Brunton Villa 15 B i
Buckingham
Canal 15 B i
Capper House 15 C h
Cathedral Road 15 B h
Cemetery 15 B i
Cbepauk Palace 15 C h
Park 15 C h
Chetpat Station 15 A g
Church 15 B i
l5 C g
Cochrane Canal 15 B f
Commander-in-
ChiefaßridgelS B h
Cotton’s Canal 15 B f
Custom House 15 C g
Distillery 15 C f
Doveton Col-
lege 15 B g
Bgmore Station 15 B g
Elphinstone
Bridge 15 B i
Emigration De-
pot 15 C f
European Bar-
racks 15 E i
Expense Maga-
zine 15 B f
Eye Infirmary 15 B g
Female Asylum 15 A g
Goods Station 15 B g
Government
Bridge 15 B h
Government
House 15 B h
Harbour 15 C g
Harris Bridge 15 B h
Horticultural
Gardens 15 A h
Hospital 15 B g
Kodambakkam
Station 15 A h
Lighthouse 15 C g
Little Mount 15 A i
Madauvaukum
Tank 15 A g
Madras Railway 15 B f
Model Farm 15 A i
Mount Road 15 B h
Museum 15 B g
Mylapur Tank 15 A h
Napier Bridge 15 C h
New Lunatic
Asylum 15 A g
Noongumban-
kum Tank 15 A h
Observatory 15 A h
Old Lunatic
Asylum 15 A g
Old Railway
Terminus 15 C f
Oyster Rock
Battery 15 E i
Parry’s Castle 15 B i
People's Park 15 B g
Perambur Sta-
tion 15 A f
Perambur Tank 15 A f
Pier UO|
Post and Tele-
graph Office 15 C g
Powder Mill 15 B f
Map.
Madras and En-
virons—continued.
Presidency Col-
lege 15 C h
Promenade 15 C h
Red Hills Water
Supply 15 A g
Revenue Office 15 C h
Rifle Butt 15 B f
Robinson Park 15 C f
Roman Catholic
Chapel 15 B i
Saint George’s
Cathedral 15 B h
Matilda's
Church 15 B g
Peter's
Church 15 C f
Thome
Cathedral 15 B i
Senate House 15 0 h
South Beach
Road 15 C h
lndian
Railway 15 A h
Spur Tank 15 A g
The Island 15 C g
Veysurl audy
Station 15 B f
Viyasarapadi
Tank 15 B f
Madri 5 E g
Madnkarai 11 G o
Madura 11 H p
, div 11 11 p
Oya 12 I q
Madurankuli 12 H q
Magadi 11 G u
Magam 12 1 q
Magar Talao 9 B g
Maghar 2 K f
Magra 1 N h
Magroni 6 G g
Magur 11 L n
Magura 1 N h
Magwe 13 Q i
, dist 13 Q i
Magyigon 13 Q i
Magyizauk 13 Q h
Maba, r 12 H q
Oya 12 I q
Mahabaleshwar 10 E 1
Mahabahpur 11 L n
Mahaban 2 G f
Mahabaung 14 Q 1
Mahadeo, /is 7 G i
Mahadevpur 8 I k
Mahac'ewa 2 K f
Mahagaon 8 G i
8 G 1
Mabajan 5 E c
Mafia,]i 10 F i
Mahakekirawa 12 I p
Mahalingapnr 10 F 1
Mahamuni Ky-
aikto 14 P i
Mahan, r 1 K h
Mnhanadi, r 7 I h
, r 12 L k
Mahananda, r 1 N f
Mahapucaunum 11 G o
Mahar 10 E k
Mahara 12 II q
Maharajganj 1 L f
2 K f
Maharainagar 2 1 f
Maharajpur 1 Mg
7 I h
Maharana 3 G d
Mahastbangavh 1N g
Mahasu 3 G d
Mahatwar 2 L g
Mahauri 9 D g
Mahavilla
Ganga, r 12 I q
Mahe 11 P o
Mahendragan.j 13 N g
Mahendratanaya,
r 12 L k
Maher 1 L g
Maheshmunda IMg
Maheswar 6 F h
Mabet 2 K f
Main 4 C d
Kantha, st 9E h
Khan 9 C g
, r 5 F h
, r 6 P h
, r 9 E h
Mahiganj INg
Mahim 3 G e
lO E k
lO B k
, 6 15 E d
, ft 15 P d
Mahiya 3 H c
Mahlaing 13 Q i
Map.
Mahmud Kot 4 D d
Mahmudabad 2 1 f
Mahoba 2 H g
Mahodra 5 G g
Mahon a 2 1 f
6 H f
Mahni 4 D d
Mahuar, r 6 H g
Mahudha 9 B h
Mahuli 10 F 1
,ft 10 B k
Mahur 8 G k
Mahawa 9 D i
Mahwa 5 G f
Mai 14 Q k
—, r 14 Q k
Maiaudh 3 P d
Maibal 4 D c
Maida 2 K c
Maidalpur 12 K k
Maihar 6 I g
,st 6 I g
Maijam 1 M h
Maikal, hs 7 I h
Mailavaram 12 I 1
Mailsi 4 E c
Maimansingh, dist 1 O g
(Nasirabad) lO g
Maingkaing 13 P h
l3 Q g
, st 13 R i
Mainglin 13 R i
Maingpon 13 R i
Maingpyin 13 R i
Maingthon Tong 13 Q g
Maini 10 P 1
Mainlon 13 R h
Mainpat, ; lat I K h
Mainwar 2 I e
Majal 9 C h
Ma.jgaon 13 Q f
Majnauli 2 K f
Majhgawan big
Majhuli 6 I g
Majianwan 1 K g
Majigura 7 K k
Majitha 3 F d
Makal 4 C d
Makau 13 P g
Makandpur 6 I g
Makatim 15 G b
Makcha 13 Q f
Makhargarh 6 H g
Makht d 8 G 1
Makhu 3 P d
Makin 4 C c
Makrai 7 G h
Makri 7 I h
Makron 6 6 h
Makm 13 P g
Maksudpur 1 N h
Makum 13 Q f
Makuwana 3 B d
Makwal 4 D d
Mai, Mouth of
Indus, r 9 B h
Selai Mon, mt 13 P h
Mala, r 10 E k
Malabar Coast 11 F o
, h 15 F i
,pt 15 F i
Malagitti 8 F m
Malaik 13 Q g
Malakwal 3 B c
Malali 8 G 1
Malan, r 9 D i
Malanchi 1 N g
Malapuram 11 G o
Malarna 5 G f
Malasar 5 E e
Malaut 3 P d
Malayagirl 1 L i
Malcolmpcth 10 B 1
Maldah 1 N g
, dist 1 N g
Malegaon 10 F i
lO F k
Malendraghi 12 L k
Maler Kot la 3 F d
Malga 6 K h
Malnargarh 6 F g
Mali Chu, r 13 O f
Malta 9 D h
9 D i
Malihabad 2 1 f
Malin 13 Q g
Malinagar 1 L f
Malir 9 P g
Maliwun 14 S o
Malkangiri 12 I k
Malkani 4 U e
Malkapur 8 G i
Malkiari 9 C g
Mallabar, div 11 P o
Mallai 1 L f
Mallangur 8 II k
11
INDEX.


MAL
MOR
Map.
Mallani, st 5 D g
Mallanpur 2 1 f
Mallapali 11 G p ’
Malligaou 8 G k
Malmala 2 K f
Malowal 4 D c
Malowri 10 F 1
Malprabha 10 Pm
, r 10 F 1
Malpur 9 E li
Malpura 6 P f
MaLsisar 5 F e
Malthon 7 II g
Malur 11 P n
Malvnlli 11 G n
Malwali 9 B g
Malwan 10 E 1
Malwatta Oya 12 I p
Mai watte 12 I q
Mania llajance 15 E I
Mainadpur 1 N g
Mamaluwa 4 B e
Mainmu 9 C f
Mampuri 2 H I
, did 2 II f
Mantra 9 C f
Mamrapur 8 G k
Man, r 6 P h
, r 10 P 1
Manaar, gof 11 H p
Mauada, r 8 G k
Managoli 10 P 1
Managopal 8 G 1
Manairi 4 E b
Mauakinata 2 H e
Manakwara 9 D i
Mananpnr 1 Mg
Manautavadi 11 G o
Manappadu 11 H p
Manaram 2 K f
Manas, r 13 O f
Manasa 6 P g
Manawadar 9 U i
Mauawar 6 F h
Manbazar 1 M h
Manbhum, dist 1M h
Manchar 10 E k
Manchenhalli 11 G n
Mauchhar, I 9 B f
Mand, r 1 K h
Manda 1 N g
5 P f
Mandal 5 F g
9 1) b
Mandalay 13 R i
, (list 13 R h
Mandalgarh 6 P g
Mandapeta 12 I 1
Mandar, h 1 51 g
Mandari 5 G I
Mandaro Tar 9 C g
Mandavgan Phar-
ata 10 F k
Mandavi 10 Pm
, r 11 Hm
Mandawal 6 P h
Mandawar 2 H e
5 G f
Mandgaon 7 II i
Mandhar, pk 7 L i
Mandhata, i 7 G h
Hand! 2 L f
3 G d
, st 3 G d
Mandiaon 2 1 f
Mandibisi 7 K k
Mandla 7 I h
, dist 7 I h
Mandlesar 6 P h
Mando Khel, st 4C d
Mandogarli 6 P h
Mandor 5 E f
Mandot 3 F d
Mandra 9 C h
Mandrael 5 G f
Mandrai Aar, r 12 I q
Mandsaur 6 F g
Mandurda 9 D i
Mandvi 9 C h
lO E i
Mandwa 7 G i
lO E k
Mandya 11 G n
Maner, r 8 H k
Manga 3 B d
Mangai, r 2 K g
Mangalagiri 11 L 1
Mangalam 11 G o
Mangaldai 13 P f
Mangalgi 86 1
Mangalore 11 F n
Mangalvedna 10 F 1
Mangaoli 6 H g
Mangawa 6 I g
Mangeppetta 8 I k
Mangelwarra 15 P d
Maugi 4 B d
Map.
Manglaur 2 G e
Mangmu 13 R h
Mangpu 1 N f
Mangrol 6 G g
9 D i
Mangvul 8 G i
Mangrulpur 8 G i
Mangta 5 D g
Mangton 13 R h
Mangur 8 1 1
Manhat 13 R h
Mani Majra 3 G d
Maniar 2 L g
Maniara 9 C h
Mauiari 1 M g
ManikarChar 13 N g
Manikgauj 1 O h
Mauikiala 3 B c
Manikpatam 12 L k
Manikpur 2 I g
Manipur 13 P g
, div 13 P g
or Nan-
kathe, r 13 P h
Manirampnr 1 N h
Maniyachi 11 G p
Manjadikara 11 G p
Man.jakar 9 C g
Maujarkala 7 K i
Manjera, r 8 P k
Manjeri 11 G o
Manjeshwaram 11 P n
Manjhand 9 C g
Manjhi 1 L g
Manjhia 2 1 f
Manka 1 L li
Mankalum 12 I p
Mankar 1 M h
Mankera 4 D d
Manmad 8 P i
lO P i
Mannar 12 H p
, i 12 H p
, pas 12 H p
Mannargudi 11 H o
Manner, r 11 Hm
Manners, sir 14 P o
Manohar Tiiana 5G g
Manoharpur 5 F f
Manohurgarh 10 B 1
Manoli 10 P 1
Manora 8 G i
, Ud 9 B g
Manpur 1 M f
3 G f
5 E g
6 P h
6 G g
,st 6 F i
Manpura 5 F g
Mansa 9 E h
Mansahra 3 E b
Mansi 13 Q g
, r 5 P g
Mansurkata 12 L k
Mantai 12 I p
Mantaunggyin 13 Q g
Man the 13 Q g
Manton 13 R g
Mantreswar 1 N h
Mann, r 13 O g
Gadro 9 B g
Manvi 8 G m
Manwal 8 P c
Manwan 2 1 f
Maoku 13 Q g
Mapusa 10 E in
Mar 9 G h
, p 4 C e
Mara 4 D d
Marahra 2 II f
Marang Baru (Bara-
gai), mt 1 L h
Mararam 1 M g
Maratha, st 10 P 1
Maraura 2 H g
Marble Rocks 7 H h
March* 2 I d
Mardanpur 66 h
Mardi 8 H i
Mardian, hs 7 I k
Margao 10 B m
Margha 4 C c
Mari 4 D c
Mariad 9 E li
Mariadeh 7 H g
Mariahu 2 K g
Marian i 13 Q f
Marjata, r 1 N i
Markacho 1 L g
Markanda, r 3 G d
Markandi 7 H k
Markhasra 7 1 i
Markapur 11 Hm
Marmagaon 10 E m
, b 10 E m
Marnee Tong, mt 1 G i
Map.
Marphia, ft 2 I g
Maroli 10 E i
Maroth 5 F f
Marsiangti, r 2 L e
Martaban 14 R 1
l4 R 1
,g of 14 R 1
Martazapur 8 G i
Martoli 2 H d
2 I d
Maruchchukaddi 12 H p
Maruda 1 M i
Maruk 3 F b
Marvvar 5 K g
(Jodhpur),
st 5 E g
Marwas 6 I g
Marway 12 K k
Masinki 1 K h
Masaudhi 1 L g
Masaudpur 3 P e
Masbakn 9 C g
Mashar 10 G 1
Mashawal 4 C d
Masherbrum, rut 3 F b
Mashrak 1 L f
Maskhal 1 O i
, chan 1 O i
, i 1 O i
Masra 1 K h
Mastan 4 C d
Mastaung 4 11 e
Masti 11 O n
Mastiala 8 II k
Mastuj 3 B a
Masu 7 C f
Masuda 5 P f
Masulipatam 12 I 1
Masura 10 E 1
Masuri 2 H d
Mat 2 G f
4 C e
Mataingdo 14 Q 1
Matale 12 I q
Matalen 12 I p
Matamuri, r 1 P i
Matara 12 I r
Matari 9 C g
Mataundh 2 I g
Matheran 10 E k
Mathkot 21 d
Mathura 2 K f
Mathuraganj 1 N h
Mathurapur 1 N h
Mathwar 6 P h
Matiana 3 G d
Matiari 1 M f
Matibari 1 N h
Matin 7 K h
13 R g
Matla, r 1 N i
Matoonga 15 F d
Mattod 11 G n
Matun 4 C c
, r 14 Q k
Matwa 9 D h
Mau 2 II g
2 I g
Aima 2 I g
Natbiianjan 2 K g
Maubin 14 Q 1
Maudha 2 I g
Mauganj 61 g
Mauktin 14 Q k
Maulmain 14 R 1
Maunagar 2 H e
Maunaniadura 11 H p
Maunudaw 14 P i
Mauni Toba 4 D e
Mauranwan 2 1 f
Maumaud 11 H p
Muvalikaia 11 G p
Mavia 15 E b
Mawana 2 G e
Mawlu 13 R g
Mayagan 13 Q h
Mayakouda 11 G in
Mayan 14 Q 1
Mayaveram 11 H o
Maymyo (Pyinu-
Iwin) 13 R h
Mayn 10 P in
Maynaguri 1 N f
Mayo Mines
(Kheura) 3 E c
: Mayu, r 14 P i
Tek 14 P i
Mazagon 15 G i
McLeodganj 3 E d
: Meadows, p 14 P n
Meaneh 9 C f
Mechi, r INI
i Mcdak 8 11k
i ,st 8 G 1
i Mee Oya 12 I q
i Meean-Meer 3 F d
i Meerut 2 G e
Map.
Meerut, dist 2 G e
, div 2 G e
Meetagit 14 S m
Megal, r 9 D i
Megam 13 O g
Meghasant, mt 1 M i
Meghna, cha , 1 O h
, r 1 O li
Megzin 2 M I
Mehar 9 B f
Mehdiganj 1 O h
Mehidpur 5 F h
6 F h
Mehkar 8 G i
Mehmadabad 9 E h
Melir 4 D e
Mehsi 1 L f
Mehutait 13 Q g
Meiktila 13 Q i
, dist 13 Q i
Road 13 Q i
Mej, r 5 P g
Mekhtar 4 G d
Mekiumi 13 Q g
Melao 9 B h
Melghat 8 G i
Melkavu 11 G p
Melukote 11 G n
Mclur 11 II o
Memari 1 M h
Memna 2 K h
Mena 4 C d
Mendah 5 P f
, r 5 P f
Mendhawal 2 K f
Meratur 11 II o
Mergui 14 8 n
, arch 14 R n
, dist 14 8 o
Merkara 11 P n
Meroe, i 14 P g
Merta 5 F f
Mesana 9 B h
Meshvar 9 E h
Metho 2 L e
Meting Sekarier 9 C g
Metp di 8 H k
Metta 14 S m
MettapolHi'in 11 G o
Mettaung 13 Q h
Mettingi 12 K k
Mettur 12 L k
Mewar, div 5 E g
Mezali 13 Q h
Mhaswad 10 P 1
MhatarPakhadeclS E e
l6 P f
Mhau 3 G c
Mhow 6 P h
Mi Khyaung, r 13 P i
Miagani 9 E h
Miagwan 9 B f
Miani 3 E c
3 K d
9 C g
9 C i
Miankalai 4 I) b
Mianwala 4 D c-
Michni, ft 4 U b
Midagesi 11 G n
Middle Andaman,
i 14 P n
Moscos 14 R m
Midh 3 B c
Midnapur 1 M h
, di t 1 M h
Mido 14 Q k
Migarh 3 E e
Milien 9 B g
Mihintale 12 I p
Mihrauni 2 H g
Mihrpur 1 N li
Mikkin 3 G c
Milam 2 I d
Mimpa 13 Q g
Minaor 3 P c
Minbesel 11 H p
Minina 14 P i
Minbu 13 Q i
, dist 13 Q i
Minchinabad 3 E d
Mindhola, r 10 E i
Mindun 14 Q k
Mingin 13 Q h
Mingyi 14 Q k
Minhla 14 Q k
l4 Q 1
Minnoriya 12 I p
Minsin * 13 Q g
Minywa 13 Q h
Minyah 13 Q g
Minze 14 R 1
Miphanga 14 S 1
Mir Haji 4 D e
Wah, am 9 C f
Mira Wali 4 D e
Miraj 10 F 1
Map.
Mirak 3 E d
Miranpur 2 II e
2 II f
Mirganj 2 H e
Miri 9 B g
Mirka TCaba 9 B f
Mirpur 3 E c
9 C e
9 C e
Batura 9 C g
Khas 9 C g
Sakro 9 B g
Mirujgaon 10 F b
Mirza 3 F k
Mirzaganj 1 O h
Mirzapur 2 K g
, d st 2 K g
Mirzawala 5 E e
Misamir 13 E b
Misrikh 2 I f
Milan 14 8 1
Mitasarra 1 O h
Mitha Tiwana 4 E c
Mithhaukot 4 11 e
Mithapnkar 1 N g
Mithrau 9 C f
, can 9 C f
Miti, r 9 C li
Mitti 9 C g
Mittri 4 B e
Miza, r 13 Q g
Mo, r INI
Mobye 13 R k
Mobyingyi 13 P h
Mocha i la 11 L m
Mochh 4 D c
Modi, r 2 K e
Mofloug 13 O g
Moga 3 F d
Mogalhat 1 N I
Mognyo 14 Q o
Mogok 13 R h
Mogultur 12 I 1
Moha 9 B i
Mohan 21 f
, r 2 I e
Mohana, r 1 L g
Mohangaih 5 D f
Mohania 1 K g
6 I g
Mohanka 3 P d
Mohar, r 11 G o
Mohari 7 H i
Moharwada 15 F d
Mohbat Hero 9 C g
Mohgaou 7 H i
Mohkyau 14 R 1
Mohnar 1 L g
Mohol 10 P 1
Moholia 1 M h
Moiiona C G g
Mohpa 7 H i
Mohrai, r 9 B g
Mokainggyi 14 R 1
Mokaung 14 Q k
Mokliad 4 D c
Mokhai 9 D g
Moklier 7 H i
Mokheri 5 E I
Moiraug 13 P g
Moj, r 9 D h
Mojarh 4 E e
Mojauli, i 13 P f
Moj pur 5 G f
Molakalmuru 11 G m
Molanuue 12 I q
Moldia 1 L h
Mole, r 13 R g
Momeit 13 R li
, st 13 R h
Momi 4 D a
Monarpur 1 L h
Mondemkhallu 12 K k
Mondersi 7 K k
MonegarChoultryls O f
Mona: 3 B c
Moughyr 1 M g
, dist 1 M g
Monhyin 13 R g
Monophang 13 P g
Montgomery 3 E d
, did 3 E d
Monze (Ras Muar),
c 9 B g
Moody, b 15 P h
Mor, r 1 M g
Morad 9 0 1
M radabad 2 H c
2 I f
, dist 2H e
Moran, r 7 6 h
Moral- 0 II f
Morasa 9 E li
Moratuwa 12 H q
Morbhanj, d 1 M i
More Thana 13 Q g
Morel, r SGI
12
INDEX.


MOR
NIM
Map.
Morgich 5 D f
Morna, r 1 K h
Moro 9 B f
Morrellgaiy 1 N 1
Morsi 8 H i
Mortakka 7 G h
Morvi 9 D h
Mosam, r 10 P i
Moth 2 H g
Motihari 1 L f
Motpali 8 H k
Motupalli 11 L m
Mouat, p 14 P o
Mounda 7 H i
Mount Lavinia 12 H q
Mow 6 H g
Mowai 7 I h
Mrohaung 14 P i
Mu, r 13 Q h
Muana 9 D h
Mubarakpur 2 K f
Muehkandi 10 F 1
Mudawal 8 G 1
Muddebibal 10 G 1
Mudgal 8 G 1
Mudhol 8 G k
10 P 1
Mudivedu 11 Hm
Mudki 3 P’ d
Mudlee Pakhadee 15 E e
Mudly Antop, h 15 G e
Mudun 14 R 1
Mugadok, mt 14 8 m
Mughal 2 K g
Mugbalbbin 9 C g
Mughal pur 2 H e
Muhamdi 2 1 f
Muhammadabad 2H g
2 K g
Muhammadgarh 6H h
Muhaminadpur 1N h
2 I f
Mukai, vd 14 8 1
Mukama 1 L g
Mukanduara 5 G g
Mukeriau 3 F d
Mukhed 8 G k
Mukhina 4 C e
Muktagaeliha 1 O g
Muktii iath 2 K e
Muktsar 3 P d
Mul 7 H i
Mula, pas 4 B e
, r 4 B e
, r 10 F k
Mulagul 13 P g
Mulainagiri, ml 11 F n
Mulamari, r 8 G 1
Mulanur 11 G o
Multiagal 11 H n
Mulbekh 3Gb
Mulehyit, h 14 8 1
Mulgund 10 F m
Muli 9Dh
Mulki 11 P n
Mullaittivu 12 I p
Mullazai 4 D c
Mullyalla 11 II in
Multai 7 H i
Multan 4 1) d
dFh
, dist 4 D e
, div 4 D d
Mum, r 8 H 1
Mummusar 5 F e
Mun 3 H c
14 R k
Munagala 8 H 1
Mundal, I 12 H q
Mundargi 10 F m
Mundiya Ghat 2 1 c .
Mundlana 3 G e ■
Mundrup 10 P P
Mundwa 5 E f 1
Muneri 10 E m
Munj 2 H f
Mungapakam 12 K 1 !
Mungar 4 D d
Mungeli 71 h '
Munnakad 11 G p !
Munnainalegudy 11 H o
Munro./t 4 C e
Munshigauj 1 N h ■
1 O h
Muntareddi 12 L k -
Munugodu 8 H 1
Murad 8 G k -
Muradnagar 2 G e ■
Muragaon 7 K h -
Murarai 1 M e ]
Murdeswar 10 F m 1
Murga 4 C d 1
Murghi 3Gb
Murgod 10 P m 1
Murhar, r 1 L g 1
Murli 2 L f ]
Murray, h 15 G c i
Map.
Murree 3 E c
Murrungapury 11 H o
Mursan 2 G f
Murshidabad INg
, dist INg
Murumgaon 7 I i
Murwara II h
Murwari dig
Musa Khel 4 C d
4 D c
, st 4 0 d
Musarkbana 2 1 f
Mushi, r 11 Hm
Musi, r 8 H 1
Musiri 11 H o
Muslimuddu 11 Hm
Mustafabad 2 I g
3 G d
Mustagb, jas 3 F b
Mutiganj 13 O g
Mutka 9 B g
Muttera 2 I e
Muttra 2 G f
, dist 2 G f
Mutukulatiir 11 H p
Muzaffarabad 3 E b
Muzatfargarb 4 1) d
. dist 4 D 6
Muzatfarnagar 2 G e
2 1 e
, dist 2 Q e
Muzaffarpur, dist 1 L g
(Tirbut)l L f
Myadaung 13 R h
Myaing 13 Q i
Myanaung 14 Q k
Myauktaung 14 P i
Myaungbwe 14 P i
Myanngmja 14 Q 1
Myawadi 14 Q k
l4 8 1
Myebon 14 P k
Myedeh 14 Q k
Myedu 13 Q h
Myengmolotkbat,
mt 14 8 n
Myingyan 13 Q i
, dist 13 Q i
Myinniu 13 Q i
Myinthe 13 Q i
Myit Nge, r 13 R i
Myitcbe 13 Q i
Myitba 13 R i
. r 13 Q h
Myit Kyo 14 R 1
Myitsou 13 R b
Myohla 13 R g
Myotha 13 Q i
Myothit 14 Q k
Myo-hla 14 Q k
Mysore 11 G n
, dist 11 G u
Nabaganga, r INI
Nabetkyi 13 Q h
Nabba 3 G d
, st 3 P d
, st 3 G c
, st 3 G d
, st 3 G e
NabiganJ 13 O g
Nabinagar 1 L g
Nabisar 9 C g
Nabule 14 8 m
Nachana 5 D f
Nachangaon 7 H i
Nadaun 3 G d
Nadbai 5 G f
Nadima 5£ g
Nadivada 8 I 1
Nadiya INI
, dist 1 N h
Nadol 5 E d
Nadun dig
Naga Hills, div 13 P g
Tribes, div 13 Q 1'
Nagal 2 H e
Nagamangala 11 G n
Nagapur 10 Pm
Nagar 3 G c
5 D g
6 E f
6 P g
5 G f
11 P n
, div 11 F n
, st 8 G 1
Kbas 2 K f ■
Parkar 9 D g :
Nagari Nose, rut 11 H n !
Nagarsnl 10 F i !
Nagavali (Lang-
uliya), r 12 L k
Nages 7 K i
Nagkanda 3 G d
Nagma 2 II e
Nagmati, r 9 D h
Map.
Nagodarji 9 C f
Nagode dig
’ , st 6 I g
Nagor, r INg
Nagore 11 H o
Nagotbna 10 B k
Nagpur 1 K h
7 H i
, dist 7 H i
, dio 7 H i
Nagrain 2 1 f
Nagrauli 2 K f
Nagri 1 N f
Nagurau 3 G e
Nagwau 2 H d
Nalian 3 G d
Nabangarh 6 G g
Nahar 3 G e
Nabeswari INg
Nahvi 2 K f
Nahwai 2 K g
Naiagarbi dig
Naiakila d G g
Naibati 1 N li
Naini 2 I g
Tal 2 H c
Nainikob 3 P c
Nainwab 5 P g
Nai palgaqj 2 1 t
Najafgarb 3 G e
Najibabad 2 H e
Nakarikallu 11 II 1
Nakbtrana 9 C h
Nakodar 3 P d
Naku 13 R h
Nakuri 2 H e
Nal 4 C e
Bank, r 9 D h
Nalagarb 3 G d
Nalauda 12 1 q
Nalapani 2 H d
Nalapara 13 O g
Nalatwar 10 G 1
Nalbari 13 O f
l3 O f
Nalcbba 6 F h
Nalcbira, i 1 O h
Nalcbiti 1 O h
Naldrug 8 G 1
, st 8 F k
Nalgonda 8 II 1
, st 8 II 1
Naibati 1 M g
Naliya 9 C h
Nalkhera 6 6 1
Nalknad 11 P n
Nallanialais 11 Hm
Namakal 11 H o
Namal 4 D c
Nambar, r 13 P f
Nambiyur 11 G o
Namka, r 13 R h
Namwaw, r 13 R h
Namse 13 R h
Namyin, r 13 R g
Nanda D“vi mt 2H d
Kot, iut 2 I d
Nandapur 12 K k
Nander 8 G k
, st 8 G k
Nandgaou 7 I i
8 H k
lO E k
lO F i
lO F i
,st 7 I i
Nandi 11 G n
Nandial 11 Hm
Nandialnmpet 11 Hm
Nandigarb 10 Pm
Nandikotkur 11 Hm
Nandirag, pk 7 I k
Nandod 9 E i
Nandur 10 F k
Nandura 2 I g
8 G i
Nandurbar 10 P i
Nangelbeda 7 K k
Nangonywa 13 R g
Nanguneri 11 G p
Naniala 8 HI
Nanjangad 11 G n
Nankam 13 Q f
Nankatbe or
Manipur, r 13 P h
Nankaung 13 R g
Nankauri, harb 14 P p
—, i 14 P q :
Nanklow 13 O g
Nanmyinklia 13 Q g
Nanpara 2 1 f
Nanpur 1 L f
Nanta 5 P g
Nanthe 13 R b
Nanton 13 Q g
Nanuaya 12 I q
Naobabad 2 H g
Map.
: Naogaon 1 L h
:1 N g
: Naosari 9 B i
: Naoshera 3 P c
, dist 3 F c
Napur 2 G e
Nar 9 E h
Nara 4 B c
lO B i
Narxina 5 P f
Narbada, div 7 G h
',r 6 F h
, r 7 I h
, r 9 E i
, r 10 B i
Naraenoar 9 C h
Narainganj 1 O h
— 7 I h
Naraingarh 3 G d
Narainkhair 8 G k
Narainpur 7 I k
Narajol 1 M h
Narakal 11 G o
Narakonda 12 I 1
Naral 1 N h
Narangi 7 I k
Naranja, r 86 1
Naraod 6 G g
Narauli 2 H e
N ara vanadavara-
kera 11 G m
Narayanavanam 11 H n
, r 11 H n
Narayangarh 1 Ml
Narbinagar 2 1 f
Narduwi 10 B 1
Naregal 10 P ra
Nargund 10 P m
Narhan Khas 1 M g
Narhi 2L g
Nari 4 B e
, r 4 B e
Narkhair 8 P 1
Narkher 7 H i
Narnala 8 G i
Naruaul 3 G e
Nan it 3 P c
Narowal 3 P c
Narra 7 K i
Narsapur 8 H 1
,pt 12 I 1
(Mrtda-
pollam) 12 I 1
Narsi 8 Q k
Narsingarb 7 H h
Narsingbgarb 6 6 1
,st 6G h
Narsingbpur 1 O h
7 II h
12 L i
dist 7 H h
Narsipur 11 G n
Nartiang 13 P g
Narukot 9 E h
Narwana 3 G c
Narwar 6 G g
Nasik 10 B i
, dist 10 E i
Nasirabad 2 1 f
5 F f
9 B f
10 P i
(Maim-
ansingb) 1 O g
Naspur 13 P f
Nasriganj 1 L g
Natai IMb
Natein, r 13 R g
Nateputa 10 F 1
Natbana 3 F d
Natliamig 14 P i
Natbdwara 5 E g
Natbpnr 1 M f
Natogyi 13 Q i
Nattalin 14 Q k
Nattaudiya 12 H g
Nattnr 1 N g
Nana para 1 Eh
Naubatpur 1 L g
2 K g
Naugarh 2 K g
Naugawan 5 F h
Naulla 12 I q
Naungba 14 R 1
Naunggyiaing 13 Q h
Naungtabwe 14 S 1
Naunpnr 10 F i
Naupadu 12 L k
Naushalir 9 C f
Naushahra 4 D c
4 E c
Nawa Kot 4 D e
Pada 15 E e
Nawab Basoda 6 HI
Nawabganj 1 Mg
IN g
1 N g
Map.
Nawabganj 2 1 f
2 K f
Nawada 1 L g
1 L g
Nawadero 9 0 f
Nawagaon, I 7 I i
Nawagarh 7 K i
Nawai 5 P f
Nawakot 9 C g
Nawalapitiya 12 I g
Nawalganj 2 H e
Nawalgarh 5 P f
Nawalgund 10 P m
Nawan Kot 4 I) d
Nawanagar (Jam-
nagar) 9 D h
Nawapnr 10 E k
Nawashabr 3 G d
Nawashkhr 3 B b
Nawi bandar 9 C i
Nawli 8 G m
Nayagaon I L It
Nayagarh 12 L i
Nayakanhatti 11 G m
Nayakot 2 L f
Nayan Bazar 1 O g
Nayar, r 2 H e
Nazira 13 Q f
Neduntivu, i 12 H p
Negapatam 11 H o
Negombo 12 H g
, I 12 H g
Negrais, c 14 Q 1
, i 14 Q 1
Negtgura 7 K k
Neill, i 14 P o
Nekmard INg
Nela 2 H d
Nelakamur 12 K k
Nelamangala 11 O n
Nellore H Hm
, div 11 H in
Nelphamari INg
Nemalpalum 12 K 1
Nendra 7 I k
Neoria 2 H e
Ner 8 G i
10 F i
Neral 10 B k
Neri 7 H i
Nerla 10 P 1
Nerur 11 Ho
Netra 9 C h
Netrakona 1 O g
Netravati, r 11 P n
Nevti 10 E m
New Uala 9 C g
Newa 6 K g
Newal.;arh 2 K f
Newari 7 I h
Newasa 10 P k
Ngabyema 14 R I
Ngalenku 14 R k
Ngankbyaung 14 Q 1
Ngape 13 Q i
Ngamin 13 Q i
Ngaputaw 14 Q 1
Ngathaingchaungl4 Q 1
Ngawon, r 14 8 o
Ngayok 13 R h
Ngwedaung 13 R k
Nia 2 L e
Niatankurai 11 G p
Nibari 13 O g
Nibra, r 7 I k
Nibsa 1 M h
Nichlaval 2 K f
Nicobar, is 14 P p
Nidadaul 12 I 1
Nidbauli 2 H f
Nidugal 11 G in
Nigband 9 B f
Nigobi 2 H e
Nigriting 13 P f
Nihalgarh 2 1 f
Nihtor 2 H e
Nikawa 9 D h
Nikewewe 12 I q
Niki 4 D c
Nilambur 11 G o
ll G o
Nilang 2 H d
Nilanga 8 G k
Nilapalli 12 K 1
Nilaswaram 11 F n
Nilaveli 12 I p
Nilawaddi 12 K k
Nilewelle, pi 12 I r
Nilgala 12 I q
Nilgiri 1 M i
, div 11 G o
, pk 11 G o
Nilingpodor 7 K k
Nilwai 7 I k
Nilwata Ganga 12 I q
Nimach 6 P g
Nimar, dist 7 G i
13
INDEX,


PHA
NIM
Map.
Nimawar 6 G h O
Nimbahera 5 F g O
Nimbhera 5 P g O
Nimkhar 2 1 f
Nimla 5 D f
Nimod 6 P h O
Nim pani 7 G i O
Ninirana 5 G f O
Ninaenia 1 L f O
Nindo Shahr 9 C g O
Nipani 10 F 1 O
Niphad 10 P i O
Nira, r 10 E k O
Nirmal 8 H k O
, hs 8 U k O
Nirpara 2 G e O
Nitauli 2 1 f O
Nitpur 1 N g O
Nizam ghat 13 Q f O
Nizanipatani 11 L m O
Niz in pur 10 E k O
Noa Dining 13 Q f O
Noakhali, d : st 1 O h O
O
(Sndharam) 1 O h 0
Nos para 1 K h 0
Noarbaud 13 P g 0
Noh 5 E 1 0
Nohsr 5 F e
Nokha 1 L g P
Nokru 5 E IP
Nonai, r 13 O f F
Nongliak 13 O g F
Nongkerasi 13 O g P
Nongpoh 13 O g E
Nongsrani 13 O g -
N 'iigstoin 13 O g I
Noni 1 M g I
NorthAndainan, il4 P n I
Arcot, div 11 H n I
Central, I
prov 12 I p I
Ksnaia, 1
dist 10 F m I
Koel, r 1 K g 1
Koo, r 1 L h -
Reef, i 14 P n I
Sentinel, ill P o I
Twin, i 14 R o 1
Western, I
div 8 F k 1
Western, 1
prov 12 I p I
Northern, div 8 II k 1
, div 10 E i 1
, div 13 K h 1
Moscos 14 R m 1
prov 12 I p I
Nosura 11 Hm I
Notak 4 D d
Nowa Thala 5 D I
Nowgong 6 H g I
lB P I
, div 13 P f
Nowpur 9 E i
Nowshera 4 D e
Noyil, r 11 G o
Nu ■ngpuang 13 Q g
Nubbibranshar 3 I) b
Nubra, r 3Gb
Nugu, r 11 G o
Nugur 7 I k
Null 3 G e
Nundiganah 12 I 1
Nunkot 13 P g
Nurabad 6 H f
Nuriwala 4 D d
Nurpur 3 P c
4 D d
4 D d
Nursing, mi 1 N f
Nurulal ad 1 N g
Nushki 4 B e
Nuttall 4 C e
Nuwara Eliya 12 I q
Nmvase 10 E i
Nuzvid 12 I 1
Nwalabo mt 14 8 n
Nyamti 11 F in
Nyamu 14 8 1
Nyaungdun 14 Q 1
Nyaungdwin 13 Q i
Nyaunglebin 14 R k
l4 R 1
Nyaunglun 13 R i
Nyanngu or
Pagan 13 Q i
Nyaungywe 13 R i
Obstruction, pt 15 G c
Od 9 B h
Odapur 3 G c
Oel Dhakwa 2 1 f
Ogalla 5 D g
Oghna 5 E g
Qjat, r 9 C i
Okarali 3 E d
Map.
OkhaManga 2 H e
Okhamandel, st 9C h
Okkan 13 Q h
l4 Q 1
l4 R 1
Okpo 14 Q k
Okrsri 9 l 3 g
Oktwin 14 R k
Ola 8 H k
Oldhano 9 C g
Ollavaconda 11 Hm
Olpad 10 E i
Ombu 3 P b
Omorkot 12 K k
Onda 1 M h
Ong, r 7 K i
Ongcde 11 L m
Ongyaw 13 R i
Onun 13 R h
Oprang, r 3 G a
Or, r 6 H g
Orchha 6 II g
Orrissa, div 12 M i
Otpo 14 Q 1
Ottiranmerur 11 H n
Outrain, i 14 P n
Owen, i 14 S o
Oyster, rks 10 F m
Pa aing-myo 13 Q i
Paan 14 R 1
• Pabal 10 P k
Pabar, r 3 G d
: Pabha 13 P f
: Pabna 1 N g
; , dist 1 N g
; Pachahata 1 L h
; Pacham Kaora 9 C h
i Padiainalais 11 H o
i Pachamba 1 Mg
Pachdar 7 H i
i Pachewar 5 F f
Pachbnia 2 II f
i Pachmarhi 7 II h
; Pachor 6 6 h
i 6 H g
i Pachora 10 P i
) Pacbpadra 5 B g
3 Pachrnkhi 1 L g
Padam 3 Q c
i Padana 9 C h
Padaung 14 Q k
D Pada w 14 8 n
i Fadmanabham 12 K ]
i Padra 9 E I
li Padianna 2 K 1
ii Padm 5 E g
p Padsl apur 10 P ’
a Padwiya Tank 12 I j
d Pagoda, pt 14 Q m
f Pahali 3 G (
g Pahar Khel 4 D (
f Si'giia 7 K
f Paharbula 1 K I
i Pahargarh 0 G :
e Paharpur 4 D <
o 4 D c
g Pahasu 2 H i
b Paliu.j, r 6 H <
b Pai Pass 3 B 1
0 Paidegal 10 E n
k Paigpur 2 I
e Paikerati 13 O j
1 Pailani 2 I j
g Paina 2 K
f Paintepur 2 I
d Pairi, r 7 1
c Pairur 8 H
d Paithan 8 P 1
d Pak rattan 3 E i
f Pakala 11 H i
g Pakclian, r 14 8
e Paklial 8 H
e Tank 8 I
q Pakokku 13 Q
i , dist 13 Q
1 Pakowr 1 M
n Pal, r 8 H
in Pala 3 B
1 14 R
1 Palai 12 I
i Palakod 11 H
k Palakollix 12 I
1 Palako da 12 K
i Palnlankwe 14 P
Palali 9 B
i Palamcotah 11 II
i Pallamkotta 11 G
Palamow 1 L
c Palainpur 8 G
h Palanpur 9 B
c , st 9 D
f Palar, r 11 L
g Palas 3 E
g Palasbari 13 O
i Palasner 10 P
d Palatupana 12 I
Map.
Palansuni 12 L i Pi
Palegamwa 12 I q P
Pale.j 10 E i P
Palekwa 13 P i P
Paler, r 11 Hin P
Palgam 3 F b
Palghat 11 G o P
ll Q o -
Pali 2 II f -
5 E g P
6 I h P
Palia 2 I e P
Pab ad 9 D h P
Palikonda 11 II n P
Palilalia 9 D i P
Pali»ela 12 I 1 P
Palkot 1 L h F
Palks, h 11 H p P
, dr llHp P
Palla 10 E i P
Palladam 11 G o -
Pallahara, st 1 L i P
Palla vavain 11 L n P
Pnlmaner 11 H n P
Palmyras, pi 12 M i F
Palni 11 G o P
, hs 11 G o P
Paloncha SI IF
Palonk 14 8 n I
Pa'pa 2 K f 1
Palverayen I
Kaddu 12 I p 1
Palwal 3 G e 1
Pambam 11 H p 1
, p-'s 11 H p I
; Pai nidi 11 Gin 1
Pamnegon 13 Q g I
. Pampur 3 11 b 1
i Pamumigaina 12 H q 1
; Pamnr 11 II in 1
i Pamzal 3 F b 1
P Panabaras 7 1 it
P Panadure 12 H q I
i , I 12 11 q -
i Panagiri 8 II 1 1
! Panagnr 7 I h 1
i Panahat 2 II f I
; Panamik 3 G b 1
; Panankamam 12 I pi
5 Panar, r 1 M g I
i,r2 M f 1
c Panch Dhar 12 L i -
i Mi Hals,
1 dist 9 E h
i Panchana, r 1 L g 1
f Panchgamga, r 10 F 1 I
g Panchipcnta 12 K k 1
1 Panchnad, r 5 G f ]
p Panchmi 5 E f -
i Panda T.irai 7 I h ]
c Pandalam 11 G p J
c Pandaria 7 I h 1
i Pandarkaura 8 H i 1
ti Pandhana 7 G i 1
f Pandharpnr 10 F II
c Pandhunui 7 H i 1
I Panda, r 2 I f ’
e Panduah 1 N h
g , ruins 1N g
b Pandur, I 3 E a
n Pandwin 3 G d
f Paneum 11 Hm
g Panga, r 1 N i
g Pangji 2 M e
1 Pangong(Tso
f Monangla r, I 311 c
i Pangsa 1 N h
1 Pangur, I 3 II c
k Panliada, ft 10 E 1
d Pani Mangalore 11 F n
n Paniala 4 D c
0 Panipat 3 G e
1 Panitola 13 Q f
1 Panjhra, r 10 F i
i Pan.jim 10 E m
i Panjpai 4 B e
g Panjshir, si 4 C b
1 Panjuk 4 B e
b Panka 13 O f
1 Panksw 13 R h
p Pankme 13 R i
n Panna 6 H g
1 6 I g
k , range 6 1 g
o , st 6 H g
h Panniar 6 H f
0 Panri 1 K h
p Panroti 11 H o
h Pansenial 6 F i
c Pantanaw 14 Q 1
g Pannn 3Gb
g Panus 4 D c
n Panwel 10 E k
b Panwns 10 B 1
f Panyo 14 R 1
1 Paoar 4 D e
q Paori CO g
Map.
Papaghni, r 11 Hm F
Paparhandi 12 K k F
Papin, p 4 D c F
Papra, r 7 I k F
Par, r 10 E i F
Ghat 10 B 1 -
Para 1 M h -
5 F g -
l4 R 1 -
Paradalia 1 N li -
Parahat 1 L h
Paranda 8 F k I
Paiangla, pas 3 H c 1
ParantiJ 9 B h I
Parasi 2 K f I
Parasnatli, h 1 L h F
Parasurampur 11 Gni I
Paraswara 7 I h I
Paravur 11 G o 1
Parbaini 8 G k 1
, st 8 G k I
Parbati, r 6 G h I
Parbatipnr 1 N g I
Parlatsar 5 F 11
Pai diary 11 H o I
Parda 6 P g I
i Pardliari 9 D h I
Pardi 10 E i I
Parell 15 G i I
’ Parha' ar 7 I k I
Par'ar 2 1 f I
i Pa'ichhaigarh 2 G c I
: Pariku •, is 12 L k 1
i Parkal 8 H k 1
i Parkar, yen 9 D g I
i Parkhuri 6 I g I
; Parkutta 8 F b 1
i Parla Kune li 12 L k I
1 Parlak' t 7 I k 1
Parli 3 G c 1
i Pannagudi 11 H p 1
i Parner 10 F k I
1 Paro 1 L f 1
IIN f 1
1 Pared 5 F f 1
i Parola 10 F i 1
f Parone 0 G g 1
) Parothu 14 S m 1
) Parsa 1 L g 1
; Parseoni I H i 1
f Partabgaih 2 I g J
iSF g ]
, dist 2 I g
i , ft 5 F g 1
? Partabpur 7 I k ]
1 Partapur 5 F h I
{ Parvatipnr 12 K k ■
f Panvan, r 50 g
f , r 6 G li
i Parwari 7 1 i ■
p Pasamd 4 D c
i Pasar, r 1 N h
i Pashat 4 D b
i Pasrnr 3 P c
1 Pass Pyl 12 I p
i Patal, r 12 K k
f Patainari 13 N f
It Patan 1 L g
p 2 I f
a 2 L f
d 5 F f
u 5 F g
i 5 F h
e 7 H h
9 E h
c 10 E 1
h S nmalli
c Sutiapard 9r» i
1 Patanda 8 F k
n Patapattesliim, il2 I 1
c Patapur 8 II k
e Patas 10 F k
f Pata« pur 1 M h
i Pataudi 3 G e
in Pataung 13 Q g
e Patena 7 II h
b Pathalipam 13 Q f
e Pathankot 3 F c
f Pathar Ka hhar 6 I g
h Pathargarh 2 H e
i Pathari 6 H h
g 61 h
g Pat bar'a 7 H h
g Pathardi 10 P k
g Patligraiu 1 N f
f Pathri 7 1 i
h Path lie 8 G k
0 Pati 2 K g
16 F i
1 Patia 1 P h
b Patiala, st 3 G d
c , st 3 G e
k Patialawali, ? 3 G d
1 Patiali 2 H f
1 Patialia 3 6 d
e Patipal Aar 12 I q
g Patiram 1 N g
Map.
Patiya 1 N g
Patkai, range 13 Q f
Pa kum 1 L h
Patlur 8 G 1
Patna 1 K h
7 K i
, dist 1 L g
, div 1 L g
, st 7 K i
and Banki-
pur 1 L g
Pati.e, r 0 I g
Patnita'.a 1 N g
Pa to 14 Q k
Patoda 10 F i
Patou Saongi 7 H i
Patri 9 D h
Patrud 8 G k
Patsa 1 K h
Patseo 3 G c
Pattan 7 H i
Pattapattu 11 G p
Patti 3 F d
Patt k n da 11 G in
Pattiwilla 12 I q
Pattukotai 11 H o
Patuakhali 1 O h
Patur 8 G i
Patwi 2 H e
Paud 10 E k
Pauk 13 Q i
Paukkliauiig 14 Q k
Paukma 13 Q i
Paunar 7 H i
Paung 14 R 1
Paungdawthi 14 R 1
Paungdch 14 Q k
Paunggyi 14 R 1
Pauni 7 H i
Pauri 2 H d
Pauti 6 F g
Pavagada 11 6 m
Pawagarh 9 E h
Pawayau 2 I e
Pawinbye 14 Q k
Pawut 14 8 n
Payakon 13 R k
Pave, i 14 8 o
Payidipala 12 K 1
Pechanpet 8 H 1
Peddapur 12 K 1
Pedro 12 I p
,,t 12 I p
Peer, pi 15 G i
Pegon 13 Q h
Pegu 14 R 1
, dist 14 R 1
, div 14 Q 1
, r 14 R 1
Yoma, mis 14 Q i
: Pehoa 3 G e
Peint 10 B i
i Peiwar Kotal, p 4 C c
; Pelgam 3 F c
, Pen 10 E k
: Pencil, r 7 H i
F Penchalakonda,
; pk 11 Hm
f Pendhat 2 H f
f Pendra 7 I h
f Peng, r 13 P i
! Pengadpa 81 1
i Penganga, r 8 H k
i Penner, r 11 G n
i Pensila, vas 3 G e
1 Pentakota 12 K 1
Penukonda 11 Gm
i Pemvegou 14 R k
i Pepa'.i 11 G m
1 Peradenia 12 I q
i Perambakara 11 L m
i Perambatur 11 II o
i Periaknlam 11 G o
b Perim, harb 15 G c
; Perindurai 11 G o
i Periyapatna 11 G n
f Periyar, r 11 G p
c Perrimbire 11 H n
g Pemmakal 11 II n
e Perungndi 11 G p
1 Pesalai 12 II p
ti Peshawar 4 D b
ti , dist 4 D b
k , div 4 D c
f Peth 10 F 1
i Pethapur 9 E h
k Petlad 9 E h
g Pettawag, r 8 H 1
i Petyi 14 Q k
h Peymadu 12 H p
d Peynu 13 R h
e Phagu 3 G d
d Phauwara 8 F d
f Phalakata 1 N f
d Pliale'a 5 F f
q Phalgu, r 1 L g
g Phalia 3 B c
14
INDEX.


RAV
piia
Map.
Phalodi 5 B f Pol
Phalsund 6 D I r
Phaltan 10 F 1 Pol
Pbaphund 2 II 1 Po
Pharamgiri 13 O g Po
Pharenda 2 K t Po;
Phartpur 6 G I Po:
Phatikchari 1 O h Po;
Phekerima 13 Q g Po
Pheui, r 1 O h Po
Phillaur 3 F d Po
Phingesa ar 7 K i
Pli long 13 P g Po
Phuktal Gonpa 3Gc Po
Phuljhar 7 K i Po
Phuljur or Kara- Po
toya, r 1 N g Po
Phulka, r 9 D li Po
Phulong 13 P g Po
Phulpur 1 O g
Phulsar 5 E e Po
Plium 13 Q f Po
Phungan, range 13 H 1 Po
Pi Khyaung, r 13 P iPo
Pianjinni 8 F k Po
Pichola 13 P f Po
Pichuli 12 K k Pc
Pidurutalagala, P>
mt 12 I q Pu
Pihai 4 D c Pc
Pihani 2 1 I Pi
Pijacur 9 B h P.
Pilibhit 2 H c P<
, dist 2 II c P(
Piliv 10 F 1 -
Pilkhuwa 2 G e Pi
Pilwa 19 E i P(
Pimpalgaon Raja 8 G i Pi
Pimpli 10 B i Pi
Pind Dadau Khan 3 E c Pi
Sultani 4 B c P
Pindar, r 2 II d P
Pindi Bhattian 3 E d P
Gheb 4 E c P
Plndya 13 R i P
Pinga 1 N g P
i'injar 8 G i P
Piniaing 13 Q g P
Pialebu 13 Q g P
Pinnyeng 14 R IP
Pinthet, 1 f Q P P
Pipalgaon 7 II i P
8F k P
Pi par 6 E I -
Piparia 7 H h P
7l h r
Piparkhota 0 1 h F
Piparwani 7 H i P
Piplauda' 0 F h E
Pipli 3 F e E
Piplia 6 F g -
6 G h I
Piplun 4 D c I
Pippli 12 L i I
Piprai 6 G I 1
Pipri 9B g I
Pipulne’r 10 F i I
Pir Panjal, 3 F c 1
Piram, i 9 E i 1
P.rganj 1 N g 1
Pirie, ? t 15 G c I
P.rmaid 11 G p 1
Piro 1 L g 1
Pirozpur 1 O h 1
Pirpainti 1 Mg 1
Pirpakh ira 9 C I 1
Pir wan 11 G p 1
Pisangan 5 F I 1
Pishin 4 B d
, st 4 B d 1
Pithapur 12 K 1 1
Pithoragarh 2 I e I
Pithorea 7 II g 1
Pitigala 12 I q
Pitlawad 6 F h :
Pitu 14 R k
Piuthanah 2 K e
Plach 3 6 d
Plansidcwa INI
Plassey 1 N h
Pobha 13 Q I
Pod 8 II k
Podili H H m
Pohra, r 3 F b
Point De Galle 12 II q
Poitono 1 L h
Pokaran 5 D I
Pokhra 2 K e
Pokhria 2 M f
Pokran Lamii 9 B g
Pokri 2 II 0
Pokwe 14 R 1
Poles 8 H k
Polavaram 12 I 1
Polgahawela 12 II q
Poh H Hm
Pollachi 11 G o
Map.
Pollonarmva, Pu
ruins 12 I q
Polpettia 12 I q Pu
Polur 11 H n Pu
Pomalwarl 10 F k Pu
Pomparippu 12 II p
Pomu 14 S 1 Pu
Pon, r 13 R i Pu
Ponagyun 14 P i Pu
Ponakyon 14 P i Pu
Ponani 11 P o Pu
( r 11 G o Pu
Ponapur 81 1 Pu
Ponda 10 E m Pu
Pondaul 1 M f Pu
Pondicherri 11 H o Pu
Poni 3 F c Pu
Ponneri 11 L n Pu
Poona 10 E k Pu
, dist 10 E k Pu
Porager 12 K k Pv
Porakad 11 G p Pj
Poramunda 1 L i Pj
Porbandar 9 C i Pj
Poreh 12 I k P;
Porenaumla 11 Hm P;
Pori mol 12 L k
P..rt Canning 1 N h P;
Portman, 6 14 P o P;
Porto Novo 11 H o P;
Portugal, b 12 II p P;
P..taua 12 I q P;
Potanur 11 G o
Poteru 12 I IP,
, r 12 I k P
Potla 5 F g -
Potlapali SHIP,
Pottur 11 H n P
Pouktaw 14 P i P
Poundar 7 H h
Poungbyin 13 Q g Q
Prakasha 10 F i Q
Pranbita, r 8 H k Q
Prannagar 1 N g Q
Pratabgarh, ft 10 E 1 -
Pratappur 1 K h (j
Prattipada 11 L 1
: Prawara, r 10 F k ft
; Presidency, div 1N h I
1 Price, c 14 P n I
: Prinseps Ghat 15 B d -
i Proddatur 11 Hm I
: Prome 14 Q k I
t , dist 14 Q k I
i Pruma 14 P i I
i Prusuthupar 12 K k I
i Pudi 12 K 1 I
i Pudna 3 F c I
i Pud nab a 2 I e I
! Pudukattui 11 II o I
; st 11 H 0
i Puduki.ko ippu 12 1 pi
3 Pudukurchi 11 G p -
i Pugal 5 B e -
f Pui 4 C d 1
y Puini, r 13 O g I
i Pukwela 14 R 1 1
E Pulaji 4 C e I
i Pulnicherru 11 Hm 1
y Pulalcberu 11 II 1 I
c Pulemeda 8 H 1 I
p Pulgaon 7 H i I
g Puliangudi 11 G p ■
li Pulicat 11 L n ;
g Pulikat, I 11 L n
1 Pulinkun 11 G p
p Pulivend da 11 Hm
t Pulpanab.i Puram,
i st 11 G p
d Purathang, r 13 O f
1 Punakan 12 H p
e Punakha 1 N f
g Punamallu 11 L n
q Punasa 7 G h
h Punch 3 F c
k , dist 3 F c
e,r 3 E c
d Punchkura 1 M h
f Pundri 3 G e
h Punganur 11 H n
I Punkabari INI
k Punkudutiva 12 II p
in Punnae 11 G p
b Punnalai 12 H p
q Punpun, r 1 L g
h Puntaniba 10 F k
f Pur 5 F g
e —, r 9 C h
f Bascra 2 G e
g Pura 6 F i
u 6 G g
1 Purandhar 10 E k
k Puranpur 2 I e
1 Puraur 11 G p
q Puri 12 L k
m Purian, j)t 14 Q m
o Puma 8 G k
Map.
Purna, r s G i Ra
, r 10 E i Ha,
Purnabhasa, r 1 N g Ra,
Purngarh 10 K 1 Ra
Purniah 1 M g Ra,
, dist 1 M g R '
Pursoi 2 K g Ra,
Purulia 1 M h Ra,
Purushottapur 12 L k Ra
Punva 2 1 f Ra,
Pus, r 8 G k Ra
Pusa IE 1 Ra
Pusad 8 6 k
Pusesavli 10 F 1 Ra
Pusgudiani 7 I k
Pushkar 5 F f Ra
Pussye 1 M g Ra
Putli 8 F c Ra
Puttalam 12 II p
Putur 11 F n Ra
Pwehla 13 R i Ra
Pyagale 14 U 1 Ra
Pyalo 14 Q k Ra
Pyarnalav, r 14 Qin Ra
Pyantaya 14 R 1
Pvapnn 14 Q 1 Ra
, r 14 Q 1 Rf
Pyawbhway 14 R 1
i Pyawbwe 13 II i
i Pyenkayaing 14 Qin Ri
i Pygmabon, pi II Pg Ra
l Pyindaye 14 Q 1 Ri
i 14 Qin
I Pyingaing 13 Q h
; Pyinmana 13 R k
r , dist 13 R k R:
i Pyinulwin 13 R h
i Pyinzi 13 Q i R:
i Pyokon 13 R k R
i R
i Quetta 4 B d R
i Quibble, i 15 B i R
< Quilandi 11 F o R
e Quilon 11 G p R
1 , st 11 G p R
ii Quoin, i 14 Rm R
1 n
k Rabkavi 10 F IB
h Rabkob 1 K h B
n Rabnabad, chan 1 O i B
d , i 1 O i R
n Rabupura 2 G e E
k Racberla 11 Hm F
k Radaur 3 G d P
i Radhan 9 B f I
k Radhanpur 9 l> h -
1 Radhapnram 11 G p I
c Raetal 5 E g -
e Ragbugavb 6 G g I
o Raghunatha-
-0 pimun 12 L k I
p Raha 13 O 1 -
p 13 P f -
e 15 P b -
d Raha.ia 9 B g -
g Rahatgarh 7 II h -
1 Rahimatpur 10 F 1 -
e Rahmani 4 D c I
m Rahon 3 G d I
1 Rah pur 9 D h 1
1 Rahuri 10 F k I
i Rai Bareli 2 1 f 1
p , d'st 2 1 f I
n , dio 2 1 1 -
n Rai Utan lo B k -
p Raiboga 1 L )> -
m Raichur 8 G 1 - ,
, f>t 8 G 1 -
p Raid rug 11 G in -
f Raiengarh 2 G d ■
p Raiganj 1 N g 1
f Raigarh 7 K i 1
n 10 E k 1
h 12 K k
c , dist 7 K i
c Raikh 4 U e
c Raikot 3 F d
h Raimara 13 N f
e Raimangal, r 1 N i
n Raina 1 M h
f Raini, r 9 C f
p Raipur 1 M h
p 1 O b
p 2 G d
g 5 P g
k 7 I i
g , dist 7 1 i
b Raipuia 1 O g
e 6 H h
i Rairakhol 7 L i
■ g , st 7 L i
1 k Rairesbwar 10 E k
e Rairi, ft 10 E m
\ p , p 10 E m
j k Raisan 3 G e
j m Raisin 6 G h
i k Raiwind 8 F (I
Map.
Rajghat 2 K g Ri
Hajagaon 7 Q k Ri
Rajagopalpet 8 H k Ri
Ra.jagriha 1 L g Ri
Bajaipalaiyam 11 G p Ri
Rnjakhera 5 H I Ri
Rajakularaman 11 G p R;
Rajam 12 K k Ri
Ra.jana 4 E d Ri
Rajanpur 4 D e R:
Rajaori 3 P c Ri
Rajapur 2 1 g Ri
_I 10 E 1 Ri
Rajarh 6 F e
6 G g Ri
Rajauti 1 L g R
Rajgaon 1 M g R
Raigarh 86 g ft
,st 6 G h R
Rajghat 2 H e -
Rajgorh 5 G f R
Ra.jiin 7 1 i
Rajkot 9 B h
Rajmabal 1 M g R
, hs 1 M g R
Rajmai 13 Q I R
Ra inagar 1 M h R
.5K g R
. r 5 F g R
Rajoli 7 1 i
Rajpipla 9 B i R
Rajpur 2 H d R
6F h R
6 P i B
7 K i P
Rajpura 3 G d P
MatdkgadS H k -
Rajpuri, cr 10 B k P
Rajsliahi, dist 1 N g P
Rakabdev 5 E g P
Rakan, die 14 P k P
Rakaposhi, mt 3F a I
i Raki 5 E g -
i Rakwana, rage 12 I q I
i Ralegaon 8 II i I
i Ralla 14 P i I
Ramagherri 11 II o 1
1 Ramana 13 R I 1
i Ramanmalai 11 Gin *
j Rainas, c 10 B in 1
i Rambawe 12 I q I
3 Ranibha 12 L k 1
i Rambhapur 6 F h -
1 Ramcha 2 L f
f Ramdrug 8 G 1 -
j 10 Fra -
0 Raineswaram 11 H p - ,
, i 11 H p
g Ramgango, r 2 I e -
Rainganj 1 O h ■
k Raingarh 1 K g
I—l L h
f 1 O h
b 8 G d
ir 5 G I
h 5 P e
17 I h
c Ramghat 2 II e
d Ramgiri 12 K k
h Ramkot 3 F c
k Ramkunda 1 K h
f Ramnad 11 H p
f Raiunagar 1 L f
1 2 II e
k 2 I f
1, 2 K g
13 B c
j 3 F c
n 6 I g
d 7 I h
g Ramnigar 1 N h
i Rampa 12 I 1
k Ram pur 1 N g
k - 2 G e
i 2 G f
e 2 II e
d 2 I 1
f 2 K g
i 3 G d
h 6 Q f
f 6 I g
h 6 I h
1, 7 K i
d 7 L i
ll G in
i , st 2 H e
i Hut 1 M g
g Rampura 6 P g
li Ramri 14 P k
i , i 14 P k
i Ramsar 5 P f
k Ramsen 5 E g
m Ramsliiii Hat 1 N f
m Ramsil, marsh 1O h
e Ramtek 7 H i
h Ramu 1 P i
d Ranaghat 1 N h
Map.
Ranahu 9 C g
Ranapur 0 F h
Ranawao 9 C i
Ranchi 1 L h
Randa 5 D I
Render 10 E i
Randeranwali 3 E d
Rand la 1 K li
Raneri, harb It Q k
RangChu 1 N i
Ranga 3 E d
Rangadi 1 M g
Rangamati 1 O ii
, ruins 1 N g
Rangarman 2 I I
Rangegoia 13 P I
Rangi 7 I i
Rangia 13 O f
Rangoon 14 R 1
—, r 14 R 1
Rangpur IN g
— 4 U d
, d : st 1 N g
Rangthaug 13 O g
Rangunia 1 P li
Ranhal 4 D e
Rania 3 F o
Ranibennur 10 F m
Raniganj 1 M g
1 M h
Ranijia 6 F g
Rauikala 1 K k
Rani kbet 2 H e
Raninagar 1 N g
Ranipet 11 II u
Ranipur 2 H g
- 9 C I
Ranisank il 1 N g
Ranjba Ki.an 9 C g
Rankam 13 Q f
Banna 12 I q
Ranimr 9 D h
l2 L i
Rauteshgul 4 I) b
i Banthambur 6 G f
i Raojau 1 O h
i Rapliu 9 D h
f Rapti r 2 K e
, 1 2L I
i Rariur 11 Hm
1 Raa 2 H d
i Ras 5 F I
i Bab-el-Man-
f deb 15 G c
1 Imran 15 E c
i Marsbigh 15 F c
a Muar(Monzc),
ac 9 B g
e Selan 15 F b
ii Shaikh Berk-
bud 15 G c
3 Sa d 15 G c
h Ra=a 8 H k
d Basal 9 U g
f Rasalcarh 10 E 1
e Rasdhan 2 H I
h Rashid 4 E d
e Rasipur 11 H o
k Raskam Daria, or
c Yarkand, r 3G a
h Rasoli 12 L i
p Rasra 2 K g
f Bastam 9 0 f
e Rastapur SGI
f Rasulabad 2 II f
g Rasulpur 2 K f
I —. r 1 M i
c Rasur 3 P d
g R.iswagarhi 2 L e
h Ratan garb 5 F e
li Rutaupur 7 K Ii
j 9 E i
g Rath 2 H g
e Rathedaung 14 P i
f Rati 2 I e
e Ratia 3 F e
f Ratlai 56 g
g liatlam 6 P h
d , st 6 F h
f Ratmale 12 I q
g Ratnagiri 10 B 1
h ,d st lo E 1
i Ratuapura 12 I q
i Rato Dero 9 C t
m Ratora 5 D g
e Ratsar 2 L g
g Ratten Pir, pass 3 F c
g Rattihalli 10 P m
k Rattotta 12 I q
k Ratu, r 2 M f
I Raucheila H Gm
g Raul, r 7 K i
f Rausingaman-
h galam 11 H p
i Rauthang 1 L i
i Rauza 8 P i
h Raver 10 G i
15
INDEX.


SHA
RAV
Map.
Ravi, r 3 G c Ru
r* 4 E d Ru
Rawal, r 9 D i Ru
Pindi 3 E c Ru
, dist 4 E c Ru
, div 3 E c Ru
Hawatsar 5 F e Ru
Rawlain 13 R i
Rayachoti 11 Hm Sa'
Rayagudda 12 K k Sal
Rayak 13 O g Sal
Rayden 1L h j
Rechna Doub 4 E d Sal
Red, pt 14 S o Sal
Redanoh 5D g
Rcdavaram 11 H n Sal
Regulavalasa 12 K k Sa
Rehand, r 2 K g Sa’
Rehli 7 H h Sa.
Relli 12 K 1 Sa
Romuna 1 M i Sa.
Ren 5 F f Sa
Rengchigiri 13 O g Sa
Reni 5 F e Sa
Renigunta 11 H n Sa
Rennapur 8 G k Sa
Renoma, r 13 P g Sa
Renr 6 E e Sa
Reoti 2 L g Sa
Reotipur 2 K g
Repi, r 5 G g Sa
Research, str 14 P k Sa
Ret, r 7 K i Sa
Reti 9 C c Sa
Hevelganj or Sa
Godna 1 L g Sa
Revello, chan 14 Pq
Rewa 6 I g Sa
,st 0 I g Sa
Rewadanda 10 E k Sa
Rewakantha, st 9 E i Sa
Rewari 3 G e Sa
Rhotasgarh 1 K g Sc
R’asi 3 F c Sc
Richwan 50 g -
Ridh 4 D d Si
Rihlu 3 Q c Si
Ritna 2 K e Si
Rind, r 2 H f
Ringnaud 6 F h Si
Riri 2 K e Si
Risod 8 6 k Si
Ritpur 8 G i
Riwah, ft 15 G c -
Roberlsganj 2 K g -
Rocky, pt 14 P k
Roeniabwali 5 B e Si
Roha 9 C h S.
lO E k S
Rohania 6 I h S
Rohera 5 E g 8
Rohilkhand, div 2 H e S
Rohin, r 2 K ( S
Rohisa 9 D i -
Rohoni 9 E h S
Rohri 9 C f -
Rohtak 3 G e S
4 C d S
, dist 3 G e s
Rohumari 13 N g S
Rojhi, i 9 C h -
Rojhro 9 D g -
Ron 10 F m S
Ronald 2 1 f £
Rondu 3 F b £
Ronkong 13 Q f -
Rori 3 F e £
Rosi Gabicha 9 B f £
R iss, i 14 S n £
Itotas 3 E c £
Round, c 14 Q 1 £
Rowlec, cr 15 G d £
Rowra 10 E i -
Ruby Mines, dist 11 R h £
Rudauli 2 1 f £
Rii'Hvair, r 11 L 1
Rudraprayag 2 H d -
Rudrapur 2 H e -
2 K f -
Rudrar 86 k-
Rue 2 L e -
Rujnagar 1 L i £
Ruk 9 0 f £
Rnkanpur 4 E e I
Rukmawati, r 9 C h I
Rukshu, did 3 II c I
Rumaguard 1 P h
Rumia Bihar 2 I e
Rungalaiiaud 12 K k
Runija 6 F h
Rupan, r 9 D h
Rupar 3 G d
Rupbas 5 G f
Rupnagar 5 E g
Rupnagarh 5 P f
Rupnarayan, r 1M h
Rupwal 3 B c
Map.
Rurah 2 H f Sa
Rurki 2 G e Sa
Rusera 1 M g Sa
Rushikulya, r 12 Lk Sa
Russellkonda 12 L k Sa
Rutland, i 14 P o Sa
Ruttusar 5 F e Sa
Sa
Sabalgarb 6 G f Sa
Sabang l M h Sa
Sabaragainu wa, Sa
prov 12 I q Sa
Sabari, r 7 I k
Sabarmati 9 E h Sa
t r 9 K h Sa
Sabhapur 7 H h Sa
Sabhar 1 O h Sa
; Sabi, r 5 G f Sa
i Sa-bin-ywa 14 Q k Sa
1 Sabzalkot 4 C e 8s
i Sachel, hs 8 H k Si
f Sachin 9 B i Si
; Sadabad 2 G f Sc
i Sadalgi 10 F 1 Si
i Sadargarh 3 E e Si
i Sadarpur l N h Si
; Sadashivgarh 10 F m
3 Sadaung 13 Q h
; Saddle, h 14 P n &
g , i 14 8 o Si
; Sadem, din 11 H o Si
c Sadhawra .3 G d S:
i Sadiya 13 Q f S
3 Sadra 9th
Sadras 11 L n
? Sadri 5 E g S
1 5 F g Si
i Sad ul lan agar 2 K f S
? Saduri 9 C g S
t Saeng, r 14 P i S
i Saera 5 B g S
e Safed Koh, nits 4C b S
g Saflpur 2 I f
c Saga 13 Q h S
g __ 13 R i 8
d Sagabin 13 R h S
c Sagaen 14 P i S
e Sagaing 13 Q i -
f , dial 13 Q i S
h Sagalair, r 11 Hm £
e Sagandia 9 C h £
k Sagar 1 N g S
i_7 H h £
c 11 F m £
g , dist 7 H h £
k ; i 1 N i £
e Sagor 0 F li £
h Sagu 13 Q i £
k Sagwara 5 F h £
h Sagwe 13 R k £
g Sah 2 I g £
e Sahar 2 G f £
f Saharanpnr 2 O e £
i , d ist 2G e £
h Sahari 2 I e ■
f 2 1 e £
e Sahaspur 2 H e £
d Sahawal 6 I g £
e Sahet 2 K f £
g Sahibganj 1 L f £
hIM g £
g (Gaya) 1L g £
m Sahlswan 2 H e £
f Sahiwal 4 E d -
b Sai, r 2 K g ■
f —, r 5 E g !
e Saichal 1 P h •
f Said 3 E c
n Saidapet 11 L n I
c Saidapur 8 G 1
1 Saidpur 1 N g
d Sailana 6 F h !
i6F h :
h Sailu 8 G k 1
f Saint George’s
1 Channel 14 P q
d Luk**, i 14 S o
e Martin,! 1» P i
f Matthew, t 14 R o
k Thomas, mill L n
e Thom 6 15 B i
i Saipur 6 K g
f Saj.juk, r 1 P h
e Sakaldiha 2 K g
h Sakardih 1 Kli
[ c Sakc“ar 4 1) c
h , I 4 B c
e Sakbi 6 I h
1 k Sarwar 4 D e
1 h Sakit 2 H f
• h Saklespur 11 F n
■ d Sakoda 7 K h
i f Sakoli 7 H i
1 g Sakrand 9 C f
’ f Sakri, r 1 L g
I h Sakti 7 K h
)c7 K h
Map.
Sakurpe 10 B 1 Sa
Salabat 7 Q i Sa
Salandi, r 12 M i Sa
Salang 2 L e Sa
Salarani 4 C d Sa
Salaya 9 C h Sa
Salbai 6 H g -
Salbaka 8 I k Sc
Salbani 1 M h
Salbet, i 9 D i Sc
Saleh Karez 4 0 d Si
Salem 11 H o Sc
ll H o Si
Saleinyo 13 Q i Si
Salena 2 K e -
Salikha 1 N h Si
Saliinpur 2 K f Si
Salin 13 Q i Si
Salipur 12 M i Si
Salleir 10 B i Si
Salmara 13 O g Si
Salmi 12 K k
Salon 2 I f Si
Salsette, t 10 E k
Salsi 10 B 1 S
Salt, I 3 H b S
, I 3 II b 8
, range 4 E c S
Salti, marsh 1 O h S
i Salumbar 5 F g S
i Salunga 13 P g S
Salur 12 K k S
■ Salwin, r 14 R k S
Amherst, S
dist Uk 1 -
; Samadhpur 2 K f S
; Samaguting 13 P g S
’ Samai 1 L g S
; Samalpatti 11 H u -
i Samasata 4 U e -
; Samatpur 0 I h -
> Sambalpur 7 K i -
f , dist 7 K i -
i Sambarsingi 7 K i £
i Samlieh 1-5 G b £
i Sambhal 2 H e £
i Sambhar 5 F f £
i Salt, I S F f £
i Sambrani 10 F m -
i Satndari 5 E g £
li Sameitkyun 13 Q i £
g Samer 6 F h £
ti Sameswari, r 13 O g £
ii Samhhuganj 1 O g t
h Samjia 1 N g £
i Samlajl 9 B h £
li Samoa 13 Q h £
i Samodh 5 F f £
li Sampgaon 10 F m £
k Sam put 3 G e £
g Samra 2 H f £
f Samthar 6 II g £
e Samundar Khan 4 C d f
e San, r 7 K i £
e Kosi, r 2 K d £
e Sanaktan 7 K i !
e Sanand 9 E h I
g Sanavarapetta 12 I 11
f Sanchi C G h 1
f Sandasal 9 E h 1
g Sandhan 9C h
g Sandi 2 1 f
e Sandoway 14 Q k
d , dist 14 Q k
g , r 14 Q k
g Sandur H Gin
h 11 G m
c , r 11 G in
n Sandwip 1 O h
1 , chan 1 O h
g,i 1 O h
h Sandy, pt 14 P o
h Sangal Klang, ml l3 P h
k Sangam 11 Hm
Sangameshwar 10 E 1
q Sangameswaram 11 H 1
0 Sangamner 10 F k
1 Sanganer 5 F f
0 Sangarhi 7 II i
n Sanghar 9 C f
1 Sanghi 3 G e
g Sangli 10 F 1
h Sangmai 13 P g
g Sangod 5 G g
h Sangola 10 P 1
c Sangrampur 1 L f
c Sangrana 4 E d
h Sangrar 9 C f
e Sangri 2 H d
f Sangu, r 1 O h
n Sanguem 10 F m
h Sangvanga 13 P h
! i Sangwi 0 F i
f Sangyi 14 Q k
g Sani 2 1 e
h 14 P k
h Sanjai, r 1 L h
Map.
Sanjan 10 B i Sa
Sanjeli 9 E 1» 8a
Sanjit 0 F g 8a
Sankaridrng 11 G o Sa
Sankariiainarkeil 11 G p Sa
Sankeshwar 9 1) h Sa
lO F 1 Sa
Sankh, r 1 L h Sa
, t 6 G f Sa
Sankliatra 3 P c Sa
Sankhu 5 F e Sa
Sankisa 2 H f Sa
Sankos, r 13 N f Sa
, Sankra 1 L h Sa
i 7 I i Sa
Sann 9 B g Sa
' Satina 1 K It Sa
Sannaia l K h Sa
i Sannigaram 8 H k Sa
i Sanpur 7 I k Sa
; Santal Parganas, Sc
dist IMg Si
f Santalpur 9 D h Sc
: , { 9 D h Si
1 Santipur 1 N h Si
) Santoklipur 3 G d Si
t Sanua 13 Q f St
3 Sanwar 5 F g Si
i San watsar 10 F k Si
; Saoli 7 H i Si
; Saoner 7 H i Si
c Saorgaon 7 H i Si
c Sar, I 12 L k Si
Sara 1 N g Si
1 9 D h Si
f Saragur 11 G o Si
j Sarahau 3 G d S:
I Sarai 2 K g S
jIL g -
e Akil 2 I g S
ti Kheta 2 K g S
i Mir 2 K f S
i Sidu 4 I) d S
i Sarai kela 1 L h 8
b Saralbhanga, r 13 <) f S
e Sarameti, »u 13 Q g 8
f Saran, dist 1 L f S
f Sarangarh 7 K i S
n , st 7 K i S
g Sarangpur 6 G h S
i Sarap, r 3 G c S
h Safari, r C G g S
g Saraswati, r 9 E g S
g Saratha 1 M i S
g Saranli 21 g S
h Saravapalli 11 Hm S
h Sarawan, st 4 B e S
f Sarda, r 2 I e S
n Sardaipur 12 L i S
e Sardar Shir 5 F e S
f Sardargarh 5 E e S
g Sardhana 2 G e S
d Sardhar 9 D h £
i Sargaon 71 i £
d Sarguja, st 1 K h £
i Sarhali Kalan 3 F d £
h Sariab 4 B d £
1 Sarila 2 H g £
h Saringara 12 L i -
h Sarir 2 G f -
h Sarjapnr 11 G n -
f Sarju, r 2 K g -
k Sarkandi 2 I g :
k Sarkar 13 P g l
k Sark pali 8 H k S
in Sarnath 2 K g 1
in Sarola 56 g 1
in Saroth 5 F g i
h Sarotra 9 E g I
h Sarsaganj 2 II f !
h Sarshal 8 H k
0 Sarsi 6 1 g ■
h Sarsuti r 5 F f
m Sam ,pk 1 L h 1
1 Sarunda 5 E f
1 Sarupkati 1 O h
k Sarurpur 2 G c
f Sarwal 7 K k
i Sanvan 0 F h
f Sarwana 6 F g
e Sarwar 5 F f
1 10 F 1
g Sasan 9 D i
g Sasni 2 H f
1 Sasoi, r 9 C h
f Sasseram 1 K g
d Saswar 10 F k
f Satabu 9 D g
[ d Satalde 7 6 li
h Satang (Tenuuia) 2 L e
m Sataoli 10 E 1
h Satara 10 B 1
i , dist 10 E 1
k ,ft 10 E 1
e , st 10 B k
k , st 10 F 1
h Satgachhia 1 M h
Man.
Satkania 1 P h
Satkhira 1 N h
Satli 13 P g
Satpati 10 B k
Satpura, hs 6 F i
Sattankulam 11 G p
Sattarmukhi, r 1 N i
Sattein 13 Q i
Satthwa 13 Q k
Satnr 11 G p
Sa-tu Sa-kan 14 Q k
Satwas 6 G h
Satyamangnlam 11 G o
Sau, r 0 F g
Sauhan 7 H h
Saumdatti 10 F m
Saunra, r 1 M b
Saurargaon 8 H k
Saurian 3 F d
Sausar 7 H i
Savali 10 E i
Savandrug, ml 11 G n
Savanga 13 P h
Savanur 10 F m
Savargaon 8 G k
Savatri, r 10 B k
Sawa 5 F g
Sawada 7 1 i
Sawalmenda 7 G i
Sawantwari 10 E 1
Sawar 5 F g
Sawi, h 14 P p
Sayain 13 Q n
Sayda 10 F i
Sayin 13 P h
Sayla 9 1) h
Sayyid Sa’awan 2 I g
Say yid pur 1 N h
2 K g
Sayyidwala 3 E d
Sazin 3 E b
' Sccundarabad 8 H 1
Segaon 7 H i
Segauli 1 L f
' Sehaf, r 4 C e
Sehi 2 G f
’ Sehore 6 G h
. Sehwan 9 B f
Seilan 15 E c
Sekandra 1 M g
! Sekum 4 B e
; Selam 1 L h
; Seliinabad 1 M h
i Selingbara 1 L h
; Sellore, i 14 S r
i Seman 9 G e
j Semai ia 6 I g
s Seniuria Ghat 1 M g
i Senbo 13 R li
> Senchal 1 N f
5 Sendurjana 8 H i
; Sendwal 7 G i
i Sengar, r 2 II f
i Sensar 3 E c
i Seogarh 10 E I
1 Seoiiar 1 L f
1 Beon«th,r 7 K i
? Seoni 7 G h
i—7 H h
f 7 I i
a , dist 7 H i
g , I 7 I i
g Seontha 6 11 f
g Seopur 0 G g
k Scori Naraynn 7 K i
g Seota 2 1 f
g Sephima 13 P g
g Sepku 13 it g
g Seram 8 G 1
f Serampur 1 N h
k Serijula 2 I e
g Seringapatam 11 G n
f Sero 9 C f
h Sernvial 11 H p
f Sesa, r 13 Q f
h Seshachalain,
c range 11 Hm
k Sesiri, r 13 Q f
h Seti, r 2 I e
g Settipattadai
f (Tiruvadi) 11 H o
1 Settur 11 G p
i Seu 5 D f
f Sewan 3 G e
h Sewani 3 F e
g Sewree 15 G e
k ,ft 15 G e
g ,ft 15 G i
h Shabeh Khel 4 C d
e Shadi 3 G c
1 Shagrot 3 G c
1 Shahabad 2 H c
12 H f
13 F c
k 3 G d
15 G g
h , dist 1 K g
16
INDEX,


SHA
SUL
Map.
Shahada 10 F i
Shahapnr 10 E k
lO P m
Shahari 7 G i
Shahbandar 9 B g
Shahbazpur 1 O h
2 1 g
, chan 1 O h
Shahdadpur 9 B f
9 C g
Shahdara 2 G e
3 P d
Shahdaura 6 G g
Shahganj 2 K f
2 K g
Shahgarh 5 C f
7 H g
Shabjahanpur 2 H f
■0 G h
, dist 2 H I
Shahkapur 9 C g
Shahpur 2 G f
3 F c
4 C e
4 E c
7 H h
9 C f
, dist 4 E c
Shahpura 5 F f
5 F g
7 I h
Shahpuri, i 1 P i
Shahr Sultan 4 D e
Shahrig 4 B d
Shahtori 4.C c
Shahzadpur INg
2 I g
2 K f
Shaikh Budin 4 D c
Main 15 G c
Oth man 15 F c
Sha'khpura 1 L g
fehakai 4 C c
Shakar,r 7 Hh
Shakin 4 C c
Shakot 3 E d
Shalura 3 F b
Shalvari 10 F in
Shami 9 U h
Shamli 2 <4 e
Shampur 7 I k
Shampura 1 N h
■— 6 6 I
Shamsabad 2 H f
2 H f
Shamsha, r 11 G n
Shamshabad 8 H 1
Shan State, div 13 R i
Shand, b 15 G c
Shankargarh 4 D b
Shankarpalli 8 II 1
Shapiyon 3 F c
Sharadanadi, r 12 K 1
Sharaf 4 E e
Sharakpur 3 F d
Sharau 4 C d
Shardi 3 F b
Sharetala st 11 G p
Shari, r 15 E b
Sharik 9 C f
Sharretalai 11 G p
Shauhli 3 G d
Shegaon 8 G i
Shekh Fazil 3 E d
Shekhpura 3 F e
Shekohpur 3 E d
Shendainangalain 11 H o
Sliendu 13 P h
Shendurni 10 F i
Shenkatta 11 G p
Sheok 3 H b
, r 3Gb
Sheopur 2 K g
Sher Shah 4 D d
Sheranni 4 C c
Shergarh 3 B d
5 E f
5 G g
Sherghati Itg
Sherkot 2 II e
Shermadevi 11 G p
Sherpur 1 N g
. 1 N g
2 K g
5 G 1
Sheru 4 D e
Sheruvana 5 D g
Sheruwala 4 D d
Shetruji, r 9 D i
Shevaroy, hs II II o
Shibganj 1 N g
Shigar 8 P b
Shighar, r 1 3 F b
Shigri 3 G c
Shihanagar 9 D h
Map.
Shikari 9 C g 1
Shikarpur 1 N f !
2 G e i
9 C f !
9 D h I
ll F m I
, dist 9 C f 1
Shikarpura 6 I g 1
Shikohabad 2 H f 1
Shillong 13 O g 1
Shimoga 11 F n 1
, did 11 P m
Shimshal, pas 3 P a
Shingnapur 10 F 1
Shirali 10 F m
Shirawati 10 P m 1
Shirgarh 1 K g
Shirinab, r 4 B e I
Shirmur 8 G 1
Shirpur 10 F i
Shirul 10 P 1
Shiurajpur 2 1 f
2 I f
Shivgaon 10 P k
Shivili 8 G k
Shokli 5 F f
Sholapur 10 F 1
, dist 10 F 1
Sholayandan 11 G o
Sholinghar 11 H n
Shomai i, r 12 K k
Shoran 4 B e
Shorapur 8 G 1
- , st 8 G 1
Shorkot 4 E d
Shravanbelgola 11 G n
Shrikhanda INg
Shugra 15 F b
Shui 4 U b
Shuidar, mt 4 C c
Shujabad 4 0 e
Shujandhar 4 E c
Shnjangarh 5 F f
Shukna INF
Shurkwa 13 P h
Shushal 3 H c
Shushang 1 O g
Shushot 3Gb
Shwebandaw 13 Q i
Shwebo 13 Q li
Shwedaung 14 Q k
Shwegou 14 R 1
Shwegu
(Shwegugyi) 13 R g
Shwegugyi
(Shwegu) 13 R g
Shwegyin 14 R 1
, dist 14 R k
Shwehle 14 Q 1
Shwelaung 13 Q g
l4 Q 1
Shweli, r 13 R li
Shwemyo 13 R i
Shwenyaungbin 13 R h
Shwetanng 14 Q 1
Siadahujo Tar 9 U f
Sial 3 B c
Sialkot 3 P c
, did 3 F c
Siaua 5 K g
Siananga 12 K i
Sibganj INg
Sibi 4 B e
Sibsagar 13 Q t
, div 13 Q 1
Sidapurum 11 Hm
Siddhapur 10 F m
Siddhaur 2 1 f
Sidhaut 11 Hin
Sidhpur 9 E h
Sidi, i 1 O h
Sidlaghata 11 G n
Sidli 13 O f
Sidoktea 13 Q i
S : godi 2 I e
Silica 7 I i
Sihonda 2 I g
Sihor 9 D i
Sihora 7 H i
7 I h
Sijawal 9 C f
Sik 2 K e
Sikandarabad 2 G e
Sikandarpur 2 L f
Sikandra 2 K g
Bao 2 H f
Sikar ' 5 P f
Sikaram 4 C b
Sikaw 13 R h
Sikhar 2 K g
Sikkim, st 1 N f
Sikri 2 G f
Sil Er r 12 I 1
Garhi 2 I e
Sila 3 E c
Silai, r 1 M h
Silchar 13 P g
Map.
Silghat 13 P f
Silheti 7 I i
Sili 1 L h
Siliguri 1 N f
Sillaur 8 P i
Silondi 7 I h
Simania 1 K h
Simga 7 1 i
Simhachalham 12 K 1
Simikot 2 I e
Simla 3 G d
Hill, st 3 G d
Simlapal 1 M h
Simnathpar 1 L i
Simra Chauki 2 L f
Simraon, ruins 2 L f
Simultala 1 M g
Sina, r 10 F k
Sinanwan 4 D d
Sinbaungwe 14 Q k
sinbo 13 R g
: Sind, div 9 C f
' , r 3 F b
, r 6 G g
Sindgi 10 G 1
Sindher 8 G k
Sindhnur 8 G m
Sindhora 6 G h
i Sindhulia Garhi 2 L f
Sindhwahi 7 H i
Sindi 7 H i
: Sindkhera 10 P i
Sindri 5 D g
Sindwa 6 F i
Singaji 7 G h
Singampatti 11 G p
: Singampunari 11 H o
i Singaora, r 9 D i
i Singapur 12 K k
; 12 K k
■ Singarayakonda 11 L m
; Singaugarh 7 H h
I Singawallur 11 G n
f Singhaua 5 F e
i Singhbhum, dist ILL
; Siugheswarsthan 1 M g
; Siiighia Hardeo 1M g
i Singhora 7 K i
Singh pur 7 Hh
Singimari 13 P f
l3 N g
Singjer 7 K i
Singla, r 13 P g
: Singoli 0 F g
Singori 7 H h
; Singpur 2 K g
16 H g
Singra 1 N g
Singraur 2 I g
; Singripurbat 13 P f
1 Singu 13 Q i
i 13 R h
i Singwara 6 I h
i Sinhgarh, Jl lo E k
I Sinjawi 4 C d
F Sinkan 13 R g
; Sinmyizwe 14 Q k
: Sinnar 10 F k
; Sinor 9 E i
! Sinsit 13 P i
i Sinthawa 13 R k
; Sinthe, r 14 R k
; Siohara 2 H e
f Sion, ft 15 G d
I Sip, r 0 G g
i Sipa 2 L f
i Sipna 8 G i
f Sipra, r 6 F h
i Sipri 4 E d
i 6 G g
i Sir, cr 9 B h
i —, r 9 C g
f John, i 14 R o
i Mattra 5 G f
3 Sira 11 G n
i Siraguppa 11 G m
5 Sirah or Forli-
i fled, i 15 F c
i Sirajganj INg
i Sirakot 2 I e
f Sirali 7 G h
e Siralkoppa 11 Pm
b Sirampur 12 K k
f Sirana 4 B d
y Sirathu 2 1 g
f SirauliPias 2 H e
f Sirdari 3 P b
3 Sirdarpur 6 F li
i Sirhind 3 G d
y Siripuram 12 K k
f Siris 1 L g
f Sirmur, st 3 G d
1 Sirohi 5 B g
e , st 5 E g
a Sironcha 7 H k
i Sironj 6 G g
y Sirpur 7 K i
Map.
Sirpur 8 G i
Tandur 8 H k
, st 8 H k
Sirruri 8 G k
Sirsa 2 K g
3 F e
, dist 3 P e
Sirsala 8 G k
Sirsawa 2 G e
Sirsi 2 H e
7 H i
lO F m
Sirur 10 P k
Sirvel 11 Hm
Sisa, cr 9 B g
Sisagad 9 C h
Sisagarhi 2 L f
Sisauli 2 G e
Sisi 13 Q f
Sisotar 2 K f
Sissaindi 2 1 f
Sisters, is 14 P o
, The, is 14 R o
Siswali 5 G g
Sita 9 B f
Sitakund, mt 1 O h
Sitamau 6 F g
, st 6 F g
Sitamarhi 1 L I
Sitanagar 7 H g
Sitanagaram 11 L 1
Sitapour, dist 2 1 f
Sitapur 2 I f
, div 2 1 f
Sitarampur 1 M h
Sitlia 0 D h
Sitkw'n 14 Q 1
Sitpur 4 D e
Sitsale 14 Q 1
Sitta 4 L) c
Sittarama 12 I q
Sittaung 13 Q g
l4 R 1
, r 14 R 1
Siu 13 R h
Siva-ganga, mt 11 G n
Sivagiri 11 G p
Sivagunga 11 H p
Sivakasi 11 G p
Sivasamudrani, i 11 G n
Sivi, r 8 F k
Siwalik, hs 2 G d
Si wan a 5 B g
Siyana 2 11 e
Skew 3 G h
Snemo 3Gb
Sobala 2 I d
Sobe 15 B a
Sobraon 3 F d
Sob) a 13 Q i
Soda, pis 3 H b
Sodakhor 5 D f
Sodaori 9 D i
Soentha Kalan 2 K 1
Sogam 3 F b
Sogaru 12 K k
Sohagi 6 I g
Sohagpur 6 I h
7 H h
Sohan, r 4 B c
Soheb 15 G b
Sohna 3 G e
Sohodra, r 5 F 1
Sohwal 2 Kg
Soi 9 C e
Soja Toba 4 D f
Sojat 5 E g
Sojitra 9 B h
Solan 3 G d
Solapuram (Jaiam-
konda) 11 II o
Somastipur 1 L g
Sombrero, chan 14 P q
, pt 14 P q
Somna 2 G e
Somnath 2 L e
Somra 13 Q g
Son 1 L g
, r 1 L g
, r 2 K g
, r 5 E h
, r 6 I g
, r 7 I i
Sona, r 1 L g
Sonai 10 P k
, r 13 P f
Bazar 13 P h
Sonai 10 F m
Sonala 8 G i
Sonamganj 13 O g
Sonamukhi 1 M h
Sonapur 1 N h
l2 L k
l3 P f
Sonar, r 7 H h
Sonargaon 1 O h
Sonda 10 F m
Map.
Sonel 6 F g
Songad 9 D i
Songbe 1 N f
Songir 10 F i
Sonhat 1 K h
Sonkach 6 O h
Sonkera 7 K i
Sonle 14 Q k
Sonnasikata 1 N f
Sonpat 3 G e
Sonpur 1 L g
7 K i
, st 7 K i
Sonpura 12 L k
Sonzeng 14 S n
Sopara 10 B k
Sopur 3 F b
Soiab 11 F in
Sorad 2 1 e
Soraon 2 I g
Sorath, st 9 D i
Sorgoda 8 E c
Soro 1 M i
Soron 2 H f
Sot, r 2 H e
Sound, i 14 P n
South Andaman,
i 14 P o
Arcot, div 11 H o
—- Kana a,
div 11 F n
Koel, r 1 L h
Sentinel, i 14 P o
Twin, i 14 R o
Southern, div 8 G m
, div 10 P 1
, div 13 Q i
, prov 12 I q
Moscos 14 R n
Spezandai 4 B d
Spiti, r 3 H c
Sri Madhopur 5 G g
Srigonda 10 F k
Srigovindpur 3 F d
Sriharikota, i 11 L n
Srikanta, pk 2 H d
Srikundapuram 11 F n
Srinagar 1 O li
2 II d
2 H g
5 F f
7 H h
(Kash-
mir) 3 F b
Sringeri 11 F n
Sriperambudur 11 Hm
Sripur 1 O g
Srirangam 11 H o
Srirangavara-
pukot 12 K k
Srishalum 11 H 1
Srivaikuntham 11 G p
Srivilliputtur 11 G p
Snwardhan 10 B k
Staghai, p 4 C c
Stedman,./t 13 R i
Stewart, sd 14 P n
Suadi 1 L li
Suar 2 H e
Suarmar 7 K i
Subalgarh, ft 2 H e
Subankhali INg
Subansiri, r 13 Q f
Subarnarekha, r 1 L h
Subathu 3 G d
Subeha 21 f
Sudamanpur 2 I g
Sudaria 2 K e
Sudasna 9 B g
Sudharam (Noak-
hati) 1 O h
Suget Jangal 3 G a
Sugur 8 G 1
Suigam 9 D g
Suiangarh (Bik-
aner), st 5 B e
Sujanpur 3 P c
Tira 3 G d
Sujawal 6 G h
9 C g
Suket 3 G d
, st 3 G d
Sukh, r 5 P g
Sukhachak 3 P c
Sukinda 12 L i
Snkkur 9 C f
Sukpuilal 13 P h
Sukravarpet or
Channapata 11 G n
Sukri, r 5 B g
Sukta, r 7 G i
Suktel, r 7 K i
Sulaiman Khel, st 4 C c
, range 4O d
Sulekere Tank 11 P m
Sulia 12 L i
Sulkeah Ghat 15 C b
17
INDEX.


THE
SUL
Map.
Sullivan’s, i 14 S o
Sultanganj 1 M g
Sultanpur 1 N g
1 N b
2 G d
2 K f
3 E c
3 F d
3 F d
3 G d
3 G e
lO F i
, dist 2 K f
Snltisgarli 2 K g
Snlur 11 G o
Sumbbu Mbadeo
Pakbadee 15 B e
Sumdo 3 II b
Sumerpur 2 1 g
Sumeysar, ft 1 L f
Sunijmii 3 G c
Sumpbel 13 P g
Sumrabu 9 I) 1
Sun Kosi, r 2 M f
Sunam 3 F d
Suridxrapandiam 11 G p
Sundarban, tract 1 N i
Sundarganj I N g
Sundarsi 6 G b
Sundila 2 1 f
Sunkisal 8 H 1
Sunkoin 7 1k
Sunth 9 R b
Suniim 13 Q g
Supa 10F k
lO F in
Supul 1 M f
Supnr 1 M h
Sur Singh 3 F d
Surab 4 B e
Snrada 12 L k
Surajgarb 5 F e
Surajgarha 1 M g
Surajpur 6 H g
Suranga 1 M li
Surat 10 E i
, dist JOE i
,st 10 E i
Suraigarb 5 E e
Surawala 3 F e
Surayapct 8 II 1
Suri 1 M b
Suria, r 10 E k
Suva 15 F b
Surkhab, r 4 B d
Surma, r 1 O g
Surpbrar 3 F b
Sursati, r 3 G e
Sum 8 P b
, r 3Gb
Sunil 1 M h
Survna, r 13 O g
Susner 6 G h
Suswa, r 2 H d
Sutalia 6 G g
Sutgati 10 F 1
Suti 1 M g
, r 13 Q f
Sutia 13 Q f
Sutlej, r 3 G d
, r 4 D e
Sutna 6 I g
, r 6 I g
Suvainamukbi, r 11 H n
Swa, r 14 R k
Swat, r 3 R b
Swinton’s, is 14 H o
Syambazar 1 M b
Sylbct 13 <i g
, div 13 O g
Syntbia 1 M h
Syriam 14 R 1
Tabayin 13 Q b
Tabet 13 R i
Table, is 14 P n
Tadeo 13 Q f
Tadiandamol, pk 11 F n
Tadpatri 11 Gm
Tadri 10 F m
lO F m
Tadur 8 H 1
Taga, r 13 Q f
Tagaungymc 13 R h
Tagundaing, t 14 R 1
Taikgyi 14 It 1
Taingapatam 11 G p
Taingda 14 Q k
Taingto 13 P h
Taiping, r 13 R g
Taj Mahal 2 H I
Tajnapur 8 F i
Taj pur 1 L g
Takht-i-Sula man 4 C d
Takbtpur 7 I b
Taki 1 N li
Takkung 3 II c
1., up.
Takot 3 E b
Takwara 4 D c
Tal 4 E b
—6 F h
Tala 2 I e
Cauvery 11 F n
Talaba, r 1 M g
Talagang 4 E c
Talaimannar 12 H p
Talaja 9 E i
Talamba 4 E d
Talap 13 Q f
Talbahat 2 H g
Talcber 12 L i
Taldanda 12 M i
Tolegaon 8 II i
Dabbara WE k
Dliam-
dbera 10 F k
Talen 6 O h
Tali (1 I h
Taligram 2 II f
Talikot 10G 1
Taliparamba 11 F n
Taljhari 1 M g
Tal'kad 11 G u
Talkhair 8 G k
Talkhan Kot 4 C d
Tallakad 11 F o
Tallapulla 11 Hm
Tallarevu 12 K 1
Talnar 7 1k
Taloda 10 F i
Talodhi 7 H i
Talper, r 7 1k
Tamalpur 13 O f
Tamar 1 L h
Tamarasseri 11 P o
Tainaw 13 Q g
Taniba 10 G 1
Kosi, r 2 M f
Tambalagam 12 1 p
Tambaur 2 I 1
Tamboli 1 N g
Tambraparai 11 G p
Tamlingtar 2 M t
Tamluk 1 M h
TammanaNuwera,
ruins 12 H q
Tamilian kaduwa 12 I q
Tammu 13 Q g
Tarapuilal 13 P b
Tamra, r 2 M 1
Tamria 5 F f
Tamuku 12 I 1
Tanakallu 11 H n
Tanbing 14 Q 1
Tanda 2 II e
2 K 1
Tandi 8 G c
Tando Alabyar 9 C g
Bago 9 t! g
Lukman 9 C 1
MastiKban9C 1
Muhammad
Khan 9 C g
Tandur 8 G 1
8 H k
, r 8 G 1
Tanga I L Ii
Tangalla 12 1 q
Tangan, r 1 N g
Tangasseri 11 G p
Tangbar 13 O g
Tangi 4 D b
12 L k
Tangpba 13 Q b
Tangutur 11 Lm
Tania 1 L b
Tanjore 11 H o
, div 11 H o
Tankara 0 D h
Tankari 10 E i
Tankiapadi 1 L i
Tankse 3 H b
Tan-lwe, r 14 Q k
Tantin 13 P b
Tanur 11 F o
Taoda 4 C d
Taplang Zong 2 M f
Tappal 2 G e
Tapti, r 7 G i
, r 9 E i
, r 10 F i
Tapum 14 Q k
14 Q k
Tar Ahmad Rind 9 I) g
Taragarb 3 G e
Tarai, dist 2 II e
, tract 2 K f
Taraidy 14 R k
Tarakesbwar 1 N b
Tara lam 11 G p
Tarana 6Gb
Tarapur 9 E h
lO R k
Tara put 12 K k
Map.
Tarar 3 E d
Taratra 5 1) g
Tarbela 3 B b
Tarikere 11 F n
Tarkeshwar 10 E i
Tarkua 1 M i
Tarn Saran 3 F d
Tarnot 7 K i
Taroch 3 G d
Tarpa 1 t li
Tartuina 7 K b
Tasgxou 10 F 1
Tasliigong 13 O f
Tashiyangsi 13 O f
Tatapani 1 K h
Tatigund ila 8 H 1
Tatta 9 B g
Tattamangalam 11 G <>
Taukkyan 14 R 1
Taukok 13 Q 1
Taungbaing, st 13 U b
Taungbogyi 14 Q 1
Taungdaw 13 Q b
Taunguwingyi 13 Q i
Taunggup 14 Q k
Taungngu 14 It k
, dist 14 R k
Taungthamyo 13 Q i
Taungtbonlun
(KalatTung) 13 Q g
Taungzaung 13 Q k
Taunsa 4 14 d
Tavi, r 3 F c
Tavoy 14 S m
, dist 14 8 in
, i 14 S n
, yt 14 S n
,r 14 S m
Taw a 14 R 1
, r IHb
Tayar 3Gb
Teakhali 1 O i
Teendaria 1 N f
Tegyigon 11 Q k
Tehri 2 II d
6 II g
, r 2 11
, st C II g
Teingyo 1» Q 1
TVjol 13 P g
Tek Naf 1 P i
, c 1 P i
Tekalkota 11 G ni
Tekmal 8 II 1
Tel, r 12 K i
Teldemiya 12 I q
Telhara 8 G i
Telingiri, r 12 K k
Tellaram 12 I 1
Tellicherri 11 F o
Telulla 12 I q
Tembbunii 10 F -k
Templedera 4 G e
Terari 7 I i
Temuria (Satang) 2 B c
Ten I'egrees, chan 14 P p
Tenasserim 14 S n
, div 14 Rm
, t 14 R n
, r 14 S n
Tendukheia 7 II b
Tenga, r 13 R f
Tengra 1 L g
Tenkaraikottai 11 H n
Tenkardi 11 O p
Tenkasi n O p
Tennali 11 G o
Tennymavedi 12 I p
Tentelgada 12 L i
Temva 1 L ll
Tenyu 14 R in
Teraal 10 F 1
Terekhol 10 K m
Teri 4 D c
T- i, r 4 U c
Terressa, i 14 P p
Terukkovil 12 I q
Terwara 9 D g
Teryai 12 I p
Tes 15 R b
Tesa, r 13 Q f
Tetnlia, r 1 O b
Teveram 11 G p
Tezpur 13 P f
Thabaung 14 Q 1
Tbabeitk.i in 13 Q h
Tbabyedaung 13 11 j
Tba-de 14 Q k
, r 14 Q k
Thagaya 14 R k
Tba’iicbi 13 Q i
Tbairka 6 H g
Tbairna, r 8 G k
Thakani 2 h f
Tbaklia 2 M f
Tbakroorwady 15 F e
Tbakurani 1 L b
Mai’.
Thakurdwara 2 II e '
Thakurgaon INI'
Thakurmunda IMS'
Thnkurtolu 7 1 i '
Thai 4 C d '.
4 0 0'
lO E k
Ghat 10 E k ’
Tlmldat 3 H b '
Thalia 2 H f '
Tbal'awada 11 G p r
Tbaln* r 10 F i '
Tbamakan 13 R i
Thames, j t 14 P k •
Thami 2 M f
Than 9 D b r
A’rda 13 Q g
(Clie.i) 13 Q 1 '
1 liana 4 E b '
5 E g '
6 G g '
lO B k '
, dist 10 E k '
Bbawan 2 G c -
Thanbaya 13 U b
I hanbyo 13 P i '
Thandiani 3 E b
Thandiwali 3 E d
Thanesar ' 3 G c
1 hang 3Gb'
Thanga 13 Q h
Tbangaon 6Kb'
—1• B k '
Tbangk rang Tong la P b
Thankot 2 L 1
Thar and Parkar,
d st 9 C g '
, or Great
Indian Desert 5Ti f
Tiiara 9 I) b
Tbarad 9 I) g ’
Tbarasiri 5 B f
Tharawadi 14 Q 1
, dist 14 Q k
Tharia-gbat 13 O g 1
Tbaru Panju 9 C f '
Shah 9 C f '
Thatan 1 M i 1
Tbatbayangarpct 11 II <>
That! 3 K d '
4 D c '
4 E c
Thaltaparai 11 H p
TbaUm 14 R 1
Tnaungdut 13 Q g '
, di-t 13 Q g '
Tbaungyin, r 14 It I
Tbawah 14 R 1 1
Tbayekonbanng 14 P i
Thayelhamcin 14 R 1
Tbayetkon 14 Q 1
Tbayetmyo 14 Q k
, dist 14 Q k
Tbayetpiu 13 R i
Thayetta 13 R g '
Thayetlan 14 R k
Thazi 13 Q k 1
Theankbway 14 H m
Tbebyu 14 Q 1
Tbeeky Tung 13 P i 1
Tbegan 14 P i
Thegon 14 Q k
Thellar 11 II n
Tbemyelat, st 13 R i
Thc< g 3 G d
Thetta 13 P h
Tbiliaw 13 R h
, st 13 B b
Thinkida 13 Q b
Tbirit 3Gb
Tliitlon 13 R b
Tbitpalu, nit 14 Q k
Tbltyaung 14 Q 1
Tholial 13 P g
Thoinar 7 I k
Tbola 8 G k
Tbondbe 3 G c
Thongwa, dist 14 Q 1
Tbonze 13 K b
l4 Q 1
Tborlah 1 O b
Tbovera rcurchi 11 H o
Tbugaon 8 G i
Tbnillier, mt 14 P q
Thai 9 C e
Thnni Kadi 11 H p
Thurla 12 L k
Thurowa 14 Q k
Ti Kbuaung 14 S m
Tiagar 11 H o
Tibbi 4 D d
Tibi 5 F e
Tihrikot 2 K e
Tigaria 12 L i
Tiger, pt 1 N i
, \<t 1 1 P k
Tijara 6 G fl
Map.
Tikari 1 L j
Tikaipara 12 L i
Tikhol 4 C e
Tikkira, r 7 L i
Tikota 10 F I
Tikri 2 G e
7 K k
Tila, r 2 1 e
Tilaiqa 9 B g
Tilati I 2 I e
Tilbar 2 H f
Tilin 13 Q i
Tiljuga, r 1 M g
, r 2 M f
Tillangcbong, i 14 P p
Tillwun 10 F i
Tilwara 5 E g
Timami 7 G h
Timeii 11 H n
Tinda * 4 I) d
Tindi 3 G c
Tindwari 2 I g
Tinnevelli 11 6 p
,d'V 11 G p
Tinpahar 1 M g
Tipperab, dist 1 O b
Tiptur 11 G n
Tirap, r 13 Q f
Tiraiballi 11 F n
Tirbut (Muzaflar-
pu) 1 L f
Tirido 3 H c
Tirkanambi 11 G «
Tirkasi, nil 4 B e
lirla 6 F b
Tinuium 11 H o
TirsuM Gandak, r 2 L f
Tirtala 8 I 1
Tiruany 11 H n
Tirucbendur 11 H p
Tirucbengod 11 G o
Tirukoirlur 11 H o
Tiruiuanai, r 11 G o
Tirnmangalam 11 G p
Tirumurtikovil 11 G o
Tirunageswaram 11 H o
Tirupati 11 H n
Tirupatur 11 H n
ll H o
Tirupur 11 G o
Tiruvadi 11 II o
(Setti-
pattadai) 11 H o
Tiruvalnr 11 H n
Tiruvankod 11 G p
Tiruvannamallai 11 H n
Tiruvarur 11 H o
Tiruvatiynr 11 L n
Tiruvattur II 11 ii
Tirwa 2 II f
Tista, r 1 N f
Titab r 13 Q f
Titaije 14 P o
Til ail 3 F b
Titar Kbel 4 D c
Titwal 3 E b
Toba 4 C e
, st 4 B d
Tochi, r 4 C c
Toda 5 F f
Bliim 6 G f
Todgarh 5 K g
Togawas 5 F e
Tobana 3 F e
Tokaiak 4 B d
Tokosbat 13 Q b
Tolti 3Gb
Tomak 12 L i
Tonaing 14 R 1
TonbauK 14 Q k
Ton bo 14 Q k
Tondamannar 12 1 p
Tondi 11 II p
Tongbong 13 Q g
Tongsu 13 O f
Tonayi 14 R 1
Tonk 5 F f
, div 5 F f
Tonlan 13 R i
Tons, r 6 I g
Tonwa 13 P h
Topcbanchi 1 M b
Topi 3 E b
Toposi 1 M h
Toppagam 12 L k
Topn 12 ll i)
Toragul 10 F m
Tori 1 L b
Torna 10 B k
Torsa, r 1 N f
Torur 7 K i
Tosh am 3 F e
Totapella, mt 12 I q
Toz 9 C e
Tranquebar 11 II o
Travaucore, 11 G i>
Tree, i li P k
13
INDEX.


TRI
ZUZ
Map.
Tribeni Ghat 2 L f
Trichinopoli 11 H o
, die 11 H o
Trichur 11 G o
Triguja, r 2 M 1
Trimbak 10 E k
Trimulgl.erry 8 II 1
Trineolnahe 12 I p
Trinkat, i 14 P p
Tripasur 11 H n
Tripunathora 11 G p
Trivandrum 11 G p
,st 11 G p
Troin bay 10 E k
, i 15 tl i
Tsamon, r 13 R i
T aukeu 14 R k
TVo Monanglair
(Pangong), 1 3 II c
Monri, I (Cha-
momeril, I) 3 II c
Tsokr Chumo, I 3 G c
Tui Chang, r 13 P h
Tnleh, cr 15 G e
Tulga 3 G d
Tuljapur 8 G 1
Tullavashil 11 II o
Tulluekwana 9 E i
TunieT) 6 G g
Tumilair, r 12 Q i
Tuminkatty 10 F m
Tumkur 11.6 n
, dist 11 G n
Tuinlong 1 N f
Tumriband 12 K k
Tuna 9 D h
Tundi 1 M li
Tundla 2 H 1
Tanga 11 F n
Tungabhadra, r 8G m
, t 11 G m
Tunnah 3 G c
Tup 2 K e
Tura 13 O g
Turaiyur 11 II o
Turavanur 11 G m
Turkaulia 1 M f
Turong 13 R f
Turrus 10 F m
Turtipar 2 K 1
Turn 12 K 1
TuruvcVere 11 G n
Tutasri 10 B i
Tuticorin 11 II p
Twgnte 14 Q 1
Twenty-four Par-
ganas, dist 1 N li
T wet tin 13 P h
Übauro 9 C e
Uch 4 1) d
Uchh 4 D e
Uch to, r 9 B g
Udagherri 12 L k
Udaipur IKb
1 K h
1 O h
, st 1 K h
5 E g
—, st 5 E g
Udaiyarpalaiyani 11 H o
Udalguri ' 13 P f
Udalkam 1 L h
Udaipur, st 1 P h
Udamalpet 11 G o
Udamattala 12 I q
Udayagiri 11 Hm
Uddhanpur 1 N h
Udepur 5 F f
Uderpidrug 11 G m
Udgir 8 G k
Udipi 11 F n
Ughi 3 E b
Ugu 2 I f
Uhas, r 10 B k
Ujh, r 3 P c
Ujhani 2 H 1
Ujhari 2 II e
Ujjain 6 P h
Ukadgaon 10 F k
Ukhias 1 P i
Ukimath 2 H d
Ukingyi 13 Q h
Ukli 10 F 1
Ukrul 13 Q g
UI, r 2 1 e
Ula Kandi I O g
Ulabar 12 M i
Ulipur 1 N g
Ullankarai 11 H n
Ulubaria 1 Nh
Uma Oya 12 I q
Umargarh 2 H f
Umaria 7 I h
Umarkhe 8 G k
Umarkot 9 C g
Map.
Umattu 11 G 11
Umbargaon 10 E i
Umdi 10 F 1
Umeta 9 E ]i
Urara 6 H g
Urarala 9 D i
Umrauganj 6 G h
Umrer 7 H i
Umreth 9 B li
Umri 6 G g
Una 3 G d
9 D i
Unao 21 f
, (list 2 1 f
Unarau, r 2 I e
Unbla, r 3 G d
Unchelira Gig
Unchhali 10 F m
Unchod 6 G h
Und, r 9 I) li
Undal 1 M li
Undra 5 11 f
Unel 6 F h
Unja 9 B h
Untala 5 E g
Untari 1 K g
Upair 8 G 1
Upargliat, plat 1 L h
Upleta 9 D i
Uppal 8 H k
tipper Chindwi",
did 13 Q g
Sind Fron-
tier, dist 9 C e
Uppinangadi 11 P n
Uprora 7 K li
Upur 11 II p
Urai 2 H g
Uran 10 E k
, i (Karanja) 10 E k
Uravakonda 11 G in
Urdavid 11 Hin
Urgun 4 C c
Urie 3 F b
Urikur 11 F n
Urittaung 14 P i
Uriya 2 H 1
Urinal, r 2 H g
Urmar Tanda 3 P d
Urtanial 7 I k
Urn, r 13 Q g
Usia 2 K g
Uska 2 K f
Bazar 2 K f
Usman 9 C f
UsyaMut 10 B 1
Utai, r 7 K i
Utakamand 11 G o
Utakuli 11 G o
Utangban, r 2 G f
—,r 5 G f
Utgir 5 G 1
Utmanzai 4 U b
Utraula 2 K f
Uttamapalaij am 11 G p
Uttur * 10 E k
Uva, prov 12 I q
Vadagenhalli 11 G n
Vadaku Valiyer 11 G p
Vadarneum II H o
Vaddadi 12 K 1
Vaddigudem 12 I 1
Vadi 8 G 1
Vaghar, r 10 F i
Vaghton 10 B 1
Vaigai, r 11 G o
Vaikom 11 G p
Vaipar 11 H p
, r 11 G j)
Vairowal 3 F d
Vaitarani, r 10 E k
Vaitur 5 D g
Vakro 9 D g
Valabhipur 9 E i
Valangiman 11 H o
Valavanur 11 H o
Valbarga 8 F m
Valdavur 11 H o
Vallam
Vadakusetti 11 H o
Valliapatti 11 H o
Vallur 11 L 1
Vamsadliara, r 12 K k
Vaniyambadi 11 H n
Varanasy 12 K k
Varanbar Cho-
thina 9 D g
Varvala 9 C h
Vasi 8 P k
Vastara 11 P n
Vasudevanallur 11 G p
Vatho, Mouth of
Indus, r 9 B h
Vutrak, r 9 E h
Map.
Vattilagnndu 11 G o
Vaulimukam 11 H p
Vavuniya
Vilankulam 12 I p
Vayalpad 11 H n
Vedavati, r 11 G in
Veddacumbera 12 I q
Veirwaro 9 C g
Velachcheny 12 I q
Velapnr 10 F 1
Vellakovil 11 G o
Vellar, r 11 H «•
Vellaturu 11 L 1
Vellore 11 H n
Velluvedditurai 12 I p
Vembar 11 H p
Vempalli 11 Hm
Velumkonda 8 II 1
Vendiloos, b 12 I q
Vengurla 10 E m
—— , rk 10 E in
Venkataßri 11 H n
Venkatred-
dipolliam 11 H 1
Ventipur 3 F c
Verakhandi 9 E li
Veiallimalli 11 H o
Ver mi 5 B f
Veran 41) b
Verawal 9 D i
Vemag 3 F c
Verukal 12 I p
Viara 9 B i
Victoria, pt 14 8 o
(Bunkot),/< 10 E 1
Victory (Jaigarli),
ft 10 E 1
Vihoa 4 D d
, r 4 D d
Vijapur 7 I k
Vilatikulam 11 H p
Villupuram
(Belpur) 11 H o
Vinehur 10 F i
Vindhya, hs 6 F h
Vinear 9 C g
Vinu, r 9 D i
Vinukonda 11 H 1
Viraghottam 12 K k
Virajendrapet 11 F n
Viramgam 9 E h
Viravanallur 11 G p
Viravasaram 12 I 1
Virawah 9 D g
Virdel 10 F i
Virpur 9 D i
Viruddhachalam 11 H o
Virudupatti 11 G p
Vishaigarh 10 E I
Vishnu Ganga, r 2 H d
Visiapatti 11 G p
Vissanapet 12 I 1
Vita 10 P 1
Vitakri 4 C e
Vitalgarh 9 E h
Vizadrug 10 E 1
Vizagapatain 12 K 1
, dio 12 K k ■
Vizayaroye 12 I 1
Vizianagram 12 K k
Vizianarayanam 11 G p
Vonipenta 11 Hm
Vontimitta 11 Hm
Votaul 12 K k
Vudncharla 11 H 1
Vullupullum 11 H o
Vunsengy 12 K 1
Vypin, i 11 G o
Vyteri 11 G o
Wada 10 E k
Wadada 12 K k
Wadala 9 D h
Wadali 9 B h ;
Wadammari 8 H 1
Wadgaon 8 G i
lO F 1
Wadhwan 9 D h •
Wadnagar 9 B h
Wady Banna 15 F b
Wagaru 14 8 1
Wagera 10 E i ■
Waghari, r 8 H i
Wagra 10 B i
Wahkad 10 F i
Wai 10 E 1
Wainare 7 I i
Wainganga. r 7 H h
Wair ' 5 G f
Wairagarh 7 1 i
Wakal, r 5 B g
Wakema 14 Q 1
Wakerawa 12 I q
Wall 9 D i ’
Walajabad 11 H n 1
Walajapct ll H n ’
Map.
Walidpur 2 K f
Walkeshwar 15 D h
Wallopadl 11 H o
Walri 2 K e
Wulungsamgola 2 M f
Wana, r 7 H i
, st 4 C c
Wanatanwila 12 H p
Wanbhachrati 4 D c
Wand Sama 9 C g
Sobd.ir Bhiant) B g
Wandiwash 11 H n
Wankaner 9 D h
Wanola 8 H k
Wanparti 8 H 1
Wanthali 9 D i
Wanwald 4 l> d
Wanod 9 U h
Wao 9 D g
Wara 10 B k
Warahi 9 D h
Warangal 8 H 1
Warangaon 10 P i
Warchi 3Gb
Warda, r 10 F m
Wardabnap tu 8 II 1
Wardha 7 H i
, dist 7 H i
, v 8 H i
Ward wan 3 F c
, r 3 F c
Wari 10 B in
, cr 9 B h
Wariyapola 12 I q
Warki , 8 H i
Warla 10 F i
Warna, r 10 F 1
Warora 7 H i
Wartu, r 9 C i
Warud 8 H i
Warval Bajori 8 G k
Wasirh'i, r 10 E 1
Waso 9 B h
Wasrai , 9 E i
Wattada 12 K 1
Wawanya 9 D h
Wazirabad 3 F c
Wazirganj 1 L g
Wazirgarh 10 E k
Waziri, st 4 C c
Wegyi 14 R 1
Weligama 12 I r
, b 12 I r
Wellawaya 12 I q
Wellewe Oya 12 I q
Wellington 11 G o
Weltur 7 II i
West, b 14 P q
—— Naw, r 9 C f
Western, die 8 G k
—, pros 12 H q
— Ghats,
rats 10 E k
Malwa,
dio 6 F h
Raj put-
ana, div 5 D f
—Torres, is 14 R o
Wetkhyaung 14 Q 1
Wetmasot 13 Q i
Wetwin 13 R h
Weyangoda 12 I q
Whale, b 14 8 o
White, pt 14 Rm
Wihar 7 H i
Wimbadaw 14 R 1
Winle 14 R 1
Winraw, r 14 R 1
Wirur 8 H k
Wojerabad 8 H 1
Wokha 13 Q f
Woraalur 11 H o
Won bo 14 8 m
Wondragedda 12 K k
Wong, r 1 N f
Worlee 15 B 1
,ft 15 E d
,ft 15 P i
Wuddala 15 G e
Wular, I 3 P b
Wun 8 H i
lO B i
, dist 8 H i
Wundwin 13 Q i
Wunhla 13 P h
Wunnur 10 F m
Wuntu 13 P h
Wyragpet 10 F k
Yadiki 11 G in
Yadiyur 11 G n
Yahlaing 13 P h
Yairamalur 11 G o
Yakalle 12 I p
Yala 12 I q
Yallamalais 11 Hm
M"p.
Yamethin la R i
, dist 13 Q i
Vamkanmard 10 F 1
Yamon 13 R i
Yamontaung 13 Q li
Yan Aar 12 1 p
Yanaon 12 K 1
Yanaung 13 Q i
Yaudabu is Q i
Yangapopi 13 Q g
Yangfai 13 Q f
Yapaku, mins 12 I q
Yargira 8 G 1
Yarkand, or Ras-
kam Daria, r 3 G a
Yasin 3 E a
Yapganto'a 12 1 q
Yatsauk 13 R i
, st 13 R i
Yatsimi 13 Q g
Yaukthwa, r 14 R k
Yaukthw.iwa 14 R k
Yaungpalo 13 R h
Yaw, r 13 Q i
Yawal 10 F i
Yawduin 13 Q i
Yazadyo 13 P li
Yazagyo 13 Q li
Ye I t R in
—, r 14 Rin
Yeapur 8 I 1
Yebawmi 13 Q g
Yedashe 14 R k
Yedatore 11 G n
Yegachi, r 11 F n
Yegyanbin 14 P i
Yegyi Pandaw 14 Q 1
Yekin 14 Q K
Yelabanka 11 G n
Yelandur 11 G n
Yelgandal 8 H k
, st 8 H k
Yellanda 8 1 1
Yellapur 10 F in
Yellareddipeta 8 II k
Yelmamehili 12 K 1
Yemen 15 G b
, st 15 E b
Yemiganur 11 G in
Yen, r 13 Q i
Yenama 14 Q k
Yenangyaung 13 Q i
Yenatha 13 R h
Yenaung 14 R I
Yenur 11 F n
Yeoguen 14 P i
Yeola 10 F i
Ycoma Tong 13 P i
Yeongrea 13 P i
Yeotmal 8 H i
Yeotroop 14 P i
Yerkad 11 H o
Yerla, r 10 F 1
Yernagudem 12 I 1
Yerra Kalva, r 12 1 1
Yesagyo 13 1 i
Yetbah 13 Q g
Yethu 14 Q 1
Yen 13 y li
Yewun 13 R i
Yezon 13 Q i
Yinbeing 14 R 1
Yindaw 13 Q i
Yoru 4 D d
Yun, dist 13 Q h
Ynnzalin, r 14 R 1
Ywadaw 13 Q h
Ywathit 13 y k
Ywe, r 14 Q 1
Zadi 14 R in
Zafarwal 3 F c
Zahaw r 13 P h
Zaidpur 2 1 f
Zakar 3 E b
Zalun 14 Q 1
Zamanea 2 K g
Zami, r 14 S in
Zangla 3 G c
Zarmelan 4 C d
Zarn 3 G c
Zaskar, r 'ist 3 G c
, r 3 G c
Zathabyin 14 R 1
Zayul Chu, r 13 R f
Zhob, r 4 C d
, st 4 C d
Ziarat 4 B e
Zicat, mt 14 R 1
Zigat 13 Q i
Zigon 14 Q k
14 Q 1
Zion Causeway 15 G i
Zira 3 F d
Zulidok 3Gb
Zuzzar 8 O c
19
INDEX.


PRINTED BY W. t A. K. JOHNSTON, EDINBURGH AND LONDON.






