

s ■ a! ’ ~
X '\ \ /. A
y
JaT M ; ■'\l_ J h'p/h ~M '*^' J '"'
r Q .
p = =*=Zr* p'J
As to the dimensions of the entire vessel, and
the proportions of its several parts,—the float
might range from 200 to 500 feet in length, by
90 in height and 60 in breadth; the car from
60 to 100 feet in length by 25 or 30 in breadth;
the awning or roof of the car about 60 feet, ex-
clusive of the studding-sails, an addition on
each side of about 10 or 16 feet—in all from
80 to 90 feet. These are matters, however,
which like similar details in ship building in
particular, in our times, reserve to themselves,
and with advantage, an ample margin.
The following statistics are given as a mere
approximation to fact; but with the hope that
they will be found a sufficiently near approxi-
mation for all general purposes:—
By Brande, a balloon of 90 feet diameter will
raise and sustain a weight of five tons, or
10,495 lbs., exclusive of its own covering and
netting. “Estimate of the total weight of the
car of the present invention, its machinery,
&c., &c., according to the subjoined plans—
31 tons 7992
This leaves an excess of sustaining power, 11 tons.’
The above statistics were prepared by a pro-
fessional engineer, in whom I had every con-
fidence.
1
o>
be cow
the dimens.
The vessel
the “ air”
described, I b<
prehension, t(
grams, while
ration of a
highly impo
the effectual!
so greatly in
would apnea
means, viz-
1st. For
the atmospl
rage rate of
rent height
of aerial n
2nd. Fo
and exped
that we p
stance to ;
the diffei
the adop
ous route
from the
be redue
and the
three mt
the gain
still mo
there is
portanc
which t
cessibl
Arctic
Borr
pp
science.
PLATE I.
Side View op Atmotic Ship
in.
of wina.
of (steam) ,
lers, —worked
chions, forv '
i.i., a-
flr
pn.
1 sling v
1.1 1.1.1.1., Si.
1 of each, the n,_
1 traversing line
n.n., triinann;
1 rudder and
1 spiked for .
1 q.q., chimney
: I
i
||
&c. e.e., raid
with iron, spiked,
float—below *-
rod,
itself
a.a., Car
boiler,
bulwarks.
PLATE IV.
At Anchor. *
o.c.c.o., four strong Intend ,
car awning, e.e., keel, f.f., fstarboard! ding. •
“ soundings 1 ’ ; not i8P
lore particularism. r~
be oonsidered'llr
nga of the f
- to those r
losphere wifk
t the tail, (f gr
"• Wit,
W-'-'
/ A- '^ Xxxs \^
' ]
f T"T » D / M
\ i E L L E
V - W
r7 B || B \jr
'I'- T . • —^ ! \
-i A r E D i A x
, ' , I
9.
EMPIRE]
Aerial navigation has long since appeared to
me beyond doubt practicable; and, if so, as
calculated to confer many highly important
benefits on man—of some few of which it will
be necessary for me to speak by and by.
Meanwhile, in order to clear the subject of all
ambiguity, it may be well to look to the other
side of the account, and inquire what risks,
if any,—whether personal, social, or political, it
might, if adopted, be likely to inflict on so-
ciety, and the world at large. To come at once
to the main point—the political question—a
question, however, (which I must confess), I
never yet heard raised. Could or would
this method of travelling tend to place
the different races of man too much on a
par with each other as to their aggressive
powers ? and, if so, would it not enable the
barbarous nations of the earth, by their vast
aggregate numerical superiority, to overwhelm
the civilised portions of the globe? Thus,
for instance, would not the Chinese, the
Cochin-Chinese, the Burmese, the worshippers
of Brahma generally, the Mahomedan races of
Hindoostan, with those under the crown of
Persia, the Turks, the Egyptians, the Russians,
the Tartar tribes, not to mention those of
Africa and America, backed with such means
of aggression, be too much for the civilised
nations, viz—the population of England,
with that of her colonies, of the United
States, of France, of Germany, of Bel-
gium, of Holland, of Spain, of Italy, of Greece.
There may be some plausibility, at first sight,
in these objections ; and it might by some be
imagined that there could be but one conclusion,
namely, that a ban ought, if practicable to be
placed on any attempt at atmotic navi-
gation ; and, in addition, there are other poli-
tical arguments against its introduction, per-
haps still more plausible. Thus, might not
our highly-polished neighbours themselves,
with their large dense population, be enabled,
by the above means, to become both trouble-
some and formidable to their numerically
less powerful neighbours ? Apparently they
might, but would they be enabled actually to
become so ? Of this, and the whole question
can at present be only one of surmise, I am
extremely sceptical.
Trajan constructed a bridge across the
Danube, to enable him to discover and extin-
guish, in their earliest stage, any warlike
movements, that might, from time to time
have been even barely initiated among his
barbarous and ferocious neighbours on the left
bank of the river.
Hadrian destroyed this bridge of his imme-
diate predecessor—satisfied if he could only
arrest for a time the matured operations of
those barbarians.
Which was the better policy ? I believe at
present there is little doubt. Indeed the very
principle of Hadrian’s policy seems to us
now highly objectionable. Carried out to its
full extent it would equally have interdicted
the canes of the savage, with the hide-covered
wicker boat, which, at one time, dashed so
bravely across the German ocean, and all this
to prevent that large influx of population,
principally from the great northern hives,
which has since proved so beneficial to us,
and the prevention of which, if practicable by
such means, would have robbed the Briton of
that invaluable self-reliance, which, under Divine
Providence, has enabled him triumphantly to
surmount so many dangers and difficulties.
In accordance with the same policy, the bark
of the humble trqder might have been de-
nounced, and that earliest harbinger of com-
merce, that agent which alone could expel
darkness and bring light to our ancestors [if only
by collision), might have been viewed as a bane
instead of a boon, and scouted accordingly. The
same policy in later times would have inter-
dicted, for once and for aye the introduction of
printing, —still more that of a “ Free Press,”
(the vital and inseparable accompaniment of a
“ Free Constitution’’), of “ Machinery” (lest
the masses should lack employment), in fact
everything that savoured of change —freedom
of thought and action, —of steam carriages,
steam navigation,—and above all things the
diffusion of education among the masses, par-
ticularly that of a truthful and enlightened
description !
The above defensive suppositions are put
forward in reply to what must be merely, from
the obvious circumstances of the case at pre-
sent, the equally supposititious objections, if any
to the system of locomotion which lam about
to describe, —and I will now only add, respecting
them, that I trust I offer them for what they
are worth and no more, in saying that they were
made from a,due deference to the public, to the
subject under consideration, if merely from its
novelty, and perhaps even to the Inventor him-
self—if but to shew that, in venturing upon a
subjec( hitherto untouched, he has not willingly
allowed any portion of it (particularly one of so
much importance) to escape his attention, much
less to be intentionally overlooked. I would
now proceed at once to the special object of this
paper—the invention of a vessel with which
it is proposed to navigate the atmotic regions,
and that too with all the facilit with which they
are traversed by their own proper denizens—
but that, previously to my doing so, I deem it
yet proper to glance upon some two or three
minor matters, before referred to, viz., any
peculiar dangers to which the atmotic vessel
itself might be supposed to be liable.
A. From the electric fluid in the atmosphere,
and this, more especially, from the quantity of
iron that would unavoidably be connected with
its steam apparatus.
B. Any supposed liability of the atmotic ves-
sel to ignition, from a too great proximity of
the float, with its highly inflammable contents,
to the stove, together with Its chimney or smoke
flue.
C. Any supposed liability of the float or bal-
loon to burst or explode from the possible occa-
sional diminution of the requisite amount of
external pressure, in consequence of the greater
rarity of the air in its higher regions.
D. The liability of the atmotic to those acci-
dents, both in rising from the ground, and
more especially in its landing, which have been
of such frequent occurrence hitherto with the
balloon still in use.
E. Next, in respect to its rate of travelling—
put speculatively as about 60 miles an hour ;
and, finally,—
P. In reference to any possible financial
objections.
My replies to the above category of objections
are—as to
A. That electric danger from mere ascent
into the atmosphere is amply negatived by ac-
tual experience; and, as to a y special electric
danger from the large portion of iron which
ATMOTIC SHIP,
BY THE HON. W. BLAND, MEMBER OE THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL OF NEW SOUTH
will be connected with the machinery of the and property) which have hitherto been
atmotic, —should this be found incapable of connected with every other species of lo-
being met by any other means—it may, in great comotive contrivance now in use;—whether
o J J J • O “ —■ QJ.rn.wi.ivj yj LX 1 1 . TUG UilgUiai, ao VYCU ttS lUC pieOtJXJLt gt/UC
measure, if not altogether, be avoided by the worked by animal power, by wind, or by The first idea of this invention suggested objects of the invention, which in every resp
selection of the more favourable electrical states steam; —and that, notwithstanding the endless itself to me in March, 1851 (now about ten are the same, are to ascend and descend in
of the atmosphere, at least for making depart- improvements of those contrivances during a years since) the following month drawings of it atmosphere—to sail through it horizontally
ures ; involving some detention now and then, long series of years, or even, in some instances, were despatched to a friend, a professional engi- every direction, with or against its current!
No. I. —Side View or the Entire Vessel.
no doubt, though most probably of greatly less from the most remote antiquity down to our days,
duration than that to which ships are occasion- One word now as to the mechanical powers
ally exposed when said to be weatherbound. which have been enlisted in the service of the
B. Any danger of ignition from the relative proposed invention.
positions of the “ steam-fire” and the “ float” is, Ist. The “Hydrostatic’’—or that resulting
I trust, fully provided against, not only by the from the differences of specific gravity in differ-
actual distance of the float from the stove, and ent fluids,
the flue or chimney, but by their careful isola-
tion from each other—first, by the distance of
the float from the car, —not less than 20 feet ; j - ‘
secondly, by the roof or awning (with its sup- I
plememary studding sails)—while the mouth of !
the flue would be furnished with an “ oper- | /
culum,” constructed of wire, for precluding the ! /
otherwise possible casual escape from it of any /
stray fire-spark. j j
C. The possible bursting of the float, from /
the cause mentioned—the greater rarity of the j /
air in its upper regions, or from any other simi- ! /
lar causes—has been to a great extent, if not j
completely provided against—first, by the usual
net thrown over the balloon or float, and this j
supported by a regular system of brails; |
secondly, by the usual gas valve or valves (made
to open by connection with an appropriate tube j
or tubes from the upper surface of the machine), j
by which any excess in the gaseous contents of the i
float could be readily at any time reduced to any !
desired extent; and thirdly, by the proposed divi-
sion of the float into a due number of more-or
less-completely-separate compartments. 1
D. Accidents in rising from the ground, and. \
more partiularly in the descending and landing \
of the atmotic—so frequent and so dangerous \
with the balloon hitherto in use—have also, \
self-evidently, both in the principle and the da- \
tails of the invention, been, I believe, most \
amply provided against.
E. Next, the rate of travelling and its mode K
of obtainment. The rate of travelling will, no
doubt, mainly depend on the various degrees \ \
of velocity and the various directions of the J \
several successive currents or strata of which \
the atmosphere may consist at different heights \
and in different parts of the globe, and which \
can, and it is expected will, be readily made avail- *~-~ '
able, to the uses of the atmotic ship by means
of those locomotive powers with which it has
been provided. The rate of these currents may
probably average some 40 knots an hour; the
steam power of the machine perhaps about 10 |
knots—making together about 50 knots—
the conjectured rate of progression ; while
to the above must be added that indirect
gain as to the above rate of progression, per-
haps always more or less obtainable, and, in some
was prirharily introduced—the most ready and
efficient means of consolidating, as one body,
the oar and the float firmly and permanently,
as well as (a matter second only to that in im-
No. 3.—Teansveb’e Section Amidships.
■ ■ . . r "cii as mau-er second omy 10 mat in im-
instances, to an immense extent, by the substi- 2nd. “ Steam,’ tne “pnmum mobile” of its tion.”* The following year, a model of it was portance) the best possible attachments to the SIDE VIEW 0F a ™otic Ship.
tution of a direct for a more or less circuitous main, strictly so called, locomotive powers,— exhibited at the Crystal Palace, and next, with three fore and the three aft stays (Plate 1, m. Float, b.b. Car, c.o. Keel, d. Rod,—extending from
route,—not to mention any assistance that might and this by means of, some amendment iu its details, at the Pans m.), and, consequently, the best means for keel of float to floor of oar (midships) attached at eash end
be derivable from the windsails (attached to 3rd. The “ Screw” (acting upon air against Universal Exhibition. It has been since constructing and working the sliding to crank axle, worked by steam power generated in car,
the tore and alt extremities ot the keel), air) for propulsion. _ subjected to further revision, resulting in ex- or travelling ballast (Plate 1, n. n.) But each erank axle worked by rod d., to work a corresponding
which may, perhaps, theoretically be 4th. The “Lever,” —as exemplified in the tensive improvements, {as figured in the accom- the car, its stands or legs the stanchions 8 ro w propeller e e., one fixed in floor of car, and one fixed
p.nnsirlp.rprl as Rr.rp.ina fa.nrl. thpvpfm’A oithov qq ™ ol,™ A A A „ j; , ...u; „ u __ ' , P ’ ° a ...i i . ..
considered as screws (and, therefore, either as fore or stem rudder, and the aft or stern rud-
“ propellents ” or “ repellents," pre-
cisely as their blades may be , __
panging diagrams,) which seem not merely to re-
■ely to re- which support the awning or roof, the in keel of float, worked by rod d.f.f., rotary sails (like those
system of brails, "he fore and aft of wiudmUl ). worked by air-pressure, from impulsive effect
rudder, the steam power as the of ( steam ) sorew propellers e.e. g.g. (air) screw propel-
\ primary active motor agent of the ler8 >- WOT ked by rotary sails f.f. i.h., strong (iron) stan -
\ \ entire invention; in fact, every (*ions, f»™dng fulcrum for rod d . for steadying its action.
element of the invention, including ‘- 1 ” awnlng 11 to ® ar > fira and P«™“eatly attached to
\ its objects, is now precisely what it “ weas 0 ® ar > y series e strong midship and
\ ■ 0 . . i, r J lateral stanchions (of timber) in addition to those (of iron)
-i-I .n was ongma y. marked 8.b.. and ao*ain laterally and fora and nft
turned or “ set”), together with the
actual screws attached to them,
should the above “ windsails” be
found practically available, —while,
should they not happen to fulfil
their proposed uses, the most ample C r ——G
allowance is made for their total 1 —
removal.
F. Next as to the buoyancy of
the vessel, and its fitness for
passing through the air. Its
buoyancy may obviously be in-
creased to any desirable extent
by merely adding to the size of the
float, which can be done without either propor- der, —but more especially in the two immense
tionately increasing its weight, or, from its “steelyard” powers,—created by the attachmeat
elongated form, adding in any adequate degree of a sliding or travelling weight made to traverse
to its difficulty of dividing the air and passing on the central or mid fore-stay—and the central
through it. _ or mid aft-stay—extending respectively between
G—Any financial objections whether as to the the stem and stern extremities of the keel,.—
first cost of the machine, or the expense of (attached both to the float and the car) for regulat-
No. 4.—The Vessel at Anchor.
keeping it in repair and in travelling trim, are, [ ing the inclination of the fore and aft extremi-
perhaps, so obviously apocryphal as scarcely to j ties of the machine—upwards or downwards, —
require anything beyond this bare notice. j for its ascent or descent —without in the latter
So much for the minor objections to which : case, reducing the weight ot the machine by the
the atmotic vessel now proposed lor considera- | throwing out of ballast, —(of which none would
tion seems, at a first glance, liable—which, had be required) or, in the former, the slightest
they been in reality much greater than they sacrifice of gas (a circumstance unavoidable with
might have appeared while yet unexamined or the balloon now in use) —while the descent and
unanswered, would sink into utter insignifi- landing of the machine may, with the utmost
cance when contrasted with the immense facility, dispatch, and precision, be secured
cost of some—together with the perpetual on any desired spot at the option of the
and enormous losses (both as to life I aeronaut.
Subjoined is a description of the vessel amidships; No. 3, a bird’s-eye view of the car
above referred to, —the No. 4, the vessel at anchor.
ATMOTIC SHIP. The original, as well as the present genera
The first idea of this invention suggested objects of the invention, which in every respec
neer, in England. Some months later, a fresh to enable the aeronaut to land when and where (LwT en B meer > m whom 1 had every con-
series of designs, explanatory of its construe- he pleases—to expel the gas from the float, in
tion and objects, was sent home, but too late, whole or in part, at his option and, finally, to The item of water, however, is evidently over-
or it would have been placed, with a fitting brail up the float, furl, and come, at the same loo^ed > but that as well as any other similar
model, as a companion to my invention for the time, securely to an anchor. oversight should there be any, could obviously
“suppression of spontaneous combustion in wool These objects it is proposed to attain by the covered by some proportionate alteration in
ships," &c., in the “Great Industrial Exhibi- following means Ist, the float, for mere ascent the dimensions of the float.
(diagram 1); 2ndly, the entire form of the machine- The vessel now proposed for navigating
the broad dorsal surface of the float,* and the tdle “ air” having been perhaps amply
still broader flat under surface of the roof or described, I beg to refer, for its more clear com-
awning of the car, supplemented by its wide- prehension, to the subjoined illustrative dia-
spread studding-sails, (plate 3, letter D), —and g ram s, while I close this paper with an enume-
\ | these again acted upon by the two rudders, ration of a few of those very numerous
u \ j and the still infinitely more powerful fore and highly important and interesting objects, for
\ aft sliding or travelling weights. (P. 1, letters the effectuation of which the atmotic ship seems
\ N. N.) intended for the express purpose of 80 greatly in requisition,—and some of which
\ raising or depressing the stem or stern of the would appear utterly unattainable by any other
\ vessel, to any extent desired ; and thus means, viz.—
regulating with the greatest accuracy Ist. For obtaining a thorough knowledge of
and certainty its ascent and descent, the atmospheric currents (their direction, ave-
The vessel itself being at the time under the rage rate of movement, and regularity) at diffe-
action of the steam screw propellers, ex- rent heights, more especially for the purposes
clusively of the propellers connected with the of aerial navigation,
two rotary windsails, together, possibly,—with 0 „. -m . . . „ .. .
the windsails themselves. 3rdly. The usual j " ??,- 0 amln Binfinitely more safe
valves—but connected with tubes opening on expeditious means of travelling than any
the upper surface of the float, some 100 feet ’7 6
and upwards above the level of the steam- a ext f nt by renderm g available
fire, assisted by brails, for the more or aerla l currents, as well as
less complete expulsion of the gas, as the ad ?P tlon ‘> f dlrect > instead of circuit-
L I from time to time required. 4th. The t e f em P h f. ratla > f e P assa f t
/ keel, attached firmly and permanently below to h , \ Un f r 7o noo * S lgbt
I the awning or top of the car, and above, along t 0 60d0 “ lles ~
/ its entire length to the under surface of the £l*2 - lt fro “ ab l out two ° r
/ float. sth. Legs to the car, shod with iron, , T ! da J s - whda
/ spiked, and, in addition, anchors or grapnels, f .. I J ce h cos , as ° V 1 ? 6 a “ d ’
for coming to a secure anchor. 8 P still more, from that of the reduced risk would,
4 In the several amendments which have been tZZ 7TT ’ °I h ’ gh , T
P made and published from time to time, cxplme thosc parts of our globe
on the original plan, there has been whl( *, are “° difficult of access-if not mac
/ r little, or rather nothing, to. reject, the other mean ® :-the entire
amendments consisting of mere modifies- n H n r ®fl lo ° s ’ t . he mtenor of
/ tions of some few parts of that plan, J™’ A wt’ ° f AfnCa ’ S< T
G> — / - with certain additions which those modifica- W°[ A”" 108 ' wlth th f summUs and peaks
i Z L— . tions themselves suggested. Thus, there is ° f the hlgheSt rangeS and “Stains.
Gi —— --C * ° y c irr i marked h.h., and again laterally and tore and aft by appro-
"/ As a means of additional se- ■?,. . , . , J
/ , pnate s ays, six ot each or any number required, and one
1 / cunty, the floit could, ot course, be it, . , 1 , ,
/ j • i . r slmg (midships), on each side, k.k., starboard sling.
/ divided into any desired number of ~,,,, • , ~ 5
/ , U U.U., side stays, m m., lore-stays and aft-stays, three
/■' more or less completely sepaiate of each, the mid aft stay, and the mid fore-stay, to serve as
/ gas-tight compartments—allowance traversing line for trimming or sliding ballast.
- being made for the additional n o trimming or sliding ballast. 0.0., fore-
weight which would attend this rlli jder and aft rudder, p.p.p.p.p., legs shoi with iron,
airangement. Tie rotary windsails f o r supporting oar when resting on the ground,
(should it be found desirable to chimney, r.r r.r.r.r., anti-attrition swabs or fenders
. , .... a— -- q.q., emmuey. r.r r.r.r.r., anu-atinuon swans or lenders
move almost ttie only objection that, as far as retain them) might obviously be reduced in wherever required.
lam aware, has been hitherto made to it— length by adding to their number.
namely, the want of firmness of connection be- Before closing this paper there is one pre- PLATE 11.
tween the float and the car—but at the same caution which I would beg strongly to recom- m _
time, in other respects, to add greatly to its lo- mend, the omission of which in the launching kaxteese . ection of loat and of ar, i idships.
comotive powers. of the balloon hitherto in use has been attended a-a., float, b.b., car. m.m., studding sail yards, dd.,
Of the diagrams above-mentioned, appended with much danger, and with frequent acci- awnln S> fi™ly and permanently attached to keel of float,
by numerous strong stanchions, and to float itself by stays,
&c. e.e., raid lateral awning stanchions, f.f., legs shod
__ with iron, spiked, g.g., keel, firmly attached, above, to
/ / t j 7 is. /"'/ dosd —kielow to car. h.h., steam screw propellers, i.i.,
/ J j - 7 ; ' f / rod, attached at each end to crank axle, worked by steam,
'V / y y —j- —— f / itself working screw propellers h.h.j.j., strong slings.
jf ■ ,L; I | • k.k., anti-attrition swabs or fenders.
7 c| P* —/'■/ PLATE 111.
I if li y FI I / ' - "Rtwri’e Tllvn- vrrn- (idPid
q (J / f Bird’s Eye view of Car.
V / a.a., Car. c.c,, aft rudder and fore-rudder, d., site of
boiler, resenmir, and coal looker, e., site of engine, f.,
site of (steam) screw attached to floor of car. g.g-g.g-g.,
to this paper, No. 1 represents a side view of dents, namelj’, that the atmotic termini or sta- a - a -> car - Üb., awning, &c. c.0.c.0.
the entire vessel; No. 2, a transverse section tions, or landing or starting places, should be awning stanchions, d.d., float furled,
* I trust I may be pardoned the personal nature of the edition was also itself republished in full by the public papers- t an d mid-fore stay. h„ slidiokaf
above few words of narrative in the immediately preceding In 1848,1 find the invention in the columns of that widely circu. J >
portion of the text, as well as the egotism, if such it may lated work, the Mechanics Magazine, (March 18, page 273) headed stearing ballast,
seem, of this note, in stating that the matter here referred with a copy of one of the engraved plans taken from the pam-
to was invented, and experimentally demonstrated by me in ptlet, with my name as usual attached, and in 1849, as also sub- ‘"* l l
public, at the Sch 00l of Arts, in Sydney as well hs published in sequently, the invention was made applicable, with the fullest descents, termed technically “ soundings” ; not i
the papers of the colony, in 1839; that soon afterwards.it was freely success, to the extinguishing of fires in coalmines—(Year Book depth to which they extend, but more particu
circulated, both in England and in this colony, on the Continent, of Facts for 1850 and 1852.) In addition, the principle of the in- perpendicular direction ;or they may be oonsidt
and in India, in a pamphlet, with explanatory engravings, be- vention has been, I believe, in two instances, applied to the sup- mations to the wide out-stretched wings of 1
tween which time and 1845, it bad been repeatedly referred to, pression of fires generally, under the protection of patents, other similar birds of prey,—the means to ft
as well as republished in full, by the Press of the colony. In but in what precise manner, or with what success, lam not ascending and descending in the atmosphere '
1845, a second edition of the pamphlet was published, with a informed. rapidity, as well as, with the assistance of the tail
dedication to the late lamented Sir John Franklin at that * Analogous to the broad dorsal and abdominal surfaces so re- rudders and the other powerful steering agent
lime the enterprising and excellent Governor of Tasmania: by markable in some of the cetace, and so useful to them in their tion are substituted', of directing their course
whota it was acknowledged in the most gratifying terms. This rapid ascents (for the purposes of “ blowing”) as well as their unerring precision.
F7U3 a.
[SYDNEY,
WALES.
FFB. 25, 1860.
descend in the through appropriate loops in the under surface
horizontally in of the car, so as to be allowed, as the vessel rose
its currents— by degrees from the ground, completely to un-
reeve themselves at any extent of its elevation
that might be desired.
“ Weight of car (light deal) ~ 908 lbs.
y Ditto blocks 133
vy Ditto ropes 816
Ditto booms 1032
U /■ Ditto engine 3340
Ditto boiler 1190
Ditto screw .. 166
D.tto coals .. .. .. H3O
now nearly the same float as at first, modified h. To serve as a handmaid or ally to
in form, as well as by the addition of a keel— meteorological science, and to astronomy.
an addition which at once suggested the intro- sth. Most probably for sanitary purposes—
Auction of the whole of the second series of direct as well as indirect—for postal purposes,—
locomotive apparatus,—the two rotary air-sails, for the transmission of gold and gems,—for the
with the scre w-propeller attached to each of making of safe and rapid passages,—forthepro-
them, while—it afforded—the object for which it motion of commerce, and the advancement of
bo. 3.—lixiiD’s. ii View of the Car.
