

ATTACHMENT
TO THE
HOUSE OE GOD.
A SERMON
PREACHED AT THE
O F E IST I IST a*
OP THE
UNION MEMORIAL CHURCH,
NORTH MELBOURNE,
The REV. ARCHIBALD GILCHRIST, M.A., LL.D.,
Pastor of the Church.
NORTH MELBOURNE :
COOK AND GO., PRINTERS, LEVESON STREET.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.


PREFATORY NOTE.
this sermon is re-printed from the Southern Cross of 20th September last,
and was preached by me on the occasion of the opening of the beautiful
new Church recently erected by my congregation in Curzon street. The
opening services were held on Sabbath, the 31st August, and were conducted
by the Eev. Dr. Steel, of Sydney, and myself. Very appropriate and elo-
quent sermons were preached by Dr. Steel at the morning and afternoon
services, while Idelivered the accompanying discourse in the evening. Asit
was not intended for publication there are portions of it which would admit
of more finish, but, for good and sufficient reasons, I prefer to leave it in the
form in which it was given from the pulpit. It is sent forth in its present
shape in the belief that it will be acceptable to the members, adherents and
friends of the congregation as, in some degree, a suitable memorial of a very
interesting occasion in the church's history.—A. G.


p? i%55/r
xq-sti
ATTACHMENT TO THE HOUSE OF GOD.
A SERMON.
“ One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after; that
I mag dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of mg life, to
behold the beauty of the Lord, and to inquire in His temple. —
Psalm xxvii. 4.
No one can study the character of David as it is presented in the
sober history of his doings or the poetic expression of his feelings
given us in the Bible without being struck with the strength of his
attachment to the house of God and its solemn services. We see
this in the promptitude and earnestness with which he turned his
attention to the work of bringing the Ark of the Covenant up to
Zion, the fortress of Jerusalem, after he had taken possession of
that city and made it the capital of his kingdom. Delivered from
his enemies, and securely established on his throne, he brought up
to his own city the sacred symbol of Jehovah’s presence in a solemn
procession of priests, sages and warriors ; and he himself led the
Avay, dancing and playing on his harp, as the white-robed priests,
amid the songs of the Levites, the shouts of the people, and the
sounds of many musical instruments, bore the ark tip the hill of
Zion, and placed it in the tabernacle prepared for its reception.
But that it should remain in a tent, while he himself dwelt in a
palace of cedar, was a thought he could not endure, and he accord-
ingly proposed to build a temple of suitable magnificence as Je-
hovah’s earthly habitation. And though he was not permitted to
carry out his purpose, he collected many materials for the great
work, and made many preparations and regulations for the conduct-
ing of public worship in Jerusalem on a scale of great grandeur.
His zeal for the bouse of God was si 1 own in a particular manner in
connection with the service of praise. A musician from early life,
he naturally inclined to the adoption of the best skill in the service
of song in the sanctuary. Hence he selected particular families in
the tribe of Levi to devote themselves to this work and to hand
down their art and their office from generation to generation, di-


vidiug them into courses for regular and successive service in public
worship. Nor did he content himself with attending to the manner
in which the service of praise was to be rendered in the house of
God. He also devoted himself to the task of supplying suitable
matter for that portion of the divine worship. He wrote many
psalms -so many, indeed, that the Collection we have in the Bible
is often called the “ Psalms of David,” as though he had written
them all. Though psalms had been written and sung before his
time, yet he wrote so much and did so much for the establishment
of psalmody as an institution in the Church of God that he may be
regarded as its founder. His, at all events, is the brightest name
among the sweet singers of God’s Israel, who have, in different
ages, taught the people by means of sacred song embodying im-
portant truth, stimulating to holy life and heavenly aspirations, and
adapted for use in the congregations of the Church in their united
expression of thanksgiving, penitence, dependence, faith, hope and
love.
In these sacred songs which he composed for use in the worship
of God, he has frequently given a very emphatic, and, at the same
time, very beautiful expression to his feelings of attachment to the
house of God : as, for example, when he says (Psalm xxvi. 8 )
“Lord, I have loved the habitation of Thy house and the place
where Thine honour dwelleth.” And, again, when he says in the
time of his exile from his throne (Psalm Ixiii. 1,2.) “ O God,
Thou art my God : early will I seek Thee : my soul thirsteth for
Thee, my flesh longeth for Thee in a dry and thirsty land where no
water is, to see Thy power and Thy glory so as I have seen Thee in
the sanctuary.” Again, in Psalm Ixi. 4, “ I will abide in Thy ta-
bernacle for ever ; I will trust in the covert of Thy wings.” And
so, as expressive of the same devotion to God and His worship and
longing after the blessing of communion with Him, he gives utter-
ance to what may be called the ruling passion of bis soul in the
words of our text, “One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will
I seek after ; that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days
of my life to behold the beauty of the Lord and to inquire in His
temple,”
Let us consider, (1 ) David’s Desire to dwell in the house of God,
and (2,) the Ends or Objects for which he wished this privilege.
I. David’s desire to dwell in the house of God ; “ One thing have


I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after ; that I may dwell in
the house of the Lord all the days of my life.” It is quite clear
that the psalmist meant by these words to convey the impression
that this longing for the house of God was the ruling affection of his
heart, and that to gratify it would be the chief aim of his life. His
language is of that emphatic kind which admits of no doubt as to
the strength of the sentiment it was intended to express. A wish
to be in the place where Jehovah was worshipped, and to join in the
ordinances of His sanctuary, was the one wish of his soul, which
exercised an overmastering power upon him, and would not let him
rest till it was satisfied. There were many pious Israelites who
loved to visit the place where prayer and sacrifice were wont to be
made ; but David had a consuming zeal for the house of God.
With him it was the one thing he was resolved to seek after.
But when he speaks of wishing to dwelt in the house of the Lord
are we to understand him as intending to convey the impression
that he wished to live within or near the sacred precincts of the
tabernacle in the same sense as the priests and Levites who were
regularly engaged in its sacred ministrations 1 Though there may
be in the form of the wish an intended allusion to the psalmists
estimate of the happiness and honour of those who were thus set
apart to minister in holy things, yet we can hardly imagine that a
man in the position of the King of Israel, and with the adaptation
for an active public life which David possessed, would or could
declare, even in a poetic effusion, that it was the main object of his
life to seek after the abode and work of the Levite ! Recognising his
own position and work as the civil head of the nation to have been as-
signed him by God, he would not be likely to entertain any desire
to relinquish it for another, however honourable that other might
appear to 1 im, or however useful its employments.
What, then, can be the meaning of the statement that the chief
desire of his heart was to dwell in the house of the Lord all the
days of his life '? Doubtless it means that he had an overpowering
desire that he might be always so circumstanced that he could re-
gularly tread the Divine courts and wait upon God in the or-
dinances of His house ; that he might live in such an atmosphere
of religious privilege, have the public means of grace so constantly
within reach, that it might seem as if he actually dwelt in the
{louse of God, He was bent upon being an habitual attendant


upon the ordinances of religion—not a mere occasional visitor to
the Church, but one whose habit it was to be in his place when the
worship of God was going on. And this he wished to last “ all
the days of his life.” He did not wish that zeal which burns
brightly for a season, and then begins to wane and gradually dies
out. He had no desire for the spasmodic devotion which is fed by
novelty and killed by time. He would live always near God.
All his life long he would like to join in the exercises of the
sanctuary and worship with the great congregation.
This attachment to the house of God and its employments
which the sweet singer of Israel thus gives expression to, is surely
calculated to call forth our admiration and stimulate us to a godly
emulation. That a man whose time and attention were necessarily,
to a large extent, taken up with the affairs of civil government and
the concerns of a large household, should show himself a pattern of
pious submission to God and complete devotion to His worship,
cannot but strike every thoughtful mind as a fact implying no or-
dinary strength of religious conviction. Religion was no mere form
with David, else he never could have held the estimate of its im-
portance which the expressions of his longing for the house of God
in the Psalms imply. His attachment to the tabernacle and its
worship, therefore, must lead us to form a higher idea of his charac-
ter than otherwise we should think warrantable, This characteristic
obliges us to admit that, with all his faults, he was a deeply re-
ligions man—one who, amidst his sins and errors, not only knew
where the fountain of healing was to be found, but actually repaired
regularly and eagerly to wash in its sacred waters that he might
present himself pure before his God.
And if we feel that this feature of David’s character helps to elevate
him in our estimation, surely we must see the wisdom of copying
his example in this particular. What was so honourable to him
cannot be discreditable to us. It is true we live in a different
age. We are much farther advanced in the history of the world.
But our spiritual needs are the same. The spirit craves for some
retreat —some refuge from the storm and bustle, the toil and trial of
life, Avhere the soul can commune with itself and its Maker, and,
with the eye of faith, contemplate the things which are unseen and
eternal. And where will it find such a refuge or retreat but in the
Church of God ? The profane worldling may think otherwise, and


betake himself to other scenes where mirth and folly will drive
away serious thought and shut eternity out of view ; but the re-
flecting earnest Christian will prefer the way of the Psalmist, when
he says, “ One thing have I desired of the Lord; that will I seek
after; that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my
life.”
But let us now look at —
11. The Ends for which he wished to have this privilege of
dwelling in the house of God: “To behold the beauty of the Lord,
and to enquire in His temple.”
“To behold the beauty of the Lord ! ” It is quite possible that
there is an allusion here to something attractive and pleasant in the
aspect of the place of worship, or in its solemn ceremonies. Al-
though it was only a tent that lodged the visible symbol of God’s
presence in David’s time, yet we can scarcely doubt that everything
in the internal arrangements and decorations of that tabernacle must
have been made with a view to the producing of a religious awe
upon the mind of the worshipper, and that the place would have a
solemn beauty peculiar to itself. In the time of the Temple it was
so in a high degree, and the devout Israelite, in using these words
of the Psalmist in the service of God, Avould naturally have sug-
gested to his mind the magnificent adornments of the great building
and the subdued beauty of its hallowed courts. Hushed into holy
calm, and resting in soft repose as if under the shadow of the
Divine Presence, the sacred house would have an irresistible attrac-
tion for the devout Jew; and we can well imagine such an one
saying—
How lovely is Thy dwelling place,
0 Lord of Hosts, to me;
The tabernacles of Thy grace,
How pleasant, Lord, they be !
There can scarcely be a doubt that the building in which God is
statedly worshipped ought to possess an appropriate beauty—an at-
tractiveness of aspect that will help the outflow of the true wor-
shipper’s feelings. The beauty of the House of God should, however,
be of a form peculiar to itself—such an attractiveness as is not
likely to be confounded with anything else, or to lead the thoughts
to other places and scenes having different and less edifying associa-
tions. While there is no reason why the building should not be as


ornamental and its furnishings as rich and costly as the circum-
stances of those erecting it will allow, it is of the greatest importance
that all this should be in strict keeping with the sacred use for
which it is designed. When this is the case, the church-goer will
feel that the solemn air and aspect of the place have for him a
pleasantness and beauty which he cannot find elsewhere, and which
exercise a decidedly elevating influence upon him. He feels that he
is looking upon what he may fairly describe as the “ beauty of the
Lord.”
It is very probable, also, as already intimated, that by the
“beauty of the Lord,” the Psalmist intended an allusion to the
gorgeous and splendid ceremonial of the tabernacle-worship as ar-
ranged for by himself and as carried out more particularly and
impressively in the time of the .temple. The ministrations of white-
robed priests in offering sacrifice and burning incense, and the
singing and playing of the Levitical choirs had a peculiar attraction
for him. He had himself laboured to make the service beautiful
and impressive; and from that very circumstance we may legiti-
mately infer that he believed the “ beauty of the Lord ” was to be
seen in the ordinances of the sanctuary. These ceremonies had to
him an attractiveness all their own, and as their influence was to
elevate his thoughts and feelings God-ward he could not but regard
their beauty as of the Lord.
The dispensation under which we live is one which does not re-
quire or impose an elaborate ceremonial upon the worshippers in
the house of God. Those who would worship the Father accept-
ably now are required to worship Him in spirit and in truth, and
are not restricted by a cumbersome, though impressive, ritual. But
though ritualism is inconsistent with the genius of pure Christi-
anity and the ordinances of public worship are few and simple in
the Christian Church, it is still true that the “ beauty of the Lord”
is to be seen in the services of the Sanctuary. There needs not
elaboration in order to beauty. Simplicity is not only not incon-
sistent with beauty, but is sometimes itself the main element in
beauty. A simple form of public worship is not necessarily repul-
sive even to the most refined taste. A spiritually-minded man, who
has been enlightened by New Testament teaching, will prefer to
rest content with such forms as are essential to the expression of
his devotions, rather than multiply ceremonies and invent grand


spectacular displays in the house of God. And when these sim-
ple, necessary forms are approached by him in the right frame,
he will not fail to see in them the “ beauty of the Lord.”
It would, however, appear most probable that what the Psalmist
meant principally was the revelation of the character of God given
in His house. In the sanctuary he found the attributes of God
more fully and attractively displayed than anywhere else. His
holiness, goodness and mercy—His majesty, greatness and power—
were there held forth with such distinctness and effect as to impress
the worshipper, and lead him to gaze, to wonder, and to adore. It
was, therefore, the beauty, the loveliness of the Divine character,
that David wished to behold by dwelling in the house of the Lord
all the days of his life. His aim was to know more and more
about God, that he might trust Him more and love Him better.
He knew something already of the Divine attributes; but what he
knew only led him to thirst for the opportunity of a life-long con-
templation of them, and his experiences in the sanctuary made him
satisfied that there and there chiefly could he behold this “beauty
of the Lord.”
It is for the same object that the Christian still frequents the
Church of God. He wishes in the use of the means of grace to
understand the nature, character, mind and will of his Maker —to
contemplate Him as He is seen in the face of His Son Jesus Christ,
the brightness of the Father’s glory and the express image of His
person. In every sermon lie hears, in every prayer he follows, in
every hymn he sings, in every baptism administered, in every sacra-
mental occasion, he seeks and expects an unfolding of the character
of God in some aspect that will attract and soften and subdue his
soul ; and as he increases in the knowledge of God and has his faith
confirmed and increased in proportion, he wishes to be much in the
house of God that he may get more of this heavenly know-
ledge and behold more of this “ beauty of the Lord.”
In this respect the Church of God becomes to the Christian a type
and foretaste of heaven where there will be a fuller unfolding of
the Divine character than is possible here. For there we shall see
the King in His beauty. Here we know only in part; here we
see dimly as through a glass. There we shall know even as we are
known and see face to face. In that heavenly temple there will
be nothing to cloud the spirit’s vision of God, no veil of flesh, no


film of sin, no darkness of ignorance, no mists of doubt, but a clear
and uninterrupted perception of the glory that excelleth. The Lord
will be the light of His children there for ever. “ For He that
sitteth on the throne shall dwell among them. They shall hunger
no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the sun light on
them nor any heat. For the Lamb which is in the midst of the
throne shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains
of Avaters, and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.”
High is the rank we now possess,
But higher we shall rise ;
Though what we shall hereafter be
Is hid from mortal eyes.
Our souls we know when He appears
Shall bear His image bright;
For all his glory full disclosed
Shall open to our sight.
But another object for which David wished to dwell in the House
of the Lord all the days of his life was, that he might “inquire in
His temple.” He not only wished the high privilege of knowing
God and contemplating and meditating upon the beauties of His
character; but he also wanted to get instruction and direction in
the House of God to help him in the every-day duties of life. He
regarded the sanctuary as a place to which he might most profitably
carry the burden of his cares, troubles, trials, doubts and difficulties
to ask for help and guidance. And so he wished to dwell there, to
be always within reach of its sacred privileges, that he might betake
himself in every time of need to the Lord in prayer and supplica-
tion for strength and wisdom to sustain and direct him in all the
varied scenes of life.
Is not the Church of God still a place to which we can repair
to make inquiry of the Lord what He would have us to do % Can
the awakened sinner go to a better place to ask if there is mercy
for him 1 Can the struggling servant of God go to a more suitable
place to ask for power to stand against the Wicked One and his
emissaries % Can the troubled doubter betake himself to a more
suitable place to get his doubts removed 1 Can the weary and
disheartened searcher after truth and happiness in this world re-
pair to any place where he will be so sure of getting what he seeks ?
Can the downcast mourner find any place so suitable to bring him


comfort and consolation ? No ! In all the varied experiences of
life the House of God will be found a most appropriate retreat
for the inquiring and anxious soul, and the piously inclined will
ever value attendance on its ordinances for the sake of the strength,
enlightenment and comfort to be obtained through them.
It is true indeed that we are under a spiritual dispensation as
compared with that of David, and that we have no need to repair
to any particular place to inquire of the Lord. The God of
prayer is to be found by us in the retirement of our own private
room as well as in the great congregation, in the solitary wilderness,
as well as in the crowded city. There is now no special place for
the earthly habitation of God, and no special instrumentality to be
used for ascertaining His will. The Christian religion is all-com-
prehending, and all-pervading. It adapts itself to every country,
and to all circumstances. Free as the air we breathe, it may be
enjoyed by all without let or hindrance from man. Wherever we
are, and however we are, God is near, and to be inquired of by
every earnest soul with the full confidence that He will answer.
But though the New Testament teaches us that our religion is
thus independent of places and forms for its exercise, yet it is far
from encouraging us to set light by the public worship of God in
the Church. On the contrary, it expressly enjoins us u not to
forsake the assembling of ourselves together as the manner of some
is.” And every thoughtful Christian, while valuing the liberty
which his religion gives him, will not fail to be impressed with the
importance of public worship, and seek to avail himself of its
privileges. While not neglecting to lay his wants before the
Throne of Grace in private, he will repair to the sanctuary regu-
larly to inquire of the Lord—to see if he can ascertain from the
lessons of instruction there pressed upon his attention, how he
should act in the special circumstances in which he may happen to
be placed at the time, or what are the general principles by which
he should regulate his conduct in all seasons. And this inquiring
after light and truth there —this seeking after the wisdom and counsel
necessary to direct him, and keep him in the ways of pleasant-
ness and peace, will make the place and the occasion dear to his
heart ; so that he will be able, in some sense, to make the
language of the Psalmist his own, and say, “ One thing have I
desired of the Lord, that will I seek after ; that I may dwell in


the house of the Lord all the days of my life to behold the beauty
of the Lord and to inquire in His temple.”
The circumstances in which we are assembled to-day make this
subject of attachment to the house of God peculiarly appropriate.
In the good providence of God we have been enabled to erect this
house for His worship, and have to-day assembled in it for the first
time, to use it in His service. It is surely a most fitting season to
express a hope that we shall all come to cherish for this house of God
and its exercises the same affection that the Psalmist had for the
tabernacle and its ordinances; that we shall find it a delight, and
not a burden ; that here we shall behold the beauty of the Lord
from Sabbath to Sabbath, and that our inquiring spirits will be re-
freshed by the communications of His grace; that here we shall
receive the blessing from the Lord and righteousness from the God
of our salvation. Let us be united in the desire and prayer that
this building shall henceforth be the centre of a pure and spiritual
influence upon this city and colony ; that no root of bitterness
shall ever be permitted to spring up within it to poison the or-
dinances of worship and cause them to spread death instead of
healing. May God preserve it for His people here for many gene-
rations to come, and may He maintain within it a pure Gospel
worship in which “ Christ and Him crucified ” will ever be held
prominently forth : raising up within it a succession of faithful
men who shall preach the Word of Life in earnestness and sim-
plicity, and feed the flock of God with diligence, affection and
wisdom. And when the great Day of Account arrives, and Christ
writes the number of His own, may it be found that very many
were here born to God and gathered into the fold of the Great
Shepherd, and that thus this house and those who ministered in
it wei’e made instrumental in promoting the glory of God and
the welfare of man !


APPENDIX.
|hfo |hcsbttrraii Cjm«|, |tort| gltltom
(Chiefly from the Melbourne Morning Papers.)
The new Union Memorial Churcli at Hothain (North Melbourne), was
opened for public worship for the first time last Sunday, August 31st, when /& .
special inaugural services were held which were attended by large congrega-
tions, the church being crowded morning and evening. At the morning
service the preliminary exercises were conducted by the Rev. Dr. Gilchrist,
the pastor, and the opening sermon was preached by the Rev. Dr. Steel, of
Sydney. The afternoon service was conducted entirely by Dr. Steel and the
evening one by Dr. Gilchrist. The discourses were all appropriate to the
occasion. The collection for the day amounted to about £lOO.
The church, which is an exceedingly handsome structure, is built on the site of
theold Union Church atthecorner of Curzon and Elm streets, having frontages
to both streets. It is of brick, black and white bricks being used for the
purposes of ornamentation, and has a frontage of 60 ft. to Curzon street, by
a depth of 90 ft. to Elm street. The style of architecture adopted is what
is known as the early decorated English. The building has a tower and
spire rising to an altitude of 150 ft., and the upper portion of the spire is
stuccoed and surmounted by a weather vane. The gable is 57 ft. in height,
having for its principal feature a large four-lighted traceried window, with
the main entrance door underneath. The church is well lighted from sides
and front with large windows filled with cathedral glass and stained mar-
gins, while there are three very handsome stained glass windows at the rear
end of the church, which are perhaps the most striking features of the
edifice. The centre one is a large circular window alternately filled with
floras and containing medallions of Martin Luther, John Calvin, John Knox
and Alexander Henderson. The window on the north side of this circular
one has a representation of Christ blessing little children with the motto
underneath duffer little children to come unto me ” and the words “In
memory of dear wee Pearsie Lyon.” The corresponding window on the
south side has for its subject the Good Shepherd with the text “ He shall
gather the lambs with his arm and carry them in his bosom.” In addition


to the main entrance two separate exit doors are provided for the galleries,
besides two others at the rear end of the church. The interior of the church
is divided in width into three parts by iron columns which run up to carry
the roof and also support the side and end galleries. The fronts of the
galleries, choir, stairs and platform are of light ornamental ironwork, and
the roof over the side galleries, as well as the centre roof, is boarded and
panelled with varnished deal. The building is very compact and will ac-
commodate about 880 people, namely, 560 on the ground floor and 320 in the
galleries. The whole of the seats are of polished cedar and kauri pine. The
full height of the ceiling in the centre of the building is 42 ft. and in the
side compartments 30 ft. The minister’s platform is at the rear end of the
church, the choir being placed behind and above the platform and lighted
by the three figured windows above-mentioned. Special attention has been
given to the necessary ventilation of the building and the acoustic properties
of the church give general satisfaction. The architect was Mr Evandcr
Mclver of Brunswick, and the contractor Mr James Thurgood of Hotham.
The Opening Services were continued on the 7th September, when appro-
priate sermons were preached by the Rev. Dr. Steel morning and evening,
and by the Rev. A. D. Kininmont, the former pastor, in the afternoon.
In celebration of the opening of the new church a Soiree was held in the
Hotham Town Hall on Tuesday, September 2nd. The building was densely
crowded. Dr. Gilchrist presided, and among those present on the platform
were the Rev. Dr. Steel of Sydney, and the Revs. W. Ross, J. Clark, J.
Cooper, A. Yule, D. Mackenzie and M. Macdonald.
The Rev. Dr. Gilchrist addressed the meeting at some length. They had
good cause to congratulate each pther, he observed, on having attained the
end for which they had worked so long and arduously. The new church
which had been opened last Sunday was a credit, not otdy to the congrega-
tion of which he was pastor, but also to the Presbyterian body generally,
and was something for the town of Hotham to be proud of. It was a com-
modious and handsome building and would for many years to come serve the
purpose tor which it had been erected. The work had not been either under-
taken or completed without considerable difficulties, but these —or, at any rate,
most of them —had been surmounted, and, therefore, they as a congregation
had cause to rejoice. Just twenty-five years ago—on the 29th September,
1854—a meeting was held in the Hotham Ward of the city of Melbourne,
not far from the present Town Hall, to consider the advisability of forming
a Presbyterian Church in the locality, the result being that within a month
from that date public worship was commenced in a blacksmith’s shop in
Viiliers street, the congregation subsequently assembling for worship in
the Havilah stores, Errol street, and afterwards in a building at the corner
of Errol and Queensberry streets. No doubt they would all appreciate the
handsome result that had emanated from such small beginnings. Some
time after this the congregation obtained a grant of two acres of land in
Curzon street, and with the assistance of the Government the old iron
school-room, that still stands on the south-west corner of the ground, was


erected and was opened as a place of worship on the 30th September, 1855.
In the following year the Rev. John Reid, of Essendon, was called to become
the first pastor of the North Melbourne charge and having accepted the call
was inducted in due course. The Rev. George M‘Cullagh Reed was the
next pastor and was inducted into the charge on the 14th January, 1858.
During his time steps were taken for the erection of a more commodious
church and the foundation stone of the old Union Church which had now
been pulled down was laid by Sir Henry Barkly, the Governor of the colony,
on the 7th April, 1859, the very day on which the Union of the different
branches of the Presbyterian Church in the colony was consummated. In
July, 1861, the Rev. A. D. Kininmont Succeeded, and for fifteen years re-
tained the pastorate, the present commodious manse being built during his
incumbency. In June, 1877, he (the chairman) had been inducted. Thus
it would be seen that since the formation of the church in North Melbourne
it had had four ministers. The present occasion was suggestive of many
pleasant reminiscences as it was j ust eleven years since his ordination and
induction into his first charge at Newtown, Sydney. He reminded them as
a congregation that they had accepted a great responsibility. Their under-
taking had brought ilpoft Them a hpavy burdmi, but yet he trusted they
would have no doubt of the future. ~ '
he had accepted
Dr. Steel also delivered an address-in which He congratulated Dr. Gilchrist
on the success which had attended his ministrations since he had accepted
the pastorate of the church.
Addresses were also delivered by several other gentlemen on the plat-
Addresses were al
form.
The Church choir under the able conductorship of Mr. D. A. Beaumont
rendered several selections in a highly creditable manner, and a most enjoy-
able evening was spent. » / /


OPENING-
New Presbyterian Church,
CURZON STREET, NORTH MELBOURNE.
■JHE FOLLOWING WAS THE OF AND
in connection with the JOpening :
(1.) OPENING SABBATH: August 31st, 1879
Morning at 11 ; Rev, Dr. Steel.
Afternoon at 3 : Rev. Dr. Steel.
Evening at 7 : Rev. Dr. Gilchrist.
Special Collections at close of each Service in aid of the Building Fund.
(2.) Tuesday, September 2nd. G. 30 p.m.
SOIREE in Town Hall, Hotham, in celebration of the opening
of the Church.
(3.) Wednesday, September 3rd,
Children's Meeting in the Church, 7.30 p.m. Addresses by-
several Ministers and others. Music. Admission—-FREE.
(4.) Friday, September sth.
Service of Sacred Song in the Church, 8 p.m. Admission—
FREE.
(3.) Sabbath, Sept. 7th. Opening Services continued,
Morning at 11 : Rev. Dr. Steel.
Afternoon at 3 : Rev. A. D. Kininmont.
Evening at 7 : Rev. Dr. Steel.
(G.) Monday. September Bth. at 8 p.m.
LECTURE in the Church by Rev. Dr. Steel. Subject.: “The
Achievements of-Young Men.”
