

Auburn
Three Years
o£ Municipal
Progress
“Advance” Print, Queen Street, Auburn—UX 7347


AUBURN —THREE YEARS AGO
What resident of Auburn has forgotten the shocking condition Of the
Municipality three years ago. There was scarcely a trafficable road or street.
The main ’bus routes were a nightmare to ’bus drivers and a danger to their
passengers. Only the nimble-footed could negotiate the principal footpaths.
Even in the main business centre of the town the broken, dilapidated foot-
paths were the cause of daily minor accidents. In dry weather the splendid
shops in Auburn Road were rendered filthy and grimy by the dust from the
badly neglected road sides—a constant source of worry and loss to our shop-
keepers. In wet weather the dust holes became mud holes and slush pools,
dangerous and unsightly.
Stepping off the Railway Station one was confronted with neglected pot-
holey streets, broken and dangerous foot-paths in every direction. Adjoining
the Station on the Northern side, one passed through a wilderness of
paspalum, littered with rubbish and divided by a rat-infested, foul smelling
drain.
Travellers to the Railway by ’bus, after being badly shaken journeying
over the rough broken roads, alighted In dust or water and mud; whilst
pedestrians crossing the triangle to the station entrance plodded through
dust or waded through slush.
In all parts of the Municipality, roads and footpaths were in a deplorable
state of disrepair. Some roads were even unformed and many footpaths
unmade, whilst the place abounded with slimy, evil-smelling, unsightly gutters
and drains, many of which were a menace to the health of the Community.
This generally was the sad plight of Auburn, after years of Incompetent
and neglectful administration by Anti-Labor Aldermen, masquerading as Civic
Reformers, Progressives, etc.
COUNCIL’S FINANCIAL POSITION
Three years ago Council’s Finances were In a state of chaos and gloom.
Council’s employees could only be employed week on and week off. The Town
Clerk’s salary and the Mayoral allowance frequently remained unpaid for
weeks. The Bank Overdraft was the largest in the history of the Municipality,
being approximately £lO,OOO. Sundry overdue accounts amounted to £5,226.
In all, Council was in debt to the extent of £15,122, whilst sundry debtors to
Council for rates and charges amounted to £31,678. In addition, Debentures
and Interest amounting to £f,ooo due to the Treasury were unpaid and con-
siderably overdue. Chaos and gloom are mild terms to use in describing the
situation.


THE TOWN HALL
Three years ago Auburn Town Hall was a “white elephant.” It was a
drag and a liability on the Municipality. It was unpopular and too frequently
unhired. It was not connected with the sewer. It did not earn sufficient to
even pay interest on the money borrowed to build it.
From the above it will be seen that the situation confronting the new
Labor Council was a difficult one, but Labor handled it with courage, deter-
mination and ability.
AUBURN TO-DAY
During the three years of Labor administration the Municipality has
witnessed a complete transformation.
ROADS AND STREETS
All the main roads have either been reconstructed or re-conditioned and
are in excellent order. A feature of the new 1 road construction has been the
timbering of the sides, a feature calculated to considerably lengthen the life
of the roads concerned. In addition, provision has been made in all new
construction work for periodical seal-coating and maintenance. It will
therefore be seen that Council’s policy of road construction and maintenance
is not only a departure from past practice, but is one of foresight, and sound
economy. In addition to the reconstruction of all main roads and ’bus routes,
numerous cross or connecting roads have been reconstructed, so that it is now
possible to journey from one end of the Municipality to the other in safety
and comfort.
The fact that all roads leading to the business centre of Auburn, and
those leading from adjoining Municipalities have been placed in first class
condition, has been an important factor in the tremendous development of
Auburn as a leading and highly popular shopping centre. Auburn, as a
shopping centre, is to-day one of the busiest and foremost in the Metropolitan
area, and much of the credit must be accorded Labor’s progressive policy of
road construction and maintenance.
FOOTPATHS
The Labor Council’s policy of footpath construction and re-conditioning
has been even more vigorously pursued than that appertaining to roads. Over
30 new concrete footpaths have been constructed, whilst as many more have
been reconstructed or re-conditioned.
DRAINAGE
Apart from kerbing and guttering 34 streets during its term, Council has
attended to the disease infested drains and gutters that menaced the health
of the community for years. These have been replaced with attended
soundly constructed concrete drains.


COUNCIL’S FINANCES
Immediately upon assuming office the new Labor Council set about
correcting the deplorable state of Council’s finances. SHOWING ITS
CONFIDENCE IN THE ABILITY AND DETERMINATION OF LABOR TO
HANDLE THE SITUATION THE COMMONWEALTH BANK INCREASED
THE OVERDRAFT LIMIT TO £12,000, thereby enabling the immediate
abolition of rationing and the placing of Council’s employees on full time
work. Further, it enabled Council to pay off long overdue accounts and to
satisfy the demand of creditors clamoring for payment.
Arrangements were made with the Treasury to extend the payment of
overdue debentures and interest over a period of ten years with interest
reduced to 4 per cent, per annum.
A successful campaign was immediately launched to secure payment of
large amounts owing for accumulated rates by persons and firms who showed
their ability to pay by immediately meeting Council’s firm demand.
A system of payment of overdue rates by instalments suitable to the
convenience of ratepayers concerned was instituted, and Council’s finances
showed immediate Improvement. At the end of six months a vigorous works
policy was being financed, all overdue accounts were liquidated, the overdraft
practically reduced to half, and Council’s finances placed on a stable footing.
The position thus established has been steadily maintained, and Labor com-
pletes its first term of administration leaving Council’s finances in an orderly
and sound condition, instead of the chaos and despair that confronted it when
it took office.
THE TOWN HALL
The Town Hall previously described as a “white elephant” is no longer
a source of worry to aldermen or a liability to the Municipality. Under Labor
it has become a popular and valuable revenue producing asset. At the begin-
ning of Labor’s term it was difficult to let. To-day it has to be booked weeks
In advance for week nights, whilst every Saturday night twelve months ahead
has been taken. Labor had the Town Hall connected with the sewer, had its
floor placed in first-class condition, and generally renewed and renovated its
furnishings. It is to-day one of the most popular halls in the Western
Suburbs.
PARKS AND GARDENS
Reference was made earlier to the deplorable condition of the locality at
Auburn’s front door —the Railway Station. To-day, excellent roads and foot-
paths radiate in all directions. The triangle .adjacent to the railway entrance
is now an expanse of asphalt. The rat-infested wilderness of paspalum
referred to has been converted Into beautiful flower beds, lawns and gravel
paths, with tables and seats where our citizens may enjoy a rest.


The children’s park, hitherto a veritable rubbish heap, has been converted
into a popular play ground. Erstwhile dust holes and rubbish heaps are now
well kept lawns, provided with seats, razzle-dazzles, swings, merry-go-round,
see-saws, horizontal bars, etc., where hundreds of happy children spend hours
of their leisure time.
GENERAL
The Labor Council has throughout its term given a splendid lead as an
employer.
In its first year of office it gave the employees a forty-hour week, and
introduced a subsidised system of assurance and superannuation that Council
as well as its employees is distinctly proud of. The value of the scheme has
been well exemplified by payment of considerable sums to the dependents of
two of Council’s deceased employees.
Council has given evpry consideration to its employees, expecting in return
faithful and loyal service, which has been wholeheartedly rendered.
On completing its first term of office, Labor desires to reiterate its appre-
ciation of the loyal and valuable co-operation of Council’s Officers and all
members of both the indoor and outdoor stalls.
During its three years of office. Labor gave three Mayors to the Muni-
cipality—Aldermen Lamb, Herlihy and Upton. All strove to honestly fulfil
their functions of office, to impartially and faithfully serve all sections of the
Municipality, and to loyally serve Labor. Labor is proud of them, as well as
their colleagues who supported them, and approval of their administration
and civic conduct has been ungrudgingly conceded by citizens generally.
FUTURE POLICY
Upon re-election to administer the Civic affairs of the Municipality for a
further term, Labor will steadfastly pursue the policy of steady progress and
development maintained during fee past three years. The good roads and
footpaths constructed during Labor’s term will be maintained in first-class
condition. The policy of construction and reconstruction will be steadily
expanded to embrace other roads and footpaths, and will continue until every
road and footpath in the Municipality has received the attention required.
Although much has already been done in this connection, much remains to
be done.
In the matter of drainage. Labor’s policy is to see every street in the
Municipality properly kerbed and guttered. Labor will steadily pursue this
policy, but In this department, as in others, can only move forward in accord-
ance with the ability of the Municipality to finance the work foreshadowed.


AUBURN PARK
Labor feels no pride in the present condition of Auburn Park, nor does
any other section of the community. Labor hoped at the beginning of its
term to construct Swimming Baths in one corner of the park, including this
as part of its park improvement and beautification scheme, but was frustrated
in this direction by the refusal of the Local Government Department to
sanction the construction of baths or to assist in any way a park improvement
scheme. We contend that Auburn is as much entitled to a Government grant
for the purpose of park improvement and beautification as adjoining Muni-
cipalities more favorably treated, and will continue to press for same.
THE SPOONER SCHEME
During its term of office, Labor has steadfastly refused to adopt the
Government’s scheme of Unemployment Relief Work, known as the “Spooner
Scheme.” This scheme sought to relieve the Government of its responsibility
to provide work for the unemployed, and to place it upon the Councils,
Labor’s opposition to the adoption of the scheme does not arise from its
political opposition to the Government. The Government collects Wages and
Special Income Tax allegedly for the purpose of providing work and sustenance
for the unemployed, and Labor does not believe that ratepayers should be
taxed twice for this purpose. Ratepayers are compelled to pay Wages Tax for
the relief of unemployment. Should they then be compelled to pay consider-
ably higher rates to Council as well for the same purpose? Labor says—No!
If Auburn ratepayers appreciate that Labor has protected them in this
# way, in defiance of pressure from the Government, then they must return
Labor to maintain this protection. The Labor Council found full time employ-
ment at award rates for 35 unemployed, in addition to the permanent staff,
without any Government assistance.
LABOR’S APPEAL
Labor confidently appeals to the electors of Auburn to return its candi-
dates at the elections to be held on Saturday, December 4th, 1937.
Labor has proven its ability in Local Government administration, and has
rendered 'faithful and honest service to the Municipality, and is confident
that the electors will demonstrate their appreciation of Labor’s work by
returning Labor’s twelve candidates at the top of the poll.


POLLING DAY
SATURDAY, DECEMBER 4th, 1937
WHO MAY VOTE
Every person (male and female) twenty-one years of age and over, whose
name appears on the Municipal Roll is entitled to vote, and should vote.
METHOD OF VOTING
The method of voting at a Municipal election differs from that at a
Parliamentary election. At a Municipal election CROSSES are used AND
NOT FIGURES. Twelve candidates must be voted for—no more and no less.
POLLING PLACES
AUBURN TOWN HALL
ST. PHILIP’S SCHOOL, HALL STREET
NORTH AUBURN PUBLIC SCHOOL
FREE LANCE HALL, CUMBERLAND ROAD
SHOP AT CORNER OF MARY STREET AND CUMBERLAND ROAD
SHOP AT CORNER OF KIHILLAH ROAD AND BCT.TMBA STREET
TOWN HALL, SYDNEY
HOURS OF POLLING
8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
LABOR’S TEAM
Labor’s twelve candidates are: Aid. J. Upton (Mayor). Aid. W. H. Lamb
(ex-Mayor), Aid. P. Herlihy (ex-Mayor), Aid. G. A. Byrne (Deputy Mayor),
Aid. B. J. Kelly. Aid. N. J. Keile, Aid. P. C. Schindler, Aid. W. S. T. Bond,
Messrs. J. Hudson, J. Bourke, C. McKee and W. W. Stone.
The eight retiring Labor Aldermen are well-known to the Municipality.
Messrs. Hudson, Bourke, McKee and Stone are all well-known Laborites
and Trade Unionists, who have associated themselves with the progress and
development of the Municipality.
They have taken a keen interest in Civic Administration, and their
election to the Council will be an undoubted acquisition to it.
For and on behalf of Labor’s twelve,
ALD. W. H. LAMB,
Campaign Director.
ALD. N. J. KIELE,
Campaign Secretary.


MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
SATURDAY, DECEMBER 4th, 1937
HOW TO VOTE LABOR
xl
X
0
X
X
X
X
BOND, W. S. T. (ALD.)
BOURKE, J.
BYRNE, G. A. (ALD.), J.P.
HERLIHY, P. (ALD.), J.P.
HUDSON, J., J.P.
KEILE, N. J. (ALD.), J.P.
KELLY, B. J. (ALD.)
LAMB, W. H. (ALD.), J.P.
McKEE, C.
Xl SCHINDLER, F. G. (ALD.)
X| STONE, W. W.
X] UPTON, J. (ALD.)
YOU MUST VOTE FOR TWELVE
