

TWO SHILLINGS.
AUSTRALIA FELIX;
■
' j ;
OR,
SIR VALIANT LOVE.
A DRAMA.
.Syiineu:
ANGUS AND ROBERTSON, 89 CASTLEREAGH STREET.
MDCCCXCXI.


Australia Felix;
SIR VALIANT LOVE.
A DRAMA
TWO SHILLINGS.
(Sstowa :
ANGUS AND ROBERTSON, 89 CASTLEREAGH STREET
MDCCCXCII.


grainittis persona.
Lord Chumley, alias Jim Baxter.- The New-Chum Stockman, in
love with Julia.
George Spence, Squatter.—ln love with Belle.
Tom Somers.* —Manager of Cattle Station, in love with Maria.
Marman —A Misanthrope.—Friend of Lord Chumley.
Pan—A Recluse.—Uncle of Lord Chumley.
Ben Whistler —A Bushman.—ln Love with Lucy.
Sam.— Mate of Ben.
Potts. —Gardener.
Grim.— Valet to Marman.
Whaler. —Murrumbidgee.
King Billy. —Aborigine.
Julia Allen (Australia Felix) —Heiress, in love with Lord Chumley.
Belle Stenworth. —Friend of Julia, betrothed to Geo. Spence.
Maria. —Maid to Julia.
Lucy. —Maid to Belle.
Mrs. Lightly, Widow.—Hostess of Stockman’s Anns
Queen Sally. —Spouse of King Billy.
Bushrangers, Station Hands, itc., ad. Jih.
* To account for this character’s peculiarity of diction, be it understood that his original is a
homely country-bred Australian of Scotch parentage.


AUSTRALIA FELIX;
SIR VALIANT LOVE.
ACT I.
Scene. — Room in Squatter's House
Enter Julia and Belle.
Julia.
I do believe I am as much in love
As any woman can well hope to be.
O Julia ! How provokingly you talk.
Why, anyone can see it in your eyes
Who is’nt blind. Don’t speak evasively.
Who is he, Ju 1
Belle.
Julia.
Belle
. Going by your statement, he’s blind—stone blind.
(laughing). The truth is, Julia, you’re not in love ;
You are by far too jestingly disposed.
(sighing). Love is no jest to me.
It is the sober earnest of my life.
So much the better for the man you love.
Julia
Belle.
Julia.
Yes, if the earnest of his life’s the same,
And lives a mutual response of mine.
O, I see Julia ! You are in love,
Belle.
But don’t know yet with whom.
No, no, dear Belle ! lam not quite so bad :
My love is prefaced with a manly grace
That might become the majesty of kings.
From which then, I infer, you are in love,
And have but read the preface of the tale ;
Julia.
Belle,


But think you, Julia, will the story bear
The high eulogium of its author’s skill
So finely prologued.
Julia.
It is the old, old story, that has run
Unscath’d the rancour of the critic’s pen
Since Adam and fair Eve—his gentle spouse—
Were driven from the gates of Paradise.
When the first issue of their kindred work
(So dearly cherish’d, but so deadly fraught
With vengeful hatred of a brother’s weal)
Had fired wild anarchy in life’s entail,
Then the old story was again rewove,
Re-crown’d with laurels, and re-christen’d love ;
And that high festival of life, since then
Divinely honoured at the nuptial shrine,
Has, in the elements of warring strife,
Been poetising the great prose of life.
Though lying prefaces there are I know,
And worthless critics, and some lying too ;
Yet such poor mummers can no more achieve
Than bans their folly in a life’s reprieve ;
Does truth detract from what our lives unfold ?
We love a new edition of the old.
Belle.
Then your edition of the story’s good :
Detail the preface ?
Julia
You can guess at that.
Belle.
O ! Well I’ll try to! Let me think a bit: It wouldn’t be that
tali fellow in the unbending suit of clothes who hovered
around you all night at the Governor’s ball last year. You
remember ? He who was so bound up in himself, you said, that
he couldn’t grace the request he made of you for a waltz with
the customary salutation of a bow.
Julia.
Now you are quizzing. It’s too bad of you
To make me feel so meanly of myself,
By quoting a remark I never meant
Out of the province of a passing joke.
But there is many a fine fellow, Ju,
In straiten’d circumstances.
Belle
Julia.
Granted, Belle dear : There is George Spence to wit,
0, do not blush now. But I owe you much
By way of pardon for so rude a speech.
Will you forgive me ? I had quite forgot
My father’s interdict upon his suit.
But I’m my father’s counsellor in much,
And I’ll be your solicitor to him ;


Only absolve me of the meanness, Belle,
My thoughtless speech so seemingly implied.
(kissing her). There then, Julia : I would as lief
Impeach a snowflake with impurity,
Belle
As you with meanness.
George and my father are especial friends.
Take comfort, Belle; for I have heard him say
That a more manly fellow than George iSpence
He never met: That ought to be significant enough
And Ned is coming, who is George’s friend ;
And father promises that when he comes
Julia.
Some gracious act will celebrate the date
Of his arrival. It is ten long years
Since last we saw him—my big brother, Ned !
0 Belle ! I wonder if he is in love ?
Belle
If he is only like his lovely sis’,
I should more wonder if he wouldn’t be.
How very positive you are of that.
0, how I wish my brother to be here !
Then you haven’t forgot Edward yet ?
His memory in my heart’s the proudest throb
That pulses the whole being of my life.
He is a soldier, and he wears a badge
Which from the chaplet of Death he pluck’d—
That rose of valour, the Victoria Cross.
Julia
Belle.
Julia
My dear, brave gentle Ned !
How I remember when he went away ;
Quelling the flood gates of his manly heart
He stoutly said good-bye to all save me,
Who, with an aspect foreign to my will,
Resolv’d like others to absorb my grief
Rather than grieve him with the sight of it.
But when I saw his pale wan face in mine,
And his lips quiver at the baulk of life,
A woman’s will within me broke away
Thawing the icyness of his resolve.
He pluck’d me in his arms and to his breast,
And kiss’d the good-bye that he couldn’t speak ;
Thus did he leave his little Ju-Ju sweet,
Nursing the sad care of a flooded heart ;
While to the breach, where honour points the way,
With tear stain’d eyes and swollen lips of grief,
A gentle lad set out, but with as brave a heart
As ever dower’d the body of a man,
To dare for valour in the lists of Death.
O don the colours and recruit for—
Belle


Julia. Love—
What I should like to, would it serve to bring
The man I care for to my standard, Belle ;
But then it wouldn’t. It would only serve
To render him more distant than he is.
Belle. More distant, Julia. You do not mean—
Julia. O, I mean only in a social way.
Belle. Or scale, perhaps 1 Which is it, J ulia 1
O how she blushes. (Aside.)
Julia (flurried). Excuse me, Belle. There is—old Potts in the
garden —
And—l—l want to see him—about some flowers.
Exit Julia hurriedly,
Belle. 0, she has gone to hide the tell-tale blushes of her love.
In schemes of gardening with the ancient Potts.
My own coz. Ju ;
You are as sweet a picture of seventeen fair summers,
As ever did delight an artist’s eye.
Now in love’s labyrinth you skip along,
With heaving bosom and sweet wondering eyes,
On through the mazes of its many ways,
Unmindful of all else but blushing Love.
And who’s the modern Theseus of her fate 1
Some noble fellow with a wealth of heart—
The poor atonement for an empty purse.
It’s nearly sunset I must keep my tryst.
(Putting on her hat—and exit.)
Scene ll.— River—high banks. Open bush country interspersed with
scrub. Logs , limbs of trees, <&c., strewn about. Station house in
the distance. Time — sunset.
Enter Belle.
Belle. The sun has quit his labours for the day.
The great star actor in Time’s many scenes
Is now retiring ; and the loud applause
He is accorded with, attests how well
His brilliant efforts have achieved success
In the arena of this Austral clime.
Slowly the curtain drops—the audience rise :
With wistful glances ere they leave, they look—
The pleasing pageantry of life that was,
The stern reality of life that is : —-
And the sweet orchestra of Nature then
Strikes up to cheer them, to dispel the thought,
That life is anything more real than play,—


The present, future, or the past array.
Enter Geo. Spence, and hides behind a hush.
But tush ! ’tis nothing, after all is said,
But love’s preamble. The plain fact is this :
’Tis simple sundown, and no George is here !
And how he promis’d with unheard of vows
That he would meet me at this hour and place !
Well, I am here, and with the diligence of love I’ve
The Old Man ridges and the scalded Plains
scanned
Till I am weary with the sorry sight
Of such bare outline. But they’re finely named ;
And if they’ve nothing to relieve the eye,
They have no sadness to afflict the heart;
For he will presently be here I know :
Meanwhile, to cheer me, I will sing a song.
I like the sweet seclusion of the bush.
Here I am one with Nature, and may choose
To hold high converse with the winds of heaven,
To gossip whimsies of the ways of life,
To lilt them ditties, or if humour wills,
To mate wild Nature in a merry dance
To their sweet lilting. What a glorious treat !
No ears to witness, and no eyes to judge,
Nor sapient jury of the brain to sit
With mock solemnity of visaged front
On Nature’s outing, and proclaim me mad :
/ Sings ) —
Life is sweet and Love is coy,
Love is Life’s adorning ;
When Life was faithless Love did die,
Then poor Life was in mourning
For what is Life worth living for
When Love is dead ?
There is nothing striven for,
When all has fled
To the cold, cold grave.
’Twas in the youth of Father Time
That Love and Life together
Vow’d, in the rosy matin’s prime,
They nevermore should sever :
But lovers’ vows—fond treachery—
Are lightly spoken;
Dumb witness of sweet perjury—
Poor heart that’s broken,
In the cold, cold grave.


Now Love and Life are wand’ring
In search of one another ;
And when, in their meand’ring,
They chance to meet together,
They vow the love of old they vow’d—
To never sever :
Then life’s sweet union fulfill’d
Lives on for ever,
’Yond the cold, cold grave.
Geo. comes stealthily from behind the hush, and blindfolds
her with his hands.)
Guess.
Belle
. George, O
(kissing her). Best to pay the forfeit ere you speak,
Else you might chide me for my tardiness,
And ask for interest.
Belle
('falteringly). Have—you—just come?
No.
Then how long have you been here 1
A little while.
Belle
Belle.
But how long.
Well, then, about as long as it took you to invoke the elements
for a genera] go-as-you-please tournament on the prosy turf.
A fairer challenger—
Belle.
O, say no more ! I thought I Was alone.
Well, so you were, as you are now, alone,
For am not I your lover—you my love ;
And may not I participate in that
Which you delight in, to have my delight.
’Tis not the monitress of worldly life,
Tight-laced morality, that prompts you, Belle;
But, like the many, ’tis the fear of her
That makes you querulous in Love’s demain,
Lest I should be devotee of her shrine,
And chide your happy innocence of life
With owl-eyed eloquence and lying tongue.
Not that I scoff the precepts of the world
Which are co-operate and modelled from
The higher functions, and should so be based
To have that salutary sense of worth
That’s so much lacking in the ways of life ;
But when morality’s the key of self,
It makes the difference we despise it for,
In our hot-headedness, and to our woe,
When he whose policy it is has power.
Therefore, the counter policy is—Wait


Until we have the talisman, and then
Adopt the moral and undo the man.
Belle. O, lam well content. You are my estimate of all the world,
and if I please you I am always pleased.
Geo. Then lam Love’s philosopher.
Belle. And mine.
Geo (kissing her). And yours, because you are sweet Love’s embodi-
ment to me.
(Shrill ivhistle in the distance.)
Belle. O, here is someone coming. Let us go.
Geo. (looking). Old Pan ! Just wait awhile ; you haven’t seen him for
a good few years.
Enter Pan with rijle on his shoulder.
Pan. Good evening, Mr Spence.
Geo. Good evening, Sir ! Where are you going to ? The house I If
so, you can accompany us.
Pan. Are you not alone ?
Geo. There is a lady—an old friend of yours—
Pan. A lady ! Where ?
(Turning round and seeing Belle).
Ay, by my troth there is ! And a right fair one too.
Good evening, Miss, and bless you for the sight
Your presence renders to a rough old man.
Belle. Good evening, Pan, but we have met before.
Pan. There is a memory about your look that seems to haunt me.
Geo. Have you quite forgot how—
Belle ( giving a sign of warning to Geo. to he silent ) —
Take a good look at me before you speak.
Pan (looking at her and shaking his head ) —■
I’m seventy odd years of age, come May,
And all the memories of that little span
Are now conglomerate, nor nothing more
Remember I than may
Within the routine of my daily life
Just charge my memory :
Yet there’s a something in your look I know
Which I can trust to honour on your word,
And say I know you, if you are content
That I should say so and not know your name.
But I am old ; and though I fear not death,
Yet when I see the mourners in his wake—
Once chiefest comrades in my life’s delight—
It makes me sad to think that they should all
Steal from me, one by one, and leave me here
Whom once they honour’d with their guise and gifts,
Alas ! Alas ! for they are nearly gone ;


Health, strength, activity, unerring sight,
Quick ears, good memory—they’re all but fled ;
Yet is my hope much better than my words,
For kindly Nature will dissolve these bands,
And set me gently in the wake of those
Who were my comrades in young manhood’s prime.
Now, at five hundred yards I would not be your mark
For all the gold that’s in the country.
Well, I am not so bad, considering my age,
And I daresay I have that in me yet
That would upon occassion stand me well.
But I am sad at times, and when I am—
Even in converse with another, then,
If that I have my melancholy fit—
I let it garble out;
For it relieves me, and revives again
A happier cherishing of other days,
When you, young master, and the sweet Miss Belle,
Would toddle with me for the live long day,
And ponder the fair flowers and fine fruit,
We did conceit ourselves with, we should find.
And O, Pan, tell me ! Do you mind the day, when you and
George and I went to the Maiden’s Springs 1 Out of the reeds
we pluck’d you made us pipes, and play’d such music that we
danc’d around till we were fairly done. And then we sat
beside you on the log, and listen’d to the story of great Pan,
which so affected us, we wreath’d a crown of blooming wattle, and
made robes of state of kangaroo grass, which we drap’d with
flowers: and in our childish harmony you join’d, and made
a little Mi-Mi of green boughs over an old charred stump which
was a throne you said ; then you put on the robes and wattle
crown, and, with a big reed sceptre in your hand, we christen’d
you King Pan—the name you have been known by ever since.
But in the after frolic of the dance, George sprain’d his ankle,
so he couldn’t walk. You had to carry him upon your back,
and to his mannish waywardness give place, by carrying me too
in your arms, and so, for fully three long miles, you had to
trudge.
Now has the old man got his sight again,
And sees in the full flush of beauteous womanhood
His little fairy child, Miss Isabel.
O, but lam right glad; and bless the thought
That Fashion’s pomp is nowhere to be seen
Without the precints of her own domain :
That though we needs must offer at her shrine.
She only asks of us what we can give


Without entailing on a sacred life :
But I grow garrulous at your expense :
The stars are out, and the night air is chill.
Geo. Come with us, then ; and as we walk, we’ll talk.
Pan. 1 thank you, Sir ! Most willingly I would,
But for a matter that I have on hand.
T’ll see you later on again to-night.
Botving to Belle and exit.
Geo. (taking Belle’s arm). Come, Belle.
Belle (looking intently). 0, there are men ! I saw them crouch and
run across the track into the scrub—there—on the river bank.
Geo. Old men kangaroo ! Your brain is fizz’d
From talking with old Pan too much of Fairyland.
Belle. No, not kangaroos ! We would have heard them.
Geo. Well, travellers, then. I never thought you were so easily
scared.
Belle. Neither am I, but I like it not. There is a consciousness within
me warns of an impending evil.
Re-enter Pan.
Pan. You are right! Come back ! Come back ! For God’s sake,
Sir, come back ; or we are all undone ! ’Tis this I meant to see
you for to-night. When over at Willan’s shanty on the creek
this morning early I heard men talking in a little room; and,
half suspecting them the Blue Cap gang, I listened and heard one
of them propose : —“ You be at Toman bil the time I’ve said. Be
sure you do not shoot. Just seize the lady without any noise.
I’ll pay the money when you’ve caged the bird.” I waited
for no more, but hurried off as hard as I could go. I
know too well the author of the plot. Let us be doing. It’s no
time to talk. Miss Isabel and you keep down the bank till you
come to the fall. The river’s low, and you can ford it there.
Go ! Go ! Don’t hesitate ! Don’t fear for me !
Belle (seeing George’s unwillingness to leave Pan ) —
No, Pan ! George will not leave you, and I’ll not leave him. I
am a woman witb frail woman’s heart; but I will stand the
issue of the worst.
Pan. My life on you, sweet wench, and your stout heart! We will
outwit them yet! You, Mr George, must hide behind that log.
(Handing rifle to Belle.)
Here is my rifle for Miss Isabel, which, with her woman’s wit,
will keep them off. Their orders are that they are not to shoot, so she
can parley the time away till I get back with help.
Exit Pan.
Geo. (kissing Belle). Keep a brave heart, dear Belle.
(Going to log and lying down behind it.)
O, but I feel mean ! (Aside.)


Belle.
I’m not afraid. Don’t be afraid for me.
And now God help me ! for my legs are weak; and my heart’s
battering like a prison’d bird in Death’s derangement. 0, may
the worst come quick ! (Aside.)
Enter six Ruffians with masks on.
Hey, mates ! I say, them coves as was along with her is off.
Pretty Sally Slyboots
Love so from her eye shoots—
Bill, you drunken swine !
That’s because yer didn’t get the first swig o’ the brandy, Jack.
Don’t be ill-natured over yer misfortin. (Advancing to Belle.)
I say my pretty Miss—
Save yer good manners for to grace yer wit, old swipes. She’ll
not miss you if that ’ere thing goes off.
Ist R.
2nd R.
Ist R.
2nd R.
3rd R.
Ifth R.
Come back, sonny! The lass means mischief with her shootin’-
stick ; and if she lets it off we’ll have the country about our
heels before you can cry crack I
2nd R.
Our heels about the country, you mean.
The lady’s been a-’possumin’.
6th R.
sth R.
Ist R.
She’ll ’possum you if you don’t quick get out.
Stand back, you lushy fool! You’re in the road !
Come, Jack ! Let’s seize the wench, and get away from here,
Or we will lose her yet with this curst foolin’.
Here, Dick ! Slip round behind her with the rope.
If one of you dare move a foot, I’ll fire.
Belle.
Ist R.
What silly rot! Throw down the barker.
It’s no good to shine.
Belle.
I tell you I will fire if you come near!
0 what a libel on the name of men you are !
There is no pity in a coward ! Hone :
No spark of manliness to fire apace,
And burn the wicked promptings of his heart,
Else I would plead with you to let me off.
1 am a woman, but I’ve got a heart
Would grace the abler body of a man !
Stand back ! I warn you, or I’ll fire the shot
That, miss or hit, will signal to your hurt.
Enter Grim, beckoning ruffians aside.
My master bade me tell you to begone. That’s the wrong lady,
so you’d better cut, if you have any wit, and want to save it for
another time. The station hands are coming, fight to the teeth
and swearing to a man. Run for your better luck ! you
villains run. Your worse is only here.
Grim.
Exit Ruffians.
(Belle faints. Rifle goes off, and ball grazes Grim’s thigh.)


Geo. ( with Belle in his arms). My love ! My love !
Grim (jumping and grimacing with pain). Great Cseser’s ghost! O
lawdy, lawdy ! Whew—hiss—yum-yum ! Saint Jeremy—
Jehoshaphat —I’m shot! O lord, I’m targetted !
( Sitting on the ground and groaning.)
(Enter Bax, followed hy Maeman, Julia, Maria, Potts, awe? Station
Hands — Gathering round Belle and George )
Pan. Keep back a little. She has fainted just,
Thank Heaven, it is no worse.
Jidia ( kneeling beside her). Poor Belle !
Belle (recovering). George—Julia, what-—O, lam very faint.
Please help me up ?
Marman ( to Grim). Get up, you fool ! What are you groaning for ?
Tell me which way they went ? Be quick ! be quick !
These noodles want to tear them into shreds;
And I must make a show of helping them,
To put them off the scent. (Aside.)
Grim (groaning). Make a reality of helping me, and put me on my
feet. My leg is broken, if my thoughts be right.
Marman ( turning away). My patience is, with such a fool as you !
Grim ( ivhile getting up). And if it were your head ’twould be no
odds. (Aside.)
Marman. I hope, my friends, that there is no one hurt ? Miss Sten-
worth, you look pale. Can I assist you ?
Belle (coldly). No, I thank you ! Julia, give me your arm, and
George you lead the way. Surely between you I can get along.
A little longer rest, and we will go.
Marman (to Pan and station hands). Then let us scour the bush. To
let such villains off without arrest is like conniving at their
wickedness.
Pan. Ay ! So it is.
Station Hand. 0, we’ll convoy them and confound them too. I’ll
squirm the wretches. 11l put that in at their earholes as’ll
puzzle their brains for a lifetime.
(Other hands tracking about with lights). This way boys ! This way.
Exit Marman, Pan, and Station Hands.
Belle. Now, lam strong enough with your good aid.
(Rising, and supported between Geo. and Julia.)
Potts ( walking off, and tumbling over a log). Bless me ! How decavin’
is one’s sight ?
Julia. 0, poor old fellow ! (Aside.)
To Potts : Have you hurt yourself 1
Potts ( getting up). It’s all right, Miss J ulia. I’m not so bli— ( Stumbling
again ).
Maria. Here, Potts ! Give me your arm. Now, we are right. Lead on.
Exit all.


ACT 11.
Scene 1. — Bushman’s camp—tent — sheet of bark with damper and salt
beef on it—bag meat safe slung from branch of tree. Open box
country — limbs, logs, &c., strewn about. Time — mid-day. Axes
stuck in immk of trees.
Enter Ben and Sam.
Ben (getting up from dinner—pulling out knife, pipe, and tobacco, and
sitting under shade of tree ) —
Benny, my boy, sit down an’ rest y’rself. J ust feel what a fat
man looks. Sam, I’m amazin’ happy—at loggers with nothing
bar the sun, and tight as a stockman in new moles.
Sam (eating away). And just’n about the same tiff to go to work—too
fond o’ mindin’ o’ y’r stock. The lee side o’ the sun is your
share o’ the work th’ day—Ben. I wouldn’t ax y’ for to strain
y’rself when y’r so tight across the brisket, I respec’ a man’s
feelin's after a square meal.
Ben. Y’r’re the livin’ pictur’ o’ what the poet said, Sam—“A fellow
feelin’ makes us wond’rous kind.” If I could whip my dover
round damper and salt junk like you, sonny, I’d take a contract
o’ cleanin’ up some o’ them ’ere Pitt Street eatin’ houses.
You’d make a reg’lar labour-savin’ machine in the eatin’
line, Sam.
Sam. Well, a’ don’t know, Ben. Twenty to the dozen your jaws go,
beside an extra handicap o’ lip. Y’u’d make a famine in any
or’inary family inside o’ five minutes, if they only attended to
your wants.
Ben. Sam, my old man says the only one as can set him is you, an’ I
haven’t got the belt from him yet. He says it “mun” be a
disease, the relapse o’ which brings on an equivalent o’ three
or’inary men’s eatin’.
Sam. (getting up and putting damper and beef in safe ) —
Well, jokin’ aside, Ben, health t’ eat a square meal is strength
t’ enjoy’t. (Stretching himself). I just feel as if I could ring
every tree in the bush now without touchin’ one o’ them. Len’s
y’ur knife and baccy.
Ben. Gemini ! Listen to the lyre bird.
Enter Whaler with swag and billy, while singing —
I’ve whaled on the Darlin’ an’ Murray,
The Lachlan and Murrumbid—gee ;
’Tis of all lives the most free from worry,
An’ that’s why I like it, d’y’ see ;
Up one side, and then down the other,
The cue of the game’s in the cant


Of a thumpin’ big swag an’ a billy,
And swear b’ the work ye don’t want.
Sam. Go it, daddy !
Ben. String us out some more of it, ol’ son.
Whaler. It’s mighty hot, boys. Is there any chance of a job for an
old man like me?
Ben. Sam, hook out the damper an’ salt horse, an’ give the ol’ fellow
a start.
Whaler. That’s the fake to fit me, boys. That’s my measure to aT.
(Pulling out an old pipe and sticking his finger into
it while looking at Ben and Sam).
Could one o’ ye gi’e me a bit of baccy ?
Ben. What ? No baccy neither ? Here’s a plug for you, ol’ splodger.
Whaler (fumbling in his pockets). Well, I—had—matches—but I
Sam. 0, but y’u’re good on the game, dad ! Y’u’re a reg’lar dabster
(throwing him matches). There. An’ now tell us what y’u
were lagg’d for ?
Whaler (while opening his swag and getting his hags out , Sc.). For
m’ reformation—on the evidence of a one-eyed p’liceman, and as
pretty a corpse as ever was stretched in the twinklin’ of a blue
pill from a Colt’s revolver. Ye see, boys, we were both in it;
an’ of the two he was the luckier man ; an’ I was the best
corpse-maker; an’ savin’ the words o’ some honest folks who
didn’t know me, and the bad sight o’ the one-eyed p’liceman,
they’d have stretched m’ neck in conformity wi’m’ conscience,
an’ made a compact man of me. Could ye gi’ me a dust o’ tea
an’ a bit o’ sugar,about as much as would sweeten the tooth
of an alligator, after the influx of a dead Chinaman ?
Sam (laughing). Pass him the bags, Ben.
Ben. Here, m’ ancient ! Dive into’t, and go on with the twister.
Whaler (helping himself). 0, but ye’ve an eye for the wants of an old
man. Well, as I was say in’, boys, I was within a miracle o’
being a sight for the adornment of society, when they thought
better to make me a spectacle. So they sent me here for the
good o’ m’ health, and out of a tender regard for the weak state
o’m ’mental faculties, they made a tablet o’ m’ back for the nine
commandments, an’ a repository o’ m’ head for the tenth, an’
gi’ me fifteen years in the Pentridge Univarsity to matriculate
for a walking advertisement of the moral law. lam the true
bill of a self-made man, boys ; for I’m the object o’ m’ own life,
and owe nothin’ to nobody for its attainment.
Sam. Well, old man, y’u’ve a wonderful flow of langidge. I wouldn’t
run such a risk o’ putting my jaw out for a trifle.
Ben (laughing). An’ that’s all true, dad?
Whaler. Every word of it, barrin’ what you don’t like t’ believe. An’
now, m’ kind lads, if ye’ll gi’ m’ as much damper dust as ’ll


make a johnny-cake, I’ll be goin’. Ye see, I mightn’t get t’ the
station t’-night; an’ that means I won’t get there afore
to-morrow night. An’ ye wouldn’t “ come it ”on a’ old man
who’s strivin’ in the elements of an honest livin’.
Ben (giving him flour in a pint pot). Here old ’un, open y’ur wallet.
There. An’ is there any other cavity in the minds eye o’ y’ur
stomach, that wants fillin’ up?
Whaler ( reciting). 0, generous heart —inestimable wealth,
That has no surcease in the vale of time—
Sam. Save us, ol’ man, what’s that ? Say it again?
Whaler. That’s poetry, m’ boy.
Ben. Rot I call it!
Whaler. An’ that’s the other name for it; and while the public are
ignorin’ which it is, the poet dies—the history of a life in two
volumes.
Ben. An’ what does he die of ?
Whaler. Sometimes o’ one thing, sometimes of another; but often the
prelude to his want of breath is want o’ bread, straight
starvation—a disease with a killin’ hold of a man that’s down.
Sam. An’, who wrote the volumes, dad ?
Whaler. 0, but ye’re green as a fresh buddin’ cornstalk. The sharp-
witted fellow, who took a contract of rescuin’ his name from
oblivion, to make a big pot over it—an’ didn’t.
Sam. Well, I’m glad o’ that; for it’s mean. It’s too much like
robbin’ a corpse for me.
Whaler. Yer right m’ lad. It’s as big a meanness as it is a mistake :
A mistake in the first person, a meanness and a mistake in
the second, and a funeral procession in the third, with an
uncommonly strong odour of the dead ; but they call it keepin ’
his mernry green.
Ben. An’ the mem’ry of a man like him wanted keepin’ green, for
he’d never ’a’ ripen’d to maturity. He must ’a’ died o’ the dry
rot. He could ’a’ been no better a specimen than a frizzled up
five weeks’ white-heart cabbage in an ol’ woman’s vegetable
garden. An’ the sharp-witted fellow—he must either have cut
himself and bled to death, or died o’ grief waterin’ the other
one’s mem’ry. The first was a wittlin’, the second a fool, an’ the
third—a regular humbug ’nointed with the flufiium o’ the
corpse.
Whaler. If ye’d had edication m’ lad, ye’d have made a good critic.
Satn. Well, dad, a’ don’t know what y’u’ve been sayin’ half o’ the time,
but I savee y’u ’re yabberin’ cricket now ; and you bet Ben’s
a bit of a slogger. He took thirty runs off his own bat agin the
Budgeree team last We’n’sday; and that’s some m’ lavlins, —
specially considerin’ after a hard half day’s wrastlin’ wi’ a chock-
an’-log fence. Y’u may guess b’ that he’s a bit of a duster.


Ben (flattered). Well, Sam, if you wasn’t the best natured fellow alive
I’d call y’u a hippopot-a-mus for such a piece of benighted
ignorance. Why man, it’s not cricket he’s talking about ; it’s
a critic.
Sam (with momentary look of puzzled stupidity , hut brightening up
quickly )
Well, when all’s said I’m not so far out, for barrin’ the chirrup,
there’s a good bit o’ stonewallin’ about both o’ them whiles.
Ben. O, lord ! Can’t y’u say critic ?
Sam. Cricket !
Ben. Ho ! Cri—crik—l mean crit—cri —O, hang !
Sam. I cry a go, Ben. You can crack your jaws over it as much as
you like ; an’ I expect y’u will if y’u keep on at it, for it has
put a crick in mine already. I say daddy can you settle this ?
’Twas you that started it. I’ve flummox’d Ben, so bring your
lamin’ to the fore. Y’re college bred?
Whaler (Picking up his swag and hilly). What’s all the colloquy
m’ lads?
Ben. That’s just it daddy : —lt’s a jolly sight too cholicy ; an’ here
I’ve been physicin’ Sam all this time to no purpose. Are you
off so soon.—Farewell then daddy. If y’ur health is good, you
can’t fare ill for the next twenty-four hours at any rate ; an’
y’u ’ll fare better if you mind y’ur stops atwixt the settin’ of two
suns from now. Hang round the station till to-morrow night.
There’ll be a kick-up and a glorious feed, be bound to
reward y’urself with a good square meal, and a long sleever.
Whcder. Thank ye kindly. I’ll say good-day t’ both o’ ye m’ lads ;
May curses quit ye,
And all blessin’s hit ye.
Ben. Good day, Sinakrib !
Sam. So long, Sir Lingo Hevercease, so long!
( Picking up the hilly).
Ben, are you hungry for a drink o’ tea ?
Ben. Ho.
Sam. Then I’ll have it for to save the waste.
(Drinking it out of hilly).
I say, Ben, next time y’u go bangin’ dough,
I hope you won’t go plasterin’ my nap !
Ben. A’ couldn’t help it, Sam. The bloomin’ thing !
A whirlwind came as a’ was mixin’ it,
An’ made me flurry for to pick it up
Before ’twas anything like thick enough;
An’ just as I was going in the tent
M’ foot slipp’d from me, and away I went.
’Twas thund’rin’ lucky that y’ur nap was there
Or else we would have had to eat a cross


Atwixt a damper an’ a yellow brick.
I saved the tucker bill th’ best I could,
An’ we can balance the remainder, Sam,
In the profit and loss account.
(Going inside tent).
Sam. A’ hope the next time you go tottin’ up
To save the tucker bill, y’u’ll bear in mind
My blanket isn’t for a balance-sheet.
I pick’d a dollop of it off to-day,
An’ left as many fragments as’ll serve
All of the magpies an’ the little birds
A month of Sundays.
An’ a’ tell y’u,
A’m going to ride the Gunner at the drive :
Y’u’ll find him runnin’ with old Scroggy’s mare
In the long angle paddock ; run him up ;
A’m goin home t’ get a clean rig out.
(sticking his head out of tent) —
Tell Jim Baxter, if you see him, Sam,
I’ll ride the Flasher filly if he likes ;
She wants a doin’, an’ I want a mount
That wont disgrace me, for old Roany’s stiff
From the last run he had, an’ wants a spell.
(shouting hack). All right; I’ll tell him !
(inside th e tent) sings —
Sally, she is
The sun of my life,
The moon of my heart,
And the sort of a wife
A man ought to have
If he wants to contrive,
Independent of sunlight
And moonlight, to thrive.
Richer than money makes,
Round as a roll •
Sweeter than honey cakes,
Cosy as wool
She looks like a lily
In love with a rose,
While ogling a cherry
Right under her nose.
Retiring as eve is,
And fair as the dawn


That smilingly leaves us—
That ushers the morn ;■ —
She’s more than I know how
To christen her half
As good as just Sally,
The sun of my life.
(Coming out of tent, whistling jig air, and dancing step —then exit.)
Scene ll. — Squatter’s House — Verandah—Lawn and
front. Time, Sunrise.
Shrubbery in
Enter Julia.
Julia.
(looking toward the rising sun ) —
Now, by the rosy chambers of the East,
That tokens some festivity of love,
A fairer morning I have never seen than this.
It is so omened to my heart’s appeal,
That had I had the option to adjure
Some special favour to forerun my love,
I never could have conjured such a theme
Of heavenly concord.
By my soul’s greeting to my heart’s delight!
Was ever morrow to a maid vouchsaf’d
In such sweet harmony 1 Was ever love
So highly honoured in a loyal maid ?
For by the sacred virtue of my life,
Bright laurell’d Phoebus has his fiery steeds
Rein’d in, and lit down from his tinted car
To do the honours of the festive board ;
Where I, none other than his bidden guest,
With my five senses and whole heart and soul
Make sweet communion. O, my heart’s joy !
But this indeed is rare.
(Kissing her hand to the rising sun.)
Auspicious omener of my life’s weal,
I kiss good morrow to your royal lips—
(bowing low)
A virgin kiss, and of a virgin love
The very beverage.
Now that I’ve feasted with the fabled gods,—
Amply partaken of ambrosial sweets
To my contentment, let the thanks be due
To the Great Giver of the bounteous fare :


His are the gifts that give my heart the joy;
Be his the honour that the joy begets,
And this thought of my heart-accepted thanks.
(Putting her hand to her breast.)
O, the sweet sadness that is harboured here !
The dear uncertainty that buoys my life!
A little craft that’s freighted with my heart,
And bound for wedlock.
The sails of airy gossamer are wove, —
Becoming fabric for a breeze of sighs
Heaving the bosom of the deep of Love—
The only elixir of life that is
Wherewith to strengthen our frail wills to seize
The toward prospects of a favouring breeze.
Then ho ! the anchor of my craft be weigh’d ;
For I will vouch a hurricane of sighs
But she shall scud on my behests, despite
The tortuous elements which war and warp
Thought’s sea within me to sad waterspouts.
My life at hazard for my love I’ll set,
With all my maiden modesty to boot;
But I shall have the issue in my ears
Of those love passages from his bold eyes !
No ! bold they are not—’tis a libel that—
But piercing rather ; for I’ve ever since
The feeling quiver of their barbed glance
In my poor heart. Yet I’ll be sworn
They have the melancholy hue of love—
The very tint that savors of the dawn
Of some fair day.
My father’s daughter’s counsellor am I,
For lack of better ; and to let my love,
That has resolved upon a course so mad,
Run without rating from the very start,
Would be a breach of etiquette for which
I will not be accountable.
My cousin Belle, if I did speak to her,
With quizzical philosophy, would shred
The secret out,
And after tease me which I couldn’t stand.
Love is the very essence of our lives ;
And we, as keepers of that sacred charge,
Must challenge jest and calumny alike ;
Else will the subtle elements escape,
And nought but curdled dredginess remain,


The sour embiiterment of after life.
Then is my wisdom manifest to have
A counsellor discreet; and such a one
I most unworthily elect—myself :
So kindly self-admonition comes.
To think I am in love ? O me ! 0 me !
To round upon nobility so sharp, and woo
My father’s stockman ? By my troth it’s love !
But it’s rank heresy no less, to spurn
A veritable lord for the caprice of such a humour !
Rank heresy ! I know it is, says Love,
But it is better than rank ceremony ,—
Both rank and rank. O saucy Love !
Your tongue is sharper than a two-edged sword ;
For you have put my counsellor to flight,
Who is so prided on his skill of fence
With wordy weapons, that he slights the shield
And triple-plated armour of the heart, undaunted truth,
As all too cumb’rous for his slender strength;
Trusting in venom’d calumny instead
To speed the ill not in his arm to speed.
Yain carpet knight! Presumptuous to think,
With thy frail subtlety of fence, to cope
The matchless valour of that noble knight
And flower of chivalry, Sir Valiant Love.
( Seeing Tom Somers).
Tom, Tom, I want you !
[Enter Tom Somers.)
When you run in the horses, will you please
To put old Madcap in the stall for me ?
I want to ride him at the drive to-day.
I’ve never seen one, so I’ll take this chance
To see a sight I have a fancy for.
Tom.
Madcap ! Miss Julia ! Ride Madcap 1 You?—
A perfect wretch ! He’s bound to bolt, and
Very free to buck. He’d break your blessed
O ! I beg y’ur pardon, Miss ! I have forgot.
Granted, Tom, for there is no offence.
You only want to scare me of my mount.
He’s not so wicked as you say he is 1
Now is he ? Come !
Well, maybe, no; not just so bad, Miss Julia
But bad enough. He’s very hard to hold,
And mettled up ; the rider, then, that has
The pith of arm to get a pull on him,
Julia,
Tom.


Must have the grit as well to keep his seat;
For baulk him on his speed, he pitches in,
And squeals like a wild heilan’man reelin’
To his pipes, and it takes a rare partner
To jit him then. Saving young Mr. Spence,
And Jim Baxter, the new-chum stockman,
There’s none in these parts
Half up to the wrinkles of old Madcap.
The new-chum stockman ! Can he ride so well 1
Ay ! that he can, Miss Julia. He’s good.
A stickler, Jim is ! —Can both mouth and mount
With any man I know, or ever know’d;
No jugglin’ neither, but straight-going work.
Look at young Fawn, and Fleet!
A liner pair were never put in gear,
Nor better paced. Jim broke ’em in.
I own I have a pride to speak of Jim,
For he is modest of his own desarts,
And well desarvin’. Y’u never hear him speak
Of what he does, or what he can do ;
But he does his work, and does it like a man.
I’m glad to hear you speak of him so well.
I had no notion he was half so good.
Why, Tom, he must be ’most as good as you 1
He is, Miss Julia ! He’s more’n that—
He’s better; and I own’t, nor am ashamed to.
It’s just a sight to see young Spence and him
Cutting out cattle, or on foot, the while
They’re workin’ ’mong them in the draftin’ yard.
They’ll neither take the fence.
A four-foot waddy is what most they take,
And deal out woe-be-tiders on the beasts
With the solemnity of a Sunday face
Dispensin’ Christmas gifts.
He’s just a wonder of a man is Jim.
He has a kind of ’chanter in his eye,
That baulks the wildest scrubbers in the bush,
Or charms them to the workin’ of his will.
It’s little wonder that the widdy’s struck.
Ben Whistler’s chances for her charms are nix
While Jim’s about. He might do worse ?
There’s a fine freehold with the Stockman’s Arms,
Without considerin’ the widdy’s self, —
As nice a piece of comely buxomness
As ever was the death of any man.
Without a shada’ of reproach, in what I say,


To her late husband. A most worthy man
Was he while livin’; and because he’s dead
’Sno earthly reason, I should say he’s less,
When knowin’, specially, the widdy’s grief ;
She paid a watery tribute to his worth
That makes me confident to say, he’s yet—
To speak at any rate within the mark—
As sweet in mem’ry as his body is
Of decent burial in a twelvemonth’s grave,
If both could be exyunid without offence,
Which more’n probable would prove the truth,
That as the stinch has with the flesh decay’d,
So has the mem’ry with the widdy’s weeds ;
For last I saw her she had cast them off;
And in a wreath of modesty and smiles
Was revellin’ in the finery of her wit
To catch another. Such are widdys.
But, Miss Julia ; lord ! It’s human nature.
Julia. I suppose so, Tom ; but you are rather hard.
Tom. It’s just m’rantin’. I’ll recant it all
The very next time I am in her house,
And drink an honest bumper of good ale,
Or what’s most handy, to a better health
In her enjoyment of her second spouse
That is to be. The first, poor man—
Julia. Please, Tom, excuse me, but I quite forgot.
(Going into house , and fetching a decanter and glass out.
walking to other end of verandah.)
Tom. If it’s by that, Miss Julia, you mean
That I should drink a drop, I’ll not refuse.
Aside —
I’ll never go behind m’self and say
I don’t like liquor when I want a glass.
(Pouring liquor out.)
It’s drunk immoderate and cursed the same,
Because—Wh-o-a ! Fair do’s, Thomas !
Never condescend to make a beast of y’urself—
But it’s a fine relaxer in the main.
Your health, Miss Julia, both first and last,
For you’re a lady, and that sums you up.
I wish you— ( drinking) a-y-e ! What beautiful twang
Julia (aside). This is Tom’s idle humour that’s abroad,
And nothing more.
Yet it affects me not a whit the less,
To know what warranty of truth there is
For such an inference. And how am 1


To ascertain the fact without committal ?
There’s Belle could manage it; but—no ! no ! no !
Maria ? No ! still worse and worse;
Her prying openness would only serve
To make his volubility increase.
0, tut ! What folly ! I’m beside myself,
For not considering that their aid’s reward
Would be the very secret of my heart,
Whose only confidence is pledg’d in me
By vows inviolable ; the which to break
Would be a sacrilege this after-life
Might scarce atone for. The matter’s plain,
Without those vile alternative resorts
That make a marplot; for what’s new in masks
That is not patented by woman’s wit,
Man’s ready-reckoner 1 And now’s the time,
When Love’s intriguing embassy’s abroad
And hearts at stake, to sift this matter out,
And prove myself an adept in the role
Of wily diplomat.
(Advancing to Tom.)
And is it true
Your new-chum protege is going to wed
With the fair widow, Tom 1
Well, as I said before, he might do worse,
Seein’ the widdy has the wit to know
She can’t do better.
Julia.
But, dear bless us, Tom,
That’s all conditional; and is more by far
A truce of speculation than true hearts.
There’s nothing definite.
Except the widdy ;
And she’s twelve st’n wite
I’ll warrant, if a pound.
Julia
(laughing). And a sound protest against doctor’s bills
When well proportion’d; for you say she’s fair.
Fair, fat, and thrifty—fig’rative, is
The livin’ model of a poor man’s wife ;
For fair to look at, she allures the eye ;
As fat to fondle, she delights the touch;
And these combinin’ are her thriftiness,
Makin’ the poor man’s humpy on a par
With the King’s palace and fine garnishin’s ;
And showing the secret of the marriage rave
Amongst the poor folks, who have sense to know


A good wife’s always a well furnished house,
Forbye a cheap one.
Julia. My honour, Tom, but you are right gallant,
And quite the oracle.
Tom. Then my old granny was a prophet sure.
Julia. A prophetess !
Tom. O, nothing more than common in the line.
’Twas what you said reminded me of when—
Savin’ your presence for the naked truth—
Buddy and dirty in a younglin’s pride I skelpt about
Without the conscience of a care or dread,
Beyond the groomin’ that I nightly got
From the old lady who had charge of me.
When I rose ruddy from the suds and scrubs
She had administered, she then would say—
“ Come here, noo, Tammy, till I kame yir hair.”
Then granny’s inquisition would commence :
“ Haud still noo, hinny ” ; and then, by-and-by—•
“ Weel, Tammy, gif ye live tae be a man,
And hae as muckle in yir head then
As ye hae noo on it,
Ye’ll be a livin’ oracle, no doot.”
(Exit Julia, laughing).
Tom. What a fine lady that Miss Julia is.
(Taking up decanter and looking at it designedly.)
(Enter Maria, tvitJi broom in her hand—seeing Tom's intention ,
and mimicing Julia’s voice.)
Maria. O, Tom, I
Tom (flurried , thinking it Jalia ) —
Yes, Miss Julia,
I—shoo, buzz, fuzzin’ ! you pulootin’ pest !
If I could catch y’ I would spoil your drone.
(Making a dart at an imaginary fly supposed to be hovering round
decanter.)
There’s nothing that they won’t investigate—they flies,
They’re most provokin’ ; and by no means nice
To have them floatin’ in y’ur drinkables,
With the oncartainty upon one’s mind
Of where they lit last—an emetic thought,
That agitates th’ intrils with a power
No draught can equal. It gives me the sp—
(Tom hearing Maria tittering , stops and turns round.)
Sakes ! Maria ; but I’m glad it’s you,
And not Miss Julia, whom I thought it was.
I wouldn’t for the sum of what I’m worth
In worldly notions had her catch me then ;


It’s so like welcomin’ one’s absence just
Behind their back.
I never was so straiten’d in my life
To make a substitute ; and sooner than faced round
I would have ran after that fly that I was fablin’ of,
Till I’d got shelter in the scrub, to bide
What impropriety there doubtless seem’d
Atwixt that there decanter and me then, —
With assumed innocence of expression —
That I was lookin’ at as you come in :
The filly-gree work of the stopper’s grand.
Maria. ( walking totvards Tom and looking at him)—
Tom ! Tom ! Tom ! You flatterer !
Tom. You little pixie 1
But you want kissin’ for the lively wit
That shows you’re in the fashion of your years—in love
That other region of our lives betimes,
Where women are all planets in a sense,
And men their satellites.
Maria. And what are they, Tom 1
Tom. And just wait awhile ;
I’m not the ’bridgment of a walkin’ die ’ —
But I can tell you what I mean the same.
When you go walkin’ of a starry night,
You’ll notice them big dazzlers in the “ Way ”
Go flirtin’, flirtin’, with their hangers-on.
Maria. I don’t go walking on a starry night,
Or any other night.
Tom. We’ll put it “if” then, for discretion’s sake.
In that great city that’s call’d Univarse,
Where worlds and all their relatives reside ;
Or homely speaking, where the stars are fixed
With their belongin’s in the heavens above ;
If y’u ’re any time at all dispos’d
To take a lunar on a starry night,
Y’u’ll notice the main thoro’fare, or street,
Of that great city, from the dust that’s raised
By reason of the trafiickin’ there’s there—
And sometimes gayer than is usual too—
Like to what Pitt Street’s on a gala day,
The Milky Way is, when the stars are out
In their fine ’firings, and their satellites
Philanderin’ round them. Are you listenin’ now ?
Well, them there satelites are hangers on.
You know it isn’t in a clothes-line sense


That they’re attach’d. They’re govern’d by what
In scienced or-a-tree is called—Maria !
Bless us, are you mismarised 1
Maria (startled and screaming slightly) —
Tom ! Mercy, don’t! My heart’s in my mouth.
Tom (sarcastically ) —
Be ikinomik then, and swall’w’t,
’T’ll save you breakfastin’ if ’t’s any size—
I thought ’twas dissolution of the brain,
You’d got so goggly about the eyes —
And I was cornin’ to the part—but no !
I’m glad t’ say y’ur wisdom is intact.
The spell is broken ! I’ll proceed no more.
Maria (sharply )
Then I’ll proceed Tom Somers ! Make a shift !
(Sweeping very vigorously with her broom).
Tom. Good wife’s dexterity, poor man’s ex tremity, and a rogue's delight
(Plausibly).
I say, Maria, are you fond at all
Of bearin’ po’try ?
Maria (turning round smilingly)
Yes, Tom, I am.
Can you make poetry ?
Tom. Well—Well y’u know, not much—
Just in a cabbagykind of way I can.
I’ve no profession of the real thing,—
Of what in English Lating is denounced
Divine fly-at-us,* and in English means—
(With a puzzled look from endeavour to explain the meaning)
But how-some-ever it’s of no account.
The little thing I made up is on stars,
As is most natural in me it should,
Seein’ I’m awfully wrapt up in them ;
And brains allow’n’
I would have been a ’stronomer, I think,
For all m’ fac’lties incline that way ;
Yet one must just be as they’re fitted out
To have prosperity and wiseness both,
Else they are wittlings this side of that,
Or fools the other ; but the proper gauge
Of one’s true calibre’s contentment :
By that y’u’ll know— Somehow or other,
I’m inclined to think
My brain’s too Aossified for studyin’ much—
* Tom means afflatus.


Maria ( mistaking Tom’s meaning — consolatory ) —
And little wonder, when, day after day,
You’re in the saddle.
Tom (perceiving the view she has taken of what he meant , putting
hand to head, and pretending to stagger , says sarcastically ) —
0 ! Good guide us all!
Aside —
And if yours isn’t mulified, I’m no judge of a kick !
Maria ( excitedly ) —
Tom ! O great goodness, what’s ailing you ?
Here, have some brandy ? It may do you good.
Tom (taking decanter and glass with alacrity) —
Ay ! Just a thimbleful to kwite m’ nerves,
They fits so—
(Tilting up decanter to pour out brandy).
Maria (fearing he may take too much arrests his arm) —
Ah ! Ah!
Tom. Are you prescribin’ for the sandy blight ?
Y’u know I’m purposin’ its down m’ throat
This liquor goes, not in m’ eye—
M’ sight’s quite eye-whole;—’t’s, m’ system’s shock’d.
Maria. Well then, I’ll pour it, and you hold the glass 1
'Tom ( surrendering ) —
O, bless the girl ! Y’u’ll remember now,
The very moment I say when to stop.
( Holding out the glass to Maria who pours a little in)
I didn’t say when —did y’u think I did ?
Maria. Oh no, but—
Tom (with assumed seriousness of expression)-
Well now, Maria, if you only know’d
The deadly consequence of takin’ that
There scrimpit measurin’ you’d die of fright,
For ’t’s on-sufficient for the stomach’s reach.
’T would go no further than the wind pipe pass,
And there ’twould choke me, or else burn a hole
Down through the gristle, and let out m’ life.
Besides, the infamy of such a taing !
The exhibition of one’s latter end
A flarin’ register in public print,
And branded sowshide I Y’u’re very kind,
I’ll say that for y’u ; and y’ur meanin’s nice—
But, I’ll no thank y’u for the present time.
(. Handing Maria the glass in a pretendedly hurt manner).
Maria ( bowing good naturedly) —
Then, Tom, you show me how high up the glass
Your “ when ” is, and I’ll know ?


Tom. Just somewhere hereabouts,
Maria. And mine is here.
We’ll halve the difference for peace’s sake,
And be good friends.
Tom. Maria y’ur a girl of omcommon gumption ;
I’ll just give in to what y’u like to give,
And drink y’ur health.
Maria. There now ! I’m certain you will say with me,
That’s a respectable nobbier.
Tom. Highly respectable.
(Then looking at Maria critically.)
Well girl, if judgin’ from the signs display’d
About y’ur person be at all correct,
Y’u’ve love’s come-hither in no small degree ;
So I will wish y’u its retaining power
In the maturer womanhood of life
Y’u are approachin’ to. (Bowing and drinking.)
Maria , ( boicing ). 0 thank you, Tom.
Tom ( aside).
It’s worth a strategy—
The primest drop of stuff I ever drank.
(To Maria).
That’s rare good liquor, I’ll be bound it costs
A price conformin’, but its worthy worth :
(Looking at his watch).
Good life! Its later than I’d any thought !
I must be going.
Ma ria. But you promis’d Tom,
To say that poetry about the stars ?
Tom. Another time, Maria, and I will:
In fac’ I’m thinkin’ ’twould be wasted breath,
Without pre-facing it to let y’u know
Its meanin’ clearly. ’T’s an unusual thing
For women to care anything at all
About astronomy; ’t’s too cut and dried.
There’s no santiment—
No love’s knick-knacking what the women likes, —
Kisses and such like, and heart-splittin’ sighs,
And droopin’ eyelids, and volcanic busts,
That heave and agitate the system so,
It makes one curious to know the cause,
And takes them rashly to the cr’atur’s side ;
Though some more venturesome will try the mouth
But that’s too desperate a course to take,
When there’s no knowin’ but they might go off,
For there’s not one of them that’s quite extinct:


It’s highly critical for any man, but very natural,
Seeing the heathenish belief that’s held
About being rocketed from off their shrines
Into the regions of connubial bliss.
( Putting his arm around Maria's waist.)
Commend me woman before dynamite
For blowing up.
She always has been, and is still preferr’d
Prime force of nature. But I mustn’t spot
Their failin’s too much, for it wouldn’t do.
Maria [ turning away from him indignantly ) —
No, that it wouldn’t, if you’d screen your kind.
Tom [apologetically ) —
Y’re right, Maria, an’ I’m glad to see
That y’u’ve a spirit that becomes y’ur charms ;
For woman’s frailty to the fore denotes
Where man’s depravity has passed ahead.
I’ve no meanin’ to impart them blame.
It’s just m’ nonesense, and y’u’ll pardon that
Maria—will you ?
[Draining closer to her.)
Maria. O yes, you’re sorry an’ I’ll not be sour ;
But Tom, how is it you’re so awfully mix’d ?
Tom. That’s it! How is it ?—and you standing there.
Maria [knowing Tom's meaning) —
First stars, then poetry, and brandy next.—
o—O, the brandy ! It’s the brandy Tom !
Tom. O—O, it isn’t! Y’u’re as far away
As seas might drift y’u in a week of years.
I say, Maria, will—
[Going to put his arm about her neck, Maria eludes him.)
Y’u little witch !
Maria. That’s not the poetry though, Tom.
Tom. Well it’s the santiment, at any rate,
That would make a fine piece of practical po’try
With a fair subject.
[Putting his arm around her waist, and in jocular earnestness)
Will y’u, Maria, b’ the troth of love,
Prescribe me quickly for a heart’s disease
The sweet extraction of two cherry lips,
And let me press ’em, for ’am very bad ?
Maria [bashfully, but inclining) —
Why—why, what nonsense you are talking Tom !
You’re always saying


Tom. I’ll be doin’ now tho’ with y’ur gentle leave,
(. Kissing her on the lips.)
A sweet comparison !
Maria. O mercy, see !
There. Some one’s coming, and you’ve roughed my hair
Do let me go, Tom ? ( Tom disengages her.) Exit
Tom (looking ) —
I’ll be going, too.
Maria,
It’s Jim, I’ll warrant he has seen it all.
(Making his exit.)
O woman, woman, y’u’re a catastrophe !
Scene lll.— Sitting Room. Time — morning.
Enter Belle and Julia. ( Julia in riding habit and whip in
hand.)
Belle. Romancing, Julia ? Indeed I’m not.
I wish you’d only condescend to think
A little seriously of what I’ve said,
And not be so provokingly jocose
About my surmise. An ungenerous thought,
Perhaps, to harbour of a noble lord
Who deigned his presence an acceptance here
For the fair fortune of my cousin’s hand,
Who, in high dudgeon at a question asked
Of her but lately anent his suit,
Witli special reference to his rank, replied—
“ A lord—a libel—he is not a man !
A very lordly gentleman he is.”
Such was your summing of our noble guest :
The text I’ve taken is the one you gave.
Julia. Deal justly by me. It was said in haste,
And quite unwittingly of being a text
For you to dilate and expound upon
To such detraction.
O, Belle, forgive me, but you make me mad.
The fellow may or may not be a scamp :
I do not judge him.
Rank is an estimate of worldly worth,
The finer fabric of our social life,
The mere commodity that drapes a man ;
His wishful merits, or his means alike
Command the purchase. And now, Belle, be off!
Put on your habit—you shall ride the Fawn.


George on old Madcap shall disport himself
A prince of bushcraft, and your loyal knight ;
While I, on Plunger, shall have honest Tom—
The merriest escort that e’er mated maid
With manly deference.
Belle. I am sadly out
Of this hunt element you’ve mooted, Ju.
I’ll be a mourner in the train I fear.
Julia. No, no ! You will not !
Not one marsupial shall come to grief,
My gentle huntress,
Nor less securely in his haunts shall graze
For this day’s hunting.
Belle. O, Ju, how curious you looked just now.
There’s more affects you than the hunt propounds.
Tears, tears ! 0 Julia, am I your friend,
And cannot share with you a simple grief ?
Julia ( kissing her). My mother, playmate, and kind friend in one,
Your gentle sympathy has brought them, Belle, —
Unsullied record of your sterling worth, —
From my heart’s register.
Belle ( drying her eyes ) —
And now I’ll go, Ju., and put on my things ;
For we’ll be merry though we ride to grief. Exit Belle,
Julia. Poor Belle ! my sympathies you always share,
And might the secret secret of a heart,
If aught in poor humanity achieved
Such righteous merit.
(Looking through the window and seeing L. Ch,umley on horseback).
There, there he is !
The man of all men I have ever seen.
, Enter George.
Geo. Good morning, Julia ! Admiring Jim ?
A perfect horseman, is he not ? A clipping rider ?
What ! blushing 1 Bless me, but you needn’t blush
For such a confirmation of good taste.
Julia ( confusedly). 0, George, you startled me. I didn’t think—
That is—l mean —you’ve only just come in I
Geo. Yes, Julia; just as you were looking out.
You certainly did speak, but what you said
I really cannot say.
I hazarded “ Good morning ” in reply.
Julia. O, I am glad.
Geo. Well yes; you do look glad—a little “off” though
Julia. O, I am glad I mean for


Geo. I think for anything that would relieve
Your great embarrassment. But listen, Ju ;
You’re not a sole admirer of Jim.
Why all the belles are ringing in his praise
About the district.
Julia. What, marriage belles?
Geo. Yes. Such a lovely peal.
Julia. And what about the beaux 1
Geo. O ! they are stringless. The great commotion in the belles, you
know, prepense tbeir tendency to straighten up and snap the
strings. Just listen to the fancy names he has—the handsome
stockman, the unimpressionable, the icicle. I think the latter
of most high import to his propriety; and Tom confirms it in
his native style, by declaring that he has got no “push ” in him,
as he calls it, for not marrying the widow of the Stockman’s
Arms.
(Enter Belle in riding habit)
Belle. Now, Ju, I’m ready.
Julia. I am ready, too.
Geo. We’ll all be ready when the nags come in.
Belle. Why, George, they are in. Widgee yarded them an hour ago.
Geo. But there’s not one of them amongst that lot a lady’s hack
excepting Fawn.
Julia. O! Madcap’s my mount, and Belle rides the Fawn. Come
Belle, and help me ? Now, George, I want to have my way in
this. Let me ride Madcap for to-day at least ?
Ge<>. Julia! nonsense. You are jesting now. A vicious tiger of a
horse that bolts and bucks, and kicks one also for no other fault
than falling off him. He’s quite a trying ordeal for a man, and
far too fancy for a lady’s mount.
Ju!ia. Then Plunger. Surely, I can ride him, George ? Come Belle !
(Giving Belle a nudge).
Belle. Yes, George, she may be trusted, don’t you think, on him. She
is an excellent horsewoman I have heard you say.
Geo. ( shaking his head doubtfully, implies the negative).
Julia. I will not go then, I will stay behind
And fortify this edifice of ours
Against the encroachments of that wicked lord
Whom Belle declares to be, since her romance,
The very villian of a plot to snare
Your humble servant, and not her at all,
Though so it happen’d.
Geo. That’s not improbable, although you jest; and now I think of it,
you’ll have to go; I’ve heard this morning that the Blue Cap
Gang stuck up Walajeree last night. That’s but a matter of
some twenty miles from here, and too suggestive of our turn


next, to not be wary. There’s not a man will be about the
place ; so send Maria, Lucy, and old Potts away to Marsh’s
until we come back. I’ll start young Widgee to Oreel at
once to give them warning.
( Walking away.)
Julia (stopping him ) —
How, George, it’s settled. I’ll not budge a foot
Unless I ride old Plunger in the drive.
Oeo. O, yes, you’ll ride him. You will have to, now ; but listen,
Julia, don’t let him out. I’ll caution Jim to have an eye on
you. He’s riding Pleet, and if the old boy galivants a bit, why
he can catch you.
Exit George.
Julia (taking Belle’s arm ) —
O, Belle, it’s glorious ! Come on ! Come on !
Scene IV. — Big Kurrajong tree some distance in front of hut.
Men 7 shut on station.—Station hands assembled and preparing for
kangaroo hunt , mending whips , horse gear , etc. —Others passing in
and out of hut drinking tea , and eating dumper or broivnie.—Oth ers
playing knifey, etc.
First Station Hand. Dick ! holy sailor ! look at your old yad ;
He’s broke the bridle, and away to grass.
Dick ( rising , and exit after his horse ) —
The wall-eyed skewbald son of brumby !
May he break his neck !
Second Station Hand. O, my colonial ! a’int Madcap tit 1
Whose hand is he in 1
Third Station Hand. Young Spence ’ll ride him
Fourth Station Hand. An’ he’ll go to grass.
Ben (pulling a note out of his pocket) —
I’ll lay you, sonny, that he won’t ? Come on !
See, here’s a tenner to a live he sticks
While gear sticks to him.
Who’ll chip a fiver on the chance o’ ten 1
Station Hand (pulling out note ) —
This says a new chum can put Madcap through.
Ben (putting his money in his pocket ) —
I never go on the blind, sonny 1 Bar Jim Baxter,
He sticks to pigskin like a native born, —
Can sit a bucker like a miracle.
(Enter Tom Somers).
Tom. Now lads, remember an’ restrain yourselves.
No blasphemy y’u’ll mind.
Exit Tom.
(All hands rising to follow him).


Ben. Sam, put that in y’ur pipe and smoke it.
Sam. Ben, you say bloomin’ if y’ur like t’ burst.
(Exit all , one of them singing ) —
Rally up ! Rally up !
You’re a mighty sight too slow,
If you think to go a-courting
Where my nag and I we go :
Where the hay is sweet as honey,
And a maid is fair as day ;
And an old man hoards his money,
While rusting life away.
0 ! the tinkle, tinkle of the bell-bird ;
That’s how it was—
The why and the cause
Of all the mishap
And the kisshap,
And the happiness I feel,
When I hear the bell-bird piping,
Like the tinkling of the bell,
On my old prad Brown.
You may rally up behind ;
But you’ll never get before me,
And my old prad Brown.
(Repeating chorus to each other).
You may rally up behind me,
You may rally all aroun’ ;
But you’ll never get before me
And my old prad Brown.
Enter Lord Crumley, alias Jim Baxter, the new-chum stockman
leading a horse , arm through bridle rein and stockwhip in hand.
Stopping in front of hut , with arm over horse’s neck.
Lord Ghumley. Three years, or more,
A questless vagrant I’ve roughed along
Upon the virtuous merits of a man,
And earned my living ;
Nor ever in my life employ’d the fact
Of my nobility to bear me out
In any enterprise. And will I now
Be other in her eyes than what I am, —
Her father’s stockman—till I win her love?
No ! That accomplish’d my birthright then,
Though no more lustre to it come, at least
Will not ignobly be borne by me.
My first impression of this land was wed
To one of thankfulness to God for life;
Then came the memory that induced my stay, —


Ned Allen’s portrait of his sister Ju,
Word painted to me on that cheerless night
By wild Itelezi.* In time of war
The rigorous duty of a soldier’s life
Is the right hand of fellowship to death —
Exclusive fellowship—exacting death !
And so all feel it as he felt it then :
The tender sadness of a chasten’d thought
Was strongly in him, for he spoke of home,
And the sweet sunlight of his Austral sphere
Was little Ju-Ju, as he call’d her then, —■
Now the most perfect model of fair womanhood
I’ve ever seen:—
For beauty has not which she cannot vie,
With that excelling excellence of life, —
Though mutely eloquent, alertly keen —
Beyond the subtlety of speech to plea
The frail life presence of mortality.
The literal favours of fair women have
Their literal wooers, is the sense of what
■Our life’s philosophy has called a flirt.—
When the fine fervency of youth has passed
That stage of manhood, the consummate ass,
The ass considerate is then matured,
And he will marry. He will have a wife !
He’ll be a husband, and no more an ass !
So he goes braying his resolve about
Till he is wedded, and well cudgelled down
To due decorum by his comely spouse ;
And he is then the meditative ass
Who says : —How jollily I might have lived
Had I been single and not such an ass, —
Without considering that the better half
Of his existence is his lordly wife.
Then there are bachelors, —mysterious men
Of bland exterior and strange repute—
All gloss and starchiness from head to foot :
Men who are mortal from a kindred view,
But mortal lonely. I hey have no response
Of loving confidence to cheer their lives ;
Shy, foxy beings, who go down to death
Fretting existence to the very grave ;
Consummate asses they don’t get beyond.
Itelezi Hill, South Africa, where the Prince Imperial was killed in Zulu War


Then there’s the lover, the more sterling man,
Whom no unworthiness of life can touch !
Whose soul’s high estimate of life is love,
And by the lode-star of his love disposed
Unswerving onward, he can never err,
For he is ever the unvarnish’d man
Whom no deception can impose upon ;
Nor can he ever to deception stoop :
His manhood’s with him to denote the man.
He weds his weakness and commands his love,
But never yields it. He would rather die
His dear heart’s offering’ than the wedded slave
Of literal fancy !
I’ll no longer be
A literal wooer. I discard the name
From henceforth from me, and I’ll woo to wed,
Commence with Julia, and with her end :
For—
Better marry
And repent my love,
Than single dally
And lament my love—■
Is what I’m mightily convinced of now.
I have been posing the consummate ass,
I fear me sadly, but never mind ;
An ass is comelier than a fool by far,
And that’s consoling; for a fool’s a fool :
In my life’s lexicon I saw it thus ;
A word exclusive of all other words
To term its meaning, and without a plea;
Whereas, a poor ass has as many pleas
As he has failures, and no end of thumps.
’Tis weary wooing that has no romance,
And this day’s hunting may achieve me all
My three month’s strategy of how to know
Fair Julia Allen for a chance to woo.
Some happy accident. Her horse perhaps
May bolt ! Provided that she is’nt hurt,
And I can catch her, I don’t mind a bit.
Saint George, I have it! I will cut her out !
And Fleet my gallant, by your bone and blood
I’ll test your prowess in a race for love 1
Be fleet, and prove me of your name this day
No vile misnomer, and I’ll pension you.
(Looking towards tJie house).


What? Plunger saddled for a lady's mount?
By all that’s sacred he is !
And why, I wonder, when he’s so unfit
For such an office ? Though as good a horse
For camp or muster as a man could wish :
Enduring, active, and as cool as keen :
When furious pikers will prop round and charge
With wily devilry, he’s all alert, —
Cuts in, and counters with his heels so clean,
Then clears instanter, and without a scratch.
By J ove, its pretty ! He is out and out
A model stockhorse ; though of no repute
By blood, yet nathless a handsome horse,
And the true picture of a Gaucho’s pride—
The hardy mustang.—But a lady’s hack !
He’s hardly tenable I think for that.
[Leading his horse away.)
Come Fleet, ray chummy, I must tie you up,
And have a bit of brownie and some tea
Before we vamos. Exit.
Enter old blackfelloiv — King Billy Lal Lal — brass plate suspended
from, his neck , indicating his title , name and locality. Opposurn
rug over his shoulder ; tomahawk in belt; spear and fishing line in
hand ; looking about very stately.
(. Re-enter Lord Chumley.)
King Billy.--- Goo’ Mo’nin’ Mista’ Jim !
L. Chumley. —Good morning, Billy ! Are you off to fish ?
King Billy. —Y’—You go’ baccy giba—ma’ch?' Thang.
Exit King Billy.
Enter Queen Sally tvith little black boy.
Queen Badly. (Hood rnornin’, Mista’ Jim ! You gib it chickpen for buy
lolly-—picanniny? Thang. You gen’leman, Mista’ Jim,
L. Chumley ( patting black boy on the head.)
Bally, what name this little fellow ?
Q. Sally. Him Edwa’. Same as Miss Julie brother, you know. Long,
long time ago him go solja along-a wa’.
L. Chumley. You like Miss Julia?
Q. Sally. Y’, Mi ss Julee lady. Gib it boot, gib it doe, gib it food, gib
it ebrathing. Big squatta fella along-a ol’ country —name
belongin’Lor’ Jumil, want marry Miss Julee. She no like,
y’know, no lub. Him go ’way.
L. Churn! ei/. How long since, Sally?
Q. Sally. O, two, tree mun bin you belongin’ here him go ’way. Him
back now. Stay along-a Stockman Arm.
L. Chumley. Whew ! The devil he is !
Q Sally. What you whistle dibbil for ? You want ’im ? Bale want


’ini. You want’ im wife mo’e betta—ha, ha, ha ! Why you no
belongin’ wife, Mista’ Jim. You good-looking young fellow,
you know. Why you no catch ’im wida’ along-a Stockman
Arm ? You no lub ? Ah ! you —no —lub. Her too much
likem ibra fella. You no likem that. You very prou’, Mista’
Jim—jela.
L. Ghumhy. That’s it, Sally. I’m jealous.
Q. Sally. Jela no good. B’m’by you lub. Fall right head in plop over
ear ; then you catchern picaniny along-a wife, all name same
belonging Edwa’. Ha ! ha ! ha ! ha ! ha !
L. Ghumley. O Sally, Sally ; how you make me blush.
Q. Sally. Ged out. You no lull—you no blush. You very prou’,
Mista Jim. I know, I know. You lub—Miss Julee. Ah!
you all red along-a face now. You blush ! You lub, you lub !
Exit Quekx Sally.
L. Ghumley. By all that’s wonderful that dusky queen
Has read the secret that I thought so safe
In my heart’s keeping.
How her cackling tongue’s
Wry-worded English did worm it out
With sly incisiveness of voice and eye.
I’d wager thousands that that fellow’s back
To patch his wooing. But I’ll spoil his patch
As surely as my name is
Enter Lucy, who , seeing Lord Ghumley, and dreading bushrangers (not
recognising him) thinking he may he one, turns and runs away
with a scream.
What’s wrong with Lucy that she runs away
And looks so frightened. H’m, its odd.
( Going into hut.)
Enter Maria, reconnoitring hut from behind big kurrajong tree. Re
enter Lucy, clutching the tail of Marias dress timidly.
Lucy. Maria ! Mercy, but he’ll see you there !
We’d better run back to the house I think.
Come ! Come !
Maria. Lucy, nonsense ! Wliat a silly fear 1
Let go, and run back if you like. I’ll not.
My legs will serve me for the better end
Of running from it, if I have to run.
Besides, you silly, there is no one there,
So what’s the good of it ? And p’r’aps it’s Ben.
Lucy. Indeed it isn’t! for he wouldn’t hang
About the hut so if it was, I know.
Maria. Well, no; he wouldn’t. He would rather hang
About your neck, Luce, so it can’t be him.


Lucy. Well —well, you needn’t be so very sharp.-
(Commencing to cry.)
I wish—he was—hang—ing—about—it—now—at—anyrate.
Maria. O, you poor frightened thing !
If you don’t stop it, I will push you out
Right opposite the hut ; you little sillikin !
I’m just as frightened, though I keep my wit,
For p’r’aps I’ll want it, and my legs as well,
If things are only in as bad a way
By half as you are with the thought of them.
O here is Potts, and he has got a gun,
(Waving her hand to him.)
Enter Potts, with gun over his shoulder.
Potts (to Maria).
Hey, lass ! A’ thout tha wud a’ bin a-nigh the ferm b’now!
Maria and Lucy in chorus. Sh—sh—sh !
Potts. Hey %
Lucy. Mercy, mercy ! But you mus’n’t speak.
There’s a bushranger in the hut.
Potts. I’ th’ hut ! A booshrineger ! Let me at’n !
Maria (clutching his coat-tails) —
Stop, stop ! You might shoot the man, an
Potts. A’ that a’ mane to, if he wunt behaive,
The thaivin’ baggage ! Let goa !
(Vigorously wrenching away and going cautiously in a stoopmigposhtre
towards hut.)
Maria. Now, Luce, be ready. If he rushes Potts,
We’ll have to run for it, and scream our best :
It’s all we can do.
Lucy. o—h ! (sobbing).
Potts (challenging Lord Chumley , tvho has come to door of hut) —
Haans oop, tha villin, or a’ll shute tha else !
L. Chumley. Why, bless me ! Surely Mr. Potts
Potts. An’ pans. Th’ mister is th’ maister naow,
S’ min’ tha knows it, and thra oop thy haans.
(Voices in the distance).
Voices hi Distance. Plunger has bolted ! Plunger has bolted !
L. Chumley (abstractedly). Plunger bolted ?
(To Potts.) You’re mistaken, Potts, I’m
(Enter Station Hand, rushing past behind hut with bridle 'in hand).
Station Hand. Plunger has bolted with Miss Julia !
Jim ! Jim ! Look slippy, and whip out on Fleet !
Be quick !
Potts. Pit
L. Chmuley. Damnation !


(. Rushing out oblivious of Potts, whom he overthrows in his exit. Gun
goes off harmlessly. Maria and Lucy running).
Maria. Help ! Help ! Help !
Lucy. Help ! M—u—r—d—e—r !
Scene Y. — Australian Mountain Scenery, Springs, Waterfalls, etc.
( Enter Lord Chumley, and Julia leaning on his arm).
L. Chumley. This lovely scene remunerates all risk,
So be not sorry, but be seated here
Within this willow awning ; for I fear
You are much wearied from so rude a ride ;
But Nature’s courteous to a courteous guest;
If we are homely with the noble dame,
She renders subtleties of balms and themes
To soothe the body and enchant the mind.
Quite needless though,
Is this portrayal of her gifts to you ;
For under favour of so fair a guest
She’s ever courteous.
(Bowing, and exit to look after horses.)
Julia (strongly conscious of the delicacy of her position, brought on
so, mainly, by her own impulsiveness).
0 10! the shame that’s tingling in my cheeks,
OlO! the love that’s nestling in my heart!
W here now’s my bravery of thought and speech,
And all the flippancy I theorised
For this encounter that I am so lost
In nerveless apathy I cannot speak,
Nor think, nor deign to in his presence look,
Without presuming that I am alive ;
And he so forward I supposed so shy;
Lt must be, surely, that he cannot love 1
O ! O ! my poor heart; ’tis a bitter thought
Awakes the sorrow of a slighted love !
Tears, dewy fragrance of a sainted life !
Sweet, silent mourners of the sacred dead
Be our companionship compacted now,
O sorrow’s blessing !
No ! surely, surely, I’m of sterner stuff
Than I must needs to in his presence weep !
Demean my womanhood with babyish tears
For his eye’s pity? I would rather have


The very life blood of ray heart absorbed
By grief, than pander a stockgazing show
For beggar’s pittance ! If I am so weak—■
If my love’s greater than my heart is strong
For its seclusion, ’tis a haw redeem’d,
So the poor sentinel who’s mounted guard
But dies with honour to the sacred trust,
’Tis well, I care not. But the ache ! the ache !
The weary sentinel, poor me, whose watch
Resolves so tardily life’s fleeting pulse,
When the white ensign of pure hope is seen
A welcome waving ! But the night is here.
The very midnight of my life, I think,
Must now be verging ; for I am as if
The tiery elements of life were charged
With chilly vapours, and all nature void
Of its sweet comeliness ; a blank ! a blank !
When Death comes wooing, and is wed to life,
Sore hearts are many, for there must be guests
To grace the nuptials ; O merry guests !
( Hearing/ Lord Chumley returning).
Hush ! Hush 1
(. Re-enter Lord Chumley).
Addressing him —
Brave sir, I thank you for the tinffiy aid
That the small matter of my life entail’d
Upon your gallantry. And do not think
Mere words expressive of my mode of thanks,
But only honouring in your esteem
What may facilitate the means through which
I most can justify my words by acts;
( Holding out her hand to him).
Or aptly punning—by this note of hand—
Draw on my friendship in your need, and know
In Julia Allen that you have a friend.
X. ChnmJey {kiting her hand) —
Lady, I would not for my worth of life
Forego such gentle courtesy of speech.
As for the service I have render’d you ;
Its merit solely in your safety is,
Wherein’s my honour, which your thanks forbid
Shall be inclusive of the sacred bond
That F have seal’d and witnessed with my lips,
In token of submission to your will.
Perhaps too boldly? I had forgot


My humble station in that moment’s bliss,
Miss Allen. But impulsive hearts
More true than studious, can never err
Beyond forgiveness ; or I will quote
The high old age of chivalry my plea,
That deigns lip homage to a lady’s hand
An honour’d chastity.
Julia. To use a homely metaphor, you’ve bush’d
Your humble station in your courtly guise,
I fancy; yet I would not have
Your sense of honour by my thanks impugn’d,
So hold my friendship in your will of speech ;
For peerless manhood is divinely girt;—
In its imperfectness commanding still,
And ever gentle.
L. Chumley. For all the gentler aspects of a man
Are the reflections of pure womanhood ;
She is the presence of joy-hearted life.
Be hers the honour.
Julia. I will not impute
Your words to flattery, than seldom else
I fear we harbour in our facial parts ;
Alas ! the pity it should ever live
To rase the sacred fortress of a heart,
Where only couriers of truth should be
As angels harbour’d.
L. Chumley. And as prayer dispatch’d ;
For be they couriers of joy or woe,
Our joy responsive is in due accord,
As would our need be in the woe for aid
Against the enemy besieging round
Life’s hallowed citadel. But, nathless, all
Apart from flattery, Miss Allen, still
There is a pleasing verity of speech—
A comely method of imparting truth—
That through the niceties of nature’s voids
Effects the ingress that another mode
Would surely fail to. And no more I seek.
Lets fools and flattery be hand and glove,
But know me ever as a simple man
Who is the bearer of a homely tale;
But under penalty of woe ’tis sealed,
If I unfold it to the ken of one
Who lacks a mutual sympathy with me
In its rehearsal.
Julia. Then a wond’rous tale,


No less mysterious. But who w r ould dare
Under such penalty to break the seal?
L. Gh,ui)iley. Fools dare and suffer, and remain as fools
The loyal only are accounted free,
And what they suffer is in wiseness stored
To their amendment.
Julia. What is the title of this homely tale?
Perhaps I’ve read it.
L. Chv/mley. No title, saving the Great Author’s name,
By which we know it;
And never written, it can not be read.
’Ti.s solely, simply a homely tale,
Because the theme anticipates a home.
Let this preamble of its worth suffice,
And hear me tell it, for this broken seal
Is my heart’s witness the words are true :
Miss Allen—Julia, I love you.—There !
The tale is told to be adjudged by you
Upon its merits. Have I told it well ?
O be not hasty, nor a worldly judge !
Consider justly ere you mar its worth
By base comparisons. ’Tis true I’m poor, —
Your father’s stockman, —but I am your peer
No less by virtue of the power of love.
A stranger am I ? And is love equipp’d—
A thing we rote at—that we learn by heart
To basely traffic ! Is it so demean’d,
Or merely fallacy, that we should doubt,
What’s pure and holy can be aught than good
For our advancement? Though an erring world,
Through lustly avarice of sensual life,
Retard the progress that would else acrue,
Still love is with us : —yet, w r e do not know
The power that binds the universe is ours,
To bind this lesser universe within
Our fleshly circuit ! And we harp on life,
As if we had not at command wherewith
To mar its crosses ! Will a mortal vow
Enhance the value of a heavenly oath ?
Go, poor mortality, and swear by dust
Who live by pleasure ?
Who says, £ 1 love you,’ with a flattering tongue.
Has lied, and put a judgment on his soul !
O be not angry that I freely speak,
Nor deem my pleading a self treasured thought;


I love you only, and I only plead
For love’s synonymy, harmonious truth !
If that you love me, be your answer—“ yes,” —
A “yes” unqualified by “ buts ” or “ ifs,”
Or “no ” that through me will unchalleng’d pass
By “ whys ” or “ wherefores.”
Though you are fairer to my eyes than light,
Dearer and sweeter to my heart than life ;
Yet I would pluck them from their seats, before
They should induce me to exchange my love
For what is commonly conceived for gold !
What ! A pure vintage of the heavenly vine
For gross intoxicants ! —•
Julia. Go ! Go sir ! Go !
L. Chamley continues. —O, Julia, hear me ! Is my love for
The mad conception of a feverish heart
That I have cherished—that you love me not 1
If in my plainness of speech I’ve said
What may unwittingly have caused you pain,
Then I am sorry, and your pardon crave
To hear me further, ere you bid me go.
Have I not seen love’s lustre in your eyes,
And love’s vicissitudes in all your acts ?
Could I have seen them had my eyes been blind 1
Will bats that hover in the dead of night,
Commend the beauty of the dove by day,
Or hear her cooing 1 And will she her home
Renounce to wander in the chamber’d night,
As if he harbour’d in its vapoury gloom,
Who lives the echo of her plaintive song ?
I know that pleading is as vainly frail
To love’s espousal, as our life is marr’d
To its estrangement; and consider how
The heart’s interpreter—the tongue—misquotes,
Then you will pardon my endeavoured speech
Its only merit;
For I would woo you with the words of truth, —
Truth, the pure ether of our timely course,
To love the leaven of eternal life.
Alas my vanity ! for I had thought
To woo you wholly in this humble guise :
Resolved, that vanity I now forego
To right of what is in a worldly sense
Exactive tribute, but no more than right :
Nor misconstrue when I tell you now,
I’m well provision’d in a wordly way—


Riches and honours, with no other care
Than you to share them, if you, Julia, will ?
O tell me 1 tell me ?
Three years of patiently enduring life,
My love has garner’d to a cherish’d thought—
A home—and Julia, your presence was
Its blissful gladness : Then say me now ;
A whisper only : —if you cannot that,
The mutest signal acquiescent, then,
Will richly dower me for a worded “ yes.”
Come Julia ! tell me ?
Julia. (Confused and falteringly). —
I I I
L. Chumley ( Putting his arms around her).
Ay, ay ! It will not, though it would be “yes,”
So I will snatch it from your lips with mine ;
In love’s orthography ; ‘ yes ’ sounds a kiss,
For I’m a graduate of the school of time.
( Kissing her.)
Enter Tom Somers (who has tracked them) and divining correctly that
he must not he seen :
Tom Somers. Preserve us !
Exit discreetly.
ACT 111.
Sce\e I. —Room in Stockman’s Arms. Time, night; candles Turning.
Enter Marmax.
Marman. Hell’s curses on it, I’m a luckless dog !
He’s here, and living in full flesh and blood, —
ISTo ghostly visage, but a solid man,
So stamped by nature to command respect,
That where ’tis lacking he inspires a fear.
Do I not feel it ? I could shoot him dead !
Ay Dios ! would too, could I conjure up
Some deed of bitterness—some devil’s plea,
That might extenuate such bloody work.
Ho, ho ! My conscience ! I would as lief
Smother a baby in its cradle-bed.
I )id he not watch me with unwearied eyes
When I was sickening to very death,
And nurse me tenderly as mothers would
Their dearest fondling ?
Had [ not always to his purse the pass


When mine was empty ?
And if it comes to what a man can do, —
I’ve seen him daring on the rugged steeps
Of the old Andes what had chilled the blood
Of hardy hunters. To an Indian wretch
Who would have knifed him, I have seen him part
His food and shelter • and applauses win
From vieing gauchos for achieving by
His cool audacity their sleight of skill.
And here ’tis echoed of the man : They talk,
These supple natives, of his wond’rous craft:
The whip he makes them has the sweetest fall ;
The horse he mouths them has the lightest rein,
Most perfect paces, and the showiest gait;
Then they extol him for his pluck in camp,
And, all unenvious of the man declare
His worth unparallelled. Acts, acts alone
Denote unerringly the man of men
For good or evil. What a wretch am I !
This rag of conscience denounces me !
This coward conscience, that will not deter
My hand from villainy ; but only pry
Into the secret closets of my heart,
And whisper, “ Wretch !”
0 could I grasp you a material thing,
1 would not leave of you a shred to taunt
My will of doing.
And he is here !
Here, hale and hearty, whom I left as dead
As signs could indicate.
As limp, and soft, and lifeless as a corpse
He lay all sodden from the angry sea
That had pitched both of us upon a ledge.
And when to consciousness I came, and saw
His manly form a poor bleaching corpse,
As then I thought it, I esteemed the man;
And cried from ray heart’s agony, “ Great God !
Poor Dick is done for ” ; and a sudden loss
I then experienced, as if some thief
Had stolen from me a great pearl of price.
Thief ! Thief ! Ay, villain of a bastard dog
Who now would rob me ! Who would pilfer all,
And leave me fitly a thing to spurn,
And to be spat upon by passers by,
And branded “ Ingrate.” The only man


I ever cared, for; who so won on me
By his high-heartedness and sterling worth,
I would not do that for the sake of him
That would have pleased me for myself to do.
I’ve seen him, tender as a woman, weep;
And where Death’s havocking made fiends of men,
Yet I did see him as became a man.
No, no, Dick Arnott, if I sight you off,
Perdition seize me. May the curse of night
Muffle my eyesight, and my soul be plunged
To hell’s extremity !
There ! I am easier ! I’ll make amends
By boldly owning to the wrong I’ve done ;
And though a villain be condemned a man
Intact in.villainy, and not a thing
Too poor to look at, and too mean to live.
(A knocking at the door.)
Ha ! yes my lordship for another day.
Poor gullable humanity, O me !
Ha! ha ! ha ! ha ! ha !
This patented nobility I’ve poached
Is strangely potent.—l’m again a lord.
( Knocking repeated.)
Come in !
Enter Grim, and Pan behind him.
What! Grim, you noodle, is it only you 1
Grim. Yes, m’lord.
Mar man. And why the devil did you not come in
Without that knocking ?
Grim. M’ lord, your pardon, but I didn’t knock.
’Twas this old man, who was directed to,
By Mrs. Lightly.
Pan (stepping forward).
Yes, your loi’dship ; it was I who knocked,
And who w r ould further on your patience tax
A little, privately.
Mar man. Ah ! You may go, Grim.
(To Pan). Sir be seated.
Pan. I thank your lordship, I would rather not.
I can say standing what I have to say.
Mar)nan. Oh ! Well say on then. You’re stiff-mannered though,
To put it mildly.
Pan. Through life, my lord, I’ve ever been a man
Behind my manners, were they good or bad;
Stiff-mannered, may be, but false-mannered—no !


That special suavity of yours, my lord,
I cannot boast of.
Marman. You are insolent, old man ! Take care !
Take honest warning ! Although your age
1 hold too sacred in my pride of strength
To use you roughly, I,am not a saint,
And may forget that you are but a man
Without discretion to control his tongue,
And must be taught it. Do you hear, old man!
Were you as young as you are insolent,
I’d kick you out !
Pan. Ha ! ha !
Now you are raving politics, my lord.
Marman. Damn ! Who are you, in the devil’s name?
And what’s your errand ?
Are you an agent, or a paper man ?
Perhaps a lunatic ? A howling saint—
Some soul commissioner of Nick’s equipped
In the ostensity of godly life ?
Speak out your calling, and I’ll humour it.
Pan. Scoff on, my lord. ’Tis fitly your wit;
The gag of railery has ever been
A coxcomb’s privilege.
Marman (' walking excitedly to and fro ) —
Well, you are certainly the coolest sort
I’ve ever met with. What infernal cheek !
Cheek ! Cheek ! O Madre ! I’m fagg’d to think
It’s so expressionless a word to term
Such damn’d impertinence. Unsanction’d, too !
Lord grant me patience to respect your age ;
I have dang’rous delight in me,
That would be exercised in kicking you,
But for the sanctity your person’s in !
Speak out, and civilly ! Your errand man ?
But first, who are you ?
Pan. Your uncle, Richard Arnott, Lord Viscount Chumley
Marman. Wh-e-w ! Another?
Pan. Yes. You are doubtless surprised to see
Your father’s brother, and in such a place,
And such a character ;
To know the title you have so debased,
Is yours no longer than I choose to be
The dead uncared-for of my house and race ;
But why I choose so, is no part of mine
For now to speak of, or for you to ask,
Beyond what proofs you may desire to have


Of my identity. Mistake me not.
Consider carefully my time of life,
My speech, ray actions ; and therefrom deduce,
If it is likely in a man whose grave
Is gaping for him to be vainly niOArnd
By the allurements of a rich estate,
That could not swerve him in his lustier prime
From the intentness of a self imposed
Career of exile. Have 1 not atoned
In studious poverty an earlier life
That in the vap’rous vanities of wealth
Was swiftly passing to inglorious death.
No, no, the rest of an unquieted soul
Cannot be pillowed in the conscious ease
Of chill morality. I’ve searched in life
For happiness, and found
Where most abounding, it is less esteem’d
A moral estimate than Godly love.
O you, who are yet in your manhood’s prime,
Are you unconscious in your lustly ways
Of all that’s conscious ? Are you alive,
Or merely animated filth in life ?
That life’s no more to you than lies and lust ;
That death's but dying as a beast may die ;
That truth is only that you lived and died,
And must be buried, because your life’s
Infectious rottenness would else offend
That life’s indebtedness ! Is that your creed ?
You poor inanity ! You soulless get !
A worm might mess on you, you’re so beneath
All things contemptible on this fair earth—
Such mean commodity ! Why are you here 1
When you had gone, what devil prompted you
To come again with your damn’d villainy
To break my peace ! To usher sorrow in a father’s
To force the virtue of pure womanhood
house,
With your loath’d presence, and traduce that fame
That is an honour’d manliness in men
To shield and succour ! But in you 1 You thing !
Is there not infamy enough in stock
For your convenience that you need assault
The very hallowedness of life as well,
In the knight errantry of vice that trumps
Frail women outraged meritorious deeds.
0 10! What are you, that you are so mean ?
The laws of Nature in creation have


Their times and seasons, and provision make
For all exigencies they cannot meet
Within that governance in our estate.
But you are subjectless to all her laws ;
To all divinity of right you’re dead ;
To all affinity of life you’re shame—
A blotch in nature, —you were got by chance !
By chance existing, and by chance will die !
For death, it comes not to a thing like you
As to a man.
Men go to honour in their several lives,
And Death comes to them—a deputed prince
From the All Sovereign Great King of Kings !
But you, you infamy, you crawl to death !
You blight of manhood and last curse on earth,
You are concisely a thing of chance
That jilts the gallows, to go waddling on
In the excrescency of lust, to yield
A shrunken atomy of filth to death !
And that ! that living is esteem’d as life !
God ! God ! What agony of shame is this,
That in the kindred of my race and name,
Is put upon me at the very grave.
My little journey was nearly done :
AVould God it had been ! that I might have glean’d
From the rich harvest of a garner’d peace
Some little morsel of that generous store
For my poor living. That I might have left
This tottering tenement of clay, as one
Who leaves a cottage for a mansion’s bliss, —
Not a poor bankrupt sold off—a thief
Whipp’d out for perjury. God ! God !
■{ Weeping, and sinking in a chair ; then again rising vigorously.
You dog ! I meant not you should see me thus ;
Tears are for babies, and not bearded men,
For leisured idleness, not treasured life;
Men drink their bitterness to steel the heart
For dire calamity—for sterner work ;
Slaves palsied droppings from their eyes emit
At every obstacle where men surmount
To die or conquer ! Then away ! Away !
Such weakness from me, for I would be strong !
Remorseless ! sever’d of all earthly ties
That might ingratiate in me for you
One spark of pity !


My eye be pitiless, my heart be stone,
To all that generates in me of you
Through blood’s commingling, till I have effaced
That foul monstrosity of life evolved
In your life’s presence to my being’s shame;
Then sorrow’s vehemence in ray heart distrain
For all indebtedness !
{Placing two revolvers on table.)
There ! Choose your weapon, and defend your lust
Marman. Old man, how bitterly your words impute
My life to lewdness ! I am not good.
I seek no favour in the mean defence
Of what is blamable, because ’tis less
Than what is vicious ;
But God ! I would not be the thing you say
For all the riches of the earth, and powers
Combining in them ! Ido not pretend
To misinterpret what you have said —
To screen my villainy in any way
Under the pretext of a virtuous shock !
I frankly own I would have pawn’d my soul
For the fair favours of that woman’s flesh !
But being thwarted, I have no remorse
In that premeditative guilt of mine.—
I have but thankfulness it was annull’d
By that strong conciousness of yours in right.
There’s fairer women ; or as fair as she,
Of easier access, who will amply serve
For all I cherished of her virtuous life.
But I was flatter’d by her flattering friends
And moral guardians at the glittering shrine
Of my—er nobility. —Ha ! ha ! ha !
I thought it wonderfully strange and good,
This metamorphosis they wrought within
The passive villainy of my estate
To my emolument.—Ha ! ha ! ha ! ha ! ha !
I was a great philosopher just then,
Not the eruption of morality I’ve since become
A man conceited of achieved repute
In the embodiment of godly self
By moral tenure :
0 I was jubilant to think my life
So highly evidenced in me this life’s
Superior intellect , from whose lofty dome
1 saw humanity beneath, and scann’d


The poor fiasco of a virtuous life: —
The virtue shamming of a virtue shamed
In the flesh’d meshes of infirmity,
Great Vulcan's net.—
And I did curse them for so many fools ;
I, in my villainy high perched, did loath
Their snakey crookedness, deplored
Their weariness of fretted life. Poor fools !
I will no more of them, I said,
Than what will serve me.
Then in my pride of potency I went
And hah’d a little , and demeaned myself
To her virginity, per my moralities.
But she did spurn me, so I damn'd them off
For an encumbrance to my villain suit,
That would have gloried in that glorious wealth
Of virgin puberty. And straightly, then,
I prefaced to her my desires apparall’d
In a fine gossamer’d attire of speech,
And sought the while possession of her hand.
But she drew from me with a dang’rous smile
And lightly flipping with her whip, she said,
“ That for your insolence my lord, but that
For injured womanhood.” I knew no more,
Than in the burning fetters of black shame
I was so manacled, I couldn’t move.
My coward villainy was all to flight :
My good Moralities were grinning too
At my discomfiture, I fancied them,
Just like an embassy of imps dispatch’d
From hell to plague me ; and I, fairly lost
To all propriety of life, did rave
In the insanity of shame, and storm’d
Foul curses on them, till away they ran,
Plugging their ears up with their finger ends,
To stop my eyesight. How I laughed to see
That motley company of life retreat
In such unseemliness of haste, they scarr’d
The masks of character wherein they play,
When the call warns them in time’s shifting scenes.
For the great burlesque of humanity.
But when the fever of my plight had sped,
And in its detriments I stood condemn’d
For the great fallacy of life I held :
For I had argued to myself, will I
Esteem that other in a woman’s life


Than is so proven in all men’s to be
More in repute of commerce than good fame ?
And I direct did tablet this creed, —
The gender, synonym, and sum of life,
As from the world’s philosophy ’tis glean’d,
And briefly by me for my wants compiled :
Man, villian ; woman, guile ;
Love, passion ; virtue, myth :
My shorter Catechism ! Ha ! ha ! ha ! ha ! ha !
Old man, I shock you ; and I cannot blush
For the avowal of such villain creed :
It was not villainy to me, good sir,
’Twas pure philosophy.
A very scavenger of truth I’ve been !
An honest calling, but in bad repute,
So I’ll discard it for some darling ist
Of siveet society’s , I think. Ha ! ha ! ha ! ha !
Man ! you have chosen for a hermit cell
The rancid dungeon of a worldly sphere ;
And all that vitiated view of life
Results from leprous vanity and lies.
The world’s philosophy ! What’s that to you?
If you esteem it in so poor a tvay,
Why do you cherish it so dearly bought ?
Come, I am with you in this hermit cell
Of poor mortality’s —this dungeon keep.—
Now first consider that your only light
Is that poor tallow evidence of day,
So faintly flickering in the filth and stench
Of this foul atmosphere. Beyond its power
To feebly radiate you cannot see.
Again, the wick and tallow of the mould
Is but a composite that lives in light;
And light in darkness is life’s breathing space,-
Not the effulgence of the glorious sun,
So richly mellowed to the human eye
In the expressiveness of form and tint
That all therein is beautiful and bright.
From the benign transparency of light
Diffused in darkness, we have power to breathe
And this affinity of light to life,
Again is witness’d to the carnal eye
By other agencies; as such may be
To the occasion of our time and state
Best suited for us in our several lives :


Taking this candle in your present life, —
You may have thought that it was yours to boast ;
Let that conceit lie buried with the dead.—
And now consider to what use you put
This gift of charity, this reason light,
That I have put in metaphor of this. (Pointing to candle.')
After indulging in a sensual course
To the extreme satiety of life ;
In an extreme debility of health
You wake alertly to a conscious death,
And see within the interim how much
Your candle’s wasted, and how little's done
To an ulterior animus of life :
Then you are fretted to repair the loss—
Fretted to vile dishonesty, perilaps ;
To lifeless lethargy, perhaps ;
To world philosophy, so-called ;
Your case as evidenced from what you say,
So that I deal with : And you take the light.
Descending with it to as great a depth
As it can burn in, and you can breathe :
To what % To witness of a phase of truth ;
For you know nothing of the power of truth :
Then how ? By vapouring in a vicious life
For the reception of its germin forms
Which take that preference of place in you
That most capacitates what most they need
For reproduction in a social scale
To the attainments of their highest form,
And that is—Common decency of life
Or mere morality,—the landscape view
Outlooking from Mount Charity the Great.
Thence, you are nothing but a charnel house—
A whited sepulchre—a living lie, —
Where all the leprous vanities of life
Aspire to godheads. And consider now
The rightful uses of this reason light—
This gift of charity—this candle light.
The candle’s lighted. But before you start,
Just look around you in the dark and see
At various periods, or points, the gleams
Of daylight shimmering in the black abyss
Like stars, —as numberless and bright as they :
These are the several aniini of life,
Or life incitements to ambition goals.
You see your animus and take the light,—


Holding it forward and above the head;
(As best to hold it to observe how best
To choose your footing); for the way is rough
And full of treacheries.
There is no record of a beaten track
By which to travel; but you plod along
In manly vigour with your light, and reach
At length the animus, and there you rest,
Refresh your energies, and start again
For the next animus. So on and on ;
The light grows brighter, and the way less rough
As you are nearing to ambition’s goal;
At last the entry, and then reward
Of honoured welcome in the hall of Peace,
Of sweet Prosperity, fair Virtue’s self.
Thus, then, has Intellect with reason trod
Through all the labyrinth and maze of life
Into the radiance of the partial day—
The land of Plenty, where fair Virtue dwells.
No longer heedful of the reason-light
Beyond its uses to explore the depths
Where the light may be but the radiance not:
For who would burn a candle in the sun ?
Strong Intellect walks on ;
On in the daylight of the sun of Truth,
Basks in his beams, and revels in the wealth
Of hidden treasures. He sees all; and knows
The law of order that confines the deep,
Controls the elements, and binds the spheres,
Is but the pattern of what law in us
Subdues the passions ; that confines, controls,
And binds within us what would else destroy.
If not subjected by the power of law
In the material benefits of life
Which are in ratio of gifts bestowed,
As in what ratio to the law we stand
That so bestows them ; and that law is Love,
Which in control with or subjection to,
So live, so benefit.
Strong Intellect walks on
Inhales fresh vigour in each breath he takes,
And newer landscapes, as he walks, unfold
Their beauties to him. And he sees the sun
Retire in honour of the day progressed ;
And Nature bathing in her crystal font;
And sinks to slumber on the couch of peace;


And sleeps the sweet sleep of the just. Awakes,
Arises ; and again he sees
In all the bud and blossom of her prime
Fair Nature greeting to the glorious sun —
Responsive answering to his longing gaze
By beck’ning blushes from her beauteous face
To speed the glories of the coming day
With which she dowers him.
Strong Intellect walks on.—
On you may trace him to the river brink, —
Then, where is Intellect 1 You vainly look
In the black waters with a shuddering dread ;
And, fearful shrinking in hushed awe, exclaim—
“ O ! O ! poor Intellect, and he so good ! ”
“ And who was Intellect 1 ” someone will ask :
And then you answer like a silly child
In wild bewilderment : —“ ’Twas he you know
“We liked to follow. He was good and strong ;
££ For he would bear us where we couldn’t walk,
“ And gently lift us where we couldn’t climb.
<£ And he did show us the sweet, sunny vale,
££ And told us secrets of the treasured deep.
“We did but name him from his giant strength,
££ And the deep lustre of his glorious eyes
££ We loved to look in ; but we did not know
££ His name—no other than Strong Intellect.
££ And we were playing by the brink to-day,
££ And missed him from us, and we fear so much
££ Strong Intellect is drowned.”
And thus you prattle like a little child.
Had you but then looked up instead of down,
You would have seen the courtesy of Death.
0, were you children or bearded men,
And not nonentities, you then would know
That Intellect—so named from what you see-
ls man ! the eyes of the undying soul,
Who, when in wickedness of life make blind,
Still pleads with whispering conscience, the tongue.
Shame fall you. Perish, you filth-rooting thing !
Blow out your light, and wallow in the mire,
If you can use it to no better end
Than putting foul construction on fair life.
You are not even a scavenger of truth.
Why man he is a paradise to you.
Thrust not your green morality at me !
Dare you be less, ’twould smother you to death,


Of hang you otherwise like any dog !
Who says morality’s the best of life,
Is like an ass loud braying on his browse
The while he stretches. Though the herbs are green
And fair to look.at, says the hungry man,
I cannot eat them ! I want bread to eat;
And that’s what ails you. You’re a hungry man, —
Less wild than starving, and less bad than wrong.
Believe me not who am an erring one ;
But break your idols and bow down the heart ;
And He will tell you who has told it me.
My boy, my boy, O, why did you come back 1
Marman. Old man, I loved her in my own wild way,
So honour bade me to not venture back ;
But I did look my catechism up,
And that determined me to come again.
Now it is done with I have learned this,
That if it be man’s privilege to ask,
’Tis no less woman’s to refuse when ask’d ;
And man’s undying honour to maintain
That virtuous scruple. Though lam but bad,
I feel within me a respect for good ;
And since I’ve met one woman and two men,
I feel more strengthened in that good respect,
And think, good sir, that if I live, I’ll make
A very good philosopher. At least,
May this console you for the pain I’ve caused ;
I’ll not forget you, and I’ll do my most.
Pan. The most, my boy, is counted for the best;
So do your most, whatever that may be,
And you will reckon with the very best.
( Holding out his hand.)
Marman. No, no, old man, I cannot take your hand ;
Again, perhaps, when you know all I will,
If then you offer it—not now. Go ! Go !
For I would be alone. Exit Pan.
{Marman, sitting in chair, leaning on the table with his head in his hands)
ACT ITT.
Scene ll.— Squatter''s house in background. Lawn and shrubbery in
front, enclosed by picket fence. Road to some distance in front of
gate entering the lawn to house. Open bush country.
{Enter Lord Ciiumley and Tom Somers).
Tom Somers. I say, Jim, can y’u enlighten me at all


Of what they stars that scoot about the sky so much
Are said to be ?
L. Chumley. Well no, I cannot. lam sorry, Tom,
I’m no authority from which to glean
Facts of the science of astronomy,
For my own knowledge of that noble branch
Is very limited. But tell me, Tom,
Your own ideas of the meteor light.
Tom. Well, I’m hanged if I know, Jim ;
I’m such a dunderhead, I daren’t speak.
The most I dare do, is to think a bit.
L. Chumley. You merit modesty at all events.
But then you know, Tom, you can speak to me
Without endangering your good repute.
Tom. 0 ! I know that, Jim. There’s none of the snub about y’u. It’s
not that y’u know. It’s a kind of a bother I’ve got to put it
into words. But I’ve been thinkin’ it might be a flake of fiery
substance from a burning world; become detached like, and gone
flaring out. But, no—that’s too unfeasible. It couldn’t be?
L. Chumley. Ho, Tom. The law of gravity forbids
Such an occurrence while the world’s mass
Retains cohesiveness.
Although, if there were from volcanic depths
Huge masses hoisted with such power of force
As to give brilliancy in their ascent
For some few seconds to our wondering gaze ;
Then what seem’d to us to dissolve in night
Would be the fact of their descending to
Where first they came from. But that notion’s crude,
And has no basis of research, beyond
What simply proves it An absurdity.
Tom. But it might be though ; or fire balloonin’ ?
L. Chumley ( laughing ) —
Eh 1 What, Tom ?
Do you imagine there are people there ?
Tom. Well, no. A happy supposition just one likes to revel in. I’ve
no belief about the matter. 1 don’t give a doit whether there
is or isn’t. It’s no more business of mine than flying is, and
that’s only curiosity. But if there is, though, lam just as
pleased, an’ wish them happiness.
L. Chumley. Well, Tom, if the logical deduction of happiness be a pyro-
technical display, I should say that they were—particularly happy.
But, p’raps, the theory most clear to us—
At least, the one most feasible to me—
Is that accounting for all errant lights
By the disruption of a burning world,


Whose masses gravitate as they are caught
While whirling through immensity of space;
And our fair Earth goes angling, it seems,
And lands a few of them ; all those that have
Sufficient density or power of weight
To pierce the density surrounding her,
That is—the air or atmosphere in which
She is enveloped, and through which they pass
With such velocity that fire ensues
From force of friction.
The lighter masses—the mere grain and dust—
Sink in proportion to their weight, that is—
Float in proportion as the air is dense ;
And there the lesser to the greater tend,
Resolve—in rank sedition as it were—
To mar the glories of our Mother Earth, —
In fact, to cogitate another sphere
Of greater empire and a mightier sway
In their embodiment, oblivious quite
Of all the big policemen about:
Those elemental officers of air
That we call vortices, disperse them to
Their great disquietude and our delight;
Lift them to great altitudes ; and then,
All the additional density acquired
While in their state of buoyancy is speed
So much accumulative, as in heights they are
Above the regions of that buoyancy,
To where descending there again ensues
The trail of friction on the wing of speed,
Apparent to us in the meteor light.
But this effect would be produced the same
By the eruptive agencies within
'The vast volcanoes of the atmosphere
That are experienced to us by winds,
Or air in motion, as in thunderstorms ;
While earth volcanoes we perceive by shocks,
Or matter moving as eruptions tend ;
And thunders are but the internal shock
■Of air volcanoes, as eruptions are
External evidence of earthly ones.
Thus—an eruption in the upper air
Breaks the air stratum, or thin layer of air,
And belches out great pyramids of fire—
No less than wholesale lightning, in fact;
While the concussions in the air so caused


Vibrate to us, and depresses on
The under strata, or thick layers of air,—
Air currents as more commonly they’re termed
And these depressions are the cause of storms
And calms, co-relatively great, as are
The air convulsions that occasion them.
Thus : —A great storm at a given point
Of the earth’s surface is a stated calm
At another point correspondingly great;
And all the rumbling noises that we hear,
And christen thunders, are made simply plain
By saying airquakes that rift fissures in
The layers or densities of air through which
Run the electric fluids or the fires
We christen lightnings. In simple truth,
The earth we walk on is the air we breathe ;
And Nature’s cunning is in simply all,
As simply treated in the all we know
Of all that’s knowable.
Sub-aerial matters—in the chaos made
By air volcanoes—are dispersed throughout
The ambient regions of the earth—
Not forced, but borne like feathers ;
And as in nearness to the earth they’re placed,
And in what state of density they are,
So the earth draws them, and so they resist ;
And that resistance we perceive in streaks
Of fire that, varying from faint to strong,
Proclaim the density that causes them.
Sub-aerial matters have no power to spread
Out in the currents of the air, because
Air force is greater as it nears the earth ;
Nor have these matters got the power to rise,
Because the counter currents of the air
Prevent them. Likewise, in a quiescent state,
Sub-aerial matter would sink slowly down
In its proportion of increasing weight,
Till from the radius altitude swept off
In lessening curvatures to mother earth,
An ignominious tire ball—no more.
Meanwhile the particles and dust all tend
To where the rarity of air is most;
Where it is oblate or flattened down
As at the poles ; then particles and dust
Pass through the same viscissitudes as do
Their bigger brethren. The rustling sounds


There heard in unison with lights
Are but the noises made in the descent,
And proof that air height in the frigid zones
Is less by far than in the temperate ones, —
Still less as nearer to the Poles we get.
In like degrees is gravitation less,
And power of magnetism more and more,
Which causes there those phantasies of light
Prom the sub-aerial substances being drawn
Through the gyrations of the Polar air.
It is in these gyrations that are seen
The finest of all spectacles of light,
Or light phenomena, Aurorae named,
But more significant, the Polar Lights.
These lights depend entirely upon how
The Earth’s position to the Sun may be,
And how and where the particles of dust
May in the air be floating at the time
The sunbeams glance upon their varying forms
Aurora landscape is the only form
Of these phenomena we see from here,
Which the Aurora Australis we name.
But of the myriads, it is only one,
That gladden eyesight in the wond’ring world.
They are as numerous in the Polar air
As the gyrations of that air may be
In strength and number.
Air is the ambient properties of Earth,
And all is of it what is in it seen.
The lovely spectacle of Eve and Dawn
Is when air strata are right angled to
The rays of sunlight, and when that occurs
Is when the sun in the horizon dips,
Or rises out of, as the case may be.
The deep rich tintedness of Eve and Dawn
Depends on force of the air currents ;
Just as they happen to be weak or strong,
So are the sunsets in their varyings from
Light amber mellow to deep golden hue
Blent in the vermeil of chameleon air.
And the cerulean atmosphere we name
The sky, or heavens, is the boundary line
Of air depicted in the aerial blue
Upon the background of unfathomed space.
O, the great glories of the earth and air 1
How man can know them and demur at God


Is the new-fangled fashion to sound fool
By every way that he may write his name,
In every way he may articulate.
There, Tom, you have my notions on the theme
Of all the aerial and sub-aerial lights.
Tom. Well, Jim, I’m clean dumfounder’d. I could no more follow
y’u than fly. In fac’, I would want to fly to follow y’u, and
then a’ think ’twould be in’ chief occupation. If a’ could read
it a’ might manage some. But just to follow y’u as one
might fly—’am fairly flummox’d. What was it y’u said that
gravitation was 1
(Julia at this moment comes out on verandah and signals with her
handkerchief, then walks out on lawn).
L. Chnmley ( seeing Julia , answers Tom abstractedly). -
Eh 1 ah—oh ! —H’m—yes ; gravitation. H’m !
Well—er—Tom, the truth is gravitation—O,
Excuse me, will you, but I must be off.
It’s a lot later than I thought it was.
Of course you’ll be at the fandang to-night.
So adios compadre, till then.
( Going into lawn through gate to meet Julia).
Tom. So long 1 ’Am sorry if ’ave kept y’u, Jim.
I’ll just loiter for awhile till—Ay !
(Looking across lawn—sewing L. CJmmley and Julia).
That’s gravitation, is it 1 An’ a’ thought as much !
Well, a worthier she couldn’t get.
She might a richer; but a better—no.
And what’s a purse to a dear heart for life 1
The heart is happier with a heart than gold.
If she’s a lady, he’s no levs a man ;
So well I wish y’u.—Y’u’re a comely pair.
Hey, bless us all, but what a glorious night.
There goes a scooter ! —What a man is Jim !
There’s nothing seemingly he doesn’t know
That’s worth the knowing. There I —there’s another !
I'll just beguile m’self a little while
With saying that bit po’try I made
I wish, tho’, somehow, that it didn’t look
Just quite so cabbagy. It sounds so like
The “Twinkle, twinkle, little star.’’ In fac’,
It’s just upon the very key
Of that sweet melody by Isaac Watts
For little children. Tho’ this of mine
Is more becomin’ for the bigger sorts
That might have hankerings for something more


Than just the twinklin’ of the little stars.
How poor old Granny, when I was a boy,
An’ often blubbering in the pangs o’ lore
Would say, “Losh, hinny ! Can y’ no gae owre 1
What ails ye, greetin’ sae 1 Nair mind it, wane !
It’s no sae worthy it s’ou’d break y’r heart.
Pit on y’r bonnet, an’ come out y’r waas,
An’jeust watch the wee stars flirtin.”
By that I take it they are much alike—
A flirt’s a twinkle, and a twinkle’s flirt.
Flirtin,’ flirtin,’ little star,
How one wonders what y’u are;
Whether y’u’re, as some do say,
A flarer in the milky way ?
Just gilavantin’ up an’ down,
Falootin’ with y’ur hangers on—
Most unconcarnedly elate,
And whiskin’ to perdition straight.
Or are y’u, in due course of time,
The makin’s of a “ home, sweet home ” ,
Or now, as presently appar’ll’d,
A lovely habitable world ?
Misgivin’s of the mind get rife
About what varity of life
Is yours, by day-time out of sight,
And flirtin,’ flirtin,’ all the night.
Some how or other, I’ve a great delight
To watch the twinkling of they little stars :
Although they others, with their steadier lights,
Are more commanding. They’re more lovely sweet
Than lovely friskin’. Its within them, tho’, '
For whiles by chance they’ll let a twinkle out
That’s so enchantin’. What’n all the ’arth
Is that there chirpin’ ? Oh ! —h—h !
(With evident efforts to retain his risibility).
Enter Grim and Mrs. Lightly.
Lightly {sobbing). O, Grim, I—couldn’t. I—so feel the—loss
Of—my po —or Robert, that I—couldn’t yet
Just— (Sobbing in Grims arms).
Grim ,
Darling, don’t you be a vale of tears,
Who are to me a lily of the vale.
There, ducky, don’t now, —An’ I’ll say nomore (Eel inqvish ingher)
I’ll never ask you to again. I’ll just
Pack up and travel an’—


Mrs Lightly (excitedly). You’ll go away !
0, Grim, don’t! Don’t you ! I’m so lonely now.
I— (, Sobbing again).
Grim. Well, now, my ducky; will you have me ? Say
Right straight. ISTo gammon ; for I can’t go on
Just playin’ second fiddle to a corpse.
That’s how I feel it. You’ll excuse me, M’m,
For talking plainly ; but I’m flesh and blood,
And seein’ you are—is it “ Yes ” or “ No ” ?
Mrs. Lightly (sobbing). O, how un—fee—fee-—fee —
Grim, (putting his arms around her) —
The parson’s melody.—He’ll sing it, Lil.
We’ll go and hear him sweety, if you like ?
Exit Grim, caressing, and the wido?v laughing.
Tom (giving vent to his - risibility). M-o-r-e gravitation !
In fac’ I think I’ll gravitate myself ! Exit Tom.
Enter King Billy, revelling in the prospects of a great feast, and looking
towards the house.
King B. Y’-ha ! Big fella eat ’em b’mby !
Shoo ’possum (giving a delightful caper, and exit).
Enter Sam, Potts, and Whaler.
Sam. Look out there, daddy, or y’u’ll spill y’rself,
And spoil y’ur dancing, and y’ur clo’es to boot.
I spec’ y’u’ll figure it a bit to-night ?
Potts. Hey, lad, a ’once could ! ’Am too owd an’ stiff’ tho’ now for
dancing.
Whaler. Ye want ’ilin’ up just, an’ ye’ll frisk aroun’ as spry asmoosic !
Sam. I say, old Splodger, y’u can flute a bit.
Y’u’ll play’s the cadger’s hornpipe to-night 1
Whaler. I will that, sonny,—an’ the whaler’s joy ;
An’ that’s the shuffle of the devil’s jig,—
M’ own composin’ Exit all.—Sam laughing.
Enter Queen Sally shouting after them
Q. S. Hey, Sam you fella ! You no go so fast.
You wan tin partna along-a ball ?
Me waltzem beautiful !
Exit singing and waltzing—two black children following her.
Sam (shouting back). Come on then, Sally, and we’ll cut a dash !
Enter Geo and Belle —walking on lawn.
Geo. Yes, Belle, now Julia’s going to wed,
It’s time that we should.
Our sum of happiness has long been one :
Suppose we house it, and locate a home :
Though heretofore my worldly estate
Has been so harass’d in prosperity
I could not honourably seek your hand,
Until I merited my worth of life •


In the clear sanction of your guardian’s will
For such fair dowry. Like a prudent man,
While not discouraging my suit, he said—
“ Wealth is the special virtue of the world,
And got with honour is a gracious boon.
The virtue of it in the getting’s proved.
Make good your title to that virtue, Sir,
And then I’ll answer.” And away I went
With all my hopes of wedding you, dear Belle,
Right down to Zero. But it’s plainly clear,
His view of virtue as akin to wealth,
Is not the hoarding; for he said to-day
That we might marry when we felt inclined.
And he has spoken in the nick of time.
I’ve never felt so prosperous before,
Nor ever half so feelingly inclined
I think to marry;
So, Belle, we’ll celebrate this good event
By getting married, if you’ll tell me when 1
Belle. Well—George, when Julia gets married—
We’ll—
Geo. (kissing her ). So we will, Belle, and we’ll prove the world
Is not so bad as it is vilified. Exit.
Enter Tom and Maria.
Tom (pointing to the sky, with arm on Maria!s shoulder)—
That there, Maria, is the Milky Way.
Do you see them there cluster of bright stars—
Right in the centre portion of it like, —
And notice one particularly bright I
Maria looking earnestly , Tom kisses her.
Maria (freeing herself). O what a mean advantage you took, Tom
Tom. A sweet one, anyhow.
I say, Maria, will—
(Going to put his arm about her, but she evading him.)
Y’u little witch !
Maria. Now, Tom, behave yourself, and tell now
About that poetry you promised to.
Tom (putting her arm within his). Well, just come here then
Y’u wouldn’t sui’ely have me bawl it out,
Disquieting Nature in her sweet repose
At this unseemly hour of the night.
Now listen, will y’u ? I’ll not tell y’u, now,
That is, not presently, but by an’ by.
Moreover, women have no special like
For such a subject. It’s too highly flown,
Or dryly p’r’aps ? I wouldn’t be’ sure which,
However, women in a general way


Are not devoted to astronomy.
The heavenly bodies in their notions are—
Not quite a kindred with the shining spheres
That dazzle us nightly with their lily lights;
And that bit po’try I struggled through,
Is all about them. But, Maria, lass,
I’ve something other of more worth to say
Than jinglin’ clatter, an’ I think that now’s
The time to say it if I mean to thrive.
I’m a rough wooer; but I love y’u, girl,
An’ know no other way of provin’ it
Than just to wed y’u if y’u’ll have me ? Say,
Right out, Maria, without shame or fear,
Whether y’u care for me or not 1
Maria (withdrawing her hand from Tom, and fumbling with her
dress while looking shyly up at him) —
I—l
Tom {/gently, mistaking her hesitation as an evidence of refusal, and a\
desire on her part to tender that refused as gently as possible) —
There, there, Maria ! I can see y’u don’t,
So don’t distress y’urself to answer no.
It’s of no consequence, Maria, more
Than just the madness of the thing in me,
Causing more bother than I’m any worth.
(Visibly affected).
Don’t think I’m—angry or offended, girl.
I couldn’t reasonably think y’u cared.
I’ll say no more than—wishing y’u good luck,
To get a husband who—deserves a wife.
For I know well y’u’re a deserving girl;
An’—
Maria ( confusedly). But, Tom, I—that is—you’re mistaken, Tom.
I—l—o, Tom, I care for you ! There, now.
{Putting her hands on his shoulders, and nestling her head in his breast)
Tom {clasping her in his arms and kissing her) —
Eh ! My little sweetheart !
We’ll just go as straight to the parson
As the round aboutness of the way ’ll allow.
Exit Tom and Mama
Enter Ben and Lucy {as far apart as the wideness of the road will permit).
Ben. S’help me, Luce ! A’ never said three words
To Widow Lightly in all m’ life
Out of the or’inary way of talk.
Lucy. 0, ay ! The ordinary way of talk
And what’s your ordinary way of talk %
Well, I know it, so needn’t think
With such lick-spittling to slaver me.


Ben. Hang it all, Luce, how you badger one—putting the right I
mean into the wrong you think.
Lucy (spiritedly). An’ when your acts don’t go with your words,
where else would you have it put 1 I think no tvrong. But
it’s the wrong I would think if I thought of • the right you
meant, instead of knowing of the right you ought. Do you
think I’m a fool 1 I’ll be no flying kite for you or no other man,
Ben Whistler! Go your own road ! I don’t want you mine !
Exit Lucy ( indignantly , and with great efforts to restrain her tears).
Ben ( standing still for a little , then suddenly pulling his slouch hat
down over his eyes, and diving his hands deep into his trousers
pockets)—exit very dejectedly after Lucy.
Enter Marman ( halting in front of gate , as if debating whether to go
in that way or round by the road). Enter Pan (placing his hand
on Marman s shoulder).
Pan. There’s no necessity for going there.
I am commissioned by your friend to say
That he will meet you at the Stockman’s Arms
Some time to-morrow : that he’s quite aware
Of all that’s happened, and no harm’s done
Beyond what can be easily repaired ;
And that you’ll think of it no other way
Than just the licence of that comradeship
Betwixt you basing, as in heretofore,
Upon mere mutual dependencies.
The ancient contract shall remain to him,
He says, as stated as in days of yore ;
And any morbidness of thought in you
Would falsely charge him with annulling it.
How, as a guerdon of good faith in you,
And an endorsement of my nephew’s acts ;
I wish you thoroughly to understand
That I am satisfied with all that’s done,
Both in accordance with his view of right
And your acknowledgments of having err’d,
Which are no less trustworthiness to right.
So come, dismiss it, and shake hands with me.
Marman ( shaking hands with him). Sir, I thank you.
Exit both.
Scene lll. —Dancing Party.
Enter Tom Somers, Ben, Sam, Potts, Grim, Whaler, Kino Billy,
Maria, Lucy, Mrs. Lightly', Queen Sally. (Ben dancing jig.)
Tom Somers. Well done, Ben ! That’s a wonderful display of capering
Ben. Sam, old sonny, I’m near winded now ! Fall in and flourish.
(Retiring to seat beside Lucy amid great applause).
Sam. Bight y’are, Ben 1 I’m not much to dance ;
But hang ray buttons if I’ll see y’u beat


For want of tryin’. If old Splodger there
Plays up the Cadger’s hornpipe, I’ll show
I’m fairly willin’ to shape out in’ best
For the upholdin’ o’ the “ bonny blue.”
Tom. Hear ! Hear !
The true spirit of sweet divarsion, Sam.
[Music strikes up. Sam dances nimbly through a series of grotesque
evolutions that elicit the laughter and applause of the assembly.)
Enter Geo. Spence, Lord Chumley, Belle, and Julia.
Tom. Well done, supple Sam !
[Sam retires to seat amid great applause.)
Geo. Spence. I have some pleasing gossip to relate
To this heart-glad assembly to-night,
Of one well known to all of us by all
That graces manhood : who has proven life
So free of flattery in his discourse
That none can touch him : that the all we say
In our endeavours to appraise his worth
To him in person, can be nothing more
Than the resonance of that worth he has,
In true and manly sympathetic chords,
So clearly evidenced by all his acts
Throughout his sojourn in our sunny land,
Where now he may in simile be said
To be just listening where the sounds converge
In glorious symphony. I see you’re all
In much amazement to know of what
My words are pregnant—of whom I speak.
I will not aggravate suspense by more
Than the announcement that I have to make
Will render eager. We have known the man
In all his merits by a homely name.
Jim Baxter’s presence to us all alike
Has been the quickening of our better parts
In recognition of a manly worth.
Tis time, however, you should know him so
By his own name and worldly estate :
Richard Arnott, Lord Viscount Chumley, alias
The prosaic new-chum stockman, Jim Baxter.
And now, my lord, you are unmasked : declare, —
As it becomes you,—your identity.
L. Chumley , stepping forward , is greeted with applause —
My friends, this fulness of heart I have
Was never gendered from so mean a source
As that of flattery ; because I feel
’Tis more in unison with your regards
For what is excellent, than is in me


For any special excellence deserved.
As no one knows me as I know myself,
I can indeed with honesty aver
I am not flattered ; but I do rejoice
Exceedingly with you,
Because my efforts in the way of right
Have your acknowledgments of being so,
Which is a strengthening of the right in me,
As this acknowledgment may strengthen you
In the continuance of that toward good.
I crave your patience to redress a wrong
That has all through my thoughtlessness occurred,
By representing falsely to you
A man whose friendship I esteem beyond
All shallow sentiment. Who has for me
The nobler quality of love evinced ;
And far, far from me be the baseness borne
That would inveigh my gratitude against
A noble merit.
He whom I speak of, you have seen and known
Bearing my name and title.
1 make no pretext to defend the act
Other than just it was a freak of his,
But rendered flagrant by a wrong of mine.
Tis this my friends—predominance of good
Is good established; and he is good
Upon the basis of predominance.
We do not throw a sovereign away
Because of the alloy ; but rather seek
To find what merit the alloy has got
In virtue of alliance with the gold ;
And that reminds me I’m an Englishman.
God save the symbol of our race and laws,
And bless Victoria with a healthful life,
Long to personify that symbol in
Her virtuous womanhood. To you, my friends,
I wish the wishes of your virtuous parts
In the fulfilment of your daily lives,
That nothing herein may be lost to you,
And all hereafter may be well assured. ( Applaus<
Somers. Will you allow me for a little just ?
Somehow or other I would like to say
How much we’re conscious of Jim— M’lord,
Allow me, will y’u, for to call y’u Jim
For sake of brevity and homely wit.
I am in such a quandary of thought


Betwixt good feelin’s and good feedin’, now,
The most I can do is to stagger out
At what I would say ;
Y’u’ll remember, lads,
That Jim was with us, and no more than just
His manhood made him; and y’u all observed
He never once let on he was a lord;
Though in the province of his manly parts,
He gave an evidence of being one,
Had he had no inheritance of such ;
However, that provided, he has proved
The title’s nothing of the man, but what
The man may merit if he has the grit.
I’ve noticed, somehow, in a worldly way,
We’re all affected to secure as much
As comes within the radius of our reach,
And whiles, perhaps, a little just beyond
What is corneatable with manly ease.
Though not commendable, y’u’ll understand,
It’s most forgiveable—more weak by far
Than deadly envious. He’s meanly lived
Who bears a malice to a worth beyond
His powers of reaching. So beware the man
Who starts a virtue manufactory on
The credit basis of equality.
Mind y’u respect him for his honesty,
But always shun him as y’u would y’ur ruin.
He has more speculation than there’s room
In all the univarse to entertain.
The most we get is from the best we do;
And when the best is honestly endow’d,
The most is always satisfactory.
Seeing our functions are not all alike,
There’s no advice to us of any use
That relegates our functions for its plan.
There’s one advice in genera] for all
That’s good to go by, and that’s ;—Stick to truth.
The very dread of it we entertain,
Is more than anything the reason why
We always ought to be on speaking terms
With Truth at any rate ; for if we are,
He’ll never leave us in a pinch like some.
How, all I’ve said is manifest in Jim.
His whole demeanour amongst us here
Bred such a confidence that what he said
Could not be otherwise than just the truth ;
Because he travels on the lines of truth.


He is a sample of a genuine power;
And since the sample is so well approv’d,
We can’t do better than adopt the lines.
Fill up the glasses, and we’ll have a toast.
A little whiskey in that glass of mine.
I drink cold water for to quinch m’ thirst,
But always whiskey when I make a toast.
I wish tho’ all of y’u to understand,
I’m no disciple of intemperance.
I say all honour to the man who starves
The curse that’s in him. May he thrive and live
To strength others in a good resolve,
And always study to depict the curse
Where it’s located, in the man ; and not,
As some will have it, in the liquor. Gosh !
Are there not curses in the world enough,
Without exploring on the ’arth for them
That’s full of blessings ? When a man’s intent
On thinking evil he forgets the good,
Reviles at Providence when he should pray ;
And thereby misses what he else would have
In the enjoyment of a nobler life.
I feel so very garrulous to-night,
There’s no containing me.
But we’ll have the toast:—
Lord Chumley : May he in his own estate
Long live to evidence that worth we all
Esteem as requisite in every man,
For every calling and degree of life ;
And if we evidence a like regard,
I’m sure his memory will never fail
To pledge our welfare.
Every inch of him he is a man-
Ben. And the best buckjump rider in the live colonies.
( Laughter and
L. Chumhy. Another toast, and then we’ll to the dance.
(.Leading Julia forward by the hand, and howiny ),
AUSTRALIA FELIX
{Applause).
{Music strikes up—each takes partner and dances ),
{Fall of Curtain).
S. T. Leigh & Co., Printers, 155 Claremte Street, Sydney.
