





AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.
. ; ■ RETURN to an Address of the Honourable The House of Commons,
y ■:-5'," dated 19 July 1839 /or, ' . ■
' ]■ :l ■ .... (
Copies or Extracts of DESPATCHES relative to the Massacre of various
‘ * ■> ’• • .
* Aborigines of in the Year 1838, and respecting the Trial of
their Murderers. ' . * . .* . / •
Colonial Office, Downing-street,!
’ ’ ' ',.12 August 1839, J
„ . • • -v : '!■■■. '• . V - 'v.
H. LABOUCHERE.
(Mr, Charles Lushinglon.J
♦ 4 g
Ordered, by The House of Commons, to be Printed,
: 12 August 1839.
[Price 8 W.]


SCHEDULE.
No. I.—Extract of a Despatch from Lord Glenelg to Governor Sir Richard Bourke, k.c.b., dated
Downing-street, 26 July 1837 - - - - - - <* aF - - p. 3
No. 2.-—Copy of a Despatch from Lord Glenelg to Governor Sir George Gipps, dated Downing-
street, 31 January 1838; (Two Enclosures) - - - ' - - - -p. 4.
No. 3. —Copy of a Despatch from Governor Sir George Gipps to Lord Glenelg, dated Government
House, Sydney, 25 April 1838 ; (Two Enclosures) - - - - - -p. 21
No. 4. —Copy of a Despatch from Governor Sir George Gipps to Lord Glenelg, dated Government
House, Sydney, 27 April 1838 ; (One Enclosure) - - - - - - p. 24
No, s.—Copy of a Despatch from Lord Glenelg to Governor Sir George Gipps, dated Downing-
street, 16 November 1838 - - - - - - - - - -p. 26
No. 6.—Copy of a Despatch from Governor Sir George Gipps to Lord Glenelg, dated Government
House, Sydney, 21 July 1838; (Five Enclosures) - - - - - - p. 27
No. 7.—-Copy of a Despatch from Lord Glenelg to Governor Sir George Gipps, dated Downing-
street, 21 December 1838 - - - - - - - - - - p. 33
No. B.—Copy of a Despatch from Governor Sir George Gipps to Lord Glenelg, dated Government
House, Sydney, 19 December 1838; (Three Enclosures) P-34
No. g.—Extract of a Despatch from the Marquess of Normanby to Governor Sir George Gipps,
dated Downing-street, 17 July 1839 - - - - - - - - p. 56
No, 10. —Copy of a Despatch from Governor Sir George Gipps to Lord Glenelg, dated Government
House, Sydney, 8 January 1839; (One Enclosure) - - - - - - p. 5C
SKETCH of the proposed Military Posts between Sydney and Fort Phillip - - - at the end.


Copies or Extracts of DESPATCHES relative to the Massacre of various
Aborigines of Australia, in the Year 1838, and respecting the Trial of
their Murderers.
No. 1.
(No. 353.)
E XTRACT of a DESPATCH from Lord Glenedg to Governor Sir R. Bourke,
dated Downing-street, 26th July 1837.
It is happily superfluous for me to impress upon you the general principles
to be observed in your conduct towards the aborigines.
I shall soon be enabled to transmit to you the Report of the Committee of
the House of Commons on this subject, made before the close of the present
Session ; and I have reason to believe that you will there find the result of
much diligent inquiry and reflection. For the present, therefore, I confine
myself to remarks, which may perhaps appear to proceed on a less comprehen-
sive view of the subject, than under other circumstances I should have thought
it right at least to attempt. 0
Your commission as Governor of New South Wales asserts Her Majesty’s
sovereignty over every part of the continent of New Holland which is not
embraced in the colonies of Western or Southern Australia. Hence I conceive
it follows that all the natives inhabiting those territories must be considered
as subjects of the Queen, and as within Her Majesty’s allegiance. To regard
them as aliens, with whom a war can exist, and against whom Her Majesty’s
troops may exercise belligerent rights/is to deny that protection to which they
derive the highest possible claim from the sovereignty which has been assumed
over the whole of their ancient possessions.
I am well aware that in extreme exigencies, public officers are not to be
governed a together by ordinary rules: at the same time, it appears to me
necessary that those rules should be steadily borne in mind in estimating the
apology made for an occasional departure from them.
v 1 a^or^nes as British subjects be fully acknowledged,
it will follow that when any of them comes to his death by the hands of the
Queen s officers, or of persons acting under their command, an inquest should
be held, to ascertain the causes which led to the death of the deceased. Such
a proceeding is important, not only as a direct protection to society at large
against lawless outrage, but as it impresses on the public a just estimate of the
value of human life.
52 6. A 2


No. 2.
(No. 72.)
COPY of a DESPATCH from Lord Glenelg to Governor Sir George Gipps.
Sir, Downing-street, 31 January 1838.
In transmitting to you a duplicate copy of the last Report of the Select Com-
mittee of the House of Commons on Aborigines, I have the honour to communicate
to you, that Her Majesty’s Government have directed their anxious attention to the
adoption of some plan for the better protection and civilization of the native tribes
within the limits of your government.
With that view, it has been resolved to appoint at once a small number of persons
qualified to fill the office of protectors of aborigines. I have confined that number,
in the first instance, to one chief protector, aided by four assistant protectors. I
would propose that the chief protector should fix his principal station at Port
Phillip, as the most convenient point from whence he could traverse the surround-
ing country, and be in personal communication with his assistants ; two of whom
should occupy the country to the northward and eastward, and 4he other two be
stationed to the northward, and as far westward as the boundaries of the colony of
South Australia.
I propose to confer the office of chief protector on Mr. Robinson, who, you
are no doubt aware, has for some time past been in charge of the aboriginal
establishment at Flinders’ Island, and who has shown himself to be eminently
qualified for such an office. I shall direct the Lieutenant-governor of Van
Diemen’s Land to communicate my intentions to Mr. Robinson, and to take the
necessary measures for sending him to Sydney, if he should be prepared to under-
take the office. It appears to be a question whether Mr. Robinson would be
willing to quit the establishment at Flinders’ Island, unless he were accompanied
by the natives from Van Diemen’s Land, in whose superintendence he is at
present engaged. I enclose, for your general information, a copy of a despatch
from Lieutenant-governor Sir J. Franklin, with a report from Mr. Robinson, on
the state of the native settlement in that island. It contains much interesting
information as to the condition of the natives under his charge, and also as to
his mode of treating them. You will perceive that in this report he strongly
recommends the removal of these natives to New Holland. The late Lieutenant-
governor of Van Diemen’s Land has expressed his conviction that no evil con-
sequences are to be apprehended from allowing them to accompany Mr,
Robinson. In the despatch which is now enclosed, Sir John Franklin states
that many objections present themselves to such a measure; and I should not
feel myself justified in directing the adoption of it, in opposition to such a state-
ment. If, however, the result of the personal observations of Sir John Franklin,
in the visit which he stated himself to be about to make to Flinders’ Island,
should be such as entirely to satisfy him that the natives might be so removed,
without personal risk or danger to themselves, and with their own free consent,
important advantages might be anticipated from the formation in New Holland
of an aboriginal settlement comparatively so far advanced in civilization. On
this point, however, I should wish you to communicate with Sir John Franklin,
and it will be necessary to act in it with the utmost caution and circumspection.
In the meantime, I trust that Mr. Robinson may, under any circumstances,
be induced to undertake the office. The gentlemen whose names are stated in
the margin have been chosen to fill the office of assistant protectors.
With regard to the expenses attending the establishment, it is proposed to
assign to the chief protector a salary of 500/. per annum, and to each of the
assistants 250/.
The four officers proceeding from this country will also have an allowance of
100/. each, on account of their outfit and passage; and according to the general
rule of this department, they have been informed that they will receive half
salary from the date of embarkation.
It will also be necessary to make some provision to enable the protectors to
supply the natives occasionally with moderate quantities of food and clothing.
In fixing this expenditure, Her Majesty’s Government have anticipated the
concurrence of the legislative council of your government, in voting the
necessary sum for meeting the charge. The object contemplated is so. important,
and the obligation which rests on the colonists to do their utmost for the pro-
tection
4
PAPERS RELATIVE TO THE


tection and civilization of the native tribes so imperative, that I am convinced
no further argument is necessary to induce a cheerful co-operation on their part
in the measure now adopted. If the aboriginal establishment at Flinders’ Island
should be broken up, and transferred to New South Wales, some portion of the
expenditure might reasonably be defrayed from the revenues of Van Diemen’s
Land.
It remains for me to explain my general view of the duties which will devolve
on the protectors, and to refer to the points which will form the ground of
instructions which you will issue to them.
1. Each protector should attach himself as closely and constantly as possible
to the aboriginal tribes whO may be found in the district for which he may be
appointed ; attending them if practicable in their movements from one place to
another, until they can be induced to assume more settled habits of life, and
endeavour to conciliate their respect and confidence, and to make them feel that
he is their friend.
2. He must watch over the rights and interests of the natives, protect them,
as far as he can by his personal exertions and influence, from any encroachments
on their property, and from acts of cruelty, oppression, or injustice, and faith-
fully represent their wants, wishes, or grievances, if such representations- be
found necessary, through the chief protector, to the government of the colony.
For this purpose it will be desirable to invest each protector with a commission
as magistrate.
3. If the natives can be induced in any considerable numbers to locate them-
selves in a particular place, it will be the object of the protector to teach and
encourage them to engage in the cultivation of their grounds, in building
suitable habitations for themselves, and in whatever else may conduce to their
civilization and social improvement.
4. The education and instruction of the children, as early and as extensively
as it may be practicable, is to be regarded as a matter of primary importance.
5. In connexion with the engagements, and as affording the most efficient
means for the ultimate accomplishment of them, the assistant protector should
promote, to the utmost extent of his ability and opportunities, the moral and
-religious improvement of the natives, by instructing them in the elements of the
Christian religion, and preparing them for the reception of teachers, whose
peculiar province it would be to promote the knowledge and practice of Chris-
tianity among them.
6. In reference to every object contemplated by the proposed appointment,
it is exceedingly desirable that the protector should, as soon as possible, learn
the language of the natives, so as to be able freely and familiarly to converse
with them. '
7• He must take charge of, and be accountable for, any provisions or cloth-
ing which may be placed under his care for distribution to the natives.
8. He will obtain as accurate information as may be practicable of the
number of the natives within his district, and of all important particulars in
regard to them.
'I hese appear to me the principal points which demand attention in reference
to this subject.
But it is of course not my intention to restrict you, in the instructions which
you wi ave to issue to the protectors, within the topics on which I have
touched, as your local knowledge and experience will doubtless enable you to
supply omissions in tne outline which I have given.
I have, &c.
(signed) Glemlg.
5 26.
■A 3


Enclosure 1, in No. 2.
Van Diemen’s Land, Government House,
My Lord, 3 August 1837.
I have the honour to enclose a report, which I have received from Mr,
Robinson, superintendent of the aboriginal establishment at Flinders’ Island,
detailing at great length the progress and actual state of the natives under his
charge.
From this your Lordship will regret to observe that there has been again a
great mortality among them, no fewer than 17 deaths having taken placeln the
six months between January and June last; in consequence of which, Mr.
Robinson renews his representations of the expediency of transporting them
across to the opposite coast of Australia.
So many objections present themselves to this, however, that I feel unable to
entertain the idea; and as I propose visiting the settlement myself in the course
of the ensuing season, after which I shall report fully on its condition and pros-
pects, I do not desire to bring it at present under your Lordship’s particular
consideration.
In the meantime, however, it is impossible for me not to approve highly of
the zeal and judgment which Mr. Robinson seems to evince in the general
management of his interesting charge. As regards their moral training, he
seems, eminently successful; and even if, from uncontrollable circumstances,
this particular black family is doomed to become extinct (which-there is much
reason to fear, their women, as I understand, being now mostly past the usual
age for childbearing in savage life), still the experience which will have been
thus acquired in civilizing and instructing them will be most valuable.
Of the several methods pursued by Mr. Robinson for these purposes, there is
one, indeed, of which I particularly approve, and which may possibly be found
to exemplify even an important principle in the future management of native
ti'ibes; I mean his native police. This will, in any case, naturally be composed
in the first instance of the most active, intelligent, and influential members of
the community, and must give these an interest and pride in enforcing whatever
regulations may be imposed on the others; it must give the whole, also, a
feeling of self-importance and equality with white men; it must thus stimulate
them to endeavour to imitate their habits and demeanour; it must make them
sensible of the value of obedience and concert in action ; and the occupation
being at once active, and in a slight degree dangerous, it must furnish those
engaged in it with some portion of that mental excitement in which they have
been trained, and the want of which, when they are suddenly brought within
the pale of civilization, has always been found injurious both to their bodily
health and mental energy.
The interest of the subject has led me thus in some measure to generalize
one portion of Mr. Robinson’s plans.
I have, &c.
Lord Glenelg, &c. See. Sec. (signed) John Franklin.
Enclosure 2, in No. 2.
REPORT on the ABOIGINAL ESTABLISHMENTS at Flinders’ Island.
Commandant’s Office, Aboriginal Settlement,
Sir, Flinders’ Island, 24 June 1837.
I have the honour to submit, for the information of his Excellency the Lieutenant-
governor, the subjoined particulars relative to this experimental and interesting institution,
since the transmission of my previous report of the Bth of September 1836; and I have
much satisfaction in stating that this settlement continues as heretofore in a very quiet and
tranquil state, and that the same order and regularity is maintained as mentioned on former
occasions.
The only thing to be deplored is the mortality that has taken place among them, and
which induces me ardently to desire that His Majesty’s Government may accede to the
removal of the present establishment to the adjacent coast of New Holland, and where the
Flinders’ Island aborigines would not only be found efficient, bu willing auxiliaries in
aiding


aiding the work of civilization, so urgently needed by the numerous tribes inhabiting that
vast continent. , , , , , , . , _
In the various communications I have had the honour to submit to the Government,
I have frequently adverted to this topic, and in my letters of the 27th, 28th, and 29th of
October 1836, have fully dilated thereupon. Should, however. His Majesty’s Government
still object to their removal, and continue the settlement where it now is, I have no hesita-
tion in stating that the race in a very short period of time will be extinct; and although it
might be urged that the same results would occur were the translation permitted, still it
would be found that by the admixture of the Flinders’ Island aborigines with the aborigines
of the country, the declension would not be observed, consequently the excitement not felt.
For a more detailed account, I again respectfully refer to the letters already alluded to, as
well as my previous reports on the same subject.
In the adoption of the foregoing measure not the slightest danger need be apprehended
of the Flinders’ Island natives coming in collision or quarrelling with the aborigines of the
country; for from the paucity of their numbers and docility of disposition, I should have
no hesitation in recommending their removal to Van Diemen’s Land, were it not that
I feel assured that the depraved portion of the white inhabitants would again commit
aggressions on them, and hence, as a natural consequence, would be renewed those dire
atrocities, scenes of bloodshed, and rapine, which it is deeply to be deplored already sully
the page of history of the country; and therefore it is that in recommending and urging
their removal to New Holland, I feel I am only discharging a faithful duty to the Govern-
ment, as well also to the Van Diemen’s Land aborigines themselves, and which the deep
interest I feel for them and others of a similar character will, I trust, sufficiently excuse
these episodical remarks, and of my again recurring to this subject.
I have much satisfaction in stating that the wants of the aborigines are amply and
abundantly supplied, and that the provisions furnished by the Government are of the best
description; and though, notwithstanding, the fatality to which I have heretofore alluded is
of painful character, still it must be conceded that the same is quite providential, and might
have occurred in their own native districts; for I do not consider the depopulation wholly
attributable to their removal, for in my opinion the same causes did exist in their primeval
districts, in proof of which abundant evidence might be adduced; and hence, amid the
calamity that has happened, it is a pleasing reflection to know that everything has been
done which ingenuity could devise or humanity suggest to alleviate their condition, and of
which the aborigines themselves have marked their appreciation, and oft repeated their
acknowledgements for the solicitude evinced, and the kind intention of the Government
towards them.
The advantages to the aborigines by their removal have been manifold, and many of
them of the highest order. In their native forests they were without the knowledge of
a God, hence but little removed from the brute themselves. Their mode of life was
extremely precarious, and to the juveniles distressing in the extreme; and though in their
insidious and deadly attacks on the white, inhabitants they invariably eluded pursuit, yet
they themselves were not without dangers and alarms, and might reasonably be said to
exist by excitement alone. The sanguinary tribes had seldom any progeny, and which
could only be attributed to their harassed mode of existence.
From those circumstances (alone) it is apparent that the policy of Government in their
removal was the most wise, the most humane and philanthropic that could possibly be
devised; and when their present and past condition is contrasted, there is no comparison.
At this asylum they are protected, every comfort and advantage of civilized life is afforded
them, and that abundantly, and of which they themselves have expressed their entire satis-
faction. But whilst they have received those advantages, of which thousands and tens of
thousands of Europeans are in lack of, they have been receiving others of a far higher
character; viz. the knowledge of God, and of which I am sure it will be gratifying to the
mind of eveiy Christian philanthropist to be made acquainted with.
Anterior to their arrival they were without this knowledge; they knew not who it was
that made them; they were in a deplorable state of mental degradation. Such is not now
the case: they not only possess the knowledge of a Deity, but are acquainted with the
principles of Christianity.
From the time I first took charge of the settlement, now near two years since, religious
'knowledge has been daily imparted to them, and religious principles inculcated. In this
laudable object the whole of the officers and my family have unitedly assisted, a duty in
which they have evinced the greatest aptitude and delight; and I myself can testify with
what avidity and eagerness they have attended to and sought after religious knowledge,
and which the subjoined paper (Appendix A, annexed to this report) will amply testify.
But whilst in the foregoing I have chiefly confined my observations to the aborigines,
and the advantages incident thereupon, still it will be found that these bear no comparison
to the advantages that have accrued to the European inhabitants and colony at large, which
are beyond calculation.
On this subject it would be superfluous for me now to dilate, since they are too apparent
to those (the least) conversant with the history of the colony to need comment. From the
preceding observations, it will be found that a recipocity of benefit has resulted to both
Parties, but to the European inhabitants the advantages have been incalulable.
important as are the benefits alluded to, they are not the only ones that can be adduced,
for when considered in an experimental point of aspect, this settlement will be found of
universal interest.
5*6. a 4 The


The work of Christian instruction arid civilization, which has taken place under the
auspices of the local government at this settlement, has succeeded beyond the most
sanguine expectation, and has determiried a question hitherto deemed impracticable.
If, as is made evident, so much has been effected for a people said to possess so little
intellectual capacity, a people reputed to be but one remove from the brute creation, and of
whom it was said they were but a link between the human and brute species; if so much
has been done for such a people, how much more might be performed with those of a
different character; and I do trust that the time is not far distant when the experiment
will be tried among the numerous tribes inhabiting New Holland ; for from the appalling
accounts received, and from what I myself have witnessed, as well as from information
heretofore communicated, there appears a prompt necessity that some efficient protection
be extended -to those ill-used and persecuted people. Humanity, religion, and justice
require that every effort should be made on their behalf.
The primeval occupants of Van Diemen’s Land are not deserving of the obloquy which
has been heaped upon them. The hostile feeling evinced by them towards the whites, and
their attacks upon the lonely settlement of the colony, are only considered as just retaliation
for the wrongs done to them and to their progenitors. They are now well disposed and
bear no ill-will or animosity to the white inhabitants. They have been grossly misrepre-
sented ; but in this respect they are not alone, but suffer in common with all their unfortunate
race, who have in all ages been shamefully maligned and cruelly persecuted;’**'
The aborigines of Van Diemen’s Land have not only shown an aptitude to acquire
knowledge, but have displayed a precocity of intellect, and have exhibited capabilities of
no ordinary character, and which the papers (Appendix B.) annexed to this report will in
part sufficiently establish, and at this settlement there are abundant proofs.
The effects that have been produced on the minds of these people will for ever put to
silence the cavils of the most sceptical and prejudicially minded; and if (as I understand)
in the sister colony the attempts hitherto brought into operation for the amelioration of
the aborigines have failed, it can only be attributed to a defect in the system, and not to
the people themselves.
I trust I shall be excused for thus digressing'from the ordinary arrangements usual in
such reports. The severe mortality which has taken place among those people since my
communication in December last, wherein 17 deaths have occurred within that period, as
per Medical Report, (Appendix C.) annexed to this communication, has induced me in this
instance to swerve from the rules of propriety, solely with a view to bring the same more
prominently under the notice of the local administration, and which the importance of the
subject seemed to require.
Having in my previous reports amply detailed to the Government all the circumstances
connected with the settlement, and with the race confided to my charge, as well as the
measures put in force for their amelioration, it only remains for me now to advert to
those circumstances which have taken place since that period, and to show how far those
measures have answered the purposes for which they were originally designed ; and in
dilating thereupon, I have much satisfaction in stating, that the results as connected with
their improvement are of a most gratifying description, and by far exceed my most sanguine
expectation, and which proves to demonstration that the most abject of the human family
are within the pale of civilization and Christian instruction, provided proper means are made
use of for its attainment, since there never existed a race of their character so degraded as
were the primeval occupants of Van Diemen’s Land, and yet by the philanthropic inter-
vention of the local administration their wretched condition has been ameliorated and
improved, and exceeds by far the majority of the humbler grades of European inhabitants,
and in their general conduct, I venture to affirm, are much superior.
Civilization.
I have much satisfaction in reporting that the aborigines are daily progressing in civiliza-
tion. Their diurnal employments are now regularly and willingly performed, information is
eagerly sought after, examples immediately followed, and industry among them is becom-
ing habitual. They are variously employed, and the labour performed by them during the
last six months is fully equal to the three years’ labour anterior thereto.
It has been charged upon those excellent institutions, the missionary societies, that whilst
they have laboured to instruct the heathen in the knowledge of religion, they have at the
same time passed by with cold and careless indifference the work of civilization. To
obviate this charge, they have of late sent out missionary artisans as well as missionary
preachers. For ray own part, I never did consider the missionary societies at fault in this
respect. The funds of those societies are raised by voluntary subscription, and for the
avowed purpose of disseminating religion among the heathen, and hence they were unde-
serving of the censure passed upon them. In adverting to this subject, Ido so merely to
show that it has been thought desirable, and by general consent, that heathen nations should
be civilized, and be induced to voluntary labour, but to achieve which has ever been found
of difficult attainment. I am, however, happy to say at this settlement the object has
been accomplished, I trust that the observations lam now making, or may hereafter make,
will not be thought too highly coloured or egotistical. I advert and enlarge upon them
solely as an act of common justice to those poor people, whose representative I am, and as
of being highly creditable to the local government itself.
The rapid advances made by them in civilization, and which has so fully developed itself
within the last six months, is solely to be attributed to the system to which ! had the
honour


honour to allude in my report of the 18th of September, In that communication I stated
that amid the numerous measures I had adopted for the amelioration of the aborigines, they
had in every instance met with a prompt and ready compliance, and that the following were
among the last established, viz.
1. An aboriginal fund.
2. A circulating medium.
3. An aboriginal police.
4. A weekly market, and
5. A weekly periodical.
The first four of these have continued to the present with increased interest and effect.
The latter, i. e. weekly periodical, has declined, but will be resumed again shortly. But of
all the schemes put in force for the civilization of the aborigines, the circulating medium
is paramount, and I know of no other scheme by which voluntary labour could be induced,
and from such a people, other than by the means referred to. With a circulation of coin not
exceeding in amount fifteen pounds, labour to the value of upwards of one hundred pounds
has been created. When the fund was first instituted the cash payments were confined prin-
cipally to the purchase of articles the honajide property of the aborigines; it is now other-
wise, for with the exception of eatables, they are necessitated to give an equivalent for
every article they may require ; for instance, tobacco. Soap, which was heretofore issued as
a ration,they now have to purchase; and for the former article, before the last supply, being
nearly expended, the value in consequence became enhanced, and sold for one shilling the
half fig.
Their raiment, which heretofore was issued to them on application, and of which when
once obtained they were perfectly reckless, as indeed they were with every article thus sup-
plied, is now only to be obtained by purchase. Again, they not only purchase their
raiment and little luxuries, but they have contributed to the erection of their new habita-
tions. The houses now erecting, of which eight are nearly complete, are substantially built
of brick and stone, and designed to contain two married couple. The natives expressed
a strong desire for boarded floors,, the adoption of which I recommended to the Govern-
ment on taking charge (as the cold brick floors were very injurious to their naked feet),
and which the late Lieutenant-governor was pleased to approve; but I found that the
natives were fickle in their abodes, and under the slightest pretence would resort to other
houses, and there having caused dilapidations in their own dwellings, frequently abandoned
them.
To obviate this, and to give them a claim on the property, I have induced them to give an
equivalent, to which they most cheerfully acquiesced. They now contribute to the pur-
chase of their floors, their cupboards, their locks for cupboards and doors; and as in the
hovels they formerly occupied, they were not only without cupboards but even shelves, and
had nothing whereon to place their food secure from dogs, or places whereon to deposit
their raiment.
The following are the list of prices paid for the articles alluded to, viz,:
. f. St dt
Floor of each house - - - - - - - 1 - -
Two cupboards to ditto - - - - - - - - - x
Locks to ditto and house-door - - - - - - - - xo
Bed berths - - - - - - - - -10 -
Total cost to each house - -- -£. 3--
The following is also a list of articles purchased by the aborigines, with their prices
attached: • . -
s. d.
Frock coats - - - - - 15 -
Dress ditto - - - - - 10 -
Trowsers, cloth - - - 10 -
duck - - - 3 -
Cloth caps - - - . _ 4 -
Worsted - _ _ _ _ j _
Women’s frocks - - - - 5 _
Blue worsted shirts - - - 5 -
Straw hats - . . _ 2 -
Handkerchiefs - - _ 1 _
Prints, per yard - - - i -
Calico - - - _ _ _ g
Cotton shirts - - . 2 _
Cotton chemise - - 2 -
Tobacco, per fig - - - - 6
Soap, per lb. - - - - - 9
thread - - . - _ _
Needles . _ - . _ _
Fishing lines - - - 1 6
hooks - - - ~ -
626.
s. d.
Tomahawks - - - - 2 -
Pannicans, tin 1 - - - 1 -
Plates, ditto - - - 1 -
Knives and forks - - - - 2 -
Blankets - - - 8 -
Rugs - - - - - 8 -
Palliasses - - - - 5 -
Tin dishes - - - - 3 -
Cups and saucers - - - - 1 -
Plates - - - - - - g
Clasp knives - - - - 1 6
Spoons - - - - 9
Plums, per lb. - - - - 7
Rice - - - .- - - 6
Sugar - - - - - - 6
Covered hats - - - 2 6
Pails - 5 _
Camp kettles - - Q _
Scrubbing brushes - - - 3 _
b In


In the list of articles above enumerated, it will be observed that there are no baubles, no
trifles, they are what may be termed substantial comforts ; and from thence it maybe
deduced, that a people who can have such desires must, as a natural consequence, be far
advanced towards a state of civilized improvement, and which is the more apparent, since
these acquirements are only attainable by purchase, and the result of honest and perse-
vering industry.
It now remains for me to show how far the aborigines are employed, and the manner in
which their labour is appropriated, and this I purpose doing as under:
1. Male aborigines, how employed.
2. Female aborigines, ditto.
The labour at which the male aborigines engage is various ; the more prominent is road-
making, and in this they excel, and are complete adepts; they are fully equal to this kind
of labour to the most experienced of the white men on the settlement, and for celerity of
movement are greatly superior.
The roads made by the aborigines during the last six months are by actual measurement
one mile, six furlongs, and eleven perches, as per schedule (Appendix D.). Those roads
have been cut through land densely wooded and uneven, the stumps have been grubbed
and holes filled up, and the superfluous rubbish swept away ; the entire of which has been
done exclusively by the natives and directed by their own judgment, unaidfifTby the advice
of any person, with the exception of one road, under the superintendence of Mr. William
Robinson. The above experiment I was induced to try, from an impression that they
would be equal to the task, and which the results have fully established. Some of those
avenues average in width from eleven to eighteen feet, and hence are sufficient for the
largest vehicle. The locality of those roads is through a dense forest, in the rear of my
quarters, and between them and the beach. Many advantages have resulted to the settle-
ment by opening this forest. It forms now a more ready* communication to the beach, by
which also the natives are prevented from coming in contact with the prisoners, as here-
tofore was the practice.
2. It affords them an easy access to collect fuel for their fires. >
3. And being contiguous to their new cottages will be found of incalculable advantage in
preserving them in health, as affording a well sheltered place for exercise and amusement
secure from every wind.
The above reasons, together with the extensive and alarming conflagrations which peri-
odically happen during the summer months, induced me to commence these operations, the
advantages of which the aborigines duly acknowledge and appreciate. During the last
summer this forest was with great difficulty kept from ignition, and which if destroyed,
would not only have thrown this settlement open to the prevailing westerly winds, but
might have also consumed a great part of the erection on the settlement. To prevent such
a calamity as the one alluded to, the aborigines have, in addition to the opening of the
roads, commenced clearing away the underwood, and have made considerable proficiency ;
when this improvement is complete, it will effectually prevent the alarming consequences
mentioned, and Hence the great anxiety heretofore experienced will be removed.
For this description of labour the aborigines receive from 1 s. to 1 s. 6 d. per diem.
Husbandry.
Tillage is another description of labour in which the aborigines engage, and in the
execution of which they have evinced great aptitude and made considerable progress.
They dig and plant their own potatoes, and which during the last season averaged between
three and four acres. They also assisted in their stowage, and during the harvest, in
housing grain. The stakes for 607 yards of fencing, amounting in number to several
thousands, have been cut and brought in from the forest by the natives. All the wattles
used on the settlement for the new erections were cut by the natives, and the product of
their labour. They have likewise brought a quantity of timber from the wreck of the
sloop “ Harmony,” a distance of several miles, and are now busily employed in assisting
and bringing in from the bush timber for roofing their new cottages.
The strong desire the natives have evinced for fruit, and the general character of the soil
and climate at Flinders to the growth of the strawberry, the exuberance of which is beyond
conception, induced me to propose to them to cultivate largely for their own use this lux-
uriant fruit. A spot was accordingly selected in a central part of the forest above referred
to, and where having pointed out the situation, and the extent of its boundary, the natives
commenced their operations under the immediate superintendence of their own chieftains ;
and I must confess that when it was begun, I had considerable doubts whether it would
ever be completed; for to such people it appeared to me an Herculean undertaking, and
subsequently was both astonished and delighted to witness with what steady and unre-
mitting perseverance they applied themselves to the task; the two chiefs, i.e. King Wil-
liam and King George, alternately coming two and three times a day to acquaint me with
its progress, such was the delight they took in the undertaking. The strawberry garden
is now complete, and ready for the plants, the setting of which will immediately commence.
The extent of this plantation is found by actual measurement to contain near two acres of
land. See Appendix (E). The whole of which, when the natives undertook the task of
clearing, was densely wooded and overgrown with underwood. It has been well grubbed
and broke up by the hoe and spade, and prepared with the rake, and is now ready for
setting. The entire of this plantation is enclosed by a substantial fence, averaging in height
- about


about six feet, and measuring in circumference 310 yards. The whole of this labour was
likewise performed by the aborigines under the superintendence of their own chieftains, and
is considered to be equal if not superior to any on the settlement. #
The natives have been occasionally employed in shepherding, and latterly one of their
number has to attend the flocks on the islands, who at the end of the month is relieved by
another from the establishment. It would be extremely prolix to enumerate all the mis-
cellaneous employments in which the aborigines engage; suffice it to say they are ever
ready and willing to assist in any undertaking they are capable of performing, and when
called upon to do so occasionally, and for want of boatmen, they have assisted in working
the boats. ,
I find that in adverting to the labour of the aborigines m reference to the fence round the
turnip paddock, I was in error, having stated that the stakes were the only part they per-
formed, whereas they cut the posts and the rails, and the major part they brought to the
settlement, as per Appendix (F.); for the posts they received from 4d. to 6d. each, and
the rails were paid for in proportion ; it is a morticed fence of three rails, substantially put
up.
Aboriginal Police.
The police of this establishment consists of four special constables, and their two chiefs*
to whom the conservation of the aborigines is confided. The constables are chosen viva
voce from each of the two remnant tribes in full assembly, convened for the occasion. They
receive for this duty a weekly stipend of l s. (the pay is only nominal) as the office is con-
sidered an honorary distinction.
The constables act under the orders of their chiefs ; the latter determine all points of dis-
putes, and on several occasions have displayed tact and judgment highly creditable, and in
every instance have administered impartial justice. When this police was first established,
it was done as an experiment, and solely with a view to assimilate the natives as much as
it was possible to the customs and usages of Europeans.
The experiment has now been fairly tried, and found to answer beyond the most sanguine
expectation.
The aboriginal police take a general surveillance over the entire of the aborigines. The
authority of the constables is acknowledged and respected. Many circumstances might be
adduced to show the utility and advantage of this police. The following is a striking
instance, and,will tend to show the advancement these people have made in the scale of
civilization and moral improvement.
In February last one of the convicts absconded from this settlement, and was proceeding
on his way to the south end of the island, for the purpose, as he said, of communicating with
the sealers, and then eventually to escape from the island ; the aboriginal police, aided by
others of their own people, were ordered by me to go in quest of him, and on the evening of
the same day, they brought him back to the settlement handcuffed, and safely lodged him
in the gaol.
In addition to the employment before enumerated, a few of the male aborigines made an
excursion in March last to the Sisters, two islands at the north end of Flinders, and from
whence they brought 201 wallaby skins, the greater part of which was sold by auction at'
the market to the officers, and realised 2 I. 13 s. 10 \ d,, and which was placed to the account
of the aborigines. The residue of the skins, with other produce, will be forwarded to Hobart
Town by the present opportunity. ■ .
In addition to the police, of whom none but the most, intellectual of the aborigines are
appointed conservators, there are other of minor character filled up by the adult aborigines ;
viz.
Cooks ------ 2
Cleik and assistant to the catechist - 2
• Storekeeper’s assistant - - - 2
Shepherd ------ 1
Surgeon’s assistant - 1
And as in the civilization of the aborigines it was deemed advisable that the juveniles
should be instructed in handicraft, I have been induced therefore, in addition to the youth
who was under the tuition of the tailor (as mentioned in my previous report, in which busi-
ness he has made great proficiency), to direct that others of the aboriginal lads should
likewise be taught useful arts. In accordance therewith, several have been placed under
the instruction of the best conducted of the prisoner artisans, and two of the lads I have
taken into my office ; one as messenger, and the other, a youth about 15 years of age, as a
copyist, who writes a fair and legible hand.
As a stimulant to renewed diligence, the above individuals are each allowed a weekly,
stipend, and further to promote emulation, premiums are distributed to the most industrious
and best behaved.
Employment of the Female Aborigines. .
The employments of the female aborigines are various. The more prominent of their labour
■r * Ur mon * :^s ,^ as been the collecting of grass and bringing it to the settlement,
for the purpose of thatching and for other uses. The labour thus performed has been con-
siderable, the gross weight of grass collected being enormous, amounting to about 40 tons.
Each woman brings into the settlement every morning before eight o’clock a bundle of
grass, averaging in weight 56 pounds, weather permitting ; they likewise collect the fuel for
; 626. b 2 their


their fires, prepare and bake their own bread, which, though unleavened, is good and whole-
some ; they cook their own food; and in April last a portion of them plucked and assisted
in curing eight casks of mutton birds on the adjacent islands, averaging in number 52,817,
and which will be forwarded to Launceston for sale, on account of the aborigines.
In addition to those salted, 2,079 birds were collected by them for general consumption.
But whilst the performance of the above labour evinces traits of great industry, I have
the pleasing task to report that they have become possessed of other acquisitions of a more
refined description, and that in addition to their aptitude in the use of the needle, and their
proficiency in knitting, they have attained the art of manufacturing French net, under the
tuition of Mrs. Clark, the wife of the catechist, who, together with Mrs. Dickenson, the wife
of the storekeeper, has also instructed them in knitting worsted.
The French net is a superior art; several specimens have been manufactured into D’Oyleys,
and which, together with specimens of worsted knitting, are herewith forwarded for the
information of his Excellency the Lieutenant-governor.
A work of this description is of itself sufficient to prove that those people are not so low
in the scale of humanity as they have been represented. ,
Domestic Economy.
In the domestic arrangements of their dwellings the aboriginal females , have made con-
siderable proficiency, and are fully equal in this respect to a large majority of white women,
and to many vastly superior; but owing to the fragile property of their present abodes, they
are unable to preserve that order and cleanliness I could wish, and which they themselves
are most anxious to perform. They are, however, looking forward with much interest to
the completion of their new houses, when they assure me I shall have no occasion to find
fault. Such is the flimsy construction of their present dwellings, that with every gust of
wind or shower of rain a part of the arenaceous dirt is thrown down, and it requires there-
fore several sweepings during the day to keep them in anything like a cleanly condition.
Their culinary utensils, pannicans, dishes, and crockery are, as far as the scanty means
of their houses” will permit, clean and well arranged. Sewing is also an employment in
which they have made proficiency. They also wash their own and husbands’ linen, cook
their own food, and bake their own bread, in which they have shown great aptitude.
When supplied with fresh meat, it is invariably boiled and made into soup, thickened with
flour, and seasoned with salt, in which herbs and vegetables are also mixed, and is very
savoury. The kangaroo, occasionally procured, is well washed and hung up to roast, after
the manner of white persons, whose examples they imitate. Their time is wholly employed
in useful labour, harmless amusements, in their attendance at school, and religious exer-
cises, and not, as heretofore, wandering about the settlement with listless and careless
indifference to what was going on; but on the contrary, evince by their general conduct,
their prompt attention to instruction, and their persevering industry, that they have
an interest in the affairs of the settlement, and which it has ever been my aim on all occa-
sions to bring them to participate. They are no longer idle spectators, but actors and
ready agents to assist, as far as strength and ability will permit, in every useful undertaking.
1 have already alluded to their proficiency in useful arts, viz. knitting and fancy net-
work, and though from the paucity of their numbers the manufacture cannot be done to
any great extent, still in whatever light we view it, whether as a branch of useful industry,
or as an amusement, one thing is certain, that it displays a precocity of intellect of no
ordinary kind, and proves that those whom civilized men despised as beings without mind,
are, like all God’s creatures, perfect in every form, and which only requires the adoption of
proper means, when the latent intellect of the degraded savage will be made manifest, and
be developed.
There are many and numerous incidents that might be cited to mark their improvement
in domestic economy; suffice to say, they are not now, as formerly, content to sit upon
the ground, but require seats, both as an article of convenience and a preservation from
soiling their clothes. Those among them who have knives and forks habitually use them,
and which the residue are anxious to possess; they now also confine themselves more
closely to their domiciles, and not interchanging or crouching under bushes or rolling about
in idleness.
The aborigines are becoming cleanly in their persons; they now' perform the necessary
ablutions daily, and the greater part of them have shorn beards; they are not now satisfied
as heretofore with one garment, i. e. a frock coat, but require trousers also, and their
raiment is in general kept in clean and proper order.
The females are equally as anxious to possess clothes of an European fashion. Several
pieces of print bought on their account, and sold at the market, were purchased with
avidity and manufactured into gowns ; they likewise wear under garments, which they keep
in clean and good order. They now evince great desire for domestic comforts, and which,
though amply 4 supplied, can only be attained by industry and good conduct. Their pri-
mitive habits are now all but forgotten: the use of ochre and grease, with which they used
formerly to bedaub themselves, is now entirely- abolished. Their nocturnal orgies, i. e.
corroberies, which hurt the repose of the settlement and impaired the health of the natives,
as adverted to in my previous reports, never occur. Their wild intonations are, now super-
seded by sacred melody, i. e. hymns and psalms, in which they greatly excel ; but as
this will be spoken of under the head of “ Sacred Melody,” I forbear now to enlarge.
The feuds that existed among the aborigines in their primeval districts are now never
thought of ; peace and good-humour being their general characteristics, and not, as
formerly,


formerly, bickerings and strife, by which in general the serenity of the settlement was
disturbed. ~ r , 0
To John Montague, Esq., Colonial Secretary, I have, &c.
&c. &c. &c. (signed) G. A. Robinson, Commandant.
Numerous other incidents might be adduced, but brevity of time prevents my doing so
by this opportunity, the vessel being now on the eve of sailing.
By the next opportunity, I propose doing myself the honour of transmitting a continu-
ance of this periodical report for his Excellency’s information, on the following subject:
1. Health of the aborigines.
2. On the state of the schools, and the improvement of the aborigines in learning.
3. The religious service and general attendance, and the improvement of the aborigines.
4. Improvements of the settlement in the buildings.
5. Improvement in tillage.
6. General improvement.
7. Regulation of the schools.
8. Sacred melody. '
Appendix (A.) and (B.)
REPORT.
The quarterly examinations of the Flinders' Island Sunday and week-day evening
schools for the instruction of the juvenile and adult aborigines were held in the school-room
on the gth May 1837. The commandant presided on the occasion, and by whom the
different classes were examined and closely interrogated. The examination was continued
to the 21st May, and the scholars were subject to a most rigid inquiry.
It was, however, quite apparent that the people had progressed in knowledge. Very con-
siderable pains were taken on this occasion to draw forth every degree of talent the pupils
were in possession of, that the same might be entered on record, and hence to form a data
to mark in future their proficiency. A want of female teachers had been experienced during
the preceding quarter, occasioned principally by the illness of the parties, and hence the
female aborigines were found in some degree deficient, when compared with the opposite
sex.
Pupils of the First Class, Leonidas, Albert, and Washington.
' Teacher, Master W. Robinson.
Examination of Leonidas.
Q. Who made you?— A. God.
Who is your heavenly Father ?—God.
What did Jesus Christ do for us ?—He died for our sins, according to the Scriptures.
Do you like hearing about God ?—I do.
Can you count ?—Yes. (Reckoned to 50.)
Have you learnt any hymns ?—Yes. (Repeated the hymns beginning, “ O’er the gloomy
hills of darkness,” &c. “ I can read my titles clear.”)
Examination of Albert.
Perfect in the alphabet, and attempting to spell.
How many Gods are there ?—One God.
Who is Jesus Christ ?—The Son of God.
Where is God ?—ln heaven.
Is he anywhere else ?—Yes, everywhere.
Who made all things ?—God made all we see.
Do you pray to God ?—Yes, I do.'
What do you say when you pray ?—Our Father which art in heaven, &c. &c.
Which is the best book ?—The Bible.
Do you wish to go to heaven when you die ?—Yes, I do.
Where will you go if you are a bad man ?—To hell.
Do you like to hear about God ?—I do.
Do you wish to learn to read ?—I do.
Do you like to sing about God ?—I do.
Do you know how to count?—l do.
This man is industrious and well-behaved.
Examination of Washington.
Is perfect in his letters, and learning to spell.
What should you do to be saved ?—Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ.
Who made the world ?—God made the world.
Da you like to hear about God ?—Yes.
Do you like to sing about God ?— Yes.
Can you count ?~Yes.
This man is well-conducted.
5 2 f). n 3


Pupils of the Second Class, Noerny, Eugene, and James.
Teacher, Mr. L. Dickenson.
Examination of Noerny.
Perfect in the alphabet, and learning to spell, and has a slight knowledge of numerals.
Who made you?—God.
Where is God ?—ln heaven.
What did Jesus Christ do for us?—He died upon the cross.
Who made all things ?—God.
Where will the wicked be sent to when they die ?—To hell.
Which is the best book ?—The Bible.
Do you pray ?—I pray at night.
What do you say ?—Our Father which art in heaven, &c. &c.
Do you like to hear about God ?—Yes.
Do you like to tell your countrymen about God ?—I like it.
Do you wish to learn to read the Bible ?—-I like to learn.
Do you like to live on Flinders like white people?—Yes.
This is a well-conducted man; is a good husband, and a kind parent; and is a constable,
and occasionally exhorts at the evening meetings. Is from the west side X»T Van Diemen’s
Land.
Examination of Eugene.
Is perfect in the alphabet, and learning to spell; has a slight knowledge of- numerals.
Where will bad people go to when they die ?—To hell.
What must we do to be saved?—Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ.
Do you pray ?—Yes.
What do you say ?—Our Father which art in heaven, &c.
Where will people who steal and fight go to when they die ?■—To hell.
Whose place is hell ?—The devil’s place.
What sort of a place is it ?—Plenty of fire and sickness.
This is a married man, a good husband, well-behaved and industrious. Is a western
native.'
Examination of James.
Perfect in the alphabet.
Where do you wish to go to when you die ?—I wish to go to God.
Where will bad people go to when they die ?—To hell.
Do you like to live in houses like white people ?—I do like it.
This is a very quiet and industrious man, a good husband, and a kind parent.
Pupils of the Third Class, Joseph, Andrew, and Francis.
Teacher, Mr. Robert Clark.
• Examination of Joseph.
Perfect in the alphabet and learning to spell; knows numerals to nine.
Who made you ?—God made me.
What did Jesus Christ do for us ?—He died for our sins, according to the Scripture.
Where is God ?—ln heaven—everywhere.
What is God ?—A Spirit.
What is a Spirit ?—lt has neither flesh or bones.
What is the name of the best book ?—The Bible.
Whose book is the Bible ?—God’s book.
Do you like to hear of God?—Yes, Ido.
Do you like to sing about God f—Yes.
This is a married man, and is industrious and well-behaved.
Examination of Andrew.
Perfect in his letters, learning to spell, and has a knowledge of numerals to nine.
Who made you ? —God made me. '
What must we do to be saved ?—Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ.
Do you pray to God?—Yes.
What do you say when you pray ?—Our Father which art in heaven, Bcc. Btc.
Where do you wish to go to when you die ?—To God.
Where will a man go to who tells lies ?—To hell.
This is a good husband, well-behaved, and industrious ; possesses great capacity, but is
volatile. Is from the west coast of Van Diemen’s Land.
Examination of Francis.
Imperfect in the alphabet.
Who made you ?—God.
Do you pray to God ?—Yes.
What


What do you say ?—Our Father which art in heaven, &c. &c.
Where will a bad man go to when be dies ? -To hell. _
What will you do to be saved f—Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ.
Do you like to hear about God ?—Yes.
Is a good husband, and kind parent. v
' Pdpils of the Fourth Class, Hector, Romeo, Buonaparte, and Christopher.
Teacher, Mr. J. Allen.
Examination of Hector.
Imperfect in his letters.
Where is God ?—ln heaven.
Who made all things ?—God made everything.
Do you pray to Gocf?—Yes. .
This man is well-behaved, is married, and is a good husband, but inattentive and fond of
the chase. Is from the east side of the island of Van Diemen.’s Land.
Examination of Romeo.
Imperfect in his letters.
Who made you ? —God.
Who made your father?—God made him.
This man is a good husband and a kind father, and is a native of Port Davy, Van
Diemen’s Land. Is inattentive at his learning. Is a stout, robust, well-made man.
Examination of Buonaparte.
Is perfect in his letters, and learning to spell; has a knowledge of numerals to nine.
"Who made you ?—God.
"Who do you pray to? —To God.
What do you say to him?—Our Father which art in heaven, &c. &c.
Who made the white man ?—God made him.
Do you like to hear about God?—Yes.
Is a steady, well-conducted, industrious man; well-behaved, and a good husband. Belongs
to the Big River tribe, and was the same individual that was apprehended on the occasion
of the military operation, i. e. the line.
Examination of Christopher.
Perfect in the alphabet, and learning to spell.
Who made your country ?—God.
Who is God ?—A Spirit.
Where is God?—ln heaven.
What must we do to be saved ?—Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ.
Is a quiet, inoffensive man ; a good husband, and industrious. Belongs to the Ben
.Lomond tribe.
Pupils of the Fifth Class, Alexander, Tippo Saib, and Arthur.
Teacher, Master H. Robinson.
. Examination of Alexander.
Is perfect in the alphabet ; learning to spell.
Who made you ?—God.
What must we do to be saved ? Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ.
What did Christ do for us ?—He died for our sins, according to the Scriptures.
Where will bad people go to when they die?—They will go to hell.
Who made all things f—God made all things.
Do you pray to God ?—Yes.
What do you say to him ?—Our Father which, &c. &c.
Are all men sinners ?—Yes.
Do you like to sing about God ?—Y es.
Do you like to tell your countrymen about God ?—Yes.
Is a good husband, studious, industrious, and well-behaved. Belongs to the Big River
tribe. Is a fine man, tall, and well made.
Examination of Tippo Saib.
, TTI Perfect in the alphabet.
Who made you f —God.
How many Gods are there ?—One God.
Where do good people go to when they die f—To heaven.
Who made the sun, the moon, and the stars ?~God made all things.
5 .- *4 Which


Which is the best book ?—The Bible.
Do you like to hear about God ?—Yes.
This man is a good husband, well-behaved, and industrious. Is one of the Big River
tribe.
Examination of Arthur. .
Imperfect in the alphabet.
Who made you ?—God made me.
Is a good husband, industrious, and well-behaved. Is of the Big River tribe. Is assis-
tant to the storekeeper.
Pupils of the Sixth Class, Alphonso, Frederick, and Rodney.
Teacher, Thomas Thompson, a lad about 11 years of age, half-caste.
Examination of Alphonso.
Imperfect in the alphabet.
Who made you I—God.
Do you pray to God ? —Yes, sir.
Where is God?—ln heaven.
Which is the best book ?—The Bible.
Do you like to sing God’s songs ? —Yes.
Do you wish to learn to read ?—Yes, sir.
Do you like to live amongst white men?—Yes.
Is a conservator of the peace, a good husband, always well-conducted, and industrious.
Is one of Big River tribe. A tall, stout, athletic man.
Examination of Frederick.
Perfect in his letters.
Who made you ? —God made me.
Who made the trees and the sea?—God.
What must you do to be' saved ?—Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ.
What did Jesus Christ do for us ?—He died for our sins, according to the Scriptures.
Do you pray ?—Yes, sir.
What do you say ?—Our Father which art in heaven, Btc.
How many Gods are there ?—One God.
What is God ?—A Spirit.
Who was the first man ?—Adam.
Who was the first woman ?—Eve.
Do you like to tell your countrymen about God?—Yes, sir.
Where do good people go to when they die ?—To heaven.
And bad people when they die?—To hell.
What is hell ?—The devil’s place.
This pupil repeated the collect for the second Sunday in Advent. Is a good husband;
conduct generally good and industrious. Is a native of the west coast of Van Diemen’s
Land.
Examination of Rodney.
Absent from illness. Is a well-conducted man; from the west coast of Van Diemen’s
Land.
Pupils of the Seventh Class, Geo. Robinson, W. Robinson, and Peter Pinder.
Examination of George Robinson.
Imperfect in the alphabet.
Who made you ?—God.
Where is God ?—ln heaven.
Is an industrious man, rather intellectual. Fond of the chase; is married, and belongs
to the Ben Lomond tribe.
Examination of 17. Robinson.
Perfect in the alphabet.
Who made you ?—God.
What is Got! ?—A Spirit.
Do you pray to God ?—Yes, sir.
What do you say ?—Our Father which art in heaven, &c.
This is a well-informed and intelligent young man, but has been ill during the last quarter,
so was not prepared to answer the interrogatories. Is very industrious and facetious; is a
fine man, and native of West Coast, Van Diemen’s Land.
Examination of Peter Pindar.
Perfect in the alphabet.
Who made you?—God.
What is God?—-A Spirit, '
Where is God?—ln heaven.
Who


Who is God ? —God is a Spirit.
What is a spirit?—A spirit has neither flesh nor bones.
What must I do to be saved ?—Believe m the Lord Jesus Christ.
Who was the first man ?—Adam.
Who was the first-woman?—Eve.
Who made all things ?—God.
What is God’s book called ?—The Bible.
Where will good people go to when they die ?—To heaven.
Where will bad people go to when they die ? —To hell.
Bo you pray ? Yes, sir.
What do you say ?—Our Father which art m heaven, &c. &c.
This man is a good husband; extremely well-behaved, and industrious. Is a young man;
•native of the north side of Van Diemen’s Land.
Pupils of the Eighth Class, Edmund, Philip, Augustus, and Henry.
' Teacher, Prince Walter.
Examination of Edmund.
Not perfect in his letters.
Who made you? —God.-
Where is God?—ln heaven.
Who made the trees arid the sea?—God.
This is a young man; a good husband and father; well-behaved, and industrious. Is
a native of north side of Van Diemen’s Land.
Examination of Philip.
Perfect in his alphabet.
Who made you ?—God.
Where is God ?—ln heaven.
This man is a good husband; his conduct is generally good. He is one of the Ben
Lomond tribe. .
Examination of Augustus.
Perfect in the alphabet, and learning to spell; has a knowledge of numerals to nine.
Who made you ?—God.
What must we do to be saved ?—Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ.
What did Christ do for us ?—He died for us, according to the Scriptures.
What is God ?—God is a Spirit.
Who are sinners ?—All men are sinners.
How many Gods are there?—One God.
Where do good people go to when they die ?—They go to heaven.
Where do bad people go to when they die ?—They go to hell.
Does God love bad people ?—No, sir.
Do you pray to God ?—Yes, sir.
What do you say ?—Our Father which art in heaven, &c.
Do you believe in God ?—Yes.
Do you like to hear about God ?—Yes, sir.
Which is the best book ?—The Bible; it is God’s book.
Who was the first man ?—Adam.
Who was the first woman?—Eve. >
Do you like to talk about God to your countrymen ?—Yes, sir.
Do you like to have clothes like white men, and live as they do?—Yes, sir.
This pupil counted to 100; is a youth about 16 years of age; is well-made, well-conducted.
Is a native of west coast of Van Diemen’s Land; is employed as a shepherd.
Pupils of the Ninth Glass, Constantine, Ajax, and Milton.
Teacher, D. Brune, an aboriginal lad.
Examination of Constantine.
Imperfect in his alphabet.
Who made you?—God.
(•• This pupil is inattentive; but is a good husband, and a quiet, well-behaved, and indus-
trious man. He holds the office of cook and chapel-keeper; is stout made, and is from the
■ central part of Van Diemen’s Land.
Pupils of the Tenth Class, King George, Thomas, and Neptune.
Teacher, Peter Brune, an aboriginal lad.
, Examination of King George.
Imperfect in his letters.
Who made you?—God.
Where is God ?—ln heaven.
Who made the trees and the salt water ?—God made them all.
This is a well-conducted, well-behaved man; is chief of the- Ben Lomond tribe; is a kind
parent, and very intelligent. ’
5=6. c


Examination of Thomas.
Imperfect in his letters.
Who made you ?—God.
This man is rather inattentive, but is a good husband, well-conducted, and industrious
is a native of the west coast of Van Diemen’s Land.
Examination of Neptune.
Imperfect in his letters.
Who made you ?—God.
Who made the white man ?—God.
How many Gods are there ?—One God.
This is a young man; is a good husband ; speaks the English language fluently; is well--
conducted, and industrious; is a native of the north coast of Van Diemen’s Land; is-
a constable.
King George re-examined.
Do you like to hear about God ?—Yes, sir.
Do you like to tell your countrymen about God ?—Yes, sir.
Do you like to hear about God ?—By-and-by I will learn plenty.
Thomas re-examined.
Do you like to learn to read the book?—Yes, sir.
Do you wish to live as white people live?—Yes.
Is the bush a good place to live in?—No, sir.
Do you like to wear clothes ?—’Yes, sir.
Neptune re-examined.
■ Where do you wish to go when you die?—l wish to go to God.
Where is God?—ln heaven.
Who made your country, and my country ? —God.
Which is the best book?—The Bible; it is God’s book.
Do you pray to God ?—Yes.
What do you say ?—Our Father which art in heaven.
Are all men sinners ?—Yes, sir.
Pupils of the Eleventh Class, Teddy Clark and Alfred.
Teacher, Charles Clark, an aboriginal lad.
Examination of Teddy Clark,
Perfect in the alphabet.
Who made you ?—God.
Who is the Son of God?—Jesus Christ.
Do you like to go to school ?—Yes, sir.
Do you pray to God ?—Yes, sir.
What do you say?—Our Father which art in, heaven, &c.
Where is the Lord Jesus Christ ?—ln heaven.
Repeated two verses of the hymn,commencing, “ Behold the glories of the Lamb;” andi
one verse beginning, " Glory to God on high.” Is five years of age.
Examination of Count Alfred.
Imperfect in his letters.
Who made you?—God made me.
Where is God ?—ln heaven.
This man has been ill a long time previous to the examination; belongs to the Big River
tribe ; is a married man, and well-conducted; is fond of the chase ; tall and well made, and
belongs to the aboriginal police.
Pupils of the Twelfth Class, Achilles and Hannibal.
Teacher, Prince Adolphus, an aboriginal lad.
Examination of Achilles.
Imperfect in his letters.
Who is Jesus Christ?—The Son of God.
Where is God ?—ln heaven.
Do you like school ?—Yes, sir.
Do you like to sing abdut God ?—Yes.
This man is a good husband, orderly in his conduct, and industrious, but fond of the
chase.
Examination of Hannibal,
Imperfect in his letters.
Who made you?—God.
Who made your father ?—God made him.
Do-


Do you pray to him ?—Yes, sir.
Do you like this place better than the bush . Yes. .... T ,
This man is one of the cooks to the natives; a stout able-bodied man. Is a good husband,
well-conducted, and industrious. (signed) G . A. R., Commandant
The continuance of the examination will be forwarded by the next opportunity.
(signed) G. A. R .
Appendix (F).
Flinders’ Island, 23 June 1837.
I hereby certify, that the post and rail-stake fencing erected round the turnip-paddock.
In December last, measures 607 yards, and that the whole of the stakes, posts, and rails
were cut, and the greater part brought to the spot by the aborigines.
(signed) Samuel Sparks, Overseer.
Appendix (D) and (E).
MEMORANDUM.
Flinders’lsland, 24 June 1837.
Pursuant to the commandant's memorandum of the 16th instant, the catechist respect-
fully states that he measured the roads made by the natives in the dense tea-tree forest
at the rear of the commandant’s quarters, and respectfully states their measurement
as below.
No. 1 Road.—Made by the natives without any assistance. It commences at the rear of
the commandant’s office, and runs westerly into the open ground at the rear of the store,
keeper’s quarters. Clear of stumps and levelled. Six feet wide, 149 yards 1 foot long.
No. a Road.—Commenced to the east of No. 1, and runs a winding course to the south.
.Is well cleared of stumps, grubbed and levelled, and a superior road. Average breadth
a a feet, length 665 yards.
No. 3 Road.—Branches off from No. 2, takes a south-east direction. This is a'Very
superior road, and equal to any that could be made by white men; a carriage might run
the entire length. The stumps are grubbed, the holes filled, the entire levelled, and even
commencing at the gate of the strawberry plantation; terminating at the boat harbour.
Average breadth 18 feet, length 488 yards.
No. 4 Road.—This road is the first (in point of time) made by the natives, and the only
one that they received any instructions respecting. It commences at the rear of the com-
mandant’s quarters, and terminates at the beach, running north and south. Four feet
' wide, length 746 yards.
No. 5 Road.—Commences opposite the gate of the strawberry plantation, and continues
towards the beach. The stumps are not entirely grubbed up, and there has not been so
much pains taken with it as with the former. Breadth 6 feet, length 338 yards.
No. 6 Road.—Commences at the same place as No. 5, and runs parallel to it, and
terminates at the beach. Is of the same description as the former. Six feet wide, length
120 yards.
No. 7 Road.—Commences at the strawberry garden, runs towards the beach in a north-
west to south direction. Averages nine feet wide, level, well grubbed, and in every way
an excellent road. Length 249 yards.
No. 8 Road.—Runs in the rear of the strawberry garden ; not so well finished as the
former. Averages seven feet wide, 1 10 yards in length.
No. 9 Road.—This road leads to the stone quarry, but partially made ; generally cleared
■of the brush. Average breadth 12 feet, length 339 yards.
The total measurement being one mile, six furlongs, twelve perches, and six feet. The
catechist states that these roads were made, with one exception, without any instructions
from white persons, and confers a great deal of credit on the perseverance and ingenuity of
the natives m clearing roads through so dense a mass of scrub, and levelling and clearing
■in the manner they have done.
They have also formed a strawberry plantation, prepared and grubbed up, ready for
putting in the plants, which measures about two acres; and they have surrounded it with a
brush fence, six feet high, superior to any fence of the same description on the settlement.
The length of the fence is 310 yards.
The men have carried from the bush to the settlement, for thatching, upwards of 60 load
of wattles.
They have also carried a large quantity of poles for roofing various houses on the settle-
ment, and are now engaged cutting and carrying poles for the roofing of their houses.
They have dug between three and four acres of potatoes, carried two acres of barley, and
carried their potatoes to the potatoe store from the field.
They have threshed their barley in a creditable manner.
Their taste for work is every day improving; and the catechist reports he feels the
highest satisfaction in recording the advances they have made in the various branches of
useful labour they have been called upon to take a part in, and the cheerfulness with which
r they assist in anything required of them.
526. c 2 They


They have also carried from the wreck of the Harmony upwards of 30 loads of timber;
The wreck is at the distance of upwards of four miles from the settlement.
The females have carried upwards of 40 tons of grass, which is being used for thatching
and other purposes in the settlement.
(signed) Robert Clark, Catechist.
Appendix (C).
Respected Sir, Flinders’ Island, 21 June 1837.
In obedience to your desire, I forward a report of the disease of which the deceased
aboriginal King William died, together with its treatment; also of the post-mortem
examination of the body.
For several days previous to his being attacked with the disease which has cost him his
life, he complained of pain about the left side of his face, to which I believe him to have
been subject, having been, as he himself, as well as other aborigines informed me, under
Mr. Allen’s care for a similar attack. Considering this to be rheumatism,. directed his
wife to foment his face frequently, which she did several times in my presence, and gave him
some aperient medicines, which treatment removed his complaint. On the evening of Monday
last, the 19th, about six o’clock v. m., I saw him, when he was, as he informed me, the hospital
nurse, and the constable Lambert (who happened to be present), perfectly free from pain; his
bowels were regularly open, having had two evacuations during that day. He was at this time
laughing and playing with his wife, and others. About five hours afterwards, that is about
eleven o’clock p.m., I was suddenly called to see him; I found him in the most excru-
ciating agony. On examination I found all the symptoms of inflammation of the intestines,
small pulse, extreme tenderness of the abdomen (so great that he would not at first suffer me
to touch it), great heat of skin, and occasional vomiting. I immediately bled him largely,,
applied fomentations to the abdomen (which were continued for several hours), and admi-
nistered a large emollient and aperient enema and some castor oil. Lremained with him,
superintending the continued use of the fomentations until daylight next morning, having
bled him twice during the night, taking in all about 50 ounces of blood, producing syncope in
a slight degree upon both occasions, without the slightest alleviation of the symptoms. Shortly
after daylight I applied a large blister to the abdomen and pit of the stomach, and subse-
quently bled him to the extent of 24 ounces more, the pulse rising, as is usual in these cases,
with the abstraction of blood, and directed preparations to be made for another enema, but
in the interim the man expired : this was about 11 o’clock a.m., 12 hours from the time
of my first seeing him. For the first six or seven hours he was perfectly sensible, and his
cries of “minatti” piteous. Upon examining the body after death I found the whole of the
viscera of the abdomen (except the kidneys and urinary bladder) more or less in a state of
inflammation —the lower part of the stomach, the two first of the small intestines, and the
liver and gall-bladder in particular; the viscera of the chest were perfectly sound. I there-
fore beg to state that this man died of general inflammation (with the exceptions I have
mentioned above) of the abdominal viscera.
l am, &c.
To G. A. Robinson, Esq., Commandant. (signed) A. Austin,
&c. &,c. &c. Medical Attendant.
Appendix (C).
Commandant’s Office, Flinders’ Island, 24 June 1837
(Copies.)
Memo. Flinder’s Island, 24 December 1836.
Died this day the native youth George.
To the Commandant. (signed) J. Allen, Surgeon.
Memo. Flinders’ Island, 30 December 1836,.
Died this day the native man Nimrod.
To the Commandant. (signed) J. Allen, Surgeon.
Memo. Flinders’ Island, 28 January 1837.
Died this day the native man Columbus, of chronic inflammation.
To the Commandant. (signed) J. Allen, Surgeon.
Memo. ' Flinders’lsland, 29 January 1837.
Died this day the native woman Puepedar.
To the Commandant. (signed) J. Allen, Surgeon.
Memo. Flinder’s Island, 5 February 1837.
Died this day, of acute pneumonia, the native man Samuel.
To the Commandant, (signed) J, Allen, Surgeon.


Memo. • Flinders’lsland, 20 February 1837.
Died this day, of chronic visceral inflammation, the native man Algernon.
To the Commandant. (signed) J. Allen, Surgeon.
]tf emo ' Flinders’ Island, 25 February 1837.
Died this morning, of chronic visceral inflammation, the native man Matthew.
To the Commandant. (signed) J. Allen, Surgeon.
Memo. Flinders’ Island, 22 February 1837.
Died this morning, of acute visceral inflammation, the native man Omega.
To the Commandant. (signed) J . Allen, Surgeon.
]\j emo . Flinders’ Island, 29 February 1837.
Died this "day, of visceral chronic inflammation, the native woman Tinedeburric.
To the Commandant. (signed) J. Allen, Surgeon.
Memo. Flinders’ Island, 16 March 1837.
Died this day the native woman Wyree.
To the Commandant. (signed) J, Allen, Surgeon.
Memo. Flinders’lsland, 21 March 1837.
Died this day the native woman Queen Charlotte..
Memo. Flinders’ Island, 30 March 1837.
Died this day the native woman Maria, of chronic pneumonia.
To the Commandant. ’ (signed) J. Allen, Surgeon.
Memo. • Flinders’ Island, 30 March 1837.
Died this day, of chronic pneumonia, the native child Manoon.
To the Commandant. • (signed) J. Allen, Surgeon.
Memo. Flinders’lsland, March 1837.
Died this day a native female infant;
To the Commandant. (signed) J. Allen, Surgeon.
Memo. ' Flinders’lsland, 8 June 1837.
Died this day, of extreme general debility, the native man Daniel.
To the Commandant. (signed) A. Austin, Medical Attendant.
Memo. Flinders’ Island, 20 June 1837.
Died this day, of inflammation of the intestines, the aboriginal native King William.
To the Commandant. * (signed) A. Austin, Medical Attendant.
No. 3.
(No. 67.)
C OPY of a DESPATCH from Governor Sir George Gipps to Lord Glenelg.
My Lord, Government House, Sydney, 25 April 1838.
In acknowledging the receipt of your Lordship’s despatch of the 26th July 1837,
No. 353, on the subject of the treatment of the aboriginal inhabitants of this country,
and the measures which are to be adopted when any of them come to a violent
death by the hands of the Queen’s officers, or by the persons acting under their
orders, I regret very much that I have to state to your Lordship that a case has
already occurred, in which I have found it necessary to act on your Lordship’s
instructions.
Your Lordship will perceive by the accompanying report, made to me by
Major Nunn, of the mounted police, that previously to my arrival in the colony
a rencontre had taken place between a party of the police under his orders and
a tribe of the natives, in which there is but too much reason to suppose that a
number of the latter lost their lives. - '
On the receipt of Major Nunn’s report, I deemed it my duty to lay it before
the Executive Council, as well as your Lordship’s despatch above alluded to,
and also a copy of the Report of the Committee of the House of Commons’
which was appointed during last session of Parliament to inquire into the con-
-526* c 3 dition


dition of the aborigines in British possessions; and I have, now the honour to
enclose, for your Lordship’s information, a copy of the minutes that were made
by the Council on that occasion. .
I had previously consulted the Attorney-General on the same subject, and as
the advice of the Council was entirely in concurrence with the opinion ex-
pressed by him, 1 have since given orders for an investigation into all the circum-
stances of the case, to take place before the police magistrate and bench of
justices, which hold their sittings at Invermein, in the county of Brisbane, that
bench being the nearest to the scene of action, though distant from it perhaps
not less than 150 miles, ...
As your Lordship expressed an opinion in the despatch above alluded to that
an investigation in cases of this nature might be held before such of the magis-
trates as have commissions for the whole colony, it is essential for me to state,
that the commissions of all magistrates, without exception, are for the whole
colony, and that therefore I could not have made a selection of any particular
magistrates, without exposing myself to the charge of partiality,-*nd of deviat-
ing, without sufficient reason, from the course of proceeding adopted in the colony
in cases of a similar nature where the lives of white men are concerned.
As the affair took place far beyond the boundaries of location, and in a
country which has rarely, if ever, been visited by Europeans, it is impossible to
ascertain with any great degree of correctness the exact scene of it, or the par-
ticular tribe which Major Nunn fell in with. From the distance, however, that
Major Nunn supposes his party to have travelled during an absence of 53 days,
it is probable that the distance of the place was not less than that which I have
mentioned from the extreme northern point of the county of Brisbane. The
limits of location do not extend to the northward beyond that county; but your
Lordship is well aware that very numerous licences are annually granted to
settlers to graze their flocks and herds to an unlimited distance beyond; I
should not perhaps very much err, if I were to say that nearly half the cattle
and sheep of the colony are thus depastured beyond what are called the limits
of location ; and any attempt to reduce the number of these licences would be
considered fatal to the prosperity of the colony.
The Surveyor-general is inclined to suppose that the affair happened in about
latitude 29° south and longitude 150° east, which would place the scene of it
about 300 miles to the north, and 70 to the west of Sydney.
I have, &c.
(signed) Geo. Gipps.
Enclosure 1, in No. 3.
MAJOR NUNN'S REPORT.
Sir, Sydney, 5 March 1838.
In pursuance of your letter dated the 19th December last, enclosing a communication
from Mr. Paterson, of the 6th of that month, addressed to you, requiring me to proceed to
Jerry’s Plains, to inquire into the circumstances stated in that letter, I have the honour to
inform you, for the information of his Excellency the Governor, that on the 31st December
last I quitted Jerry’s Plains with a party of the mounted police, consisting of Ensign
Colban, two serjeants, and 18 troopers, and a black boy named Jacky, and marched direct
for the Namoi. On reaching that river 1 heard some very distressing accounts of the
ravages committed by the Guyder blacks on their way up. I accordingly proceeded in
search of them on the day of my arrival, and after marching the whole of the night, we
came in sight of a party of them about two hours after daylight. After disposing of my
men so as to prevent the escape of the natives, and giving positive orders not to fire unless
in self-defence, it being my object to take as many prisoners as possible, I rode down upon
them, and succeeded in capturing two tribes of the. Namoi and the Guyder. 1 then, with
the aid of the black boy, told them that they were charged with spearing cattle, and with
murder, and required them to point out the guilty persons. Fifteen men were then brought
forward as the perpetrators; these I handcuffed together, and after destroying their spears
and other weapons of warfare, I allowed the others to depart. About two hours before sunset
(the horses being then refreshed) I returned to my former station for the night, placing the
prisoners under the charge of a serjeant and two men. Two of these prisoners were pointed
out to me as the murderers of one of Mr. Hall’s men about a year and a half since; and
I determined upon leaving them in security until Mr. Hall, who, I believe, could identify
them on his arrival up the country; but shortly after my return these two men suc-
ceeded


eeeded in slipping their , handcuffs and attempted to make their escape, m which one
succeeded, but the other was shot by the sentry. Feeling anxious to proceed to the Guyder,
where the ravages were stated to be greater, and having permitted the rest to depart, with
the exception of one man, who promised to conduct me to-the other tribe of the Guyder
blacks I then proceeded to Mr. Bell’s station on the river Guyder, which I reached in
four days. Mr/Bell requested me to stay a few days, as the blacks were very troublesome
in spearino- the cattle. Being, however, anxious to proceed to Mr. Cobb’s station, 1 left
Ensign Coiban and a party of men to search the woods for the natives, which they , did, but
without success, returning to, me in two days. In about four days I reached Mr. Cobb’s
station on the Big River; I found every thing in disorder; the shepherds were afraid to
take their flocks out of sight of the hut ; in fact, the statements in Mr. Paterson’s commu-
nication are fully borne out. Learning from Mr. Lamb, the superintendent at Mr. Cobb’s
station, that the blacks were at some distance in the interior, he having followed them,
, after the murder, a short distance, Mr. Lamb, Mr. Hall, and Mr. Scott’s men undertaking
to accompany me, I provisioned the mounted policemen for 15 days, and determined to
pursue them. On the fourth day I came upon a man sleeping under a tree; seeing four
spears leaning against it, I suspected that others were in the neighbourhood, I accordingly
secured him, and afterwards four others (three with their women); from them I learnt that
the main body of the tribe were at some considerable distance on other wakes. Keeping
the men as guides, I proceeded in.quest of the.rest of the tribe, hearing all from these
respecting the sheep taken.. On the second evening after taking the men, I came up with
the main body on a river called the Bogy, which runs through a wood, but so open that
the men could ride through : I rode down upon them, but no sooner did they perceive us
than they speared one of the troopers through the calf of the leg, and showed evident inten-
tions of spearing many more. I then felt it necessary, for the safety of my men, to use
sharp measures, and reluctantly gave orders to fire, and regret much to state that a few
fell in consequence. ; On entering their encampment I destroyed - a great number of their
spears. I must not omit to mention that Mr. Lamb fully indentified several articles
belonging to his station, taken away from the hut by these blacks. After resting a day, we
proceeded on our return to Mr. Cobb’s station, guided by some of the blacks, by a more
direct route, feeling anxious to return as soon as possible, apprehending rain, which, owing
.to the flatness of the country,: would have prevented our travelling. I have parted with
my guides, after rewarding them much to their satisfaction, and. explaining to them that
•we had no wish or intention to injure them, but to prevent a recurrence of the outrages that
,-had been committed. On reaching Mr. Cobb’s station I considered it prudent to rest my
men and horses for three days. I then proceeded to the Australian Company’s station on
the Peel River (which, although rather out of my road, afforded me an opportunity of
getting my horses shod), and from thence to Jerry’s Plains, which I reached after 53 days’
duty. . ’ -
I have, &c.
(signed) J. W. Nunn,
The Honourable Major Commandant M. Police.
The Colonial Secretary, &c. &c. &c.
Enclosure 2, in No. 3.
M INUTE OF COUNCIL,-New South Wales,
Extract from Minute, No. 23, of the Proceedings of the Executive Council, dated
• 27th March 1838, relative to Major Nunn’s Report, dated sth March, 1838, giving an
Account of a Rencontre between a Party of, the Mounted. Police under his Orders and a
. Tribe of the Native Blacks.
Present:—His Excellency the. Governor, the Honourable Colonel Snodgrass, c. n., the
Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Australia, the Honourable the Colonial Secretary,
the Honourable the Colonial Treasurer.
His Excellency the Governor informed the Council that he felt it to be his duty to sub-
a re P. or . t which he had received from Major Nunn, of the mounted police, dated
the sth instant, giving an account of a rencontre between a party of the police under his
orders and a tribe of the native blacks, in which, in consequence of their having speared one
of his men, displayed evident intentions of spearing more, he judged it necessary for
the safety of his party to order them to fire, when, he regrets much to state, that a few of
the blacks fell. ,
His Excellency also laid before the Council a despatch from Lord Glenelg, dated the
. 26th of July 1837, an d received in this colony the 24th of February last.
His Excellency likewise laid before the Council a copy of the printed Report made during
the last Session of ihe Imperial Parliament by a Committee of the House of Commons, on
the subject of the treatment of the aborigines in British colonies. ’
His Excellency then stated, that as Lord Glenelg had in his despatch above mentioned
.recommended an inquiry in every case in which an aboriginal native should come to a
c 4 violent


violent death in consequence of any collision with officers of the Government, or persons
under their command, his Excellency requested the advice of the Council as to the best way
in which such an inquiry could be instituted, for ascertaining the circumstances under
which the recent loss of human life mentioned by Major Nunn had occurred.
The Council, after mature deliberation on the important subject submitted to them by his
Excellency, are unanimously of opinion, that the fittest tribunal for the investigation into
this, and all similar cases, will be a court composed of the police magistrate and bench of
justices, in the district where any loss of life may have occurred; or of the nearest, or most
convenient district, in the event of the occurrences having taken place beyond the boundaries
of location.
His Excellency next requested the advice of the Council as to whether the investigation
should take place before the police magistrate, and such justices as might in the ordinary
routine of business attend, or whether it would be desirable to summon other police magis-
trates to assist in the inquiry, or to take measures to secure the attendance of any specified
number of justices; and further, whether any law-officer of the Crown, or person on the
part of the Attorney-general, should be appointed to assist the court in the investigation.
The Council having deliberated on the questions proposed to them, arc unanimously of
opinion, that a police magistrate and an ordinary bench of justices are perfectly compe-
tent to the duty of making such inquiries as are proposed, without the assistance of any
extra magistrates; and as hitherto, upon inquests on the death of white persons, by violence
or accident, the attendance of members of the legal profession has not been usual, nor
deemed requisite, the Council do not see that their attendance is necessary or advisable
upon such inquiries as are now proposed.
These questions having reference to the occurrences reported by Major Nunn being thus
disposed of, his Excellency drew the attention of the Council to the Report of the Committee
of the House of Commons, which he had laid on the table, and particularly to the suggestions
contained in pages 82, 83, and 84, of that Report; and requested to be informed whether, in
the Opinion of the Council, it might not be desirable to appoint protectors of the aboriginal
natives, and to combine their duties with those of the commissioners of Crown lands; and
whether it would be expedient to constitute them coroners or magistrates; and in the event of
any such measure being judged advisable, whether a public notice, founded on Lord Glenelg’s
despatch, and announcing thejneasures to be adopted, ought not to be published for general
information in the colony.
The Council concurred with his Excellency in the expediency of declaring the commis-
sioners of Crown lands to be protectors of the aboriginal blacks, and of charging them
with the duty of making an inquiry into the circumstances under which in any case, either
of a white or of a black man, the loss of life may have occurred,] beyond the present boun-
daries of location; but recommend deferring until further information on the subject is
obtained consideration of the question whether the commissioners should be appointed
coroners or magistrates.
The Council also concur with his Excellency in thinking that it will be advisable to pub-
lish, with as little delay as possible, a notice of the nature proposed by his Excellency.
(A true extract.)
William Macpherson,
Clerk of Councils.
No. 4.
(No. 68.)
COPY of a DESPATCH from Governor Sir George Gipps to Lord Glenelg.
My Lord, Government House, Sydney, 27 April 1838.
In my despatch, No. 67, of the 25th instant, I detailed to your Lordship
the measures which I thought it right to adopt in consequence of a recent col-
lision between a party of the mounted police and a tribe of the native blacks,
and I have now the honour to acquaint you, that I have further deemed it neces-
sary, with the advice of ray Executive Council, to issue a Government notice,
declaring that in all cases where any of the aboriginal inhabitants of this
territory shall lose their lives in consequence of a quarrel or collision with
white men, an inquest or inquiry shall be held, precisely similar to that which
is held in the located parts of the territoiy when a white man comes to a violent
or sudden death ; and also declaring that the commissioners of Crown lands,
beyond the boundaries of location, shall act as protectors of aborigines.
Your Lordship will perceive by the copy which I enclose of the proposed
notice, and which will appear in the Gazette of Wednesday next, that it is
founded partly on your Lordship’s despatch of the 26th July 1837, No. 353,
and partly on the suggestions thrown out in the Report of the Committee of
the House of Commons, on the treatment of the aborigines in British settle-
ments, which sat in the last session of Parliament.
Your


Your Lordship is, I am sure, well aware of the extreme difficulty of devising
any measure that shall effectually check the outrages which, I regret to state, ,
are now of frequent occurrence beyond the boundaries of location; I may not ,
be very saturnine of the entire success of the one I have resorted to, but being .
the only one within my power, I hope it will meet your Lordship’s approbation.
I have also deemed it necessary to republish a notice, which appeared in the
Government Gazette on the l6th of September 1837, on the subject of
the forcible retention by white men of women belonging to the aboriginal
tribes, which, there is reason to fear, is often the immediate cause of these
outrages. , , a
■ 1 have, &c.
(signed) Geo. Gipps.
2 May 1838.
P.S. —Since the above despatch was written, I lament to say that information
has been received, both from the north and which, being calculated to
exasperate the public mind against the blacks, rentiers it, in my opinion, desir-
able to defer the publication of these notices for a few weeks.
To the north, and in the neighbourhood of Major Nunn’s late operations, a
man in charge of a cattle station, belonging to a person named Fitzgerald, has
been found barbarously murdered, and also two other men, belonging to a
surveying party under Mr. Finch.
From the south, we have accounts of a large convoy of sheep and cattle
belonging to a gentleman of the name of Faithfull having been attacked on the
13th ult. on their way to Port Phillip, and eight men killed out of eighteen, who
formed Mr. Faithfull’s party; ; The particulars of this last occurrence I have not
yet received, but I have directed a civil stipendiary magistrate and a party of
the mounted police to proceed with all possible’ haste to the spot, and have
given them particular instructions for their guidance.
The blacks who are supposed to have murdered the two men belonging to the
surveying party have been taken, and will be tried before the Supreme Court.
(signed) Geo. Gipps.
Enclosure in No. 4.
Extract from Minute, No. 24, of the Proceedings of the Executive Council, dated 6th
April 1838, on the subject of a Notice to be published relative to measures to be pur-
sued in cases of the Death of Native Blacks by violence.
Present:—His Excellency the Governor, the Honourable Colonel Snodgrass, c. b., the
Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Australia, the Honourable the Colonial Secretary,
the Honourable the Colonial Treasurer.
With reference to the proceedings on the 27th ultimo, and the advice of the Council rela-
tive to the intended publication of a notice announcing the measures proposed to be pursued
by the Government, in all cases of the loss of human life produced by causes arising from
the occasional intercourse between the white inhabitants of the colony and the aboriginal
natives, his Excellency the Governor laid before the Council a draft of the notice proposed
to be published, containing such an intimation to the public as is above mentioned, com-
bined with general instructions to the commissioners of Crown lands, for their guidance in
the performance of the additional duties with which they are to be charged, as protectors
of the aboriginal blacks ; which notice having been read, and carefully considered by the
Council, they approve of the same, and advise the early publication thereof.
. (A true extract.)
Wm. Macpherson,
Clerk of Councils.
Enclosure A. 1, to Minute No. 24, of 1838.
ABORIGINES,
? x f eli l e " c y ie Governor having been directed, in a despatch recently received from
e rmcipal Secretary of State for the Colonies, to cause an inquiry to be instituted in
every case where any of the aboriginal inhabitants of this country may have come to a
violent death m consequence of any collision with white men, his Excellency, with the
nr“I 0 ( ?° UnC1 ’ ? 6emS h pr °P er ’ in notif ying the same to the Zionists, to
urge upon their consideration in the most earnest manner the solemn nature of the obli^a-
-5 D tions


tions by which we are bound, as men and as Christians, towards that race, and to invite
their co-operation in the fulfilment of the duties which those obligations involve.
As human beings, partaking of one common nature, but less enlightened than ourselves,
as the original possessors of the soil from which the wealth of the colony has been princi-
pally derived, and as subjects of the Queen, Whose sovereignty extends over every part of
Wew Holland, the natives of the whole territory have an acknowledged right to the protec-
tion of the government, and the sympathy and kindness of every separate individual. In
disputes among themselves they may be governed by their own ancient usages, wherever
these do not interfere with the rights or safely of their more civilized fellow subjects. In
disputes between aborigines and whites, both parties are equally entitled to demand the
protection and assistance of the law of England. To allow either to injure or oppress the
other, and still more to permit the stronger to regard the weaker party as aliens, with whom
a war can exist, and against whom they may exercise belligerent rights, is not less inconsis-
tent with the spirit of that law, than it is at variance with the dictates of justice and
humanity.
In accordance with these principles, and in obedience to the instructions of Her Majesty’s
Government above mentioned, his,Excellency is pleased to direct that on every occasion of
a violent death occurring among the aborigines of this territory, wherein any white man
may be concerned, or supposed to be concerned, an inquest or inquiry sMll be held by the
nearest coroner or magistrate (as the case may be), in exactly the same manner as inquests
or inquiries are held in the located parts of the country when the deceased are Europeans or
white men.
In order also to carry Her Majesty’s gracious intentions into more complete effect, by
affording, more certain security to the great body of the aboriginal inhabitants residing
beyond the present limits of location, his Excellency is further pleased to direct that
officers shall be appointed for their special protection, who shall be designated “Protectors
of Aborigines,” and that for the present the commissioners of Crown lands beyond the
boundaries shall act as such protectors.
The duties of these officers will be, on the one hand, to cultivate at all times an amicable
intercourse with the natives, to assist them in procuring redress for any wrong to which
they may have been subjected, and particularly to prevent any interference, on the part
of white men, with their women.
On the other hand, they will make known to the natives the penalties to which they will
become liable by any act of aggression upon the persons or property of the colonists. They
will endeavour to induce the chiefs in their respective districts to make themselves respon-
sible for the good conduct of their tribes. They will use every means in their power to
acquire such personal acquaintance with individuals, and influence over them, as may
ensure'either the prevention of aggressions, or the immediate surrender of the guilty parties,
and in the latter case they will forthwith take the steps that may appear to them necessary.
To faciliate these objects the protectors will be furnished with the means of making
occasional presents of articles either of use or of ornament, and will receive further instruc-
tions, in detail, for their guidance.
5.
(No. 244.)
COPY of a DESPATCH from Lord Glenelg to Governor Sir George Gipps.
Sir, Downing-street, 16 November 1838.
I have received your despatches, No. 67, of the 25th April, and No. 68, of
the 27tH April, in which you inform me of a collision which had taken place,
shortly before your arrival, between a party of the mounted police, under Major
Nunn, and a tribe of the natives, in which there was reason to suppose that
several of the latter had been killed, and of the measures which you had taken
in consequence. As in accordance with the instructions contained in my
despatch of the 26th July 1837, you had directed an investigation into the
circumstances of this’ unfortunate transaction, I abstain from any comment
upon it until the result of that inquiry has been ascertained ; I will only observe
that this event, and those which are mentioned in the postscript to your despatch
of the 27th April, afford additional evidence of the necessity of every possible
precaution on the part of the Government to prevent collision between the
settlers and the native tribes.
No means occur to me as more likely to check the natural desire for reta-
liation on the part of the natives than to impress them, if possible, with the
conviction that the laws of the colony will be equally administered for their
protection from wrong and injury as for that of the European settlers; and that
in every case of injury to person or property an examination equally rigid will
be instituted, from whatever quarter the complaint may proceed, and an equal
degree


degree of punishment will be inflicted on the delinquent, whatever be his race,
or origin or colour. ■ , , ,
, I am far from assuming that blame attached to Major Nunn, or the party
under his command, on the occasion of the collision with the natives which
you have reported; but the more searching and minute the inquiry into any
such transaction, and the more complete the publicity given to that inquiry,
the greater will be the confidence in the vigorous and impartial protection,
afforded by the law to the unoffending inhabitants of whatever class, and the
stronger will be the inducement to have recourse to the constituted autho-
rities for redress. ,
I approve of the notice which, with the advice of the Council, you proposed
to issue on this subject, and of the intended republication of the notice of the
16th September 1837. lam not prepared to question the necessity, which in
your opinion existed, for some delay in their publication, but I trust that that
delay will have been of very short duration, as it seems to me important that
the views and intentions of the Government on this subject should be clearly
and generally known. .
My despatch of the 31st January last, which you will have probably received
shortly after the date of your despatches, to which I am now replying, will
have conveyed to you full instructions and authority relative to the appoint-
ment and duties of protectors of the aborigines within the limits of your
government. '
I have, &c.
(signed) Glenelg.
No. 6.
(No. 115.)
Copy of a DESPATCH from Governor Sir George Gipps to Lord Glenelg.
My Lord, Government House, Sydney, 21 July 1838.
In my despatches of the 25th and 27th April last, Nos. 67 and 68, I in-
formed your Lordship of various outrages which had taken place in the
remote districts of this colony, beyond what are called the boundaries of
location, and of the measures which it was then my intention to adopt.
In the despatch of the 25th April, I stated that an inquiry was about to be
instituted at Invermein into the circumstances under which a number of the
aborigines lost their lives in a rencontre with a party of the mounted police,
under the command of Major Nunnand in that of the 27th I informed your
Lordship of ray intention to issue a Government notice on the subject, though
in a postscript to the same I stated that in consequence of events which had
come to my knowledge, since the notice was prepared, I had been induced to
suspend the issue of it for a few weeks.
I lament now to have to state to your Lordship, that in consequence of the
continuance of similar outrages, the calls for the services of the mounted
police have been so constant, that I have not been able to spare the men who
would have been required as witnesses in the proposed investigation at Inver-
mein j ahio that, under the advice of the Executive Council, I have refrained
from issuing the proposed notice, on account of the degree to which the public
mind continues to be exasperated against the blacks.
On the 18th ult. a memorial was transmitted to me, by a number of gentle
men interested in the opening of the country near Port Phillip, of which I
enclose a copy, but in so doing, as well as in transmitting to your Lordship a
copy of my answer to it, it is necessary that I should explain to your Lordship,
that some of the gentlemen who signed this memorial had previously waited
upon me and requested that I would either myself levy war against the blacks,
or sanction the enrolment of a militia for that purpose, and allow them to be
supplied with arms and munitions of war from Her Majesty’s stores; and that
it was (as I presume) in consequence of my declining to do either that their
subsequent memorial was, contrary to usual practice, addressed to the Governor
and the Executive Council, instead of the Governor alone.
I have the honour to enclose a short abstract of the principal outrages between
blacks and whites, which have been reported in the last three months. Your
526 - D 2 ' Lordship


Lordship will observe that a great proportion of these acts of violence have
occurred in the neighbourhood of Port Phillip, or on the road between the
settled parts of this colony and that place, the reason of which is, that large
herds of cattle and flocks of sheep have been recently driven through these
extensive tracts of country, with a very insufficient number of people to guard
them, often not more than in the proportion of one man to several hundred
sheep. That under these circumstances predatory attacks should have been
made on them by the natives, does not, I must say, appear to me in the least
degree to be wondered at.
Your Lordship must be aware that it is quite out of the power of this
Government to give to the proprietors or their flocks the protection they
desire; even if we were restrained by no sense of humanity towards the
blacks, the resources of the Government would be quite insufficient to keep
military parties always in advance of persons who are migrating in search of
pasturage, advancing often 50 miles in a single season, and, in the case of Port
Phillip, having stretched to a distance beyond our former limits of between
300 and 400 miles in the last three years.
If proprietors, for the sake of obtaining better pasturage for their increasing
flocks, will venture with them to such a distance from protection, they must
be considered to run the same risk as men would do who were to drive their
sheep into a country infested wh;h wolves; with this difference, however, that
if they were really wolves, the Government would encourage the shepherds to
combine and destroy them, whilst all we can now do is, to raise, in the name
of justice and humanity, a voice in favour of our poor savage fellow-creatures,
too feeble to be heard at such a distance.
Your Lordship will not fail to observe, that of the outrages enumerated in
the accompanying list, some took place 200 or 300 miles to the north of Sydney,
others at more than 500 miles to the south, and some (at Geelong, the western
limit ofPort Phillip) at a still greater distance.
In order to keep open the communication between Sydney and Port Phillip,
it is my intention, with the concurrence of the officer in command of Her
Majesty’s troops, to establish military posts on the road; and I forward a
sketch, on which the places of these proposed posts are marked, they being, as
your Lordship will perceive, the places where the road crosses the following
streams on the way, viz. the Murray, the Ovens, the Violet Creek, and the
Goulburn.
It was between the Violet Creek and the Ovens, and at a distance of 400
miles from Sydney, that the attack was made on Mr. Faithfuli’s convoy of sheep
and cattle, on the 11th April last, in which seven of his men were killed, and
all the rest dispersed. These men (who were chiefly convicts) did not defend
themselves, but ran at the first appearance of their assailants, though, as there
were 15 of them, with fire-arms in their hands, they ought to have beaten off
any numbers, however great, of naked savages.
As soon as information reached me of this aggression, I sent a magistrate
with a party of the mounted police, under an officer, to the spot; blit, after a
fruitless search of 41 days, they returned without having seen a single native.
I thought it right that a civil magistrate should accompany the party, and I
have the honour to enclose to your Lordship a copy of the instructions with
which I furnished him.
The third outrage enumerated in the list which I lay before your Lordship,
is one, I lament to say, committed not by the blacks, but on them. As yet I
have received no official report of the circumstances of the case, though I have,
in like manner as in the one just mentioned, sent a civil magistrate and a party
of mounted police to inquire into it and collect evidence, and to bring, if
possible, the offenders to justice. There is too much reason to fear that in this
case 22 human beings, including several women and children, have been deli-
berately put to death by a party of white men ; and this occurrence happened,
not in the neighbourhood of the spot where the attack on Mr. Faithfuli’s men
was made, but at a distance perhaps of 500 miles to the north of it.
I have, &c.
(signed) Geo. Gipps.


Enclosure 1, in No. 6.
TO his Excellency Sir George Gipps, Knight, Governor-in-chief, and the Honourable and
Executive Council of New South Wales.
The Memorial of the undersigned Colonists, Landholders and Proprietors of Stock,
Respectfully showeth.
That your memorialists having a deep interest in the welfare and prosperity of the new
settlement at Port Phillip, and in the peace and good government of this colony generally,
conceive it incumbent on them to bring under the notice of your Excellency and Honourable
Council the state of that part of the country, arising from the hostility of the aborigines.
That your memorialists have learnt with feelings of regret and alarm, that certain tribes on
the road to and in the neighbourhood of Port Phillip have lately assumed a hostile attitude
towards the settlers, and have committed many murders and other outrages upon them;
that they are assembled in large numbers armed, and attacking such persons as are most
unprotected and within their reach, so that many have been obliged to abandon their
stations, leaving, in some cases, their flocks and herds at the mercy of the hostile tribes;
and that the intercourse by land between this part of the territory and Port Phillip, if it
has not already ceased, has become one of imminent danger to life and property.
That your memorialists are,not aware of any aggression on the part of Her Majesty’s
white subjects which could have excited the blacks to commit the excesses and barbarities,
of fresh instances of which almost every post brings the account, but believe that the
natives, unrestrained by moral principles, and placing little or no value on human life,
have been stimulated by their natural cupidity and ferocity in perpetrating the outrages of
which they have lately been guilty.
That your memorialists feel, however, that an inquiry into the cause of these attacks on
the lives and property of their fellow-subjects, peacefully pursuing an avocation sanctioned
by the laws of their country, is not the question at the present time, but rather (their
existence being ascertained beyond doubt) how most speedily and effectually a period may
be put to these outrages.
That your memorialists are of opinion that (hese untutored savages, not comprehending or
appreciating the motives which actuate us, attribute forbearance on our part solely to
impotence or fear, and are thus rendered only more bold and sanguinary. This opinion,
founded on past experience, will receive ample confirmation on reference to the history of
this colony and the acts of its former governments. It is undeniable, that no district of
the colony has been settled without, in the first instance, suffering from the outrages of the
natives, and that these outrages continued until put an end to by coercive measures. Con-
ciliation was generally used in the first instance, but invariably failed in producing any good
effect, and coercion was ultimately found unavoidably necessary, which, if earlier adopted,
would have saved much bloodshed on both sides. It is only when they have become
experimentally acquainted with our power and determination to punish their aggressions
that they have become orderly, peaceable, and been brought within the reach of civilization.
That your memorialists fear, that if adequate protection be not afforded by the Govern-
ment, the settlers will undoubtedly take measures to protect themselves, as it is not to
be supposed they will remain quietly looking on whilst their property is being destroyed,
and their servants murdered; and your memorialists need hardly observe, that such a
mode of proceeding would inevitably be attended with consequences of the most painful
nature. • r
That your memorialists, in conclusion, respectfully entreat your Excellency and Honour-
able Council to take such energetic and effectual steps as will for the present' repress, and
for the future prevent, the aggressions of these hostile tribes, and protect the lives and
properties of Her Majesty’s subjects who are engaged in the laudable and enterprising-
pursuit of a pastoral life in the interior, and the pioneers of civilization, your memorialists
being convinced that such a course will eventually prove to be the most humane and
merciful.
And your memorialists will ever pray, &c.
Sydney, 8 June 1838.
(82 Signatures.)
Enclosure 2, in No. 6.
g; r Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney,
• ? honour, by command of the Governor, to acknowledge the receipt of a memo-
vn a!™*’ addressed t0 his Excellency and the Executive Council, and signed by
yourself and other gentlemen interested in the settlement at Port Phillip. S
In this document it is represented, that the natives of that part of the country have
SS! h ° S f lle attltU J e ’ ““embled in large numbers, and committed many outrages
flocTs LTf^ 6 ' - V f been T rdered ’ others have been obliged to abandon tS
ft hw not .bp !’ and l 6 , mtei i C0Urse b f we f n the settlement and the rest of the colony, if
536 already ceased, has been rendered an undertaking of imminent danger to life and
D 3 property.


property. It is also stated, that you are not aware of any aggression on the part of Her
Majesty’s white subjects, whereby those atrocities could have been provoked, but ascribe
them to the natural cupidity of the aborigines, their want of moral principles, and their
belief that forbearance in Europeans proceeds from impotence or fear; experience having
shown that attempts at conciliation have hitherto led only to acts of greater aggression,
which would never have occurred, had the coercion, which was ultimately found necessary,
been resorted to in the first instance.
Your memorial further points out that, unless protected by the Government, the settlers
will undoubtedly take measures to protect themselves, and it prays therefore that, to obviate
the painful consequences of such a proceeding, effectual steps may be immediately taken
to repress and prevent such aggressions on the part of the aborigines, and to protect Her
Majesty’s white subjects in the peaceful prosecution of their lawful pursuits.
In reply, I am directed by his Excellency to inform you, that no person can have felt
more concern or regret than he has at the accounts recently received from the southern
parts of this territory. That in order to afford to the settlers in those districts all the pro-
tection in his Excellency’s power, he despatched a party, consisting of an officer and 12 men
of the mounted police, to the River Ovens, as soon as he heard of the late massacre of Mr.
Faithfull’s men, and that this party has since been increased to 21 ; so that with the seven
that were originally at Melbourne, there will be a' party of one officer and 28 mounted
policemen, independently of the military force, which by a recent addition of 12, now
amounts to 44 ; and that a discretionary power has been given to the poljge magistrate at
Melbourne to cause parties of infantry to advance, if necessary, into the interior.
I am also instructed to inform you, that it is the Governor’s further intention to establish
posts at convenient distances along the road, from Yass to Port Phillip, in order to keep
open the communication, and that a permanent addition will be made to the mounted
police for this purpose.
Having thus explained the measures which have been adopted, and which his Excellency
has reason to hope will be sufficient. Sir George Gipps desires it to be intimated to the
gentlemen who have signed the memorial, that as he has the most positive directions from
Her Majesty’s Government to treat the aboriginal natives as subjects of Her Majesty, it is
entirely out of his power to authorize the levying of war against them, or to give sanction to
any measures of indiscriminate retaliation; and in order that no misapprehension may exist
on this subject, he feels bound to declare, that nothing which has been done in this colony
in former times, or in any other colony or place whatsoever, would, in his opinion, be a
justification for departing from the strict obedience which is due to the orders of Her
Majesty’s Government.
It is doubtless only of late years that the British public has been awakened to a know-
ledge of what is owing to these ignorant barbarians on the part of their more civilized
neighbours; but a deep feeling of their duties does now exist on the part both of the
Government and the public, as may be proved by reference to the many inquiries which
have been lately instituted on the subject, and particularly by the unanimous address of the
House of Commons to his late Majesty, adopted in July 1834, and by a Report of a Com-
mittee of the same House, made in the very last sitting of Parliament, both of which docu-
ments are of easy access to the public.
I am, however, directed to acquaint you, that there is nothing in the Governor’s instruc-
tions to prevent his protecting to the utmost of his power the lives and property of settlers
in every part of this territory, and that this his Excellency is determined to do. Sir George
Gipps, moreover, readily allows, that after having taken entire possession of the country,
without any reference to the rights of the aborigines, it is now too late for the Government
to refuse protection to persons, who have come hither, and brought with them their flocks
and herds on its own invitation, though at the same time, it must be evident that every
wanderer in search of pasturage cannot be attended by a military force.
In conclusion, I am instructed to notify to you, that although the memorial to which this
letter refers is addressed to the Governor and Executive Council, his Excellency has not
deemed it necessary to take the advice of that body on it, as the line of his own duty is so
clearly defined, that he feels neither doubt nor difficulty as to the course which he ought
to pursue.
I have, &c.
Philip G. King, Esq. (signed) E. J)eas Thomson,
The Gentleman first signing the
Memorial referred to.
Enclosure 3, in No, 6.
Statement of the Principal Outrages committed by, or on, the Aboriginal Inhabitants of
New South Wales, of which Reports have been received by the Local Government, since
the 25th April last, the day on which my Despatch, No. 67, was written.
To the North of Sydney.
1. On the 2d May a report was received from Lieutenant Cobhan of the mounted
police, stating that he had discovered the dead bodies of two men, named Gorman and
Gale, who had belonged to a surveying party under Mr. Finch ; and that he had captured
a party


a party of blacks, who were concerned in the murder of them. Two blacks were reported
to have been killed in the affray.
2.-On the 2d June a report was received from the Rev. Mr. Threlkeld, engaged on a
mission at Lake Macquarie, stating that three aboriginal women had been murdered, by
persons who were supposed to be in the employment of the Australian Agricultural
Company.'.
- 3. A report was received on the 6th July from Mr, Foot, that in consequence of a horse
having been speared at Mr. H. Dangar’s station, a party of white men had assembled for
the purpose of attacking the blacks; that they had taken 22 of them, including many
women and children, and put them all to death. No official account has as yet been
received of this atrocious deed, but a magistrate with a party of mounted police has been
despatched ’in pursuit of the perpetrators of it. The scene of the atrocity is supposed to
be not less than 200 miles to the north of Sydney.
On the Port Phillip, or Southern Side of the Colony.
1. Between the rivers Ovens and Goulburn, a large convoy of sheep and cattle, belong-
ing to Mr. W. Pitt Faithfull, and under the charge of 15 white men, was attacked by a
party of blacks, said to have been 300’strong. Seven of the white men were killed, and
the rest, as well as the whole of the cattle, dispersed in all directions. This occurrence took
place about 400 miles from Sydney, and 150 from Port Phillip.
2. On the 15th April the cattle station of Mr. Samuel Jackson, near Port Phillip, was
attacked by about 50 blacks, some of whom had fire-arms ; about 50 sheep were carried
away, though some of them were afterwards recovered.
3. On the 22d April the station of Mr. John Gardiner, near Port Phillip, was attacked
by a party of blacks, some of whom had fire-arms; they were, however, repulsed, and two
of them' who were subsequently taken were recognised as having been under the instruc-
tion of Mr. Langhorne, the missionary at Port Phillip. No lives were lost, though shots
were fired on both sides.
4. On or about the same day a flock of 520 sheep, belonging to Mr. Kenneth Clark, was
driven away from his station to a distance of seven or eight miles by the blacks- All were,
however, recovered, with the exception of 43.
5. On the 6th May the flocks of Dr. Jonathan Clark were attacked by a party of blacks,
who had dogs with them, and 20 sheep were carried off.
6. On the 19th May Thomas Jones, a servant in the employ of Mr. Bowman, was
murdered by the blacks, about 60 miles from Port Phillip. On the preceding day a flock
of sheep had been driven away from Mr. Bowman’s station, though all were afterwards
recovered, with the exception of four.
7. On or about the 22d May all the stations on the Burwan creeks, extending to. a
distance of more than 30 miles from Geelong, (on the western side of Port Phillip,) were
attacked, for the second time, by a party of about 60 blacks. Several huts were plundered;
one flock of sheep was driven to a distance of seven or eight miles, three were killed and
25 wounded. From another station 16 lambs were carried off, and from a third, six
sheep and six lambs; and other mischief is reported to have been done to a considerable
extent. ■ ■ ■> _
June 1. A black man, supposed to have been engaged in a murder committed some months
ago, near Geelong, was drowned in an attempt to escape from the persons who were in
pursuit of him.
June 9. Seven or eight blacks killed in defending a flock of sheep which they had
carried away .from the station of Mr. Yaldvvyn, about 80 miles from Port Phillip. On this
occasion the blacks are said to have defended themselves with great bravery.
N.B. A great number of less important outrages have come indirectly to the knowledge
of the Government, or been reported in the newspapers. And it is said that a white
woman,.the wife of a soldier, has been murdered between Melbourne and Geelong, though
no official account has been received of it.
July 1838. .
Enclosure 4, in No. 6.
SKETCH of proposed Military Posts between Sydney and Port Phillip.
Vide Map at the end of the Paper.
Enclosure 5, in No. 6.
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
t k’ l "’ j- ' 28 April 1838.
. AM directed by his Excellency the Governor to transmit to you the accompanying
copies of letters received from Lieutenant-colonel White and Dr, Gibson, reporting the
murder of eight of Mr. Faithfull’s servants on the Port, Phillip road, between the rivers
Ovens and Goulburn, in the early part of the present month, by a party of aboriginal
natives, stated to consist of about 300 individuals; and to inform you that the Com-
- - ■ D 4 mandant


mandant of the mounted police has been instructed to make immediate arrangements
for sending an officer of mounted police and as many troopers as can be spared from the
other duties, but not less than io in number,, to the scene where this dreadful outrage took
place. His Excellency requests that you will also proceed thither in company with the
officers of mounted police; make the necessary investigation into the causes which led to
this lamentable occurrence, and take such steps as the circumstances of the case may
appear to require for bringing the offending parties to justice; and I am directed to trans-
mit to you the accompanying instructions for your guidance in the execution of this duty,
•a copy of which has been furnished to the officer of mounted police, with a request that he
will act in concert with you, and follow such instructions as you may deem necessary in
the exercise of the orders to you in this behalf.
I have, See.
The Police Magistrate, Yass. (signed) E. Eeas Thomson.
Sir, Left Bank of the Ovens, 15 April 1838.
Being aware that exaggerated reports would most probably circulate at Sydney, I feel
it my duty to acquaint you, for his Excellency’s information of the fact, of a most furious
attack having been made on 18 men of Mr. Wm. Faithfull’s, at .the Swampy River
or Winding Swamp, by about 300 of the aboriginal natives. It appears that on the morn-
ing of the 1 oth instant, when they were putting their bullocks to, the dash was made, when
eight of the white people were unfortunately slain, and property, I believe considerable,
destroyed. Mr. George Faithfull was xm his way to this party when he fell in with one of
the mangled corpse of the white men ; several were found and buried. Mr. Faithfull has
fallen back on my station with the escaped people, and one wounded man, who is so dread-
fully lacerated, that I believe he cannot survive.
I have, &c.
To the Colonial Secretary. (signed) H. White,
Late Lieutenant-colonel 96th Reg.
Sir, Terranna, Goulburn, 23 April 1838.
I beg leave to report to you, for the information of his Excellency the Governor, that by
letters received this evening through the mail from Port Phillip, from ray brother-in law,
Mr. George Faithfull, and the overseer of Mr. W. P. Faithfull, I have learned the melan-
choly intelligence that whilst on their route (on the usual line of road to Port Phillip) with
several large flocks of sheep and two herds of cattle, Mr. Faithfull’s people were attacked,
on the 13th instant, between the Ovens and Goulbourn rivers, by a party of native blacks.
Eight of Mr. Faithfull’s men were killed, and his drays plundered.
His Excellency may rely on the truth of this report, as several of the bodies of the
slaughtered men were found by Mr. G. Faithfull, who at the time of the attack was at a
distance in the rear, with the last of his flocks.
Mr. Faithfull had but a few men left to assist him, and was in hourly expectation of a
fresh attack from the blacks.
I have, &c.
The Hon. the Colonial Secretary, &c. &c. (signed) Andrew Gibson, J. P.
Sydney.
The duty of the magistrates will be to inquire on the spot into all the circumstances of
the case, particularly the circumstances that preceded the murders.
Whether the parties had been in the presence of each other for any considerable time
before the attack.
Whether any previous hostility had been shown, and, in such case, the supposed cause
of it.
Whether it appeared an act of rapine only, or an act of retaliation for any wrongs, or
supposed wrongs, on the part of the blacks.
Whether the party attacked had with them any black women at the time of the attack,
or at any time previously.
Whether there were any grounds for supposing that any other party that has traversed
the same road has ever carried with them black women, or had any intercourse with them
on their passage. (
The police magistrate is also to inquire whether any and what resistance was offered
by Mr. Faithfull’s men. As there were x 8 of them with fire-arms (it is presumed in their
hands), it is strange to suppose that they allowed themselves to be slaughtered without
resistance. In the event of their having used their fire-arms, or made resistance in any
shape, the magistrate will of course endeavour to ascertain the number of blacks that may
have been killed. The most important duty that the police magistrate has to perform,
however.


however will be to give directions to the officer of mounted police as to the pursuit and
capture of the persons who may have committed the recent outrage.
In executing this very important duty, the police magistrate will bear m mind that the
black natives of New South Wales are in every respect to be considered subjects ot the
Queen and not as aliens, against whom the Queen’s troops may exercise belligerent rights.
No act of indiscriminate reprisal is therefore to be sanctioned against the tribe or tribes
which may have been concerned in the late murders, proceedings are to be adopted
similar to what the laws of England would authorize if any company of depredators or
murderers had been guilty of similar atrocities. The endeavours of the police are, first of
aIT to be directed to secure the persons of as many individuals concerned in the murders as
can be identified; and if any can be secured in this way, the object of the enterprize
should be considered as accomplished. If none can be identified or secured, other indi-
viduals, not exceeding the number of the men murdered, maybe secured; and, amongst
them, it would be desirable that-the persons of some of their chiefs should be included.
The party under the orders of the police magistrate or officer of mounted police is not to
make use of their fire-arms, or other weapons, except in self-defence, and then only to the
extent that may be absolutely necessary for their own protection, or for the capture of the
prisoners whom they are to secure.
In the event of any distant pursuit being deemed necessary, the police magistrate will
not be required to join it, but he will be expected to give directions for the conduct of it,
and as to the distance within which it is to be limited.
By his Excellency’s Command.
28 April 1838. (signed) E. Deas Thomson.
No. 7.
(No. 265.)
COPY of a DESPATCH from Lord Glenelg to Governor Sir George Gipps.
Sir, Downing-street, 21 December 1838.
I have received your despatch, No. 11a, of the 21st July, transmitting
several documents with reference to further collisions which had unhappily
taken place between parties of white settlers in the colony and the aboriginal
inhabitants.
: You are so fully aware of the views and wishes of Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment on this subject, that it is unnecessary for me here to repeat them. I can
only refer you to the instructions already addressed to you as to the measures
to be taken with a view to prevent the recurrence of outrages so destructive of
human life, and so much to be deprecated on every principle of policy as well
as of humanity. . •
. I approve of the answer which you returned to the memorial from Mr, King
and other gentlemen, and of the proceedings which you had adopted with
reference to the several transactions stated in your despatch. Your instruc-
.tions to the magistrate accompanying the mounted police appear to me proper
and judicious. I assume that the direction, that in the event of the police
being unahle to identify and secure any individuals concerned in the murders
•which had been perpetrated, other individuals, not exceeding the number of
men murdered, should be secured, including, if possible, some of the chiefs,
■was given only with a view to hold members of the same tribe as temporary
hostages for the future conduct of their companions, and not with any object
of retaliation on parties against whom no proof of guilty participation in the
outrage existed; any proceeding sanctioning measures of mere retaliation,
would, I am confident, be wholly discountenanced by you, and could only tend
to increase the evil, by encouraging similar acts on the part of the aborigines.
I am deeply concerned on account of the character of the settlers, to find that
the aggressions have not all been on the side of the aborigines. I hope, with
reference to the last outrage to which you refer in your despatch, that a strict
investigation will have taken place in pursuance of your directions, and that
due punishment will have been inflicted on the parties against whom acts of so
revolting and disgraceful a nature may have been substantiated.
. Ido not clearl 7 perceive the force of the reasons which have led to a con-
tinued postponement of the proposed notice, a copy of which you transmitted
in your despatch of the 27th April. Without, at this distance, prescribing to
yourtie precise course which should be adopted, I cannot help expressing my
E opinion


opinion that such a notice is highly expedient, in order that while the Govern-
ment afford all due protection to the person and property of the peaceable and
industrious settlers, it may be clearly known by all parties that it will not
shrink from enforcing the law against all those who, not for the purpose of self-
defence, hut wantonly, commit acts of violence or aggression against the
aboriginal inhabitants.
I have, &c.
(signed) Glenelg.
No. 8.
(No. 200.)
C OPY of a DESPATCH from Governor Sir George Gipps to Lord Glenelg.
Government House, Sydney,
My Lord, 19 DecembSf 1838.
In my despatch of the 21st July last. No. 115, I brought under your Lord-
ship’s notice a long list of atrocities, committed both by and on the aborigines
of this country, and I then stated that I had despatched a party of mounted
police in search of some white men, who were supposed to have put to death,
in cold blood, not less than 22 helpless and unoffending blacks ; it is now my
painful duty to inform your Lordship, that seven of the perpetrators of this
atrocious deed, having been convicted on the clearest evidence, suffered yester-
day morning the extreme penalty which the law awards for the crime of
murder.
The act for which these men have paid the forfeit of their lives took place
on the evening of Sunday the 10th June last, at or near a cattle station
belonging to a person of the name of Henry Dangar, distant perhaps 350 miles
from Sydney, in a direction due north, on the banks of the Myall Creek. This
creek is a branch of the Big River, which is supposed to fall into the sea at
Shoal Bay, in about lat. 29° south, but your Lordship is aware that this part
of the country is so little known, that it is impossible to fix the spot with any
degree of precision. On the banks of the Big River there are several cattle
stations besides that of Mr. Dangar, and it appeared on the trial, that for some
weeks previous to the 10th June, not less than 50 blacks, of all ages and sexes,
had been living at these different stations, (but mostly at Mr. Dangar’s) in
perfect tranquillity, neither molesting the whites, nor being themselves molested
by them. In consequence of some old quarrels, however, or possibly from
accounts having reached the place of occurrences in other quarters, a deter-
mination seems to have been formed by the white men to put the whole of the
blacks to death. On the afternoon of Sunday the 10th June, a number of them
suddenly surrounded the place, where more than 30 of the blacks were assem-
bled ; they tied them all to a rope, in the way that convicts are sometimes tied,
in order to be taken from place to place in the colony; marched them to
a convenient spot, about a quarter of a mile off, and put them all, with the
exception of one woman and four or five children, deliberately to death. The
following day, Monday, the 11th June, the same white men scoured the country
on horseback, endeavouring to find 10 or 12 of the blacks, who having left
Dangar’s station on the morning of the 10th, had escaped the massacre. These
10 or 12 persons have never been seen or heard of since, and it is doubtful to
this day whether they were not overtaken and murdered also.
The first accounts of these deeds of blood reached Sydney about the end of
the month of June. I despatched, with as little delay as possible, a stipendiary
magistrate (Mr. Day), on whose activity and discretion I could rely, and a party
of mounted police, in search of the murderers ; and Mr. Day, after an absence
of 53 days, reported to me in person, that having come unexpectedly to the
cattle station of Mr. Dangar, he had succeeded in capturing no less than 11 out
of the 12 persons who were known to have taken part in the massacre. When
Mr. Day arrived at the spot, some few scattered human bones only were visible,
great pains having been taken to destroy the whole remains of the slaughtered
blacks by fire ; but undeniable evidence was procured of more than 20 human
heads having been counted on the spot, within a few days after the day of the
massacre;


massacre; and the-best accounts lead me to suppose that the number of per-
sons murdered, of all ages and both sexes, was not less than 2 . e P e
sons apprehended by Mr. Day all arrived in this country as convicts, though
of some of them the sentences have expired. The twelfth man, or the one who
has escaped, is a free man, a native of the colony, named John Fleming. -
The 11 men were all brought to trial on the 15th of November, on an infor-
mation lodged against them by the Attorney-general, containing nine counts.
The first four counts charged them in various ways with the murder of an abo-
riginal black, named Daddy, the only adult male who could be identified asone
of the murdered party; the five other counts charged them (also in various
ways) with the murder of an aboriginal male black, name unknown. The jury
on this occasion acquitted the whole of the prisoners.
The Attorney-general immediately applied to have them detained on the fur-
ther charge of murdering the women and children, none of whom had been
comprehended in the first indictment; and this being done, seven of these men,
on the 27th of the same month (November),.were again brought before the
Supreme Court, on the charge of murdering a child. On this occasion, the
first five counts charged them simply with the murder of an aboriginal black
child; other counts described the aboriginal child by the name of Charley. The
Attorney-general laid this information only against seven of the prisoners,
instead of the whole 11, in order that they might have the opportunity of call-
ing the other four, if they chose to do so, as witnesses in their favour, but
which they did not do. On being.brought this second time before the court,
the prisoners, who were defended by three of the ablest counsel at the bar,
entered on the first five counts a demurrer, to the effect that there was not
sufficient certainty in the description of the aboriginal child, neither the name
nor sex being mentioned; and against the other counts of the indictment,
which charged them with the murder of a boy called Charley, they entered the
plea of “ autrefois acquit ,” saying that it was the same offence for which they
had been already acquitted. The presiding judge (Mr. Justice Burton) over-
ruled their demurrer, declaring that there was sufficient certainty in the
description of the child, though neither the sex nor name was mentioned; and
upon their plea of “ autrefois acquit ,” issue being joined by the Attorney-
general, a jury was empannelled to try whether the offence with which they
then stood charged was or was not the same for which they had already been
acquitted. This jury found that it was not the same offence. The seven men
- were consequently two days afterwards, on the 29th November, put on their
trial for the murder of the child, and found guilty on the first five counts,
which described the child merely as a black aboriginal, but were acquitted
upon the counts which charged them with the murder of a child named
Charley, sufficient proof of the name of the child not being adduced.
'Die seven men were brought up for judgment on the sth instant, upon
which occasion their demurrer, as well as their plea of “ autrefois acquit ,” was
brought under the solemn consideration of the three judges of the Supreme
Court, and sentence of death was not passed upon them until after the three
judges had unanimously expressed their opinion against the validity of their
demurrer, and their satisfaction with the verdict of the jury which had been
empannelled on their plea of “ autrefois acquit .”
The report of the judge (Mr. Justice Burton)’ who presided at the trial was
received by myself and the Executive Council on Friday the 7th instant, when
no mitigating circumstances appearing in favour of any of them, and nothing to
show that any one of them was less guilty than the rest, the Council unani-
mously advised that the sentence of the law should take effect on them; thev
were accordingly, ordered by me for execution, and suffered yesterday morning
2it nine o clock*
I enclose, for your Lordship’s information, copies of the following docu-
niGnts i“~ j j
,' \ t^ie n °tes of the- Chief Justice, taken on the 15th November, at the
tnai of the 1F men for the murder of the aboriginal named Daddy, which ended
m an acquittal. •
2. Report of Mr. Justice Burton of the proceedings on the 27th November
pn the demurrer of the seven prisoners, and on the trial of their plea of '• autre-
joisacqu.it, 1
• ? a6 ’ E 2 3. Minute


3. Minute of the proceedings of the Executive Council, on the 7th instant,
to which is appended a copy of the report made to the Council by Mr. Justice
' Burton of the trial, at which the seven men who have been executed were
found guilty.
4. It will be satisfactory to your Lordship to hear, that the smallest doubt does
not exist of the guilt of the men who have been executed, or of their all having
been engaged in the massacre. The whole 11 would indeed, I have reason to
believe, have pleaded guilty at the first trial, if not otherwise advised by their
counsel. After condemnation none of the seven men attempted to deny their
crime, though they all stated that they thought it extremely hard that white
men should be put to death for killing blacks. Until after their first trial, they
never, I believe, thought that their lives were even in jeopardy. Three peti-
tions were presented to me in their favour, though not very numerously signed,
one from Sydney, another from Parramatta, and the third from Windsor, but
I did not feel that I could, consistently with my public duty, pay regard to
them.
I have, &c.
(signed) Geo. Gipps.
Enclosure 1, in No. 8.
REPORT of the Trial of the Convicts named in the margin, before James Dowling , Esq.,
Chief Justice, and a Jury of Civil Inhabitants, at a Criminal Session of the Supreme
Court, holden on the 15th November 1838, at Sydney, in the Territory of New South
Wales, on an Information for Wilful Murder.
The information contained nine counts.
First count charged, that on the 9th June 1838, at a certain place near Dangar’s
Myall Creek station, some person, unknown to the Attorney-general, murdered an
aboriginal black native of the colony, named Daddy, by shooting him with a loaded pistol,
and that the prisoners tvere present, aiding and helping the said unknown person to do
and commit the murder.
Second. That the prisoner James Oates murdered an aboriginal black native, named
Daddy, with a loaded pistol, and that the other prisoners were present, aiding, &c.
Third. That some person, to the Attorney-general unknown, murdered an aboriginal
black native, named Daddy, with a sword, and that the prisoners were present, aiding, &c.
Fourth, That the prisoner Edward Foley murdered an aboriginal black native, named
Daddy, with a sword, and that the other prisoners were present, aiding, &c.
Fifth. That a person, unknown to the Attorney-general, murdered an aboriginal male
black, to the Attorney-general unknown, with a loaded pistol, and that the prisoners were
present, aiding, &c.
Sixth. That the prisoner James Oates murdered an aboriginal male black, to the
Attorney-general unknown, with a loaded pistol, and that the other prisoners were present,
aiding, &c.
Seventh. That a person, to the Attorney-general unknown, murdered an aboriginal male
black, to the Attorney-general unknown, with a sword, and that the prisoners were present,
aiding, &c.
Eighth. That the prisoner Edward Foley murdered an aboriginal male black, to the
Attorney-general unknown, with a sword, and that other prisoners were present, aiding, &c.
Ninth. That all the prisoners murdered an aboriginal male black, to the Attorney-general
unknown, by striking, beating, kicking, and casting and throwing him into burning wood,
timber and trees.
The Attorney-general (John Herbert Plunkett, Esq.) and Roger Therry, Esq., con-
ducted the prosecution.
Counsel for the prisoners, Messrs. A’Beckelt, Foster, and Windeyer.
Thomas Foster Examined.
I am superintendent at Dr. Newton’s stations at the Big River, a considerable distance
beyond Liverpool Plains and the boundaries of the colony. I have been there about 15
or 16 months. I was there in June. Dr. Newton’s is 16 miles from Dangar’s station.
On Saturday, 9th June, I went to Dangar’s with William Mace, Mr. Dight’s overseer.
I stopt there that night. I saw Anderson, the hut-keeper, and a party of blacks, between
40 and 50; there were men, women, and children. I remained there that night, and left
on


on the following morning; Dight’s overseer and about to of the same b acks returned
with me, leaving the remainder at Dangar’s. On my return home, a little boy who lives
with me, John Murphy, told me something which induced me to send the to blacks back
to Mr. Dangar’s. I saw them no more. They went up a creek They went in the
direction of {War’s. The following morning, Monday, I sent the blacks away; about
four in the afternoon of Sunday, and on the Monday morning, about half an hour aher sun-
rise a party of mounted men, some I believe armed, came. There were about 10 or 12,.
all mounted bn horseback, some armed, two with pistols. They came to the men’s hut,
where I was giving some directions; only two came near enough to speak to them, the
prisoners Oates and Kilmeister. Oates is called Hall’s Jemmy; he is assigned to Mr.
Hall •he was armed and mounted. I said to him. “ What’s the matter? He asked me
where were the blacks; I said, “ God knows where they are now,” and we spoke no more.
Oates came at first to the door where I was coming out. They all came galloping up;
each was pulling up his horse, and getting .round. I think they were near enough to
hear. Some alighted, and went into the hut. I saw them. Whilst in my own hut I saw
prisoner Johnstone pass by the door; he appeared to be going towards our stockyard.
I saw prisoner Hawkins; Russel was amongst them; T don t recollect any others. I
said, “ Well, Kilmeister, are you after the blacks?” He said, “They rushed my cattle
yesterday.” His horse came into the garden, and he went in after him. He was dis-
mounted when he said this. Kilmeister is assigned to Mr. Danger. They remained about
a quarter of an hour at the men’s huts. I know a man named Sexton; he lives on the
farm. The party went towards Mr. Dight’s, about two miles from my place. I saw a
party of horsemen up the Creek afterwards, but I could not say who they were; about
three or four miles off. In two or three days I went to Mr. Dangar’s on business; I saw
Mr. Hobbs about Wednesday; he is Mr. Dangar’s superintendent. In two or three days
afterwards I went with him to a sheep station of our own, two or three miles from his.
I there parted with him, but reached his place that evening, and stopped there all night.
Next morning Mr. Hobbs took me up to see the remains of some blacks; he took me to
the side of a ridge about half a mile from his place. Anderson’s huts almost join Hobbs’;
he is an assigned servant. 'I saw the body of a black, with the head on and the limbs
apparently burnt off. I saw a head without a body, and two or three skulls so completely
destroyed by fire as to render it impossible to say whether they were women’s or men’s.
There were the remains of a large fire, a recent fire; I can’t say whether it was extinguished.
There were two heads and a bod}' not burnt, lam positive the heads not burnt were black
men’s heads. I saw no arms, that I recollect; I saw no small limbs; there was a large
heap of ashes round the skull. I tracked some horses part of the road from Mr. Dangar’s
to that place. There was more than one; several. The head without the body was away
from the others; I could not tell how it was severed. I then proceeded home ; I stopped
only five or ten minutes; I found it disagreeable; I was overcome by the smell. It was
on the side of a ridge; the fire occupied a large space. It was a wood fire. I told several
persons what I saw. Mr. Hobbs returned to his station. Mr. Hobbs was much affected,
and kept away farther than ever I did. I saw Kilmeister on the Sunday evening. He
made no complaint of the cattle being rushed. I live xfi miles from Mr. Dangar’s.
Cross-examined by Mr. A’Beckett,
I have been there 14 or 15 months. Kilmeister answered a question Of mine as to the
cattle. Hobbs was affected, and held his handkerchief to his mouth, and he told me he
had been there before. 1 tracked horses, as in the public road, to Mr. Dangar’s. I can’t
say how far I tracked the horses; I don’t think I tracked them to this place. It had been
raining a day or two before, and it was easy to track the horses. I only remember two
of the men being armed. It is a customary thing for such men to be armed in the bush.
It is not unusual for such men to be mounted. It is in consequence of the danger they
run through the blacks they go armed. I have been more fortunate than my neighbours.
I believe I am well sheltered ; my station is central, and I am surrounded by neighbours.
There is less apprehension in the part where I am. I had not seen any blacks only those
while I was there. I don’t know of their fighting among themselves. 1 saw no children’s
skulls. I have enumerated all I did see. The sight affected Mr. Hobbs, and he put his
handkerchief to his mouth, I suppose in consequence of the smell.
Re-examined.
The tracks were on a public road, not travelled much, except by the stockmen. I
cannot say it is usual to see 10 or 12 men mounted in a body. The 10 black men I
brought from Dangar’s appeared to me to be quiet; they were not armed. I brought
them back. 1 selected three boys I wanted, and did not wish to have the seven. I would
rather be without them. If there had been small skulls I think I should have seen them.
I looked anxiously for a child I knew. The three skulls were women’s or men’s, not
children’s. I knew Daddy; 1 had seen him before.
By Prisoners’ Counsel.
I cannot say he was called Daddy Daddy. I have seen the man that Hobbs called
Daddy; he was an old man.
‘ By the Court.
™. e baC n were unarmed, except with a tomahawk ; I think two or three had
tomahawks. Daddy was a man, but shoit.
526. E 3


Mr. William Hobbs Examined.
•I have been superintendent to Mr. Henry Dangar for the last two years at Peel’s River
and the Big River. I went to the Myall Creek station about 15 months ago. I remember
the beginning of June. I left my station on the 7th of June, on a Thursday. I had a
station lower down the river, and I went to visit it; I left Kilmeister and Anderson in
charge. When I left home there were about 40 or 50 black natives there. There were
men, women, and fchildren ; from 10 to 12 women, and 10 or 12 children; they were
equal; the rest were men, young and old. I was only on the station 10 or 12 days ; they
were at my hut for 10 or 12 days. As far as 1 saw, they behaved themselves quietly;
if they had not I would not have allowed them to remain. I returned to the same
station on the 15th June, I am certain ; I am guided by my ration books; it was Wed-
nesday. On my return I found Anderson at home, and a black I left, named Davy, when
I was going. Kilmeister returned in a short time.after I arrived. When Kilmeister came
home, I sent for him to my house, and I asked him what had become of the blacks I had
left at the station when I went away. He said he did not know. I told him that I had
heard that they were murdered, and that I knew all about it. He said he knew
nothing about it, and said he had no hand in it, I told him I had heard he was
down at Dr. Newton’s and Mr. Bight’s station with the men who came to the
station. I asked him what he was doing there. He said looking after his
cattle. I said nothing more then on the subject at all. I then spoke to Davy. Davy
went with me, under half a mile, in a westerly direction. I saw horse tracks and
black men’s tracks of naked feet. There had been a little rain, which made the impres-
sions visible; the impressions were very numerous; there were children’s footsteps, more
than one ; I should think more than five. The tracks of feet were between the tracks of
the horses, and the horse tracks were outside of the naked feet tracks. These tracks led
me to where I found a number of dead bodies lying; there were a great number of bodies,
but the stench was so great I could not count them with accuracy. I endeavoured to
count them. I made more of them sometimes than another. The most I made was 28
with the heads and the frames. Some of the skulls had been burnt, but the frames re-
mained to show what they had been.
I made out the least number above 20. I can swear there were the remains of above
20 human beings. I saw some bodies with flesh remaining; they were terribly disfigured.
I could not tell how many. I knew Daddy well; he was an elderly man, very large; the
largest man I ever saw in my life, either a while or black. 1 saw a large body there, but
it had no head on. From the size I should imagine it was his. I left Daddy at the
station when I left; he was there with the other blacks. I saw the children’s heads quite
distinct; from 10 to 12 smalj heads that I took to be children’s ; also some of the children’s
bodies. I believe the large body was the body of Daddy. The body was disfigured ;
some of them were not whole ; I could not swear whether they were male or female, they
were so disfigured. I am perfectly satisfied in my own mind it was the body of Daddy ;
it was on its back; the head was off; the breast was remaining. The bulk of the body
was the same in size of Daddy; I believe it was the body of Daddy. I saw several heads
with the flesh on; I know none of the features. I recognized some female and male
heads. I saw male heads with the hair not scorched. Where the fire had not burnt the
hair off, the heads could be distinguished. The heads must have been taken off, or
cut off, by what means I cannot say; I should say not burnt off, as they were not
lying convenient to the bodies. On the morning of the 16th Mr. Foster went with
me. I am sure I tracked the feet of horses from Anderson’s hut 100 yards up to the
spot where the fire was; the tracks are to be seen to this day. I traced the tracks from
the corner of the fence near Anderson’s hut; Anderson’s hut is 50 or 60 yards from my
house. The fire covered a space half as large as the enclosed part of the court. There
was the remains, of a large log, which had been set fire to and had gone out. I saw
several places all round where the ground had been stained with blood. I endeavoured
to ascertain the number of children’s skulls, but the stench would not allow me to do it
correctly. Next day I went with M r * Foster; he went to it; 1 did not go close to it
on that day at all. I went close enough to see the bulk of the bodies. He was not
there above a minute and a half-altogether ; I staid a quarter of an hour at least the day
before. I cannot say I saw any difference in the place, except the parts of the body were
more scattered.
The native dogs would lessen the number of the remains every hour. There were a great
many birds of prey at the bodies, eagles, hawks, and crows. When I went back the second
day after parting with Foster, I spoke to Kilmeister on the subject; I told him I thought
it was a cruel thing for him to sanction the murder of these people, as he appeared to be on
such friendly terms with them when I left; I told him that it was’ entirely through him that
the blacks were permitted to come to the station at all; he.was a confidential servant; I was
there since; it was through his suggestion the blacks were permitted to come there at all.
I told him I considered it my duty to report it to the Government; he said he hoped I
would not, not that he had anything to do with it, but as he had been a long time with us,
it would cause him to be removed and turned in to Government: he appeared very uneasy
about it altogether, and begged me not to report it; I told him I would certainly report it
to Mr. Dangar, and wrote a letter to that effect; when I had written the letter, I sent my ser-
vant to bring the men down from the hut, to tell them what I stated in the letter; Kilmeister
and Anderson and Burrows came down; I read the letter to Kilmeister,and he appeared to be
very


very uneasy about it, and said »I hope you will not report tins. I hope, for the Lord Jesus
Christ’s saL. you’ll not report this,” and kept on saying that. He said that while I was down
the river, these blacks had been out, and spearing his cattle; he was speaking of the blacks
that were murdered • he did not tell me this at first. W hen I returned, I said to Kilmeis-
ter “ Now you have told me that the blacks l.ad speared the cattle and that there were
some on the run with spears in them; you will go with me and show me those cattle
This was about the 20th of the month. I was out on the run four or five days with K.l-
meister- I saw no signs of the cattle being disturbed; I was not satisfied that he was
tellins me the truth; I told him that I should certainly report it, as he had been telling me
this about the cattle to prevent rov reporting it. At this time I satisfied myself there were
no cattle speared. The prisoner Kilmeister brought the blacks to the station contrary to
mv orders • they conducted themselves quietly; I saw no difference; they were not often-
give in any wav, not the slightest that I saw. I had a good deal of conversation with
Kilmeister at different times as to the cruelty of the murder, and the manner they left their
remains : and Kilmeister said, " That was too bad,” and, “ If you like, I will go and bury
their remains I told him as he had staled he had nothing to do with it, it would do him
a very severe injury in going, to the place where they were, as I was certain there would
'be inquiry into ‘the matter, and it would come out in evidence that he meant to conceal
these remains, to prevent the parties from being brought to justice. He always denied to
me that he bad anything to do with it, and I always thought him innocent until I heard
the evidence of the witnesses, he being so familiar with the blacks; not a day that he
returned from his run that he was not dancing, laughing, joking, and playing with these
.blacks: he used to get the children to dance, and some of the women to sing; I have seen
that several days. On the 15th and 16th June, I asked Kilmeister how he took the blacks
away ; I understood he was present when they left; I told him I understood he had gone
down to Mr. Dight’s station with the men who took the blacks from the station; he said,
« I was looking after my cattle;” he said he did not go with the men; I asked him par-
ticularly, and he said Davy would prove it; Davy was present when he said this ; I tried
every point. He had a brace of pistols, which he carried with my permission ; he never
went out without them; I never went out myself without pistols. I was at Mr. Eaton’s
station on the night after the 20th; I saw James Parry at Eaton’s; I saw him as hut-
keeper; I said to him,* us I was returning from the river, “ I say. Jemmy, this is a bad
job, and I am. very sorry that you are one of the number;” he said, “It is, but I hope
there will be nothing more about itl said, “ I am sure the case will be inquired into,
or investigated.” Mr. Day, the police magistrate, came there in July, or beginning of
August, to investigate this matter; I forwarded my communication to Mr. Day; I have
not settled with Mr. Dangar, but I believe I shall leave his employ in consequence of this
trial. 1 was at the station when Mr, Day went there ; I showed him the place where the
dead bodies had been ; they were not there then ; there were some remains picked up by
Mr. Day; I helped; there were several human bones, ribs; there were small pieces of
skulls; the heads had been removed ; I never went to the place since the day I went with
Mr. Foster, until I went with Mr. Day; I cannot say how they were removed.
Cross-examined by Mr. Foster.
I have been 15 months at that station, the major part of the time, except going for
cattle. Kilmeister always denied having anything to do with it; I tried to find him out in
it; he has no ticket of leave; he was an excellent servant, and found no fault with his
situation; he was afraid he would be turned in to Government. Very seldom Igo out
without being armed ; the fire-arms were there for his personal safety ; I consider it neces-
sary to be prepared with fire-arms to protect myself against the blacks; I would not go out
without; 1 should consider it dangerous to go far back into the interior. He always
denied it; he said the cattle were speared and rushed ; I doubt whether there is a better-
servant in New South Wales; he was always a friendly, humane, quiet man; he did not
appear to be a person who would wantonly attack another. I returned about the 15th June*
Mr. Day took me to show the tracks, and I pointed out the spot; I was there on the even-
ing of 15th and morning of 16th, first with black Davy, and secondly with Forster; I went
first a little before sundown, and the second time a little before eight in the morning*
they were apparently then in the same state; part of the bodies had been removed,
I imagine by native dogs; Forster did not stop long; he had perhaps the same opportunity'
of observing as I had, if he slopped long enough ; 1 did not go nigh the spot the second,
time. Iheie were several bodies with heads off; the large body had the head off, the
thighs and legs had the flesh off, the trunk was whole; the legs and thighs had no flesh,
but on the chest and ribs the flesh was partly on; the frame was whole; I speak of bone,
and flesh. 1 could not tell whether it was a male or female body; the flesh was disfigured.
I was much affected with the stench, it prevented my paying that attention I would other-
wise pay; I was affected all at once. 1 cannot take upon mvself to say whether it was
a female; it was a large frame, whether of a man or woman it was out of the power of any
one to speak to. I could not swear Daddy is not at present in existence.
Re-examined.
I have never seen Daddy since. I never saw a woman in my life with so large a frame’
J.qSrcr B " n a,,y ° f ,he tribe ° r 40 p “ o “ si
526.


Edward Denny Day, Esq., Examined.
I am police magistrate at Muscle Brook. In the latter end of June I went up to
Mr. Danger’s station. Iforwardid the information to the Colonial Secretary, for the
Governor’s information; and I received instructions to proceed to that part of the country
to inquire into the transaction. I went to Mr. Danger’s ; Hobbs accompanied me to a spot;
we examined the spot, and saw that a large fire had been kindled there ;it was 14 yards
in circumference; 1 got there on the 20th July. There were a number of small fragments
of bones ; it appeared as if the place had been swept; the large cinders which would
remain after a large fire had been removed; 1 found some fragments of bodies ; there were
some teeth, the rib of a young child, the jawbone of a human being; I take them to be so
(produces the hones); this is a rib-bone of a child; there are some teeth ; the jaw-bone, the
rib, and the teeth now produced are, I believe, human, I examined a great number of
witnesses in the case, and committed the prisoners. I had a communication with Parry;
it was not taken down; Parry stated that be knew nothing of it, and declined saying any-
thing; they stated nothing. I was out about seven days.
George Anderson, Examined.
lam assigned servant to Mr. Dangar; I was at his station at Myall Creek, as hut-
keeper, for five months, in June. Mr. Hobbs lives there as superintendent; he left home,
to go to the Big River, in the beginning of June; when he left, there were some native
blacks there ; I have said there were 20, but I am sure there were that number, and up-
wards; I would not swear there were not 40. While master was away, some men came on
a Saturday, about 10; I cannot say how many days after master left; they came on horse-
back, armed with muskets and swords and pistols; all were armed; I was at home when
they came, and the stock-keeper; I was sitting with Kilmeister, the stock-keeper, in the
hut; 1 saw' them coming up; they came up galloping, with guns and pistols pointing
towards the hut; I did not attend to what they said; they were talking to Kilmeister
outside. I know Russel, Tolouse, Foley, Johnstone, Hawkins, Kilmeister, Palliser, Lamb,
and Oates; Blake and Parry Ido not know. About 10 came up to the hut, as near as I could
tell; I will not swear Parry Was not of the number, but I did not see him; I never saw
any of them before then, except Kilmeister; I cannot say which came up first; they were
all spread about ; the blacks were all encamped ready for the night; they were not more
than two yards from the hut; this was about an hour and a half before sundown; there
were plenty of women and children amongst them. The blacks, when they saw the men
coming, ran into our hut, and the men then, all of them, got off their horses; and Russel
had a rope, which goes round a horse’s neck, and began to undo it whilst the blacks were
in the hut; while he was undoing it, I asked what they were going to do with the blacks,
and Russel said, “ We are going to take them over the back of the range, to frighten
them.” Russel and some one or two went in; I only took notice of Russel going in
while the blacks were in; I remained outside; one of them remained in; L heard the
crying of the blacks for relief or assistance to me and Kilmeister; they were moaning the
same as a mother and children would cry ; there were small things that could not walk;
there were a good many small boys and girls. After they were tied, I saw Russel bring
the end of the rope out they were tied with, and gave it one of the men on one of the
horses, I cannot say which. The party then went away with the blacks; the man who
took’the rope from Russel went in front, and the oihers behind; all the blacks were tied
together, and this rope tied them all fast; they were tied with their hands; one black
fellow had on a pair of handcuffs; they were all fastened with one rope; it was a tether
rope for horses in a field ; it is a very long rope ; they brought out the whole except two,
that made their escape as the men were coming up; they were two little boys, and they
jumped into the creek close to the hut; there was no water in it; they escaped at a dry
part; one black gin they left with me in the hut; they left her because she was good-
looking ; the}' said so; I forget which; another black gin they left that was with Davy,
another black fellow, who was with me; there was a little child at the back of the hut
when they were tying this party, and when the blacks and party were going away, this
little child, as I thought, was going to follow the party with its mother, but I took hold of
it and put it into the hut, and stopt it from going. 1 had two little boys, the small child,
two gins, and Davy and Billy; they all went away except these; the child was going after
its mother. There was an old man, named Daddy, the oldest of the lot; he was called
Old Daddy ; he was an old, big, tall man; this Daddy and another old man, named Joey,
they never lied along with the rest; they were crying, and did not want to go ; they made
no resistance. Some of the children were not tied, others were; they followed the rest
that were tied ; the small ones, two or three, were not able to walk; the women carried
them on their backs in opposum skins; the small children were not tied that followed the
mob; they were crying, in and out of the hut, till they got out of my hearing. They went
up towards the west from the hut, the road way; Kilmeister got his horse ready, after he
had done talking to them, and just before they were going to start; he went with them
on horseback, and took the pistol with him; he was talking to them five or ten minutes;
I did not take notice what he said; I was frightened ; I did not pay any attention to what
they were talking about. Hall’s Jemmy (Oates) had a pistol. I know. Foley; he had a
pistol


pistol in his hand, standing at the door while the blacks were inside. I did not take any
notice of swords at first; at a distance, when they were galloping up, I saw swords and
pistols. Kilmeister went with (hem when they started; they were not in sight above a minute
or «o after the v went away; about a quarter of an hour, or 20 minutes at the outside, 1 heard
the report of two pieces, one after the other; the reports came from the same direction they
went • the second was quite plain for any one to hear; I only heard two; 1 did not hear
anythin® else but those two. It was just before sundown, next night after, the same men
came ba°ck to the hut where they took the blacks from; they were altogether of a lump,
except Kilmeister..who was left behind; one of the party gave Kilmeister’s saddle off his
horse, and I asked him where Kilmeister was; he came in about 20 minutes after; they
stopt all night. I and Kilmeister slept together in one berth; the rest all slept in the hut;
they were talking; I cannot recollect what they said. Next morning, three of them, after
they had breakfast, took firesticks out of the hut, Russel, Fleming another, and Kil-
meister another; and before they took the firesticks, Fleming told Kilmeister to bring the
leg-rope with him that ropes the cows; Kilmeister asked me for the leg-rope, and I gave
illo him, and they went in the same direction as they took the blacks and that I heard
the two pieces. One of the men was left behind, and all the rest went with those who had
the firesticks; one was left with me as guard, named Foley. While they were away, Foley
and I were in the hut together, and the rest away; during the time they were away,
I asked Foley if any of the blacks had made their escape; he said none, that he saw; he
said all were killed except one black gin. Before the party came back, Foley drew one
of the swords out of the case, and showed it to me; it was all over blood. During that
time Davy and Billy came to the hut; in about an hour the other men came back to the
hut; I saw smoke in the same direction they went; this was soon after they went with
the firesticks; when they came back, I do not recollect what they said ; they got upon
their horses, and Fleming told Kilmeister to gp up by-and-by and put the logs of wood
together, and be sure that all was consumed; Ido not recollect his saying anything; some
of them were in the hut, and must have heard it. Kilmeister, directly after the party went
from the station, went in the same direction and brought back the horse he left behind;
he said in the morning he was going after his horse, down the creek; the smoke was up
from the creek, up the ranges; I never went to the place; I did not like to go; Davy
went* and he came back. Kilmeister was away in the middle of the day; he said the
horse was knocked up, and not able to walk ; I saw him; he could catch him anywhere.
1 saw the smoke pretty well all day ; at the first beginning there was a great smoke ; in
the after part of the day there was not much. . I was there when Mr. Day came; Kil-
meister was at home when the police were coming; in the morning after they went away
a piece of a broken sword was found ; it was a broad piece, all dirty ; I saw no blood on
it; it was in the hut; I gave it to Mr. Hobbs when the police went away from the station;
it did not belong to my station; it came with the party; it looked like a piece of a handle;
ns a guard; I gave it to him one night as he was in bed ; he returned it; this was after
the police went away. When the police came, Kilmeister was at home; he said, “ For
God’s sake, mind what you say, and not to say 1 went with them, but in a quarter of an
hour after themthis was not true; he went with them at the same time. They brought
back no black gin they saved; the gins they left, and the two boys, and the child I sent
away with 10 black fellows that went away in the morning. .Tlie same evening, in the
night, the 10 black fellows came back, which Forster had taken away in the morning, and
1 turned them (five) away along with those 10; it was moonlight; 1 sent them away as I
did not like to keep them, as the men might come back and kill them. ’
Cross-examined.
They came back in the night; I was in bed at the time. I did not ask to have that gin
left behind ; I did not ask for one; it was when they were going away when they undid
one gin for me. They left Davy; he had been there a good while; he was more naturalized
than the others; the others were as quiet as he; 1 did not dream they would take Davy.
.There was a gin left for me; I did not ask them to leave a gin; I did not ask for the giti
they left; I asked for one I had had before; she was a black fellow’s gin. I swear I
staid m the hut after they left; I staid there all night, except I wanted a bit of wood.
Davy slept on the station in the overseer’s hut; I never went to the place after Davy
came. 1 saw smoke in the direction they went; there was no smoke the same day or day
beiore; there was no.bush on fire. I heard the shots distinctly, quite plain. I told Hobbs
they took the blacks away, and I could not help it. Ido not recollect his asking me who
they were; i told him I did not know who they were; I never knew them before.
I never said .1 was sorry I did not make it stronger or worse against Kilmeister; I do not
swear I did not say ato Burrowes. At first I identified only one man before Mr. Day by
j eco '* ect smc e, the night after they came back, who they were byname; I only
identified one or two by name. 1 swore to all the others by their faces, not by their
names. I knew them to be the same men, and only knew the faces of others; the two
names were Russell and Fleming; the rest I knew by face; I knew Russell. I said before
Mr. Day,and I told Hobbs, that 1 did not know them by name; I did notsay that I could not
tell them; I did not swear to all by name. I had two examinations, as I wanted to speak the
whole ot the truth ; I recollected more than I stated at the first examination. I have been
here five years and better; I came for life. I never said this would get me my liberty”
1 neither expect nor hope for my liberty; Ido not ask for anything, only f or protection’
J . 5 ' F Ido


I do not know what made it worse for Kilmeister, as he was as bad as the rest; I forgot
it before. I do not recollect the magistrate saying I should be committed: he said I
might be committed for thinking; I said I did not think I should know them again;
I began to think all that happened ; it was after I began to recollect the whole of what
was said and done that I spoke. I have been punished twice since I have been in the
colony : once for neglect of duty, and the second time for being absent; I was helping a
man with his cattle, to assist him in driving cattle, with his horse and dray. I was never
punished at that station ; I was at New England; I did not deserve it on that occasion.
I was brought from New England to Patrick’s Plains; I was eight days coming down,
and I walked hard there and back. It was for not shifting the sheepfolds every day.
There were two charges against me; one for being away; I was away from the morning
till the afternoon ; I went five or six miles; I got two fifties. I came here for life, for
robbing my master; I was ignorant and'foolish, and misled by different people; lam no
thief. I was guilty of telling another one to do it, and being concerned I was transported.
I was an apprentice; I was never out of streets in my life at nights for five or six years.
Foley was left behind as a guard; they said, let him stop in case the blacks should come.
This was as a guard over the arms left with me; I thought it was done to make me believe
there was danger. I have been frightened by blacks; I saw a black fellow come one
night; he never spoke, but ran away when I spoke; that was not Mr. Hobbs’ station.
I knew Old Joey at the station; he was a stout old man, but not so stout as Daddy
There was King Sandy, and his wife and child; Sandy was taken away, aiyj his wife and
child; Hippeta was the one I wanted ; lam sure Sandy was taken away, Joey and Daddy,
and Tommey; I could name a good many by what they called one another. Those that
went away with the rope they had been there a good while. I did not know the names of
all the men; I knew Daddy, and Joey, and little Charley, and Sandy. King Sandy was
the father of Charley.
Re-examined.
Davy never belonged to the tribe ; he belonged to the Peele; he came with Charley
Neeve, with cattle to the station. The blacks were there when Davy came; Davy was
among Dangar’s people as long as I knew them, backwards and forwards, and other
places. When I told Hobbs I did not know the prisoners, I answered that I did not know
them before. Before Mr. Day examined me Kilmeister was given in custody'; I was then
examined. I did not identify only one by name. I was in bed when I was called, and all
of a tremble. One of the servants came, and called me up; when I saw them all I knew
them by sight; there were two not there ; as soon as I saw them I identified them as the
persons who came to the hut. It was over the arms Foley was left to guard; they left
two swords, pistols, and muskets; I counted myself 15 pistols. The roof of the spout
where the water ran off. the hut was full of pistols. There were two Sandys; King and
the other went down. King Sandy went with Forster, and left two of his gins behind.
John Bates Examined.
I am assigned to Mr. Dight, of Richmond. I was at the Big River, two miles from
Dr, Newton’s ; I was there in the early part of June. I saw a party of men, in the begin-
ning of June, at Dr. Newton’s; there might be 10 or 12 ; they stopped a few minutes;
they asked if there were any blacks there? I told them I did not know; this was a Satur-
day' they came. I knew Lamb amongst Mr. Eaton’s men, and others named James Parry,
Hawkins, Johnstone; some one of them asked if any blacks were there ? I said, no. They
asked if there were any blacks cutting bark ? They were riding up together; they, were
armed, some. I saw pistols; I saw a sword. They were on horseback; I cannot say
whether any of the men I named had arms; I "Said I did not know, and I did not belong
to the place. I called the hut-keeper, and he spoke to them, and they went away. On
the Monday the same party came, about nine in the morning, at Mr. Dight’s station;
they were alighted when I went to the hut; I saw a black gin there, sitting by the fire.
They were not there when I went out; I was only away for a bucket of water, and when
I came back I found the men and a black gin sitting by the fire, the same men I have
already named ; there were arms with them. Hall’s Jemmy and Kilmeister were at our
place on the Monday; some one said they would call for the black woman. They had
breakfast, and stopped about an hour and a half; they made no inquiries. Eaton’s man.
Parry, said they had settled the blacks; but I cannot say what conversation was goingon;
the others were at the hut at this time, Hawkins, Kilmeister, Johnstone, and Lamb; I could
not say it was said in their hearing; no other remark was made that I recollect, lam sure
Parry said that; I cannot tell how the subject came up; it was Monday they came.
Andrew Burrows Examined.
lam assigned to Mr. Henry Dangar. In June I went with cattle to the lower
station, before Mr. Hobbs. When I left a good many blacks were about the house; men,
women, and children. I knew an old black fellow, called Daddy; he was a stout old
man; he was larger than the others; I did not count the women and children. I was five
days going down, two days I stopped, and three days coining back. I went down with
cattle, and came back; I arrived the third day after. When 1 came back I spoke to Kil-
meister; I said to him that ! had heard the blacks were taken away from there, and I told
• - - him


him it was a shame for him; that Mr. Hobbs, the superintendent, would perhaps be angry
about the blacks. He said. “ Mind your own business; I know nothing at all about
them ” He said a lot of men came to take them away, and he knew nothing about them,
what'became of them after. I was Jiving before then at the station with Kilmeister.
I told the police magistrate, as near as I can tell, he said he knew nothing about them,
I had been at Russell’s station going down ; I saw some men there that evening; I stopt
there that night; amongst them was Hawkins. I saw Tolouse, Russell, Foley, Palliser,
a man of Johnstone’s, of colour. I saw. 1 went off before Mr. Hobbs; he came the day
after me It was the third night I slept at Russell’s. They were talking about blacks;
some asked me if the blacks were at our station : I said, “ Yes, they were.” They asked
me how Jong. 1 said they were about four or five weeks; I told a lie ; they were words
first came into my mouth. They said, “ Then they were the men who did the depredations
down the river.” They did not say anything to me about what they wanted. Russell had
a sword, and was fixing some straps to it—sort of leather straps; he was making a sort of
small pouch. Some said they were looking after the blacks that took the cattle away from
some stockman down the river. It was not the same as a policeman’s or soldier’s pouch ; it
would hold ammunition. 1 saw a few other arras ; I saw a few muskets and pistols. They
said they wished Jem Lamb was at home; they did not say what number they expected ;
if I did say, I forget it. They said they expected some men; I might have said more
than 1 remember. When I left Russell’s place I met a man armed; I heard he was
Fleming, at his own hut; I went to his station; it was near in sight of Russell’s; he had
a short coat, and sword, and fowling-piece or musket. 1 called at Russell’s on my way
back ; I only went to the milking-yard; I did not find him at home. 1 came along with
Mr. Hobbs, and he went on before me, and followed Mr. Hobbs. There was a man
named Tolouse at Russell’s. I was never down there before or since. Ido not know the
stations.
Cross-examined.
It was not strange to meet a man armed. Stockmen go about armed ; they always do,
and must. Daddy was a good-sized black; I think there was another old man taller than
him, but not so stout. I know Anderson; he and Kilmeister used to be quarrelling with
each other, at variance. I know one night Anderson was in his bed, he said he was sorry
for one thing he had done. I asked him next morning what he meant; he was sorry he
did not tell the truth. He said if he knew what he did then, he would have made it worse
for him. I cannot exactly say what he said. He said if he had known, he would have
made it worse for him.
Re-examined.
Ido not know what it meant; I was afraid from Mr. Day asking. I thought a man
might be brought into a thing he knew nothing about. It was not in spite. I did not
take particular notice what he said. Anderson was on the bed when he was called up to
be examined by Mr. Day. It was after Kilmeister was taken into custody he said
this; Kilmeister was taken away by the police then.
William Mace Examined.
I am a ticket-of-leave at Mr. Dight’s station ; I was there in June. A party of men
came to my place on the nth June; I saw fire-arms; some on horseback; I was in the
hut. They brought a black gin ; she was left by a man ; a certain person asked to leave
her there. There might be from to to 12; they had breakfast. Kilmeister, Hawkins,
Johnstone, Tolouse, Foley, Blake, Oates, were there ; I saw some arms with them; they
were talking about their horses, and nonsense, and romances, which could gallop best.
People take black gins. It is usual to see men armed; I never saw 10 or 12 before
armed; I saw five or six. 1 knew the men were employed looking after gentlemen’s
property. I have a ticket.
Cross-examined.
Everybody goes armed. People often go in a body after cattle at a distance. I believe
this was Monday. I saw Sandy come down with Mr. Forster before, King Sandy; I am
certain I saw him the day before; he had a plate; I saw him on the Sunday ; 1 am not
positive to a day ; I saw him on the 10th of the month. My place from Dangar’s is 16
miles. lam sure I saw King Sandy on the 10th ; I saw him on the toth at Mr. Forster’s,
Charles Reid Examined.
lam a ticket-of-leave holder; lam employed by Mr. Henry Dangar. In June I took some
bullocks from the Myall Creek to the Big River, to a station, about 60 miles. On my
way down 1 slept at Russell’s ; I believe it was a Thursday, early in June; I slept there on
the third day after leaving Dangar’s ; I saw Palliser and Hawkins, Foley and Tolouse;
Burrows was assisting me with the cattle. It was nearly sundown. They asked if there
were any blacks towards our place; we told them there were; they said, they could not
be the blacks that did the depredations down the river. I saw a musket and sword.
I saw Russell sewing a buckle on a strap; I saw a pouch there; he had it on a table; they
526. F 2 did


did not say what they had been doing; I think they said they were down the river; that the
blacks had been rushing cattle, and they did not see none. I knew the men were from
different stations. It was such a poucli as stockmen use for ammunition. I was once
before at Russell’s, but not with Burrows. I did not return from the lower station. On
my return, I met Fleming; he was alone; as soon as he got his horse and breakfast we
went off; we left these men in the hut, or about the place.
Mr. Hobbs called again.
■ I recollect sending Burrows and Reid from upper to lower station on the sth June,
Tuesday; the distance is from 60 to 70 miles; Russell’s is 40 miles from upper station;
1 think Thursday, 7th ; I saw the skulls on the evening of the 15th June.
Cross-examined.
I did not go with them; they had bullhcks; I saw them start; the cattle were not very
tame.
Mr. Ambrose Foss Examined.
lam a dentist in Sydney. This jaw-bone is of a human being; there are two teeth in
it; these pieces are pieces of human teeth ; they appear to have been burnt all ;*I am not
a surgeon; I conclude the rib is a human rib.
Cross-examined.
That little one is not the bone of a man, but of an adult; it is a rib bone, I should
conceive.
The case for the Crown being here closed, the counsel for the prisoners contended that
there was no case to go to the jury. First, There is no proof tnat the body of a black
man, named Daddy, lias been found; and, for anything that appears to the contrary, he
is still alive. Secondly, There is no identification of any one black man, name unknown,
to satisfy the counts in which the name is omitted. Third, Tnere is-no proof to satisfy
any of the counts as to the manner of the death either of Daddy or of a black man
unknown. *
By the Judge-
First, It is for the jury to determine whether, under all the circumstances, the bulky
remains of a human being found at the fire did not belong to the man Daddy, who was
proved to have been taken from the hut by the prisoners, and never afterwards seen
alive.
Secondly, If the jury are not satisfied of this, .then they will have to determine whether
one of the bodies found was not the body of one of the other male black men taken away
by the prisoners.
Third, The manner of the death is necessarily laid in different ways to meet the evidence,
and it is for the jury to collect from the circumstances to what mode of death the evidence
was applicable. There is certainly no evidence from which the jury can collect that the
deceased was burned alive. The case must go to the jury.
The prisoners being called upon, said nothing in their defence, but called the following
witnesses:
Henry Dangar, Esq., Examined.
I live at St. Patrick’s Plains ; Kilmeister has been my servant since 1834 5 bis character
is very good ;he was a trustworthy and obedient servant. Anderson is also my servant;
I would not believe him on his oath; he has been addicted to telling lies, and on the most
trifling occasion; I have not been able to place the least belief in him.
Cross-examined.
Anderson has been in my employment since 1833; for two years he was under my im-
mediate, control—the first two; for the last two years he has been under Mr. Hobbs ;he
has been punished for leaving his charge of sheep at the shearing time; he had charge,
and left the flock ;he went away for two or three days together; this was at the branch
station; he was brought to Patrick’s Plains bench; 1 prosecuted him; I knew he was
absent; I visited my station sometimes; it was more convenient for me to wait before I
had him punished, as there was but one court-day at Invermein; I do not recollect it
was reported to me that Kilmeister was absent from his station. Hobbs neither pleases or
displeases me; he is leaving; his term is expiring; it was not in consequence of this case
that I said I should part with him; this had not hurried the termination of our agreement;
I saw the place where the fire had been made; Hobbs pointed out where he saw the dead
bodies ; I understood that Kilmeister had joined the party ; I did not see a part of a sword
left. I have found Anderson unruly and troublesome, more than any man I had before;
he is distant from justice, and I have not been able to have him punished. He has dis-
obeyed orders, and told falsehoods, telling me he had been at one place when he was at
another; the instances have been various. He has been troublesome, and addicted to
lying; in the last instance, he told me he had gone in search of lost sheep; that was his
defence,


defence, to excuse himself. On another occasion I senthim with a cart, and he said he
lost the beast, and got away, &c. I found he had gone to a-neighbouring station. I did
not see any dead bodies. lam a subscriber to the.defending of these men.. One is one of s
my servants.
John Cobb Examined.
I reside at Maitland ; I know Lamb; he has been in my employ for two years; he has
conducted himself with propriety, as far as 1 know; I consider him a quiet, peaceable, in-
offensive man.
Thomas Simpson llall Examined.
I know Oates; he was under ray superintendent for three years; his character stood as
high as any men I ever had under him; he is a steady, correct man.
Cross-examined.
I live at Invermein; I superintend three stations beyond the boundaries; I have the
superintendence of two farms on the Hunter, and I superintend five stations; they are
200 miles apart. Oates was without an overseer at this time; he was on this station, near
the Big River, upwards of 150 miles away.
George Bowman Examined.
I am a farmer and grazier at Richmond; Johnstone was my servant for five years and
a half; the last four years and a half I found him a good man; I always found him steady;
whenever I sent away cattle or sheep he used to take them.
Cross-examined.
He is free by servitude two years; he has been in Mr. Cox’s service. I know nothing
of him for the last two years.
Charles Joliffe Examined.
lam superintendent for Messrs. Bell. I know Russell and Palliser; they were under
my charge for two years last February. Russell was a most active man, and I never found
any fault with him ; he is a good servant; I never wished a better; he is a quiet, well-
disposed man. Palliser bears the same character; he is a quiet, well-disposed man.
Cross-examined.
I live within 15 miles of Palliser; I was in Sydney at the time of the transaction.
Here the case closed on both sides.
The Chief Justice recapitulated the whole of the evidence for the jury.
The jury found all the prisoners Not Guilty.
At the prayer of Mr. Attorney-general, the prisoners were remanded for trial on another
charge.
Sydney, 14 December 1838.
James Dowling, C. J.
Enclosure 2, in No. 8.
Sir, Sydney, 13 December 1838.
In compliance with your Excellency’s request, conveyed to me by letter of the Assist-
ant Colonial Secretary, dated the Bth instant, that I would furnish a report of the pro-
ceedings had before me in the case of Kilmeister and others for the murder of certain
aboriginal natives, on their plea of autrefois acquit,
1 have the honour to state, that on the 27th of November last, Charles Kilmeister, James
Oates, Edward Foley, James Parry, John Russell, William Hawkins, and John Johnstone,
were arraigned before me on an information filed by Her Majesty’s Attorney-general, con-
taining 20 counts.
In the first of which it was charged, “ that some person, to the Attorney-general un-
known, Bcc., on the 9th day of June, in the year of Our Lord 1838, with force and arms,
at a certain place near Dangar’s Myall Creek station, in the colony aforesaid, in and upon
a certain aboriginal black child, whose name to the said Attorney-general is unknown, in
the peace, Sic., then and there being, then and there feloniously, wilfully, and of his malice
aforethought, did make an assault; and that the said person, to the said Attorney-general
unknown as aforesaid, a certain pistol, of the value of 5 s,, then and there charged with
gunpowder and other destructive materials, which said pistol the said person to the said
Attorney-general unknown as aforesaid, in his right hand then and there had and held,
then and there feloniously, wilfully, and of his malice aforethought, did discharge and shoot
off, to, against, and upon the said aboriginal black child, whose name to the said Attorney-
-526. r 3 • general


general is unknown as aforesaid, with the destructive materials aforesaid, out of the pistol
aforesaid, and there, by force of the gunpowder aforesaid, by the said person to the said
Attorney-general unknown as aforesaid, discharged and shot off as aforesaid, then and
there feloniously, wilfully, and of his malice aforethought, did strike, penetrate, and wound,
giving to the said aboriginal black child, whose name to,the Attorney-general is unknown
as aforesaid, then and there with the destructive materials aforesaid, so as aforesaid dis-
charged and shot out of the pistol aforesaid, by force of the gunpowder aforesaid, by the
said person to the said Attorney-general unknown as aforesaid, in and upon the body of
said aboriginal black child, whose name to the said Attorney-general is unknown as afore-
said, one mortal wound of the depth of four inches, and of the breadth of half an inch,
of which said mortal wound the said aboriginal black child, whose name to the said
Attorney-general is unknown as aforesaid, then and there instantly died.”
And charges that the prisoners “at the time of the committing of the felony and
murder aforesaid, to wit, on the day and year last aforesaid, with force and arms, at the
place near Dangar’s Myall Creek station aforesaid, in the colony aforesaid, feloniously,
wilfully, and,of their malice aforethought, were present aiding, helping, abetting, comfort-
ing, assisting, and maintaining the said person, to him the said Attorney-general unknown
as aforesaid, the said aboriginal black child, whose name to the said Attorney-general is
unknown as aforesaid, to kill and murder, in manner and form aforesaid.”
And also charged “that the said person, to the said Attorney-general unknown as afore-
said, and the prisoners, then and there feloniously, wilfully, and of their malice afore-
thought, the said aboriginal black child, whose name to the said Attorney-general-is
unknown as aforesaid, in manner and form aforesaid did kill and murder, against the
peace,” &c.
The second count charges the prisoners, together with other persons unknown, with
having assaulted an aboriginal black child.
Charged James Oates with murder, as principal in the first degree, laying the mode of
killing in the same way as in the first count; and charged the other prisoners, with persons
unknown, as being present, aiding, helping, abetting, Bcc., as in the first count.
The third count was the same as the first, only laying the mode of killing to have been
by a sword.
The fourth count charged one of the prisoners, Edward Foley, as principal in the first
degree, laying the mode of killing to have been by a sword ; and charged the other
prisoners as being present aiding, helping, abetting, &c.
The fifth count charged all the prisoners with the murder, and laid the mode of killing
to have been by kicking, beating, and burning.
The sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, and tenth counts were the same as the first, second,
third, fourth, and fifth respectively, only stating the person killed as an aboriginal male
child.
The eleventh, twelfth, thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth counts were the same as the
first five respectively, only stating the person killed as an aboriginal female child.
The sixteenth, seventeenth, eighteenth, nineteenth, and twentieth, were the same as the
first five respectively, only stating the person killed by the name of Charlie.
To the first five counts of this information the prisoners filed a demurrer, assigning the
following cause;
“ Inasmuch as there is not sufficient certainty in the description of the said aboriginal
black child, named in the said first, second, third, fourth, and fifth counts.”
And as to the said sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, and tenth counts of the said informa-
tion, the prisoners pleaded, “ That heretofore, to wit, on the ist day of November, in the
year of our Lord 1838, at the criminal sittings of the Supreme Court, holden at Sydney,
in the colony of New South Wales, John Herbert Plunkett, Esq., Her Majesty’s Attorney-
general for the said colony, informed the said court, that some person to the said Attorney-
general unknown, not having the fear of God before his eyes, but being moved and
seduced by the instigation of the devil, on the 9th day of June in the year of our Lord
1838,. with force and arms, at a certain place near Hangar’s Myall Creek station, in the
said colony.of New South Wales, in and upon a certain male aboriginal black child,
whose name to the said Attorney-general was unknown, in the peace of God and of our
Lady the Queen, then and there being, then and there feloniously, wilfully, and of his
malice aforethought, did make an assault; and that the said person to the said Attorney-
general unknown as aforesaid, a certain pistol, of the value of 55., then and there charged
with gunpowder and other destructive materials, which said pistol the said person to the
said Attorney-general unknown as aforesaid, in his right hand then and there had and held,
then and there feloniously, wilfully, and of his malice aforethought, did discharge and shoot
off, to, against and upon the said male aboriginal' black child, whose name to the said
Attorney-general was unknown as aforesaid; and that the said person to the said Attorney;-
general unknown as aforesaid, with the destructive materials aforesaid, out of the pistol
aforesaid, then and there by the force of the gunpowder aforesaid, by the said person to
the said Attorney-general unknown as aforesaid, discharged and shot off as aforesaid, then
and there feloniously, wilfully, and of his malice aforethought, did strike, penetrate, and
wound the said male aboriginal black, whose name to the said Attorney-general was
unknown


unknown as aforesaid, in and upon the body of him the said male aboriginal black, whose
name to the said Attorney-general was unknown as aforesaid, giving to him the said last-
mentioned male aboriginal black then and there with the destructive materials aforesaid;
so as aforesaid discharged and shot out of the pistol aforesaid, by force of the gunpowder
aforesaid, by the same person to the said Attorney-general unknown as aforesaid, in and
upon the body of him the said male aboriginal black, whose name to the said Attorney-general
was unknown as aforesaid, one mortal wound of the depth of four inches, and of the
breadth of half an inch, of which said mortal wound the said lastmentioned male aboriginal
black then and there instantly died. And the said Attorney-general further informed the
said court, that the said Charles Kilmeister, then and there and thereby described as
Charles Kilmeister of Invermein, in the colony aforesaid, labourer; the said William
Hawkins, then and there and thereby described as William Hawkins, late also of the same
place, labourer; the said John Johnstone, then and there and thereby described as John
Johnstone, late also of the same place, labourer; the said Edward Foley, then and there
and thereby described as Edward Foley, late also of the same place, labourer; the said
James Oates, then and there and thereby described as James Oates, late also of the same
place, labourer; the said James Parry, then and there and thereby described as James
Parry, late also of the same place ; labourer, and the said John Russell, then and there and
thereby described as late also of the same place, labourer, afterwards, to wit, at the time of
the committing of the felony and murder aforesaid, to wit, upon the day and year last
aforesaid, with force and arms, at the place last aforesaid, in the colony aforesaid,
feloniously, wilfully, and of their malice aforethought, were present, aiding, helping,
abetting, comforting, assisting, and maintaining the said person, to the said Attorney-
general unknown as aforesaid, to kill and murder the said male aboriginal black, whose
name to the said Attorney-general was unknown as aforesaid ; and so the said Attorney-
general said, that the said person to the said Attorney-general unknown as aforesaid, and
the said Charles Kilmeister, William Hawkins, John Johnstone, Edward Foley, James
Oates, James Parry, and John Russell, then and there feloniously, wilfully, and of their
malice aforethought, in manner and form aforesaid, did kill and murder the said male
aboriginal black, whose name to the said Attorney-general was unknown as aforesaid,
against the peace of our said Lady the Queen, her Crown and dignity. And the said
Attorney-general further informed the said court, that the said Charles 'Kilmeister, William'
Hawkins, John Johnstone, Edward Foley, James Oates, James Parry, and John Russell,
and divers other evil-disposed persons, whose names to the said Attorney-general were
then unknown, not having the fear of God before their eyes, but being moved and seduced ;
by the instigation of the devil, on the day and year last aforesaid, with force and rm, kt
the place last aforesaid, in the colony aforesaid, in and upon a certain male aboriginal
black, whose name to the said Attorney-general was then unknown, in the peace of God
and of our said Lady the Queen, then and there being, then and there feloniously, wilfully,
and of their malice aforethought, did make an assault; and that the said James Oates a
certain pistol, of the value of 5 s., which he the said James Oates in his right hand then and
there had and held, then and there feloniously, wilfully, and of his malice aforethought,
did shoot off and discharge to, against, and upon him the said male aboriginal black, whose
name to the said Attorney-general was then unknown as aforesaid, and that the said James
Oates, with the destructive materials aforesaid, out of the pistol aforesaid, then and there
by force of the gunpowder aforesaid, by the said James Oates then discharged and sent
forth as aforesaid, then and there feloniously, wilfully, and of his malice aforethought,
did strike, penetrate, and wound the said male aboriginal black, whose name to the said
Attorney-general was then unknown as aforesaid, in and upon the body of him the said
last-mentioned male aboriginal black, giving to the said male aboriginal black then and
there with the destructive materials as aforesaid, so as aforesaid by him, the said James
Oates, shot, discharged, and sent out of the pistol aforesaid, by force of the gunpowder
aforesaid, in and upon the body of him the said male aboriginal black, whose name to the
said Attorney-general was then unknown as aforesaid, one mortal wound of the depth of
four inches, and of the breadth of half an inch, of which said mortal wound the said last-
mentioned male aboriginal black then and there instantly died. And that the said
Charles Kilmeister, William Hawkins, John Johnstone, Edward Foley, James Oates, James
Parry, and John Russell, at the time of the committing of the felony and murder
aforesaid, then and there feloniously, wilfully, and of their malice aforethought, were
present aiding, helping, abetting, comforting, assisting, and maintaining the said James
Oates to kill and murder the said male aboriginal black, whose name to the said Attorney-
general was unknown as aforesaid, in manner and form last aforesaid. And so the said
Attorney-general said that the said James Oates, Charles Kilmeister, William Hawkins,
John Johnstone, Edward Foley, James Parry, and John Russell, then and there feloniously-
wilfully, and of their malice aforethought, in manner and form last aforesaid, the said male ;
aboriginal black, whose name to the said Attorney-general was then unknown as aforesaid,-
did kill and murder, against the peace of our Lady the Queen, her Crown and dignity.
And the said Attorney-general further informed the said court, that some person, to the
said Attorney-general unknown as aforesaid, not having the fear of God before his eyes,
but being moved and seduced by the instigation of the devil, on the day and year last
aforesaid, with force and arms, at the place last aforesaid, in the colony aforesaid, in and
upon a certain male aboriginal black, whose name to the said Attorney-general was then
unknown as aforesaid, in the peace of God and our Lady the Queen, then and there being, >
then and there feloniously, wilfully, and of his malice aforethought, did make an assault,
■ 526. f 4 and


and that the said person to the said Attorney-general unknown as aforesaid, with a certain
drawn sword, made of iron and steel, of the value of s s„ which he, the said person to the
said Attorney-general unknown as aforesaid, in his right hand then and there had and
held, him the said male aboriginal black, whose name to the said Attorney-general was
unknown as aforesaid, then and there feloniously, wilfully, and of his malice aforethought,
did strike, stab, cut, penetrate, and wound, giving to him the said last-mentioned male
aboriginal black one mortal wound on the head of him the said last-mentioned male
aboriginal black, of the length of four inches, and of the depth of one inch; one other
wound on the neck of him the said last-mentioned male aboriginal black of the length of
six inches, and of the depth of three inches; and one other mortal wound on the belly of
him the said last-mentioned male aboriginal black of the breadth of one inch, and of the
depth of nine inches, of which said mortal wounds the said last-mentioned male aboriginal
black then and there instantly died. And the said Attorney-general further informed the
said court, that the said Charles Kilmeister, William Hawkins, John Johnstone, Edward
Foley, James Oates, James Parry, and John Russell, afterwards, to wit at the time of the
committing of the felony and murder aforesaid, to wit on the day and year last aforesaid,
with force and arms, at the place last aforesaid, in the colony aforesaid, feloniously, wilfully,
and of their malice aforethought, were present aiding, helping, abetting, comforting,
assisting, and maintaining the said person to the said Attorney-general unknown as
aforesaid, to kill and murder the last-mentioned male aboriginal black as aforesaid. And
so the said Attorney-general said that the said person to the said Attorney-general unknown
as ; aforesaid, and: the said Charles Kilmeister, William Hawkins, Johtf**Johnstone,
Edward Foley, James Oates, James Parry, and John Russell, then and there feloniously,
wilfully, and of their malice aforethought, the said last-mentioned male aboriginal black,
in manner and form last aforesaid, did kill and murder, against the peace of our Lady the
Queen, her Crown and dignity. And the said Attorney-general further informed the court,
that the said Charles Kilmeister, William Hawkins, John Johnstone, Edward Foley,
James Oates, James Parry, and John Russell, and divers other evil-disposed persons,
whose names to the said Attorney-general were then unknown, not having the fear of God-
before their eyes, but being moved and seduced by the instigation of the devil, to wit, on
the day and year last aforesaid, with force and arms, at the place last aforesaid, in and
upon the said male aboriginal black, whose name to the said Attorney-general was then
unknown as aforesaid, made an assault, and that the said Edward Foley, with a certain
drawn sword made of iron and steel, of the value of 55., which the said Edward Foley in
his right hand then and there had and held, him the said last-mentioned male aboriginal
black then and there feloniously, wilfully, and of his malice aforethought, did strike, stab,
cut, and penetrate and wound, giving to him the said male aboriginal black one mortal
wound on the head of him the said last-mentioned male aboriginal black of the length of
four inches, and of the depth of one inch; one other mortal wound on the neck of him the
last-mentioned male aboriginal black of the length of six inches, and of the depth of three
inches; and one other mortal wound on the belly of him the said last-mentioned male
aboriginal black of the breadth of one inch and of the depth of nine inches, of which said
mortal wounds the said last-mentioned male aboriginal black then and there instantly died.
And the said Charles Kilmeister, William Hawkins, John Johnstone, James Oates, James
Parry, and John Russell, and the said other persons whose names to the said Attorney-
general were then unknown as aforesaid at the time of the committing the felony and
murder last aforesaid, then and there, to wit, on the day and year last aforesaid, with force
and arms, at the place last aforesaid, feloniously, wilfully, and of their malice aforethought,
were present helping, aiding and abetting, comforting, and maintaining the said Edward
Foley to kill and murder the said last-mentioned male aboriginal black, in manner and form
last aforesaid. And so the said Attorney-general said that the said Charles Kilmeister,
Edward Foley, William Hawkins, John Johnstone/James Oates, James Parry, and John
Russell,and the said other persons to the said Attorney-general then unknown as aforesaid,
then and there feloniously, wilfully,and of their malice aforethought, the said last-mentioned
male aboriginal black, in manner and form last aforesaid, did kill and murder, against the
peace of our said Lady the Queen, her Crown and dignity. And the said Attorney-general
further informed the court, that the said Charles Kilmeister, John Johnstone, William
Hawkins, Edward Foley, James Oates, James Parry, and John Russell, and divers other
evil-disposed persons, whose names to the said Attorney-general were then unknown, not
having the fear of God before their eyes, but being moved and seduced by the instigation
of the devil, on the day and year last aforesaid, with force and arms, at the place last afore-
said, in the colony aforesaid, in and upon a certain male aboriginal black, whose name to
the said Attorney-general was then unknown, in the peace of God and of our said Lady
the Queen, then and there being, then and there feloniously, wilfully, and of their malice
aforethought, did make an assault, and that the said Charles Kilmeister, William Hawkins,
John Johnstone, Edward Foley, James Oates, James Parry, and John Russell, and divers
other evil-disposed persons, whose names to the said Attorney-general were then unknown,
then and there feloniously, wilfully, and of their malice aforethought, did strike, beat, and
kick the said male aboriginal black, whose name to the said Attorney-general was then
unknown as aforesaid, and did then and there feloniously, wilfully, and of their malice
aforethought, cast, throw, and push the said last-mentioned male aboriginal black into
and amongst certain burning wood, timber, trees, and Jogs, and did then and there feloni-
ously, wilfully, and of their malice aforethought, cast and throw the said last-mentioned
male aboriginal black into a certain fire there, and did compel and force the said last-
mentioned


mentioned male aboriginal black to remain and be in tbe said fire; and by means of such
casting and throwing and pushing of the said last-mentioned male aboriginal black into
and amongst the said burning wood, timber, trees, and logs, and of such casting and
throwing the said last-mentioned male aboriginal black into the said fire, and compelling
and forcing the said last-mentioned male aboriginal black to remain and be in the fire
aforesaid, the said last-mentioned male aboriginal black then and there died. And so the
said Attorney-general said that the said Charles Kilmeister, William Hpwkins, John John-
stone, Edward Foley, James Oates, James Parry, and John Russell, and the said other
evil-disposed persons whose names to the said Attorney-general were then unknown as
aforesaid, then and there feloniously, wilfully, and of their malice aforethought, the said
male aboriginal black, whose name to the said Attorney-general was unknown as aforesaid,
did kill and murder, in manner and form last aforesaid, against the peace of our Lady the
Queen, her Crown and dignity.”
And the said Charles Kilmeister, William Hawkins, John Johnstone, Edward Foley,
James Oates, James Parry, and John Russell, say that they were tried on the 15th day
of November 1838, of the said felonies and murders, and in due manner of law acquitted
of the premises in and by the said information above specified and charged upon them,
as by the record thereof more fully and at large appears, which said judgment still
remains in full force and effect, and not in the least reversed or made void. And the said
Charles Kilmeister, William Hawkins, John, Johnstone, Edward Foley, James Oates,
James Parry, and John Russell, in fact, say that the said Charles Kilmeister, William
Hawkins, John Johnstone, Edward Foley, James Oates, James Parry, and John Russell,
and the said Charles Kilmeister, William Hawkins, John Johnston, Edward Foley,
James Oates, James Parry, and John Russell, so informed against by the said Attorney-
general, and acquitted at last as aforesaid, are one and the same persons, and not other
and different persons; and that the felonies and murders of which the said Attorney-general
so laid information against them the said Charles Kilmeister, William Hawkins, John
Johnstone, Edward Foley, James Oates, James Parry, and John Russell, and of which
they were so acquitted as aforesaid, and the felonies of which the said Attorney-general
now. lays information against them in the said sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, and tenth
counts of the said information, are one and the same, and not other and different felonies
and murders ; and this they the said Charles Kilmeister, William Hawkins, John Johnstone,
Edward Foley, James Oates, James Parry, and John Russell, are ready to verify, wherefore
they pray judgment, &c. And as to the felonies and murders of which information is laid
against them the said Charles Kilmeister, William Hawkins, John Johnstone, Edward
Foley, James Oates, James Parry, and John Russell, in the said nth, 12th, 13th,
14th, 15th, 16th, 17th, 18th, 19th, and 20th counts of the said information now filed
against them, the said Charles Kilmeister, William Hawkins, John Johnstone, James Oates,
James Parry, Edward Foley, and John Russell, say that they are not guilty thereof; and
of this they the said Charles Kilmeister, William Hawkins, John Johnstone, Edward Foley,
James Oates, James Parry, and John Russell, put themselves upon their country, &c.
The Attorney-general joined in the demurrer, and took issue on the plea of autrefois
acquit thus pleaded ore tenus.
The judgment of the court on the demurrer was for the Crown (overruling the prisoners’
objection as to those counts to which it referred), and that the prisoners should answer over,
as they then pleaded not guilty to them.
A juror was returned instanter, and sworn to try the issue taken on the plea of autrefois
acquit.
The evidence given upon that issue is annexed hereto; and the charge which I delivered
to the jury thereon was briefly whether the prisoners had been previously tried for and
acquitted of the same offence as that to which their plea applied, which I explained to be
the murder of an aboriginal male child.
The jury returned a verdict for the Crown, negativing the prisoners’ plea “ that the
felonies and murders of which the Attorney-general so laid information against them (the
prisoners as aforesaid), and of which they were so acquitted as aforesaid, and the felonies
of which the Attorney-general then laid information against them in the sixth, seventh,
eighth, ninth, and tenth counts of the said information, were one and the same, and not
other and different felonies and murders.”
The judgment of the court, in consequence of this verdict, was, that the prisoners
should answer over, and they severally pleaded accordingly “ not guilty” to those counts to
which their plea of autrefois acquit had applied.
The trial then proceeded upon the issue, guilty or not guilty, and the result of that
trial was that the prisoners were all convicted upon the first five counts of the information
only, which charged them with the murder of an aboriginal male black child, name
unknown, and to which their demurrer had applied, and acquitted upon all the other
counts of the information, including of course those counts to which they had confine
their plea of autrefois acquit.
It only remains for me to state that the circumstances of the prisoners’ plea of autrefois
acquit, and the verdict thereon and their conviction, as above stated, were afterwards
brought by me under the consideration of the other judges, Chief Justice Howling and
Mr. Justice Willis, both of whom concurred with me in opinion that the former acquittal
of the prisoners afforded no ground of objection to their subsequent conviction; and the
Chief Justice stated that the prisoners had not in fact been tried before him for the murder
526. G of


of a child, but that he applied the evidence entirely to the case of one of the blacks named
Daddy, or a black adult, name unknown, although the same circumstances were neces-'
sarily in evidence upon both occasions, the transaction having occurred at one and the
same time.
I have, &c.
To his Excellency the Governor, (signed) W. W. Burton.
&c. &c. &c.
Notes of Evidence taken in the Trial, before Mr. Justice Burton, of the Issue joined in
the case of The Queen versus Charles Kilmeister and Others, on the Plea of Autrefois
Acquit.
Mr. Gurner, Chief Clerk, Supreme Court.
I produce the record on an information for murder against Charles Kilmeister, William
Hawkins, John Johnstone, Charles Toulouse, James Lamb, Edward Foley, James Oates,
James Parry, George Pallister, John Russell, and John Blake.
They pleaded severally not guilty.
Tried 15th November 1838, before his Honor the Chief Justice and a civil jury, and all
found not guilty.
Record read. It was here admitted by the Attorney-general that the prisoners*are part
of the persons who were tried and acquitted on that information.
Mr. Edward Dormer O'Reilly, Attorney for the Prisoners.
I recollect their being tried on the 15th November last (10 or 12 days past); the witnesses
on that occasion were ordered out of court. I heard the opening speech of the Attorney-
general ; he said that several persons were killed on the same day, and at the same place,
men, women, and children; bones were produced on that occasion, and a question was
asked; I understood Mr. Day to call one the rib of a child. Mr. Foster afterwards
examined upon the same point; it was elicited in the evidence, by a witness named Hobbs,
that seven or eight and twenty persons were killed.
Cross-examined by the Attorney-general.
It came out in evidence that bones of children were found; that bodies were found,
whether male or female not known, and some known to be males. I do not think that the
evidence was confined to the man named Daddy. Evidence came out that men, women,
and children were murdered ; I think the circumstances embrace them all, men, women,
and children, all killed under one and the same state of circumstances. I recollect that it
was objected, that it was not certain if a man named Daddy was killed; attention was
called to the circumstance of a head with a beard being found; by the evidence, as it
appeared to me, there had been men, women, and children murdered ; the bones produced
by the magistrate he stated were all he found, a rib, some teeth, a jaw-bone.
Mr. Charles Kemp.
I was present at the trial of the prisoners on the former occasion; I remember counsel
taking an objection to the sufficiency of the evidence ; no proof of the identity of Daddy;
that a large body found was Daddy, or even a male.
The Chief Justice said, I must leave the case to the jury.
The Attorney-general observed that there were heads with beards on, and that
Chief Justice turned back to his notes, and remarked that Foley had said they were all
killed, except one woman.
By Therry.
It was contended that there was no proof that Daddy was killed, or a male; the
objection was confined to the fact of Daddy being killed, or a male; the evidence went to
all the blacks being taken away; Daddy was the great strength of the case.
By the Court.
Daddy was described as an old man, very large; the largest man seen.
By A’ Beckett.
The Chief Justice told the jury that if they were satisfied that a male black was
murdered, then the information in point of law was sustained.
By Therry,
I understood the Chief Justice alluded to Daddy particularly; and whether also any
male black was killed. No proof of any particular male black being killed was alluded to,
except with beards upon them,
(signed) W. W. Burton.


Enclosure 3, in No. 8.
Extracts from Minutes, No. 49 and No. 51, of the year 1838, of the Proceedings of the
Executive Council, dated 7th December and 14th December 1838 respectively, relative
to the cases of Seven Men under Sentence of Death, for the Wilful Murder of an Abori-
ginal Child.
Extract from Minute No. 49.
Present:—His Excellency the Governor, the Honourable Major-general Sir Maurice
Charles O’Connell, k.c.h., the Honourable the Colonial Secretary, the Honourable the
Colonial Treasurer.
His Excellency the Governor laid before the Council the report of Mr. Justice Burton
on the cases of the under-mentioned seven prisoners, convicted before him, at the late
criminal sessions of the Supreme Court, of the wilful murder of an aboriginal child, and
sentenced to suffer death, viz., Charles Kilcfleister, James Oates, Edward Foley, James
Parry, John Russell, William Hawkins, and John Johnston.
His Honor being introduced, explained the circumstances attending the cases above-
mentioned.
The Council, after an attentive and mature consideration of the same, unanimously
advised that the sentence of the law should take its course.
Extract from Minute No. 51.
Present as on the former occasion.
The Council having met pursuant to summons, his Excellency the Governor, with refe-
rence to the proceedings on the 7th instant, and the advice then given by the Council that
the sentence of the law should be allowed to take its course upon the seven men then under
sentence of death for the wilful murder of an aboriginal child, now laid before the
Council,
Petitions addressed to his Excellency for the extension of mercy towards those men;
first, from eleven of the jurors who had tried and acquitted those individuals on a charge
of murder of one or more aborigines; second, from ten of the jurors who had tried the
same persons and found them, guilty of the crime for which they were now to suffer; and
third, by a considerable number of the inhabitants of Sydney, Parramatta, and Windsor.
The Council having fully considered the petitions now laid before them, see no reason to
doubt that full justice was done to the unhappy prisoners in their trial at which they were
found guilty ; and, consequently, that there is no reason for altering the decision at which
the Council have previously arrived, namely, that the sentence of the law should be allowed
to take its course.
(A true Extract.)
William Macpherson,
Clerk of Councils.
Sydney, 14 January 1839.
Extract from Enclosure A. 1, to Minute No, 49, of 1838.
Charles Kilmeisler, James Oates, Edward Foley, James Parry, John Russell, William
Hawkins, and John Johnston.
Murder—Sentence of death passed.
The prisoners were convicted of the murder of a black aboriginal child, name unknown,
at Dangar’s Myall Creek station, on the 9th of June 1838, under the circumstances stated
in the following evidence by
George Anderson, an assigned servant to Mr. Dangar, who stated, “ I was in his employ-
ment at the Myall Creek in the month of June, and since April; Mr. Hobbs was super-
intendent; .1 remember his leaving the station to go to the Big River; Reed and Bur-
roughes went before him ; I can’t say how many days—not many ; there were a number of
blacks there; I never counted them; I know there were upwards of 20; they stopped there
about three weeks before they were taken away, as near as I can recollect; there were
two old men, Joey and Daddy ; two young men, Tommy and Sandy by name; two whose
names I don’t know ; there were a good many women and children. About ten men,
armed and mounted, came there; I did not count them. I recollect Mr. Foster coming
there; he went away in the morning with 10 blacks, and those men came in the evening,
about an hour and a half before sundown ; they galloped up together, with swords anil
pistols ; the blacks were all sitting down by their fire, about two yards from the back of
the hut, encamped for the night, having a lot of wood collected ; the men dismounted.
Kilmcister was there when they came; I cannot say if Parry was there; I recollect the
others quite well. Russell had a tether rope in his hand, used to tether a horse at night to
526. H feed;


feed ; he went into the hut where the blacks had run as soon as they saw the party ride
up. They desired me to fetch a drink of milk, and I did so; I can’t say I knew any of
the men before; two of the blacks made their escape, boys eight or nine years old; they
ran into the creek. When I returned with the milk, I found the blacks tied by the hands
to the rope ; I saw a pair of handcuffs on one of those blacks (Tommy); one of the horse-
men outside took the rope from Russell when they brought the blacks out. They were all
crying in the hut whilst they were tying them, men, women, and children ; they were led
off, the horsemen with them, some before and some behind; some of the children walked ;
I remember little Charlie amongst them; no one prevented his going; he went into the
hut along with them, and came out with them. They were all taken away except Davy
and his brother, and two black gins, and a little black boy; he was at the back of the hut
as they went away, and followed them ; I took hold of him and put him back again into
the hut ; one of them; I don’t know which, said, “ this little gin is a good-looking gin,
and we won’t fake her, but leave her with you,” meaning me; as to the other gin, they
said, they would leave Davy a black gin; they \vent up the roadway towards the sun
going down. Kilmeister had been out all that day, and was taking his supper; he ap-
peared to know the party, by shaking hands with them, and appearing friends. They were
there altogether 20 minutes, or half an hour at farthest; they got away as quickly as they
could; Kilmeister went off with the party, mounted on his horse, and his pistol in a belt
which he wore round his waist. I kept them in sight three or four minutes; in about a
quarter of an hour after, I heard two shots fired in the same direction as thpy«went; I saw
no more of the party that night. Kilmeister said nothing to me when he went away;
I did not hear any complaint of the blacks having rushed his cattle; I saw the
blacks who went with Mr. Foster come back again at night, frightened, out of
breath with running; they cooied before they came up; I was in bed; the blacks
who were with me answered them, and talked with them; I turned them away directly,
because I did not like to keep them; I thought the men might return and kill them.
The next I saw of the party who took the blacks away was, they came to my place again
next evening, ten minutes or a quarter of an hour before sundown. They were talking
about the blacks all night, about a black gin they had in the camp'with them the niglu
before. I did not ask what they had done with the blacks that evening; 1 partly knew.
In the morning they got up after sunrise. I asked Russell if he was going to bury the
blacks, he said “Yes, he was going to bury them with a good fire.” They had
their breakfasts, then they took fire-sticks; one named Fleming had one and Russell
another. Fleming asked Kilmeister to get the leg-rope; 1 gave it to him, and he took the
leg-rope and a fire-stick, and they all went but one in the direction they took the blacks;
that was Foley, he remained as guard; he told me he was to guard the place; the arms
were left there, pistols and swords and muskets. Foley drew out a sword covered with
blood, in the hut, when they were all gone; I asked him whether they were all killed;'
I asked whether any escaped; he said “ None that he saw; they were all killed but one
black gin they saved.” They remained away about an hour; I observed a smoke, as from
a fire, in the direction they went; there was a good deal of smoke all day. I recollect
Fleming saying to Kilmeister, “Go up there by-and-by, and put the logs together, and
be sure that all is consumed.” Kilmeister told me that his horse was knocked up,
and he had left him down by the creek; he went away in the direction of the smoke, as he
said, to get up his horse, and was absent from the forepart of the day till the afternoon.
Mr. Hobbs came home three, four, or five days after. I recollect Mr. Day coming.
Kilmeister was in the stock-yard, he told me “ For God’s sake to mind what I said about
him, and to say that he did not go away with the party, but that he went away a quarter
of an hour after.” I told him 1 should speak the truth, I was not going to get myself
into trouble. The handle of a sword was left in the hut; I never took notice of it till
I gave it to Mr, Hobbs. I did not go to the place where the fire was; I did not like to go
in consequence of what the black fellow said to me.
The evidence of this witness was sought tp be impeached upon his cross-examination,
and by the evidence of Mr. Henry Dangar, his master, and the master of one of the
prisoners, but there was nothing elicited which went to contradict his statement, and
nothing disparaging to his character beyond what might with equal truth be alleged against
any person in the station of the witness (namely, a prisoner of the Crown) in this colony ;
and his credit was upheld by the evidence of a person, Mr. Hobbs, of whose character,
conduct, and respectability, as appeared in evidence, and especially his conduct relating
to this transaction, I cannot speak in terms of too high praise.
In corroboration of the testimony of Anderson, respecting the blacks having been taken
away by some such party as he described, and as to the numbers so taken, it was proved
by Mr.’Thomas Foster, superintendent to Dr. Newton, at Big River, about 16 miles from
Dangar’s station, who had occasion to visit it on Saturday the gth of June, and left it on-
Sunday morning about xo o’clock, with xo native blacks, that when he arrived, at the
station there were between 30 and 40 natives, men, women, and children, then about the
overseer’s place and the men’s huts (Mr. Hobbs estimated the number as being between 40
and 50). ItWas on that night, according to the evidence of Anderson, that all the blacks
were led away by a party of armed horsemen, except those taken away by Mr. Foster; and
Davy and his brother, two women, and a little boy ; and on the following morning 12 or
13 men, all mounted, came to Newton’s place, of whom Kilmeister, Oates, Russell,
Hawkins, and Johnstone were identified; they were then inquiring alter the blacks, no
doubt meaning those who had been taken away by Mr. Foster the day before, and in
pursuit


pursuit of whom, it was shown in another part of the evidence, they returned to Dangar’s
station, and from thence, still in pursuit of them, towards MTntyre’s, Mr. Foster having
bid them make their escape, in consequence of his suspicion that they were sought for the
purpose of destroying them.
Some of the party were also shown by the evidence of two men, Burrowes and Reid, to
have been preparing arms two or three days before the Sunday on which the blacks were
led away from Dangar’s, at the distance of 40 miles from that place, and were inquiring
after blacks ; and particularly if the blacks were at Dangar’s place,inquiring how long they
had been there, speaking of depredationshaving been committed down the river by blacks
on the cattle of some stock-men, and saying they were going after the blacks; there were,
eight or nine men of that party, of whom Hawkins, Russell, and Foley were identified;
A party of about 12 men, of whom Johnston, Hawkins, Russell, and Parry were identified,
were at Newton’s on Saturday morning, in the absence of Mr. Foster, inquiring for the
blacks. There was a heavy fall of rain on that day, and both Hobbs and Foster distinctly
traced the horses’ hoofs of a party of men going from Newton’s to Dangar’s, almost all
the way ; and at Dangar’s station were similar tracks about the huts, and from thence to
a place about half a mile distant, on the side of a ridge, there were the same impressions
on the ground, intermingled with the impressions of the naked feet of blacks of all ages,-
between two lines of horsemen. At that place were the remains of a large fire; there were
no marks of naked feet going away from it, all round in any direction ; but there were the
marks of feet with shoes on of persons who had evidently been rolling logs down from the
upper part of the ridge to the fire.
On the 15th of June Mr. Hobbs returned to his home, it being then five days since the
blacks were led away, as stated by Anderson, and the- place where the fire had been was
first visited by him alone that evening, and by himself and Foster next morning.
On the first occasion Mr. Hobbs was engaged from a quarter of an hour to 20 minutes
in examining the place, and he found the remains of several bodies of blacks, some with
flesh on them, all in a disfigured state, partly consumed by fire and torn by native dogs
and birds of prey; he counted at one time 28 skulls, of whom from 10 to 12 were those of
children, but from the stench and feelings occasioned by such a scene, he was not able to
make a very accurate calculation of the numbers which had been there destroyed;
counting the skulls and mutilated remains as well as he could several times, he varied each
time in his number, the smallest number he counted being 20, and the greatest 28. It
is to be feared, considering the bodies of the persons destroyed had been exposed to the
action of a large fire, that their numbers must have exceeded even his highest calcu-
lation.
But there was afforded the strongest corroboration to the evidence of Anderson, as to
the fact of the blacks having been taken away from his hut, and the strongest evidence
that they had been destroyed by the party who took them away; of that party, Anderson
stated, were all the prisoners, except that he did not identify Parry as one of them.
Respecting this man, however, the evidence of another witness, Bates, showed him to be of
the party seeking for blacks at Newton’s, on the Saturday; that he was of the same party
on Monday, when he made use of the expression to that witness, “ We have settled the
blacks;” and upon another occasion, being spoken to by Mr. Hobbs, who said to him,
a few days after his return to Dangar’s, “Jemmy, this is a bad job, and I am sorry that
you are one of the number;” he said, “ It is, sir, but I hope there will be nothing more
about it.” ■
There could be no doubt, therefore, that a large number of blacks, consisting of men,
women, and children, were taken away trom Dangar’s by a party of armed horsemen, and
put to death, and that the prisoners were of that party.
With respect to the motives which led to the commission of so great a crime, none
appeared in evidence, except that it was alleged by some of the prisoners that depredations
had been committed by blacks upon cattle lower down the river, at the distance of from
40 to 60 miles from where the unfortunate objects of their vengeance had resided for at
least 12 or 14 days, having also come to that station from M'lntyre’s, further up the
river, and more remote from the place where the depredations were alleged to have been
committed. At M'lhtyre’s they had resided for a considerable period, two months at
least, so that there was not the slightest reason for supposing that the blacks who were
put to death were concerned in any depredation complained of.
The encampment from which they were taken was inspected by Mr. Hobbs on his
return, and bore evident marks of having been hastily left by them, as described by Ander-
son, A number of those little things which are valuable in their sight, and which they
always carry with them when they remove voluntarily, being found scattered about in their
encampment, and there was not a single weapon of offence there; they , had indeed,
according to the evidence, lived quietly and peaceably at the station at least ten days or
a fortnight, subsisting upon such wild animals as they could catch.during the day, and
such trifling assistance as the superintendent of the station could afford to give in aid of
their own exertions, but which means of support were so scanty, that not a single article of
food was left behind them.
Sydney, 7 December 1838. (signed) W. W. Burton.
526. H 2


Enclosure A. i, to Minute No. 51, of 1838.
TO his Excellency Sir George Gipps, Knight, Governor of New South Wales, &c. &c. &c.
The Memorial of the undersigned, being the Jury on the late Trial of eleven Men charged
with the alleged Murder of one or more of the Aborigines at Liverpool Plains,
Humbly showeth, —That your memorialists, on the 15th day of November last, were
empannelled as a jury to try the charge preferred by Her Majesty’s Attorney-general
against 11 men for the alleged murder of one or more of the aborigines of this colony, to
the authorities unknown, at Liverpool Plains, in June last.
That after the most, attentive, impartial, and patient investigation of the whole case,
from 11 o’clock in the morning till 10 o’clock at night, and after hearing the luminous
recapitulation of the evidence and charge by the learned judge who presided at the trial,
your memorialists pronounced, unanimously, a verdict of acquittal of all the prisoners on
all the counts.
That your memorialists were led to pronounce this verdict of acquittal, because they
were not convinced by the evidence that any positive proof of guilt had been adduced to
criminate the prisoners, and as a jury of their country, on oath, they qeuld not con-
scientiously find them guilty, such verdict involving the lives of the parties, and common
equity requiring that the accused should have the benefit of any doubts arising from, a
defect in the evidence.
That your memorialists, from their experience of the laws of England, were led to hope
that their verdict was final and conclusive, in the absence of proof or identity of any male
or female black being murdered, known or unknown, neither could the witnesses for the
Crown swear that the parties taken from the hut“ roped together” were not then living.
That your memorialists have reason to believe that seven of these unhappy men have
been arraigned a second time for the same crime (as it appears to your memorialists), and
that they have been convicted on the same evidence on which they had been acquitted by
memorialists.
That your memorialists beg to vindicate the propriety of their prior verdict, and to urge
upon your Excellency that the discrepancy existing between the two verdicts of the suc-
cessive juries is such as to justify your memorialists in imploring that mercy and miti-
gation of the sentence of the law, which it must ever be gratifying to your Excellency to
dispense, when the lives of so many persons are involved; or should your Excellency
think their case peculiar in point of law, w'e humbly pray that you would be graciously
pleased to give to the unhappy men the benefit of an appeal to the fountain of mercy, and
submit their case to Her Majesty in Council. And your memorialists will ever pray.
(signed) Thomas Holmes, foreman. George Humphrey,
John Harris. Thomas Harper.
Joseph Hangon. William Howard.
M. Hooper. ' Charles Hensley.
John Hall. A. Higgins.
David Hill.
Enclosure A. 2, to Minute No. 51, of 1838.
TO His Excellency Sir George Gipps, Governor, &c., Sic., &c.
The Memorial of the undersigned, being Jurymen on the trial of the seven Men
convicted of the Murder of an Aboriginal Native,
. Humbly showeth,—-That memorialists were jurors on the trial of seven men arraigned
for the murder of an aboriginal child, to the authorities unknown, and convicted by
memorialists, and subsequently condemned to death.
. That memorialists believing that there are circumstances connected with the case of
these unhappy men to justify an appeal for mitigation of sentence to your Excellency as
the fountain of mercy in the colony, venture to approach your Excellency with a humble
recommendation that you would be pleased to take their case into your favourable con-
sideration, and grant to them such an extension of mercy as will preserve their lives, in
the hope that their future conduct will in some degree atone for the crime of which
they have been convicted.
That memorialists, in consideration that the said unhappy men have received the
highest characters for good conduct, humanity, and attention to their masters’ interests;
that public sympathy has been very generally expressed on their behalf; and that the jury
who tried the case for the first time have made a similar appeal to your Excellency, fer-
vently trust, and individually pray, that your Excellency would consider that the ends
of justice have been satisfied by their condemnation and long imprisonment, and that
their


their lives may be spared, by a mitigation of the last penalty of the law. And.memorialists
will ever pray.
(signed) William Knight. William Johnston,
11. Leworthy. William Jones.
John Little. > Edzvard Small.
his Benjamin Lee
Henry x linden, John Leary.
mark,
his
Alexander x Long,
mark.
Enclosure A. 3, to Minute No. 51, of 1838.
TO His Excellency Sir George Gipps, &c., Governor-in-Chief of the Territory of
New South Wales, &c. &c. &c.
The Memorial of the Undersigned,
Humbly Showeth, —That we, the undersigned inhabitants of Sydney, and others, taking
into consideration the unhappy case of the seven men who are now under sentence of
death for the alleged murder of an aboriginal child, to the authorities unknown, humbly
venture to approach your Excellency to implore that mercy on their behalf which it is
your Excellency’s prerogative to exercise, and which it must ever be gratifying to your
Excellency to dispense, when proper grounds are presented for its display.
That while the undersigned are unwilling to call in question the verdict which has
consigned these unhappy men to an ignominious death, they cannot but express their
opinion that the discrepancy between the verdicts of the juries who tried the cases for the
first and second times, supported by precisely the same evidence, is such as to afford a
justifiable plea for imploring mercy from your Excellency, and on your Excellency’s part
for extending the same to them.
That the undersigned take the liberty to impress on your Excellency’s mind the sovereign
principle of leaning to the side of mercy in all cases in which a doubt can exist in favour
of the accused: that the persons referred to have been convicted on circumstantial
evidence solely: that it is possible that the aboriginal native, for the murder of whom
these unhappy men have been found guilty, may have met with death from other hands
than those of the unfortunate men now under sentence, no direct evidence being furnished
of their guilt: that it is possible the other aboriginal native referred to by name, for
whose alleged murder they were tried and acquitted-, may be still at large, no evidence
having been furnished of his death ; and, therefore, knowing the extreme liability to error
in such cases, and the deplorable consequences arising from a sudden and precipitate
execution of the law upon persons who may afterwards be proved innocent, we trust that
your Excellency will feel justified in complying with the prayer of this memorial.
That great differences between the blacks and whites in the interior have existed for a
long period, many white persons having suffered death by the hands of savages while
defending their masters’ property, and protecting the numerous herds and their
employers, the murderers of whom have not been brought to justice.
That in addition to these circumstances which have excited the sympathy of the public,,
the undersigned have to urge upon your Excellency’s favourable consideration, that the
unfortunate men have received from their employers and others the highest characters for
fidelity to their, masters’ interests, general good behaviour, humanity, and attention to
their duty.
Your memorialists, therefore, fervently trust, that for these and other reasons, your
Excellency, with the advice of the Executive Council, will be graciously pleased to extend
to the persons referred to now under sentence of death, that mercy and mitigation of
punishment which you may deem expedient and consistent with your Excellency’s sense
of public duty.
The number of names attached to the foregoing petition is 227.
A petition in precisely similar terms, with 77 signatures, from Parramatta; and a
petition also, in similar terms, from Windsor, with 186 signatures.
Sydney, December 1838.
526. H 3


NEW SOUTH
WALES. :
No. g.
No. 9.
(No. 95.)
EXTRACT of a DESPATCH from the Marquess of Normanby to Governor
Sir George Gipps; dated Downing-street, 1 7 July 1839.
I have received your despatch, No. 200, of the 19th December last, report-
ing the conviction and subsequent execution of seven men concerned in the
murder of aborigines. . ■
The whole of these proceedings point out strongly the necessity of pursuing,
in the most firm and decided manner, such measures as may be best calculated
to check that system; which has unfortunately arisen, of atrocities committed
both by the settlers and by the aborigines against each other. The measures
which you have adopted with a view to that end have met the unqualified
approbation of Her Majesty’s Government; and I trust that the fate of those men
who have recently suffered the extreme penalty of the law for the murder of
natives will serve to check that feeling of recklessness in sacrificing the lives of
the natives, which has shown itself to a lamentable extent on this occasion
The attention of Her Majesty’s Government -has been recently called to the
necessity- of making provision for receiving the evidence of aboriginal natives
in courts of justice. This, however; is a question which I consider it better to
leave to you to bring before the local legislature, convinced that it will receive
that consideration which so important a question demands.
Marquess of Nor-
manby to Sir G.
Gipps, 17 July
1839;
No. 10.
(No. 8.)
COPY of a DESPATCH from Governor Sir George Gipps to Lord Glenelg.
No. 10.
Government House, Sydney,
My Lord, 8 January 1839.
With reference to my despatch of the 19th December last, No. 200, in which
I announced,to your Lordship that the sentence of the law had taken its course
on seven unhappy men who had been engaged in a most atrocious massacre of
the aborigines of this country, I think it right to ericlose to your Lordship
a copy of a letter, written by the principal' gaoler of Sydney to the sheriff, in
which the gaoler (Mr. Henry Keck) states that each and all of these men, at
different times during their confinement, acknowledged to him their guilt.
I have, &c.
(signed) (' George Gipps.
I
Sir G. Gipps to
Lord Glenelg,
8 January 1839,
ai Dec. 1838.
Enclosure in No. 10.
Her Majesty’s Gaol, Sydney,
SJ r> 21 December 1838.
In compliance with your suggestion to me yesterday, respecting the seven men
executed on Tuesday morning, I have the honour to inform you, that frequently, during
their confinement here, they each and all, at different times, acknowledged to me their
guilt;-but implied, that as it was done solely in defence of their masters’ property, that
they were not aware that in destroying the aboriginals they were violating the law, or that
it could take cognizance of their having done so, as it had (according to their belief) been
so frequently done in the colony before.
I have, &c.
The High Sheriff, (signed) Henri/ Keck ,
Bcc. &c.-&c. a' Principal Gaoler.
Enclosure
in No. 10.
56
PAPERS:—MASSACRE OF AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.


Ordered, by the House of Commons to be Printed, 12th. Aug. 1839


AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.
COPIES or Extracts of Despatches’ relative
to the Massacre of various Aborigines in
Australia , in the Year 1838, and respecting
the Trial of their Murderers.
CMr. Charles Lushington.)
Ordered, by The House of Commons, to be Printed,
12 August 1839.
[Price Bf/.]


