

James Brogden, Esq., M.P., Thomas Tooke, Esq.,
Stewart Majoribanks, Esq., M.P., George Brown, Esq.,
William Ward, Esq., John Macarthur, Esq.,
Rd. Mee Eaikes, Esq., Donald Maclean, Esq.,
was held on the 10th of April, 1824, at the chambers of John
Macarthur,
Esq., in Lincoln’s Inn, to consider a scheme for establishing a Company
I now known as the Australian Agricultural Company, the object being to
/ conduct pastoral and agricultural operations in the colony of New South
Wales. An interview with Earl Bathurst, the Secretary of State for the
Colonies, was sought and obtained on the 14th of April, 1824. At this
interview a general outline of the scheme was submitted to his lordship
who stated that he viewed it with great favor, and encouraged them to
work out the details of it and to communicate them to him.
This was done, and the scheme having been approved by Lord
Bathurst, the Company was established in the same year by 5 G. IV., c.
86, which received the royal assent on the 21st June, and by a royal
charter bearing date November sth, 1824, which inter alia provides—
. sth. That the Company should employ upon the land such
number of convicts as the Governor of the Colony should be willing
to supply.
Bth. That the lands granted should be held in mortmain and
be absolutely unalienable except upon the following conditions :
For every £lO,OOO expended by the said Company in the
formation of roads, the erection of buildings, the cultivation, clearing,
fencing, draining, or other improvements, the Company might
alienate 60,000, acres until one moiety or equal half part of the
lands granted to them had become alienable—provided amongst other
things that it shall be lawful for the said Company to alienate any of
the lands to be granted to them, upon obtaining a special license
for that purpose from his Majesty through one of the principal
Secretaries of State.
9th. * *
OI W # Jit


then the whole of the hinds granted shall be free of quit rents
originally charged thereon.
Subsequently, that is in the year 1825, the Directors made further
proposals to Lord Bathurst, soliciting a grant of certain coal-bearing
lands at Newcastle in New South Wales, and offering on certain conditions
to work the mines, the working of which at the time was carried on by
the Colonial Government at a considerable annual loss, and the progress
of the negotiations which ensued is shown by the following extracts from
the correspondence between the Colonial Office and the Governor of the
Colony, and between that office and the Directors of the Company.
Extract from Lord Bathurst's despatch No. 31 , to Sir
Thomas Brisbane , Governor of New South Wales.
The Company having requested to be allowed to purchase a
small tract of land on the hanks of the Coal River (now the
River Hunter), for the erection of quays and other buildings where
cattle and other articles may he shipped or landed , or receive
temporary shelter; you will permit the general Agent to purchase
on the Company’s behalf, any tract of land on the banks of the
Coal River not exceeding 2,000 acres in the whole, provided that
the purchase be made upon the same terms in every respect as if
a private person were the purchaser.
The 2,000 acres, which Lord Bathurst as above directed the
Company should be allowed to purchase, were subsequently included
in the Company’s grant as a separate estate, pursuant to an arrange-
ment by which the Company at the instance, and in fact at the
request or by the desire of the Imperial Government, who, as a
matter of policy and upon principle, thought it inexpedient that
the Colonial authorities should be engaged in coal mining, took over
the coal mines at Newcastle.
Negotiations with this object had been for some time in progress,
but ultimately resulted in the following proposals from the Company :
It should be borne in mind that at this date the Colonial
Government were the only persons working coal in the Australian
Colonies, and that they had found the venture a most unprofitable
and unsatisfactory addition to their general duties.
2


Extract from a letter from Directors of the Company to May 31st, 1825
Under Secretary of State for Colonies .
In our letter of the 31st of March last we had the honor to
transmit the enclosed extract from the third report of Mr. Com-
missioner Bigge upon the agriculture and trade of New South
Wales, in which the Commissioner has recommended the Crown
to grant leases of the coal mines discovered in that Colony;
and as it appears to us that a portion of the large capital sub-
scribed for the Australian Company might be employed in
working the mines in question upon a proper system, we request
you will be pleased to submit the accompanying proposals for the
consideration of Lord Bathurst.
PROPOSALS.
1. That the Governor of New South Wales shall be
empowered to grant to the Australian Agricultural Company a lease
of the coal mines at Newcastle and other places in New South
Wales for the term of 31 years.
2. In order to the Company’s obtaining legal possession of
the coal their agents shall have such liberty as the Crown can give
to search for and discover the same. The Company’s agents shall
give notice to the Governor of New South Wales of any mine
proposed to be opened by or on behalf of the Company, upon which
the Governor is to cause the Company’s agents to be put into
possession thereof.
3. The Company engaging by way of quit rent to pay to
His Majesty as follows :
“ For and in respect of each mine for and during the term of
“ 31 years from the time at which the Company’s agents shall be
“ put into possession thereof respectively—
“ One-twentieth part or share of all coal wrought and brought
u to the pit’s mouth.”
4. The Company by its agents to take such shares or
proportions of the coal at the market price thereof for the time
being in the said Colony, such price to be agreed upon between
them and the said Governor, or to be fixed by arbitrators chosen
annually in the usual way, that is, one by the Governor, one by the
Committee of Proprietors of the said Company in New South
Wales, and the third by the two so named and any two to decide.
5. The Company to pay any damage done to the land of
private persons in which they shall seek for, or work to obtain coal
belonging to the Crown.
6. The Company to send to the Colony, persons experienced
in the mode of working and conducting coal mines in England,


and to employ convicts as labourers in the mines under the usual
directions and control.
7. The Company to have the privilege of renewing all leases
for like terms of 81 years and on similar conditions, upon notice
being given by them to that effect at any time previously to the
expiration of existing leases.
Extract from a letter from Sir T. Brisbane to Directors of
the Company .
In the month of November last I was honored with your letter
of the sth July transmitting the Act of Parliament that had recently
been passed in behalf of the Australian Agricultural Company,
together with the plan for establishing that Company.
Keflecting on the effects resulting from such a Company in the
various points of improvement connected with it, I cannot but view
it as a bright and unexpected light burst forth on this infant colony,
and if followed up by all the characteristic energies of those
gentlemen I see are connected with such undertaking, either as to
influence, wealth or respectability, I can only regard the interests of
New South Wales as thus completely identified with those of the
mother country, and must therefore hail it as the happiest event
which could have befallen the Colony.
I hope I need not request you to assure the gentlemen who
have done me the honour to sign the letter transmitted to me, that I
shall have the utmost gratification in promoting their views,
inasmuch as I must ever consider them as promoting the interests
alike of the Government as the Company, and were I permitted to
hazard an opinion, I should decide that the soul of the undertaking
will hinge with the agent the Company may think proper to send
out from England.
The Committee here have done me the favour to wait upon me,
when I assured them of my hearty co-operation; but as I had
received no official communication on the subject, I regretted I could
not move in it until I was authorised and my instructions
transmitted. I shall also avail myself of the permission granted me
by the Company of communicating with them hereafter, when I shall
with perfect candour state my sentiments. And I shall in proof of
this premise it by saying I consider it a most favourable omen of the
future well-being of the Company, the selection they have made of
the committee resident in the Colony.
4


Letter from Colonial Office to Directors of the Company ..
July
With reference to the proposals which have been submitted
by you for the consideration of His Majesty’s Government for
working the coal mines that have been discovered in New South
Wales founded on the recommendation of Mr. Commissioner Bigge,
“ that leases for terms of years should be granted of the coal,
“ reserving an annual rent for the same, with a certain proportion
“ of the coal raised,” I am directed by Earl Bathurst to acquaint
you that his lordship is willing to grant to the Australian
Agricultural Company a lease of the coal mines at Newcastle in
New South Wales for the term of thirty-one years, on the payment
to the Crown by the Company, from the date at which they may
come into possession of the mines, of one-twentieth part of the
produce at the market price of the day in the Colony, provided
the Crown deems it advisable to dispose of the same to them.
But if disagreement should exist between the Crown and the
Company as to what may be the market price, that point is to be
settled by two arbitrators mutually chosen, with power to appoint
the third.
As from the imperfect manner in which the coal mines have
been hitherto worked on account of the Government, it is not
possible accurately to ascertain the quantity of coal capable of being
raised, Earl Bathurst must reserve to the Crown the right of
retaining a fifteenth portion of the produce instead of a twentieth
should it be deemed expedient hereafter to alter the terms of the
agreement with the Company in this particular. But you will
distinctly understand that such additional portion will not be
demanded unless the result of the experiment for working them
be such as in the opinion of His Majesty’s Government may justify
the demand of an increase.
letter from Directors of the Company to Colonial Office.
Dec
I am instructed by the Directors of the Australian Agricultural
Company to acquaint you that acting upon the consent of His
Majesty’s Government, conveyed in your letter of the 7th of July
last, to grant to the Company a lease of the coal mines, at
Newcastle, in New South Wales, for a period of 31 years, the
Directors have engaged Mr. Henderson, a person of extensive
practical experience in the working of coal mines, both in this
country and in Scotland, to proceed to the Colony with an efficient.
establishment. And that they have also contracted for steam
engines and other apparatus to be shipped with the utmost
expedition.
5


With the view, therefore, of avoiding any delay, I am directed
to request that you will he pleased to obtain Earl Bathurst’s
order that the possession of the mines in question may be delivered
to the Agents of the Company, duly authorised for the purpose.
Despatch from Lord Bathurst to Lieutenant-General Darling ,
Governor of New South Wales , No. 36.
The Australian Agricultural Company having submitted to His
Majesty’s Government certain proposals for undertaking the
working of the coal mines at Newcastle, in New South Wales, I do
myself the honor of transmitting for your information a copy of
the terms upon which his Majesty’s Government have consented to
grant to the Company a lease of the same. The instrument by
which the mines in question are to be assigned to the Company
will be forwarded to you as soon as it is completed, but, in the
meantime, I am to desire that you will furnish to the agent of the
Company as many convicts as can conveniently he spared from
other services, for the purpose of repairing the pier, from which the
produce of the coal mines will he embarked; it having been
represented to his Majesty’s Government that the pier in question
has become, from neglect, almost wholly unserviceable.
P.S. —Your Excellency will of course understand that the
Company will be required to provide for the maintenance of the
convicts who may be thus employed in the repairing of the pier, as
they will be the persons principally benefited by the measure.
(For Enclosure referred to in above despatch, see page 4.)
Despatch from Lord Bathurst to Lieut-General Darling .
* * * * I have no objection to your allowing
their agent to take possession of a tract of land not exceeding 500
acres in such situation as you with the advice of your Council may
select; and you will consider yourself empowered to grant at the
same time to the agent of the Company, such reasonable facilities
as they may require for the purpose of occupation; you will also
take measures for having the lands most accurately surveyed and
valued * * * * in order that I may be prepared to give
you such further instructions as may be necessary for the final
grant of the lands to the Company.
Despatch from Lord Bathurst to Lieut.-General Darling •
With reference to the instructions which I have this day
addressed to you with respect to the selection of a tract of land to
be assigned to the Australian Company at or in the vicinity ot the
6


Coal River. I think it necessary to inform yon that if the Company
should already have been placed in possession of the lands which
your predecessor was authorised by my despatch of the 18th May,
1825, to assign to them you are not to grant to the Company the
additional lands which form the subject of my separate instructions
of this day.
But if the Company should not already have been placed in
possession of the lands which your predecessor was directed to assign
to them on the banks of the Coal River, I have only to desire that
in the measures which you will take for deciding on the situation of
the land which you have by my despatch of this day been authorised
to assign to the Company, care may be had that the public interests
be not prejudiced by allowing the Company to take possession of
more than a fair proportion of the most valuable land.
Extract from the Minutes of a Meeting of the Court of Directors
of the Company .
On the subject of the negociation with His Majesty’s Government, res-
pecting the coal mines Mr. R. Hart Davis, a Director of the Australian
Agricultural Company reported that he had several times conversed with
Lord Francis Gower on the business, and had also spoken with Mr.
Huskisson.
That on the instant, Mr. Macarthur had accompanied
him to a conference with Lord Francis Gower (who had succeeded
Mr. Stanley as Under Secretary for the Colonies) when, in behalf
of the Company, it was represented that in consequence of the
obstacles which had arisen in the way of the Company’s working
the mines, and under the disposition hitherto manifested by the
Colonial Governor respecting them, the Company were not
desirous to oppose his wishes and were willing to relinquish their
Agreement on being indemnified for the expenses incurred by
them.
That Lord Francis Gower expressed an opinion, in which
Mr. Huskisson entirely concurred, when Mr. Davis afterwards spoke
with him that His Majesty’s Government upon principle thought
that the mines would be best worked by a Company or individuals,
and that it would be unwise to impose such a duty on the local
governor under any circumstances in addition to his laborious and
necessary duties.
That it was strongly impressed upon the notice of his lordship
and afterwards of Mr. Huskisson, that if it were decided for the
Company to work the mines, it would be requisite for the colonial
governor to be made distinctly to understand that such final
arrangement emanated entirely from His Majesty’s Government,
7


and not from the Australian Agricultural Company; and that it
was highly important for the success of the undertaking that the
colonial governor should be restrained not only from competing
with the Company in working the mines, but from having any
control whatever over the works, and further that His Excellency
should be instructed to render every reasonable assistance in the
transfer of buildings and works connected with the mines in
granting the 500 acres of the coal field to he selected by the
Company, and especially in the supply of convict labourers.
These suggestions were entirely assented to, and it was
proposed to permit the Directors to read the despatch to his
Excellency, containing the instructions intended to be written with
a view to their proposal of any desirable alteration.
Mr. R. Hart Davis then read a letter which he had received from
the Colonial Office, dated May 9th, 1828.
I find that Mr. Huskisson agrees so entirely with my view of
the subject of our late conversation at this office, that I trust there
will be no difficulty in coming to a satisfactory arrangement with
the Australian Company with regard to the coal mines. It will be
necessary to reserve a power to Government of resuming the grant
in the event of the Company failing to work the mines, and also to
fix the proportion of coals to be furnished to Government at the
cost price. Perhaps you will consider this point and any other
matter of detail which occurs to yourself and the other gentlemen
interested, and the details might be adjusted by another interview at
your early convenience.
A conference was subsequently held on Tuesday the 10th June,
1828, with Lieut.-Gen. Sir George Murray, K.C.8., Secretary of
State for the Colonial Department, several of the Directors being present,
and the following is the substance of the conversation that passed :
Mr. Manning observed that the object of the deputation was to obtain
a final decision upon the question so long pending between His
Majesty’s Government and the Australian Agricultural Company
regarding the coal mines in New South Wales.
Sir George Murray replied that he believed the question was so
far settled that a mutual understanding was already formed upon it.
Mr. Hay (Under Secretary of State for the Colonies) said that he
believed Mr. R. Hart Davis was thoroughly acquainted with the present
state of the negociation, and perhaps would mention it.
8


Mr. Davis observed that the proposal for the Company to work the
mines had originated with His Majesty’s Government, upon the recom-
mendation of Mr. Commissioner Bigge in his printed report, that it was
at first intended to grant to the Company a lease for 31 years of all the
mines in the Colony, hut that owing to a legal objection to the
Company’s taking a lease under their charter, it was afterwards arranged
for them to have a grant in fee simple of 500 or 1,000 acres, part of the
coal field, which was finally fixed at 500 acres. And it was understood
by the Company that the present pits and works were to be included in
the grant and for the Local Government to discontinue working.
That under such agreement the Company had sent out steam
engines and a complete colliery establishment of officers and servants
at a large outlay of expense, but that owing to some misconstruction of
the despatch from Earl Bathurst, the Colonial Governor had determined
to continue working the old mines in competition with the Company,
and that the Company’s agents had consequently declined to proceed,
since which period the Company’s establishment of servants for that
department had been maintained in idleness, that if it were the wish of
His Majesty’s Government for the mines to continue in the hands of the
local governor, the Company were ready to relinquish them upon being
indemnified for the expenses they had incurred.
Sir George Murray said he considered a business such as coal
mining to be a sort of speculation with which a local government ought
not to be encumbered, and upon principle he thought that any business
which could be conducted by individuals would be much better managed
by them than by Government. He thought therefore the Company
ought to work the mines.
Mr. Davis read part of a letter to him (chiefly on a different subject)
from Mr. Huskisson, but which stated in a postcript that Mr. Hay was
fully acquainted with his opinions as to the expediency of letting the
Company work the coal mines instead of the local government.
Sir George Murray said he was much pleased to find his opinion on
the subject coincided with that of Mr. Huskisson, and that it confirmed
him in the view he had previously taken.
Mr. Macarthur observed that it would be desirable for the Company
to have the present pits and works included in their grant, and trans-
ferred to the Company as contemplated in the original agreement; —that
as there was no machinery employed nor expensive works of any kind,
the coal, having been hitherto wrought in the most simple manner by
hand labour and common buckets, and buckets for raising the water and
coal, there would be nothing to pay for—and it was especially desirable
it should be understood these arrangements were required as absolutely


necessary for the welfare of the undertaking, and not with any desire of
opposing the wishes of General Darling, to which the Company were at
all times most anxious as far as possible to accede, and were even still
ready to do so in this particular if it were thought right by His
Majesty’s Government.
Sir George Murray repeated that he considered it would he expedient
for the Company to work the mines instead of the local government, and
that that opinion was formed upon several grounds—he saw no ohjectiou
to include the present pits and works in the grant to the Company— he
considered that in making such grant, he was not placing a monopoly in
the hands of the Company, for that perhaps would not be desirable ; for
as there was a large quantity of coal land other grants might be made.
Mr. Davis stated in reply that it had never been contemplated for
the Company to meet with any competition from the local government,
or that a grant of coal mines should be made to any other company for
the purpose of working in opposition to them, although the Company did
not seek any restriction to prevent private individuals from working coal
which might be found on their own lands; that it would be the chief
object with the Company to increase the consumption of coal in the
Colony, and with that view to raise and sell it at the low T est possible
price.
With reference to the supply to be required by the local government
and its officers, it was proposed that any quantity required by them for
use should be furnished at Bs. 6d. per ton at the pit’s mouth, being the
present cost price as nearly as can be estimated.
All this was assented to by Sir George Murray. It was finally
settled that the Directors should write a letter requesting that a grant of
500 acres of the coal field should be made to the Company in any
situation to be selected by their agents.
The following formal application was then addressed to the
Secretary of State by the Company: —
In pursuance of the wish expressed by you to the deputation
of Directors of this Company, who had the honor of a conference
with you on the 10th inst., we now beg leave to renew our
application that a grant in fee simple of five hundred acres of the
coal field at Newcastle in New South Wales may be made to the
Company, and that their agents in the Colony may be permitted to
select the land in the situation they may consider best adapted for
working and shipping the coal.
10


We beg leave to add, that considering the time which has
elapsed since the establishment of officers and servants were
engaged by the Company for that department and the great expense
which has been necessarily incurred in the Colony without return,
and that the Company’s steam engines and other machinery are
suffering injury for want of use, it is of material importance that the
arrangement now made should be carried into effect with as little
delay as may be consistent with the convenience of His Majesty’s
Government.
The foregoing arrangement having emanated from an opinion
of public expediency on the part of His Majesty’s Government, and
not from any desire of the Australian Agricultural Company on any
account to oppose the wishes of the Colonial Governor, we also
beg leave to submit for your consideration that it is very desirable
for the success of the undertaking that this circumstance should be
distinctly understood by his Excellency.
It will likewise be very desirable that the governor should
clearly understand that every idea of continuing to work the old
mines on the part of Government is abandoned, and that the pits in
which the works have been hitherto carried on may be included in
the proposed grant of 500 acres, and be transferred to the Company
if their agents should think it desirable to have them.
It is also most material to the future interests of the Company
that every possible assistance should be afforded to them in the
supply of convict labourers.
It may be proper in conclusion to repeat in writing our
proposal to which you were pleased to assent, that the Company
should furnish to the Local Government and its Officers from time
to time such quantities of coals as may be required by them for use,
at Bs. Cd. per ton, delivered at the pit’s mouth, such being the
present cost without profit as nearly as can be ascertained.
Despatch from Sir George Murray to Lieutenant-General 31st
Darling
It will doubtless be in your recollection that at one time
it was the intention of His Majesty’s Government to grant to the
Australian Agricultural Company upon certain conditions a lease
of all the coal mines at Newcastle, including those which
theretofore had been worked on account of the Government. A
difficulty, however, arose as to the Company’s holding a lease of
11


mines specifically so called, and it was then deemed more
expedient that they should receive a tract of land, including the
spot where the mines were situated, it being the opinion of His
Majesty’s Law Officers that any mines of coal found under the
surface of the land granted to them (if not specially excepted in
the grant) would by such grant pass to the Company, and that
the right of raising and selling it at the pit’s mouth would
consequently be vested in them. * * # * I have accordingly
to desire that you will immediately grant to the Australian
Company a tract of 500 acres on the banks of the Coal Elver at
Newcastle, and you will permit their agents to select the land
which they may consider best adapted for the purposes of their
dealing in coal, allowing them, however, only such a proportion
of frontage to the water as the convenient shipping and working
of the produce of the mines opened or to be opened may liberally
require on the water side. *******
If they have received no part or a part less than 1,500 acres
of the tract of 2,000 acres mentioned in the instructions of 18th
May, 1825, you will grant to them in addition to the 500 acres-
so much land as they may wish to have, not exceeding with the
500 acres the aggregate of 2,000 acres, and in this last case you
will allow their agents to select the land, which in addition to the
500 acres, is so to be granted to them in the same manner and
subject to the same restrictions as to frontage, which have
been already specified with respect to the 500 acres. In
the 500 acres now proposed to be granted it is intended that
the works, which have hitherto been carried on by the Government,
be included, should the Company wish it, and this not as a matter
of favor to them but on public grounds, for I am averse upon
principle to the carrying on of works of this discription as Govern-
ment concerns. * * # As there is reason to apprehend that
the establishment of officers and servants engaged by the Company
may from the length of time which has elapsed since their arrival
in New South Wales have become in a degree disjointed and
dispersed, and that the Company may from that cause be unable
to begin their operations so early as could be wished, and in order
that in the meantime the public may sustain no interruption in the
supply of coal in the Colony you will consider yourself authorized
to continue the Works at Newcastle upon the present plan for
a period not exceeding one year from the arrival of these instruc-
tions, unless the Company should be sooner prepared to relieve
you from such charge within that time, in which case possession
will of course be given to them accordingly.
12


Letter from Horace Twiss, EsqM.P., Under Secretary of
State for the Colonies to Directors of the Company , on the subject
of the coal mines .
In reply to the letter which the Australian Company addressed
to the Secretary of State on the 18th ulto. relative to a tract of
600 acres of land on the bank of the Coal River, which the Governor
of New South Wales was instructed to place at the disposal of the
Company hut of which he had delayed the grant, I am directed by
Secretary Sir George Murray to acquaint you that he has
addressed definitive instructions to the Governor on this subject to
the following effect, viz.:
1. That a grant be immediately made to the Company of a
tract, not exceeding 500 acres on the banks of the Coal River at
Newcastle, and that their agents be permitted to select the land
which they may consider best adapted for the purpose of their
dealing in coal, being allowed only such a proportion of frontage to
the water as the convenient shipping and working of the produce of
the mines, opened or to be opened, may liberally require in that
situation. If however the Company have been allowed to take
more than 1,600 of a tract of 2,000 acres on the banks of the
Coal River of which Lord Bathurst’s instructions to Sir Thomas
Brisbane, dated the 18th of May, 1826, authorised the grant to
them the Company will on receiving the now proposed grant of 500
acres, be expected to give up whatever part of the last-mentioned
tract they may already possess beyond 1,500 so as that their whole
possession under the instructions of the 18th May, 1826 and under
the present instructions, coupled together shall not exceed 2,000
acres in the aggregate. If on the other hand the Company have
received no part or a part less than 1,500 acres of the tract of
2,000 acres mentioned in the instructions of the 18th May, 1826,
the Governor will grant to them in addition to the 500 acres so
much land as they wish to have not exceeding, with the 600
acres, the aggregate of 2,000. And in this last case the
Company’s agents are to be allowed to select the land which in
addition to the 600 acres is so to be granted to them, in the
same manner and subject to the same restrictions as to frontage
which have been already specified with respect to the 600 acres.
2. That in the 600 acres now proposed to be granted, the
works which have hitherto been carried on by the Government be
included, should the Company wish it.
3. That although the assistance required by the Company
in regard to convict labourers must necessarily depend upon the
means which the Colonial Government may have at its disposal for
affording it, yet as the Government will cease to raise the coal,
13


which may be required for the general purposes of the Colony, every
possible facility and encouragement for this object be afforded to the
Company, so that no scarcity of this article may take place, and
the quantity raised be, as far as depends upon the assistance of
convict labour, at all times if possible adequate to the demand.
By the original agreement which it was proposed to enter into
with the Company, they were to receive a lease of the coal mines
at Newcastle, in New South Wales, for the term of 81 years on
payment of a portion of the produce, not less than a twentieth nor
more than a fifteenth, at the option of the Governor. As the footing
upon which this question now stands has been materially changed
by the substitution of a grant of a comparatively small number of
acres for a lease of the whole of the coal mines at Newcastle, the
Secretary of State has deemed it sufficient.
4. That the 500 acres, as well as the other 1,500 taken, or
to be taken, be charged with the usual quit rent, the annual amount
of which is to be determined by the Surveyor-General according to
the value of the land for an ordinary superficial occupation, and
not with reference to its value as mine land, which quit rent,
however, as to the 500 acres and as to so much more of the land to
be comprised in the aggregate of 2,000, and not already granted to
the Company, as shall consist of coal land, it is not to be
redeemable.
5. That a condition with reference to the 500 acres and to
any other coal land not already granted be inserted, that all such
ground may be resumed by the Crown with the permission of His
Majesty’s Government in England, if in any year the Company
shall raise a less quantity of coal than two-thirds of the weight
which on an average of the three years ending the 31st December,
1828, has been yearly raised from the mines which are now
wrought to the Government, together with the further stipulation
that Government shall be entitled in perpetuity to all coal wanted
for its own consumption, not exceeding in any case one-fourth of
the average annual produce of the mines included in the 500 acres,
to be delivered at the pit’s mouth at prime cost.
6. That as the Company will have incurred a great pre-
liminary expense for a public benefit, which expense ought to
have a fair opportunity of repaying to themselves, no Governor
will, for the next 31 years, grant or convey any coal mines or land
containing any coal mine, without a specific exception of the coal
in such grant or conveyance, nor afford any assistance in convict
labour for the working of any coal mine to any other Company or
to any individual or individuals, without the previous sanction of
the Government at home, a sanction which would probably be


granted if the Company should avail themselves of their monopoly
to impose an exorbitant price upon coal, the produce of their mines.
As the arrangement acquiesced in by all parties at the interview
in this office on Saturday has been strictly adhered to in all but one
or two slight particulars, I, of course, anticipate no objection on
behalf of the Company, but I shall be glad to be acquainted by you,
in a formal manner, for the information of the Secretary of State,
that the Company are satisfied with these conditions, in order that
the despatch may be completed accordingly, which will be done on
Wednesday next, the 6th of August, unless I receive from you
before that time any communication to warrant a further delay.
Colonial Secretary of Aew South Wales to Sir Edward Parry }
Commissioner of the Company , in New South Wales .
I am directed by His Excellency to
inform you that in furtherance of the instructions of His Majesty’s
Government, he is ready to give you possession of the coal mines
now worked by the Government at Newcastle, and to afford you all
the facilities in his power by convict labour whenever you will
authorize the Superintendent to take charge of them. lam also
directed to state that the several conditions on which the Company
are to hold those mines and such other lands to the extent in the
whole of 2,000 acres as may be selected by you in their name, are
stated by you with sufficient precision, but may be more correctly
specified as follows, viz. :
Ist. The Company to have 500 acres of coal land at or near
Newcastle, including the mines now w r orked.
2nd. The Company may select 1,500 acres of additional
land on the banks of the River Hunter adjoining the
said 500 acres or otherwise, provided the same be
unlocated.
3rd. Each allotment to have a liberal water frontage.
4th. All possible assistance in convict labour to be granted
for working the mines.
sth. Colonial Government to cease working as soon as the
Company may be ready to commence.
6th. The usual rate of quit rent to be charged.
7th. The quit rent not to be redeemable.
Bth. The land may be resumed by Government if in any
year the Company raise a less quantity of coals than
two-thirds average annual quantity raised in the
three years ending 81st December, 1828.
15


9tli. The Government to be entitled to all coal wanted for
its own consumption not exceeding one-fourth annual
produce.
10th. No land to be granted by Government during 31
years after the date of the present grant without
special reservation of all coals and coal mines, nor is
Government to afford assistance in convict labour for
the purpose of working coal to any other Company or
individual without sanction of the Secretary of
State. * * * *
Colonial Secretary of New South Wales to Sir Edward Parry.
Referring to my letter of the 15th December, informing you
that his Excellency the Governor intended to bring yours of the Ist,
requesting his Excellency’s sanction on the following points relative
to the coal mines authorized to be granted to the Australian
Agricultural Company at Newcastle, under the consideration of the
Executive Council, viz.:
Ist. To sink a pit and to erect a steam engine about
100 yards from the Western boundary of the proposed
town allotments of Newcastle.
2nd. To be allowed to work the coal under the unlocated
parts in that neighbourhood, including, if requisite, the
bed of the river.
3rd. To work the coal which lies under the intended town.
4th. To be allowed a liberal water frontage somewhere
abreast of the spot selected for the site of the steam
engine and shaft.
I have now the honor, by the direction of the Governor, to
inform you that the subject has accordingly been submitted to the
Council, who saw no objection to a compliance with either of the
above proposals, and that his Excellency has therefore been pleased
to sanction the same on the condition, however, that if you work any
of the seams of coal under the intended town above the one at
present in use, it must not be at a less depth than 100 feet from the
surface, otherwise the safety of the town and inhabitants will be
endangered.
Colonial Secretary of New South Wales to Sir Edioard Parry.
I had the honor duly to receive and to submit to the Governor
your letter of the 18th October last, accompanied by a sketch,
illustrative of the manner in which you are desirous that the coal
16


grant of the Australian Agricultural Company at Newcastle should
be measured.
In reply, I am directed to inform you that his Excellency
having had an opportunity of seeing the land and conferring with the
Surveyor-General on the subject has been pleased to sanction the
following arrangement with reference to the sketch, viz.:
1. That the grant is to comprise 2,000 acres, deducting the
quantity specified in paragraph 2 below—is to have a
frontage of 500 yards on the river adjoining the
Company’s jetty, and to be bounded by the road from
Newcastle to Maitland, the lines F G D and the line
DC prolonged, with an addition adjoining and parallel
to the last line equal to any deficiency which may
occur in this portion of the 2,000 acres.
2. That the Company forego their application for the surface
right of the portion comprised within the lines
A B F G, and stated to contain about 67 acres, on
account of its forming a part of the town, and he
allowed in lieu the town allotments Nos. 23 and 52 in
Pacific and Watt Streets, Newcastle, together with the
mining right to the tract so relinquished, subject to
such conditions as to depth and necessary supports as
may be approved by the Government Mineral
Surveyor.
3. That the grant of land and the town allotments be subject
to quit rents without power of redemption.
I do myself the honor to add that the Surveyor-General has
been duly apprised as above, and also instructed to mark out the
road in question as far as it will bound the grant, which his
Excellency considers necessary previous to the land being measured.
Directors of the Company to Right Honorable Lord Stanley ,
Secretary of State for the Colonies .
1. I have the honor on the part of the Australian Agricultural
Company to acknowledge receipt of Mr. Under-Secretary Hope’s
letter of the 9th August last, enclosing several draft instruments and
other documents which have been transmitted from New South
Wales, and which is the mode the Local Government suggests for
completing the title of the Australian Agricultural Company to the
lands granted to them in 1824.
These are—
Ist. Draft of a proposed warrant from the Crowji to the
Governor of the Colony, authorising the grant to be
made.
17


2nd. The draft of the grant proposed to be made under the
foregoing warrant of 1,027,588 acres of land in three
lots.
3rd, Draft of a proposed surrender by the Australian Agri-
cultural Company to the Crown of the surface of 87
acres, reserving to the Company the minerals.
8. These documents have been carefully examined by the
Directors of the Australian Agricultural Company aided by their
Solicitors, Messrs. Freshfields, and I regret to say that it appears
to us that they cannot be executed as they now stand without much
contradiction and confusion, being inapplicable to the present state
of things.
4, Your Lordship is aware that the Royal Charter dated the
Ist November, 1824, under which the Australian Agricultural Company
is incorporated, and which was shortly followed by the grant of land
contemplated therein, requires that the land so granted shall be held
under certain conditions, all of which are fully enumerated. Of
these conditions some are temporary, others defeasible, and others
have been affected by the altered policy of the Government, yet
now, after a lapse of 20 years, all these condition are inserted in the
proposed title deeds, as if nothing had been done during all that
time, and as if the Australian Agricultural Company were only now
about to be established and put in possesion of the grant for the
first time.
5. The conditions above referred to are twelve in number, and
1 proceed to shew your Lordship that they have in every instance
been complied with as far as depended on the Company, or have
become inapplicable from the lapse of time, or inoperative from the
altered policy of the Government.
6. The Ist condition prescribes that the grant shall be under
the seal of the Colony, and is one of mere form, which will be
carried out on the return of the title deeds from this country,
approved of by your Lordship.
7. The 2nd, Brd, 4th, 9th, 10th, 11th, and 12th conditions
prescribe the amount of quit rent to be paid by the Company, either
in money or by the maintenance of convicts. The fulfilment of the
12th condition, in fact, superseding those preceding.
8. The Company have, up to the 81st December, 1842, saved to
the Government, according to the mode of calculation prescribed in the
12th condition, the sum of .£181,712, and as there are still about 200
convicts under assignment to the Company, <£B,ooo more aie to be
added up to the end of the present year ; it will be apparent therefore
to your Lordship that under the 12th condition of the charter, the quit
rent has been fully redeemed, and that the introduction into the title
18


deeds of these conditions, without, at the same time, a full
recognition of their fulfilment, would give them a prospective and
therefore a most injurious effect on the interests of the Company.
9. Conditions sth and 6th prescribe the maintenance of convicts
by the Australian Agricultural Company in a certain proportion of
free labourers, and of the due provision of proper superintendence.
The redemption of the quit rent I submit to your Lordship, proves
the fulfilment of these conditions, independent of the inconsistency
of binding the Australian Agricultural Company to the future
maintenance of convicts, which, from the altered policy of the Govern-
ment, cannot be supplied.
10. Condition 7th provides that the lands granted to the Com-
pany shall not be alienated within five years from the time of the
grant. The Company have been in possession of their lands for
nearly twenty years, this condition, therefore, is altogether
inapplicable from lapse of time.
11. Condition Bth prescribes an outlay of £lOO,OOO in the
whole by the Australian Agricultural Company “in the formation of
roads, the erection of buildiugs, the cultivation, clearing, fencing,
draining, or other improvements of such lands ” to be ascertained by
reports from the Colonial Surveyor-General before the Company are
at liberty to sell the lands granted by the Crown. Or, these
surveys may be dispensed with, and power to sell given by a special
license from the Secretary of State.
12. There are peculiar circumstances connected with this con-
dition of the Company’s charter, to which I solicit your Lordship’s
attention, it is the only one the fulfilment of which is not susceptible
of the clearest proof, but even here I feel assured that I shall be able
to satisfy your Lordship that no reasonable doubt can exist as to the
objects contemplated by Government in making this condition being
long since fully accomplished, and that even were this fact less clear
than it is, the Australian Agricultural Company have the strongest
claims to the favourable consideration of your Lordship, in conse-
quence of their having been deprived, almost from the outset, of that
full aud continuous supply of convict labour they were led to expect.
13. In the first place, I would observe That throughout the
various negotiations, verbal and written, which took place in the
year 1823-4, preparatory to the Australian Agricultural Company
obtaining their Act of Parliament, royal charter, and grant of land,
between the Colonial Department and the then Directors of the
Company, the object to which your Lordship’s noble predecessor
avowedly attached primary importance, was to guard against the
grant of land being used merely as a speculation, wherein the pro-
jectors of the Company might take advantage of any sudden increase
in the value of Colonial land, such as prevailed a few years ago, to


transfer the lands to less responsible parties who might fail in the
fulfilment of the conditions of the tenure touching the maintenance
of convicts, hence not only the introduction of this condition, but
also certain clauses in the Act of Parliament, which prohibited any
change in the Directors for five years, or the payment of any divi-
dends for a certain period, and not, I submit to your Lordship, that it
was of any importance to the Government when making a grant
such as the Australian Agricultural Company received, whether a
few thousand pounds more or less were expended on the lands in
any particularly specified manner.
14. If, therefore, I am able, on the part of the Australian
Agricultural Company, to shew your Lordship that their Capital
has been fully expended in the improvement of their lands in
various ways, independent of the essential benefit their incorporation
has been to the Colony at large by the introduction of superior
breeds of sheep, oxen, horses and mules without regard to expense,
a fact universally admitted in the Colony; lam satisfied that your
Lordship will be disposed to admit that the Bth condition of the
charter has been fairly satisfied.
15. The Australian Agricultural Company have had for some
years past the whole of their property in the Colony valued every
year, which valuation authenticated by their Commissioner and
Chief Accountant is sent to this country, the valuation varying of
course with the variation in the value of their several descriptions of
property, and at the present time exhibiting a very reduced scale in
consequence of the deterioration of every description of Colonial
property, the purpose for which these valuations are made, namely,
a true annual exhibition of the value of the Company’s property,
precludes the suspicion that any motive could exist on the part of
the Company’s officers to aggravate the value of the whole or of
any part.
16. I have the honor to submit for your Lordship’s examin-
ation the last annual valuation of the Company’s property received
from the Colony, and it shows that the whole is estimated at
£355,249. 9s. 10d., and that the Company have now, apparent and
in good condition, roads, bridges, buildings, cleared lands, fences,
drainings, &c., of the actual present value of £56,729. 14s. lid.,
independent of the steam engines, machinery, wharves, &c. at
their Collieries, and if to this your Lordship will add the excess
nearly of £40,000 which has been saved to the Government in the
maintenance of convicts beyond the £lOO,OOO required to redeem
their quit rent, I trust your Lordship will see grounds to justify the
admission that the Bth condition of the charter has been fairly
fulfilled.
20


17. But even if I should be too sanguine in this expectation,
there are grounds I submit which entitle the Australian Agricul-
tural Company to a more than ordinary share of the liberal
consideration of Government, and which in justice to the interests
I represent I may not omit to press upon your Lordship’s attention.
18. Your Lordship is well aware, and the preamble to the Act
of Parliament incorporating the Company clearly proves, that the
grant of land was then calculated to he of mutual benefit both to
the Government and the Company. The land was at that time
entirely valueless to the Crown, while it was of great moment to
the Government to he relieved from the expense of maintaining a
large body of convicts, and I can confidently assert that the
undertaking never would have been embarked in by the Australian
Agricultural Company, or the grant of land accepted, but for the
expectation held out to them of a constant and adequate supply of
convict labour, amounting at the time to a moral obligation on the
part of the Government to continue that source of supply of labour
independent of its pecuniary advantage to the State.
19. The records of your Lordship’s office will show how
urgently, from time to time, the Company pressed for an adequate
supply of convicts, and how constantly their applications and
claims were made subservient to those of the private settlers by the
local government, even when convicts were at their disposal.
20. When the altered policy of the Government led to the
abolition of the assignment system, your Lordship will do the
Company the justice to remember that they submitted with
deference to the change, though keenly sensible of its disastrous
effects upon their interests, and without intruding upon the Colonial
Department those murmurs of complaint which a change so much
at variance with the original understanding on which they embarked
their capital might have warranted, proceeded, and have continued
from time to time, to send out from this country free labourers at a
heavy expense, the effect of which has been, together with your
Lordship’s decision regarding their coal monopoly, that of the 20
years the Company have been incorporated, the Directors have
only been able to pay a dividend to the proprietors for 8 years.
No dividend was paid for the first ten years, and they have been
necessarily suspended for the last two years, the total dividends
paid during the eight years amount only to £B. I Os. per share of
TBO paid up.
21. If what I have thus stated be not deemed by your
Lordship sufficient to justify the admission on the part of Govern-
ment that the Bth condition of the charter has been actually
fulfilled by the Company, it will, I earnestly hope, be found sufficient
to warrant your Lordship granting us the special license to sell
21


our lands, which power is reserved to the Secretary of State by the
last clause of that condition.
22. To insist upon the prescribed surveys being now under-
taken after the lapse of 20 years would operate with extreme
hardship and injustice on the Company, and protract, to an
indefinite period, their power to turn their property to the best
advantage, by the encouragement of settlers upon their estates, for
hitherto they have been unable to give a legal title to a single acre
of land, and there is too much reason to apprehend from the long
delay which has already taken place in the preparation of the
title deeds even in their present defective state, and for which
delay the Company is in no wise responsible, that some years
would elapse before the surveys could be completed, with reference
to the other duties the Surveyor-General has to perform, and when
completed would not give any fair or accurate report of the sums
that have been expended by the Company under the prescribed
heads of “ roads, buildings, cultivation, clearing, fencing, draining,
and other improvements.”
23. Whatever the Australian Agricultural Company has
expended under these different heads from year to year since they
first took possession of their grant, they are clearly entitled by the
terms of the Charter to have credit for, in estimating the fulfilment
of the Bth condition ; but I submit to your Lordship the impossibility
of any Surveyor being able after a lapse of 20 years to ascertain
with any approach to accuracy, what amount may have been
expended during that time in cultivation, clearing, fencing, draining,
or other undefined improvements unless he had a perfect-knowledge
of and still recollected the precise state of the lands when first taken
possession of by the Company.
24. The very fact of depasturing and otherwise providing for
100,000 sheep, 6,000 horned cattle and 500 horses which the
Company possess must imply an improvement in the lands so
occupied, upon which it would be impossible without a long previous
knowledge of the country to affix any money value, and yet for
which I submit the Company would be entitled to consideration in
estimating their fulfilment of the Bth condition of the charter.
25. If I have succeeded in satisfying your Lordship that the
Company have fulfilled the conditions of their charter, or that there
are sufficient grounds for your Lordship granting the special license
to sell their lands, then I respectfully take leave to suggest that the
various documents received with Mr. Under-Secretary Hope s letter of
9th August last and which arc herewith returned, be sent to the
Solicitors of the Colonial Office with an intimation to that effect,
when the proper form in which the deeds should be prepared would
be easily settled between them and the Solicitors of the Company.


26. I have not made any allusion to the 4th Instrument sent
by the Local Government and referred to in the outset of this
letter, because I understand that in a subsequent Despatch from
Governor Gipps your Lordship has been advised that it is not now
thought necessary by the Colonial Law Officers to require the Com-
pany to surrender and re-assign to the Crown the portion of land
therein referred to.
Mr, James Stephen , Under-Secretary of State for the Colonies , to
Directors of the Company.
With reference to the correspondence and interviews which
have taken place between yourself and this department on the
subject of a grant by the Secretary of State of a license under the
terms of the charter of the Australian Agricultural Company to
alienate the whole, or some portion of the lands granted to them,
I am directed by Lord Stanley, to inform you that he has
recently received a despatch from Sir George Gipps, from which
it appears that the Company are now entitled as of right to
alienate three hundred thousand acres.
Lord Stanley has also reconsidered your letter of the 20th
December last, in connection with the information now received.
In that letter you press upon his Lordship the justice of
altogether relieving the Company from the restraint on alienation
of their lands hitherto imposed upon them ; founding your application
partly upon the general change in the policy adopted with regard to
the alienation of land in the Australian Colonies, and partly on
the special ground among others, that by the withdrawal of convict
laboui, the Company are not only prevented from cultivating and
managing their property generally, in the mode originally contem-
plated, but more particularly have been prevented from effecting
those improvements by means of which, under the terms of the
original charter, they could have entitled themselves, as of right, to
a dispensation to the extent of 200,000 acres more, in addition to the
300,000, for which Sir George Gipps now reports that they have
already established a right to a license.
Lord Stanley cannot, without a reference to the Local
Government, come to any decision on the propriety of removing
altogether the prohibition against alienation, but admits the validity
of the argument advanced, as affecting the extent of land, which, it
was contemplated in the original charter, that the Company might
entitle themselves by improvements to alienate, amounting altogether
to 000,000 acres, and his Lordship therefore will not object to
granting the necessary license for alienation of 200,000 acres in
addition to the 300,000, to which the expenditure of the Company
gives them an absolute right, making the whole, for which a license
will be granted immediately if wished, 500,000 acres.
23


Directors of the Company to the Rt. Hon. Lord Stanley.
My Lord,
I have the honour to acknowledge on the part of the Directors
of the Australian Agricultural Company, the receipt of Mr. Under-
secretary Stephen’s letter of the 16th ultimo, communicating
your Lordship’s decision on the reference made to your Lordship
in my letter of the 20th December last, relative to the lands
granted to the Australian Agricultural Company in New South
Wales, and the title deeds conveying the same under the terms of
the Eoval Charter of the Ist November, 1824.
•/ /
We trust we shall not be considered insensible to the liberal
consideration given by your Lordship to our representations, or
to the extent of the concession contemplated by your Lordship—
which on the contrary we gratefully accept —if we venture to offer
a few remarks on Mr. Under-Secretary Stephen’s letter, a course
which it appears incumbent on us to adopt in protection of the
large interests confided to our management, and in order that the
extent of the concession which your Lordship is disposed to make
to us, beyond our existing rights under the Loyal Charter may be
correctly understood.
We observe that since my address of the 20th December last,
u your Lordship has recently received a despatch from Sir George
Gipps from which it appears that the Australian Agricultural
Company are now entitled as of right to alienate 300,000 acres of
their land,” which report on the part of Sir George Gipps is no
doubt founded on the statement of amounts laid out, and expended
by the Australian Agricultural Company in improvements of the
land granted to them under the Bth condition of the Royal Charter.
The gross amount exhibited in that statement is £75,098.155. Id.,
which sum under the Bth condition of our charter would entitle us
as of right to the power of alienating 375,000 acres without
restriction.
Although it is not so stated in Mr. Under-Secretary Stephen’s
letter now under acknowledgement, yet we have reason to know
from the report of our Commissioner, Captain King, that Sir
George Gipps, has grounded his report of our being entitled, as of
right, to alienate 300,000 acres only upon the belief that the amount
expended on the coal land at Newcastle did not give the Company
a proportionate right of alienation, the grant at Newcastle having
been made some time subsequent to the original grant under the
Royal Charter, and was not contemplated therein.
We submit to your Lordship that Sir George Gipps is in error
in this opinion, because if your Lordship will refer to the Act of
Parliament (5 Geo. IV., cap. 86) founded on the Royal Charter to


the Company it will be found expressly declared in the preamble
that all lands as shall or may be granted by His Majesty within the
said Colony to the Australian Agricultural Company shall be subject
to all the conditions, provisoes, &c., as His Majesty by such His
Charter may impose, &c., and we are assured by our legal adviser
that the conditions of the charter would apply under the said Act
of Parliament to any grant of the Crown made in addition to the
land originally granted at however distant a date.
If this be the correct interpretation of the preamble of the sth
Geo. IV., cap. 86, it would appear that we are as of right entitled
to alienate 375,000 acres, and if to this be added the fact that in the
statement of the amount expended by the Company under the Bth
condition of the Charter the actual money outlay as shown by the
Company’s books is alone included and that if the surveys prescribed
by the charter could after such a lapse of time be conveniently made or
were indeed practicable, the value of the improvements made by
the Company would exhibit a much larger amount than £75,000,
a fact which we doubt not will be admitted by Sir George Gipps if
he have not already done so ; thus your Lordship will perceive that
the concession intended to be made to us to alienate 200,000 acres
beyond what we are entitled to as of right falls considerably short
of that amount.
We beg your Lordship to believe that w r e do not press the
foregoing points with any other object than that of endeavouring to
remove what we respectfully submit is a misapprehension on the
part of Sir George Gipps of what we believe we may claim as a
right under our charter and in order that your Lordship may be
aware that the concession made has not gone to the liberal extent
apparently intended by your Lordship.
We observe that your Lordship cannot without a reference to
the local government come to any decision on the propriety of
conceding to us the removal altogether of the prohibition against
the alienation of any larger quantity of our land than is provided
for in the Royal Charter * * * and we of course
submit * * * we should not have preferred our
application * * * had not the altered policy of
the Government * * * led us confidently to believe
that a compliance with our request would be in accordance with that
policy and that the Government had not any object or interest in
holding a corporate body such as ours to a perpetual tenure in
mortmain instead of allowing us by the unfettered right of sale
of all, to dispose of moderate portions of our lands after certain
improvements from time to time, and thereby encourage the per-
manent location in the Colony of a large body of landholders, such
operations necessarily extending over a period of many years to


come. If we are mistaken in this supposition * * *
we acknowledge that we have no grounds to support the application
we made, except those set forth in my letter of the 20th
December last.
Being now in possession of your Lordship’s decision generally as
to the manner in which the conditions of our charter are to be treated
in the title deeds, we are engaged in a revision of those transmitted
from the Colony in conformity with the verbal instructions referred
to in the commencement of Mr. Under-Secretary Stephen’s letter,
which together with a form of license for the sale of 500,000 acres
which your Lordship has agreed to grant will be submitted for
approval as soon as completed by the Solicitors to the Company.
9 (J- 10 Vic., cap. 351 , assented to 7th August , 1846 • Reciting
5 Geo. IV., cap. 86 and Royal Charter.
Also reciting that under divers instructions from time to time
issued by order of George IV. and William IV. to the Governors of
the said Colony, the said Company had been authorised to take pos-
session of several portions of land and other hereditaments situated
in the said Colony, and had with the assent of the Governors for the
time being entered into and taken possession of the said lands and
hereditaments, and had been for 20 years and upwards in possession
thereof, but no grant thereof had been made to the said Company.
And also reciting that the said Company have from time to time
employed and maintained upon the said lands very large numbers of
convicts, and have by such employment exonerated her Majesty’s
Treasury from a charge exceeding in the whole the sum of £lOO,OOO
and had also laid out large sums of money in the improvement of
divers parts of the said lands * * * * and had substantially
fulfilled divers of the conditions contained in the said letters patent
* * * * and by reason of lapse of time and the alteration of
circumstances, others of the said conditions have become im-
material, &c.
Enacts that it shall be lawful for her Majesty by warrant under
Eoyal Sign Manual to authorise the Governor for the time being of the
said Colony of New South Wales to grant by deed to the said Company
any lands, tenements, and hereditaments in the said Colony *
freed and for ever discharged of and from the quit rents, conditions,
provisoes, limitations and restrictions in the said letters patent or
charter expressed and therein before recited, or such of them or
such parts thereof as Her Majesty shall in or by the said grant or
warrant direct * * * * * * *
and it shall be lawful for the said Company to hold, alienate, sell and
26


dispose of all or any part thereof, subject only to such conditions as shall
be stipulated in and by the grant.
And further enacts that this Act shall be deemed and taken to be a
public Act, and shall extend to and be in force in the said Colony of New
South Wales and its dependencies.
Directors of the ('onipany to the Eight Honorable Earl Grey ,
Secretary of State for the Colonies .
My Lord,
Being sensible of the great pressure upon your Lordship’s time
that would immediately follow the prorogation of parliament, I have
felt it to be respectful to allow a moderate time to elapse before .1
solicited your Lordship’s attention to the present position of the
Australian Agricultural Company, consequent on the Act of Parlia-
ment recently passed, and pointed out the disadvantage under which
that Company has long laboured, and must continue to labour until
your Lordship finally decides upon the only point touching their
title deeds not yet settled.
I am anxious, in stating the case of the Australian Agricultural
Company, to avoid any recapitulation of previous correspondence
that can be avoided, and therefore, for the present, would respect-
fully request your Lordship’s advertence to the letters named in the
margin, together with the minutes or memoranda thereon left in the
Colonial Office by your Lordship’s predecessor; these with the Act
of Parliament above mentioned, will put your Lordship in possession
of the present position of the Australian Agricultural Company, and
if anything more should be wanting to a clear apprehension of our
case, I trust your Lordship will allow me to furnish what may be
necessary, and to do which I have ample means.
Your Lordship will gather from the correspondence I have
mentioned and the Act of Parliament the following facts :
Ist. That the Australian Agricultural Company after having
been incorporated upwards of 22 years, have not yet
been able to obtain the title deeds to the grant of land
made to them.
2nd. That it has been proved to the satisfaction of
Government, that where practicable, the Australian
Agricultural Company have substantially filled the
terms of the Royal Charter under which the grant of
land was made to them, and, that where the terms
have not been fulfilled, a fulfilment is now imprac-
ticable from lapse of time, changes in policy of
Government and other causes.
3rd. That in consequence the right of the Australian
Agricultural Company to a declaration of exemption
27


from all the stipulations of the charter, and to possess
in fee siixple with free power of alienation 500,000
acres of their original grant, and of all other land
subsequently acquired by purchase, have been fully
recognized.
4th. That the only limitation now existing, to prevent the
Australian Agricultural Company dealing with the
whole of their landed property in the Colony as they
pleased, is that contained in the Bth condition in the
Royal Charter, which declares that the lands granted to
the Australian Agricultural Company shall be held in
mortmain, except 500,000 acres to be manumitted on
certain conditions as above mentioned, the substantial
performance of which has already been recognized,
and it was to authorize the Crown at its discretion
to release the remaining portion of the grant from this
condition of the charter that the Act 9 and 10 Viet.,
cap. 351, was recently passed. It is to obtain this
consideration and concession at your Lordship’s hands
that I now, as Governor of the Australian Agricultural
Company, address you, all other points having been
finally decided upon, as will be perceived by the
correspondence already mentioned.
The ground upon wdiich the Australian Agricultural Company
claim this concession from your Lordship may be stated under the
following heads, which I make as brief as possible, viz. :
Isto Because when the grant was originally made us, 22
years ago, land was of no value to Government, and
was given freely and gratuitously, and if our land has
acquired any value since or does hereafter, it has been
or will be by the outlay of our capital and our long
occupation and consequent improvement of it.
2nd. Because our main inducement to involve our capital in
the undertaking was the apparent certainty of our
being amply supplied with convict labour, and if such
a prospect had not been held out to us by Government
we never would have embarked in it...
3rd. That such supply of convict labour has been inadequate
from the first, that when the assignment system
prevailed we never got our fair proportion of convicts,
that for many years the supply was miserably deficient
and the cause of repeated complaints from us as the
records of your Lordship’s office will amply prove,
while it was at all times compulsory upon us to main-
tain a large body of convicts whether we wanted them
28


or not, had it pleased the Colonial authorities to order
us to receive them.
4th. That consequently we have been put to great expense
in sending free labourers from this country and in
hiring others in the Colony, an expense that we
should not have been put to but from the altered
policy of the Government.
sth. That we have sent out to the Colony at our expense
upwards of 650 emigrants, and that the bounty
latterly granted to all other settlers on the importation
of free labourers has been refused to us by the local
government.
6th. That we have expended upwards of <£300,000 in our
undertaking, and by the introduction of the finest
breeds of sheep, oxen, horses, mules, &c., have
benefitted the Colony generally as is universally
acknowledged.
7th. Because regardless of expense we have done every-
thing that was practicable to improve the moral and
social condition of all our servants whether free or
convicts. A church has been built on our grant, we
have a minister of the Church of England, paid by us
and exclusively devoted to our establishments. We
support schools, and the result of all has been that
our establishments are remarkable for a degree of
order and good conduct not always found in the
Colony. Many of those employed by us have been
in our service from our incorporation, many convicts
assigned to us have been reclaimed and are now
industrious people settled on our properties since their
manumission, and we believe that we form a rare
exception in having had for several years some of the
aborigines in our service.
Bth. That we have done all this with no assistance, and
but little encouragement from the Government,
either at home or abroad, but on the contrary,
have been compelled to press our complaints on the
Home Government year after year, while the assign-
ment system lasted, at the unfair manner in which
we were supplied with convicts in comparison with
others not having the claims we had. While on
the other hand, when the policy of Government
was altered, and all furthar supply of convicts with-
held, we submitted without murmur or remonstrance
or troubling Government with any claims or


complaints, notwithstanding the injurious effect
which such a change had and continues to have on
our prosperity.
9th. That from this failure to supply us with convict
labour, and the expense of free labour never
calculated on when we embarked in our under-
taking, we have only been able to pay 34 and
l-6th per cent, on our paid-up capital to our
proprietors in 22 years, and that for 10 years we
were unable to pay any dividends.
10th. That from the long delay in completing our title
deeds arising from no omission or fault of ours,
we have lost the opportunities which the high price
of land at one time afforded of selling advantageously
such portions of our grant as we could, and have
since established, our right to alienate.
11th. Because we have strong grounds to complain of the
treatment we have received from Government with
regard to our coal mines, the working of which we
undertook reluctantly, at the express desire of the
Home Government, upon the faith of certain
privileges which have not been maintained to us
which have been violated or evaded, and are so to
this hour, while we have in vain sought for redress.
12th. Because we challenge comparison with any
analogous Colonial corporate body, as having more
faithfully and undeviatingly fulfilled the object,
spirit, and letter of our original incorporation, as
far as the Colony is concerned, with so little support
or encoragement from Government, but often
having to contend with the reverse.
These, my Lord, are the outlines of the principal grounds on
which the Australian Agricultural Company lays claim to the
consideration of Government for any concession beyond our
recognized rights. I have stated them as briefly as I could, being
at the same time prepared, if your Lordship desires it, to afford
ample proof in detail of all I have asserted.
It may and no doubt will in the first instance occur to your
Lordship that a compliance with our application might as touching
the late Land Sale Act have the effect of making us appear as a rival
seller of land to the Government, and to a certain extent this
cannot be denied, hut if your Lordship should see fit on the grounds
I have stated to free the remainder of our land from the only
restriction now upon us, I respectfully submit that if viewed in all
its bearings this should not form an objection sufficiently strong to


overrule all that I have stated in support of our claims to
consideration.
Because we should not be a rival seller more than any other
landed proprietor in the Colony, and it is notorious that owing to
the distress under which the Colony has laboured for the last three
or four years, there are vast quantities of land that would now be
sold if there was any sale at all for such property, the present
holders of which will be always ready to undersell the Government
should a demand for land arise.
I further submit to your Lordship’s consideration whether it is
likely that a Company, which has stood its ground under many
great and pressing disadvantages for 22 years, would now rush
heedlessly into the market and sacrifice its property, on the contrary
are we not more likely to uphold the value of land, and when we
do sell small portions from time to time to settlers upon terms
which only a Company like ours can give, to secure to the Colony
a countervailing advantage by the encouragement and introduction
of an increased agricultural population, establishing themselves as
it were under our protection and fostered by our support where
industrious and deserving.
While, as we hope, when we do not sell, that most of what we
part with will be sold in this country to parties contemplating
emigration, who would be confirmed in their intention by the
certainty that would attend their dealing with an established and
responsible Company, able and willing to give them many facilities
in stocking their land, and in easiness of payment. We should
rather co-operate and promote than interfere with the object of the
Land Sale Act, in encouraging emigration.
But in truth, my Lord, we have no intention of precipitately
selling our land, it is obvious that it must be many years before we
can hope to sell even a moiety of that land to which our right to sell
has been admitted; but it is natural without any such intention
that we should desire to be in a position to be able to deal with the
property, which I must be permitted to say, we have very hardly
earned after the lapse of so many years, unfettered even by a
restriction that in the end might prove more nominal than real,
because, supposing your Lordship not to allow our claim to the con-
cession we now seek, and to refuse us any consideration, it may be
fairly doubted whether the Colony would be any gainer by keeping
us tied up in mortmain with regard to half our land, and compelling
us to evade the restriction by long leases of 999 years at a pepper-
corn rent, which I apprehend we shall have full legal power to do,
a course it would be much more agreeable to our feelings to avoid.
I venture confidently to anticipate that your Lordship will
rather incline to the opinion that it will be better, by a fair and liberal


consideration towards us, to carry us with the Government as willing
and zealous coadjutors in carrying out its plans which it is equally
our desire and interest to do. To lower the value of land would
he obviously suicidal on our part.
I will only further add that your Lordship’s compliance with
our application to have the title deeds to all our grant completed in
fee simple will obviate a difficulty I apprehend of considerable
magnitude that must attend their being drawn up on any other basis.
For if we are to have one half of our grant in fee simple, as we have the
right to, and the other half is to remain in mortmain, I apprehend the
attempt at definition or division under these two tenures would be
very difficult if not impracticable. But I forbear lengthening this
letter by any attempt to describe what I doubt not will readily occur
to the mind of your Lordship.
Mr. Hawes , Under Secretary of State for the Colonies , to
Directors of the Company .
I am directed by Earl Grey to acknowledge receipt of your
letter of the 4th instant, in which you call his Lordship’s attention
to the present position of the Australian Agricultural Company with
reference to the recent Act of Parliament 9 & 10 Viet., cap. 851, to
amend the 5 George IV, cap. 86, for granting certain powers and
authorities to the Company.
Adverting to the fact that the right of the Company to a
declaration of exemption from all the stipulations of the charter,
and to possess in fee simple with free power of alienation 500,000
acres of their original grant, and of all other land subsequently
acquired by purchase, have been fully recognized. You represent
that the only limitation now existing to prevent the Company from
dealing with the whole of their landed property in the Colony as
they please, is that contained in the Bth condition of the Eoyal
Charter, which declares that the lands granted to the Company
shall be held in mortmain, except 500,000 acres to be manumitted
on certain conditions, ,the substantial performance of which has
already been recognized, and that it was to authorize the
Crown at its discretion, to release the remaining portion of the
grant from that condition of the charter that the Act 9 & 10
Yict., cap. 351, was recently passed. You therefore request on
behalf of the Company that that restriction may be withdrawn.
In reply, I am directed to acquaint you that Lord Grey is
happy to be able to comply with your request, and his Lordship
trusts that you will now have no difficulty in the completion of the
title deeds of the Company’s grant.
32


Lord Grey to Sir Charles Fitzroy , Governor of New South Wales.
With reference to the despatches enumerated in the margin,
from your predecessor, respecting the conveyance to the Australian
Agricultural Company of the lands which they have occupied for
several years under the provisions of their charter, and various
arrangements from time to time since their incorporation in 1824,
assented to on behalf of the Crown by my predecessor. I have
now to apprize you of the decisions which the Government have
taken on this subject, and to give you the necessary instructions for
completing the title deeds of the Company.
I do not propose on the present occasion to recapitulate the
several matters which as between the Crown and the Company
required to be adjusted, nor do I think that any useful purpose will
be accomplished by my drawing your attention to the correspondence
on this subject that has passed between this Department, the
Company, and the Law Officers of the Crown. Upon my accession
to office I found that progress towards completing the Company’s
title had already been made, that communications had taken place
between Lord Stanley as well as my immediate predecessor and the
Company, that the Law Officers had been instructed to prepare the
necessary instruments to convey the lands to the Company with
the right forthwith to alienate a considerable portion. It was
however discovered that in consequence of the conditions and res-
trictions imposed by their charter and the Act (5 Geo. IV., cap. 86)
under which it was issued, this conveyance to be at all available
to the Company for the purpose of selling land could not be effected
without the sanction of Parliament. Accordingly application was
made to the Legislature for authority to the Crown to grant, and to
the Company to hold or to dispose of land, freed and discharged
from the conditions and restrictions to which I have now adverted.
Parliament has thought proper to sanction that application, acting
I presume upon the assumption that many of the reservations in
question are wholly inapplicable to the state of things at present
existing in the Colony, while others are of doubtful advantage to
the public, and I now transmit for your information and guidance
a copy of the Act passed during last session empowering Her Majesty
by warrant to authorize you to execute a conveyance to the
Company of any lands in the Colony freed and discharged from all
conditions and restrictions (9 & 10 Vic., cap. 851).
Since the passing of this Act I have myself also been in
communication with the Company and am unable to perceive that
any adequate advantage to the Crown, commensurate with the
disadvantge to the Company, will be secured by continuing the
conditions and restrictions respecting the tenure and sale of land,
which in the early negotiations with the Company or at any
33


subsequent period may have been contemplated on either side,,
whilst I am greatly impressed on the one hand with the evil that
must result from land remaining unproductive in the hands of the
Company, and on the other with the importance to the Colony at
large of encouraging the introduction of capitalists, whether they
may intend settling upon land the property of the Crown or of an
influential and well established public Company.
I have therefore felt justified in submitting to the Queen the
advice that Her Majesty should issue a Warrant directing you to
cause to be prepared a deed conveying to the Company the land
specified in the Warrant freed, and discharged from all conditions and
restrictions. I may also add, that in submitting this advice, I was
not altogether influenced by the altered state of the Company’s
settlements as respects convict labour.
Her Majesty, approving of the course proposed, has been
graciously pleased to affix the Royal Sign Manual to a Warrant
directing you to execute a deed according to the form therein set
forth, which Warrant I now transmit to you in original, and I
have to instruct you to lose no time in giving due effect to Her
Majesty’s commands. It is unnecessary for me to advert in detail
to the provisions of the deed, but there is one point on which some
further explanation may be convenient. You will not fail to observe
that it includes the land at Newcastle, where the Company have
their coal works.
It has been thought advisable that the same principle dispensing
with conditions and restrictions applied to the other lands should be
extended to the land containing coal, and that the Company should
be released from any engagement to the Crown respecting the coal
mines, at the same time that the Government is to be released from
any stipulation which otherwise would be binding upon it in con-
sequence of a former agreement with the Company, giving them
exclusive advantages in the working of coal, which agreement
henceforth is to be considered at an end.
Deed of Grant under the hand of Sir Charles Augustus Fitzroy and
the Public Seal of the Colony.
Recites the Act 5 Geo. IV., cap. 86, and the Royal Charter.
Also recites that by divers instructions, issued to the Governors
of the Colony, the Company have been authorized to take
possession of the lands and hereditaments thereinafter described,
and have, with the assent of the Governor for the time being, taken
possession of the same, and have been for several years in possession
thereof, and have expended very large sums of money in the
improvement thereof, but no grant thereof hath yet been made.
34


Also recites 9 & 10 Viet., cap. 351.
And also recites that in consideration of the said instructions
Her Majesty had, by Warrant under Eoyal Sign Manual, dated 18th
April, 1847, authorized the Governor of the said Colony to execute
a deed under the Great Seal of the Colony, of the tenor of the now
reciting presents.
In consideration of the premises, we have granted and do hereby
grant unto the Australian Agricultural Company and their successors :
Firstly: 464,640 acres in the county Gloucester, &c.
Secondly: 249,600 acres at Liverpool Plains, &c.
Thirdly : 313,298 acres at the Peel River, &c.
Fourthly : All that piece or parcel of land in our said
Colony, containing by admeasurement 2,000 acres,
situated in the parish of Newcastle, county of
Northumberland, commencing at the north-east
corner, and bounded partly on the north by 35*40
chains of the coast on a west line, on part of the
west by a south line of 10*00 chains to the south
side of the road to Maitland on the remainder of the
north, and on the north-east by the south side of
the before-named road to the north-west corner,
that corner bearing from the centre of the bridge over
Throsby’s Creek, N. E. 50*00 chains, on
the west by a south line of 193*50 chains, on the
south by an east line of 162*00 chains to the coast,
on the south-east by the coast, and on the east by
a line bearing N. 15°, W. 47*00 chains to the
coast at the north-east corner aforesaid. Except
and always reserved to us, our heirs and successors,
out of the said piece or parcel of land, containing
2,000 acres, all that piece or parcel of land con-
taining by admeasurement 87 acres, situate in the
said county of Northumberland, and parish of
Newcastle, commencing at the north-west corner of
the township (according to the scale of the maps
prepared by Mr. Hangar), and bounded on the west by
a line bearing S. 7°, W. 17*15 chains, and a line bearing
S. 15°, E. 41*00 chains to the coast line, on the
south by the coast line, on the east by a line bearing
N. 15°, W. 47*00 chains to the harbour of New-
castle, and on the north by high water mark of that
harbour, westerly to the commencing point.
Fifthly : oa. Or. 36p., town of Newcastle, being allotment
No. 28.


Sixthly: Oa. Ok. 86p., town of Newcastle, being allotment
No. 52.
Seventhly: Right to mine for coal under the above-
mentioned 87 acres.
To hold, &c., freed and for ever discharged from all and every
the quit rents, conditions, provisoes, limitations, and restrictions
in the said letters patent or charter expressed and contained.
It will be remarked that the promises to the Company of ample
water frontage to their coal lands have not been carried out. They are
first promised a tract on the banks of the Coal River (p. 2, 12), then
an additional 1,500 acres, all allotments to have a liberal water frontage
(p. 15). The 500 acres were to include old mines. Finally, however,
the water frontage is limited to a very small portion of the grant which
the Company are subsequently made to pay for. In 1869 and 1870,
in course of negotiating with the Company for the purchase of certain
land required for sidings leading to the New Government coal staiths, a
claim was raised by the Government that the right of the Company to
Harbour frontage did not give them the right to extend it to deep
water, in other words, that the water frontage was merely nominal, and
payment was claimed for reclamation by means of ballast deposited by
vessels frequenting the harbour opposite the Company’s land, under the
directions of Government Officials, assisted by natural causes. A
continuous raising of the bottom had resulted in advancing the low water
mark in front of the Company’s property, and had also increased the area
of dry land at all states of the tide. This newly formed land was in
pursuance of an agreement to that effect come to during these negotiations
purchased by the Company, at a valuation, and authority having also been
given to them to reclaim and purchase an additional strip, whose
northern limit was a reclamation line laid down by the Government
Harbours and Rivers Department, the two portions were conveyed in one
parcel to the Company by—
Deed of Grant which
Recites that in conformity with regulations then in force for the
sale of reclaimed Crown Lands in the Colony of New South Wales,
the Australian Agricultural Company have become purchasers of the
land thereinafter described, for the sum of £1,077, the price
determined by appraisement, as by law required.
In consideration of the said sum : We, with the advice, &c., have
granted, &c. unto the said Australian Agricultural Company their heirs
and assigns subject to reservations hereinafter mentioned.
All that allotment or parcel of land in our said Colony containing
by admeasurement 2a. Or. 25p., be the same more or less, situated in
the County of Northumberland, parish of Newcastle, at Newcastle,
36


Port Hunter, commencing on the eastern boundary wall of the
Australian Agricultural Company’s grant of 2,000 acres at a point
where the assumed high water line at time of the aforesaid grant
meets that wall, and bounded thence on the east by that wall
northerly about o*4o chains to the limit line of reclamation as laid
down by the Engineer-in-Chief for Harbours, &c., on the north by
that limit line westerly to its intersection with the northerly
continuation of the Australian Agricultural Company’s western
boundary line, on the west by that northerly continuation, southerly
about 2*Bo chains to the aforesaid assumed high water line, and on
the south by that high water line, easterly about 28*00 chains to
the point of commencement, as per plan in the margin hereof
* * * * with all the rights and appurtenances
whatsoever thereto belonging.
To hold unto the said Australian Agricultural Company, their
heirs and assigns for ever * * *
Provided, nevertheless, and we do hereby reserve unto us, &c., and
to the Governor for the time being of our said Colony by such
person or persons as shall be by him or them authorized in that
behalf full power to make and conduct through the said land all
common or public drains and sewers which may be deemed
expedient.
36 Sf 37 Viet , cap . 30, Assented to 15th May , 1873.
Recites incorporation of the Company, the amount of paid-up
capital, and that it is expedient the Company’s objects should be extended.
Enacts that the Company’s former Acts shall extend to the
Colonies.
Empowers the Company to conduct mining, mineral, pastoral,
trading, carrying, and other operations.
Gives power to borrow money on debenture, declares powers of
Directors, signature of orders, appointment of agents, &c., &c., &c.
37


