

Australian
Musical
Possibilities
By
Henry Tate


(f" .
/
if


:: Australian ::
Musical Possibilities




Australian
Musical Possibilities
by
Henry Tate
With an Introduction by
Bernard O’Dowd
Commonwealth of Australia:
EDWARD A. VIDLER
Publisher
4 COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE


ACKNOWLEDGMENT.
The author desires to refer to the previous
publication of these papers in “The Argus,”
‘‘The Herald,” ‘‘The West Australian,” ‘‘The
Theatre Magazine,” “Corroboree,” and ‘‘The
New Outlook,” and to thank the Editors and
Proprietors of those journals for their kind per-
mission to re-publish here.


CONTENTS
Page
Introduction, by Bernard O’Dowd 7
Prelude 11
Racial Music 14
Bush Rhythms 19
Bush Melody 22
Bush Harmony 25
Aboriginal Music 28
Bush Orchestration 32
Epilogue 36
Appendix I.—
Bell-birds at Belgrave 47
A Cinderella of the Arts 49
Appendix II. —
Henry Tate’s Australian Music 55
Appendix Hl.
Music Supplement:
"Morning in the Gully” (Pianoforte Solo) ... 65
"The Australian Thrush” (Song) 68


KEATING-WOOD PTY. LTD.
Printers
36 LONSDALE ST.. MELBOURNE


INTRODUCTION
THOSE of us whose faith it is that Australia is the matrix of a
richer humanity and a kindlier as well as more enlightened
civilisation than the present, here or elsewhere, will welcome
Henry Tate’s little volume as a new witness to that faith.
Foundations of mighty polities are slowly and silently planned.
Much that is experimental, tentative and exploratory precedes the
noisy pile-driving —and oh! the bonfires for the rubbish and the
muck-rakes for the ordure!
Among the planners of the City Beautiful none is more potent
than he who has feelers, whose inner urge compels him to search,
through a lifetime, if necessary, for truth, for good will, for beauty
—that is, for those intangible realities out of which all good
solidities are compounded.
Sound civilisations are based on sound ideas. A good tree bears
not evil fruit. If the fruit is evil the tree is doubtful. Is it any
wonder that men who live in the age of the Great War should not
only raise the question whether the politics or religions which made
that war possible are not impostor politics and religions, but should
also suspect that the Art, the ethics and the poetry which allowed
that war slowly to ripen are bogus Art, ethics and poetry? May
not such suspicion be the real crucible of our new supernaturalisms,
Bolshevisms, Fascisms, Cubisms, Pyrrhonisms and futuristicalities?
So subtly blended with life is idea that there is more than mystic
logic in questioning the soundness of Christianity, nationalism.
Raphael, the Ten Commandments and metrical poetry when the
world that believed in them, aye, made them its josses, burst itself
asunder in 1914-1918.
However these things be, those to whom Australia is not a
geographical expression but a spiritual banner know that it is only
by thought, goodwill and beauty that the Commonwealth That Is
To Be will be soundly and permanently planned and built. From


whatever source these architectonic essentials come we welcome them.
The very chance of their coming is a tonic. Every sign of their
coming is a Star of Bethlehem.
Already there have been scouts and forerunners —a few news-
papers, many poems, “Such is Life,” those who transfer Australian
light and shadow to canvas, whether with the tender love of a Pater-
son or the Peter the Hermit zeal of a Meldrum, those who Manu-
wise or Lycurgus-wise or Gracchus-wise frame the politic ground-
plan itself, from Lang and Vern through Higinbotham, Lilley and
Lane to Higgins and others of to-day, and so on in many branches,
not forgetting the obscure devotion of bird-lover, flower-gatherer,
moth-collector, and totem-interpreter. All have their parts in the
team-work that shall at last, if we are worthy the destiny, drag the
New Jerusalem from apocalyptic dreams to a shining fulfilment in
Australia.
Shall not Music, too, contribute its enchantment to the ensemble?
(After all, since magic is primarily swig, may not the ultimate of
all song be the creation out of chaos of the Enchanted Isle of our
Australian dream?)
Here, too, signs have not been wanting. No adept in music
myself, so little indeed that I theorise about it dogmatically and
(so my friends, with ears, tell me) blasphemously, yet even I, as a
far-off admirer of Marshall Hall, found democratic inspiration and
an added love for and pride in Australia while in the strangely real
atmosphere which his wizardry had power to fling around every
subject he touched. I have responded, too, as if I were of the
inner circle, to the dithyrambic enthusiasm of Tom Collins, and have
wondered why his paean on music has not already taken its rightful
place in general opinion among the great passages of English
literature.
Moreover, I happen to know Henry Tate, the author, as a writer
of verses of very fine lyrical quality, and as a man whom one can
trust and for whose comradeship one feels rich. One cannot
have known him for years without realising that he is of that
select company of people, not numerous yet, who are very silent
during the tumult and the shouting, but are, by the intensity of their
faith, the clairvoyance of their hope and the flame of their love,
the real nucleus of the Commonwealth that is not yet, but is
assuredly to be in this land of ours. The sincerity of his belief
in, hope for and love of Australia is an inspiration to all around
him.


Whether you are musical or not, you cannot hear him dis-
coursing on his favourite topic of the development of an Australian
music, “racy of the soil,” and yet throbbing in unison with the
great music of all the world, without feeling that Australia has a
great part to play in the future of the world, that that part will
be a beneficent and not a malevolent or parasitic one, and that
towards the shaping of the soul that will become the real Australia
a music of our own will not be the least potent of the creative wands.
This little book of his collects and gives some unity to his
considerations at various times of the possibilities of Australian
music. It so savours of Australia throughout that it must prove
interesting and welcome, not only to every real Australian, but to
anyone who wants to become acquainted at first hand with the
spirit of Australia. To use his own words about other things, it is
“distinctively Australian, and artistically eminent,” and to a singular
degree emanates “the musical aura of the Bush.”
The thinker as well as the artist reveals himself frequently in
the book, for example in such sentences as these;—
“Music that achieves nationality is on the way to rise
above nationality”;
or,
“Good work has a higher goal than recognition, due
or undue, and that goal is its own accomplishment.”
The poet in Henry Tate frequently finds expression, particularly
in his passages relating to the dreams of the old navigators and others
about Australia—Nearchus, Columbus, da Gama, Bruno and Galileo
—and during his remarkably arresting treatment of the artistic possi-
bilities of aboriginal music when he refers to the “grotesque and
pathetic shadows falling swiftly into the silence of the Never Never.”
The book is remarkably rich in the results of our author’s search
for musical material, ranging from bird-calls to aboriginal songs
and dances, and from the perfumes and climatic vicissitudes of
the bush to the use made of its “woodnotes wild” by the most
Australian of our poets and writers. The treatment of the last-
mentioned subject will prove of peculiar interest to literary folk
and is characterised by the author’s fairness, sanity and insight.
Mrs. Vida Lenox’s carefully compiled annotated catalogue of
Henry Tate’s Australian music is a useful appendix to the book
and will be greatly appreciated.
While I am not competent to assess technically the value of the
theories set forth in this volume by our author, my Australian in


stinct tells me that they are sound and full of the promise of develop-
ment into fact. His statements (inter alia) that our bird-calls “supply
us with an unfailing reservoir of varied and charming rhythms,” and
that "the various distinctive characteristics of bush sounds may grfe
a peculiar tinge to the musical idiom in which an Australian com-
poser may express himself,” have to me striking originality.
Apart from its musical theories and their soundness, however,
the little volume is redolent of gum-leaves, is a welcome addition
to Australian prose literature, and, it seems to me, meets the acid
test of a real Australian book, that is to say, it could not have
been written save by an Australian who knows, loves and has faith
in his country.
BERNARD O’DOWD.
January, 1924.
10
INTRODUCTION.


Australian Musical Possibilities
PRELUDE
In Australia, where we await the advent of a school of
composers who will succeed in producing music which will
be recognisable as national in the sense that the composers of
Italy, France, Germany, and Russia are recognised, the rapid
rise of Russian music to the highest eminence should arouse
keen interest and attention. About eighty years ago, Glinka
struck the first great blow for Russian musical supremacy
when he produced his “Life for the Czar” at the Imperial
Theatre, in Petrograd. Thus modern Russian music fur-
nishes a curious contemporary parallel with Melbourne; 1836
saw the founding of Russian national music, and in 1835
Fawkner’s party sailed up the Yarra. The parallel is drawn
so that the possibilities of the quick rise of an art to supreme
importance may be clearly illustrated. Much depends upon
when our first great blow for characteristic Australian musi-
cal composition is to be struck. Will it be soon, or in the
far distant future ? No one can tell, but if we aim as high as
the Russians have done, and if we avoid the snares of a too
facile popularity, we may be sure that somewhere, sometime,
some Australian will raise the banner of a new national music
and draw all the efforts that have seemed to fail into the
ranks of his conquering army.
It is true that in every case of a signal development of
music a store of raw material and theoretical technique has
been already in existence to draw upon before distinctive
national characteristics have begun to manifest themselves.
In Italy, the “fixed songs” of the church and the melodies
of the Troubadours were interwoven with the dry but mar-
vellously skilful technical network which had been slowly


evolved under the wing of ecclesiasticism. In Germany, the
chorale added its wealth and grandeur to the Italian elements,
and produced a sound art of glorious renown, while Russian
music, superposed on all that went before it, derived its
characteristic brilliancy, iridescence, and pulsating humanity
from the folk song and dance, legend, and tradition which
have emerged from the rich and mysterious past of the
country which gave it life.
Australia inherits all these elements. It is customary to
regard our country as lacking in folk-lore, folk-song, mytho-
logy, and historic tradition, and it is quite easy to regard this
lack as a misfortune and a hindrance to the development of
a national type of Australian music. A more resolute scru-
tiny of the situation discovers that such a conclusion is not
by any means as sound as it appears to be; that there are
possibilities which are easily overlooked; resources that are
only masked; and even advantages that may prove to be
unique.
It is evident that all the musical material which the ages
have produced is ours to build with. The intricate and pro-
found technique of the old contrapuntal schools ; the splendid
musical literature which has grouped round itself the sonata
form of the masters from Haydn to Brahms; the symphonic
poem, with its freedom and well-nigh limitless possibilities;
the opulent mines of operatic development; the modern
French movement, with its strivings towards a new musical
system based upon the inexhaustible potentialities of wider
harmonic relations; and the fascinating, opalescent mingling
of old and new which is Russian music, all offer their
treasures to our hand. We may lack Australian folk-lore and
folk-song, but we have that of all the world.
The names of Raleigh, da Gama, Columbus, Cook, to
name but a few, and the hidden gods who launched their
ships, indicate a subtle mythology, yet to be evolved, which
our very existence makes our own. Our history is short, but
it does not lack characteristic features, and our story is inter-
woven with that of the old world in a way that only requires


a deep-sighted interpreter to display its novelty and richness
of interest. Our animals, our birds, our flowers and trees
exhibit traits which are peculiarly their own. Our blue-grey
distances, suffused with clearest sunlight, have a voice if
we could hear it. The green light of our gullies does not
vibrate with memories of the past, but it is eloquent with the
deeper music of the future. Our social and political ideals
have commanded the admiration of the whole world, and
surely they will provide many a glorious theme in the days
when genius will have set the “billows of sweet sound” in
motion.
But if we have no more, we have a virgin page. On the
palimpsest of old-world literature, legend, and song can be
traced the faint lines which show the vanishing imprints of
aeon upon aeon. The very absence of the factors which have
seemed to mould the great movements of the past makes our
position unique. An ordained and unavoidable development
along definite and comparatively confined paths is not forced
upon us, and we are in a position to wrench our music from
silence by sheer intellectual power. The range and freedom
of our choice of resources is unparalleled in all the world’s
history, and we have good reason to hope and believe that
some day the music of Australian composers will be recog-
nised as national, and take a worthy place in the world’s
treasure house of tonal art. —1917.
13
PRELUDE


RACIAL MUSIC
It has been well contended that great music is above
nationality. This is true, but great music must first be pro-
duced, and the traits and characteristics of different nations
have played no mean part in its production. Racial traiU
have frequently given schools of musical thought a peculiar
stamp of individuality which has distinguished their work
and led to the discovery of new and opulent resources that
would have remained unknown. Art must have material,
and the nerves of nationality, which have carried such deep
and vivid impressions to the throbbing centres of musical
inspiration, are not likely to lose their value till mountains
and seas, climate, race, creed, and history have themselves
vanished. Music that achieves nationality is on the way to
rise above nationality.
It is not in any narrow, exclusive sense that the world
speaks of French music or Russian music. A nation may
well be proud if its composers have succeeded in expressing
it so well that no better classificatory term can be found for
its music than the name of the people whose souls are throb-
bing in its tonal art. Wherever there are men, those
under-currents flow whose tides are influenced by unseen
forces, and the country whose composers have been patient
enough and daring enough to tonalise the psychological
stimuli of these under-currents have always been allowed to
call these men and their music its own. When it is plain
that national peculiarities, traditions, and conditions have
been the stimulating factor it seems idle to crush the harmless
and useful distinction with the ponderous generality which
opened our enquiry.


It should be obvious that the term “national music” is
not used in a proprietary sense but in an essential sense,
implying that the character of the music is such that it has
come to be recognised as Italian, or French, or Russian. The
existence of international trade in music is almost inconceiv-
able, and the idea of a national ownership of music is so
offensive to commonsense that the notion refuses to advance
a step beyond the spot where it was born.
Consideration of Australian music brings us to a phase
of the subject which has led to confusion of thought. This
arises when native composers are confounded with national
music. A composer may quite well be an Australian without
writing anything which could be regarded for a moment as
Australian music. Chopin wrote Polish music because he
took up the Polish dance-forms and impregnated them with
the fire of his own genius. The saturation of Chopin’s per-
sonality with the concerns of Poland was such a potent
factor in lending fire and inspiration to the composer that
Chopin’s music, universal in its appeal, if any is, is yet bound
to Poland by links which nothing can break. Dvorak, a
European master by birth and education, is found endeavour-
ing to produce music which hoped to be distinguished as
American by the effort it makes to incorporate and transfigure
the characteristics of plantation melodies. Mr. Percy
Grainger, who has attained real eminence as a cosmopolitan
composer, attracted world-wide attention by his researches in
folk-lore and folk-song a year or two ago. This is conclu-
sive proof that he quite realises the value of racial characteris-
tics as factors in the production of that “best that every
country has to offer” which makes the great music of the
world.
If Australia is to come into line as one of the countries
whose national characteristics have inspired great music,
Australia must have composers who will study their own
country, and aim to achieve in their music an inherent dis-
tinction that will arouse interest in it as Australian music.
The difficulties of this task, which are not to be under-esti


mated, are in a fair way to be overcome by the composer who
grasps what the end in view really is.
Work of immediate value is to be done in the direction
of placing the possibilities from a nationally artistic point of
view before our composers and the public. The only prac-
tical and firm basis for the evolution of Australian music is
in the thought world of our composers. When they begin
to write music, however crude their early efforts may be,
which reflects aspects, physical, psychological, or intellectual,
of Australian life, the foundation of our national music will
be laid. It is now apparent that one of the most telling factors
in the advance of Russian music was the clear conception
that was established in the minds of the Russian people and
rising Russian composers by the brilliant expositions of the
national musical ideal which Cui and other members of the
famous group of constructive composers contributed to the
Russian press. These men were fiercely intolerant of all
influences which interfered with the free development of
national tendencies in their country’s music. Cui alludes to
Wagner’s music dramas as an enormous mystification which
deceived even their composer. He goes on : “I would like to
preserve my compatriots from the dangerous contagion of
Wagner’s decadence. Whoever admires his operas holds
Glinka as a writer of vaudeville. The desire to find some-
thing deep where nothing exists can have only dangerous
consequences.” Such violent repudiations of accepted
musical influences may provoke a smile, but it is not so easy
to laugh at the results of their musical policy. Not afraid
to begin their movement they were as stubborn in their rejec-
tion of elements foreign to their aim as they were persistent
in absorbing all that was native to it. As to our own be-
ginnings, the rapid advance of sonata form, from a crude
outline, eked out with inane bridge passages, and often poor
to a degree in melodic and harmonic interest, to a complete
and glorious opulence, should not be without its lesson for
Australians.


“Recognition,” however, by a premature establishment
of partly-developed ideas, might well be the worst thing if it
came too soon. The right kind of work will find minds in
our community that will absorb its essentials. The work of
great composers has invariably been superposed upon the
work of others, who have suffered, in more or less degree,
the fate of all pioneers. This is an inevitability, which, being
beyond our control, should evoke neither tears nor contempt
for those w'ho endure it. But an artistic impulse that is vital
wall win its way, though individuals may be undeservedly
ignored. Effort that is to count will survive either in its own
identity or by incorporation with kindred effort. Its spirit
will be absorbed and transmuted through the capillaries of
artistic life, and it will find its w'ay into the life-blood of its
country’s art. “Due recognition” is a dream. Good work
has a higher goal than recognition, due or undue, and that
goal is its own accomplishment. It will find wider doors
than those of concert-halls open to welcome it, and sooner or
later greater audiences than those w hich greet the individual
will feel and appreciate its influence. The mind that truly
apprehends what the name of a great composer stands for
sees that it stands for a final concentration of far-reaching and
heterogeneous effort w-hose elements have combined in a
master-mind and a master moment and produced such energy
in the process that the supreme pinnacle of achievement has
been reached, and remains the dominating peak of a great art
region.
The names of Gregory, Spervogel, Dunstable, Okeg-
heim, Jannequin, Arcadelt, Orlandus Lassus, and Palestrina
mean little or nothing to the man of to-day. Yet it has been
said of Palestrina and Lassus that “these masters fused with
the skill of genius the countless elements of musical lore that
had been transmitted to them through generations into one
harmonious whole.” So much for “due recognition.” But if
the names of these men are fading into the shadows, their
work, surely that part of them which they would have most
wished to live, is invincibly vital in those realms, populous


with the musical ideas of noble spirits, which lie, a “Silent
Land,’’ behind the pre-eminent names of such composers as
Bach and Beethoven.
Early Australian composers, in their turn, must be pre-
pared for misunderstanding, neglect, and disappointment.
The task of creating a national music such as the Russians
have lately achieved is no simple task. No single composer
could accomplish it, but he may light a torch which will show
where the path begins to others, w'ho will press further into
the jungle of the unknown. Those w'ho would follow and
help our national music must be prepared to see our first
composers advancing with faltering steps. Much effort must
be consumed in experiment, and every experiment will excite
the jibes of the inconsiderate and indifferent. The towering
names of the geat masters will be used to shut out the sun-
light of appreciation from our own pioneers. But those who
would wish to be loyal to an Australian ideal, in music as
well as in other activities, will be wise to regard the aim rather
than the achievement, and seek a point of view' which will
disclose, past the insignificant seed, the coming glory of the
blossoming wattle. The rest will depend on the
self-sacrifice, courage and patience of our composers. — i <)r7.
18
AUSTRALIAN MUSICAL POSSIBILITIES


BUSH RHYTHMS
It has been said that “definiteness of any kind in music,
whether of figure or phrase, was first arrived at through
connection with dancing.” So, when we ask for “something
with a tune in it,” we are craving for that element in music
which music owes to dance forms. Melody, as we know it,
has grown round the pulses or beats which throb in music
as the heart beats in the frame of a living thing. The surg-
ing interest, the flow of pulsing vitality, the definite tunes,
which characterise the music of the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries, are very largely due to the strongly marked and
definitely defined musical figures of the dance forms of the
world.
Rhythm is plain and insistent in rag-time, and, used
more artfully, it is just as persistent in the most complicated
and abstruse sonata of modern music. The importance of
native dance forms to national music is well established.
Wide differentiations, providing valuable sources of inspira-
tion, have arisen from simple variations in the dance rhythms
of various nations. The Minuet, evolving into the elastic
Scherzo, is embodied in many famous pieces of classical
music. The Chica (jig), and its modifications, the Fandango
and Bolero, have given character to Spanish music, and fur-
nished a starting point for the highly artistic work of a
group of Spanish composers, which has lately come into
prominence. The tang of the Polish character in the music
of Chopin is at least partly due to his superb handling of the
Mazurka and Polonaise rhythms. Handel’s renowned air,
“Lascia ch’io pianga,” is a straight-out Sarabande, a stately
dance of Moorish origin. Here we have a fine example of
19
AUSTRALIAN MUSICAL POSSIBILITIES


the versatility of dance forms. A wide range is shown be-
tween this pathetic air and the Farandola, a thrilling dance of
Southern France, said to have been the exciting factor when
the “mob of Avignon massacred Marshal Brune in 1815.”
The Australian composer, searching for native pecu-
liarities to build a national music upon, must soon give at-
tention to the very essential matter of striking and characteris-
tic rhythms. There may be original and suitable rhythmic
patterns in the dance music of our aborigines, but, if so,
they are difficult to get at. In any case, they are scarcely
characteristic of the real life of Australia to-day, and their
interest will soon be too remote to be readily identifiable.
It is entirely different with our bird calls. They are with
us always, and they supply us with an unfailing reservoir of
varied and charming rhythms. The paltry imitation of the
calls in any exact way is too cheap a device to be worth con-
sideration. Indeed, the actual notes of some of the carols go
outside the resources of any conceivable musical system.
The rhythms of many of the bird calls, however, are so de-
finite and clear that they may be easily used for the basis of
fantastic dances, and so added to the Australian composer’s
store of ideas for transformation and elaboration.
The butcher bird, among his numerous chants, gives us
a grave and gentle measure, not very marked, it is true, by
novelty, but readily combinable wdth other calls in an artistic
ensemble. The two notes of the mopoke might well serve
as a link or refrain on occasion. The grey thrush offers a
thrilling succession of throbs, rather a long lilt for an inside
pulsation, but brilliantly fresh and characteristic in its far-
swung polonaise-like virility. The golden-breasted whistler
has many beautiful calls, in which the rhythm varies con-
siderably. This bird gives a valuable choice of double and
triple measures.
There are many others, but the variety of the magpie
calls in quite remarkable. Many different rhythms may be
noted in the course of a single day, and any one of these
sound patterns will furnish an accompaniment by transposi


tion and alteration of pace that will be found adaptable to
melodic ideas, fiery, grave, or gay.
While we are lamenting the absence of dance forms as
a source of national musical inspiration, the birds in their
green palaces are tapping out dainty measures without stint,
which, when we have ears to hear them, we shall reproduce
with effect in the internal pulsations of our Australian music.
-— 1919.
21
BUSH RHYTHMS


BUSH MELODY
The bow of the wind, playing upon the innumerable re-
sonances of ihe bush; on the leaves, the swaying branches, on
reeds and wildflowers, isolated stringybarks, thickly timbered
hillsides, and winding gullies, awakes long-sustained melo-
dies of lingering charm. Birds and insects pour their quota
of tiny melodic designs into these grander songs, as Cellini
cast ornaments of gold and silver into the mould of his
bronze figure of Perseus. The wind and the rain, even the
silent snow, evoke the changing moods of our melodious
forests. The imagination and skill of the composer will
grasp these “unheard melodies” and resolve them into music
we can hear and understand.
The master of all is the wind. Perhaps he comes gently,
perfumed with the faint scent of wet gum leaves, and
eloquent with echoes of the butcher bird’s rich carol. The
notes of the bird pass into the general song, but tone-spectres
linger in the mind of the listener, and weave themselves
into a sauntering melody. Presently the shimmering twitter
of the blue wren, with its glint of sparkling timbre, spins in
a dizzy counterpoint. It is thrillinglv high, and seems to
parallel musically the almost unearthly brilliance of the
plumage of many tiny birds.
When the storm rushes through organ gums the ear is
haunted by the memory of the bird calls that rang out with
the morning sun. The noble voice of the gale exalts these
elfin trifles of the fancy into rolling melodies. As the clouds
thin, the clear notes of the grey thrush ride in the wind, sing-
ing the rain away.
At least two of our birds will suggest w r orked-out melo-
dies, as contrasted with the broken morsels of melody known


as “figures.” The slow and dreamy prelude of the butcher
bird naturally expands into musical sentences of the medita-
tive type. The grey thrush stimulates ideas of a more vivid
character, quick-moving, splendid, joyous. The magpie,
with its thousand songs, will furnish themes which may be
developed to suit any mood. The golden-breasted whistler
is another spring of versatility. The climbing notes of the
pallid cuckoo, capriciously loitering on one or another of the
airy rungs of the chromatic ladder, are capable of inspiring a
remarkable variety of subsidiary scrolls to ornament longer
melodic outlines. Combinations of the eerie call of the
mopokes with the pallid cuckoo call, will yield fine rhythmic
patterns, well fitted for sequential treatment. These and
many other calls are eminently suitable for imitation, not by
any means “the simple expedient of imitating the bird calls,”
but imitation “in the technical sense of the repetition of a
motif or phrase,” one of the most effective devices known to
musicians.
Some of the representations of our bird calls in staff
notation wall be necessarily approximate in pitch as many
fine calls elude the resources of the present division of the
octave into twelve semi-tones. The moods and characteristics
of the calls need not be lost on that account. There is
nothing whatever to prevent their valuable rhythms from
being accurately recorded by patient investigators. It is
quite reasonable to hope that a practically complete collec-
tion in staff notation will be made in course of time. The
musical significance of these calls will then be realised. Skil-
ful use of the devices of transformation of theme, develop-
ment, and thematic imitation will transmute this scattered
material into a new rainbow of tone tints and patterns for the
ever-varying kaleidoscope of music.
The deviations suggested from melodic outlines formed
upon other models may at first appear slight. The history of
music is rich with instances of remarkable fields being opened
up by similar bypaths from the broad highway. For example,
Bela Bartok, by adopting from Magyar folk-song the idea
of deflecting by a semi-tone a single note of the harmonic


minor scale, and combining this piquant characteristic with
Magyar sentiment in the crucible of his mind, was enabled
to produce music that reflects the mental outlook of his race.
His work achieved international renown, not only as Magyar
music, but also as music of general interest and worthy
artistry. An authority remarks that “the Magyar idiom,
being originally the product of simple and naive minds, adds
a convincing quality to his work.”
Australians may in like manner seek at least part of their
inspiration in the surface leads of our bird calls, which are
indicators of rich veins in the mysterious mines of ourselves
and our bush.


BUSH HARMONY
Investigation of the possibilities of inspiration for dis-
tinctive harmony in our bush voices leads to an important
domain in Australian art activity.
Experience may prove that there is inexhaustible inspira-
tion of this kind. Beginnings are elusive. But unsuspected
jewels are soon revealed, which may well be the forerunners
of a sparkling treasury of song.
The search for musical traits that are distinctively Aus-
tralian at once uncovers a sharp cleavage between Australian
music and what may be termed general music. Thus an
Australian musician may compose music of the highest
general interest without including a single trait that would
stamp it as Australian.
We already have Australian composers of the first con-
temporary standing.
The names of G. W. Marshall-Hall, August Siede,
Percy Grainger, F. Bennicke Hart, and A. E. Floyd at once
occur. All these fine composers have dallied with Austra-
lian ideas. Marshall-Hall’s Australian opera, “Stella,”
with its magnificent love scene, and Siede’s fine orchestral
poem, “Australian Witches’ Night,” are the most imposing
works we have yet had on partially Australian lines.
Grainger’s disastrously-named “Colonial Song” is a subtle
and charmingly wrought study of Australian psychology.
Bennicke Hart has given us some splendid vocal settings of
verses by Louis Esson and other Australian poets. Dr.
Floyd’s dainty lyric, “The Wattle,” is known and sung far
and wide.
Insofar as the libretti of these and other works of supreme
calibre are drawn from Australian sources they may be grate-
fully welcomed as Australian music.


The fact remains, however, that they represent but a tiny
part of the output of their creators, and it is not apparent
that the inclusion of inherently Australian traits in the music
itself was a paramount object with any of these eminent com-
posers.
The total achievement of all our composers, so far as
distinctively Australian music is concerned, falls far short of
the individual achievement of O’Dowd, Lawson, Lambert,
or Streeton in their branches of art.
Neither have we won yet to such poignant musical in-
dividuality as Alfred Hill has secured for New Zealand with
his unique and beautiful studies of Maori traits.
To the difficult question of what Australian traits we may
gather for our harmony from the bush, an attempt is here
made to begin a reply. The possible harmonic inspiration of
the bush divides into two main streams.
In the songs and dances of the aborigines there may be
peculiarities of scale (modal) construction that will yield new
and distinctive harmony. A little of such inspiration will go
a long way with skilled composers. The mighty tone struc-
tures that have been reared on the Dorian, whole tone, and
other deviating modes amply testify to this cheering fact.
Unfortunately, though there are records of such abori-
ginal tunes, they are not available for general use.
All that can be said here is that steps should be taken at
once to secure any more of such invaluable musical material
as may be still obtainable. Whatever is collected should be
displayed at once in the curriculum of our musical education,
and made available in the musical section of our public
libraries.
Interesting as the possibilities may be, it cannot be
denied that the aborigine is more or less estranged from the
psychology of the modern Australian.
The fusing of such harmonic individuality as the abori-
gine may have wdth the music of our country will be depen-
dent for its Australian interest on the somewhat oblique rays
cast upon it bv the sympathetic imagination it encounters.
Genius is quite capable of fusing these loose elements into
26
AUSTRALIAN MUSICAL POSSIBILITIES


metal of the required tenacity. In the meantime, the collec-
tion and dissemination of aboriginal raw material before it
disappears for ever is a necessity that calls for immediate and
effective action.
In our bird calls we have an entirely different proposi-
tion. They ring in the ears of all of us. They are not depen-
dent on the skilled composer for rescue from the recondite
aisles of our libraries. They chime to the courtship of Harry
of Wooloomooloo or Henrietta of Toorak. The coincidence
of a rippling thrush call with the first kiss will not fail to
evoke a sweet unwritten symphony whenever memory recalls
that passing but immortal moment.
This is only saying that our bird calls are not estranged
from the psychology of the modern Australian.
The tonality of our bush seems to point to “lucid har-
mony,” as Ernest Newman happily puts it. Modern music
has cheapened the diatonic discords, and without some
brightening factor they tend to become as wearisome as the
threadbare progressions they displaced.
The butcher bird, to pick out one of the many possibili-
ties, with his lift of a semi-tone from the initial note, the
fall to a semi-tone below the first sound, and the return to the
starting-point, indicates the “augmented sixth” interval,
and a scale with a flattened second. If the sixth degree be
flattened in sympathy, a delightful scale with a major third
results, abounding in symmetrical harmony and entrancing
possibilities of lucid modulatory and chromatic progressions.
All possible scales are included in Eaglefield Hull’s drag-
net scheme: but the resources in actual composition of a
number of the deviations he gives—such as this one—are
practically unexploited.
There are many suggestions of “something different” in
harmony in the fragments of natural scales and arpeggi of
our Australian birds.— 1922.
27
BUSH HARMONY


BUSH ORCHESTRATION
Any day in September we may hear a symphony on the
orchestra of the Bush. Long before dawn the melancholy
notes of a pair of mopokes sigh through the sleeping trees.
The low, but insistent, hooting of the boobooks, calling each
other from two hills, haunts the ground bass of the wind in
the leaves until far into the day. The darkness is scarcely
tinged with grey when a kookaburra launches a blurred and
drowsy laugh into the morning. The first rays of the sun
arouse the “psalm of the dawn,” who sends his pure pipe,
varied with a tiny chromatic roulade, from the saplings in
some dark thicket. His throat, colored with the pale yellow
tints of the dawn, has made him known as the wild canary
or yellow robin. For once the academicians have found the
most expressive title —Eopsaltria—psalm of the dawn. When
the pallid cuckoo adds his plaintive notes —two or three at the
same pitch, followed by a semi-tonal climb—the symphony of
the morning has well begun. His song sharply distinguishes
this Australian singer from his relative, the English cuckoo,
which he closely resembles in appearance. The title of semi-
tone bird is inspired by his chromatic excursions. A whip
bird, who has cut off his crack, adds his lovely round note
to the growing tutti.
As the sun gets higher, a few woolly cumuli form a
group in the north-east, but not another cloud breaks the
blue arch of the sky. Warmth gathers in the sweet-scented
air, and a soft bass undertone is drawn from the leaves by
the light and fitful wind. The grey thrush’s call, so often
heard in disjointed fragments, rings out, complete and clear.
A few repeated notes precede a triplet fall, leading to a
splendid upward sweep of a twelfth, trailing all the glory


of the morning with it. This bird has been called the har-
monious thrush, but a song in single notes, however lovely,
can scarcely make harmony. The intention is evidently
amiable, but it falls short, even in idea, of this clarion call.
A magpie, sailing along on a bee-line, comes to rest on
the airy lookouts of a dead messmate, and throws his luscious
carol into the sunlight. He cares not whether his back is
black or w'hite, and is in no w ise burdened by his euphemistic
classification as a crow-shrike. He is a full-bred Australian,
and the melody which pours from his beak, inexhaustible in
variety, is filled to the brim of its last golden cup with
sound of ravishing timbre. The quality of his tone is only
rivalled —sometimes outrivalled—by that of his near rela-
tion, the butcher bird. Even when the magpie is most joy-
ously sustaining his reputation of the “flute bird,” a new
voice will ring through “the pillared cathedral, tremulously
green”—a contralto, so opulent, so entrancing, so sure of
its charm, that all the other sounds, from the dizzily brilliant
see-saw' shimmering of the blue bonnet to the lowest gurgle
of the magpie, fall into a harmonious background for it.
With his uniform of black head and neck, grey back, and
white-starred wings, the butcher bird is a real soldier of the
bush. His wars are with mice, insects, and little birds.
When he wans a battle he sends his high-pitched laugh,
eerie and malicious, through the leaves. His habit of im-
paling his victim on a thorn or twug until he is ready for a
meal has led to the idea that he keeps a butcher’s shop, hence
his title. He is indeed a slayer, but he seldom fails to pro-
vide a requiem of unforgettable melody for his prey. Open-
ing with a phrase in six-eight time, he pauses in disdain for
a few moments, letting the telling pulsations of his tones die
out among the gums. Then comes the rest of the song, a
“winding bout” of chiming ecstasy, which lingers, low-
pitched and exquisitely dulcet, till the light airs which first
thrilled to it have drifted far aw r ay. ,
Beneath this network of Nature’s counterpoint, in-
finitely varying, the wind draw's a bass moto perpetuo from


the leaves, which blends with the hum of gauze-winged flies
and wild bees. Long crescendi, wonderfully graded, rise and
fall away again with the sinking of the wind. On a day
that is nearly calm, the dynamics of the symphony remain
dreamy and the music is essentially lyrical. Through it all
Life rolls a broad cantilena, virile with the energy which
drives the sap through hidden capillaries; strains the lean
and lissom flags of the gum-leaves, and vibrates in the
throats of the birds and the pulsing of lusty hearts, all beat-
ing onward to the gates of their destinies.
In September, when the birds will often sing from dawn
to noon without a second’s break in their fairy chorus,
Scriabin’s dream of an orchestra, not only of sound, but of
color and perfume also, is literally realised. The prism of
a great composer’s mind should readily decompose the sounds
of our Nature music into elements fit for instrumental treat-
ment. The wind in the trees calls for strings. Its under-
tones lie in the region of the double basses and ’cellos, and
die violins and violas will readily match the long tremolo of
the leaves. The superb contrapuntal figures of the birds in-
dicate wood-wind effects. The piccolo will be required for
the dazzling iridescence of the superb warbler’s whistle, the
laugh of the butcher bird, and the silvery twittering of the
blue wren. The pallid cuckoo, with his chromatic sorrow,
could only be represented by the plaintive oboe. The magpie
revels through the whole gamut of the wood-wdnd. Now he
calls for a flute, and again for a clarinet; his whimsicality
suggests the oboe, and his splutter of anger the higher re-
gisters of the bassoon. Nothing but the rich middle notes
of the clarinet will do for the wizard carol of the butcher bird,
and the inimitable kookaburra would probably be only
adequately suggested by a cunning alternation of oboe and
clarinet effects.
The scintillating contrapuntal figures of the bird calls,
a glittering arabesque winding round the central theme in
wizard sound-spirals, would seem to provide ample material
for the development of novel and charming wood-wind effects.
For Life’s grand canto fermo, the central theme itself, the
30
AUSTRALIAN MUSICAL POSSIBILITIES


nobility of soft trombone notes, the romance of horns, and
the splendour of bright toned trumpets are available.
But what are we to do with the perfumes that are filling
ail the interstices of our symphony ? The sweet, strange
scents from the dark springs in the gullies ; from prickly
mimosa, tetratheca, pittosporum, and wattle blossom ? How
shall we give the subtly different perfumes of pink heath,
myrtifolia, eucalyptus, wild musk ? How are we to deal with
the colors? What of the numberless shades of green; dark
in the gullies, light emerald where the sunlight half pierces
intervening foliage; what of the magenta of the tetratheca,
the scarlet of the Australian heath, stepping down the dainty
stairs of the color scale to match the white of the snow tree;
and the fairy gold of the million-flowered wattle-blossom ?
What of the blue melting into deeper blue of the soft hill
lights ; the veils of hazy grev and the liquid sunlight pouring
off the leaf edges on waving bunches at the tops of the great
gums, like a cascade of quicksilver?
There is no reply. For the present, scent and color
orchestras must remain where they are, dimly discernible as
possibilities in the half-recorded visions of the lost and irre-
placeable genius of old Russia —Scriabin. — rqiq.
31
BUSH ORCHESTRATION


ABORIGINAL MUSIC.
Its Artistic Possibilites.
Vivid and detailed accounts of the picturesque ceremonies
that inspired the music of the aborigines may be found in the
pages of many eminent Australian scientists and observers.
Yet so little is actually recorded in musical notation of the
remarkable and characteristic sound fantasies that once rang
throughout the length and breadth of Australia that the
scattered fragments which have been preserved gather a con-
stantly increasing musical interest and value as time goes on.
In Dr. A. W. Howitt’s “Native Tribes of South-East
Australia,’’ three dirge-like songs recorded by Dr. Torrance
possess considerable rhythmic interest. One of them is a
song of the Wurrunjerri, the tribe that once occupied the site
of Melbourne. Another was composed by Kurburu, a native
minstrel, who lived where the town of Berwick now stands.
It was generally believed by the native composers that they
were inspired by some mystic power; something “that rushes
down into the breast of the singer.” This belief is exhibited
in Kurburu’s song. Kurburu had killed a native bear, and
its Murup, or spirit, entered his breast and made him sing,
“You cut across my track, you spilled my blood, and you
broke your tomahawk on my head.” Another of these songs
of the Victorian tribes is a lament for a native who died
through “evil magic” in the Dullur country, near Geelong.
There is no doubt that many of the songs of the Vic-
torian tribes possessed both musical and literary interest.
Dr. A. W. Howitt, whose sympathetic and graceful style in-
vests his records with never-failing charm, makes us realise


that the art world would be richer if the lost music of the
tribes of this State had been preserved. He writes of their
songs:
“With custom they grow upon one, until at length one
feels in some measure the effect which they produce upon an
aboriginal audience in so powerful a manner. There is a
wild and pathetic music in some of the songs which I have
heard chanted by a number of voices together. Such was the
song of Ngalalbal, as I heard it at the Murring Kuringal,
and the song of the bat, in which at early dawn the whole of
the men joined one by one in chorus, the words describing the
bats, ‘flitting about in the dim light which shows between the
upper boughs of the trees.’ ” The song of the bat and the
Ngalalbal have gone where the Victorian aborigines have
gone, never to return.
Mr. R. Brough Smythe, in his “Aborigines of Victoria,”
has preserved a staff notation version of the “Narinyeri
Dance,” recorded by the Rev. George Taplin. This is a
fine and virile piece of music. It is sung in parts, at the in-
terval of a fourth (according to the record), and it furnishes
an extraordinary parallel with the “Organum” of Hucbald,
840 A.D., one of the earliest European devices for voices
singing at a different interval. The words run, “The Narin-
yeri are coming; soon they will appear; quickly they are
walking.”
The same writer gives a “Morning Song,” sung by the
blacks on the Swan River, W.A. The scene is a native
camp where the men sit sharpening their spears in the mild
air of early morning, while the women make up the fires. It
is a dreamy, plaintive melody, distinctive in tonality, and
Smythe writes enthusiastically of its beauty as it floated
through the early summer mists on the river.
Tom Petrie, in his “Reminiscences of Early Queens-
land,” has recorded two fine native melodies in musical score.
One relates the sad end of Bobbiwinta, a diver famous for
his skill in the water. Bobbiwinta plunged into the sea one
afternoon, and never returned. The tender-hearted natives
composed a “corroboree” in his memory. The music is in


two sections, the first slow and appealing, “My oar is bad,
send me my boat. lam sitting here waiting” ; and the second
more passionate and urgent, “Jump over for me, friends,
etc.” The other song is a lullaby, taught to the Turrbal
blacks by a stranger. It is in a plagal mode, and floats
melodiously down the steps of an octave. Petrie remarks
that it soothed two generations of white infants to sleep.
Both these songs have a strong melodic affinity with chants
preserved in Sir Baldwin Spencer’s phonograph records.
The singularly affecting characteristic of a lingering repeti-
tion of the lower key note is a notable trait in these types of
aboriginal music.
The books of the Rev. J. Mathew contain many refer-
ences to native songs and descriptive details of the perform-
ances that are of interest musically.
All these melodies are full of suggestion, and are likely to
be valuable to composers who may wish to incorporate and
develop traits of native minstrelsy in their own w-ork.
It would be difficult to over-estimate the musical and
literary value of the phonographic records that Sir Baldwin
Spencer brought back with him from his expeditions into the
interior of Australia. The intense musical interest of these
records was made manifest at a lecture given at the Public
Library, Melbourne, in May, 1922, by Dr. A. E. Floyd.
Some fourteen records were given of the music and singing at
the various types of corroborees and ceremonies of the dif-
ferent tribes.
The music is surprisingly interesting. Wild and bar-
baric as much of it sounds, it is rich in rhythms and themes,
that, once annotated and fixed, will supply a copious reser-
voir of melodic germs and rhythmical fragments of the type
that composers all over the world are continually seeking.
Apart from the merely melodic and superficial aspects of this
music, a deeper significance is not lacking in the novelties of
musical architecture it suggests, and the extraordinary
vivacity and vitality of utterance that are the outward evi-
dence of a spirit within that might well inspire a composer


who could respond to that mystic element which eludes de-
scription as effectually as it stimulates creative thought.
In 1901, when Sir Baldwin Spencer and Mr. F. J. Gillen
were among the Arunta, Warramunga, and neighbouring
tribes, they witnessed and recorded such great “corroborees”
as the picturesque wanderings of the Wollunqua, the great
serpent whose head reached the sky, the wonderful Fire Cere-
mony of the Warramunga, where torches fifteen feet long
blazed to the wild music of the Kingilli singers, the Rain
Intichiuma of the Kaitish tribe, with its remarkable music,
and the exquisite episodal imitation of the plover call, and
many other striking ceremonies. At that time these per-
formances retained all the fervour and vigour of the tradi-
tional renderings handed down from ancient times.
If a wizard were to emerge from the pages of the Ara-
bian Nights’ Entertainments and offer the people of Aus-
tralia the chance of hearing the actual music of the hunting'
tribes of the Neolithic Age (for so the Australian aborigines
are classed by Dr. A. W. Howitt), he would be bestowing no
greater boon than Sir Baldwin Spencer’s records offer to the
public of Australia and the world. —1923.


EPILOGUE.
A desire has found expression in our poetry for a music
that will capture and idealise the undersong of Australia.
All imaginative Australians are conscious of this undersong.
It rolls through our lives like a great canto fermo, ornamented
with the airy counterpoints of the magpie, the butcher bird,
and the harmonious thrush. Jennings Carmichael heard
“Delicate airs and harmonies pass,
Subtle and swift, through the bowing grass.”
These airs and harmonies, to her, were mingled with the
“deep undersong” of Australian gums. O’Dowd descries
the pipes of Pan behind
“Magpie songs our schoolboy ears ignored,”
and he cannot listen long in the bush solitudes without hear-
ing
“ the chord of purifying sorrow,
Born ere the world that pulses through your trees.”
The “deep undersong” that so moved his gentle prede-
cessor is not silent for him, and he gives it back to us in
“Your harps, unblurred by glozing strings, intone
The dirges that behind creation moan.”
It would certainly be strange if our bush, apait from its
natural and perceptible sounds, possessed no songs of its
own. That it does possess such songs we are assured, not
only by our own instincts, but by the echoes of these
“unheard melodies” that are already scattered through
our Australian literature. Man has left so little trace in the
bush that we come to it as to a virgin world. European
forests have been haunted from time immemorial with the


stories of living and bygone races. We do not know what
enchantments await us in the Australian bushland, but we may
be sure that we shall hear the voices of the gnomes that haunt
the coo! green aisles when our ears are fit to catch their songs.
The aborigines are passing away before our eyes, grotesque
and pathetic shadows falling swiftly into the silence of the
Never Never. There may be time before they have all gone
to enfold such songs as they have in the amber of our future
music. Something may still be done to preserve their lays,
but very soon even these vague and wandering voices will be
gone forever, and the bush will sing only the songs our dif-
ferent ears can gather.
The Australian brings to his unique reservoir of poten-
tial musical inspiration a modern psychology, and the strange
mythology that must necessarily accumulate round the causes
leading up to the discovery of America and Australia. Our
own transference from an environment of tradition and con-
vention to a land where Art should find a new Arcadia must
have a place in the story.
In the dreams of old navigators, from Alexander the
Great’s Admiral Nearchus, to Cook and Flinders, the modern
Australian race was born. In the telescope of Galileo, the
staunchness of Bruno, the stormy voyages of Columbus and
da Gama, we have the materials of a mythology that awaits
the breath of genius to quicken it into prolific life.
The untimely death of Alexander is a national tradition
for us, because it delayed the progress of navigation and dis-
covery for a thousand years. Conceive Australia discovered
in the eighth century instead of the eighteenth ! When the
differences in politics, thought, science, and particularly
music, are remembered, and the population and relative power
of the nations of 788 and 1788 compared, the story of the
causes leading up to the discovery and settlement of Australia
will be seen to be full of artistic interest. These hints will
suffice to show that our national traditions (whose existence
is often denied) are not only unique but inexhaustible.
Australians are the children of the dreams of the great
men who lived and strove in the Dark Ages of European his


tory. The dawn that followed this night glows happiest in
our Australian skies.
O’Dowd has not missed this rich mythological vein. In
“The Bush,’’ speaking of Australia, he says:
“All that we love in olden lands and lore
Was signal of her coming long ago !
Bacon foresaw her, Campanella, More,
And Plato’s eyes were with her star aglow !
Who toiled for Truth, whate’er their countries were,
Who fought for liberty, they yearned for her!
No corsair’s gathering ground, nor tryst for schemers,
No chapman Carthage to a huckster Tyre,
She is the Eldorado of old dreamers,
The sleeping Beauty of the world’s desire.”
The contention that the wish for a distinctively Austra-
lian music is a plant of healthy growth might well be sup-
ported by a host of instances other than those that may be
found in our literature. But the desire for such music is one
thing and the realisation of that desire quite another.
In the beginning it will be necessary to w r ork inward
from externals in the search for characteristic traits. These
will ultimately be transformed into psychological stimuli that
will re-act upon the minds of Australian composers. Only in
some such way can we hope to make music that will be at
once distinctively Australian and artistically eminent.
The history of music is very short. The greatest revo-
lutions and innovations in the art have had their beginnings
in small deviations from musical convention. Therefore we
must not despise a possible line of inspiration, because it
seems tiny nor yet imagine that the possibilites for novelty in
music itself are in any danger of becoming exhausted.
In every case where music has assumed a national dis-
tinctiveness the point of cleavage will be found in some seem-
ingly trivial and external feature. Dance rhythms, the
chorale, scale modes, and the development of musical in-
struments, to name a few instances, have all been potent


factors in the development of music. At one time or another
each of these unspiritual elements has changed the whole
structure of musical architecture. One or another of them
has played an essential part in the evolution of what we are
content to recognise as Italian, German, French, Russian,
Magyar, or Spanish schools of creative music. Why then
should Australians calmly accept the dictum that in creative
music we have no distinctive resources ?
In every case composers have begun by working on the
ideas they found available. It may be thought that the
alteration of the existing harmonic minor scale by a single
semi-tone was a trivial and artificial device. Yet by this
means Bela Bartok, finding that this trait was peculiar to
Magyar folk-song, wove it into music that proved to be
highly artistic and yet distinctly Magyar.
The difficulty in trying to find a starting-point for a dis-
tinctively Australian music does not lie in discovering all the
impossibilities, but in summoning up sufficient courage and
sincerity to test and try out traits, however simple and ex-
ternal, that seem to offer characteristic possibilities.
Of such, one may be mentioned by way of illustration.
The butcher bird, in one of his chants, sounds a note, rises
a semi-tone, falls a tone, and returns to the original note. If
the first note is regarded as the key note of a major scale,
it will be found that a major scale with a flat second is sug-
gested. No doubt theorists and composers have dabbled
with all possible scales, but very few of these more recondite
scales have been made the basis of a splendid art-work such as
that of Bartok.
In addition to the undersong, the musical aura of the
bush, its charm, melancholy, grandeur, and mystery, we
have in its wonderful bird songs a treasure-house of potential
musical inspiration.
These calls are present in the sub-consciousness of every
Australian who mentally recalls the panorama of the bush
as he knows it. Unless his mind has been alienated by educa-
tion in another country, these natural sounds must be psycho-
logically associated with his idea of Australian life. Gum


trees do not make our paintings great, but when one of our
artists paints a great picture, gum trees in it will inevitably
make his picture Australian. In any Australian art-work
into which sound enters, the bird calls will enter, willy-nilly.
Thus, Bernard O’Dowd, comparing the bush with “fac-
tory or farm,’’ has no particular idea of music when he
sings :
“And ’mid the censers of the mountain musk,
Acolyte bell-birds the Angelus are pealing,
And boobooks moan their vespers in the dusk.”
Yet even Chopin may not have disdained to use this idea,
and the notes of the birds concerned, for one of his nocturnes.
F. T. Macartney, also, rouses our “ignoring schoolboy
ears” with
“Spring comes with a yellow flourish as of trumpets bravely
blown,
And the clumps of saplings at sunset seem organ-pipes
transmuting the sound
Of the throb of the world on its axis—round
To flickering changes of leaf-tip dyes,
Which intervals of shadow harmonise
With magpie melodies that float
Like globes of dew dissolving in a lily’s poignant throat.”
Barcroft Boake, in his beautiful poem, “The Box Tree’s
Love” (for a six-year maid), finds a song in the trees them-
selves :
“ . . . . then he’d spread
His leaves to shield her, while he droned
A lullaby, so softly toned
It seemed but as the gentle sigh,
Of Summer as she floated by.”
When the little maid died, he
“Shook his branches, till each leaf
Chorused his agony of grief.”


Marie Pitt, remembering Hamilton, cannot forget the
birds:—
“Half my heart is yearning yet, yearning yet for Hamilton,
Hamilton beyond the surge of sobbing Southern main.
Oh the croon of wistful winds, calling, calling, calling me
Where the mottled mountain thrush is singing through the
rain.”
It is thus perfectly natural for us to begin our search for
distinctively Australian musical traits with our bird calls.
It is useless to look upon them from outside. We are not in
the position of an audience; we are on the platform with them,
players in the same Australian orchestra. It is we who are
inarticulate, not the bush, not the birds.
When the resonators of our minds respond to these native
vibrations, then all we know and feel will combine with them
in the general euphony, and the symphony of Australia will
begin.
A sincere investigation of our natural and external
musical resources will not appeal to the over-sophisticated;
from them there is nothing to hope for, but the earnest and
determined student may use the frailest of stepping stones
to cross the stream that divides us from higher things.
Apart from the deeper and more subtle inspirations our
bush holds for music, the very distinctive calls of our native
birds may enter with effect into several of the great divisions
of musical activity.
No one, of course, can forecast the ultimate trend of our
music. That will depend entirely upon the lines our success-
ful composers adopt. It is quite reasonable, however, to re-
gard scale construction as one of the ways in which distinc-
tion in our music may be achieved. The present object is to
attempt to summarise such possibilities as may be found at
hand, in the hope that some fruitful germ may emerge from
the “unknown and impossible confusions” that surround the
subject.
The duodecuple scale seems too comprehensive to help
us to a sharply defined individuality. This so-called scale
41
EPILOGUE


resembles a medicine chest, from which a specific remedy is
to be selected. A special mode, such as a major scale with
flat second, even if slightly traversed, may prove the most
fitting. It is not a question of newness, as has been shal-
lowly supposed, but of appropriateness. Our resources,
however, are by no means confined to scales.
The rhythms of our bird-calls provide us with a widely
varied assortment of workable sound patterns. Very charac-
teristic measures can easily be evolved from the calls of the
magpie, butcher bird, grey thrush, golden-breasted whistler,
and others. Inside pulsations, of the quality that give such
a throbbing vitality to the Polonaise, may be readily con-
structed from the calls of these birds. These may come to be
interwoven with melody and harmony of any known or un-
known character. So far as rhythms go they will bring a
lilt that is entirely their own to the music.
The harmonic aspect of the bush exposes a faint possi-
bility of valuable modal or scale peculiarities in the music of
the aborigines. If any information exists on this subject it
should be made accessible to students of composition. It is
most desirable that the music of the remaining tribes should
be recorded and preserved before the race dies out, and it is
too late.
The augmented sixth in one of the butcher bird’s songs
has already been noticed. Another significant tendency in
the various calls is the persistence of the major third. This
implication of some form of the major scale in so many of
our bird-calls, taken in conjunction with our broad open land-
scapes, our climate of sun and air and far-sweeping winds,
and the fearless, liberty-loving aspirations of our citizens,
seems to turn us away from scale modes and harmony that
depend for their appeal on the poignancy of striving minor
thirds, diatonic discords wandering far from the free air of
resolution, and “arpeggi” of a twelve-note scale that has
neither beginning nor end.
For us, at least at first, “lucid” harmonies, and bright
chromatic chords, seem more fitted to supply that glowing
and varied harmonic color that will accord with the rich


aspects and resources of our country and our life. Examples
ot a native basis for such harmony are to be found in the
major tendencies of our bird-calls and the chromatic climb
of the pallid cuckoo.
The consideration of melody leads us to one of the most
entrancing domains of our bush music. It is well known
that melodic fragments floating into the mind of the composer
have been transformed in the crucible of his artistry into
masterpieces of tonal art. The original fragment may never
appear in the exact shape of its first conception. Beethoven’s
C minor symphony may be quoted as an example of what
may be evolved from a simple musical idea of a few notes.
Varied as is the content of the several movements of this great
work, the four notes of the opening theme permeate the entire
creation and stamp themselves into every mood of the music
with signal effect.
In the melodic bric-a-brac of our bird-calls there is no
limit to the charming variety of such tiny germs of inspira-
tion. The dreamy prelude of the butcher bird, the soaring
sweep of the grey thrush, rising like a rocket from a thicket
of “linked sweetness,” the pensive ritenuto semi-tones of the
pallid cuckoo, and the mixed rhythms of the golden-breasted
whistler, supply us with a copious horn of melody that has
all the attributes of the widow’s cruse.
The combination of different calls offers a wide field for
melodic exploitation. The fact that some of the calls go be-
yond the semi-tonal limits of our musical system is of no
moment. A puerile mimicking of the calls cannot be contem-
plated. The capture of their spirit will never be a great tax
on the ingenuity of a qualified composer.
Orchestration may hopefully seek new effects and com-
binations in the peculiarly characteristic sounds of the bush.
The timbre of some of the bush notes and the novel melodic
figures that abound seem singularly adapted for wood-wind
counterpoints and designs.
The sound of wind in the gums is influenced by the mil-
lions of dryish dagger-shaped leaves all vibrant with un-
known resonances. The light clashing of these leaves is ab


sorbed into the main stream of continuous sound as the
tremolo of strings is absorbed into the general mass of the
orchestral tutti. The mind weaves into this tonal back-
ground melodious thoughts that suggest the noble voices of
trumpets, horns, and trombones, interweaving with the
vaguer songs of the leaves. These are joined by the fairy
patterns of magpie and thrush calls in the middle wood-wind,
the mopoke sighing in the milder registers of the bassoon,
and the blue wren and superb warbler hovering dizzily over
the ensemble. This kaleidoscopic orchestral fantasy is
arranged by the changing moods of weather and season into
appropriate movements, Adagio, Andante, Scherzo, Presto,
as the moment wills.
Just as it has been inferred that the peculiar shape of
eucalyptus leaves may reasonably be expected to give a
peculiar tang to the sound of the wind in the gums, so it may
be suggested that the various distinctive characteristics of
bush sounds may give a peculiar tinge to the musical idiom
in which an Australian composer may express himself.
His music may not be identifiable in any obvious way
with the external sounds of the bush, yet the spirit of it all
may be there. The transmutation of tonal ideas in a com-
poser’s intellect is a mysterious process. But the mind of a
creative musician, steeped in the sound associations that have
been touched upon here, could scarcely shed them entirely
when he offers to the world the equivalent in music of him-
self, his times, and his surroundings. Although some may
think it banal, it is really an imperative necessity to reach
a viewpoint that will ultimately enable us to see the link be-
tween the music of the bush and the music of the world —to
indicate an attitude of mind that will contemplate a distinc-
tive Australian music as a reasonable possibility—to dissi-
pate the too widely accepted impression that we Australians
have nothing to hope for; nothing to work for, nothing
beautiful of our own to bring to the temple of humanity’s
music. 1Q22.


APPENDIX I.




BELL BIRDS AT BELGRAVE
At the crest of the ridge the first faint “tint” was heard, four
Regent honey-eaters, regnant beauties of the realm of birds, sped
diagonally across the sharply descending track. The path ended
in a road running north and south. On the east side of the road
lay a basin half a mile in diameter. Far down, at the bottom of
this bowl of verdure, the reservoir gleamed through the foliage of
wattle and gum trees, a jewel of shining water 80 yards
square. The stream of its overflow, escaping in a thin sheet of
cascade over the lip of the confining masonry, slipped gurgling
through the thickly tangled undergrowth to the south.
Down in the basin the occasional “link” emitted by each of
the hundreds of bellbirds grew into a continuous, yet irregular, suc-
cession of chimes. The calls threw a wavering network of golden
tone over the silence, just as the leaves and the twigs overhead
latticed the sunlight with chequers of azure and gold. The birds
rang their tiny bells with but little variation of pitch. Occasion-
ally a note would miss fire, higher or lower, without breaking the
exquisite outline of the music. Now and again the low “hoo-hoo
ha-ha” of unassertive kookaburras, or the swish of a distant whip-
bird floated spectrally across the ceaseless chiming of the bells. The
whole fairy transformation scene of colour and sound seemed to be
waiting for some ineffable voice to utter the last word of its soul.
It came, lingered, and was gone, almost before the unwary ear
had caught its music. A bout of magpie carols from a hill across
the gully, winding and interweaving like a quartet of clarinets on
an invisible tower, dreamed across the symphony, tender and lucent
as the blue arch of the listening sky. Long after its echoes had
fallen asleep in the zenith the feathered host of bellringers reve-
rently continued their euphony as though they hoped those seraphic
strains would sound once more.


These birds must not be confused with the crested bellbird,
which has a deeper note. The bellbirds of Belgrave reservoir are
known as “bell miners.” They are rich olive green in colour, and
a little larger than sparrows, with touches of bright yellow and red
about their heads. The method of a single bird is to alight on a
thin twig, utter a conversational chirrup or two very softly, peck
at a couple of leaves as he hangs sideways or upside down, hunch
his shoulders, and send his vivid little bell note to join those of his
mates. At a very moderate estimate, some hundreds of birds were
singing at once in a square half-mile of thicket.
Their note is short, sharp, and musical. They emit the sound
with a little burst which gives it the clear-cut initial edge of a bell
note. The ringing effect is produced by a great number of birds
each sounding a single note at intervals. The notes ring from
every direction, and are almost continuous. A wonderful rhythmic
variety results. Sometimes the notes come together, but one will
be close and clear and the other far off and faint. They may
run in ripples or be syncopated as in “rag-time.” This variety of
loudness and capriciousness of rhythm invests the music of the bell
miners with a glamour that never palls. The tone is rich and
golden rather than silvery. It is not high-pitched. Some of the
birds sound a shade lower than others. This adds to rather than
detracts from the fascination of their concert.
These Belgrave birds are the brothers of those sung by
Kendall, who refers to their music as—
“ Silver bells from a distant shrine.”
1923.


A CINDERELLA OF THE ARTS
In a general survey of Australian art attention is soon focussed
on the backwardness of creative music. Lindsay, Lambert, and
others have linked Australian traits and psychology with the chain
of world-thought in oil, water-colour, and black and white- Law-
son has carried Australia, in a literary sense, to Europe, and Europe
is the real stage of the world’s intellectual activities. Arts, peoples,
artists, ideas, only become positively visible when Europe, like
Jehovah, has breathed the life of recognition into their potentialities.
Some Australians have already passed the Pillars of Hercules, and
entered the charmed seas of European appreciation.
Our soldiers have engraved a characteristic Australian imagery
on cast-iron methods of warfare —methods old as the world.
O’Dowd has introduced a new poetry, different, original, vital. A
Columbus of the pen, he leads the way to undreamed-of intellectual
continents.
The genius of Henry Lawson, thwarted, sometimes blurred, by
his harsh environment, has, nevertheless, kindled a touch of Austra-
lianism that gleams from the highest pinnacle our art has yet
attained. Lawson has the passion, the vision, the burning appeal,
and the simplicity of diction that make, not only for great poetry,
but for beloved poetry. In him Australianism is dominant, and he
shows us that Australia can provide themes of such human import
as stirred the pen of Burns. The sheer cry of the heart echoes
from some of the lyrics of Lawson in stanzas that refuse to be
forgotten. Such perfect flowers of song belong to the whole world,
and they adorn humanity’s crown, but they were grown in Aus-
tralia. Their sap was drawn from Australian rains and Austra-
lian soil, and they stand for the beauty and pathos
that live in the hearts of the sons and daughters of


the Never Never. Melba has given the world a new glamour
in vocal interpretative art. Her sunlit tones are debonair with
echoes of the wide and gracious skies of Australia and in the
supreme quality of these tones Europe found a variety of fascina-
tion which long years have failed to wither.
Apart from the poetry, the new audacity, the blue sky timbre
which Melba took with her from Australia, the great diva is a sub-
limated product of European aesthetics and technique. She infused
the virility and sunlight of Australia into the dwindling tissues of
the sentimental but efficient “il bel canto” art of perfect vocali-
zation. The art of other Australians may be greater in type, but
as an individual the prima donna towers. Europe has canonized
these aspirants and some others. In each case the sacred portals
have opened to strongly distinctive work. The drive of a con-
scious or unconscious Australianism has been potent in every in-
stance.
The Australian composer is faced with a more subtle and diffi-
cult task than his successful compatriots. The cheap and facile
dictum that Australia is barren of distinctive musical resources is
continually dinned into his ears. Such resources must be innate
in the life of every nation that has achieved any kind of indivi-
duality, and our composers are only faced with the same inertia and
hostility that has always confronted those who would find new
paths. We have already achieved distinction as Australians in
athletics, arms, literature, painting, and interpretative musical art.
Our creative music still waits for an Australian to lift it into line
with these activities.
It may be admitted that there is much to daunt our composers.
Initial difficulties of conception and invention are formidable.
Avenues of access to the open air of publicity are choked with the
dead timber of indifference and a lazy adherence to the stereotyped
formulae of old-world musical methods. For the most part, old-
world compositions or Australian-made echoes of them are served
up to the helpless public. So long as our composers confine their
experiments to these well-worn lines and our institutions decline to
encourage Australian creative music, this branch of our artistic
work must languish.


But our composers will not be for ever restrained by these diffi-
culties, for there is something in the higher types of humanity that
refuses to succumb to mere conditions, however adverse. Obscurity
and poverty did not silence Schubert, though they certainly short-
ened his life. The Arctic snows did not deter Franklin, nor
Shackleton, nor Scott. Pain did not quench the wit of Heine nor
sickness stifle the courage of Voltaire.
Our writers and painters have had the sagacity to visualise
Australia and the pluck to send their vision home. Our singer,
thrilled with the song of the gums and the sough of the wind,
beating across the interminable ranges of the Never Never, fought
her Homeric fight against the sneering coteries of European art
circles by virtue of her innate Australianism and her unquenchable
courage. Our creative music, so far as there is light to see it by,
has been content until now to seek its successes along the well-
trodden paths of old-world methods. The sunlight of European
inspiration, however lustrous it may be in its own environment,
fades to a dusk in climes that know far different skies.
Yet, we have gleams 1 The butcher bird sings for Australia.
The deep voices of Bass Strait rollers do not miss their leads, and
the brilliant polonaise of the grey thrush does not wait for a certifi-
cate from old-world academicians. These, and such Australians as
Lawson, Streeton, and O’Dowd show our composers a clear path to
heights where odious comparisons cannot reach them. 1922.
51
A CINDERELLA OF THE ARTS




APPENDIX II




HENRY TATE'S
AUSTRALIAN MUSIC
(With Some Press Commentsi)
Compiled by Vida Lenox.
This annotated catalogue has been compiled with the object of showing that
Mr. Tate’s arguments are capable of practical application in actual musical
composition. It is felt that a list of the musical works with which he has
illustrated his theoretical and imaginative ideas is a necessary supplement to
his treatise. Mr. Tate has written a great deal of other music, but only his
experiments in a distinctively Australian idiom are included here.
FOR ORCHESTRA
DAWN.
An Australian Rhapsody for Full Orchestra.
As well as the Score, the composer has written out parts for 73 per-
formers. DAWN is an ambitious work, in full symphonic form. It takes
some fifteen minutes to play, and ends with an impressive coda. DAWN was
written in 1922, and has not yet been performed. The composer’s programme
note may be quoted:—
“The actual thematic material of DAWN is derived from the sounds of a
real dawn in the bush, as recorded under the heading ‘Bush Orchestration' In
‘Australian Musical Possibilities.’ ”
The underlying moods of the music are influenced by the consideration of
the ideas of undiscovered countries that floated through the dreams of ancient
and medieval sailors, astronomers, mathematicians, and philosophers. This
aspect of the subject is also discussed in different parts of “Australian Musical
Possibilities.”
The music of DAWN seeks to embody both the material sounds of a dawn
in the bush, and the mytho-historical stimulus of the “dawn” of Australia In
the minds of the men of the olden times.
The music lingers long in nebulosity, and is slow in declaring itself. This,
of course, is in keeping with the procession of a real dawn, but there is also an
aesthetic parallel in the recollection of the romantic strivings and tentative
ventures which culminated, at long last, in the discovery and settlement of
Australia.
The “second subject,’’ in the nature of a chorale, representing Hope, Love,
Dreams, and Joy, serves as a canto firmo around which the smaller themes
group themselves.
The general aim of the composition is the musical recording of a state of
mind arising from a contemplation of Australia’s “dawn” in the minds of men;
an intellectual reverie which attempts to express itself by means of a musical
transformation of the sounds of an actual dawn in the Australian bush.”


BUSH MINIATURES
Morning. Bush Voices. Bush Noon. Song of the Gums.
Magpies. Shadows of Clouds. Bush Dreams.
Evening.
Morning. Bush Voices, Bush Noon, Song of the Gums, Magpies, Shadows
cf Clouds, Bush Dreams, Evening.
A set of light impressionistic pieces, \yhich has been successfully performed
in Melbourne.
“Compositions which translate into dainty musical terms tjie enthusiasm of
his bush impressions. Even ears educated in Europe are touched by the melody
and ingenuity of his piano cycle, ‘The Australian,’ and his ‘Bush Miniatures’
for orchestra, which have been lately given in Melbourne.” —“The Bulletin.”
“Successfully rendered by the small orchestra, under the baton of the com-
poser.”—“The Herald,” Melbourne.
FOR PIANOFORTE
THE AUSTRALIAN
A cycle of 16 pieces reflecting the life of an Australian from his birth to his
death at Gallipoli. The cycle concludes with an affecting Threnody, “Gallipoli,”
for unaccompanied male voices, in which are drawn together in one thrilling
whole, all the subtle episodes of tenderness and strength that vibrate through
the entire cycle. The composer ends his “Foreword” with the hope “that the
work may serve as a suggestion of the way in which a characteristically Aus-
tralian idiom might be ultimately evolved.” The numbers are;—The Mother,
Young Life, Fairy Tales, Youth’s Unrest, A Hush in the Hills, Omens, Dreams,
Spring, Relentless Fates, Surge and Spindrift, in Egypt (A Memory of Gum
Trees), The Edge of the Whirlpool, A Lull, Battle, Fading Lights, Gallipoli.
“This is a really good and successful piece of programme music; the titles
show that Mr. Tate has imagination and poetic feeling, and the carrying out
of them shows that he is very far from being musically inarticulate. He really
has something to say, and he succeeds in saying it.”—“The Age.”
“For the first time Australians were listening to music which smells of
the soil of this country, as the music of Glinka does of Russia; the music of
Bach of his country and its conditions. But that impression only succeeded an
intense appreciation which the music itself, with its subtle harmonies and its
elusive melodies, produced.”—“The Herald,” 1918.
“ • • • this composer should immediately make arrangements for the
publication of his ‘Gallipoli’ (The Australian’) cycle, which, besides the finest
war-plaint the writer has ever heard, contains work unsurpassed for force,
daintiness, and originality. This cycle is in itself sufficient justification for the
creation of a new set of musical methods, besides being an example of their
practical use in musical composition.”—“The Graphic of Australia,” Melbourne.
56
AUSTRALIAN MUSICAL POSSIBILITIES


“A cycle of 16 compositions for the piano, written on the basis of the
pamphlet (‘Australian Musical Resources’), has numbers of extraordinary
beauty. The final number, ‘Gallipoli,’ might be regarded as putting the com-
poser among the great men of modern music. Generally speaking, his melodies
are pure and simple; his harmonies have an unusual, strange, sweet quality,
which is like the smell of the bush.”—“Christian Science Monitor,” U.S.A.
“ • . . . The cycle for pianoforte . . . with which he succeeded
in proving that there is abundant material in the characteristic spirit of the
bush and the calls of the native birds for the creation of a distinctly Australian
note in original music.” —“Table Talk,” Melbourne.
“Mr. Henry Tate made good his claim that Australia offers abundant in-
spiration in its scenic beauties, its youthful vigour, the spirit of the bugh, and
the songs of its birds for a distinctive note in musical composition ... he
struck a note of subtle interpretation, which he emphasised in the several
songs, vocal quartets, and the cycle for piano of his own composition.” —
“Graphic of Australia.”
“Here we also have a perfect miniature example of the music or sound
drama,” —M. Garth, in “The New Outlook,” Sydney.
SUITE JOYOUS
A set of five light pieces—Morning in the Gully, In the Bush, Heart Song,
March, Good Luck.
“Contains whole strophes of pure bush melody, and appeals strongly to the
senses of flowing rhythm and deep harmony.”—M. Garth, in “The New Out-
look,”
BUSH NOON
“An exquisite conception of the peace and sunshine quiet of a clear,
still afternoon among the hills, a thing full of tree murmurings, the lisp of
wind, and a faint, far-calling of birds.” —“The Christian Science Monitor.”
TRAGIC STUDY
A powerful rhapsody in sonata form, this study gives vivid impression of
the futility of human effort when closely oppressed by the forces of Nature.
The bush as a background is aptly suggested. This work has not yet been
performed in public, but will be heard at a meeting of the Australian Institute of
the Arts and Literature during 1924.
THE VOICE OF THE NEVER NEVER
A nocturne of the far-back country.
“Gives back again the lonely vastness of great back-country plains at night.”
—“The Herald.”


BASS STRAIT ROLLERS.
A prelude of heavy, rolling chords above a main theme based on th«
“deflected scale.’’
FOR TWO PIANOS
WATTLE SUITE
Several pieces of the type of “Bush Miniatures.”
FOR VIOLIN AND PIANO
SONATA—“Birds of the South.”
(Allegro, Scherzo, Lento, Scherzo, Presto.)
Developed almost entirely from the call of the Australian (grey) Thrush.
With a Scherzo ingeniously built up on the rhythm of croaking frogs.
FOR PIANO DUET
SPRING SUITE
A set of five light bush pieces.
INCIDENTAL MUSIC TO “YIN-YIN.”
(An Australian play, by Mrs. E. Coulson Davidson.)
DAWN
BUSH MINIATURES.
An arrangement of the original version for orchestra.
VOCAL
THE DREAMS OF DIAZ
An Australian Mytho-musical Play for Contralto, Tenor, Bass, and
small Piano-Orchestra.
This work illustrates the traditional possibilities referred to in the Pre-
lude and Epilogue of this book. The words of the play are written by the
composer. The operetta is founded on an incident of the long-drawn mari-
time search for “the great Continent in the South.”


MALE QUARTETS (Unaccompanied)
Bush Night Song, Gallipoli, Hamilton.
SONGS
In the Night. The Sundowner’s Lullaby. Songs of Reverie.
The Australian Thrush. The Coach-whip Bird.
My Sweetheart’s at the Shearing. Summer Time.
Australian Spring. The Splitter, etc.
Most of the words associated with these compositions are the work of
the composer, but settings of poems by Miss Elsie Cole, Mrs. Marie E. J.
Pitt, Miss Gertrude Hart, and Mr. Fumley Maurice are included in the fore-
going lists.
“ .... Two songs (Songs of Reverie) .... in which the
‘deflected scale’ more particularly is made use of, and with effects that should
convince sceptics of its musical worth.” —“The Australasian,”
The rhythms and sound patterns of bird calls have been made considerable
use of in the accompaniments to the songs. In “Summer Time” we find the
magpie's varied carol, the mopoke’s markedly rhythmic call in “The Splitter”
and “Wattle Time,” and the grey thrush’s song in “Wattle Time,” “The
Australian Thrush,” and others. The sudden glissando of the Whip-bird is
introduced with striking effect in the song that takes his name.
TECHNICAL
AUSTRALIAN MUSICAL RESOURCES (1917)
A small pamphlet, in which Mr. Tate endeavours to give a few short
specific examples of a simple application of his ideas. The essay, he gays,
“has not been written with the notion of formulating a fixed method, but only
for whatever suggestive value it may possess. Our composers may find in its
point of view or in its specific ideas a suggestion which will lead in the
direction of distinctively Australian work.”
“The 'deflected scale’ is, in fact, a more natural basis for fc. work of
modern cast than the old form of diatonic scale, especially in chromatic music,
and, if the principles be extended, it offers great opportunities for variety of
tonality. Much monotony results from old-style music on account of the
adherence to the old-scale modes. This would be obviated by the ‘deflected
scale,' but only so if the scale is kept free. Mr. Tate’s “deflected scale’—one
corresponding to the ordinary major scale, but with the super-tonic and
sixth degrees flattened —is apparently only offered by way of illustration.
Composers who are inclined to follow his lead will probably make their own
scales in much the same spirit that they now choose the keys of their pieces.
The other ideas Mr, Tate has are of considerable value, and he shows by
musical illustrations how they can be worked out artistically.”—“The Aus-
tralasian."


‘‘An admirable ideal. Our composers should be interested.”—“The Bul-
letin.”
“Mr, Tate has also set down four different bird calls, which he ingeni-
ously works up into melodic and contrapuntal themes. There is no reason
why, from them, characteristic compositions of great and lasting merit should
not be evolved. Has it not been said that a bird call suggested to
Beethoven the first movement of the C minor symphony?”—“The Herald,”
Melbourne.
“To this innovation the objection has been put forward that modified
scales tend toward monotony, to ‘greyness,’ in big works constructed on such
principles, but it is only necessary to listen to some of Mr. Tate’s own com-
positions, entirely planned on his own novel features, to be convinced of
the futility of that argument,”—“The Graphic of Australia.”
“ . . . We know and admire Mr. Tate’s sincerity and poetic in-
stinct so well in spheres we understand that we feel sure that his efforts to
blaze a trail through the Bush Harmonic will be useful and suggestive to
Australians of the musical way.”—Bernard O’Dowd, in “Birth,” Melbourne,
1918.
“ .... we owe him something to begin with for his clear plea for
an Australian quality in our music, which is put forward at a time when
the Australian national interest calls for emphasis.”—Frederick T, Macartney,
in “Australia,” 1918.
“ ‘Australian Musical Resources’ —a pamphlet published recently—opens
new horizons, and gives the prospect of a music which will be as typical of
Australia as the music of Bach and Schumann is of Germany, and as that
of many other composers is of their kin and countries.’’ “The Christian
Science Monitor,” U.S.A., 1918.
“Henry Tate, who believes that symphonies, fugues, and other musical
combinations lie deep in the bush .... He has gone steadily on, and
some day Australia may incline an appreciative ear in his direction,” —“The
Bulletin,” Sydney.
“If it is on the countless unused delights of the Bush that Mr. Tate
uses his technical powers, we can only hope that he is the forerunner of a
serious and enlightened school.” —“The Melbourne University Magazine.”
60
AUSTRALIAN MUSICAL POSSIBILITIES


APPENDIX III.




COMPOSITIONS
by
HENRY TATE




MORNING IN THE GULLY
Henry Tate
For Pianoforte
65


MORNING IN THE GULLY,


MORNING IN THE GULLY.


THE AUSTRALIAN THRUSH
Words and Music by
Henry Tate
68


THE AUSTRALIAN THRUSH.


THE AUSTRALIAN THRUSH.




THE AUSTRALIAN THRUSH.


