

AUSTRALIA MUST BE HEARD
PART 11.
By W. H. GOCHER.
The reception accorded to Part I. of “Australia Must Be
Heard,” at a time of political excitement, has suggested to me
the necessity of further elaborating the proposals to be con-
sidered at the coming Conference to be held in Western
Australia on the 17th of June inst.
The debate will unquestionably centre on the Peace pro-
posals which are now being put forth by the Australian Laboi
Party for submission to the Democracies of the World.
During my recent visit to the Southern Capital, for the
purpose of interviewing the Mint Authorities, politicians, arid
Trades Hall Leaders, enabled me to arrive at a concrete idea
of the attitude and thought of those sections of the community;
and, to put it mildly, I was paralyzed with amazement at
their ignorance on matters pertaining to currency.
STUPIDITY OR RASCALITY ON MINTING VALUES.
In the course of an after-dinner chat at the Federal Par-
liament House, with Dr. W. Maloney, M.P., the simple matter of
metal values cropped up. Dr. Maloney mentioned that he
had information from the Deputy-Master of the Mint that the
cost of minting one ounce of silver was (5/6) five shillings and
sixpence face value.
This was indeed an eye-opener, as I pointed out, by ex-
plaining the bimetallic ratio between gold and silver.
Whereupon a communication was immediately sent to the
Mint for verification of the statement. On the following day
a courteous reply was received at Parliament House, stating
that silver mintage cost 5/6 per ounce —face value.
I immediately called upon the Mint authorities and minu-
tely went into details on the subject of ratio, and other currency
matters. _
A STARTLING STATEMENT.
The relative value between gold and silver, so I was in-
formed at the Mint was 14.1 of silver to one of gold; which 1
stated was a hideous mistake, showing that our gold standard
value was, 16 ounces of silver to one ounce of gold.
The Mint Officer. —“How do you make that out?”
My reply was that- 16 times the value of one ounce of
silver is equal to one ounce of gold—and the standard value
of gold per ounce is 4 sovereigns.
I was then subjected to a perfect tornado of decimals,
and, after a lengthy discussion, I told the Mint officer I was just
about as clear as when he started.
I asked him to kindly consider me a business man, and
tell me what amount of silver he would give me in change for


4 sovereigns. . . ,
He replied promptly—‘Eighty shillings.”
“Therefore,” I replied, “according to your face value
in minting, i.e., 5/6 per ounce for silver, you would lose 8/-
on the transaction —or 2/- in the sovereign. He seemed sur-
prised.
It will be seen from the foregoing that Australia must be
losing an enormous amount annually.
The Mint official merely remarked: “We are a branch of
the Royal Mint, and we are working in complete accordance
with the British Act, which has been in vogue since 1817.”
THE 4 ‘ AGE ’ ’ ASTONISHED.
I then went to the Financial Editor of the “Age” (Mel-
bourne), and told him what had transpired. He said the
Mint authorities were entirely wrong; there must be some
great mistake; and promised to investigate the matter him-
self.
That night Dr. Maloney brought the matter up in the
Federal House of Representatives, and
STRANGE TO SAY,
not a member of that Assembly seemed to understand the
currency question, for they laughed derisively at the Doctor.
The following day we again dined together, when he
told me of his humiliation by the laughter of his fellow-
parliamentarians, and said he preferred to have no more to say
on the question.
When I told him that the Editor of“ The Age” thoroughly
agreed with me, he replied, “I don’t care about you nor your
editors; if you like to speak about Worcester sauce or pickles,
111 gladly entertain a discussion. Anyhow,” he said, con-
tinuing, “come up to the. Medical Hall, and well weigh the
amount in silver and see if it’s accurate.”
We found then that 5/6 in silver weighed exactly one
ounce (troy). This so convinced the Doctor that he was
perfectly satisfied; and, further, conveys the fact that deep
study on currency is not necessary, because of its simplicity.
For twenty years I have been writing and agitating in
every possible manner for the restoration of the BiMetallie
System to the displacement of the present monstrous capitalis-
tic gold standard; which has proved itself to be the cause of
all the International troubles in the world to-day.
For, understand, that although Germany was on a gold
standard, Zimmerman, the great financial adviser of the Ger-
man Government, ignored the words bi-metallism and mono-
metallism, and simply gave legal tender to silver up to five
pounds; and issued 100-mark notes, and notes of smaller
denomination; thereby expanding her currency by a hundred
million pounds.
Instead of taxing her people for military purposes, she
acquired great prosperity through the said expansion of her
currency. Thus, it will be readily seen that the source of
her power came through the hoarding of silver, with which


Wlll ?hu a s''^rd^nfPSrated^t 6 Germany purchasing Broken
Hill silver a 1/10 per ounce, was enabled to secure increased
value to The extent P of 150 per cent, (that being approximate >
the difference between bullion silver and xace vaue),
wM, tl™ enormous wealth, was
anything she wanted in her organization for the cleve
f W nrld power ambition —even to the extent of ouyi b
sLapltelr®/'- - Australia and converting them nno
engines of destruction against her sons. , t ,
§ With the foregoing statement contrast the gold shandaid
system which has been our capitalistic horror for the past
JSd And always remember that silver coinage is the,
m ° a f t will h be m rwell if 1 quote the famous utterance of that
illustrious American, Wm. Jennings Thomas
in his Presidential campaigns a greater Democrat than Iho
Jefferson, and Thomas Jefferson was once describee
greatest Democrat since the time of Christ. , liall
These are the famous words of Bryan- No longer snau
upon the brow of Labor a Crown of Thorns; no longe
shall you Crucify humanity .to the Cross of Cold. >
again “The gold standard is so cruel and so wicked that
far surpasses the infamy of all the standing armies of the
WOr And although our papers at the present time make no
reference to William Jennings Bryan, it is well knoun to
those who follow the magazines that he is actively devoting h s
great energy and ability to Peace Propaganda.
It must be conceded by the members of the Labor Con
ference that the importance of the monetary system makes -
imperative that it should have a conspicuous place in the
forefront of the proposals to be considered by the Democracies
of the Nations on the 17th of June. , , h
A great deal of confusion has been created about the
understanding of the subject of Bi-metallism, owin to to t
false impression that it required the study of a special litera-
ture and a detailed knowledge, of finance. This m wrong,
as the simplicity of the foregoing illustrations shows.
Therefore I maintain that if we stand by the full textn.
our own Constitution, and make as much money as we require
within our own territory, we will be rich indeed, without
borl Take g this simple truth to your heart— -To-day you cash
an Australian £l-note and receive silver h AhtyJoJa
that Australian pound-note represent silver? This, is not a
new proposition, for silver was money from tune immemo <■*
until 1873, when the capitalistic gold bugs demonitized silver
in the United States, under what has since been known as the
“Prime of Ae’es,” fully referred to in Part 1.
° This will”not do away with the sovereign, as we will slid
require gold, because with silver it makes-twice the amount


of money, hence the word bi-metal.
The absurdity of that almost national fallacy that “the
English sovereign is worth its weight in gold,” is easily ex-
ploded when we remember that is the value of an
ounce of gold, according to the Mint authorities, and an ounce
is used in making four sovereigns.
My final advice to Australians is, never mind about read-
ing books on this side or that side on Bi-metallism or Mono-
metallism, but use your common sense. Do what Germany
did and is doing, whilst Japan and other nations are doing
the same.
The death-rattle of the gold standard is now heard through-
out the world, and we must not permit Australia to be dictated
to by any other nation.
Again, I remind you of Lloyd George’s words a few years
back, before this brutal war. He knew what Germany was
doing, when he stated: “Germany and other nations have
“refused to be dictated to by these financial institutions, and
“if they are not careful, Britain will do likewise, as we are
“having too much—Rothschild.”
THE UNSEEN POWER?
The concession to Australia by the Imperial authorities in
allowing us to frame a Constitution for our self-government,
has resulted in one of the finest efforts at constructive legis-
lation that ever emanated from the brain of man. But any
power behind the Throne that mars the progress of our pro-
sperity makes the Constitution null and void, and self-govern-
ment becomes at once a sham and a hollow mockery.
No country in the world has more liberal laws pertaining
to Banking, Legal Tender, Issue, and Coinage than we have,
but immediately we proposed to mint our coinage, a storm of
protest arose from an Unseen Power, and England refused to
allow us to reopen our Mints —until pressure was brought to
bear by the Labor Government of that time. Andrew Fisher
was Prime Minister.
We were then permitted to mint silver to the value of
£lOO,OOO per annum.
At that time Australia had in circulation about £2,000,000
in silver, which would take about 20 years to go out of
circulation before we could exhaust the old coin.
One year the Fisher Government asked for permission to
coin an extra £lOO,OOO in silver, on account of financial re-
quirements at the time. The English Government informed
the Commonwealth Government that gold preceded silver in
minting, but granted permission for an extra £50,000 —thus
meeting us half-way for that year only.
I was informed at that time by the Mint authorities that
the old coin could not be withdrawn at the rate prescribed,, as
they were wanted for circulation. Hence the amount of worn-
out silver in our midst at the present time.
I have always found that audacity modestly applied be-
comes efficacious, as instance the following recent episode:—
On an occasion not long ago I was travelling on a North


Sydney tram, and tendered a sixpence to the conductor as
fare. He said the coin was “worn” and refused to take it.
I refused to offer another. He gave me a card, and told me
to pay the manager in Elizabeth-street. At this office I was
informed that the conductors were instructed not to take
“worn” coin, as the banks refused to accept them from the
Department. I called on the manager of a city bank, and
told him that the Tramway people refused to accept the coin
from me. He said, “Well, if they won’t take it, why should I
accept it?” I said, “They say you won’t take it from them,
“so they won’t take it from me.” I then politely told him
that I would not tolerate the dislocation of trade, nor would
I permit the Australian poor to be robbed. He then referred
me to another bank official, and I subsequently saw the Traffic
Manager at the Tram Office again, to whom I said, “Please,
summon me, won’t you?” To which he replied, “We will
let events take their course.”
Two days later I received a communication from the
Railways Commissioners, demanding 2d. for fare, and a penny
for postage, with a warning “to be of better behaviour in
future.”
My reply to the Commissioners was as follows: —
Gentlemen, 1 —
lam in receipt of your letter. I refuse to tender any
other coin, and a Court of Justice must be approached.
Yours faithfully,
W. H. GOCHER,
President Australian Currency League.
This closed the incident, as far as the Railway people were
concerned; but a few days later a mandate from the Govern-
ment was published, announcing that any Coin of the Realm
with even the faintest semblance of a head showing must be
accepted as legal tender.
PROFITEERING.
I would like to submit the following facts on the above
question for the consideration of the Conference: —
Here is an extract from Part I. of 4 ‘Australia Must Be
Heard 9 ’:
In furtherance of the contentions on this subject, the
Commissions established to collect evidence for the regulation
of prices of meat totally ignore the main influence.
Instead of taking the evidence of master butchers and
stock salesmen, etc., why does not the Commission call the real
authors of this monopoly before its tribunal?
Let the Commissioners obtain from the Government Print-
ing Office a pamphlet which contains the names of the stations,
sheep and cattle, owned and controlled by the Australian banks
and financial concerns, and compare the names daily of the
squatters (?) who send stock to the Homebush sales. Then
compel these gentlemen to give evidence before the Commission
on these points: Firstly, are they the owners of the property ?
Secondly, are they instructed or influenced by the mortgagee


bank or concern as to the number of head of either cattle or
sheep they shall send to the market
Then it will be the duty of the Commission to ascertain
the source which influences the purchasing of stock for export.
And, after comparing the two sources, which is really only one,
the public will know who is the master, tyrant of the meat
market •* .
The Meat Commission was held at the Commonwealth
Bank, where I saw Mr. Brown (Secretary to the Commission,.
I drew his attention to these statements,: and the matter
of giving evidence. He said, “If you are game enough to
face five King’s Counsellors, go m.” I replied that I trusted
to God they were game enough to face me. 1 attended cue
Commission for a while, and then saw Mr. Brown again. 1 his
time he told me that Commissioner Mills was reading my
work concerning the matter, and added: “I think, Mr. Gocher,
< < it would be advisable for you to bring a few of these squatters
“before the Commission. We know who they are, but you bring
i 1 them along.”
To this astounding suggestion, I replied: “This matter is
“in your jurisdiction, Mr. Brown. You have power to sum-
“mon these people to attend, and compel them to give evi-
dence.” He promised to write and let me know if my
evidence would be heard before the Commission. ;
I have not heard from him yet.
Now, as the Conference of the 17th of June will be the
most important of its kind yet held in Australia, and the eyes
of Australia will be focussed on the doings, of the delegates,
we exhort them to deal with this grave question of Profiteering
which has developed to such cruel dimensions, whilst the toiling
masses are being robbed of their very few privileges.
A REMARKABLE UTTERANCE.
When I read the newspaper report of a speech delivered
by the Very Rev. Archbishop Dr. Mannix, in which he stated
that “this war is not England’s war—nor is it Germany’s
war, nor Australia’s, but it is a capitalistic war,” I concluded
that he was a Bi-metallist, like his brilliant colleague, the Rev.
Dr. Walsh, who is the most convincing authority on the subject
in the Empire. , , „ . ,
And, with this conviction, I took the liberty of interview-
ing Dr. Mannix in Melbourne. He, however, displayed a
stubborn disinclination to be drawn into a discussion on the
subject, but when I remarked that the question of Bi-metallism
was not understood in Australia, he significantly said:
“Neither is the question understood in England.”
TRADES HALL VISIT.
That veil of suspicion which seems to envelope every
visitor to the Headquarters of the Labor Movement having
been carefully removed, I was received by the leaders with
politeness, especially when I told them I had travelled from
Sydney to talk to them as a man to men, on the all-important
matter of trying to stop this brutal war.
I was more than delighted when I heard that they had in


AUSTRALIA MUST BE HEARD.—(Part II.).
motion many similar proposals to those promulgated in the
first art of my work, “Australia Must Be Heard, and had
been set down for consideration at the coming Conference in
Perth. . • .
They thoroughly agreed with me that an Armistice is im-
perative before Peacs, so that the voice of the Democracies
must be heard. , u
It is only fit and proper that such resolutions should come
from Australia, as the leader of all democratic thought and
action. . , -a a
Py a strange coincidence the proposals to be consicleieu.
bv Labor number nine as they do in my published work.
It may be that the Conference will think it advisable to
knock out one of their proposals. For instance, Clause 3 v)f.
Labor’s Terms of Peace —and at the same time they may
eliminate Clause sin my proposals. However, I reprint the
two sets of suggestions, leaving the delegates to add or take
from these proposals
I.—TERMS OF PEACE.
1. The right of small nations to political independence.
2. That the European countries invaded during the present
war be immediately evacuated, and their future territorial
integrity guaranteed: provided that the ownership of dis-
puted territories shall be determined by a plebiscite of the
inhabitants, under the protection of an International Com-
mission. This course would dispose of Alsace-Lorraine,
Poland, and similar cases, on the democratic principle that
all just government must rest on the consent of the go-
verned.
3. That, prior to the process of disbandment of the. com-
batant armies, the soldiers shall be voluntarily utilised,
under International control, for the restoration of the
devastated territories, at the expense of the invaders.
4. That, where an amicable arrangement cannot be reached
by the Peace Conference in regard to captured Colonies
and Dependencies, such territories shall be placed provi-
sionally under International control.
5. That the freedom of the seas be secured on the lines laid
down by President Wilson of America, in Jkis speech at
Washington, in May, 1916, where he advoAed: “A uni-
versal association of the nations, to maintain the inviolate
security of the highway of the seas for the common and
unhindered use of all nations of the world.
6. The abolition of trading in armaments, and the prohibition
of the private manufacture thereof.
7. The abolition of conscription in all countries simul •
taneously.
8. The control of foreign relations under a democratic sys-
tem, based upon publicity, in lieu of the pre||n.t methods
of secret diplomacy. • §
9. That the existing machinery for International Arbitration
be expanded to Embrace a Concert of Europe, ultimately


merging into a world-wide Parliament, as advocated by
President Wilson in a recent message to the American
Congress. . T «
AUSTRALIAN PROPOSALS.
(1) The map of Europe be not altered, with the exception
of the restoration of Alsace-Lorraine to the French in lieu o
the return to Germany of her coiomes—an except
ease being Samoa, which be retained by England and America
Naval^Base.^oian d , syste m 0 f Republican
to become a dominion of the British
Empire; and small nations which have been ruthlessly de
with, especially Belgium, be indemnified.
THE REFORM PLATFORM.
The following platform shall constitute the demanc s o
Australia before the settlement of hostilities: .
(1) Restoration of the moneys of the world previous to
1873 and reform of the banking system of the nations.
(2) Tolerance of religious liberty in all lands.
(3) Universal adult suffrage.
(4) Oneness of common interests amongst the nations.
(5) Racial demarcation.
(6) Limitation of monarchy.
(7) The abolition of the House of Lords.
(8) International Annual Democratic Convention.
(9) Self-Government for all Dominions.
Although the above may seem ambitious, when a brief
explanation is given on each proposal it will be recognised that
the simplicity of these set forth entitle Australia to promulgate
of the Leaders of the Australian Labor
Movement towards the American, Samuel Gompers, it appears
that he does not express the sentiments of United Labor m
the States of America. It may be necessary, therefore, to
get in touch with William Jennings Bryan, whose sympathy
with world-wide progress on all Democratic Reforms is o
unquestionable sincerity.
It may not be known that Mr. Bryan, as one of the most
pronounced Presbyterians in America, introduced for the first
time in the States, tolerance of Religious Liberty.
It is admitted on all hands that both sides m the war are
satisfied that a continuance of the struggle is hopeless; it
would be well if the delegates left the first step towards an
Armistice to W. Jennings Bryan, who could easily get m touch
with the one important neutral Power, His Holiness the Pope,
especially when it is remembered that His Holiness is eager
for a cessation of the cruel hostilities; and who is eager to
accept suggestions from any quarter. .
In conclusion, let us hope that the delegates will to
the magnitude of the work they have m hand, remembeiing
that not only is Australia waiting impatiently for their deci-
sions, but the eyes of the world are upon them.
