

f
..
A ,
ao
iC
Lr ; ' 1 I
*
it
r j
\




or black colour, fancy my coffee to be thin and weak, but
these were at once inclined more favourably directly I gave it
a dark colour by means of burnt sugar, or by adding some
substitute.
The real flavour of coffee is so little known to most persons
that many Avho drank my coffee for the first time doubted of
its goodness, because it tasted of the berries. A coffee, how-
ever, which has not the flavour of the berry is no coffee, but
an artificial beverage, for which many other things may be
substituted at pleasure. Hence it comes that if to the de-
coction made from roasted chicory, carrots, or beetroot, the
slightest quantity of coffee be added, few persons detect the
difference. This accounts for the great diffusion of each
such substitute. A dark mixture, with an empyreumatical
taste, most people fancy to be coffee. For tea there are no
substitutes, because everybody knows what real tea is like.
Heating qualities have generally been attributed to coffee,
and for this reason it is avoided by many people: however,
these heating qualities belong to the volatile products called
forth by the destruction of the soluble parts of the berries
in the process of roasting. Coffee prepared in my manner is
not heating, and I have found that it may be taken after
dinner without disturbing the digestion; a circumstance
which, with me at least, always takes place after the enjoy-
ment of strongly-roasted coffee.
For special cases, such as journeys and marches, where it
is impossible to be burdened with the necessary machines for
roasting and grinding, coffee may be carried in a powdered
form, and its aromatic properties preserved by the following
process: —One pound of the roasted berries are reduced to
powder and immediately wetted with a syrup of sugar, obtained
by pouring on three ounces of sugar two ounces of water,
and letting them stand a few minutes. When the powder is
thoroughly wetted with the syrup, two ounces of finely-
powdered sugar are to be added, mixed well with it, and the
whole is then to be spread out in the air to dry. The sugar
locks up the volatile parts of the coffee, so that when it is
dry they cannot escape. If coffee is now to be made, cold
water is to be poured over a certain quantity of the powder
and made to boil. Ground coffee prepared in this way, and
which lay exposed to the air for one month, yielded, on being
boiled, as good a beverage as one made of freshly-roasted
berries.
VOL. V.—NO. XVIII. , ( v % i


AUSTRALIA AND EUROPE FORMERLY ONE
CONTINENT.
BERTHOLD SEEMANN, Pli.D., F.L.S., Y.P.A.S.
TO our forefathers it must have had a wonderful fascination
when some astrologer of note proclaimed the great
events that were to happen in the world, or uttered solemn
words of warning that sent a thrill of horror through the
believing multitude. Our practical age, by its unbelief, has
deprived itself of all the pleasure resulting from that pas-
time. True, there have been some modern attempts in that
direction, but they have invariably resulted in failure. _ We
no sooner hear of some popular preacher having predicted
the end of the world to occur within three years - ’ time, than
we read in the newspapers that the prophet has rudely
destroyed our nascent belief by taking a new lease of his
house for a series of years. Modern science, which dis-
pelled so many delusions, has laid it down as one of its
dogmas, that it is absolutely useless to attempt lifting the veil
which separates the living present from the unborn future;
and mankind has no sooner mastered this dogma than it makes
right-about-face, and throws itself, with all the ardour of a
youthful lover, into the arms of the past. Not content with
such history as is written in books, it compels the hiero-
glyphics of Egypt and the picture-writings of America to
give evidence. Rude implements are put in the witness-
box, and every stone or bone touched by the hand of extinct
human races becomes an object of interest. The fainter the
stream of history runs, the greater the interest it inspires.
But at last a point is reached where all human history, as far
as present investigation goes, apparently comes to an end.
Even if we assume the correctness of M. Desnoyer’s observa-
tion, man’s existence upon earth has, as yet, not been traced
farther back than to the Pleiocene formation. But it would
be premature to say, because no evidence has as yet been
adduced, that man may not have existed in the Eocene, espe-
cially as it can be shown that a race of men, the lowest we
know of, co-exists with that remnant of the Eocene Flora
which still survives on the continent and islands of Australia.
With the entire cessation of data for human history, our


Fig. 1. Pig. 2. Fig. 4.
Fig. 3. Pig. 6. Fig.'7,




interest in tlie good and evil periods through which our
planet has passed does not abate; but we go on inquiring
into the nature and formation of the tertiary, secondary,
and primary rocks, because the history of the one. helps
to explain that of the other, and imparts an irresistible
force to the dicta of modern investigation. After we shall
have made greater advance in these investigations, and accu-
mulated more facts, we shall be in a fair position to reconstruct,
with a tolerable degree of accuracy, the whole surface of our
globe as it existed at the various geological periods, show the
boundaries of the continents and islands, clothe them with
extinct forms of vegetation, and recal to life races of animals
and men long passed away. Unger’s ideal landscapes of
primitive nature* foreshadowed the results which the united
labours of geologists, botanists, zoologists, and anthropologists,
are busy to bring about. It cannot be said that at present
they are pursuing their labours in concert; on the contrary,
every one is too busily engaged in his own workshop to
trouble himself much about the doings of others; but there
is no harm in that course when so much preliminary work has
still to be got through. It is perhaps all the better that up
to a certain point every one should work independently, merely
contenting himself with letting the general public know the
principal results at which he has arrived.
The facts which botanists have accumulated for recon-
structing these lost maps of the globe are rather comprehensive;
and they have not been backward in demonstrating the former
existence of several large tracts of solid land in parts now
occupied by great oceans. The many striking points of con-
tact between the present floras of the United States and
Eastern Asia induced them to assume, that during the present
order of things there existed a continental connection between
South Eastern Asia and Western America. The singular
correspondence of the present flora of the Southern United
States with that of the lignite flora of Europe induces them
to believe that, in the Miocene period, Europe and America
were connected by a land passage, of which Iceland, Madeira,
and the other Atlantic islands, are remnants; that, in fact,
.the story of Atlantis, which an Egyptian priest told to Solon,
is not purely fictitious, but rests upon a solid historical basis.
Again, the existence of certain Iberian plants in Ireland they
explain by having once more recourse to a former continental
connection between the Iberian peninsula aud that island. An
hypothesis even bolder than any of these has been advanced
* Ideal Views of the Primitive World in its Geological and Palaeonto-
logical Phases. London : Robert Hardwicke, 192, Picadilly.


by Dr. Unger, of Vienna, one of the most distinguished and
cautious of leading botanical palaeontologists, to account
for the similarity, not to say identity, of vegetable forms
existing in the Eocene beds of Europe and the present flora
of Australia. Dr. Unger employs, in his essay on this subject
{Journal of Botany, British and Foreign, vol. hi. pp. 39-70),
the same method by which he proved so satisfactorily the
former existence of the island of Atlantis {Journal of Botany,
iii. p. 12), and it may be interesting to give here the result
of his labours, adding such observations as may suggest
themselves.
New Holland and the neighbouring islands are characterized
by a vegetation at present not met with in other parts of the
world. Several natural orders and genera of plants are there
found in such overwhelming majority that the vegetation
derives from them its distinguishing character. There are,
for instance, certain Myrtaceous plants — Eucalypti, or gum-
trees —diffused over New Holland in such numerous species,
and the species represented by such innumerable individuals,
that they alone determine the character and the condition of
the forests. The same remark applies to a countless multitude
of those heath-like plants, the Epacrids, which are to New
Holland what the Ericas are to the Cape of Good Hope. The
peculiarity of these trees and shrubs, and their abundance,
have induced botanical geographers to designate the extra-
tropical part of New Holland “the region of gum-trees and
Epacrids. 33 But these are not the only types characteristic of
this part of the globe : the Proteacece, Santalece, Monimiacece,
and Anthoholece, are equally prominent. Time, some of them
have sent outposts to other continents, but their principal
army is stationed in New Holland and the adjacent islands;
the Proteacece especially are spread over the whole continent
of Australia in numerous genera and species. Nor must we
omit to mention several genera of Jjeguminosce and Coniferce.
There are also the Acacias, with numerous species, and curious
enlarged leafstalks, peculiar to the Australian types; and
amongst the Coniferce, the genera Araucaria, Podocarpus, and
partly Callitris.
Let us now see how far these characteristic plants of New
Holland are represented in our European Eocene formation.
Not only do we meet with the polymorphous order Myrtacece,
but it is plain the genus Eucalyptus itself is represented
amongst the fossils. Of several species the peculiar leaves
as well as the fruit have been found. The same is the
case with the Epacrids. But much more stress has been
laid upon the Proteacece, as the characteristic plants of
the Eocene period, than the Myrtacece and Epacrids. "We


AUSTRALIA AND EUROPE FORMERLY ONE CONTINENT. 21
have found of them different leaves, fruit, and seed, and are
in a position to make out even certain genera, such as BanJisia
(fig. 13), JDryandra, Hahea, Embothrium (fig. 12), Grevillea (fig,
10), Lomatia, Persoonia, Petrophyllum, &c. Thus it would
appear that the Proteacece now constituting the bulk of
the New Holland vegetation played a similar part during a
former geological epoch of Europe. Greater stress has,
however, to be laid —because the character of New Holland
and the Southern Hemisphere is more especially determined
by them—upon the presence of the Santalacece, Anthobolece ,
and Munimiacece, particularly the genus Leptomeria, of which
several species have been discovered in the Tyrol and in
the lignite deposits of the lower Rhine. Closely related to
these leafless shrubs is the Australian Cherry {Exocarpus,
fig. 9), which, strange to mention, is found amongst the
fossils at Nadoboj (fig. 8). Nor must we omit to enumerate
the genus Laurelia , which is peculiar to New Zealand and the
mountains of Southern Chili. All these fragments make it
evident that the flora of the Eocene period bore the character
of the present Australian vegetation. But what are we to add
about the Goniferce, Cupuliferce, Casuarinece, Araliacece, Legu-
minosce, &c. ? Amongst the most common fossils of Sotzka
and Haring are the branches of a coniferous plant which
has its exact counterpart in the genus Araucaria; and
the latter, as it is well known, belongs exclusively to the
Southern Hemisphere, New Holland and Norfolk Island pos-
sessing five species. Podocarpus , Eibocedrus, and Gallitns,
may also be named as natives of the same hemisphere, and
fragments of them are found in nearly all localities of the
Eocene formation. Who does not know the Gasuarmeoi of our
greenhouses, and that those leafless, equisetum-like trees
are almost exclusively met with in New Holland ? They
also seem to have been represented in pre-historic ages.
It is also worthy of remark that amongst the numerous
fossil-oaks of the Eocene period, there is one with the
type peculiar to the Javanese ones of the existing vegeta-
tion; and that the dwarf Beeches of Tierra del Fuego,
Chili, Van Diemen's Land, &c., of the present day (figs.
2, 3, 4, 6, and 7) probably also existed formerly (figs. 1
and 5). Many more instances could be cited, but we may
content ourselves with casting a look upon the widely-
diffused and polymorphous class of Leguminosce. As is well
known, it is divided into several tribes, every one of which,
preferring a certain climate, has selected this or that country
as its principal dwelling-place. Amongst those with pea-
flowers the Dalbergiece and Gcesalpinece are only met with in
the tropics ; whilst the Mimosece form a considerable portion of


the tree-vegetation of New Holland. Amongst the fossils of the
Eocene formation we have corresponding with them the genera
Pterocarpus, Drepanocarpus, Gentrolohium, Dalbergia, Cassia ,
Ccesalpinia, Bauhinia, Gopaifera, Entada, Acacia, Mimosa ,
and Inga—Acacia being, perhaps, most numerously repre-
sented.
Seeing what a considerable portion of the Australian and
Polynesian flora was represented by characteristic types in the
Eocene period, we can no longer entertain any doubt that Europe
stood in some hind of connection with New Holland. But what
was the exact nature of this connection? Let us hear Dr. Unger's
answer. Wherever similar or the same effects in natural phe-
nomena are perceived, we are justified in ascribing them to
similar or the same causes. A vegetation in Europe bearing
the same character as that of New Holland and the adjacent
islands of the present day compels us to admit that, at the
Eocene period, a set of conditions prevailed in our continent
similar to those under which the Australian flora at present
exists. It is not conceivable that when our forests were
formed by Araucarias, instead of Pines, and our underwood of
Proteacece, Santalece , &c., instead of Ehammi, Privets, and
Hazels, the climate and soil should have been the same as
they are now. We know but too well what peculiar conditions
of temperature, light, moisture, &c., certain plants require,
and how slavishly we are tied to certain rules in our cultivation
of foreign plants. True, Araucarias, Proteacece, and Epacridece
grow, at present, exceedingly well in Europe, but only when
protected by glass, in a certain artificial temperature and
light, and a well-prepared soil—calculated to approximate
the exceptional conditions under which they are grown to
those of their native country. We may, therefore, conclude
with good reason that the conditions which we produce arti-
ficially, in order to grow these plants, existed in the whole
of Europe ; in short that, at the Eocene period, Europe must
have had a climate lihe that of Neiv Holland at the present dag.
But by thus determining the climate of Europe during
the Eocene period, we have not proved more than that our
part of the world could formerly support a vegetation
which required a much milder climate. It is more important
to ascertain how the vegetation of a continent situated
at our very antipodes could find its way hither. It is com-
paratively easy to account for the spreading of the plants
of an adjacent milder climate to our northern zone, or how
the plants of a northern subtropical region came to us; but
the occurrence of representatives of the southern hemisphere
in the northern certainly demands a very peculiar set of con-
ditions. In trying to solve this problem we shall have to


learn a little geography—pre-historic geography though it he
—by the assistance of botany. The principal questions that
meet us at the very outset are : Has a continental connection
between these two quarters of the fglobe been possible or
probable ? Are there any proofs similar to those by which
is supported the former connection between Europe and
America? None whatever; moreover, the geological inves-
tigations respecting this point are still so unsatisfactory that
we gain no support from them to account for a contempora-
neous and homologous vegetation in these two extreme
corners of the globe. Nothing remains save to assume either
the existence of several centres of creation, or the transmission
from one locality to the other of the greater number of these
plants over land and sea. By adopting the first alternative,
we should have to assume that, at the same geological period.
New Holland as well as Europe produced the germs of iden-
tical, or very nearly identical plants. An identity of climate •
which, under any circumstances, must be granted —would seem
to settle the question, by the adoption of this hypothesis, in
the most simple manner. And why should not similar, or even
perfectly identical plants originate in two or several parts of
the globe, provided external circumstances are favourable ?
Theoretically speaking, there is, indeed, nothing to oppose to
this, provided that the origin of species is brought about exclu-
sively by external circumstances. But we are led to quite an
opposite view by what we know of the distribution of existing
plants. We know that every species was originally confined
to a more or less circumscribed space, whence it spread cen-
trifugally. However extensive the range of certain plants
may be, it has always a well-defined limit, beyond which the
species seldom ventures in isolated patches. Wherever we
do meet with such exceptional cases, similar to those of the
enclaves in the distribution of languages, we have no difficulty
in recognizing in them intruders, or as parts cut off from the
principal stock, and geology has already in some respects
accounted for the cause of this dismemberment. But not a
single species has as yet been found occupying two distinct
territories which are evidently the result of two centres of
creation. These facts justify us in rejecting the proposition
of a contemporaneous origin of identical or nearly identical
species in two countries widely separated from each other,
and nothing remains but to assume that either the New
Holland plants emigrated to Europe, or (what is less probable)
the former European plants, which had an Australian charac-
ter, passed from Europe to New Holland.
Wandering is the destiny of mortals. If man or beast are
compelled to leave their native place, their organization, and the


nature of surrounding circumstances, easily supply us with an
intelligible reason for the act. But it is more difficult to
account for the migration of plants, intimately connected as
they are with the soil; and if, nevertheless, we find these
effecting a migration from one continent to the other, it can only
be the result of a tendency belonging less to the individual
than to the whole species struggling for existence. If it bo
interesting to trace the migrations of different races of men
and animals, it is not the less so to watch the distribution of
plants. At present a considerable number of European plants
grow in New Holland, and many of them existed there even
before that continent was discovered by us. If these could
find their way thither across the equator. New Holland plants
could pass to us before vessels began to navigate between the
two continents. What currents, winds, and migratory animals,
can effect in this respect has been substantiated by super-
abundant evidence. Long ago. Nature established a telegraphic
intercourse over the globe, by means of which she not only
makes known her decrees, but effects her necessary postal
communications ; and if amongst the cosmopolitan plants there
are so many lower Cryptogams propagated by minute light
spores, we cannot long remain in doubt about the agents
that lent a helping hand to these colonists. But even this,
as everything else in this world, has its limit; and it would be
unphilosophical to think that by these means alone we could
explain the whole distribution of plants. Oceans and large basins
of water offer, indeed, great obstacles to the spreading of terres-
trial plants, though they may be instrumental in carrying
fruits and seeds. But experience has taught that the trans-
portation effected by waves and currents is, at best, confined
only a limited number of plants which can bear the ill
effects of water without losing their vitality, and which, on
their arrival on foreign shores, meet with such conditions as
are essential to their existence. It is evident that amongst
the numerous species composing the flora of a country there
can only be very few which are able to overleap the boundaries
of their natural range.
But all this does not explain how the peculiarities of a whole
flora can reappear in far distant countries. If, therefore, we
find in the Eocene flora of Europe principally plants bearing
the characters of those of Australia and Polynesia, we can
hardly believe that the whole of them could have passed un-
injured across Torres Strait to New Guinea, the Moluccas,
Ac., to Asia, and thence to Europe. On the contrary, to
render this singular fact somewhat intelligible we shall be
compelled not only to assume a closer connection of the
different Polynesian islands with Australia, but also a conti-


nental connection of them with Asia by way of the Moluccas.
It is, therefore, by means of a continental highway that the
Araucarias, Proteacece, Santalece , and numerous otherarboreous
and herbaceous plants, reached our continent, where, after
myriads of years, they are still preserved as fossils. But
supposing that the highway had been sufficiently practicable
to permit masses of plants to reach Europe, the problem still
remains, how did it come to pass that tLey could make so
difficult a journey, extending over thousands of years, without
obtaining on foreign Asiatic soil conditions favourable to their
existence? Unfortunately, the geological investigations of
that continent do, as yet, not enable us to make even a sur-
mise, but we know for certain the ranks of these Australian
emigrants were increased in Asia by a number of species
which continued with them their onward march to Europe,—
at that time, it should be remembered, not a cold country.
But Europe of the Eocene period received the plants which
spread over mountains and plains, valleys and river-banks,
neither exclusively from the south nor from the east. The
west also furnished additions, and if at that period these
were rather meagre, they show, at all events, that the
bridge was already building which, at a later period, was to
facilitate communication between the two continents in such a
remarkable manner. At that time some plants of the western
continent began to reach Europe by means of the island of
Atlantis, then probably just rising above the ocean. The nu-
merous Hickories, Maples, Oaks, Poplars, Nyssacece and Papi-
lionacece, &c., can have reached us only from a western centre
of creation. Europe thus became, in all probability, the farthest
limit attained by the outposts and colonists of three great
centres of creation, situated at about equal distances from each
other, and the place where they met and amalgamated.
Europe, without being a centre of creation, thus received the
impress of the peculiarities of three great continents.
Australia, on account of its isolated geographical position,
strange productions, curious physical character, and the low
degree of development attained by its flora and fauna, must
not be regarded as a newly-born island, but, on the contrary,
as a country in its senility, which from time immemorial had
retained its character unchanged. New Holland may be likened
to an old man, rather than to a child ; it does not begin to
breathe and to live; on the contrary, it has lived and toiled, and
is tottering towards the grave. This is indicated, not only by
its flora and fauna, but also by geological peculiarities of the
country. None of the newer formations, so widely diffused over
Europe, cover its extensive primitive rocks; and its older de-
posits, principally consistingof layers of carboniferous sandstone


and porphyry, are horizontal and undisturbed. No revolutions
have passed over the surface since it rose from the ocean; and for
that reason the greater portion of the country still looks most like
the bottom of the sea. On the other hand, there is a phenomenon
plainly indicating that the country has done playing its part,
and must now prepare for vast changes. The whole of New
Holland is surrounded by coral reefs, those buildings of
sinister Naiades which slowly but surely drag their victims to
their watery habitation. It is known that these reef-building
corals grow only in considerable masses where the ground is
gradually sinking. If there were no other sign, these coral
banks surrounding the continent and islands would point to
changes in the level; and, from what the smaller Polynesian
islands have already undergone, the future New Holland—viz.
a dissolution of the continent into groups of islands—might be
predicted. But the entire condition of the country, the
desert-like character of the interior, the great number of salt-
lakes, the rivers terminating in swamps, &c., indicate an
approaching geological change, which, however —let our co-
lonists take comfort —may not take place for some thousands
of years. As soon as New Holland shall have been broken up
into islands, we may expect its vegetation to assume the same
aspect as that now presented by the Polynesian islands. The
bulk of the plants, adapted as they are to the peculiar dry
climate of the extratropical parts, would perish as soon as
the climate became insular, and the Asiatic flora, which even
now presses hard upon the northern parts of New Holland,
would get the upper hand, as has been the case in the Pacific
after the dissolution of its continent into those innumerable
islands now called Polynesia. Plants with dry leathery leaves
would be superseded by those having a more luxuriant but
weedy look ; for that I take to be the principal physiognomic
difference between the floras of extratropical Australia and
tropical Asia.
It must be evident that the inquiry Hnger has set on foot
cannot stop here. The abundance of the most typical forms
of Australian mammals the marsupials (opossum and
kangaroo)—in tertiary European deposits, will doubtless
tempt some comprehensive mind to treat the subject from a
zoological point of view. It is most important to ascertain
whether the present fauna of Australia was always associated
with the present flora. Ido not know of any reason why it should
not; but a closer examination of all the facts may possibly
point to a different conclusion. It will probably turn out that
in the Australian native population we behold the oldest as well
as the lowest race of men—a race in many instances without
any religion whatever, and incapable of mastering any religious


teaching,—a race unfitted for civilization, and so near the brute
creation that it might be appropriately classed with it, if it was
not for its power of language and the only ingenious thing in
its possession—the boomerang. The reason why New Hol-
land could not make any great strides in civilization, conceding
even that the natives as a race were capable of it, are easily
found in the nature of the country. It wants moisture and
nutritious plants for man and beast. It requires immense
tracts of land to feed even a flock of sheep, wild animals are
scarce; and whilst every other part of the globe has added
edible plants to our table, we have not received a single addi-
tion from New Holland ; indeed, Europeans who should have
to rely for their food upon what Australian vegetation can
supply, would share the melancholy fate of Burke and Wills
when they tried to eke out their existence by eating the
wretched nardoo fruits of Australian swamps. There could be
no flocking together of men as long as these conditions were
not remedied, no permanent interest in property, and no im-
provement. All was hopeless stagnation
But if, under these unfavourable conditions, man has existed,
at least as far as we historically know, for several centuries,*
we may conclude that he could exist in Europe, even during
the Eocene period; when the same, or a closely similar climate,
vegetation, and perhaps fauna, prevailed there. We may also
be sure that, with such surroundings, whatever his race may
have been, he could not have arrived at a much higher degree
of civilization than the wretched aborigines who are now dis-
appearing in Australia.
Bearing in mind that, at one period of the earth's history,
there flourished in Europe a vegetation very, similar to that
still beheld in Australia ; but that the whole of it has been
swept away, to make room for other vegetable forms, leaving
no trace behind except what is recorded in the great stone-book
of nature. New Holland is highly instructive. It is a faithful
picture of what the aspect of our flora must have been ages
ago ; and on paying a visit to Australia we are, as it were,
transporting ourselves back to ante-historical periods. The
* I am fully aware that some anthropologists regard (perhaps with
justice) the Australian and Papuan races as identical; but I have avoided
complicating the question here discussed by the introduction of that subject.
The most northern country occupied by Papuans are the Andaman islands,
and I have shown, some years ago, in the Athenceum, that they were visited
about 1000 years back by Sindbad the Sailor (the popular version of whose
narratives is familiar to us through the “Arabian Nights’ Entertainment”),
and that the inhabitants were at that time as wild as they are at the present
day, though in contact with the civilization of Asia,


effect which such an inspection produces on the mind is very
singular. It kindles in us (and I speak from personal ex-
perience) feelings of curiosity, but no sympathy. We delight
in bright green foliage, sweet-smelling flowers, and fruits with
some kind of taste in them. But we have here none of all
these. The leaves are of a dull, often brownish, green, and
without any lustre, the flowers do not smell, and the fruits,
without any exception, are tasteless and insipid. Is the whole
of this vegetation, and the animals depending upon it for
support, to disappear before the continent becomes a fit abode
for the white man ?
Plates 2 and 3 represent a few specimens of the fossil species found in
Europe, and their corresponding living types, the former illustrated by-
woodcuts, the latter by nature-printing, Fig. 1, Fagus pygmcea, and fig. 5,
Fagus Chamcephegos, two fossil species ; figs. 2, 3, and 4, Fagus obliqua;
fig. 6, Fagus betuloides and Fagus Cunninghami, three existing species ;
fig. 8, the fossil Exocarpus Itadohojana, and fig. 9, the existing Exocarpus
cupressiformis; fig. 10, the fossil Grevillea Kymmeana, and fig. 11, the
existing Lomatia linearis ; fig. 13, the extinct Banlcsia Solonis, and fig. 14,
the existing Banlcsia serrata.


Fig. J3.
Fig. 14.
Fossil European Plants, and their Analogous Living Species.




ON OZONE IN RELATION TO HEALTH AND
DISEASE.
B. W. RICHARDSON, M.A., M.D., F.R.C.P.
I HAVE undertaken to write a few pages for the Popular
Science Review on the subject of Ozone in relation to
disease. The subject is all novelty and all interest, so that
those who have studied it, as I and some few others have
studied it, are sure of a hearing when they communicate what
they know in intelligible language. But for the very reason
that the subject is both novel and interesting, it is necessary
to approach it with caution, and certainly without enthu-
siasm. The cold philosopher whom Bulwer Lytton has so
marvellously depicted in “ Zanoni,” Zanoni’s own guide and
counsellor, would not himself have been too frigid in his
philosophy to deal with this topic. Since the day when
the word Ozone first became known in this country, I have
made the subject before us a careful study, and eleven years
ago a conjoint paper by Dr. Moffatt and myself was read
at the Epidemiological Society, the key-note of which
paper was ee Ozone and disease.’* But I confess that as
yet I know very little about the matter —very little that
can be called real and demonstrative. I feel as one of the
crew of Columbus might have felt when, nearing the western
islands of the Indies, he saw floating towards him remnants
of trees and broken paddles and canoes, with flights of birds
above head, and other indications that land must be near, but
with no land in sight. I feel that there are many indications
of the near approach of some great truth connected with dis-
coveries on Ozone; but the truth is either not visible as yet,
or, being visible, is so dimly seen as to be indefinable.
It is fair, reader, that I should give you this warning, and
having made so clear a confession, I will ask you to trust me
as a guide without hesitation or fear. I will direct the light I
hold boldly on paths that are known, and if at any time it
shall fall on paths that are obscure, the fact shall be stated,
and no artificial path shall be described.
The chemists have held a sharp contest respecting the true
nature of Ozone. In general terms the word refers to a


gaseous substance possessing a peculiar odour : it is a nega-
tive word, conveying no accurate idea of the composition of
the substance—and perhaps this is an advantage to science
rather than the contrary, at least for the present time; the word,
that is to say, is meaningless, and might, from its derivation
“ o£w, to smell,” apply to any gas that is odorous ; but because
it is meaningless as a definition, it pledges itself to no theory or
hypothesis as to the elementary constitution of the substance
it designates. When that constitution is discovered, and all
chemists shake hands over it in cordial agreement, it will be
good time to change the name, if that be desirable, and make
the designation define the substance as it really is in its
essence.
The circumstances under which Ozone may be presented are,
to a considerable extent, known. When an electrical machine
—a common frictional machine —is set in motion, and sparks
or flashes are taken from the positive conductor, Ozone is
developed, and its characteristic odour is readily detected.
When water is decomposed by electricity, Ozone appears, with
oxygen, at the positive pole; in fact, according to one view,
the oxygen is simply in an active state, ozonized. If oxygen,
nitrous oxide gas, or carbonic acid gas, be placed in a glass
jar, and electrical sparks be passed through the gas. Ozone is
developed, and the same has been stated in respect to nitrogen,
but Dr. Wood and I were unable by experiment to sustain
this last assertion. Ozone may also be obtained by heating
one end of a glass rod gently, and then immersing the said
end in a jar through which rectified ether is diffused in vapour.
A ready way of making Ozone is to take sticks of common
phosphorus, scrape them until they have a metallic lustre, place
them, in this condition, in a large bell jar, and half cover them
with water. The air in the bell jar is soon charged with
Ozone, and a large room can readily be supplied with air in
the ozonized state by this process.
To make Ozone on a large scale an apparatus invented by
Siemens is the best. A cylinder of glass is covered neatly on
its outer surface with tinfoil in the same manner as a Leyden
jar. Then within this cylinder a smaller cylinder, also coated
with tinfoil, is introduced and fixed with cork. The two free
ends of the large cylinder are closed with corks well coated
with sealing-wax varnish, and each cork is perforated so that
a small wooden or glass tube may be inserted. There is thus
formed a chamber of glass, lined with tinfoil, and if a bellows
be attached to one of -the small tubes, and air be driven from
the bellows, it passes through this chamber and can be collected
as it escapes at the opposite end. To ozonize the air that may
be sent through this chamber, it is now only necessary to


1
O _ * ° 1 ’ ?
•" ~ _i
0
\ w
fN
discharge electrical sparks through the chamber while the
current of air is making its way. To effect this, the coasting of
tinfoil on the inner and the coating of tinfoil on the outer
cylinder are each armed with a fine platinum wire. These
rs
CJ
>
Q)
s
u
a
s
2
'o
&
o
o
jfa
> ho
*5 a
g|
O *
Cm ZJ
U b
CJ P
S 3
n C
3
OP*
OS
S' 3
Sn
o 2
to o
N
o o
-
o
N
O
wires are connected by their free ends with the poles, one wire
to one pole, the other to the opposite pole,—of a large induction
coil. : The coil being set in action by the power derived from
three or four cells of a Grove’s battery, electrical discharges


are freely made in tlie chamber of the cylinder, and the air
is richly ozonized. In the diagram herewith supplied, the
apparatus, as it is set up ready for action, is well depicted
by Mr. Orrin Smith.
By means of this apparatus I have produced an air which is
irrespirable except for a brief period, and so active in its
destructive power that gutta-percha and india-rubber tubings
are destroyed by merely conveying it. To obviate the mechani-
cal difficulties arising from this cause Dr. Wood has very
ingeniously devised a tube of quills, which answers every
purpose : the quills are held together with sealing-wax varnish,
the narrow end of one quill being inserted into the wider end
of another, and so on in a line.
Such are the various methods by which Ozone is produced,
and however produced it appears to have the same properties :
it is, therefore, assumed to be the same substance as derived
from all these sources, but what it is, —that is still a disputed
question.
I shall not trouble the reader with any argument on this
great subject —it suffices for the physiologist to know that
there is an active agent, which he may call Ozone, and which
he can produce at will, —but I may state, in one or two words,
that, in respect to composition, one class of theorists hold
Ozone to be simply oxygen in an active state, while others
maintain that it is a combination of oxygen with hydrogen, a
peroxide of hydrogen. According to my light I should say
that those who hold for the active oxygen theory have the best
of the disputation; but I will not press the point further,
because the object of this paper is not to discuss what Ozone
is, but what it does in one particular course of action.
By operating with Siemens’s apparatus, we may discover
with great rapidity and by frequently repeated experiment,
the influence of Ozone on both dead and living organic animal
matter. We may follow these lines usefully.
On dead matter that has become putrid Ozone acts with
great vehemence as a deodorizer or purifier. This it effects by
decomposing the products which emanate from the putrifying
body, and the effects are the same in the most offensive
compounds. I could illustrate these facts by numerous expe-
riments, but one will be sufficient.
In the year 1854, I placed a pint of blood derived from an
ox, in a large, wide-mouthed bottle. The blood had coagu-
lated when it was placed in the bottle, and consisted of two parts
clot and serum. It was left in this state, exposed to the air,
until it was quite putrid and the clot was softening: then
the clot was gently stirred from time to time, until it had


*


