

AUSTRALIA’S
TESTING.
SIX SERMONS
Preached in Scots Church, Melbourne, in time of
War, May to July, 1915.
BY
The Rev. W. BORLAND, M.A., B.D.
[COPYRIGHT].
Price - - - SIXPENCE.
Published by Members of Scots Church, in aid of the Red Cross
Fund for the Australian Wounded.




AUSTRALIA'S
TESTING.
SIX SERMONS
Preached in Scots Church, Melbourne, in time of
War, May to July, 1915.
BY
The Rev. W. BORLAND, M.A., B.D.
[COPYRIGHT].
Price - - - SIXPENCE.
Published by Members of Scots Church, in aid of the Red Cross
Fund for the Australian Wounded,


CONTENTS.
Page
1. Australia's Testing - ' ' 3
11. Untroubled Hearts - - 'lO
111. A Nation Awake - - 'l7
IV. Happy Warriors ' ' '25
V. Trusting and Doing Good ' '32
VI. The Fellowship of Christ's Sufferings ' 40


Australia's Testing.
SUNDAY MORNING, MAY 30th, 1915.
Farewell Service for Officers and Men of the
Naval Bridging Train, Domain Camp.
11. Sam. 7:18. —“Then David the King . . . said,
Who am I, O Lord God, and what is my house,
that thou hast brought me thus far?”
Saul was a big man in more ways than one;
but his kingship over Israel was a failure, and the
reason was that he was an individualist. He trusted
in his own resources. All credit for the success of
his army or the prosperity of his people must be
ascribed to him personally. He was jealous when
David and other young leaders took the initiative,
and were justly praised for their achievements. He
was also suspicious when the prophets brought the
best moral judgment of the time to bear on national
questions, and he resented what he regarded as their
impertinent interference in affairs. Saul, then, was
a king with a closed mind, who disdained counsel
alike from God and man.
David’s policy was different, because his nature
was different. A man of pre-eminent ability and
effective power, he didn’t trust in his own resources.
Singularly free from self-conceit, he was always
open to suggestion and influence. He trusted other
men, appreciated their powers, encouraged them to
act, and graciously acknowledged their achieve-
ments on behalf of the nation. He was a king
with a mind which was not closed, but open to all
that was best in the nation’s progressive thought
and activity.


But, in particular, David’s mind was open—as
only a few kingly minds have ever been—to Divine
suggestion and influence. He heard the words of
the prophets gladly, and gave heed to them, not
only when they denounced his enemies, but when
they reproached himself. By the parable of the
poor man’s lamb, Nathan brought home to David
his own flagrant personal sin; and then the king
didn’t strike the prophet down as a treasonable
meddler; he himself was stricken down, a penitent,
sinful man, to rise from his prostration a better
king.
It is a great thing to see ourselves as others see
us; but David had sense of a greater thing—to
see himself as God saw him. All men sin, and all
true men repent, for the human victory is won by
repentance and self-control. David deserved to be,
and was, a victorious king, because he first fought
out the fight within himself, and became a victorious
man—a humbler but a far fitter man than before
he sent Uriah to the front.
That was a severe test of manhood, and David
bore it well. But the most searching test of a man,
or a king, or a nation, is success. A hard, coarse
grain in one’s nature may enable one to endure
failure, but it takes finer qualities to make the most
and the best of brilliant success in life. David also
stood this test, and stood it well. He was at the
zenith of a great career. From the sheep folds to
the war tents of Israel, to the court, to the palace,
to the throne, he had risen by the ascendency of
manly worth to the highest place among his
countrymen. By bravery and military genius he
had made the nation’s arms respected; by wisdom
and statesmanship he had widely extended his
realm, and secured peace and prosperity within its
borders. Where there had been discontent before,
and social unrest among the people, there was now


an ordered social life enthusiastically loyal to the
throne.
In the flush of such a triumph, the idol of his
countrymen, the envy of surrounding nations, David
might have been pardoned a little pride, a little
personal vanity. The words of Nathan the prophet
sound somewhat inhuman—“ Thus saith the Lord
of hosts, I took thee from the sheepcote, from fol-
lowing the sheep, that thou shouldest be prince over
my people Israel; and I have been with thee
whithersoever thou wentest, and have cut ofif all
thine enemies from before thee, and I will make
thee a great name.”
What? Is there no such thing as a self-made
man? Had David, then, no personal credit in all
his effort and endurance, no glory for his bravery,
and no honour for his forethought? Is all praise
due to the God, and none to the hero?
These are questions for small souls. The great
among men know that it is due to themselves to
acknowledge God and praise Him for His gifts.
The man is no man who boasts that he is self-
made. In his glorious hour of ascendency, the hero
is never puffed up. He is humble and wistful.
“ Who am I, O Lord, and what is my house, that
Thou hast brought me thus far?”
It is magnanimity like this that makes a man
nobler than his deeds, sets him higher than his
envied reputation, and proves his worth of soul to
be greater than any material wealth he has ac-
quired. And of such great and humble men it is
written: “To him that hath shall be given.” They
are worthy of success, and fit to use it; therefore,
success shall follow them all the days of their life.
Their desire to succeed is, an intense eagerness that
God’s gifts should be used joyously to promote
God’s purpose in human life, and, as that purpose
prevails, their success becomes apparent.


Now, brethren, we Australians at this moment
are under the very test of success which tried David
and found him a true and kingly man. Let us think
where we are. We are in possession of a good land,
which is fertile and generous to its people in pro-
portion to their efforts to avail themselves of its
resources. A drought such as we have recently
passed through, and the way in which those most
sorely tried have passed through it on the whole,
showing so much faith and trust in God, and the
hope which has sprung up in their hearts, like the
young grass after the rain, prove again to us the
exceeding goodness of our land. It is an envied
possession that is ours; yet, while war has raged
in many lands, and ravaged fair territories, and
devastated prosperous villages and towns and
cities, and ruined thousands of happy homes, our
land has been inviolate —not one acre has been
trodden underfoot by an invader, not one roof has
fallen, not one of our innocents has been slain, not
a single hostile shot has been fired within our island
continent.
Here is a blessing indeed! What are any hard-
ships we may have borne or may have yet to bear
compared with this possession of our land in peace
and security through ten months and more of
blighting war? Let us Australians think of Bel-
gium, and contrast her lot with our own! Have
we, or our fathers, merited or earned all this? Are
we so much more deserving, so much more indus-
trious than the people of Belgium, or Poland, or
France, or our own threatened, raided, anxious and
bleeding motherland? We are enjoying a success
in life, and the most confident, the least considerate
among us, cannot believe that we owe all this suc-
cess, or even a large part of it, to our own fortitude,
or wisdom, or industry. Our fathers, in harder
times —cruel hard these old times seem to us—used


to “ count their mercies ” and give God the glory.
Are we so sodden with success that we should be
self-satisfied, boastful, godless in the enjoyment of
God’s bounties? Rather, with that great and kingly
man of old, let us come before the Lord, and say:
“ Who am I, and what is my house, that Thou hast
brought me thus far?”
But we are not Australians merely; we are
citizens of the British Empire. It is the power of
that Empire under God that has secured to us our
safety at this time, and at all times our increasing
privilege of free citizenship, and of national institu-
tions shaping themselves according to our people’s
will. In all the world to-day there is no power
equal to that of our Empire. I say that fearlessly,
not because I believe our army, or our fleet, or our
financial power to be invincible. The events of ten
months have shown that no such powers can be
invincible, unless they have the confidence of at
least half the world behind them. That power on
which our safety depends rests on righteousness.
We cannot boast that, in all that long course of
history through which the Empire has risen to its
pre-eminence, our statesmen have done no un-
righteous deeds. They have done many such, and
we repent of them; we have been punished for
them. But more and more they have been shown,
and we have been shown, that international power
depends on trustworthiness and on trustfulness.
We have the help of many allies to-day, because the
nations know that we can be trusted to keep our
covenants; and we are a united, loyal empire, con-
sisting of many races and nations, because we all
know that Britain has trusted us with her own
most precious heritage. She has given us liberty
and security in exercising it. The power of this
great Empire rests, then, upon trust. All nations,
except three, trust that we will use our might justly.


If we do otherwise, we perish! Injustice to one
small nation might at any time bring our world-
power to nought. And the Empire trusts her
nations and their peoples to use their freedom
loyally and justly. A few years of suspicion and
distrust, shown in the policy of the Empire towards
any of her daughter nations, might cause it to
perish, by reason of internal strifes.
Do you see what the present situation reveals?
As a free, self-governing people of the British Em-
pire, we owe all —all—to the guidance of God.
Statesmen have blundered into injustice and sus-
picion many a time, but we have been led, often
against our will, to build on trust. Trustworthiness
and trustfulness are the foundations of the power
under which we breathe freely and live safely.
“ Who am I, O Lord, and what is my house, that
Thou hast brought me thus far?” With that great
king, we humble ourselves in the presence of God,
who hitherto has helped us, and given us success
above any nation. We give God the glory. We
ask Him to bless us still, to give success to our
arms in this conflict; and, when this war is over,
to use our power along the lines of His purpose,
which is not only just and trustful, but loving. We
have put our hands to the plow, and we may not
turn back till the Kingdom of God shall come, till
all nations shall be safe and free under the Divine
law of nations.
With this high yet humble thought, let me bid
God speed to you, officers and men of the naval
bridging train, who are going to the front, offering
yourselves willingly and without reserve to a cause
which can evoke thoughts so worthy of brave and
good manhood. Some of you have been already
under fire, in peril of life, for this cause. Many of
our brothers have laid down their lives for it in
camp, or trench, or battleship; many have been


wounded, and all our hearts are sore. But God has
brought us thus far, and we shall trust Him. He
will not leave us. He will see us through.
You are loyal men. We trust you to show your
loyalty to God by manly deeds and Christlike deal-
ings with men, whatever be their race or nation.
You are generous men. Be generous in your
thoughts of those among us who are prevented,
or delayed, from going with you. Trust us all
here at home to remember you, and work for you,
and pray for you.
You are loving men. We can say this of you,
which we should perhaps be shy to say at any other
time. “ Greater love hath no man than this, that
a man lay down his life for his friend.” We pray
that your lives, so freely offered, may be mercifully
spared; and, come what may of this your going
forth for us, we know that you are safe, as safe
as we are, or may be safer, in the love of our
Heavenly Father.
PRAYER.
Almighty God, who hast brought us thus far in Thy
keeping, give us a deep sense of what we owe to Thee;
and grant that we may freely offer our lives to the
achievement of Thy loving purpose of salvation for man-
kind. Grant us to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk
humbly with Thee; that we may never depart from Thy
way in life; that in death we may be fearless, trusting in
Thee; and that, by Thy wondrous love, we may eternally
enjoy Thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


Untroubled Hearts.
SUNDAY MORNING, JUNE 6th, 1915.
St. John 14:1.—“Let not your heart be troubled;
ye believe in God, believe also in Me,” or
“ Believe in God, and believe in Me,”
In a time of strain and trial, such as we are all
passing through, one is apt to be downhearted; and
there are always plenty of pessimists, who are in-
genious in learning and disseminating the worst
and most depressing news. We have need, there-
fore, of an uplifting of the heart when we come to
church in these days. If ever we had need of a
Gospel—that is to say, “ good news ” —we need it
now; and, if ours is true religion, it ought to enable
us to say, in the words of the Psalm, “ I was glad
when they said to me, let us go into the house of
God.”
And then we are, all of us, sad at heart, or
troubled at heart, in these days. Sorrow and sus-
pense are the inmates, not of one home here and
there, but of all our homes. Yet we know that
we ought not to give way to grief, nor to let
anxiety unfit us for the doing of our part in life,
so that we may strengthen and not weaken our
nation under the great trial it is undergoing.
Well, in this also, our religion ought to help us,
by giving the oil of joy for mourning and the gar-
ment of praise for the spirit of heaviness. And true
religion does help us. “ Let not your heart be
troubled. Believe in God and believe in Me,” says
Jesus. It is not the Spirit of Christ which is pessi-
mistic, and lays emphasis on dark and depressing
aspects of experience. The Living One, who would


reign in us if we would but receive His fulness,
Himself came through sorrows; but He does not
luxuriate in sorrow. He will rather reveal the joy
of life in the greatest of sorrows. Yes! Amid
turmoil cares and darkness of the world, the hear-
ing ear may listen to one voice which is cheery,
yet which strikes not a false note of frivolity as it
pleads and counsels, “ Be not anxious, careworn,
troubled or depressed. Be trustful, believing and
happy. Even in this time of darkness, now if ever,
let your light shine.”
Our Lord Christ would not permit even the
gloom of His Cross to dishearten His disciples. He
turned their attention away from His own tragic
fate to the thought of that life which was to spring
on the strong wing of love out of the very tomb.
And He would have it so with us! When our
beloved die, whether it be in the ordinary course of
nature or in the tragic yet heroic circumstances of
warfare, we must let love secure the victory over
selfish grief within us. For it is neither by sorrow,
nor yet by resignation, but it is by joy that we win
victory over death. “ Thanks be to God, who giveth
us this victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ!”
It would be a poor tribute to the memory of our
dear ones to let that very memory, through any
sombreness of ours, cast shadows upon other lives.
Is it not a bright memory? They are entered, not
into darkness, but into glorious light. Let our
thoughts of them illuminate, therefore, all our inter-
course with others. Let gladness shine from them
through us, for they at least are glad. “In His
presence is fulness of joy.” Yes!
“ Under heaviest sorrow earth can bring,
If from the affliction somewhere do not grow
Honour which could not else have been, a faith,
An elevation, and a sanctity,
If new strength be not given, nor old restored,
The blame is ours,”


. Cheerfulness and hopefulness are Christian vir-
tues at all times, and in these times especially.
When the mourners go about the streets, they are
Christian duties. But what if one’s sadness is
accentuated with a sense of sin and shortcoming?
There are those who strongly feel that this calamity
of war is nothing but our due. It is due to us for
past sin—national sin and personal sin. I believe
that to be true, and that it is foolish for us to
ascribe all the sin which has brought such a curse
of misery upon the world to other nations and to
other people. Britain may be right in this war
without being self-righteous.
If we say our nation has not sinned, and cannot
sin, we commit the folly and show the presumption
of the German spirit, and we deceive ourselves, and
the truth is not in us. I trust and pray that men
and nations, our own among them, will emerge
from this fierce trial humbled in pride and purified
in purpose by that sense of sin without which
there can be neither salvation for the individual nor
happiness and prosperity for the State.
But I do not learn from Christ, who conquered
sin, that a true sense of sin should plunge us into
despair. He assures us, rather, that, when we
mourn for our sins, we ought to be happy, for we
shall surely be comforted. The Lord’s people are
happy people. “By their fruits ye shall know
them.” One who goes about in a gloom of inward
darkness is not Christ’s man, whatever he may be.
Christ’s man is a radiant man. He has brought
forth fruit unto repentance, and repentence is not
a burden, but a release. His repentance is unto life,
and not unto death. It is unto light, and not unto
darkness. It is unto joy, and not unto gloom.
“ If thy morals make thee dreary,” says Robert
Louis Stevenson, “ depend upon it they are wrong.
. . . Conceal them like a vice, lest they should


spoil the lives of better and simpler people.” No!
If one is dreary and morose and hopeless, it is not
because one is a Christian, but probably because
one is not more than half a Christian. Happiness,
heartiness, joyfulness are Christian duties. They
are part of one’s contribution to the calm steadfast-
ness of our people in the present crisis. “ Let not
your hearts be troubled!” “ Let not your counten-
ances be sad!” “Let your glad light so shine
before men that they may glorify your Father in
heaven!”
But human nature is human nature, and one can
hardly be happy and hearty and joyous just be-
cause it is one’s duty. Happiness must have a
sufficient cause. Joy cannot be manufactured; it
must stream out of a flowing source within one’s
nature. The birds don’t sing, and the trees and
flowers don’t bud and bloom because they have
consulted the calendar and discovered that it ought
to be springtime, and they ought to be proclaiming
it. Nature’s joy in springtime is due to the strength
of the returning sun, which quickens seed and root
in the moist soil, and wakens love to song in the
breast of bird and beast and creeping thing. So
joy springs in human hearts, according to the
same good law, wherever God’s presence is felt,
and the warmth of the “ Strong Son of God, Im-
mortal Love,” glows in the soul and quickens the
life. “ Let not your heart be troubled: Believe in
God, and believe in Me!”
“ Believe!” Do you realise the meaning of the
word? It doesn’t mean that you are simply to
take on trust things you may have heard of the
power and love of God; but it does mean that you
are to live and move and have your being in God,
so that His love may become the life of you.
Neither does it mean that you are to accept formally
certain orthodox statements about the grace and


saving strength of Jesus Christ, but it does mean
that you are to come to Christ, and let His mind
think for you, and His insight see for you, and His
heart beat in you, and His will move you. We are
to live in Him, and He in us. We believe, then, in
no barren intellectual way, as one believes that
two and two make four, or that the sum of the
angles of a triangle is equal to two right angles.
We believe in God and in Christ with all the heart,
and soul, and mind, with all the manhood and
womanhood of which we are possessed. We believe
humanly. But we also believe divinely, for in no
human philosophy is there laid such a foundation
as the Gospel provides for brave and hopeful man-
hood, and for no less brave and hopeful, but more
patient and more gentle, womanhood. We believe
in God and in His Christ!
What does it profit thus to believe to-day? Well,
it gives us a confidence and steadiness of soul which
no war news can shake. We believe in God, not
in the Navy, the Army, or the Bank of England,
but in the living God; therefore the crash of that
gross, material civilisation which had been taking
the place of religion in so many lives did not cause
us trepidation; neither do enemy successes gained
by the adoption of devices of inhuman—nay,
Satanic—cruelty shake our faith. It is righteous
causes that prevail in God’s world, and righteous
causes are not promoted by a hate which is devilish.
We believe in God. While, with heart and soul
and mind, we desire and work for this war’s speedy
ending, we brace ourselves to see it through. What
we believe to be God’s will must be done, cost what
it may.
We believe in God, trusting that He will give
peace on earth again in His good time. The final
victory cannot be without effort on the part of all,
and suffering and great sacrifice on the part of all;


but, God helping us, it shall be without boasting,
without hate, without cruelty, and without oppres-
sion and agrandisement on our part. Meanwhile,
we believing non-combatants will do our utmost to
mitigate the horrors of war.
And we believe in Christ, the Son of God, who
revealed the heart of the heavenly Father. For the
joy set before Him, He endured the Cross; and we
believe that just as great joy and precious liberty
and blessed peace came of that agony of His,
wherein His body was racked, His flesh torn, and
His manhood done to death, so shall there come
of the present waste and wounding and slaying of
precious manhood, truer joy and nobler liberty and
more honorable peace for mankind.
As for the loving men, who are laying down their
lives for our life, we feel for them. It pains us to
read of their sufferings; we pray for them, and our
prayers are heard and answered, not as we will, but
as God wills always. But we do not pity them.
They desire our sympathy, our help, our prayers,
but they do not desire our pity. We pity ourselves
if we cannot be with them, and God pity us if we
do not help them all we can. And, when they fall,
*we mourn for them, yet with the feeling that they
have won a crown of life; and we think that it were
maybe better to mourn for ourselves, who are not
worthy of them, far less of Him who said, “ Weep
not for me, but for yourselves and for your chil-
dren.”
And to the mothers, the wives, the daughters of
these men we can say: “ Let not your heart be
troubled!” for we believe in Christ. If we didn’t
believe in Him, the words would be mockery. But
we believe that Christ is with our men on the shot-
swept field. He is with them through the dark
valley. “Lo I am with you alway, even unto the
end of the world. Thou shalt fear no evil, for I


am with thee. Ye shall not die, but live. Because
I live, ye shall live also.”
We believe in God and in Christ; therefore we
can say to ourselves, and we can say to those who
mourn, without any reserve and without any after-
thought, but with great tenderness, “ Let not your
heart be troubled. Believe in God, and believe in
Christ.”
PRAYER.
Almighty God, Father of our Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ, we thank Thee that, by faith and patience of the
Scriptures, we have hope in great tribulation. Perfect
rhy strength in our weakness, teach us to trust in Thee
alone. Turn sorrow into joy for us. Comfort and uplift
all mourners with a live faith and a reasonable hope in
Jesus Christ, who, by the power of Thy Spirit, conquered
death, and hath opened to all believers the realm of life,
wherein there shall be no more pain, neither sorrow nor
sighing, for the former things are passed away, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


A Nation Awake.
SUNDAY MORNING, JUNE 13th, 1915.
Psalm 110 : 3.—“ Thy people offer themselves
willingly in the day of thy power (or muster-
ing, or mobilisation) : In the beauties of holi-
ness, from the womb of the morning, thou
hast the dew of thy youth.”
No Psalm is more frequently quoted in the New
Testament than this 110th, “ brief as to the number
of its words, but great in the power and wealth of
its meaning.” It is a song of the Messiah, and of
the triumph and reign of God in human affairs;
and yet it was, in the first instance, a song of war-
time, describing the way in which a Jewish king
established and consolidated the nation’s strength
in Zion, drew around him the youth and vigour
of the race, and consecrated his own and his
people’s destiny to the glory of God in a reign free
from the menace of surrounding enemies, because
it should be a reign established in righteousness.
It seems likely that the Psalm was first sung
after David’s early victories, after he had
taken the stronghold of Zion from the Jebu-
sites, and made it the new centre of the nation’s
life. This city, on the frowning rock of Zion,
was to be the city of David and his dynasty.
But the king’s first act was to establish and to
make emphatic the power beside the throne, the
power of God upon the throne, without which it
could not stand. He therefore brought the ark
of the covenant of the Lord from its resting place
in the field of the wood, amid national rejoicing,
and gave it the place of highest regard and


honour in the very heart of the new national senti-
ment, at the power-centre of the people’s life. It
was not David, then, who should dominate from
Zion. Jehovah should reign, and the king should
be His strong right hand to do His righteous will.
But the king’s warfare was not ended. The
Jebusite was still in the land; and the Philistine,
surging up from the plains through the mountain
passes of the south, was threatening the frontier.
Nevertheless, the king’s rule should stand, and
not fall; the freedom, the justice, the rightness,
the holiness of it should prevail, for the power of
reality was strengthening and extending the realm
of the Son of Jesse.
“ The Lord shall send forth the rod of thy strength out
of Zion;
Rule thou in the midst of thine enemies.”
David was not only a king, then; he was the
representative of a people—their priest before God
—to stand for their human interests and aspirations
in the supreme court of human appeal, and at the
same time to mediate God’s judgments to them and
to consecrate their response as a nation to the holy
will of the Most High.
“ The Lord at thy right hand . . .
Shall judge among the nations.”
This old song gives us an insight, therefore, into
the inner consciousness of a king and nation under-
going the trial of warfare for human liberty and
divine right; so it is not “an old song,” as we read
it to-day. It is a new song for us, as it was for
Oliver Cromwell on the day when Edmund Ludlow,
with the suspicion of the stern republican in his
mind, interviewed the newly-appointed Commander-
in-Chief. Cromwell “ spent at least an hour in the
exposition of the 110th Psalm,” we are told, dwell


ing on the “ great providences of God now abroad
upon the earth,” saying that he looked upon the
design of the Lord in that day to be the freeing of
His people from every burden, and professing his
own readiness to sacrifice his life in the service of
the nation.
“ Thy people offer themselves willingly in the
day of thy mustering.” It is a stirring sight, at
any time, in any place, to see the flower of a nation
offering themselves willingly in a cause which is
worthy of human devotion, and which can be
regarded in the light of “ God’s providences abroad
upon the earth.” There may be those who stand
aloof, those who cannot realise the national need,
those who pursue their accustomed course of
selfish individualism, but the generous hearts are
with the colours, or, if they cannot serve, are proud
of those who can and will —proud of them, and
careful for them, and prayerful for them, and loyal
to the brave defenders.
We have reason to thank God that so many
have responded of freewill and without compulsion
to the call of our king, and that so many more,
gradually realising that the call is urgent and
extends to every fit man throughout the Empire,
are preparing to respond. We have reason to
admire the spirit of this voluntary service, now
especially after it has been tested and proved again
and again. Few of our men have themselves tried
to interpret the spirit of their service. For them
it is not thought out, but lived out. Let me read
you, however, part of a letter written from the
front by Captain Norman Leslie, of the Irish Rifle
Brigade:—“Try and not worry too much about the
war. Units, individuals cannot count. Remember,
we are writing a new page of history. Future
generations cannot be allowed to read the decline
of the British Empire, and attribute it to us. We


live our little lives and die. To some are given
chances of proving themselves men, and to others
no chance comes. Whatever our individual faults,
virtues, or qualities may be, it matters not, but,
when we are up against big things, let us forget
individuals, and let us act as one great British
unity—united and fearless. Some will live, and
many will die, but count the loss nought. It is
better far to go out with honour than survive with
shame.”
It comforts and heartens us to hear such calm
and noble words from the firing line. But it is not
only those who are in military harness, nor is it
our men exclusively who have offered themselves
willingly in the day of the great muster. Listen
to the no less noble, and no less faithful words of a
woman who has done and is doing her part: —
“ Courage rises with trust. The nation trusts us,
God trusts us. We do not give ourselves, but
those who are far more precious than ourselves.
We give, not for ourselves, nor even for our own
generation, but for a future race. We sow in sorrow
that others may reap in joy.”
Oh! I think we can appreciate to-day, as none
of the generation now alive could appreciate until
the realities of the great war came home to us, the
joy of David when he saw all the strong young
men of the nation arrayed and equipped for battle
against the aggressive power of the Philistines.
The mothers in Israel gave their brave boys; all
the fit men were there, and the rest of the nation—
the non-combatants —were neither idle nor apa-
thetic. All were doing their part —shepherd and
trader, farmer and skilled artificer, priest and
prophet and poet —all the manhood and womanhood
of the race was heartily and resolutely with or
behirul the host of mighty men. It was a human
duty, which controlled selfishness and prevented


slackness in every tribe and every township and
every home. Moreover, it was a religious privilege,
which evoked every generous thought and feeling
and impulse of the people to be of service there and
then. They were not doing this for themselves,
or their own generation, or David’s throne and
household, but for others, for future generations,
for the Kingdom of God and the continuance of His
purpose of righteousness.
So the national poet saw that devoted host mus-
tering with a will, in the power of a great and good
purpose. He saw the beauty of it. Was it not the
issue of the radiant freshness of aspiration out of
the warm heart of a people? It was like the glorious
rising of the sun of righteousness upon the moun-
tains, with the light of liberty illuminating peak
and slope and valley in floods of enthusiasm and of
pure, young life. “ Thy people offer themselves
with a will in the day of thy mustering power. In
the beauty of holiness they come forth out of the
very womb of morning. Thy vigour is not spent,
O David, servant of Most High God. Thou hast
still the dew of thy youth, and the flashing of the
spears is as the soft slendour of sunlight on dew-
laden grass.”
If the Spirit of God revealed such a vision in that
little army as it streamed down from the mountain
stronghold of Zion, what can it reveal in the mus-
tering of our men to-day, and their going forth
from the glens of Scotland, and the meadows of
England, from Ireland’s green isle, from India’s
teeming plains, from Canada’s virgin vastness,
from our own young island continent, from South
Africa, with its great problem and its good hope,
and from every part of the world-wide Empire?
We see a growing unity of purpose, surely, which
it is the duty and the privilege of everyone to
foster.


A call is going forth through every nation and
State of this Empire, and what is the meaning of
the call? It is a call for young men, and the youth
of the race have responded, wherever they have
understood the call. I am convinced that men, in
the numbers needed, and more, will respond with-
out compulsion. When it is realised that a large
proportion of those who have already responded
are married men and fathers, I cannot think, for
example, that single men will longer hesitate. But
the intense note of the moment is an appeal on
'behalf of the men who have already gone for us.
They need support. They need munitions. Our
defenders need the means of defence. Our libera-
tors must have equal chances in the grim conflict
with those who would enslave us and the world.
The call, then, is for organisation in every British
Nation and State, in order to provide the material
conditions which will secure even chances to our
soldiers and victory to our cause. The mothers and
the sisters are of quicker mind where needs
are concerned. They anticipated and are admirably
meeting the need of comfort and healing for our
brave boys in camp and bivouac. But fathers and
brothers have been slower to provide the sterner
necessities of modern war.
Let us not seek to blame anyone. Our men do
not waste their breath in blaming us. Captain
Norman Leslie says very simply:—“To some are
given chances of proving themselves men, and to
others no chance comes.” Our chance is come.
We may be unfit to bear a rifle or man a field gun,
but we are not old, decrepit and done with; while
they can draw breath, true men still retain the dew
of youth. We can respond to a cause and hear a
high calling, whether we are 35 or 55. We who are
between 45 and 60 are fitter men, we think, at this
very work of organising and manufacture and


supply, to which we are called, than the brave
young lads of five and twenty.
Here is our chance! What is our social, our
industrial, our political machinery for? Is it bound
by some necessity to keep on providing for the
needs of a free and peace-enjoying and luxury-
loving people, and for these needs exclusively, when
luxuries are no longer decent, when any child may
see that peace cannot be ours again for many
months to come, and that freedom may never be
ours again if we don’t organise as no nation ever
organised before, except the Germans? Norman
Leslie had no thought of blame when he wrote from
the trenches: —“ Future generations cannot be
allowed to read the decline of the British Empire
and attribute it to us.” If the Empire should de-
cline, future generations will certainly not blame
the boys in the trenches. They will blame the poli-
ticians and the business men and the artizans and
the labourers and the people, whose servants these
are, because they did not see in time the boys’ need,
and did not control all their cunning machinery
and use it to do the one thing needful.
But, God willing, we shall be free again, and the
Empire will not decline.
Let us blame no one. Let us rather realise, as the
letter from the front admonishes, that “ we are up
against big things. Let us forget individuals (or
suppress them if they obstruct immediate and effec-
tive response to our high calling), and let us act
as one great British unity—united and fearless,
trusting in God.”
Oh! I am convinced that God can be seen and
known in this organisation of our race as surely
as in any peace conference. In the nation’s con-
secration to its great task with a will, but with no
hatred, there is a stern beauty of holiness. The
race is not decadent, decrepit, senile. “ Thou hast


the dew of thy youth!” What we need is the spirit
of consecration, through a great and active trust
in God. “ Courage rises with trust. The nation
trusts us, God trusts us. We do not give ourselves,
but those who are far more precious than ourselves.
We give, not for ourselves, nor even for our genera-
tion, but for a future race. We sow in sorrow that
others may reap in joy.”
If that is true, then our war song, like David’s,
will be a Messianic song, for it will prepare the way
of the Kingdom of God and of His Prince of Peace.
PRAYER.
Bless unto us, O God, Thy word of truth. Make it
quick and powerful to rebuke our apathy and sloth and
sin. .May Thy Spirit stir in us the true desires of life,
that we may realise and do our duty as Thy children and
heirs of Thine heritage of freedom and righteousness,
trusting ever in Thee, our fathers’ God, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.


Happy Warriors.
SUNDAY EVENING, JUNE 27th, 1915.
St. Matt. 5: 9,—“ Blessed (or happy) are the peace-
makers, for they shall be called (or reckoned)
sons of God.”
Jesus came to guide human feet into the way of
peace. His guiding of individual lives was always
towards inward peace, and He promised that pre-
cious gift to the weary and heavy-laden. Amid the
turmoil of affairs and the distractions of social life,
the busiest of men could find peace if they came to
Him. “In the world ye have tribulation,” He said,
“'but courage! I have overcome the world.” When
He founded His Kingdom on earth, and invited men
into the freedom and privileges of the Realm of
God, He spoke as the Prince of Peace.
One of the main purposes of that spiritual ruling
of God in human life was to bring about peace
among men, to break down walls of partition and
misunderstanding and hate between individuals and
classes and races, by making them all, first of all,
at peace with God. Atonement among men was to
be secured through atonement with God. And the
impression left by His earthly life on the minds
of those who knew Him was one of peacefulness.
When He was taking farewell of His friends in
the upper room, He spoke of peace as His supreme
gift to them. It was to be their permanent pos-
session, of which no outward circumstance or in-
fluence should deprive them. “ Peace I leave with
you, My peace I give unto you.” “These things
have I spoken unto you, that ye might have peace.”
And they did possess it. “ The fruit of the Spirit,”


says St. Paul, “is love, joy, peace.” When St. Peter
wishes to commend the new faith to his hearers in
the house of a Roman soldier, he describes it as
“ preaching peace by Jesus Christ.”
Yet this peace did not come with comfortable
ease. It was acquired strenuously, and maintained
amid conflict and suffering, and secured only by
enduring faith. “ Never was a life more continu-
ously involved than that of Jesus in incidents which
would seem destructive of peace.” By Jewish
public opinion the man of Nazareth was regarded
as a disturber of the peace, and He admitted that
He was, to outward appearance, a peace-breaker
rather than a peace-maker. “ Suppose ye that I am
come to give peace on earth?” He asked, “ I tell you
nay, but rather division.” “ I came not to send
peace, but a sword.”
Jesus had a mission. He knew what was given
Him to do. “ I do not mine own will,” He said,
“ but the will of the Father that sent Me.” That
will of God led Him into conflict with the powers
of Church and State. It made Him increasingly
unpopular with His countrymen during the last
months of His life. His steadfast loyalty to the
will of His Heavenly Father brought Him personal
misunderstanding and the loss of many followers.
Some of His own friends doubted Him, or thought
Him mad. Many who had hailed Him as Messiah
concluded that He was a false or at least a mis-
guided prophet. The bitter enemies He had made
threatened Him and conspired His death.
Yet, amid all that storm of passion which raged
around Him, and throughout that fierce battle in
which He was to lay down His life for His friends,
Jesus was at peace. He was doing the will of God.
That was His meat and drink, His joy in life and
death. He could assure. His disciples that, while
they would be misunderstood, as He had been,


forsaken, maligned, tortured—some of them—and
done to death, as He had been, they should have
the same peace as He enjoyed—yes, enjoyed, even
when His flesh was pierced and His frail body
racked upon the Cross.
Now, when we come to consider this promise of
Jesus, “ Blessed (happy) are the peace-makers, for
they shall be called (or reckoned) sons of God,”
we mustn’t sentimentalise out of existence the fight
that Jesus fought for peace, and the real state of
war that must exist in our experience, if we are
to find peace in doing the will of God. When the
conditions of our outward life are on the whole
prosperous and externally peaceful, we do forget
the stern conditions of our Christian warfare. We
do sentimentalise, and indulge in dreams of childish
unreality.
From what we see in our dream, we conclude that
the Kingdom of God is surely near at hand. Our
civilisation is securing it. The whole world is
organised to secure the blessings of peace. Peace
is a blessing—such a blessing that war seems in-
conceivable. Why it is the interest of every race
and nation and individual to maintain peace. They
have spent millions upon millions sterling on arma-
ments to make the very thought of war so dreadful
that thinking nations will not wage it. They have
made such a delicate system of commerce through-
out the world that commercial nations, having any-
thing to lose, will not risk such a derangement of
trade as war implies. They have so organised the
workers of all nations that, if war were declared
on a large scale, there would be a general and world-
wide strike, so that, the fighting men not being
available, the war would collapse. The idea of
war in these days is out o.f date; it is ludicrous; it is
an insane illusion. Whether you believe in a King-
dom of God or not, you surely believe in that


beautiful, visible and effective thing called modern
civilisation. Then you must believe in universal,
perennial peace; for civilisation guarantees it
through the stupendous might of armaments, the
far-reaching, world-embracing necessity of com-
merce, and the enlightened modern organisation of
social life, which is a growing power in every great
nation.
You remember that dream which so many had
dreamt and described in countless languages so
often, all the world over, that it was no longer
thought of as a dream, but a reality. We have had
a rude awaking. After nearly a year of desolating
destructive and demented warfare, no thoughtful
person dreams that civilisation, as we knew it,
material civilisation, which has collapsed and can
never again be reconstructed on the same founda-
tions, is any guarantee of peace.
The world has suffered because of that dream,
and the outward peace of the world cannot be
attained again except through much more and much
greater suffering. There are still occasional voices
which say: “ Let us talk peace, and get the repre-
sentatives of the nations together in order to talk
peace; and peace we may surely have in some nice,
smooth way;” but they are like those who, in the
days of Jeremiah, thought they could heal the deep
wounds of Israel lightly by superficial treatment,
crying, “ Peace, peace,” when there was no peace.
It is assuredly not peace-talkers, but peace-
makers, who are happy in these days. And who are
the peace-makers? Those who seek the guidance
and do the will of God. The guidance of God has
brought His children to another Gethsemane,
another Calvary. They hate war, and would have
avoided it if they could. They have said, “ Father,
if it be possible, let this cup of shame and suffering
pass from our lips.” But it was not possible! They


are constrained to say, “ Father, not my will, but
Thine, be done!”
An earthly power, greater than any that the
world has seen, has organised the will to power—
power of the sword, power to enslave the con-
sciences and wills of all weaker men and nations.
A war lord of this world has set this will to power,
with all its material agencies of skill and cunning
and resource, against the will to good—against
God’s will.
The fruits of that will to power are seen in hate
and cruelty, oppression and wrong, whereas the
fruits of the will to good are righteousness and love
and peace. Hence it is that those who love their
fellow-men, and hate war, must take up the cross
of shameful, hateful warfare and bear it for the
love of Christ and of humanity, for the cause of
liberty, civil and religious, against human tyranny,
for the cause of helpless innocence against the
cruelty and lust of an inhuman will to power.
We cannot say, “ Peace, peace,” when men, some
of whom are better servants of God, and better
soldiers of the Lord Jesus than we, are bearing this
cross of war, and are being crushed under it or
crucified upon it. While we are enjoying peace
here, they are dying yonder that we may continue
to enjoy peace as long as it may last. They know,
many of them, that the outward peace of nations,
which the victory of the Allies will secure, will not
be for all men the inward peace of God; but it will
be the means of that peace. They believe that;
they hope and pray for that; so their feet are shod,
as St. Paul says, with “ the preparation of the
gospel of peace.” In that sense, then, they are the
peace-makers.
Blessed are they; yes, happy are they! And we
are blessed, we are happy in making up our minds
to join them, if we can, to bear that cross with them,


and achieve that victory with them, if we can; but,
!f we can find no way of supporting and cheering
and helping them, if we can only think of our own
things, and seek our own pleasures, if we can only
take from them —at what cost to them and theirs—
all that peace means and freedom and safety, and
misuse what they are giving their lives for, and
give and seek to give little or nothing in return,
unhappy are we, miserable are we, cursed are we!
They are indeed Christ’s happy warriors—those
of them who know the Lord Christ, and have His
joyful vision of the coming rule of God among
men—the Kingdom of righteousness and peace and
brotherly love that shall be when Christ’s hour is
come! You may say that they endure the cross,
counting nothing of the shame, fojr_ the joy set
before them.
Ah! but the cross was a ghastly thing! And
this warfare is a ghastlier thing. I am thinking
of the men in the trenches who are Christians.
How they are tried! They are tempted to hate,
revenge and cruelty. How can a Christian lad be
happy in that place of skulls? We, amid our com-
forts here, have our conscientious and our religious
scruples about war. What of the Christians who
are yonder in the thick of it?
Well, there has come to me a tale from Flanders,
told by a Scottish chaplain. He was called to
administer the peace of God and the consolation
and hope of our faith to a dying lad—a Christian—
one who had found Jesus and tried to follow Him,
who hated no man, whether Briton or German, who
would have shrunk ten months ago from the very
idea of going out to kill his fellow-men. The boy
was troubled! In that moment, when a man pre-
pares to meet His God, and no secret is hid, and
no excuse or affectation possible, he said, “ How can
God forgive me? You know that work in the


trenches? I have been happy in it—never happier!
How can Christ receive me?” The Chaplain was in-
spired. In a flash of vision he realised all I have
been trying to say to-night, and more. “ God will
forgive you. He has forgiven, for you have tried to
do His will! Christ will surely receive you, happy
as you are! For He said, with His own lips,
“ Happy are the peace-makers, for they shall be
reckoned the sons of God.” The dying lad saw it,
and is glad—l surely believe—now that his warfare
is ended, in the peace of God and the love of Christ.
PRAYER.
O God, Father of all, and lover of men, we beseech
Thee to send peace on earth, a deeper and more lasting
peace than the world has ever known. Uphold all peace-
makers, and grant that our statesmen, and our soldiers,
and all our people, may earnestly desire and seek Thy
peace. Take from our hearts all material ambition, so
that this war may not be waged by us for gain, and deliver
all of us from the passion of hate. Give peace in our
time, O Lord, for there is none other that fighteth for us,
but Thou only O God. This we ask for Christ’s sake.
Amen.


Trusting and Doing Good.
SUNDAY MORNING, JULY 4th, 1915.
Psalm 37:3. —“Trust in the Lord and do good.”
“ Trust in the Lord and do good,” a simple rule
of life, yet how profound! The height and the
depth of it are equal. It penetrates to the root of
our vitality, for trust in God is the root of religion.
It rises to the height of human endeavour, for doing
good is the fruit of religion. Let us first go to the
root!
I. Through all the Old Testament we can trace
this golden tendril of trust. The psalmist’s refrain,
“ Trust in the Lord,” is also the heartbeat of pro-
phecy, and all the Bible stories, from Abraham to
Daniel, are told about trustful lives. Israel’s entire
history, indeed, describes the development of a
nation dependent upon God, a devoted race, whom
Jehovah never failed from age to age.
“ Our fathers trusted in Thee:
They trusted in Thee, and Thou did’st deliver them.
They cried unto Thee, and were delivered:
They trusted in Thee, and were not ashamed.”
Well, the same gold thread runs throughout the
New Testament. Its attachment here, however, is
to the Cross of Christ. Trustfulness becomes the
distinctive note of Christian character, the keynote
of existence for bearers of the Cross. “ Whatso-
ever things were written aforetime,” says St. Paul,
“ were written for our learning, that, through
patience and through comfort of the Scriptures,
we might have hope.” But the Scriptures are not
all of ancient date. Since Paul wrote his letters


to the faithful in Corinth, Ephesus and Rome, there
have been millions of lives that were living epistles
of hope and trust—human documents known and
read of all men.
Many and many a time the outward order of the
world has been a hell of torture to the Christian
conscience. This week we commemorate the life and
martyrdom of John Huss, the Bohemian reformer,
who, on the 6th of July, in the year 1415, suffered
death for loyalty to Christ. Oh! there have been
tyrannies and sufferings in time past, as great as
those that threaten and sharply try us now; but
the bearing of Christian men in all these crises
might be described in one resonant sentence: “ They
trusted in the Lord, and refrained not from doing:
good.”
Brethren, for our peace of mind and joy in the
Holy Ghost, we must realise to-day, each one for
himself, each one for herself, this secret root of
steadfast life. Yes! into the very texture of our
web of human experience we must weave the gold
thread of trust in God. However dark the outlook,
however sore the strain, however strong the powers
of hate and the forces of evil, however dubious at
times the issue of the great struggle may seem to
be, as for us, we shall “ rest in the Lord, and wait
patiently for Him.” We shall “ trust in the Lord,
and do good.”
Don’t let us dissemble! Our trust is being sorely
tried, and those of us whose trust meant only the
expectation of continued favours, those who
counted on the mercies of God, without considering
fully the conditions which assure His covenanted
mercies, have had their faith severely shaken.
Brethren, if we are to be trusty sons of God in
foul as well as fair weather, in grey haar as well
as golden sunshine, we must do some thinking.
Our worship and our prayers in this time must be


with understanding. We must, I think, call to
mind certain truths about the world as God has
made it.
Remember, first, how lofty is God’s purpose re-
garding us. If God aimed at the things many value
most, then He has failed again in these days, as
He failed before in many of the darkest days of the
world’s life. But God does not aim, and can never
aim, merely at temporal comfort, material safety,
and pleasant living for His children. God can aim
at nothing lower than the eternal good of all men
and of every man; and it is a difficult thing, involv-
ing discipline and hardship, to uplift even a single
life to the level of the Divine destiny.
Recall again the long sweep of the world’s past
ages, with its recurring ebb and flow of spiritual
life. Human progress may be traced in history,
sure, indeed, as the being of God, yet slow and
gradual as the response of man to Divine grace has
ever been. There have been many low tides in the
past, when mankind seemed to have lost the sense
of God, and when God Himself appeared to have
relinquished interest in man—depressing periods,
wherein the very saints, in their loneliness, felt
something akin to despair.
A soul that is impatient is therefore out of touch
with God, and a man or a woman in a hurry loses
grip of reality. If we are to make the best of the
business of living our life, we must have faith in
God, whose aim is never lower than our best, and we
must trust in our Heavenly Father, whose patience
with His children’s waywardness is the wonder of
human history. Against probability we must trust.
Against what looks like contradictory evidence we
must hold it as unshaken fact that God’s way is
best, and that in all things (however tangled they
may seem) He is working out the good of them
that love Him, and are loyal to Him. For it is


only through steadfast, patient, loyal men that the
great promise can be fulfilled of salvation for man-
kind.
“ I follow, follow, sure to meet the sun,
And confident that what the future yields
Will be the right—unless myself be wrong.”
11. But this attitude of Christian patience doesn’t
mean a folding of hands in passive resignation.
There is a fine discipline in it, for the watchword
rings out, “Trust in the Lord and do good!”
Here is no echo of the Mohammedan saying, “ It
is written.” The Gospel certainly does not incul-
cate fatalism. An old proverb assures us that,
“while man proposes, God disposes;” and there is
no disputing the truth of that. But no man will
ever be content merely to propose; he must ever be
doing good, and that is how God disposes. His
disposition is good, and you and I and the next
man or woman who are sincerely intent on doing
good are God’s executive.
We are, therefore, in this rational, purposeful
Christian ordering of affairs, co-workers with God.
Do you see how that venerable language of religion
clothes a fresh idea for this generation? “We are
very members incorporate in the Body of Christ.”
We are hand and eye of His, heart and will of His,
to do our bit of His work for mankind, and perform
our function in His ministry of salvation.
Once we enter into the spirit of it, this trusting
in God is by no means the slow business it is often
said to be. While we are trusting in God, He is
trusting us; and, if we do good at the right time—
that is to say, whenever we have opportunity—then
we needn’t fear that God will fail us. He will help
us, and crown our effort at the right time, which is
His own good time. Meanwhile we are not re-
quired to make bricks without straw. If we are
loyal to our Leader, and true to His ideal, we shall


become like Him, following in His steps. We shall
receive from God strength for the work, and a fine
spirit of service.
But we may fail, you say. Faint heart! Half-
heart! Listen to the words of a poet who was a
man, a whole-hearted man: —
“ Better have failed in the high aim, as I,
Than vulgarly in the low aim succeed,
As, God be thanked! I do not.”
Well, brethren, that is very plain truth. Is it
not such as the needs of our time demand? God,
in His providence, has set before the world in these
days life and good, and death and evil. It has
taken eleven months for us to realise that, if we do
not choose good with heart and mind and will, our
lot and destiny and that of our children will be
evil. We have been given time and opportunity to
measure the extent and the quality of that evil.
That it has not reached us yet is not due to our
efforts to avert it.
If we can still think of our lot as good on the
whole, we owe that to what has been done for us
and suffered for us in Belgium and France, in
Poland and Servia, on the broad seas by our un-
tiring naval watchmen, and, to some extent, already
in our motherland; and we shall not forget those
who have lost goods and land for us, those whose
liberty and nationhood have been taken from them,
those whose old people and women and children
have received treatment which one dare not de-
scribe. If we forget them, then our own name will
surely be blotted out.
But what we have failed to see, as yet, is that
the choice of good and evil must be definite and
decisive; it must be a choice, not made by a few
fine men for the nation and the race, but made by
a united nation, unanimously made by the whole
race.


The conflict is not decided yet! If we had no
faith in God, and in our people, that their desire is
to do God’s will; if we looked to military conditions
merely, we should have no more reason than our
enemies to believe that the victory is sure for our
cause. Our too easy optimism has been our main
source of weakness. We may thank God that time
has been given us to realise the reality, and the
power, and the purposefulness, and the resource of
the evil organised against us. But it is clear now
to all men who have the courage to face facts that
all we have really gained yet is breathing time.
We have trusted in God, but rather feebly, not as
Germany has trusted in her will to conquer and her
power to conquer. But God, in His mercy, has
given us time to prove that His trust in us is not
misplaced. We have been slow to respond. Our
slowness of wit and of will has cost us and our
Allies thousands of dear and precious lives. We
have lost many of those who were not slow of wit
and will, men who realised at once that the choice
must be made, and laid down their lives that the
rest of us—their countrymen —might have time to
make the choice, and really pull ourselves together
and do our best.
We have learnt now that eight or nine months
ago we had morally no right to trust in God, for
we were not yet awake and alive to the need of
putting all our manhood and all our nationhood, or
even half of it, into the supreme, organised effort
of doing good.
Now we are awake, now we are alive. We feel
that to do good at this time—for a man or a woman
or a child of our race—is no vague, indefinite thing.
We are intent now on the one thing needful—the
next thing, the thing we must do if we are not pre-
pared to sacrifice all that life has meant hitherto—
I mean all the best of our sacred traditions, our free


institutions, our cherished hopes, and our Christian
aspirations. We must do all the good we can for
the cause, and, at this critical time, it seems to me,
we must deliberately forget everything else except
the cause.
What the cause needs at the moment is organisa-
tion, and organisation for one purpose. Recruiting
is not the only thing! We want the young, fit men
for the front. That is their place in this time of
choice and of testing. But we shall see them in
their right places, all of them, only when we, who
cannot go, are in our right places. Our leaders
must take the lead, not by lip service to the cause,
but in dead earnest, and with no divided purpose.
Business men and labour men must come into line
with the nation’s purpose.
Women have already taken their places, and so,
in the main, have professional men and university
men. But there is no class that could not do more,
or, at least, do what they are doing more effectively.
We are maintaining the good cause against the evil,
the cause of free social life against military des-
potism. Well, we must show by headwork, as
well as handwork, by the co-ordination of our
efforts, and by the discipline of every social class,
that the might is with the right. If we fail, it is
safe to say that militarism will dominate the earth
for generations to come, as it has not done since
the days of the Roman Caesars.
You can see, then, that recruiting is only part of
the great call on our manhood. Our young men—
though all of them should go to war for us—can
avert such a calamity only if they are equipped,
munitioned, cared for and supported by organisa-
tion as efficient and complete as that of our enemies.
It is in these terms —the terms of reasoning and
thinking manhood, the terms of resolute and fully
organised nationhood, the terms of Divine good


purpose ruling as by one impulse the life of man,
woman and child among us—that we shall re-
spond to God’s high calling in this great conflict.
Do you want to be rid of anxiety and fear? to
face the facts and yet have hope and assurance?
to shake the world’s confidence in militarism for
ever? to strike the shrewdest blow yet struck at
the hoary, hellish institution of aggressive warfare?
“Trust in the Lord and do good!” Organise and
act as God’s executive, for His glory and the good
of mankind in this and future generations.
PRAYER.
Almighty God, in whom we have trusted, let us not
be put to shame by our own faithlessness, nor to con-
fusion by our half-heartedness. Teach us to serve Thee
as Thou deservest, to give and not to count the cost, to
fight and not to heed the wounds, to toil and not to
seek for rest, to labour, asking no reward except to know
that we do Thy will of godness, through our Lord Jesus
Christ, who liveth and reigneth with Thee in the unity
of the Holy Spirit. Amen,


The Fellowship of Christ’s
Sufferings.
SUNDAY MORNING, JULY 18th, 1915.
Phil. 3:10. —“ That I may know Him, and the
power of His resurrection, and the fellowship
of His sufferings, being made comformable to
His deathor, as the verse may be translated:
“ I desire to know Him, in the power of His
resurrection, and the fellowship of His suffer-
ings, with my nature transfigured to die as He
died, to see if I, too, can attain the resurrection
of the dead.”
I have been trying for some time to find a reason-
able explanation for the fact that our present deep
and testing national experience is drawing us all —
saint and sinner—nearer to Jesus Christ. Many who
a year ago were hardly aware of any real need of
fellowship with Christ crucified, and some who had
no interest whatever in the mystery of His Cross,
are now being drawn irresistibly into the fellowship
of His sufferings. Men, and women too, who were
outsiders in relation to the life in Christ, have been
wistfully seeking something they cannot define,
something they really need, but fail to find in the
world, which, till quite recently, seemed sufficient
for them. Gay and gallant France, for instance, is
not only a nation at arms; it is a nation at prayer.
Lusty British lads, who had little use for religion,
and had never been at the Lord’s table, have asked
in great numbers at the front to be received into
this fellowship, as they were on the point of enter


ing or re-entering the trench of the shadow of
death. I need not give you further signs of this
wonderful movement. They are to be seen any-
where in the world to-day, and, where they are not
to be seen, they can be felt.
Well, in the course of my reading last week, I
learnt that Friederich Lange, one of the pioneers
of modern secularism, the writer of the great “ His-
tory of Materialism,” said once, in conversation
with an astonished rationalist friend of his, that,
while the note of our modern life is joyfully trium-
phant and progressive, we ought “ not to ignore
the gloomy shadow which, after all, accompanies
our entire life.” This man of fact, and process, and
precise logic, held that in the national worship there
should be “ certain festivals, during which the
happy mortal, too, might learn to plunge into the
abyss of misery, and again find that he was as
needy of salvation as the unhappy, and even the
wicked.”
When I read that I realised how we have all been
brought now, by the providence of God, into that
place where the modern thinker was convinced that
the most light-hearted human being ought at times
to be. We are under the gloomy shadow. The
happiest of mortals is being taught to plunge into
the abyss of misery, and find again that he is as
needy of salvation as the unhappy and even the
wicked. We may thank God if this is not for us
the gloom of despair and the abyss of pessimism.
We may praise the goodness and the mercy of the
Father, if the cross is here, transfiguring the gloom
for us; and if, in this abyss of misery, the risen
Christ can look upon us with luminous and sympa-
thetic eyes, and can uplift us with hands that no
tyranny, or hate, or death can ever render helpless.
Those who try to think out for themselves a way


through the present situation of chaos, and reso-
lutely seek some principle of reason and righteous-
ness by which it may be possible to order its un-
speakable disorder, no less than the humble who are
ever disposed to trust simply and prayerfully in the
good ordering of God, are uniting to-day in the
desire of St. Paul—“ I would know Him in the
power of His resurrection, and the fellowship of
His sufferings, with my nature transfigured to die
as He died, to see if I, too, can attain the resurrec-
tion of the dead.”
For the cross is now actually set in the midst
of our life. Thousands of our young men have
entered, or are about to enter Golgotha—the place
of skulls. Whether they know Christ or not, they
have shared, or will share, the fellowship of His
suffering for others. Whether their natures are
transfigured by His faith and love and hope or not,
many have died, or will die, as He died—for others.
There is another striking parallel. This suffer-
ing, this death, like the agony of Jesus, is due to
sin. Whose the sin has been, whether many nations
or few have had part in it, whether one can appor-
tion the guilt of all this murderous business to one
man or one class or one race of men, God alone
knows; but one thing we surely know—that this
insanity of slaughter could not be among those who
are called in every nation to be children of God and
brethren, without sin, without hideous breach of
God’s law of love, and of the human bond of
brotherhood.
Yet another thing is certain—those who are con-
tending for our cause suffer and die not for their
own sins only, many of them not for their own sins
at all. Theirs is what theologians call vicarious
suffering, vicarious sacrifice, vicarious death—suf-
fering, sacrifice, death, that is, for the sin of others,


and on behalf of others. They suffer as Christ suf-
fered. They die as Christ died, for others, and
because of sin not their own, at least, not all their
own, I say, then, that the cross is set in our
midst. If we do not see its meaning now, we never
shall. If we cannot make the power of it our own
now, I think, we never can.
In the darkest hour of the great Civil War in
America, Abraham Lincoln was asked whether he
was sure that God was on “ our side.” Lincoln’s
reply was: “ I do not know; I have not thought
about that; but I am very anxious to know whether
we are on God’s side.” In this our darkest hour,
are we on God’s side? If we are not on God’s side
in this conflict, if we are not in touch with Christ’s
Spirit and at one with His purpose in this Gol-
gotha, then all this endurance, all this suffering,
and all this death of our bravest and best will be in
vain. If we are on God’s side, as we desire to be,
what then? “I desire to know . . . the fellow-
ship of His sufferings.” Well, then, we are suffer-
ing now, and our desire is to suffer as Christ suf-
fered. There is to be no fatalism in our attitude,
and no hard, unteachable, stoic endurance. We are
not to say within ourselves, doggedly and blindly,
“ This thing is inevitable; it had to be; and we must
get through with it somehow.” For Christ has
shown us just how to get through, not somehow—
anyhow—but as God wills. “ Not my will, but
Thine, be done!” is our attitude.
Now, God’s will in all suffering is to remove
the cause of evil, and that cause is sin. Germany’s
greatest asset in this war is not her own strength,
derived from her will to conquer, but rather our
weakness, which arises from our will to sin. She
says we cannot win, because we are too selfish. We
love money, our enemies are saying; we love ease


and pleasure and our own personal and class in-
terests far too much ever to become an organised
nation, working as one, and sacrificing itself for
one undivided purpose and one unselfish end. That
is what they are saying of us. “ After ten months
of war,” one reads in a Berlin journal, “ Britain has
awakened to the need of munitions and of national
organisation, but the ingrained British selfishness
will prevent her from obtaining these things, which
the earnestness and self-sacrifice of our people have
already gained for the Fatherland.”
Now, none can deny that we have sinned, and
our luxury, our individual and class selfishness, our
greed of comfort and of pleasure, our party differ-
ences, our lack of national purpose, and of earnest-
ness and loyalty in serving such a purpose, have
wrought inevitable weakness at the very core of
our life. It is only by herculean effort and heroic
sacrifice that we can renew our strength. That
strength is increasing. Thank God! we can see it
growing and extending its influence; but at what
a cost! The strong are suffering and laying down
their lives for the weak. The provident and gener-
ous are spending their resources for the improvi-
dent and the mean. The temperate are bearing the
burden of intemperance. The loyal and pure-
hearted are in peril and in travail of body and soul
for the base and the indifferent among us. It is
the natural, the inevitable, order. When suffering
must be borne, and there is need of sacrifice, the
loving men and women, the generous, the gifted,
the earnest, take the lead. The others follow
slowly.
To all who are giving of their dearest, and spend-
ing of their best, one can therefore say: “You are
following in His steps; you are entering into the
fellowship of His sufferings; you are bearing the
cross of the Saviour Christ.”


“ Take up thy cross; let not its weight
Fill thy weak spirit with alarm;
His strength shall bear thy spirit up,
And brace thy heart, and nerve thine arm.”
St. Paul says, further: “My nature transfigured,
(I would) die as He died.” Yes! that is the sequel.
If you are with Christ in the fellowship of His
sufferings, you will not fail Him in the last test.
It is not only at the front that men are dying with
Christ to-day. Everyone who tackles his or her
besetting sin—be it lust of the flesh, or lust of the
eye, or pride of life—and loosens its grip, and casts
off its tyranny, and brings a free, unfettered will to
the service of God and humanity at this time, dies
to sin as Christ did. And, with that death, comes
the birth, the re-birth, or the new birth of a soul
in him.
One who went to the front a few weeks ago
heard on every hand: “ Belgium has found her
soul!” or “France has found her soul!” according
to the nationality of those he conversed with. On
his return, he said: “ I see such a change in the
spirit, not only of our soldiers, but of all classes
among our people here, that I am bound to say,
‘ Britain is finding her soul.’ ”
Yes! if we die, as He did, to sin, we shall know
Him in the power of His resurrection, and we, too,
shall attain the resurrection of the dead. If that
which caused our enemies to laugh at our weak-
ness was ingrained British selfishness, it is a cause
we can get at and deal with. It is your selfishness
and mine, and the selfishness of the next man and
woman. It is the selfishness of your social set and
mine and the next man’s, the selfishness of the
class, and the party, the family, and the Church,
that is yours and mine and the next man’s. We can


crucify our selfishness, and it is God’s will that we
should. The cross is set in the midst for no other
purpose, so far as we are concerned! We have a
work to do, an organisation to create for this pur-
pose—for bravely suffering the penalty of sin, for
frankly repenting of sin, for resolutely turning to
God, for freely receiving such inward strength of
the Spirit as alone can break the power of sin, and
release the power of God. We must do that inward
work, and we must create that inward organisation,
or the outward work of strengthening and equip-
ping the army and of organising the nation for its
great duty will not prosper and achieve its purpose.
All the true-hearted throughout the Empire are
actuated now by this high resolve, and their influ-
ence will tell, is telling. We must not be impatient;
we must work, and wait, and pray. The deeper our
anxieties the greater our losses, the more general
our sufferings so much the more complete will be
our regeneration.
Never, therefore, was the inward need of union
with Christ in His great work of loving sacrifice
and saving grace, which is felt by every Christian
soul, so intimately related, as it is now, to the out-
ward need of loyalty to the king and nation. That
is why we have an instinctive feeling—saint and
sinner, eager and careless alike—that, when the
cross is in our midst, we cannot be onlookers any
more. It is power we need, and power is here.
Here, out of weakness crucified, strength is per-
fected and crowned! We must be in touch with
the power centre. National need and soul need
converge to-day in the Cross of Christ, and the
issue is life or death. If it is to be life, then we
must crucify our lusts, we must “ die to live ” with
the Saviour of men. Sharing the fellowship of His
sufferings, dying with Him to sin, we shall, by the
grace of His Holy Spirit, know the power of His


resurrection in a new inward vigour of the soul,
and a new outward energy of the nation.
PRAYER.
Most merciful Father, who hast brought us to the
foot of the cross, grant us to be united to Christ in His
sufferings, that we, being cleansed from sin as by heavenly
fire, and quickened by the saving power of Thy Holy
Spirit, may attain to the resurrection of the dead, and
may have part in our nation’s duty, and in the advance-
ment of Thy Kingdom of righteousness and peace, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


BROWN, PRIOR* CO- C
107-171 QUEEN SI MELBOURNE, r
