

■ 176
Copy No..
ewrMi'Sl ffijgypgy
.r- . y%. v£ ;'/*.* v ■$ '
v; _ •*>
JESm
Australian Imperial Force.
INSTRUCTIONS TO O.C TROOPS
ON TRANSPORTS RETURNING TO
AUSTRALIA.
DEPARTMENT OF REPATRIATION
AND DEMOBILISATION.
Issued by
Director of Movements and Quartering, Dept, of
Repatriation and Demobilisation, A.I.F.
i I Pi r'
f' ? ■ Date






•1/w
FOREWORD BY THE DIRECTOR-GENERAL.
“ The Officer Commanding this Transport is,
Actually and Morally, Personally Responsible
for Everything Connected with the Voyage so
far as Concerns the Troops Committed to his Charge.
He is Vested with Complete Powers to Regulate
and Control their Good Conduct and Well-Being.
It rests with him Worthily to Discharge, to the
Utmost of his Ability, this Grave Responsibility
TOWARDS THE MEN AND TOWARDS AUSTRALIA, AS THE
Last, but not the Least Important, of the Services
WHICH HE WILL BE CALLED UPON TO RENDER FOR HIS
Country in the Great War. He is Empowered to
Enlist and Avail himself of the Assistance of
every Officer and N.C.O. on Board his Ship, It
SHOULD BE A MATTER OF HONOUR WITH HIM CONSCIEN-
TIOUSLY to Carry into Effect the whole of the
Regulations contained in this Pamphlet.”
Lieut-General,
Director-General,
Repatriation and Demobilisation, A.I.F
03.


Dept, of Repatriation and Demobilisation
Australian Imperial Force,
54, Victoria Street, S.W.I.
- V -Y •••••-••' <2 •
1. You are appointed to the commaitfl of me Troops
returning to Australi| per
embarking a
next, the... im ...instant
2. This pamphlet contains your instructions. It will be
treated as a Confidential document and will be kept in your
possession until the completion of the voyage.
3. On completion of the voyage you will sign and date
this page and forward the pamphlet to the Defence Depart-
ment together with other papers connected with the ship.
4. Please acknowledge receipt
Lieut.-General,
Director-General
of Repatriation and Demobilisation, A.l.h.
Forwarded to Defence Department, Melbourne.
Goo &f> ,S
D.te


Page 3, para. 2, add sub. para.
{d) Australian Comforts Fund have kindly arranged to
supply fresh fruit at their expense to troops calling
at Colombo. You will ensure that application for
same is made to Messrs. Thos. Cook & Son at that
port. (17.4.19.)


PART I.
BOOKS, STORES, Etc., PLACED ON
BOARD TRANSPORT.
I.—Official Library.— The following books have been Library,
placed on board :
{a) Manual of Military Law.
( b ) King’s Regulations.
( c) Standing Orders for the A.I.F.
(d) Scale of Provisions for Australian Troops travelling on
Transports.'^
You will satisfy yourself that these books are actually on
board before sailing, and you will give a receipt for same to the
Embarkation Staff Officer at the Port of Embarkation.
2. Red Cross, Comforts Fund and Y.M.C.A. Stores. — stores, Red
Stores for free distribution to troops are placed on transports Cross,’etc.
as follows :
{a) On transports carrying fit troops, by the Australian
Comforts Fund and the Y.M.C.A..
{b ) On transports carrying invalids, by the Australian Red
Cross Society.
( c) On transports carrying families, by the Australian Com-
forts Fund, Y.M.C.A., and Australian Red Cross
Society. In the case of these ships the Y.M.C.A. and
Australian Red Cross Society’s stores are for distribu-
y tion amongst families as well as troops. On arrival at
the Final Port of Disembarkation any surplus goods
are to be handed to the respective representatives of
these Societies.
3. A.I.F. Canteen Stores.— A.l.F. Canteens provide a Stores
canteen on each transport, and you will administer this can- Canteen-
teen and account for proceeds and balance of stores in
accordance with instructions which you will receive direct
from the A.I.F. Canteens.
4. Stationery and Typewriter.— An ample supply of Stationery,
stationery and one typewriter has been placed on board. You
will make available for the Senior Medical Officer such sta-
tionery as is necessary for his use. The balance of stationery
and the typewriter will be handed to the Senior Ordnance
Officer at the Final Port of Disembarkation,


G.0.C., A.1.F.,
for Distribution,
5. Australian Army Reserve.—Booklets : A supply of
booklets containing information on the Australian Army
Reserve has been placed on board. You will distribute one
booklet to each member of the A.I.F. on your Transport.
6. Personal Letter from G.0.C., A.I.F. to Officers^ —
A supply of copies of above has been placed on board. You
will arrange for one of these letters to be given to every officer
embarked with you as soon as possible after embarkation.
7. Mail Stores.— For the purpose of despatching mails
during the voyage the following stores will be placed on
board :
(a) Mailbags, one or more for each State.
( b) Linen labels, string.
(c) Lead seals. Note.— lead seals must be effectively
closed on the string securing any mail bag.


PART 11.
EMBARKATION.
1. Movement to Port of Embarkation.— Troops and Movement to
families for embarkation will be conveyed to the Port of Em- £ or * of f .
barkation by special trains on the day of embarkation. The mar a lon
Embarkation Staff Officer will acquaint you of the train
arrival times, together with the numbers carried in each train.
2. Embarkation Procedure. — ( a ) Embarkation will be Embarkation
controlled by the Australian Embarkation Staff Officer. You Procedure-
will not grant leave to Officers, Nurses or other ranks without
the special permission in each case of the Embarkation Com-
mandant or his representative. You must not permit any
individual to embark after the main embarkation has been
completed unless the Embarkation Staff Officer has first given
express instructions to this effect. All communications with
this Department found to be necessary before sailing must
take place through the Australian Embarkation Staff Officer,
_( b ) The normal method of embarkation is set out in the
attached extract from “ Instructions to Embarkation Staff
Officers.”
3. Animals not to be Embarked.—You are not to permit Animals,
any animals such as dogs, cats, monkeys, etc., to be brought on
board by troops. If any such animals are discovered after
sailing they are to be destroyed and their carcases cremated in
the ship’s furnace.
4. Collection of Pay Books. —The Chief Paymaster’s Paybooks.
Representative will collect pay books from troops as they
embark.
5. Cash for Voyage.— The sum of ........ will be placed yQ S^J e ° r
on board by the Chief Paymaster’s Representative. You voyae,e ’
will check this amount and give him a receipt for same. This
sum is to be used for voyage pay for all troops and for dis-
embarkation pay for personnel disembarking at the first


Australian port. At the first Australian port you will ob-
tain a sum sufficient to-enable vou-to make-4isembarkation
Embarkation 6- Embarkation Documents. —( a) On completion of
Documents. embarkation you will be handed a complete nominal roll of
details embarked, together with the Medical Board Proceed-
ings, A.I.F. Form 534 (Repatriation), and other documents
relating to each individual whose name appears on that
nominal roll.
( h ) The Embarkation Staff Officer will prepare an Em-
barkation Return. You will satisfy yourself as to its accuracy
and sign same. In making such future returns as the Shipping
Company may require, you will ensure that any figures ren-
dered agree with those shown on the copy of the Embarkation
Return handed to you by the Embarkation Staff Officer. If
you find that subsequent check necessitates a variation from
such figures, you will notify this Department of the fact by a
special letter, a copy of which you will hand to the master
of the ship.
Disposal of 7. Disposal of Mail after Embarkation. —All letters
written after embarkation and prior to sailing should be
handed for posting to the Australian Embarkation Staff
Officer.
Orderly Room 8. Orderly Room Sergeant.— An Orderly Room Ser-
Sergcant. geant will be embarked as part of the ship’s staff. If the
soldier embarked as Orderly Room Sergeant is below the rank
of Sergeant you will promote him to the rank of “ Voyage Only
Sergeant ” in accordance with the provisions hereinafter set
Postal 9. Postal Orderly. —An experienced Postal Orderly will
Orderly. kg embarked on your transport. He will report to you imme-
diately upon embarkation, and will be responsible to you for
the proper performance of his duties. He will be in posses-
sion of written instructions as to his duties, and you will make
yourself acquainted with their nature and scope. You will
allot him accommodation suitable for his work at the earliest
possible moment, as arrangements have been made whereby
“ Late Mail ” for troops will be placed on board before the
transport sails, and throughout the voyage you will in all ways
facilitate the prompt and efficient handling of mail.




10. Records Clerk.—A Records Clerk will be embarked Records Clerk
on your transport. A copy of the document setting out his
duties is handed to you with this pamphlet.
11. Chief Paymaster’s Representatives. —The scheme Representatives
approved for finalisation of pay accounts on demobilisation C,PM-
provides for the appointment by the Chief Paymaster, A.1.F.,
of Officer and N.C.O. personnel for duty on each transport re-
turning to Australia. with the required number
of N.C.O.’s, will be embarked on your vessel. Every facility ,
should be given to enable the Pay Staff to carry out their
duties. Detailed instructions have been issued to these officers
the Chief Paymaster.


PART ML
THE VOYAGE.
Nnminni Rniu 1. Checking of Nominal Roll. — [a) Within 24 hours of
departure from port you will check the Nominal Roll with the
details embarked, and if ‘circumstances permit you will
despatch a wireless message to the Director-General, Depart-
ment of Repatriation and Demobilisation, A.1.F., 54, Vic-
toria Street, London, notifying him of any alterations. The
telegraphic address is “ Demobaust, London. Should this
not be practicable, the information should be contained in a
report despatched at the first opportunity. All wireless
messages or cables should be sent in clear.
(&) When the voyage is via Suez, you will despatch a wire-
less message to the Defence Department as early as possible,
within the 24 hours prior to arrival of your transport at the first
Australian port of call. The message will state the name of
the transport and the date of her departure from England,
and contain full details of all alterations and additions to and
deletions from the original roll, including in deletions all ranks
who have become casualties en route by reason of death, dis-
embarkation to hospital, or absent without leave, or for
any other cause whatsoever, and including in additions all
ranks who have been taken on strength en route. If it is
impossible to despatch this message by wireless, a cable
embodying the same information should be sent from the
first Australian port of call.
(c) If the voyage is via the Cape itie information mentioned
in ( b ) will be communicated to the A.I.F. Representative, The
Castle, Cape Town, with a request that he'should forward the
same by cable without delay to the Defence Department,
Melbourne.
(d) The information contained in the message to the Defence
Department is used by it as a basis for notifying the next-of-
kin and relatives of all ranks when, and by what ship, the latter
may be expected to arrive.
2. Casualties. —All casualties during the voyage {e.g.,
casualties arising from death, disembarkation under orders on
account of sickness or for any other reason at any intermediate
Port of Call, or absence without leave), will be reported by
Casualties.






Page 9, line 2.
Before the word Casualties ” insert “ Cases of troops
being dangerously ill, and " (16.4.19.)
To follow para. 4, Part 111, page 9, “ Instructions to O.C.
Troops on Transports returning to Australia.”
The utmost care is to be exercised in the compilation, or
completion of these forms as they are the starting point of the
Repatriation Department’s task of establishing the soldiers
in civil life in Australia.
It is necessary that the information on these forms should
be the latest in the possession of the men and that it should
express their desires on the voyage out to Australia.
It will probably be found, in a great many cases, that the
men will desire to alter their answers given to questions set
out on Form No. 534, owing to their having, at a later date,
suffered from some physical disability, or to their having
received special training or enhanced experience under the
A.I.F. Education Service or other causes.
You will, therefore, give every facility to the men under
your command :
(1) To alter the form already made out by them.
(2) If necessary to withdraw the original form and
substitute a new one.
You will also see that forms are compiled in respect of those
men for whom no completed forms have been placed on board.
Sufficient blank forms, together with “ Instructions to
Officers responsible for filling in A.I.F. Demobilisation Form
No. 534 will be issued to Officers commanding Troopships
for this purpose.


cable to the Director-General of Repatriation and Demobilisa-
tion at the first opportunity. Casualties arising from death
will also be reported by cable to Defence Department, Mel-
bourne, as soon as possible after they occur.
3. Voyage Reports. — (a) From each Port of Call you Reports,
will forward to the Director-General, Department of Repatri-
ation and Demobilisation, a report giving particulars of any
casualties that may have occurred en route and a record of
any items of interest.
(b) On completion of the voyage you will furnish the
Secretary, Department of Defence, with a complete voyage
report, drafted under the headings set out in the pro forma
handed to you with this pamphlet. You will also send a
copy of this report to the Director-General of Repatriation
and Demobilisation, A.I.F.
4. Repatriation. —You will complete the A.I.F. Form A.I.F. Form
534 of each Officer and soldier to be disembarked in Australia. 534
In the event of an A.I.F. Form 534 not having been placed on
board for any such individual, you will supply such form from
the stock in your possession.
The procedure for filling in these forms is as follows :
(a) The name of ship and port of disembarkation will be
filled in on the front page.
( b ) You will instruct the S.M.O. to complete the Medical
particulars on the reverse of each form. •
(c) You will then cause the completed forms to be packed
in six bundles. Each bundle will contain the papers
of the whole of the personnel to be disembarked in
any one State and the papers in each bundle wil
be arranged in alphabetical order.
{d) You will cause a nominal roll to be made up on Form 3
of individuals who are to be disembarked in a State
. different from the State of their enlistment. Seven
copies of this roll will be made.
( e ) You will hand the six bundles referred to in para, (c)
together with the nominal roll, para, {d), to the
Repatriation Officer at the First port of disem-
barkation in Australia. * r / :
5. War Records. —Historical Records~{ i.) You will keep War Records
an historical account of the voyage. This will be forwarded
on completion of the voyage to the Commandant of the
Military District in which the final Port is situated.
The following are some of the points on which information
is specially desired
(a) The personnel on board
(i.) Ship's Staff (Officers, other ranks, nurses).
(ii.) Returning troops (Officers, other ranks).


(6) Preparations for reception of troops.
(c) Weather, miles covered, latitude, longitude, and any
important incident. (To be recorded daily.)
{d) Resume of organization and administration ; feeding
and sleeping arrangements; sanitation.
(e) Exercise and amusement of troops.
(/) Discipline and moral.
(g) Reports on shore visits, if any, at Ports of Call.
( h) Reports on health and work in ship’s hospital. It is
suggested this should be compiled separately and
attached as an appendix. It should include:—
Nos. and classification as to disability (general if
detailed not possible).
Arrangements for treatment.
Operations, infections and intercurrent diseases ;
results.
(/) Disposal of troops upon arrival in Australia.
(j) An appreciation of the arrangements generally, including
lessons learned for future guidance from experience
gained.
(ii.) One copy of any publication issued during the voyage
should also be forwarded with the historical account.
(hi.) It is also desired that a list of the names and addresses
of any men who take good photographs during the voyage, or
who have any in their possession, be sent with the historical
account, in order that the War Records Section may make
application for copies.
Discipline, g. Discipline, Games and Exercise. — {a) You are respon-
Games, etc. / s igi e t hat di sc ipp ne and good order are maintained on board
/ ship. It appears that in some cases members of the A.I.F.
g I are under the impression that punishments inflicted will be
7- I remitted on their arrival in Australia. This view is entirely
< unwarranted and all troops embarked on your Transport
I should be informed accordingly. You are assured of every
I support by superior authority in any steps you may take
/ consistent with Military Law to cope with disobedience of
I orders and open defiance of authority on the part of any
V members of the A.I.F. under your Command.
. /t\ a rr „ i: i a r\„ A C ‘ ”
{b) An officer commanding troops “ On Active Service ”
on board a transport, can convene a Field General Court
Martial, under Section 49 of the Army Act, for the trial of any
person subject to Military Law under his command.
The persons authorised to confirm the findings and sentences
of Field General Courts Martial are set out in Section 54 (1 d)
of the Army Act and Rule of Procedure 120.
Under Section 188 of the Army Act, where a person subject
to military law is on board a ship, this Act shall apply until


lie arrives at the port of disembarkation, subject to this
proviso, that if he is tried and sentenced while so on board
ship, the finding and sentence so far as not confirmed and
executed on board ship, may be confirmed and executed in
like manner as if such persons had been tried at the port of
disembarkation.
The Commanding Officer must express in the Order for the
assembly of the Court, that it is not practicable to convene a
General Court Martial.
The Commanding Officer can also confirm the findings and
sentences, but where the sentence is Penal Servitude, he must
not be below the rank of a Field Officer.
A death sentence must be confirmed by the Governor
General, under Section 98 of the Commonwealth Defence
Act. , „
After the termination of the war, Field General Courts
Martial cannot be held on board ship. After this period has
passed, Commanding Officers will hold offenders over for trial
at the port of disembarkation.
(c) According to information recently received from the
Secretary for Defence, Melbourne, regarding a Transport that
arrived with 80 Officers and 700 other ranks on board, it
appears that though the Officers were able to perform ordinary
duties they did not keep order or maintain discipline, and it
is considered that their laxity in this regard was due to the
Officers being mostly concerned in their personal comfort,
keeping apart from the other ranks and generally treating
them with indifference. This had a very bad effect during
the voyage and prepared the men s minds for the appioaches
of evil instigators. You are instructed that all Officers
embarking with you are to have duties to fulfil unless in the
opinion of the S.M.O. they are unfit for duty. Your
Officers should be specially impressed with their duty to the
men, and instructed to take an interest in their welfare.
They must be given to understand that they are responsible
to you as O.C. Troops for the discipline, comfort and health
of those on board.
Should cases of mutiny or insubordination occur you will
identify ringleaders and provide evidence for trials by
Court Martial.
(d) In consultation with the Senior Medical Officer you
will arrange for physical exercise, and for this purpose a
Sports Officer will be embarked with the object of keeping
the men as far as possible occupied and exercised during
the voyage. You will ensure that the utmost use is made of
this Officer for the benefit of all troops and patients whom
the S.M.O. considers are in a fit state to be so exercised.


(e) You will provide the greatest possible area of deck
space for the exercise and recreation of your troops and you
will see that the sufficiency of space thus allotted does not
suffer by comparison with the deck saloon and smoke room
accommodation provided for Officers.
7. Disposal of Waste Matter. —You will take measures
to ensure that no paper, clothing, rubbish or articles of any
description are thrown overboard by the troops. You will
arrange with the Master of the Vessel for the disposal of such
matter.
8. Cell Punishment. —Admiralty Orders direct„ihat no 1
man is to be locked in any compartment below the upper
deck at sea L-that men undergoing cell punishment are not
to be confined at sea ; and that cell punishments are to be
deferred until the ship returns to a defended harbour.
Transport Regulations provide that no punishments can
be carried into effect on board a Transport without the con-
currence of the Master. Masters of Transports are being
informed that they are to use their discretion in permitting
cell punishment to be carried out at sea by the Officer Com-
manding Troops. You will see that these Orders and Regu-
lations are strictly adhered to.
Hospital Clothing Army Bands. — You will ensure
U that during the voyage all men under medical treatment
are wearing on sleeve of both Tunic and Great coat the light
blue arm bands which they have been wearing on embarkation
and that men in possession of these are not permitted to
disembark at any Port without them.
10. Storage of Infected Bedding.— During the voyage
you will make adequate arrangements to ensure that infected
bedding is kept separate from the remainder, so as to avoid
the necessity for the disinfecting of the whole on arrival in
Australia.
The Master of the Ship has been asked to render you
any assistance necessary in this matter.
Punishment,
not
11. Liquor on Transports. —Para. 52 of Standing Orders
of A.I.F. is republished on account of its great importance :
“No fermented or spirituous liquors are to be supplied
to Officers travelling on Mail steamers, nor to Officers
and other ranks on Transports.”
You must clearly understand that no authority from
whatsoever source received can absolve you from strict
adherence to the letter and spirit of this clause.
12. Leave during Voyage : — (a) Leave is not to be
granted at Ports of Call except with the approval of the






Page 13. delete para. 14 and insert in lieu.
__at Tard “B” has been abolished. Q 1
14. Personal Card c. form for each officer
form will be used in leu ’ . ar ti c les of Government
and soldier embarked showing; the Q C Xroops
Clothing m his possession A x F Depots in U.K.
by the representative placed on board and if
A number of sp QJ U R has {ailed t 0 provide a
the G.0.C., A.I. • P nr soldier vou will immediately
completed form (Tonof Me kit of such officer
prepare sueh a form a P embarkation . Y ou will keep
or soldier within 7 d y stores in the Army Book 165,
a ledger accoun hoard and you will commence this
which has been_ piace - Y of those ordnance
25 «
you intermediate ports and such articles as
may be withdrawn from the troops.
Clothing issued during signed toon h.
be'eiffieted^in^th^'^on^lidat^St^ement.^wh^i^will^be
't*Cbalanced immediately before [ arriving at the
first Australian port of call in anticipation of audit.
T , n 1 forms w m be grouped according to Australian
The Q 1 forms win u s r tQ the Embarkation
Military Districts and will be handed
Authorities as troops disembark.
You will make a balance
port of disembarkation and Conso i ida ted
Statement, Ordnance and other supporting vouchers and any
unexpended stores. (12.4.19.)


'tsC Yon Wlll comply with all orders issued by the
rT.O.C., at any Port of Call during the voyage, and will provide
and maintain such picquets as he may consider necessary
during your stay at such Port.


General Officer Commanding such Ports. In cases where
this approval has been obtained you will ensure that at least
75 per cent, of duty Officers are always retained on board.
This restriction does not apply where the whole or portion
of the troops land in formed bodies for exercise or route
marching, in which case 25 per cent, of the Officers not detailed
for such exercise or route march may be granted leave. You
will never grant leave to Officers and withhold same from the
other ranks.
( b ) In considering the advisability of granting leave, you
will remember that it is important to prevent your troops
becoming infected with epidemic disease and you should
therefore ascertain what condition of health exists on shore.
(c) You will arrange that special duty officers and adequate
picquets, under selected officers, are landed at ports where
leave is granted. These picquets will be responsible for the
maintenance of discipline amongst members of the A.I.F.
ashore, and will also collect stragglers. You will impress
upon the men that leave granted during the voyage is a con-
cession, and you will appeal to their honor to uphold the good
name of the Australian soldier and not to abuse this
privilege.
Leave parties must be properly organised and steps taken
-r"' to prevent men overstaying leave.
13. Surprise Kit Inspection :— {a) Returning soldiers Kit
have been known to take with them valuable government Inspections,
property which they claim as their own private property.
{b) You will arrange periodical surprise kit inspections and
confiscate all such articles and also any indecent postcards,
literature and such like.
(c) The Department of Trades and Customs in Australia has
instructions to detain all such property as is above mentioned
and you will therefore assist its officers by arranging for any
special search and in every other way whatsoever.
14. Personal Card “ B.”—This card is to be filled in Personal Card
fo>-ftai:h soldier returning to Australia, and cards for each Card ** B -”
State the soldiers' disembarking in, or pro-
ceeding to, that Stateaiid''wilLbe addressed to “ Staff Officers,
Soldiers ”
Spaces marked 1-9 and 12 and 13 should
board, spaces 14-16 should be marked “ Missing ”
ments are not held.
A Kit Inspection should be held during the voyage to enable
the particulars on the reverse of the card to be completed.
Appointment of
15. Appointment of N.C.O.’s—lf there are insufficient N.C.O.’s.


N.C.O’s. for duty on board the Transport, you are empowered
to appoint " Voyage Only N.C.O’s.” in the following propor-
tion : One Sergeant for every complete 50 rank and file and
one Corporal for every 25 rank and file. Such N.C.O.’s will
receive the pay of acting rank, which will terminate on the
date of disembarkation in Australia. No payment for such
rank will be made during the voyage, but you will hand to the
District Paymaster at each Port of Disembarkation a certified
statement, as per attached form, shewing the amount earned
during the voyage by each Voyage Only N.C.O. who dis-
embarks at such Port. Should the appointment of any
" Voyage Only ” N.C.O.’s of and above the rank of Sergeant
be made you will at the first available opportunity notify
this Department by special letter giving particulars of such
appointments in order that payment of the victualling rates
may be adjusted accordingly.
Quarantine. 16. Quarantine : — ( a) In the event of a Quarantine
Officer boarding the vessel at any Port in Australia, he will
require to see the whole of the Troops, and you will take
measures to have all A.I.F. Details paraded for his
personal inspection. In order to avoid delay of any kind,
this parade will be mustered immediately on his approaching
the vessel.
{b) You will be personally responsible for the strict obser-
vance by your troops of the civil quarantine Laws and Regula-
tions at all Ports of Call.
(c) You will impress upon the Senior Medical Officer and
other Medical Officers on board that the decision of Quarantine
Officers is final and must be upheld. Medical Officers must
refrain from expressing any opinion concerning quarantine
regulations and arrangements in the presence of troops.
Clothing. 17. Second Hand Clothing. —Second hand clothing
intended for Ordnance Stores is to be collected and packed in
bags or bundles to facilitate handling on disembarkation.
Staff, A.A.M.C. is. A.A.M.C. Staff. —Should there be any shortage of
A.A.M.C. personnel you will place at the disposal of the
S.M.O. such a number of suitable men as he may require for
extra Hospital or orderly duties.
Mail. 19. Sorting of Mail. — In arranging mail for despatch,
you will ensure that they have been “ faced,” sorted and
securely tied into separate bundles for each State. The
bundles for the several States must be enclosed in separate
bags, which vou will cause to be tied securely, sealed, labelled
and addressed to the G.P.O. of the respective State Capital
towns. Letters addressed to places outside Australia will
be collectively bagged ; the bags containing such letters will


Page 15, para. 20, sub. para. (6).
Delete last three lines after word “ Australia ” and insert
in lieu thereof:—
“ provided that the paybook is not already overdrawn, and
£5 in all other cases.” (18.4.19.)


be labelled descriptively and handed to the Civil P.O, at the
First Port of Call.
20. Pay : — (a) Provided sufficient credit exists in their
Paybooks, Officers and Nurses may draw up to £lO, W/O's
and N.C.O.’s of and above the rank of Sergeant up to £5,
and other ranks up to £3 during the voyage. Payment should
be made at least twice during the voyage but consideration
should be given to the detail work that is to be carried out
by the Pay Staff on board.
(6) On the day prior to disembarkation at any Port,
and in no case before that day, disembarkation pay will
be made to all personnel disembarking at that Port. The
sum of £lO will be paid to personnel who embarked from
Australia prior to 1917 and who have not since returned to
Australia, will be paid to alTetber-personneh
provided that in each ease sufficient credit to cover the amount
to be paid is shewn in the paybooks.
(c) Approval has been given that members who have their
homes or relatives in any District other than that in which
they enlisted may, if they so desire, disembark and have
their accounts finalised in the district in which their homes
are situated or their relatives reside. It must be understood,
however, that the Defence Department will accept no liability
for any expense incurred by these members if they subse-
quently transfer to their District of enlistment. Your
attention is directed to para. 22 below.
(i d ) The Chief Paymaster’s Representative, who will be
engaged in the preparation of Non-effective Statements
during the voyage, must supply the District Paymaster at
the first Port of Call in Australia with lists of members who
desire their accounts to be finalised in any district other than
that in which they enlisted. You will therefore provide this
Officer with facilities for obtaining this information during
the early stages of the voyage.
{e) All payments made during the' voyage will be signed
for on special Troop-ship Acquittance Rolls which are to be
made out in strict alphabetical order and in triplicate, the
signature being taken in triplicate also. Separate acquittance
rolls will be made out for men who are to disembark in differ-
ent States.
(/) The triplicate copies of Acquittance Rolls will be handed
to the District Paymaster of the State to which the Rolls
relate, and you will obtain from this Officer a receipt for the


triplicate copies. The original, duplicate, and the balance of
the triplicate copies of all Rolls, together with receipts for
triplicate copies handed to the District Paymasters at inter-
mediate ports of call, will be handed to the District Paymaster
at the last port of call in Australia.
( g ) A statement must be kept of cash transactions showing
on the debit side the sum received from the Chief Paymaster,
together with any amounts received at intermediate ports,
and on the credit side the totals of Acquittance Rolls paid
during the voyage. This statement, together with the un-
expended cash balance and the original, duplicate, and the
balance of the Triplicate Rolls ( vide para, (e) above) will be
handed over to the District Paymaster at the last port of call
in Australia.
(A) At each port of disembarkation in Australia you will
submit to the District Paymaster or his authorised representa-
tive a certified extract from “ Ship’s Orders,” showing fines,
forfeitures or other casualties affecting pay which have been
promulgated during the voyage.
Orders to Pay, 21. Order to Pay Forms. During the voyage the Pay-
master will obtain from each individual on board a signed Order
in duplicate, nominating the Bank in or nearest to his Home
Town, to which any sums due, or which may become due, to
him are to be credited. No variation of this instruction is to
he permitted, except with the approval of the O.C. Troops, after
due enquiry by him. The Order must shew the full Christian
names of the soldier and his Australian Postal Address. The
Orders will be handed to the District Paymaster on disembarka
tion, together with a covering schedule which will record the
names and addresses and Bank where pavable.
Disembarkation 22. You will promulgate the provisions of para. 20 (c), in
Choice 1 * 0 * °* * ssues the Routine Orders issued by you before a
payment of any description has been made to any of the
troops under your Command, and you will invite applica-
tions from any members of the A I F. who maybe desirous of
disembarking other than that in which they have enlisted.
You will make the necessary arrangements for the disembark-
ation of the applicants at the ports nominated by them. You
should impress upon all ranks that they cannot alter their
State of disembarkation after a first payment of any descrip-
tion has been made.


triplicate copies. The original, duplicate, and the balance of
the triplicate copies of all Rolls, together with receipts for
triplicate copies handed to the District Paymasters at inter-
mediate ports of call, will be handed to the District Paymaster
at the last port of call in Australia.
(g) A statement must be kept of cash transactions showing
on the debit side the sum received from the Chief Paymaster,
together with any amounts received at intermediate ports,
and on the credit side the totals of Acquittance Rolls paid
during the voyage. This statement, together with the un-
expended cash balance and the original, duplicate, and the
balance of the Triplicate Rolls ( vide para. ( e) above) will be
handed over to the District Paymaster at the last port of call
in Australia.
(, h) At each port of disembarkation in Australia you will
submit to the District Paymaster or his authorised representa-
tive a certified extract from “ Ship’s Orders,” showing fines,
forfeitures or other casualties affecting pay which have been
promulgated during the voyage.
Orders to Pay, 21. Order to Pay Forms. During the voyage the Pay-
master will obtain from each individual on board a signed Order
in duplicate, nominating the Bank in or nearest to his Home
Town, to which any sums due, or which may become due, to
him are to be credited. No variation of this instruction is to
he permitted, except with the approval of the O.C. Troops, after
due enquiry by him. The Order must shew the full Christian
names of the soldier and his Australian Postal Address. The
Orders will be handed to the District Paymaster on disembarka
tion, together with a covering schedule which will record the
names and addresses and Bank where payable.
Disembarkation 22. You will promulgate the provisions of para. 20 (c), in
in District of two issues of the Routine Orders issued by you before a
01ce ’ payment of any description has been made to any of the
troops under your Command, and you will invite applica-
tions from any members of the A I F. who may be desirous of
disembarking other than that in which they have enlisted.
You will make the necessary arrangements for the disembark-
ation of the applicants at the ports nominated by them. You
should impress upon all ranks that they cannot alter their
State of disembarkation after a first payment of any descrio-
23a. The Chief Paymaster will advance to you from the
A.I.F. Funds Trust Account a sum calculated at 2s. per head
for the number of troops (all ranks) embarking.
You will expend the sum for the benefit of the troops on the
voyage, and will produce vouchers for the expenditure,
together with any unexpended balance, to the District Pay-
master at the last Port of Call in Australia.


Page 16, add new para.
24 Sanitation. Yon will take particular care to ensure
that all latrines, urinals, baths and ablution places are kept
thoroughly clean.
All latrines which require to be flushed are to be so dealt
with frequently, and not less often than six times in each 24
hours at suitable intervals. (30.4.19.)


PART IV.
DISEMBARKATION.
1. Disembarkation Records Schedule.— Under no cir- Records
cumstances is a soldier’s original Form B 103 to be handed over Schedule,
until his final disembarkation.' If a soldier is reported A.W.L.
at any port, disembarked for admission to hospital, or any
other reasons, action will be taken to complete in triplicate the
special disembarkation schedule provided for the purpose.
One copy will be retained by you and filled in with other
Transport Returns, and the other two copies will be handed
over to competent military or other Landing Authority at port
concerned. Special care must be taken in the compilation of
these disembarkation schedules, as they form the basis for
permanent record of the soldier.
Attention is drawn to the instructions printed on reverse
side of form, which must be complied with in every detail, and
the form sent ashore ( a ) on soldier being reported A.W.L. at
port, ( b) sick to hospital at port. On re-embarkation on a
transport the form will accompany soldier concerned.
2. Special Nominal Roll on Disembarkation. — (a) You Nominal
will prepare a Nominal Roll in triplicate of all A.I.F. details
embarked in the U.K. or elsewhere, showing the particulars
set out in para, (c) hereunder, and also the particulars of the
disposal of each individual. You will hand this triplicate
Nominal Roll to the Staff Officer, Invalids and Returned
Soldiers, 3rd Military District.
( b ) You will prepare a Nominal Roll in quadruplicate of the
personnel to be disembarked in each Military District, and you
will hand such quadruplicate Nominal Roll to the authorities
at each port of disembarkation. This Nominal Roll will
embody the particulars set out in para, (c) hereunder.
(c) Particulars : Regimental Number, Rank, Surname,
Christian Name, Unit, Reason for Return, Recommendation.
3. Disembarkation Return.— When rendering the Return
amended Disembarkation Form A.M. (4 B) to the Embarkation
Staff Officer at the final port of disembarkation you will show
thereon the number of troops, etc., for each district.
4. Dress.— lt has been reported that in many cases men D ress
have been allowed to disembark in Australia wearing collars
and ties with jackets unbuttoned at the neck. You will see
that this is not permitted, and that all dress regulations are
strictly adhered to by all ranks.


5. Personal Effects. —To facilitate disembarkation and
in order that baggage may accompany the troops about to
disembark, you will hold such a surprise inspection as is
mentioned in Part 111, para. “B ” of the kit of all troops
within 48 hours prior to your arrival at the first Australian
port of disembarkation. You will thus ascertain what articles
of a dutiable nature are in possession of the troops.
A list of all articles other than'necessary military equipment
or personal effects (personal effects include wearing apparel
and any article for personal wear or use which is the bona fide
property of the soldier, and is intended for his personal use)
will be made out on the Customs Declaration Forms provided
for this purpose. Should these printed forms not be available,
they will be made out in manuscript in accordance with the
pro formas in your possession.
Each officer will personally fill in and sign the Officers’
Declaration in respect of his own baggage.
Declarations regarding the inspection of baggage belonging
to the troops under their command will also be filled in and
signed by the Officers Commanding Units or Troop Decks, and
handed to the Officer Commanding Troops.
From these Declarations the O.C. Troops will prepare a
Declaration Form for the Collector of Customs at each Aus-
tralian port of disembarkation.
The articles shown on this form and on the Officers’ Declara-
tion Forms should be removed from the baggage, and will be
placed under bond by the O.C. Troops for delivery to the
Customs Officers ; otherwise it will be necessary to place the
whole of the baggage of the individuals concerned under bond.
All persons signing these Customs Declarations are warned
that a statement made thereon which is untrue in any par-
ticulars is an offence against Section 234 of the Customs Act,
punishable by a penalty not exceeding £lOO.
The provisions of this order will not in any way interfere
with the right of the Customs Officers to re-examine any, or
the whole, of the baggage if, in their opinion, this action is
considered necessary.
Cases and packages containing personal effects of soldiers
arriving by transports from abroad, if delivered to the Defence
Department under bond, are to be held until released by an
order of the Department of Trade and Customs.
A supply of the Forms referred to above has been placed in
Ship’s Orderly Room.


Page 19, para. 1, sub. para. ( b) (5).
In line 2 for “ six months " read “12 months." (27.4,
Page 19, para. 4, sub. para. (a).
Second line before figure 7 insert “ 4 to,” end of sub. para.
(a), add :
This is not applicable in the case of invalids until recom-
mended for discharge after completion of Medical Treatment.
No interim advances will be made to any soldiers during
the period of 7 days after disembarkation. You will pro-
mulgate this para, in Ship’s Orders. (18.4.19.)


PART V.
IN AUSTRALIA.
1. Leave : — (a) Upon disembarkation “ Leave of absence Leave,
on full pay and Subsistence ” will be granted to all ranks
including Nursing Service for a period of 7\ days for every
6 months service abroad calculated from the date of em-
barkation in Australia, to the date of disembarkation there.
{b) This leave is granted subject to the following con-
ditions :
(1) In no case will the total period of leave exceed 60 days.
(2) Fractional periods of service over four months will be
calculated as a full 6 months service.
(3) When the period of leave granted includes half a day,
such half day will be counted as a full day for the
purposes of leave and subsistence.
(4) Where a person has returned to Australia and re-
embarked for further service, the length of his interim
stay in Australia will be deducted from his total
period of service for the purpose of estimating leave.
(5) Where the period of service abroad has been less than
6 months, at least 14 days leave will be granted, but
without subsistence allowance.
(6) Where long service furlough has been taken abroad,
14 days leave will be granted without Subsistence
Allowance.
2. Rate of Subsistence : —(a) With the exceptions Subsistence
mentioned in the preceding paragraph, three shillings Subsis-
tence Allowance for each day of leave will be granted to all
ranks having at least one year’s service abroad.
(b) Officers Field Allowance will cease as from the date of
disembarkation.
3. Discharge. —Soldiers will be discharged from the Discharge.
A.I.F. upon expiration of their Disembarkation Leave.
4. ( a ) The .District Paymaster in Australia will make Settlement
available days of disembarkation all balance to the of
credit of soldier’s pay account to date of discharge, together Aecounts *
with the whole of accrued deferred pay, also subsistence
allowance if payable.


( b ) Members whose homes are in the country will be paid
only in their home towns, unless good cause be shown to the
contrary. The special approval of the Officer Commanding
the. Transport must be obtained where payment is desired
elsewhere than in the soldier’s home town.
Rail Warrants. 5. Tree Railway Warrant. — ln all cases where the home
or family of the soldier is situated at a distance from the
Drt of Disembarkation, he will be issued with a free Railway
’arrant to the Railway Station nearest his home or family.
6. Forfeiture of Privileges and Payments.— -Where
any soldier has delayed his return to Australia negligently
or has deliberately missed his Transport either in England
or at any intermediate Port and thus remained a charge upon
the State for longer than would have been the case except
for his default, he will become liable to the forfeiture, in
whole or part, of any or all of the privileges or payments
set out in Part V. hereof, both during the voyage and after
disembarkation. You will notify all ranks of their liability
in this respect


Page 20, para. 4, add new sub. para. (c).
(c) Should you not disembark at final Port of Call in
Australia owing to quarantine restrictions you will adjust
your advance of cash at the first Port of Call on the return
voyage advising Defence Melbourne by wireless of the name
of such port. (18.4.19.) dine


PART VI.
MUNITION WORKERS AND
WAR WORKERS.
In accordance with Instructions from the Minister for
Defence, any Munition and War Workers embarked on your
ship will be under supervision and control. As O.C. Troops,
neither you nor the Captain of the Ship have power to inflict
punishment onany of these persons unless violence is attempted,
in which case the offender can be confined by the Master of
the Ship as long as he threatens or offers violence continually
or otherwise is a danger to the safety of the ship or the lives
of those on board.
Should any Munitions or War Workers be embarked, the
following will be handed to you by a representative of the
Officer-in-Charge, Munition and War Workers, Australia
House, Strand :
(a) Nominal roll shewing states of men’s accounts and
advance paid and reason for return.
(b) Medical History Sheet of Worker.
(c) Statement shewing conduct of men whilst in England.
You will hand to the Embarkation Staff at each Port in
Australia where men disembark a copy of Nominal Roll and
Medical History Sheet for men concerned. You will also
hand over or forward to the Secretary for Defence, immediate-
ly on arrival, Nominal Roll for all districts and statement
shewing conduct of men whilst in England.
Lieut-General,
Director-General,
Repatriation and Demobilisation, A.I.F.


EXTRACTS FROM A.I.F. STANDING ORDERS.
PART VII.
CHARGE OF STORES ON TRANSPORTS.
INSTRUCTIONS TO O.C. AND QM-


CHARGE OF STORES ON TRANSPORTS.
INSTRUCTIONS TO O.C. and Q.M.
Note. —( a ) All equipment and stores not consigned as cargo
will be off loaded at last Australian port of disembarka-
tion.
Note. —( b ) For instructions to Senior Medical Officers re-
specting Medical Stores and Red Cross Stores vide
“ Standing Orders, Australian Imperial Force, paras.
126-128."
1. Responsibility for Stores.— Officers in charge of Responsi
Government stores are responsible for their care and custody bility for
until consumed or handed over and an acquittance obtained Stores,
therefor.
Officers commanding troops on transports are responsible
that a guard is placed on all hatchways to prevent the pillage
of cargo, and that any troops interfering with the cargo
are severely dealt with.
All ranks should be frequently reminded by Commanding
Officers of their individual responsibility in respect of Govern-
ment property issued to them, whether for personal use or
for re-issue. During the entire period of service in the Force,
all articles of military clothing, kit and equipment, issued to
a member, or for which an allowance or refund is paid, remain
Government property for which a member may be called upon
at any time to account. On the termination of his service
every member will be required to return to store all such
articles as have not previously been withdrawn (or to pay
their value), except such articles as he is allowed under
Standing Orders to retain after discharge.
2. List of Stores on Transports other than Ship’s Lj sts of
Stores. — The Officer appointed Quartermaster on a Trans- Stores,
port outward bound to Australia will, on behalf of the O.C.


Troops, take charge of all military stores and equipment
placed on board for use on the voyage. He will prepare a list
of such stores in triplicate in the form shown below :
List of Stores (other than Naval Department Ship’s Stores).
Received on board Transport for use on voyage.
I certify that the above is a complete list of Stores received
on board Transport for use on voyage.
Sig. of O.C. Troops.
Received two copies
of above list. Date
of above list.
Sig. of E.S.O.
Date.
Two copies of the above list will be handed to the Australian
Embarkation Staff Officer or his representative at the last port
of call in the United Kingdom.
The Australian Embarkation Staff Officer or his representa-
tive at last port of call in the United Kingdom will similarly
forward both copies of lists received by him to Movements and
Quartering Branch (Department of Repatriation and
Demobilisation, A.1.F., 20, Belgrave Square, London. This


Department will forthwith forward one copy of the list to
Secretary, Department of Defence, Melbourne, and retain the
second copy for reference, a certified correct copy being,
however, forwarded to the Secretary, Department of Defence,
by the following mail.
The triplicate copy retained by the Officer Commanding
will be signed by Embarkation Staff Officer or his represen-
tative and pasted inside the cover of Army Book 165, which
is to be used as a ledger by the Quartermaster.
3. Deficiencies. — Losses and deficiencies while in store Deficiencies
charge, or on issue, will be inquired into immediately they of Stores,
are discovered with a view to responsibility being placed on
the individual concerned and the value recovered. It is
important to adjust all deficiencies before disembarkation, as
it has frequently happened, owing to the distribution of units
immediately after disembarkation, that Officers Commanding
Troopships have been unable to recover the value of defi-
ciencies from the personnel of such units, and have therefore
had to personally make good the value of deficiencies not
recovered. Officers Commanding Troops are warned that
only the finding, duly ratified, of a Board of Inquiry can Board of
exonerate them from personal liability for deficiencies. Inquiry.
Should the responsibility for a loss or deficiency be in doubt
or disputed, and the value not immediately recoverable from
the individual concerned, the Officer Commanding Troops, if
unable to arrive at a decision in the matter, will convene
a court of inquiry in accordance with the provisions of Aus-
tralian Military Regulations 711 to 726.
Commanding Officers will in all cases be held personally Liability for
liable for loss in respect to equipment, clothing, or other stores g° 0 s r s e ° f
on their charge, unless satisfactory evidence is tendered to
the Board—
(a) that the loss is due to the wrongful act, default,
or neglect on the part of some other person definitely
ascertained ; or
(b) that, although no other person can be definitely
ascertained as responsible for the loss, all necessary
instructions and supervision had been given and exercised
by the Commanding Officer, such as might reasonably
have been required of him in the circumstances ; or


(c) that the loss was due to some occurrence or fact
over which he had no control.
Boards will state definitely in their report whether the
evidence produced is sufficiently satisfactory to relieve the
Commanding Officer of personal responsibility, and under
what clause of the above paragraph. If the evidence pro-
duced is not considered such as to relieve the Commanding
Officer, he should be informed accordingly by the president,
and an opportunity afforded, if desired by him, of furnishing
further evidence.
Deficiencies, generally speaking, may arise in one or more of
the following ways :
{a) Blankets and Stores on board the Transport not
taken into the count being temporarily overlooked.
{b) Blankets and Stores stolen by the ship’s crew.
(c) Stores surreptitiously taken off the Troopship
by the troops.
{d) Stores lost or damaged through the exigencies of
the service and not accounted for by the finding, duly
ratified, of a Board of Inquiry.
Difficulties arising from deficiencies in Ship-owners’ Stores
and Government Stores can be reduced to a minimum by
careful attention to the following points :
Prevention
of Losses.
{a) Early in the voyage, and frequently thereafter,
men to be warned that ail deficiencies will be charged on
re-payment, and therefore it will pay every man to
prevent damage or loss during the voyage.
To facilitate adjustment of deficiencies on disem-
barkation, it is instructed that check be made of all
stores on the morning (at least 24 hours) prior to arrival
at port of disembarkation, and the deficiencies, if any,
be ascertained. Troops should after this check use
mess tins, etc., at meals ; and, weather conditions
permitting, greatcoats in lieu of blankets.
{b) By mounting guards over all stores after they have
been collected until proper receipts have been obtained.
(c) By collecting the value of deficiencies from the units
affected before disembarkation.


[d) By constituting Boards of Inquiry to inquire into
and report on loss or damage of Government Stores.
(e) By prompt adjustment on the part of the Officer
Commanding Troops with the Master of the vessel in the
case of Ship’s Stores, and the Staff or District Paymaster
in the case of Government Stores.
Adjustment
of Defici-
encies.
The following is the procedure for the adjustment of defi-
ciencies in respect of Ship-owners and Government Stores .
(a) Ship-owners Stores.— ln regard to Ship-owners’
Stores, it is pointed out that only damage or loss which
in the opinion of the Officer Commanding Troops is wilful
or the result of gross carelessness will be charged against
the men.
The final payment of troops on board will not be made
until the value of deficiencies of Ship-owners’ Stores has been
recovered. Deficiencies in Ship's Stores are a matter between
the Shipping Company and the Officer Commanding Troops,
and no claim will be recognised by the Government for
deficiencies in such Stores after the disembarkation of the
troops. Recovery must be effected from the troops on board,
[Vide Article 100 of Instructions for Masters of Transports.)
Settlement for these Stores is to be effected by the Officer
Commanding Troops direct with the Master of the vessel
concerned.
(h) Government Stores. —“ Deficiencies in Government
Stores ” means all those Government Stores deficient
which are not accounted for by the duly ratified finding
of a Board of Inquiry, or those destroyed without proper
Medical authority.
In ascertaining deficiencies in Government Stores ai tides
destroyed by instructions of the Medical Officers should be
included, but a certificate from the Medical Officer detailing
the articles destroyed should be attached. Immediately
deficiency is ascertained and the necessary forms signed the
Officer Commanding Troops personally becomes liable for
the amount of the deficiency. Form T. 122 hereunder is used
for Navy Department Stores. Other Government Stores
are entered on the separate Form shown therewith; see
9 and 10. Medicql and Veterinary Stores will be shown
on separate lists.


The following procedure should be adopted by the Officer
Commanding Troops, which, if adhered to, would relieve him
of all liability with regard to deficiencies in Government
Stores :
For Officers Commanding Troops on the homeward journey to
A ustralia.
Immediately the amount of the deficiency in Government
Stores chargeable against the troops shall have been ascer-
tained the Officer Commanding Troops will prepare an
Acquittance Roll and obtain thereon the signatures of the
troops concerned for the amounts chargeable against them,
debiting in each soldier’s Pay Book the amount for which he
signs on the Roll. Such Acquittance Rolls with the usual
certificates will be handed in to the District Paymaster of the
last District of disembarkation. No cash need be refunded
by the members in this respect, their signatures on the
Acquittance Roll being sufficient.
Ammunition
4. Ammunition, Disposal of. —All ammunition, includ-
ing any unexpended of that issued for the use of the troops on
board, as well as that conveyed as cargo, will be taken over
by the Embarkation Staff Officer.
Rifles and
Typewriters.
5. Rifles and Typewriters, Disposal of. —All rifles
placed on board the transport for defence purposes, but not
including those on charge to Units, will similarly be taken
over by the Embarkation Staff Officer.
Officers Commanding Troops will be held personally re-
sponsible that rifles are thoroughly cleaned and treated with a
liberal application of mineral jelly, or other rust preventative
before being placed in chests, prior to disembarkation.
Ihe Embarkation Staff Officer will also take over the type-
writer which is placed on board the transport for use on the
voyage. If no typewriter is placed on board, the Officer
Commanding Troops will render a statement in writing to this
effect to the Embarkation Staff Officer.
Ordnance 6. Ordnance Stores and Stationery Stores Placed
Stores. on Board for Use During Voyage, Disposal of. — All
Ordnance Stores placed on board for use during the voyage,


such as rifles, ammunition, etc., and stationery stores, will be
properly accounted for to the Embarkation Staff Officer at
the port of disembarkation, and particulars of any deficiency
in same will be supported by a copy of the-Board Proceedings,
in the case of loss, and a certificate containing full particulars
of expenditure of ammunition or other stores.
Arrangements should, be made with the Master of the
transport for the disposal of all such matter.
9. —Specimen Form T. 122 referred to in (3)
Voucher to -. Account 191
Statement Showing the Losses or Deficiencies of
Government (Naval Department) Stores
chargeable against Troops conveyed from
Approved ; and I certify that I have received a duplicate of
this list, and that the value of the stores specified above will
be recovered from the Troops chargeable therewith.
Military Commanding Officer.


Note. —This form is to be made out in duplicate and
presented to the Military Commanding Officer, who will sign
the certificate on one copy and return it to the Master, who
will transmit it to the Navy Office as a Voucher to his Account.
10. —Specimen form referred to in (3) :
Australian Military Form.
Voucher to Account
Statement Showing the Losses or Deficiencies of
Government Stores (Military)
chargeable against Troops conveyed from.
in the S.S between the 191
and the 191
Approved ; and I certify that the value of the stores
specified above has been, or will be, recovered from the troops
chargeable therewith.
(Signature).
Commanding Troops on board
Date.
Station.


11. —Specimen forms referred to in (3) :
From.
O.C Troops, Transport.
I hereby notify you that a deficiency of in
Government stores on board this transport has been ascer-
tained. The amount of the share of this deficiency to be
borne by the unit under your command is.
You will obtain the signature of each member of your unit
on the usual form of acquittance roll for his proportion of
the deficiency, and will enter the amount for which each
member signs in his paybook. The acquittance roll must
be handed to the Staff Paymaster or his representative within
two weeks of the date of disembarkation ; failing which the
amount will be debited to your personal pay account without
further notice by the Staff Paymaster. No cash need be
refunded by members in this respect ; their signature on
the acquittance roll must be clearly marked “ Collection of
deficiency by due by this unit on
board transport.
Please return to me at once the attached certificate duly
completed by you.


From —
To—
O.C. Troops, Transport.
I hereby agree to obtain an acquittance roll duly completed
by the members of my unit, and enter the amount for which
each man signs in his pay-book, totalling in all the sum
0 f being this unit’s share of the deficiency
for Government stores on board Failing
the return of this acquittance roll to the Staff Paymaster or
his representative within two weeks of disembarkation, I
hereby authorise him to debit my Pay Ledger Account with
the total amount of this unit’s share of the deficiency.
Signed.
Date.
Commanding.


12. —Officers Commanding Troops on Transports will
furnish statements showing:
(i) Quantity of medical stores [a) taken on board ;
( b ) used during the voyage ; and (c) balance remaining
on hand.
(ii) Quantity of veterinary stores taken on board, used
during the voyage, and balance remaining on hand.
(iii) Quantity of forage taken on board, used during
the voyage, and balance remaining on hand, specifying
the several items.
13. —Cases and packages containing personal effects of
soldiers arriving by Transports from abroad, which are
delivered to the Defence Department, are to be held until
released by an Order of the Department of Trade and Customs
Personal
effects.


• m
