

Australia's Share
in the War
AND
Who is Paying for it?
Issued by the Executive of
the Australian Labor Party
State of New South Wales
Price, Threepence
Per Dozen - - - 2/6
The Worker Print, Sydney




AUSTRALIA’S SHARE
IN THE WAR
AND
WHO IS PAYING FOR IT?
Issued by the Executive of
the Australian Labor Party
State of New South Wales
SYDNEY:
The Worker Trade Union Print,
St. Andrew’s Place,
1918,




AUSTRALIA'S SHARE IN THE WAR
AND
WHO IS PAYING FOR IT ?
THE COST OF LIVING.
We have heard and read much about the increased effi-
ciency in production as a result of improved machinery, the
opening up of the national resources of the world, the wonder-
ful new inventions, the improved and new processes, the better
organisation of commerce and industry, the increased world-
wide exchange of commodities. We have heard of steam-pro-
pelled agricultural machinery, improved seed wheats, dry farm-
ing and a host of other such factors, all of which contributed
to the lessening of the cost of production. It seems therefore
anomalous that notwithstanding all these advances in material
science, the cost of food should increase and rents be much
higher. That there has been a steady accelerating rise in the
prices of all the necessaries of life since 1901 in Australasia
is beyond dispute.
The causes of the rise in prices of food and raw material
are too obscure to be dealt with in a wide comprehensive man-
ner, and can only be lightly touched upon here. We shall deal
with the rise in prices of the necessary commodities of life
which took place before the war, briefly touch upon the war-
time rises, and more fully with the dangers with which we are
threatened in the future. Three striking facts are made appar-
ent relating to the first fourteen years of this century: first,
the enormous growth in rents, especially ground rents; sec-
ondly, the enormous increase in taxation; thirdly, the growth
of monopolistic trading, the increased pooling and merging of
all concerns -which handle the necessary commodities of the
people of the Commonwealth. These three factors run in a
parallel line with the curve in the prices of food, clothing and


shelter. Between the years 1900 and 1914 rents rose more rapidly
in Sydney, and to a higher degree, than in any other part of
the Commonwealth. We find that in 1914 22/8 was required for
payment of rent which in 1901 was only 15/-. Put in another
way: the amount of accommodation which could be secured
in 1901 for £751 cost in 1914 £1135, an increase of 50 per cent,
for all capital towns weighted and averaged.
“RENT SWALLOWS UP THE GAIN, AND PAUPERISM
ACCOMPANIES PROGRESS.” .
The greater proportionate rise in rent in comparison with
other necessaries of life will be recognised if we .put it yet
another way. In 1914 we required £ll4O to purchase shelter
(house rent), groceries, meat and dairy produce; the same
goods could have been purchased for one thousand
pounds (£1000) in 1911, and for £BBO in 1901. It will thus be
seen that the main factor in Australia was rent. This must
be borne in mind because the price of our commodities are
largely dependent upon ground rent, and any increase in ground
rent means an automatically increased price of all other goods,
all other things being equal. It also needs emphasising, be-
cause while with us in Australia it was the main factor, in
Great Britain any change in rents which took place during the
same period is not worth taking into consideration.
With Federation came a new factor in taxation, so im-
portant that in the year 1914 the Commonwealth Taxation had
already amounted to £16,587,906, which works out at £4/1/-
per head of the population of the Commonwealth.
THE GROWING DANGER OF THE ONE GREAT TRUST.
Last but not least we have the operation of trusts and com-
bines, the importance of which is not yet sufficiently recog-
nised even by the Labor Party; for one thing is certain, that
however important the trust movement was in this connection
before the war, it has become a yet more important factor.
Readers of “The Worker” will have recognised the growing-
danger of the ONE GREAT TRUST.
A NEW SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC FACTOR.
, We shall see as we proceed that the war has introduced
an important and new factor altogether, which will, reduce the
purchasing power of the nominal wage, apart altogether from


any increased activities of the trust movement, a factor which
must mean the economic enslavement of the workers of Aus-
tralia.
{
The rise in prices, as we shall see, has been unchecked, and
in the light of current events is of a most startling character.
There is the great destruction of life and the disablement of
so many millions of human effectives who are the producers
of the commodities of life. Under modern warfare the strong-
est go down equally with the weakest, for prowess
is a negligible factor in these days of chemical warfare. Mil-
lions have been killed and crippled, millions are still being
required and called upon to fill the vacancies made by the wast-
age of human life; millions have been withdrawn from the
work of production and put to the manufacture of
munitions and the general work of destruction. Millions are
consuming more food and using more clothing, and are destroy-
ing the great fertilising products of the world while they are
engaged in the work of destruction —more than they do in a time
of peace. The actual diminishment in the accumulated products,
coupled with the destruction of the more limited war-time pro-
duction, is simply incalculable, and the effect of it has been
brought home to us, and will be to a greater extent after the
war. One illustration of the magnitude of this great destruc-
tion and its direct and indirect effect upon us, though so far
removed from the seat of war, will explain why the hundreds
of articles into which cotton enters are increasing so enor-
mously in prices.
EATING UP COTTON.
DEMANDS OF MODERN WARFARE.
How considerable a factor cotton is in warfare is illus-
trated by the following statistics sent out to their Sydney agent
by Messrs. Newman, Smith and Newman, of London, makers
of cotton goods:
“A 12-inch g.un disposes of half a bale of cotton with
every shot fired. In a naval battle, like the one off Jutland,
from five to six thousand pounds a minute are consumed
by each active warship. It takes more than twenty thou-
sand bales a year to provide absorbent cotton to staunch
and bind the wounds of *the injured. One change of ap-
parel for all the troops now engaged in the war represents


more than a million bales. One hundred thousand bales
will be required to equip the proposed aeroplane fleet if
cotton, as may be necessary, supplants linen wings. The
U.S.A. is now turning nearly a million bales a year into
explosives alone.” —“Evening News,” 21/3/’lB.
Wool in London was £l3/5/- per bale in 1908. This rose to
£l7 in 1914, and £27 per bale in 1916. This, of course, has in-
creased the price of clothing. %
Leather increased in price enormously before and
during the war, which will explain much of what you notice
when looking in the bootshop windows. We have taken
the London prices of wool, because in normal times London
fixes the price, and because cloth made in England out of
wool of Australian growth and cotton goods will be dearer
for many years to come. The high prices of cotton will induce
its growers to exhaust the soil, and cotton is one of the grossest
feeders known in the vegetable kingdom. The nominal price
of cotton in the bale on the plantations in the South of the
United States was 4d. per lb. Any fluctuations for many years
before the war ranged between 8 cents and 6 cents (3d.) per
lb. The heavy crop in 1914 was responsible for a fall to 6
cents (3d.) per lb. The lower prices were before the era of
explosives and munitions. The latest quotation is 75 cents
(3/li) per lb.
Go to your tailor to-morrow and he will tell you, as an
honest man, that he cannot supply you with a suit of clothes
anything like equal in quality to that supplied before the war
AT ANY PRICE, and that he can only give you a suit possibly
equal in appearance, but nothing like the same quality, at a
greatly advanced cost.
As with the human body so with the world economic. If
one worker suffers all Workers suffer, and thus the
cotton of America, the wool and hides of Australia determine
largely the price of clothing in other parts than in the coun-
tries in which they are produced.
IN AUSTRALIA, DESPITE THE INCREASE IN THE
COST OF THE NECESSARIES OF LIFE, LABOR IN POLI-
TICS SUCCEEDED IN PREVENTING A FALL IN THE IN-
COME OF THE WORKERS.
IN GREAT BRITAIN, DESPITE THE RISE IN MONEY
WAGES, THE WORKERS’ INCOME WAS SHRINKING.


Wages cannot be computed in £s. d. The only test is: What
is left out of the money wages after the necessaries of life and
the local standard of living has been met?
WHEN PRICES ADVANCE AS THE RESULT OF OTHER
FACTORS THAN HIGHER WAGES, THEN, NOTWITH-
STANDING! THAT RISE, A DECREASE IN REAL WAGES
IN MONETARY PURCHASING POWER TAKES PLACE.
In England “the table of index numbers of food, coal and
raw material shows that within the lifetime of the present
generation of young men there has been an almost continuous
fall in the power of the working-class income to command the
necessaries of life.” —(“Labor Year Book,” 1916.)
In England the purchasing power of money had fallen to
such an extent that already on the Ist July, 1915, 30/6 was
needed for the same purchases as could be bought in i 904 for
20/-. The workers in Great Britain did not succeed in pre-
venting a fall in real wages between 1904 and 1914. In the
absence of any reliable data, one can only imagine what the
purchasing power of the sovereign is in England, or in other
belligerent countries close to the war zone, or what the
profiteers would have reduced it to if private enterprise had
remained unrestricted by Government.
We have then seen that the rise in prices of the necessaries
of life is not peculiar to Australia. It is true that in England
the rents of the working people were not perceptibly increased;
but coal, which to the people of the colder climates is a matter
of the greatest importance, had risen in price before the war.
“From 1896 onwards most of the principal articles of
working-class diet, the prime necessaries of life, have advanced
considerably in price, especially since 1905.” —(Hobson in 1916.)
A table published by the Board of Trade in 1913 shows that
in London the three groups of food, (1) bread, flour, cereals and
potatoes, (2) meat, (3) dairy produce, had all advanced over
35 per cent. Including in the consideration tea, coffee,
cocoa, etc., which had a slower rise, there was a total rise in
the expenditure of the working-class families of 27 per cent.
The following figures will show how this advance in the price
of food works out.
Remember that the expenditure of working classes on food,
clothing and housing forms a larger part of the expenditure
of the poorer than of the better-to-do classes, These figures


are brought up to 1914 by the author of “Facts for Socialists,”
and issued by the Fabian Society:—lß96, 91.7; 1898, 99.5; 1900,
100; 1902, 101; 1904, 102.4; 1906, 102; 1908, 107.5; 1912, 114.3;
1913, 114.8; 1914, 117.
The relevancy of these oversea figures will be apparent
when we remember that Labor’s opponents attributed the rise
in prices of the necessaries of life to the Labor Party and the
militancy of Australian Trades Unionism.
WORLD-WIDE RISE IN PRICES OF FOOD.
In France, in Great Britain, and wherever the scientific
advances in the production of wealth are greatest, prices rose,
irrespective of the political color or character of the
respective Governments; the rise in price was world-
wide. IN GREAT BRITAIN THERE WAS NO DOMINANCE
OF LABOR IN POLITICS, AND THE WORKERS
WENT TO THE WALL. IN AUSTRALIA LABOR IN
POLITICS DID SUCCEED IN HOLDING ITS OWN
LABOR’S ALLEGED RESPONSIBILITY FOR HIGH PRICE
OF FOOD REFUTED.
Whatever the causes which contributed to the great in-
crease in the price of food generally, it is certain that wages
were not responsible for anything like that attributed to it
by Labor’s opponents. It is difficult to estimate the indirect
effect of any increase in nominal wages, but an examination
of the direct effect on any one commodity shows the absurdity
of shouldering the whole rise on to this one cause: a cause
which in itself is a necessary concomitant of other causes.
Readers of “The Worker” will remember that the Master
Bakers in 1912 could discern no other factor to account for the
increase which had taken place in the cost of the production
of bread than wages. It was shown by one of our Labor men
that the portion of the rise in the price of bread of four farth-
ings which could be attributed to wages was only 25 per cent.,
or one farthing of their estimated increased cost of production;
£6 per ton of flour, 50 per cent, was really due to the increased
price of flour, WHICH HAD RISEN £3 per ton in price. The
case of bread is typical of hundreds of other commodities, and
is only given here because it is included in the larger share of
every one pound which is spent in commodities whose prices
are risen most, as bread, rent, and meat,


In Sydney the rise in prices of food, groceries, clothing and
house rent was greater than in any other of the capital cities
of the Commonwealth. In June, 1914, 23/7 was required to
purchase what could HAVE BEEN purchased in 1911 for 20/-,
and in 1916 26/7 for the same purchases. In Queensland the
20/- went as far in 1914 as it did in Sydney in 1911; but if we
take the weighted average of the six capital cities of the Com-
monwealth we find that in 1914 22/10 equalled 20/- in 1911;
in 1916 it required 26/11 to equal 20/- in 1911. THE RISE IN
PRICES COMMENCED BEFORE THE IN WAGES,
AND DURING THE YEARS WHEN WAGES WERE TEN
PER CENT. LOWER THAN THE NOMINAL-WAGE OF 1911
AND 32 PER CENT. LOWER THAN 1916.
1911.
1916.
s.
d.
s.
d.
Bread
3.5
21b. loaf ....
0
4
Flour . .
. . 2
8
251bs
3
6
Tea
. 1
3
per lb. ....
1
6
Sugar
3.7
n • • • •
5.1
Australian Jam ..
. 0
84
n )) • • * •
1
0
Kerosene
. 0
11
1
6
Milk
. . 0
4
0
5
Butter
.. 1
1
per lb. ....
1
5
Cheese
. 0
8
11 11 * * * *
1
0
Eggs
. 1
4
doz. ....
1
9
Bacon
. . 0
10
per lb. ....
1
4
Rump Steak
. 0
7
>> 11 ....
1
1
Round Corned Beef . .
. . 0
4
11 11 ....
0
9
Brisket, with Bone . ..
. . 0
2
11 11 ....
0
5
Leg of Mutton
. . 0
34
ii 11 ....
0
7
Pork (all round)
. . 0
7
11 11 ....
1
0
But that is not the whole story. We have only dealt with
the official figures. Any housekeeper knows that the actual
increase in the cost of living is greater than any of these
official figures reveal; nor must it be forgotten that any in-
crease in the cost of living, like any increase in indirect taxation
and much of direct taxation, falls with the most crushing
effect on the poor in proportion to their poverty. Notice the
greater increase in the articles above enumerated which form
the diet of the very poorest. Brisket bone beef rose 150 per cent


We need thrash this matter no further beyond showing
how the war has increased the upward curve in the cost of
living which was already so large before the war.
According to the Commonwealth Statistician foods and
groceries were 29.3 per cent, higher on the average in Janu-
ary of this year than they were in July, 1914, a month before
the war.
According to the “Economist” prices in America had risen
107 per cent, during the war to January, 1918. In England the
prices had in January, 1918, advanced by 129 per cent.; and
it must be remembered that the profiteers would have made
these prices yet higher had they not been controlled. Recent
information from London states that butter was unpro-
curable at any price. A quarter-pound of margarine cost 6d.,
and two mutton chops were purchased for a family at 2/4 per
lb. It also cost five or six hours’ time and 3d. in tram fares
to a suburban resident to secure even this.
How much of the 29 per cent, increase in prices in war
time which has been placed here upon Australian produced
food has been taken from our people and has gone in the
£156,000,000 beneficiaries? And, again, how much of the new
tribute-levying power of the wealthy bond-holder has been
created out of the straits of the people and is being devoted to
discounting the workers’ wages and those of their children and
children’s children yet to come? Add the 29 per cent, increase
which Mr. Knibbs informs us has taken place during the war
to January, 1918, to the 30 per cent, rise in prices which took
place before the war, and we have a rise of over 60 per cent.
AUSTRALIA'S WAR DEBT.
WHAT IT MEANS TO THE WORKER.—WHO PAYS IT.—
AND HOW IT IS PAID.
THE COMING STORM.
“The night grows wondrous dark, deep swelling gusts
And sultry stillness take the rule by turn,
Whilst o’er our heads the black and heavy clouds
Roll slowly on. This surely bodes a storm.”
Perhaps the most important phase of this subject which
deserves consideration is the effect which it must have on
the distribution of wealth, Undoubtedly it will tend automati-


cally to a yet greater increase in the inequality of the distri-
bution of wealth, to a reduction in the purchasing power of
the sovereign, and to the ECONOMIC ENSLAVEMENT OF
THE WORKERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH.
Just as we get the most deceptive statements re the mili-
tary, naval and diplomatic situations from high alleged experts,
so we have been recently given the most deceptive statements
with regard to Australia’s war expenditure by alleged financial
authorities. Mr. Watt, the Commonwealth Treasurer, and Mr.
Denison Miller, as also the financial editors of our dailies, well
illustrate this truth.
Mr. Miller tells us that Mr. Knibbs estimated the value of
the total wealth of Australia at the end of the official financial
year “of 1915 at £1,643,463,376. Then he proceeds to esti-
mate that an increase has taken place in the total wealth of
the Commonwealth, amounting to £156,536, 624, on the day on
which he made the statement, March 23, 1918. By adding
these two sums together Mr. Miller arrives at the total
value of the private wealth of the Commonwealth as
£1,800,000,000. Then in the most optimistic and airy manner
he informs the public and the world at large that Australia
could go on for a number of years expending for war pur-
poses £80,000,000 per annum ‘WITHOUT FEELING THE
PINCH.”
■ There is, of course, no analogy between the incidence of
the more or less productive States debts and the unproductive
Commonwealth war debt. Apart from the latter being unpro-
ductive, except to the extent of £2,000,000 invested in the
Commonwealth-owned ships, the war debt carries a higher rate
of interest.
SOME STARTLING COMPARISONS.
The interest on the war debt will be found to exceed in
amount the total net earnings of the whole of the States from
their railways, tramways, sewage systems, and all the public
works of Australia, which have been constructed out of the
£370,000,000 States dbbts.
Obviously the earnings of the £370,000,000 are earmarked,
and a large amount of it for overseas. Therefore, in arriving
at the earning capacity of the total wealth of Aus-
tralia, we must deduct this amount, as also the capitalised


value of all the private interest which we are committed to send
out of Australia. The earnings of our total wealth must be
reduced by all the wool, wheat, rabbits and other produce
which has to be exported from Australia to pay our overseas
as well as our internal public and private debts. Obviously,
then, only our unencumbered wealth can be taken into con-
sideration in arriving at the saving capacity of our people.
The foregoing consideration makes the savings of
£156,000,000 in war time even more remarkable than at first
sight appears, and it is not to be wondered at that Mr. Watt
describes the position in the following words: “Our resources
by some mysterious fashion NOT APPARENT ON THE SUR-
FACE, had been rapidly augmented.” There is no mystery
about it to the student of history. We would recommend Mr.
Watt to study the history of England for enlightenment.
Investments in war loans do not increase the wealth of
the nation, as is assumed by the financial editor'of the “Daily
Telegraph,” who adds the £105,000,000 already funded to our
total wealth. It does increase the wealth of the wealthy people
who are paying income tax on their present investments, and
who escape it immediately those investments are transferred
into war loans; but it does not increase the wealth of the
nation. It increases the net earnings of the investments of
those who escape the' payment of income taxation on large
investments, it decreases the taxation paid to the Common-
wealth and State Governments, it robs the general revenue and
adds to the load to be carried by the non-bondholder.
The extent of the profit which our predatory classes have
made in the time mentioned by Mr. Miller, amounting to
£156,000,000, is emphasised by making a comparison with the
savings effected in the United Kingdom in normal times.
It is estimated that the savings of the United Kingdom
amount from £100,000,000 to £130,000,000 per annum, and that
they average per person £2/10/- or £3 a year. This is based on
the presumption that the annual average of the income or
earnings of the population of 46,000,000 is about £35 for each
person (1914), including women and children. (It is admitted
that these figures are highly excessive, as the assessment of
the death duties does not confirm so high an estimate. But
for the sake of our illustration let it go at that.) We will
take the maximum savings at £3 per inhabitant. This works


out at £138,000,000 for the year. Mr. Miller’s £156,000,000 works
out at £3O per head of the community, and £l3 per head per
annum of savings.
Mr. Miller’s figures claim that the wealth per million of
the people of Australia amounts to £360,000,000. Working out
the wealth of the United Kingdom we find it amounts only
to £326,000,000 per million of the population.
The United Kingdom receives interest in the form of our
products, and we and all the outlying portions of the Empire
contribute to the wealth of the United Kingdom. This con-
sideration will make our alleged savings even more remark-
able.
Probably the amount of British investments abroad before
the war exceeded £3,000,000,000.
Chiozza Money estimated that these investments yielded
an income of £80,000,000 per year to the people living there.
These investments form about one-fifth the value of the pri-
vate property of the United Kingdom. Unless we have to
assume that the securities of these foreign investments have as
a result of the war been lost, we see that Great Britain can
bear with less suffering a debt of greater amount per inhabi-
tant than we can. Undoubtedly many of these securities during
the war have been pawned; indeed, it is likely that as a result
of this war the United States will be the chief pawnbroker, as
she will, if the war is continued and she carries out her ship-
building proposals, become the greatest mercantile marine
nation, as the number of our ships decrease so her strength
proportionately grows. So far America has done all the pro-
mising financially and Australia has done more than any other
belligerent nation. America, if she spent £7,000,000,000 for war or
military purposes, would not spend as much as .we are committed
to spend if the war endede to-morrow. A £40,000,000 loan in
Australia equals a United States loan of £800,000,000.
We have always been told that we are more wealthy than
are our cousins over the seas; but in arriving at this conclusion
our optimists ignore our liabilities. In estimating these total
liabilities as they will be in August next we cannot accept
Mr. Watt’s figures of £233,000,000 as being correct. The mea-
sure of our contribution to the war is not the measure of the
funded amount of our debt, but it is the measure of our total
commitments that must 'be taken into consideration, and we


are committed to the payment of war pensions which will
largely exceed the amount of our old age and invalid pensions.
We are committed to the repatriation of our soldiers, and if we
capitalise these annual liabilities we shall certainly be committed
to pay the interest on a sum exceeding £150,000,000. But let us
take it to be £82,000,000. Added to Mr. Watt’s expenditure we
see clearly that our war debt must exceed at least £315,000,000,
or three times the amount of the £105,000,000 that has' been
converted into loans, and on which Mr. Miller bases his pro
rata contribution of the people of the Commonwealth. That
the sum of £315,000,000 is an under-estimate must be apparent
to most superficial inquirers. Suppose we send over the seas
315,000 men, and that the average time of service of the men
so sent amounted to 1000 days each, it is certain that every
man costs on an average at least £1 per day (30/- would not
cover it), including the cost of training, outfit, food, clothing,
transport, guns, hospitals, munitions, pensions, repatriation, the
dead weight of officialdom, the non-combatants who remain at
home —three hundred and fifteen thousand men at an average
cost of £1 per day for an average 1000 days, viz., £315,000,000.
Mr. Miller’s statement “that we had only passed our first
shilling; to be exact, what Australia had contributed of her
wealth amounted to 1/2 in the £,” is childishly absurd.
Certainly Mr. Miller, as a banker in estimating the financial
position of any of his bank’s clients who required further ad-
vances, would take the whole of his clients’ total commitments
into consideration and not merely those for which he had given
negotiable instruments of security and instruments of credit.
Mr. Miller’s 1/2 in the £ as the alleged contribution of Aus-
tralia to the war makes us appear 66 PER CENT. LESS
FINANCIALLY SELF-SACRIFICING THAN OUR ACTUAL
COMMITMENTS JUSTIFY. We say, “TO BE EXACT,” and
on Mr. Watt’s figures, that the people of Australia having
spent and been committed to spend by August next the sum
of £233,000,000, have contributed 2/6 in the £. If, however, we
take into consideration our total commitments they will amount
to 3/6 in the £, and that is taking Mr. Miller’s estimate of
£1,800,000,000, which is absolutely absurd.
Mr. Watt has apparently understood Mr. Knibbs’s figures
better than has Mr. Miller, as he has apparently deducted the
£150,000,000 or £200,000,000 which represents assets in Australia


which are owned by non-residents of Australia —just one of
those little trifles one would expect an expert to miss.
In the “Sydney Morning Herald” there appears a state-
ment made by Mr. Watt to the effect that the wealth of Aus-
tralia is £1,600,000,000, in which case our contributions will
amount to 4/- in the £. However, if we reduce the estimated
wealth of Australia to normal figures and values, it must be
5/- in the £.
Mr. Watt, the Commonwealth Treasurer, states: “By the
time the present loan closes in August, Australia will have
spent £233,000,000 on naval and military operations. Of this
only £105,000,000 has been raised by loans.”
That statement means that out of every £233 already spent
and to be spent by August next, £lO5 has been funded. But
the people of the Commonwealth are in exactly the same
position towards the amount of the debt that has yet to be
converted into loans as to the amount that has. It is only the
personnel of our creditors that has changed by the funding of
the debt, and it is the people of the Commonwealth, not the
war bondholders, who pay the interest on that debt. And in
the last resort it should not matter whether the nation has to
pay the interest to this or that institution or individual, but
as a matter of fact, owing to the unwise action of our Com-
monwealth and State Treasurers, it does matter. We shall
see later on when we come to examine the earnings and advan-
tages of the wealthy contributors to the war loan what they
gain at the expense of the public.
Mr. Watt told us.that in Australia only one in fifty had
subscribed to the war loan. How can he possibly know and
arrive at such a result? Does he count the amount contri-
buted by the Mutual Provident Society as one contribution, and
does he place the credit to Mr. Meeks only?
HUGHES'S MAXIMUM CLAIMED AS THE MINIMUM.
The M.P.S. which has put £2,000,000 into the war funds is
now charging on all renewed and matured mortgages 6 per cent,
instead of the previous 5 per cent.; small encumbered landlords
now pay Mr. Hughes’s maximum, which becomes the minimum,
the 1 per cent, extra, and will be passed on to the tenants, and
if they are not able to pass it on, well, it’s big bug swallow
little bug; and if rents are not increased their fall to something
nearer a rational rate will be prevented-


THE ART OF FOULING ONE’S OWN NEST.
WE ARE USED TO POLITICIANS FOR T/HE SAKE
OF EFFECT FOULING OUR STATES’ NESTS AND
UNDERSTATING OR OVERSTATING FACTS AND
FIGURES; BUT WE OUGHT NOT, AND WE WILL
NOT, PERMIT FINANCIAL EXPERTS TIO LIE TO
THE PUBLIC AS TO THE FINANCIAL SACRIFICES AUS-
TRALIA IS MAKING.
Mr. Watt tells us that only two per cent, of the population
has contributed to war loans. Let us assume that 8 per cent,
will subscribe to the war loans yet to be raised. What will it
mean? Does it not mean that 92 per cent, of the people of the
Commonwealth will have to earn an amount equal to the whole
of the taxation which the whole of the people of Australia were
paying to the Commonwealth Government in the year before
the war? And we can, forsooth, do all this on the assurance of
Mr. Governor Denison Miller “WITHOUT FEELING THE
PINCH.”
Have any of our financial experts ever calculated what
the converse of the law of compound interest really means,
or have they always been in the fortunate position of not re-
quiring to know what it DOES MEAN? Let Mr. Miller get
some of his smart men to work it out for him. Eighty million
pounds a year for another seven years would totally wipe out
the private wealth of the Commonwealth, as an ever-increasing
amount of capital would be withdrawn from production. More-
over, ten years of expenditure with interest added does not
mean merely £800,000,000. Have these gentry forgotten the
horrible warnings uttered whenever they raised for political
purposes the cry of capital leaving the country because of the
wickedness of Trades Unionises? Credit would cease, and it is
on credit that all belligerent countries wage war after the first
year or two. Even now we are not raising war loans as they
were raised in the early stages of the war. Our
employees who are contributing on time-payment terms really
represent the truth, as it is eventually to ALL THE WAR
LOANS which on the face appear to be altogether different.


♦
“JUST OPPOSITE TO , WHAT THOU JUSTLY SEEM ST.”
HYPOCRITE.
“O Serpent heart, hid with a flow’ring face, ,
Did ever dragon keep so fair a face?
Beautiful tyrant, fiend angelical,
Dove feathered raven, wolfish ravening lamb,
Despised substance of divinest show,
Just opposite to what thou justly se.emst.”
There seems to be some vague idea that the investor in war
bonds is necessarily a patriot WHO PAYS FOR THE WAR.
As a matter of fact, in many cases the converse is the case,
and the investor is not a patriot but a Shylock. These rich
patriots in all belligerent countries increase their demands,
raise the interest rate at which they are prepared to remain,
or to become patriots just in proportion as the difficulties and
the agony of the people increase. Moreover the greater the
advantage that section of the community gains the greater will
be the disabilities of the other sections of the community.
“HIS MOUTH IS ALMOST FULL OF MUCK, YET STILL
HE GAPES FOR MORE”
THE PATRIOTISM OF THE WEALTHY MAN WHO
WILL NOT INVEST IN A PATRIOTIC WAR LOAN UNLESS
HE SECURES AN ADVANTAGE OVER THE REST OF THE
COMMUNITY, WHICH MEANS AN ENORMOUS DEPLE-
TION OF THE REVENUE OF THE COUNTRY, HAS BEEN
WELL DESCRIBED IN THE FEW PITHY WORDS, “PAT-
RIOTISM IS THE LAST RESORT OF THE SCOUNDREL.”
WE ARE DETERMINED NOT TO ALLOW SHYLOCKS TO
POSE AS PATRIOTS.
Our investigation will show that apart from the Income
Tax which is being remitted to these men, there must be an
enormous amount of increased direct taxation unless we resort
TO THE EXPROPRIATION OF THE £156,000,000 WHICH HAS
BEEN LOOTED FROM THE PEOPLE HERE AND IN ENG-
LAND BY THE MEN WHO HAVE TAKEN ADVANTAGE
OF THE POOR PEOPLE BY INCREASING THE PRICE OF
THEIR COMMODITIES DURING WAR TIME.
Any increased taxation must come out of direct taxation.
Our Customs taxation is already so high that it will bear very


little more without reaching the point of “DIMINISHING RE-
TURNS.” Any further increase would defeat the object of
obtaining more revenue.
The investor of £IOO,OOO in the war loan has the advantage
of an exemption from both State and Federal Income Taxa-
tion if he invests at 4| per cent. Those who now invest at
5 per cent, are exempted from State, but not from Federal,
Income Taxation. /
It is not only on the amount invested that the State and
the Commonwealth loses, but on the whole of the income of the
wealthy investor, who, after the deduction, pays the reduced
rate of income if the transaction reduces the income below the
5/- in the pound. It is not in the subscribed amounts only
that the State loses, but on the remaining income the rates
will be reduced.
GREASING THE FAT SOW—THE SAME OLD GAME.
If £IOO,OOO is invested in gilt-edged securities at 6 per cent,
the investor would receive £6OOO, out of which he would have
to pay at least £1250 to the Commonwealth and £364 to the
State. His £6OOO would, by State and Federal taxation, be
reduced to a net earning of £4386. Immediately, however, he
changes that investment of £IOO,OOO into the loan fund at
4| per cent., free from State and Federal taxation, he secures
£4500 net. His investment produces a better return, but the
Commonwealth and State loses £I6OO, and he further escapes
any further income tax that may be imposed. But no man
will invest £IOO,OOO unless he has other investments or in-
comes, and as the income tax is progressive our investor will
gain a larger remission of taxation than we have calculated,
and he would probably be paying the 5/- per £1 instead of the
sum we have calculated, in which case the loss of taxes will
largely exceed the amount we have here shown. Probably
those gentlemen who are amassing fortunes out of our mis-
fortunes' may yet declare as did Clive, “THAT HE WAS
AMAZED AT HIS OWN MODERATION.”
The following is a comparison between the United Kingdom
war debt as it stood in 1914 and its incidence to the people
of the United Kingdom as compared • with the incidence of
our war debt to our people as it will stand in August, 1919:


The public debt of the United Kingdom reached its lowest
point since the Boer War in 1914, at which date it stood at
£661,473,765. The rates of interest paid on the United King-
dom debt fell from £3 per centum to £2/15/- per centum in 1888,
and to £2/10/- per centum in 1903. The United Kingdom debt
per inhabitant was £l4/7/-; the estimated population of the
United Kingdom a month before the war wsCs forty-six and one-
third million. The total charges which this carried in the
year 1914, including the cost of the management of the in-
terest and some other items, was in round figures £20,000,000.
These charges work out at 8/9 per inhabitant of the United
Kingdom. Actually this amount must be reduced, because
unlike our war debt, the' United Kingdom debt includes an
amount equivalent in value to the earning capacity of
£150,000,000. That asset is the Suez Canal shares, valued
broadly at £25,000,000, and the earnipgs on these shares often
exceeded fifteen per cent. As we have seen we have only
£2,000,000 assets in our debt. And this asset must be one
decreasing in value. The expenditure on the silos will produce
no interest.
AUSTRALIAN WAR DEBT, AUGUST, 1918.
Taking the amount of our commitments in August next as
£315,000,000, and leaving out any expenditure that may have
been met by taxation (for reasons which we shall show), the
debt works out at £63 per inhabitant of Australia. The interest
on this amount at 5 per cent, works out at 63/- per inhabitant;
nor have we included in this amount the charges of adminis-
tering our war debt, and God only knows what that will
amount to.
Forty-six million people were responsible for the United
Kingdom debt as it stood in 1914. Five million people are
responsible for the Australian debt as it will stand in August,
1918.
THE UNITED KINGDOM, OWING TO ITS OVERSEAS
INVESTMENTS AND EARNINGS, HAS A GREAT OVER-
WHELMINGLY COMPENSATING ADVANTAGE OVER ANY
OF THOSE WHICH WE IN AUSTRALIA ARE ASSUMED
TO HAVE IN MATTERS OF THIS KIND.
If we add to our debt the cost of administration the in-
terest of 63/- per annum will doubtless run into charges of
65/- per inhabitant.


What our debt really means even on the optimistic esti-
mate we have made will be better understood by the following-
figures: £63 per person, man, woman and child in the United
Kingdom would mean an addition of £3,000,000,000 to their
public debt.
) s .
In the case of Austria-Hungary it would amount to
£3,250,000,000;- Germany, £4,290,000,000; Prance, £2,600,000,000;
United States, £6,175,000,000. This gives some idea of the
relative financial sacrifices we are making, but it ignores our
heavy State indebtedness.
And this war burden comes upon us as an entirely new
factor in our economic and social life. The British public debt
in 1688 was only £664,236. Nearly £16,000,000 was added by
the “glorious revolution.” Militarism and Navalism in 230 years
had run that debt up to about £l2 per head in 1914, leaving
out the Suez Canal shares earnings, and giving credit therefore
to the whole amount. Our share in militarism in four years
%
has run it up to £63 per inhabitant of Australia.
SHYLOCKS OR PATRIOTS, WHICH?
We are assured by Mr. Miller that some people have be-
come much more 1 wealthy, notwithstanding the war (should it
not be because of the war?), to the extent of £156,000,000 be-
tween June, 1915, and March 23, 1918.
Now what has become of this £156,000,000? Where is it?
Into what channels has it gone? Who has it? Mr. Miller tells
us most emphatically the war, financially, has been a blessing
to some people. Who are they? His statement assures us
that an increase of wealth amounting to 1/9 in every £1 has
taken place, while incurring, according to his specious wrong
statement, 1/2 in the £ for war expenditure, all we have to do,
taking the former figures for granted, would be to take these
savings brutally extracted from the people and wipe out just
one-half of the estimated war expenditure to August next.
There is a great resemblance between ground rent, or
economic rent, and this war loot. In both cases the community
creates the values, and so we are reminded of what Mr. Glad-
-1 *
stone said on the land question 30 years ago, and quote the
passage as fitting both cases: “I freely own compulsory expro-
priation is a thing which is admissable, and even sound in
principle.”


Mr. Miller knows, and if he does not he ought to know, that
when nations, like individuals, launch out beyond their means
they recklessly discount the future. THERE MUST COME A
SUDDEN ARREST TO SOMEBODY’S INCOME.
It is an axiom in finance, “THAT THE SUFFERINGS OF
THE NATION WHEN TAXATION IS HEAVY ARE THE
SUFFERINGS OF THE POOR; THAT BEYOND NAKED
CONFISCATION BY THE RANSOM OF THEIR PROPERTY
ONLY CAN TAXATION REALLY TOUCH THE RICH.”
We should expropriate this £156,000,000 at a time when we
are faced with declining revenue, Customs and Income Tax.
The redemption of the principal of our further debt is left to
the discretion or convenience of the debtor, and every man,
woman and child living in Australia, as also our unborn child-
ren yet to come into the wor-ld —these are the debtors. And
don’t let us forget our children. We owe this much to our
conscience. In the words of Coleridge, “Can anything be more
dreadful than the thought that an innocent child had inherited
from you a disease or a weakness, the penalty in yourself of
a sin OR WANT OF CAUTION?”
A PROBLEM WHICH THREATENS TO BE AS SERIOUS
AS LANDLORDISM.
What does the war loan mean? Moneys are placed in the
hands of the Government by contributors to the war loan be-
cause they believe that future Governments will be able to
repay them and present Governments to pay them interest.
Governments do not pay either interest or repay loans out
of existing accumulated wealth. It is pn the credit of the
Government which is BASED SOLELY ON THE PRESENT
AND FUTURE EARNINGS OF LABOR. Our war loan then
represents promissory notes drawn on the wages to be earned
by the people of Australia.
WAR CHARGES PAID OUT OF WAGES.
This great economic truth, “THAT WAR CHARGES ARE
PAID OUT OF WAGES,” is endorsed by Thorold Rogers, and
as we shall see later, by Mr. Porter in his “Progress of the
People.”
The economic slavery of the British people for many years
after the end of the Napoleonic wars bears unqualified testi-
mony to the proof of this contention.


And here let us call to witness the leader of the “Daily
Telegraph,” published on February 22, 1918: “The man who
lends steadily for war purposes will inevitably place his neigh-
bor who does not do so at a serious disadvantage.” Let us
carry this argument to its logical conclusion by adding that
not only the neighbor who has money to invest and does not
do so, but all the people, men, women and children, who have
nothing to invest, are placed “at a serious disadvantage.”
Mr. Miller’s presentment of facts are as deceptive as are
his figures. THE WAR CHARGES WILL NOT BE PAID OUT
OF THE ACCUMULATED WEALTH OR THE SURPLUS
EARNINGS WHICH HAVE FALLEN INTO THE MAWS OF
A SMALL SECTION OF OUR PEOPLE. (They may advance
some portion.) The £156,000,000 which they have robbed from
the public should be taken to ease the nation’s burden. As a
matter of fact, war charges will be paid out of the future
earnings of labor, using that word in the broadest sense
possible.
We shall have to find an amount equal to this £156,000,000
without allowing for any future expenditure which the war will
entail. The war charges could be met at one-half the cost of
suffering “without feeling the pinch” if these savings were
confiscated for military and naval purposes, and in view of
the very limited number of the people into whose hands these
savings have fallen, it would not be so difficult to do as is
generally imagined. If Mr. Watt really desires to find out
where these savings are this inquiry will assist him. Very
little of this amount has gone into the Savings Banks of the
States of the Commonwealth. The workers are certainly not
getting any of it, nor have they received any of it. Many of
them are losing the chattels which they possessed before
June, 1915.
An investigation of the deposits placed during the war in
all our Savings Banks reveals the fact that these deposits per
depositor are not increasing as rapidly since the war as they
did before the war. Evidently, then, the thrifty classes repre-
sented by the Savings Banks are not getting it. It is usual
to take Savings Banks deposits as an indication of the diffu-
sion of wealth, and as a barometer which records the general
increase or decrease in the prosperity of the people.


Between 1915 and 1917 we find matters growing even
worse. While deposits per depositor amounted to £47/1/. in
1915, they averaged £46/16/3 in 1917, a decrease per depositor
of 4/9.
Between 1912 and 1914 the deposits in the Savings Banks
of the States, including those of the Commonwealth Bank,
increased by £372,492; that is to say, during the two years
before the war the increase was at the rate of 21/- per deposi-
tor. During the first two years of the war the increase in
total deposits was £311,961; the increase per depositor was only
9/2. Two items should be remembered. The single soldiers left
some of their wages to be placed to their credit, and, again,
many poor people have drawn their last penny out to send a
few pounds to their soldier boys. We know it, for we have
dune it.
WHAT A SWAG IT IS!
Let us track this stolen loot as a policeman would track
the swag of a burglar. What a big swag it is we shall see.
This sum means an average increase of £3O per inhabitant of
the Commonwealth, or £l2O for every family of four. Have
you got it? Has your family got it? How many families in
the Commonwealth increased their wealth, their savings,
by £l2O between June, 1915, and March, 1918? And we must
remember that all this increase in wealth has taken place in
the private wealth of Australia, and at a time when the value
of our public works could certainly not be increased, in view
of the fact that the rates of interest incurred in their con-
struction are rising with every loan which matures, and which
has to be converted and is being converted at higher rates
of interest. And when we remember the criticism of the “In-
vestors’ Review” and other British papers in the past, we can
imagine what their criticism will be when future loans are.
required and Australia’s true financial position as a result of
this war stands revealed to the world.
Our expenditure this year—l9lB—will be £97,000,000; but
it is not only monetary losses that we have to consider in
counting the cost and forecasting the effect of this war on.
our future. We must not forget in 1914, when we were free
of this war debt, Australian manhood was probably at its very
best. All accounts of the deeds of our boys at the Front prove
that they were some carats better than the average fighter.


At the commencement of the Civil War of America the
Americans were at their very best, so Hayes, the Sociologist,
tells us in the very latest text on Sociology. And America
has had to make up for the loss of the hundreds of thou-
sands who went down in that fratricidal struggle by the
immigration of people “largely from the beaten races of
Europe.” What America might have been had she been able
to people her Western States by the descendants of these men
of Anglo-Saxon and Irish nationalities, what she has lost by
not being able to do so can only be imagined by the thoughtful
student of American history.
Has Mr. Miller taken this loss into consideration in arriv-
ing at the conclusion that we can continue spending on the
war £80,000,000 per annum -for years to come, including the
growing number in the loss of men, “without feeling the
pinch”?
We shall certainly lose at least 100,000 (probably double
that number) of our very best in killed and totally disabled,
leaving out of consideration those who through sickness and
other causes will be semi-incapacitated. That loss represents
20,000 to every 1,000,000 of our population. The United States
would have to lose close upon two million men in killed and totally
incapacitated before her loss would equal that sustained by Aus-
tralia. But back to our question. Where is this loot? Who
reaps the difference between the prices paid for Australian-
produced foods before the war and during the war, or, let us
say, between Mr. Miller’s dates, June 30, 1915, and March, 1918?
Who is getting the difference of the fixed prices of metals,
especially our rare metals, and the prices charged to the Im-
perial Government? Who loots the difference between the
fixed price of rabbit skins and the cost of the material which
is charged to the British manufacturers of military clothing
after they have been exported to America and manipulated
there? Who has got it all? Let us see if Mr. Palmer, the
stock and share broker, can assist us in our inquiry.
LORD, HOW THESE POOR PATRIOTS SUFFER!
In Mr. Palmer’s report, compiled to March 20, three days
before Mr. Miller’s statement, the Palmers tell us that “at no
time since the commencement of hostilities has money been
as plentiful as now.” Ye gods! and this after £105,000,000 has


been funded. Referring to the Sixth War Loan in the Febru-
ary report we read: ‘‘The new departure is really a conces-
sion to people of limited means.” In view of the incidence of
the terms of the war loan as we have investigated them, the
Palmers must have hides which it would be impossible to
pierce with an Italian stiletto.
The Pcilmers continue: ‘‘There are no small men in Aus-
tralia.” Also they tell us ‘‘lt is the men of limited means who
possess the influence.” And they continue to tell us in their
March report that ‘‘the best investments are expected to hold
their own; business in mining company shares continues very
good.”
In the February report we read: ‘‘This month business in
investment stock has been steady, prices are steadily HIGHER
ALL ROUND,” and this notwithstanding all the fuss that is
made about war taxation.
In their March report we read: ‘‘Steam shares. —There has
been a rush for three of these on account of amalgamation
rumors.” Evidently merging gives higher returns to the merg-
ers whatever it may do to the people, for the Palmers con-
tinue: ‘‘The merging would doubtless be advantageous to the
company; the yield on present prices is £5/15/- per centum,
and the chances of AUGMENTED DISTRIBUTION ARE EX-
CELLENT.”
In the January report we read: ‘‘The year has opened with
a very strong demand FOR ALL CLASSES OF INVEST-
MENTS.”
Next comes the gem of all, for the Pawners tell us, ‘‘The
reason for so much buying is not difficult to discover; it lies
in the fact that Australia’s main articles of export are the
raw products of the land, mines and flocks. RECORD PRICES
FOR METALS, WOOL AND WHEAT have caused widespread
prosperity (mark the word “widespread” please) in the Com-
monwealth. But, above all, we have to thank the Imperial
Government for advancing us practically the full value of our
products, even though but a small portion can be shipped for
a long time to come.”
The Palmers provide us with other gems which indicate
the wretched condition to which the war has brought these


patriots. “GOLDSBOROUGH, MORT-IT IS NOT UNREA-
SONABLE TO EXPECT A GOOD INCREASE IN THE DIVI-
DEND OR ELSE AN ISSUE OF BONUS SHARES, TO BE
ANNOUNCED WITHIN A FEW MONTHS.” “TOBACCO IM-
PROVED SIXPENCE. IT IS THOUGHT THAT THE PRICE
WILL IMPROVE AGAIN WHEN ONCE THESE LONDON
DELIVERIES ARE DISPOSED OF.” (So all the moneys are
not going into war loans, but to purchase fresh imported scrip.)
“AFTER THE WAR THESE SHOULD BE MORE VALUABLE,
AND A RESUMPTION OF OCCASIONAL ISSUES OF BONUS
SHARES. . . . BURNS, PHILP AND CO.—THERE HAS
BEEN AN IMPRESSION FOR SOME TIME PAST THAT
THERE WILL BE AN AUGMENTED DIVIDEND AT THE
FORTHCOMING MEETING ” And again, “PRICES
HAVE RISEN; WE LOOK FOR YET HIGHER PRICES, ETC.,
ETC GOODLET AND SMITH had rather an astonishing
rise from 15/6 to 17/6. The present return can be looked upon
as the medium. . . . PAUL AND GRAY presented another ex-
cellent report, declaring 15 per cent. . . . Various good divi-
dends come due this month. Yields are excellent.”
And so the Palmers go on: “This rose—that improved—the
articles will be altered to enable the company to pay higher
dividends.”
We recall Hood’s:
“Oh! God, that men should make bread so dear,
And hold flesh and blood so cheap.”
“WHEAT —the first pool in 1915-16 is certain to return in
six or seven months a profit from 11| to 12 per cent.”
“WHEAT—the latest pool, 1917-18: this scrip is practically
guaranteed from loss, whereas his profit, though deferred, may
be anything from nothing to 200 per cent, or more.”
WHALES ON LAND.
And so these patriots gamble with the people’s food and
with loaded dice. “Heads we win and tails you lose.” These
are the whales.
“The great one eats up the little ones a-plays
and tumbles, driving the poor fry before him, and at last de-
vours them, all at a mouthful. Such whales have I heard on


the land who never leave gaping till they’ve swallowed the
whole parish, church, steeple, bells and all.”—Shakespeare.
We have seen what the Palmers are handling. Evidently
these and others of that ilk have never understood, and never
♦
could understand, “the sacramental tie of all public relations.”
Mr. Watt is looking for money. He tells us that he will
commandeer it if it is not voluntarily subscribed. We would
advise him to turn his attention to the investments, to the
bonus shares, to the watered stock. And what about the
£56,000,000 net increase that Mr. Watt himself informs us is
lying in the banks? Not the Savings Banks, mark you; we
have seen that it is not there.
This predatory class has taken it from our pockets, and
much of it is being converted into fresh instruments of torture.
These people are placing fresh burdens on the workers of
Australia. Their increased wealth has been derived from us
in the form of “record prices for wool, meat, etc.” The in-
* m
creased prices placed upon us and upon our own Australian
production, and upon the land which is being re-purchased
and resumed at prices which include not only the unearned
increment, but also a large anticipated unearned > increment,
Going into larger dividends, greater interest, annual bonus
shares, faked balance sheets, hiding true profits; going into
the pockets of men here and their confederates in other coun-
tries who stand between our real producers and the British
Government.
STRONGER CHAINS AND ECONOMIC SLAVERY.
It is true, as the Palmers tell us, that the British people
through its Government has advanced to Australia many mil-
lions of pounds, but these millions are included in the
£156,000,000, and have not come to the people of Australia;
and if a section has it at such times as these, that section must
be compelled to hold it only in trust for the people of Aus-
tralia in this time of financial stress. Our cousins across the
seas have no intention that this sum should be used in se-
curing the future economic slavery of the workers of Australia.


COMMONWEALTH AND STATE DEBTS.
So far we have dealt with our unproductive debt only.
What the war debt, added to the States and Commonwealth
debts, will mean to Australia the following figures will show:
The total value of Australia’s production of wool,
meat (exported), and gold (exported) in the
first year of Federation, 1901, was about .... £32,000,000
But, as this was a bad year for Australia, let us
take the year before Federation. The total
value in that year (1899) was less than £33,000,000
In the latter year the gold exported was consider-
ably less, and wool exported was greater in
value than in the former year (1901). A large
percentage of the difference in the gold export
was due to a great increase in the production of
. gold in Queensland.
If the war expenditure of Australia ended in
August next (and it cannot end even if peace
came before that date), the total interest
charges on the war debt in 1919, calculated on
the most optimistic basis, would be £15,750,000
The total interest on our States debts at 4 per
cent, would be £16,000,000
The sum total of interest and charges payable in
1919 would be £31,750,000
But our total annual interest and charges bill will
certainly exceed, even if the war ended before
August next £34,000,000
The total debt of Australia, calculated on the most
optimistic basis would be £685,000,000
But much more likely to be £800,000,000, as no re-
turns of private debts are here taken into con-
sideration, nor is the debt of the Common-
wealth, which has been accumulating since
1912, included in this calculation.
From these figures it will be seen that the interest and
charges on the total debt of Australia, apart from charges
of administration, flotation of loans, etc-, will, in 1919, exceed
in amount the total value of all Australian production of
wool, meat (exported) and gold (exported) in the first year


of the Commonwealth, or in the last year before Federation.
Notwithstanding - all the advantages which an internal debt has
over an external debt, th,e whole interest and charges must be paid
to the Australian bondholder as well as to the oversea creditor
out of exported production—the bondholder cannot buy our
products. We must first secure the means wherewith to pay
our internal creditors from overseas. Leaving out of con-
sideration the Commonwealth ships (a decreasing asset), our
war debt will be entirely unproductive, and our children and
children’s children will curse the generation in which we are
living if we do not pay some portion of our debt out of
the war prosperity which falls to the landlord and war profit-
eers.
DEARER FREIGHTS AND HIGHER FARES.
The States debts are only productive to an extent of
perhaps ninety per cent., certainly not more. Taking this into
consideration the 4 per cent., at which we have calculated
the burden of the States debts is not excessive, apart from the
further higher rates of interest on conversions. The rate of
interest on the States debts has been steadily rising since
1912. The rise been accelerated by the war, and will be
still more accelerated by our less favorable financial position
when the war terminates. The average interest paid on the
States debts for all States was £3/13/11 per centum, and
£3/14/- per centum for New South Wales, 1915. At the
end of 1916 it stood at 3.71 per cent., and there is not likely
to be any borrowing for a long time to come at less than 41
per cent., if not at the rates much higher. The average interest
per inhabitant on the States debts will amount to
at least £2/15/- within the present year, which, added to the
65/- per head of the population for the war interest, will make
the total charges and costs of administration at the very
lowest possible estimate £6 per annum per inhabitant.
The debt per head of the States’ debts will exceed £75,
possibly £BO before this year is over.
The debt per head incurred for the war to August next
will exceed £65 per head —TOTAL, £l4O.
This equals a public debt for the United Kingdom of
£7,000,000,000. But we are quite sure that £l6O will be nearer
the mark. , *


The Commonwealth revenue per head was £6/4/9 in 1916.
The total net revenue for that year could not have exceeded
£25,500,000 for alb Commonwealth purposes in the second year
of the war.
The total value of all wool exported from the Com-
monwealth averages per annum £25,000,000*
Meat (say) • , 2,500,000
Sheep skins (say) 1,500,000
Australia’s total production of gold for gold (for
1917) 7,000,000
Total £36,000,000
All this production is required to pay the combined Com-
monwealth and States’ debts. If it be said much of this will
be paid to the bondholder, then it only accentuates our con-
tention that that section will gain in proportion as the other
section of the community must suffer.
It may be asked, “Why have you left out of consideration
the war taxes which have been raised during the war?” First,
because we are losing a large amount of taxation through the
asininity of our State and Commonwealth Treasurers and the
want of patriotism of our wealthy men, as we have to surrender
a large amount of income tax. Secondly, because the falling off
in Customs taxation due to restricted shipping will this year
amount to nearly £2,000,000. Thirdly, because we are spend-
ing out of loan funds for the construction of Commonwealth
public works, which in the first twelve years of Federation were
paid out of revenue. These considerations, added to the fact
that our Federal civil servants are occupied in buildings for
which we have to pay rent or interest before they can work
in buildings belonging to the Commonwealth free of rent.
These factors combined more than outweight any advan-
tages we have received from war taxation. Moreover, Palmers’
report shows that the whole of the war taxation has not affected
the dividends or investments of the looters of the £156,000,000.
THE DIFFUSION OF WEALTH HUMBUG.
It is not true that the wealth of Australia is well distri-
buted. It is only relatively true in comparison with some other
countries. And how little there lies between the workers of
the country and starvation is evidenced by the last strike and
by periods of sickness and unemployment.


Forty years ago it could be truthfully said of Australia:
THERE IS NOT MUCH LUXURY, BUT THERE IS ALSO
LITTLE DESTITUTION. Every year the careful student of
our State Year Books could notice the change, as did also the
compilers. In the early days we read about “the vast growth
of the wealth, both of the community as a whole and of the
individuals of which it is composed”; and, again, the remark-
able condition of progress, the equal of which it would be in
vain to look for in other countries. Later all this optimism
as to diffusion of wealth disappears, and we read in later Year
Books: “It is obvious that an increase in ratio of wealth
accumulation, and an increasing distribution of wealth, are
consistent with a dearth of employment amongst a class of the
community. It is a sound sentiment that a condition of
regular employment of the whole population WILLING TO
WORK (the caps, are ours) is more conducive to real
prosperity than a condition which, while affording increased
opportunities of saving to a proportion of the community,
leaves a not inconsiderable section uncertain as to their means
of support during a large part of the year.” Later still we
read: “The condition of affairs to which allusion has been
made is one of the inconsistencies of modern progress, by no
means peculiar to Australia, AND TO REMEDY IT IS PER-
HAPS THE CHIEF AIM OF MODERN SOCIAL LEGISLA-
TION.” But we have no space to follow this drift. There it
is, and the governing authorities are making matters worse
and not better. What are you going to do about it?
Notwithstanding all the glamor of bank deposits and the
claim that Australia is the paradise of the working classes,
for years past a strong drift has set in tending to an over-
growing inequality in the diffusion of wealth. This drift was
recognised by one of our official statisticians over twenty years
ago, when he wrote in one of our official Year Books, “A
MORE RAPID INCREASE OF WEALTH THAN THE AVER-
AGE ON THE PART OF ONE OF THE COMMUNITY IM-
PLIES AN INCREASE OF POVERTY IN THE LOT OF THE
REMAINDER.” —(Coghlan.) We have not space to show how
this drift has grown year by year, even during the years of
our alleged prosperity. Our investigation proves that this al-
ready dangerous, existing feature in our social life is being
automatically and almost without any notice immensely inten-
sified.


What will be the effect of war on the Australian worker?
The loss in. production of our lost stalwart men? Who pays
for the war? Who profits by the war? Well, let us study
the past to help us interpret the present and to make the way
smooth (or smoother) for the future. The first axiom of all
philosophy is, ‘What has happened may happen again.” Well,
what DID happen after other wars?
Beyond question, during the great Napoleonic wars, the
British debt grew with frightful rapidity, AND WEALTH
GREW WITH IT. But the wealth was very unequally distri-
buted —(there is no mystery about it, Mr. Watt) —was the
share of very few persons. Mr. Porter has shown in his “Pro-
gress of the People” “that the cost of that great struggle, as
far as England was concerned, was borne by those who lived
on* wages, or were engaged in genuine industrial callings.”
BUT THE CRITICISM OP ALL THOSE WHO HAD TO PAY
WENT UNHEEDED. Our best interpreter of the economic
history of Great Britain tells us that “during the Napoleonic
wars landlords and war contractors assumed a scale of , expen-
sive living.” Now, as then, there was a class who profited by
the war, and who invested their profits in a most lucrative
manner, also in war bonds, and they left their trail behind
them. The people did not profit by the war. THEY WERE
CRYING FOR BREAD, AND CONTINUED TO CRY FOR
BREAD FOR THIRTY YEARS, MANY OF THEM EVEN UN-
TIL THIS WAR, WHEN FOR THE ' FIRST TIME THE
UNITED KINGDOM GOVERNMENT WAS COMPELLED TO
PROVIDE SUFFICIENT FOOD FOR THE PEOPLE—as
Mr. Miller tells us, “as an insurance of the WEALTH of the
country.”
Our history teaches us that “during war time ‘doubled
rents were accompanied by prices of produce.’ and
the foundation was laid for a class closely allied to the land-
owning classes, whose unearned increment savings found a
profitable investment through fostering wars and meddlesome
interference abroad.” It is the unearned increment which chiefly
seeks an investment in Imperial ambitious designs; and, more-
over, during the period referred to, the savings of the land-
owners were invested in funds highly lucrative to the fund-
holders, but through the medium of which a permanent loss is
inflicted even unto this present day. As an illustration: the


£18,000,000 loan of April, 1797, 3 per cent, consols was raised at
£125, and an annuity of 6/6 for 14 years. But to give the land-
owners, war contractors, and other profiteers all the benefits
it was necessary to wring the money (most of which was
spent in foreign countries) from the poor by taxation of every
description. Macaulay, referring to this period, said that such
was the ingenuity displayed in raising money by Pitt that “any
new or untried tax was almost impossible of suggestion.” But
notwithstanding all this, the landowners and other profiteers
and their satellites were reaping immediate, tangible results,
and drawing promissory notes on prosperity, and became so
powerful that they were able to impose food duties and corn
laws which, for many long years, caused suffering and want to
the nation. In old English histories there is a cartoon repre-
senting the Premier alarming the cook by popping his head
out of the salt-box, with the unexpected salutation, “How do
you do, cooky?” She cries out in consternation, “Curse the
fellow; how he has frightened me! I think in my heart he is
getting in everywhere. Who the deuce would have thought of
finding him in the salt-box?” >
How unjustly the taxes pressed upon the poor is realised
when you read the list of articles taxed. But barbarous as it
all seems to us now, this war will lead us into the same un-
happy condition. Taxes were imposed on corn, flour, seeds,
sugar, raisins, pepper and all spices, tea, coffee,
wines, spirits, malt, hops, ale and beer, game, sweets, salt,
vinegar, butter, cheese, fish, soup, starch, candles, coal, cinders,
coke, Fuller’s earth, pipeclay, tobacco and snuff, leather, furs,
cork, paper, bank-notes, deeds, vellum and parchment, glass
windows, houses, lead, wood, slate, stone, bottles, bricks, tiles,
and so on. This enumeration constitutes only a part of the
goods taxed, for distinct taxes were paid by trade, auctioneers,
coachmakers, horse-dealers, pedlars, bachelors, and male and
female servants.
In tracing the history of the English public debt, we find
its commencement almost synchronises with the termination
or the abolition of the Feudal system. The Feudal system was
swept away in England in 1656 by an Act which was re-
enacted by the Convention Parliament after the Restoration in
l§6o. Unfortunately the good contained in older systems is


generally swept away with the evils that are apparent, and so
the great moral truth which Feudal land tentures recognised
was also swept away when the undoubted oppressions which
the lord or baron imposed upon the serfs were swept away.
The serf paid to the lord, the lord in one form or another to
the King, the King, as overlord, represented the nation. This
fact, however, “was conveniently forgotten by Kings and their
advisers when in furtherance of ambitious schemes involving
aggressive wars, they found it convenient to tax the landless
in direct payment of money, and by the imposition of pound-
age dues, which were really the commencement of customs
exactions.”
Feudalism, whatever its admitted faults, recognised through
its system of land tenure what someone has called “the sacra-
mental tie of all public relations,” to an extent from which we
are to-day very far removed. What it did assure was this:
“That those who were protected in the privilege of the admin-
istration of certain portions of the common heritage of the
people, were compelled to recognise that that possession was
conditional on payment for that privilege to the community.”
Feudal lands were held on payment of special services, and
these payments or services were such that if measured at
present prices, would suffice for the whole of our expenditure
on this war.
SHARE IN THE WAR.
Never in the history of the world Idas a nation had to
bear such an unproductive debt, amounting to £63 per head,
and likely to amount to £BO or £9O per head of the population
of Australia.
Never has a nation had an unproductive debt approaching
to £l4O or £l6O per head, only 45 per cent, df which is pro-
ductive and without any assets worth considering. The United
Kingdom would have to spend £6,333,000,000 before her national
debt would equal that of Australia, even adding that amount
to her pre-war national debt. We are told by our historians
“That the rich in the latest stages of national progress are
continually getting richer and the poor poorer.” This has been
remarked in every age from Solon to Gladstone, and the fall
of Home h&s beep traced to the long-continued operations of


this pernicious tendency. Our philosophers have told us that
the greatest benefactors are those who can devise means to
prevent this pernicious tendency. Our Labor men must adopt
the attitude embodied in the sentence taken from Ruskin in
his “Principles of Political Economy”: “WHEREAS IT HAS
LONG BEEN KNOWN AND DECLARED THAT THE POOR
HAVE NO RIGHT TO THE PROPERTY OF THE RICH, I
WISH IT ALSO TO BE KNOWN AND DECLARED THAT
THE RICH HAVE NO RIGHT TO THE PROPERTY OF THE
POOR.”
“Thou shalt not steal, neither shalt thou be stolen from.”
—'Thomas Carlyle.
THE DANGER OF TRUSTS, COMBINES, Etc.
7 7
During the war the trusts haye consolidated their forces,
and if groups of nations which are facing each other should
unfortunately indulge in an after-war, an economic trade war,
during times of so-called peace, the lot of the workers of all
nations would be worse than ever, as under the plea of
economic necessity international groups will fight international
groups, and the combines will be more extensive than ever,
and we shall be robbed by such wars, even more effectually
than by wars sustained by military arms.
OUR PUBLIC DEBT.
“Am I now doomed to meet thy fatal arm,
Or wilt thou first from life steal every charm,
And bear away each good my soul would guard?”
Never again will we permit the profiteering crowd to con-
tinue their repredations which we have suffered under their
callous, bogus brand of patriotism, when we are once again
enabled to give an articulate expression to our indignation and
disgust.
The lessons the war has taught us are such that we dare
not, when peace returns, allow men to charge our poultry
farmers 5/- per bushel for weevily or mice-infested wheat for
Which they paid to our accommodating officials only as much
for a bag of three bushels; or, to go further afield, never again
dare we permit the British shareholders in Roumanian oil
wells to demand 40/- (compensation for the destruction for
war purposes) for every share having a nominal value of 20/-.


ETl’ll’ 3 1 3 P w ' r » -* 5 ’ a y n
WHAT CONSTITUTES A STATE?
MEN, HIGH-MINDED MEN.
Men who their duties know,
But know their rights, and
*
Knowing dare maintain,
Prevent the long-aimed blow,
And crush the tyrant while they rend the chain.
THESE CONSTITUTE A STATE.
But there are other dangers.
Our forebears have struggled in vain to secure for us
popular rights and liberties against the arbitrary authority of
the Crown. Freedom of speech, freedom of the publication of
Parliamentary debates, freedom from arrests, are privileges
of Parliament, some of which go right away back to the days
of the Lancastrians.
Says Elsynge: “The Commons did often times under Edward
111. discuss and debate among themselves many things con-
cerning the King’s prerogative, yet they were never interrupted
in their consultations, nor received check for the same.” In
1621, the Commons declared, “That every member hath freedom
from all impeachment, imprisonment, or molestation, other than
by censure of the House itself, for or concerning any bill,
speaking, reasoning, or declaring of any matter or matters
touching the Parliament or Parliament business.”
THESE ANCIENT RIGHTS ARE BEING VIOLATED
HERE AND ELSEWHERE. M. TSCHEIDZE SAID TO ONE
OF OUR WAR CORRESPONDENTS IN PETROGRAD: “YOU
ENGLISH ARE SACRIFICING THE LIBERTIES FOR
WHICH YOU PROFESS TO BE FIGHTING. YOU ARE
SURRENDERING FREEDOM OF SPEECH. YOU HAVE
SURRENDERED THE FREEDOM OF THE PRESS. YOU
HAVE ABOLISHED TRIAL BY JURY, AND IN DOING SO
YOU ARE DISHEARTENING ALL THE DEMOCRATS WHO
ARE FIGHTING FOR THOSE LIBERTIES.”
The right of publishing a fair and faithful report of the
debates and proceedings in Parliament, without any authorisa-
tion from either House, was determined in 1868 by the decision
of the Court of Queen’s Bench (Wason v. Walker) that no
action for libel would lie against the proprietor of the “Times”
for so doing. ,


Publicity was one of the most important instruments of
Parliamentary Government before the war, BUT NO LONGER
EXISTS. We cannot, we dare not, allow these encroachments
on our political liberties to continue. We read in May’s Con-
stitution History (Vol. 2, p. 53): “Laws are they not Which
public approbation hath not made so.”
*
What shall it profit us if we shake off the Prussian
Junker and we have to carry the Home-bred Junker on our
shoulders? THEY ARE OF THE SAME CULT. EACH OF
THEM BELONG TO THE CLASS THAT HAS HAD SOCIAL
CONTROL OF THE NATIONS OF EUROPE, and each holds
that “War on the whole is a normal and desirable expression
of human strength and virtue.”
These people are the enemies of the people, and would
make peace w T ith the Prussian Junker, or any other Junker, if
they thought it necessary to do so, in order to retain their many
tribute-levying rights over their own people.
Labor must control these people’s activities. What their
idea of vested interests is, the only vested interests they can
discern and fear, is well illustrated in the leading article of
the “S.M.H.” 18/4/18: “Women in receipt of soldiers’ pay, or
retailers profiting by the advance in the early-purchased
stocks, ‘ALL ARE EQUALLY OBJECTIONABLE.’” Not a
word about the war-hogs, not a word about the vested interests
we have dealt with. Only the poor women and the wicked
retailers.
Was ever such hypocrisy to equal these few lines of the
“S.M. Herald”?
We are not so helpless as would at first sight appear. For
is it not admitted that the people through their Governmental
agencies have the peower to take POSSESSION OF THE
WEALTH OF INDIVIDUAL CITIZENS AND SPEND IT IN
THE INTEREST OF THE MANY?
Taxation should be imposed on lines that lead to the
diffusion of wealth. Hitherto, and as we have seen in this little
study during this war especially, all steps that have been taken
lead to the aggregation of wealth; only a little of the direct war
taxes really sticks at first to the first payees, then it is passed
on, as the dividends we have referred to show clearly.


When such aggregation is allowed to take place through
war, or because of war, it becomes a NATIONAL. CRIME.
As it is our object to see that no nation shall profit by
war, so it must be our object to see that no individual shall
profit'by war. To prevent such an iniquity is to remove one of
the most potent incentives to war. Not to spoil these
Egyptians would be to put a premium on national crime, to
reverse the moral and natural law, to punish virtue and reward
vice. It would create additional scourges for our own and
our children’s backs; it would be establishing the most potent
factor to the inequality of the distribution of wealth that has
ever existed in any country, apart from the curse of private
ownership in land and the bounties of nature stored in mother
earth.
We endure from our own kith and kin that which we would
resent with our last drop of blood if a stranger within our
gates were to attempt to impose upon us.
The Irish revolted against Landlordism because it was
imposed by an oppressor of another race; possibly, also,
because of another religion. Here we are allowing greedy men
to STAND BETWEEN OUR RETURNED SOLDIERS’
FUTURE PROSPECTS.
It the war charges continue mounting up another year they
will become as great a source of evil as is our unrestricted
system of private ownership of land. The area of land within
the borders of Australia is enormous, amounting to 1,903,000,000
acres. About 165,000,000 acres is alienated; 91 per cent, yet
unalienated, or in course of alienation. For twenty-five years
some of our public men have been enquiring* for data as to the
amount which the States have received for these lands. All in
vain; the excuse is that no data can be found to form any
reliable estimate. But why not? The figures would be too
startling to suit the men who have controlled our destinies in
the past. The show would be given away.
It will be quite safe to assume that after allowing for
payments made for resumptions, fo r land granted, for those
lands sold at 6/4 an acre, and for the millions of acres sold
under the bogus auction sales at £1 per acre, the States will
not have received more than £1 per acre for all lands alienated,
and the proceeds have mostly been used as ordinary revenue.


Now if we estimate the net receipts as 165,000,000 acres at 20/-
per acre we shall have £165,000,000, and yet the lands taxable
under the Federal Land Tax are valued at over £200,000,000,
representing- only 14,619 returns. All land values are created
out of public expenditure and social needs. We could have
been debt-free, whereas we are now to be saddled with an
amount which, if the war lasts much longer, will equal the
burden of landlordism without any compensations, except the
assurance of the old peace time loot and the later loot dealt
with herein.
We have sold the Crown lands of Australia at an average
of £1 per acre, and we buy the same lands back (after having
increased their value by the outlay of the £370,000,000 on
railways, tramways, etc.) at £6, £7, £B, £lO, £l5, £2O, £lOO, or
twenty thousand pounds an acre. We make the land values, and
every child we bring into the world, and every immigrant who
arrives,, makes those values. Our money expended on the
security of our labor makes those values, and yet, like lunatics,
we allow them to crush us and our children after us. On
Page 1, notice rents rose 50 per cent, in a few years. Why?
Well, why did Ireland suffer the pangs of hunger in the
midst of her plenty? Why was only the “horrible root” left
to her, although she exported more cereals and cattle than
would have maintained the whole of her people in comfort and
plenty? You know; then be forewarned and get to work before
it is too late. Call your wisest and your best, and prepare for
the great fight. All your advantages are slowly slipping from
you. It is not so easy after war to recover even the political
liberties which have been filched from you, and which you
have been foolishly persuaded to part with under the plea of
necessity.
Tae Worker Print, st Aj*4r-ew's Place, Sydney.






IS YOUR NAME
ON THE ROLL?
-"0 .v,, '■ 1 ■ '<'■} • ,-i 't>-. ■ ■. -i/• : .i .« ■ : ;i
— —— -
POLITICAL POWER IS
ESSENTIAL TO THE
WORKERS
Little, if anything, can be accomplished with the
Exploiters of the Workers in possession of the
\ Political Machine
- ' : 1 "■£ : ■ x i '
%
Every Man and Woman can do
his or her bit to save Australia if
his or her name is on the Roll,
but not unless.
/ ' i ‘ " ' 4 ' -. .. .■
With your Name on the Federal and State Rolls,
you are a Citizen with a Citizen’s Rights
THE FRANCHISE ALONE
DISTINGUISHES THE FREE
MAN FROM THE SLAVE


Labor and the War
Here, we have a little pamphlet de-
fining the position from the standpoint
of such organised Labor as is repre-
sented by Sydney Worker. Xt is full
of vague sensational statements, catch
phrases, and breathless exclamations. It
sticks to the queer old ideas of demo-
gogic journalism—such an idea, for in-
stance, as that the raising wages
does not increase the cost of living. It
easily assumes that no man outside the
Labor movement has decent or avowable
motives for whatever he may do in the
patriotic field. And it again finds it
convenient to ignore the great outstand-
ing truth of this tremendous crisis—the
fact that this is not a capitalistic war
or a class war, but a war forced upon
the free nations, a war of righteousness
against unscrupulous aggression, a war
in which the world’s democracies are
fighting for their existence. If the
Allies were defeated by the Central
European Powers there would be no
more democracy in our time, and all the
legislation that stands In the workers’
interest would become null and void.
Papers like the Worker would be sup-
pressed at the nod of the oppressor.
The pamphlet contains nothing new,
unless it be this new misquotation:—
Oh ! God, xhat men should make bread so dear,
And hold flesh and blood so cheap.
It is so easy to write dogmatically of
high finance for a class of readers who
know nothing about great financial
problems. It is so easy by disingenuous
sophistry to convince a man that your
view is right concerning any subject
that he does not understand. And the
position as to the war is simply this:
That however sincere political differ-
ences may be, they should not be per-
mitted at any point to interfere with the
prosecution of the war on wliich the
future freedom of men in the world en-
tirely depends.
Australia’s Share in the War, and Who is Pay-
ing for It. Issued toy the Executive of the
Labor Party, State of New South Wales. Sjdney,
The Worker. —3d. ■ ■ i
