

AUSTRALIA
in PALESTINE


mm . mm mmmmmmmum. mm..mm
tikmjia ; ]
m ;
2)ALESfaFfE“:
J a






AUSTRALIA IN PALESTINE






GENERAL SIR EDMUND H. ALLENBY, G.C.8., G.C.M.G.


AUSTRALIA
IN PALESTINE
SYDNEY
ANGUS & ROBERTSON LTD
89 CASTLEREAGH STREET
1919


Printed by
W. C. Penfold & Co. Ltd., 183 Pitt Street, Sydney
London Agents: The Oxford University Press


TO THE MEMORY
FALLEN COMRADES




Editors’ Note
HIS book owes its publication to the warm interest
taken in its initiation by a Committee comprised
of the G.0.C., A.1.F., in Egypt; the G.O’s.C.
Anzac and Australian Mounted Divisions and
Brigades, and a number of other senior A.I.F.
officers ; and, later, to the generosity of the many
contributors of paintings, sketches, photographs,
verse and prose.
Australia in Palestine is in no sense intended as a complete picture
of the Australians part in the Great Campaign. It is merely a Soldiers’
Book, produced almost entirely by soldiers in the field under active service
conditions to send to their friends in Australia and abroad. An edition
has also been published for sale to the general public, and any profits
derived from it will go to one of the A.I.F. funds.
Thanks are due to our many contributors, and in particular to
Mr. James Mcßey, the Official British Artist in Palestine, for his fine
portrait of General Allenby (specially drawn for this book) and other
sketches; to Captain Hodgkinson, British Press Officer, for permission to
use many British official photographs; to Mr. Jeapes, British Official
Cinema Photographer, for the loan of many snapshots ; and to Sergeant
E. A. Hodda, A.1.F., who took charge of the business arrangements,
and to whose keen interest and ability our obligation is substantial.
We have also to thank Major N. D. Barton, D. 5.0., 7th A.L.H.
Regiment, and Messrs. H. M. Somer and Sydney Ure Smith for the
valuable assistance they have given as Committee of Publication in
Australia.
H. S. GULLETT ) 1-. j.
CHAS. Barrett 1 Edltors -
David Barker, Art Editor.




CONTENTS
Preface (Lieut.-Gen. Sir H. G. Chauvel)
Fighting for Palestine (H. S. Gullett)
Anthem Bells (“ Gerardy ”) -
Palestine Poppies (Charles Barrett)
Farming in Arcady (H. S. G.)
Standing To (Brentonman)
A Waler’s Story (E. L. D. Husband)
The Horses Stay Behind (“ Trooper Bluegum ”)
One Too Many (“ Anon ”) -
The Light That Failed (“ Sarg ”)
A Night March (“ Aram ”) -
A Gloomy Outlook (“ Aram ”)
Reconciliation (“ Gerardy ”)
Mail Day (“ Wil Cox ”)
A Day Over The Lines (H. Bowden Fletcher)
Mounts and Remounts (“ Acrabah ”) - ■
Concerning Medical Blokes (“ Larrie ”)
The Signal Service (“ Ack-Vic-Ack ”)
Battle Song (“ Gerardy ”)
The Little Bint of Wady Hanein (“ Camp Follower ”)
Algy, Misfit (“ Billzac ”) -
Page
xiii.


Palestine (“Trooper Bluegum”)
The Camel Brigade (“Trooper Bluegum ”)
Resting (“Tralas”) -
The Mukhtar’s Goats (“ 2469 ”)
The Batman (W. M. W.)
Damascus (H. W. D.)
Malaria (“ Koolawarra ”)
Fall Out The 1914 Men (“ Bataggi ”)
Old Horse o’ Mine (T. V. B.)
Concerning Machine Guns (“ Sarg ”)
Delivered ! (“ Gerardy ”)
Page
123


ILLUSTRATIONS
COLOUR
Facing
Page
General Sir Edmund H. H. Allenby, G.C.8.,
G.C.M.G. .... iii.
Jerusalem, from below the Mount of Olives 4
Romani. Mount Royston in the distance - 14
Magdhaba, showing the Wady Bed about
one mile from Turkish buildings - 26
The Road to Jericho - - - 38
The Dead Sea (Sunrise) - - - 42
Australians on the Road to Jerusalem - 50
An Australian Flying Squadron in Palestine 50
PLATES
Australians prior to the fight for Nalin
Anzac Ridge, Gaza-
National Types
Evening amongst the Judean Hills
A Camp in the Desert
Got Him Cold
The End of the Scrap
Convalescent
A Signal Office in the Field
Some Souvenir
Jaffa ..... 54
Buying Oranges, Jaffa
PHOTOGRAPHS,
Lieut.-General Sir H. G. Chauvel, K.C.8.,
K.C.M.G xv.
Jaffa - facing 4
Map of Ottoman Empire ... 6-7
A Brief Halt Richly Earned - - 9
Jerusalem from the Air - - . 9
Damascus from the Air - - - 10
3rd L.H. Camp at Belah - - - 10
Facing
In a Village Street ... facing 14
Map of Northern Sinai - - - 18-19
Turks marching out of Jerusalem (1914) - 23
Gaza - - - - - 23
The Mount of Temptation - - - 24
All the World Over - - - 24
Turkish Prisoners at Beersheba
Etc.
Page
In the Jordan Valley - - - 30
Spring Water, Clear and Cold - - 30
Map of Palestine - 34-35
Ismailia - facing 38
In the Jordan Valley - - 41
Shopping in Jericho - - 41
“ Baksheesh ” . . - 42
A Meal outside the Bivvies - - - 42
Scotties on a Route March - facing 42
Major-Gen. Chaytor receives Arab Chiefs - 46
Damascus - .... 4
Map of Syria .... 48-49
Orange Seller, Jaffa - - - 53
In the Shade - - - - 53
The Village Well 54
Street Market, Jerusalem
Jericho, showing garden oasis
Light Horse crossing Jordan
Native Plough and Team
Harvest Time
Ploughing as of Old
Native Stock


The Franciscan Monastery - - * * 66
Lake of Tiberias - - - - 66
Outposts ----- 70
Jordan Valley Dust - - - - 70
sth L.H. Brigade entering Nablus - - 73
Watering Horses, Els Salt - - - 73
Horses Thirsty - - - - 74
Light Horsemen in Judean Hills - - 74
Wady Nimrin - - - - 81
Arab Agents - - * - 81
German Prisoners in Jericho - - 81
Meal Time - - - * - 82
“ She’s Boiling ” - - - 82
Defences in the Ghoraniyeh Bridgehead - 85
The Brickmaker - - - - 85
A Typical Arab Village - - - 86
4th L.H. Brigade Watering Horses - 86
Roman Fort, Jericho - - - 88
Horses under cover 89
A.L. Horse in Camp - - - 89
2nd L.H. marching through Khan Yunis - 89
Turkish Prisoners at Es Salt - - 97
Jericho - - * - - 97
Nazareth from the Air - - - 98
“ A Light Horse Type" - - - 101
Mounting First Guard in Jericho - - 107
Halt and Rest
Church and Tomb of the Virgin
Jaffa Gate, Jerusalem
Church of the Holy Sepulchre, Jerusalem
Church of the Nativity, Bethlehem
Brig.-General Ryrie inspects the “ Bully " -
Brig.-General Cox on River Jordan
A Wallad of Palestine
“Tower of the Forty”
Mosque of Omar
The Midday Halt
Brig.-General C. L. Smith, V.C., M.C.
Our Water Supply -
Watering Time, Camel Brigade
“ Prepare to Mount ”
Camels bearing Supplies on the Philistine
Plain
Bedouins Captured at Hassaniya
Street Market, Jerusalem -
Bedouin Village
Turkish Prisoners, Nablus -
Mrs. Chisholm's Canteen at Kantara
Bethlehem -
Troopers entering Jericho
Damascus -
Finish


Preface
USTRALIA IN PALESTINE” should prove of great
interest to the people of Australia, and especially to
those whose lives have been spent outside the great
cities, for it includes a record of the achievements of
their “ very own” —the horsemen of Australia, and
of the Flying Corps and the Anzac Section of the
Imperial Camel Corps, which were recruited from
them, and co-operated with them in the greatest war yet known to
history.
The Australian Light Horseman —and under this name I include the
Field and Signal Engineers and Medical Services connected with him, who
come from the same stock —is of a type peculiarly his own and has no
counterpart that I know of except in his New Zealand brother. His
fearlessness, initiative and endurance, and his adaptability to almost any task,
are due to the adventurous life he leads in his own country, where he
has been accustomed to long hours in the saddle, day and night, and to
facing danger of all sorts from his earliest youth. Perhaps these qualities
are inherited from his pioneer parents. His invariable good humour under
the most adverse conditions comes from the good-fellowship and camaraderie
which exists in the free and open life of the Australian Bush. His chivalry
comes from the same source, and it is one of his strongest points. In other
words, the life he has been accustomed to lead has fitted him to become,
with training and discipline, second to no cavalry soldier in the world.
As far as Australia is concerned, the Palestine Campaign may be said
to have commenced with the crossing of the Suez Canal by the Anzac
Mounted Division at Kantara on the 23rd April, 1916, to re-occupy Romani
and the western end of the Katia Oasis Area. The mounted troops of
Australia and New Zealand had already proved their extraordinary
adaptability to circumstances as infantrymen in the hard school of Gallipoli,
but it yet remained for them to show their value as cavalry. The occupation
of Romani was followed by long and trying marches in the Desert of Sinai,
during the hottest summer known in Egypt for many years, after an elusive


enemy who did not appear in any force until July, 1916, when he advanced
on Romani preparatory to his second attack on the Suez Canal. The
disastrous defeat inflicted on the Turkish arms at Romani, and the pursuit
which followed, not only demonstrated the inestimable value of the horsemen
of Australasia as cavalrymen, but opened the way for the advance to the
Eastern Frontier of Egypt which ended the enemy’s menace to Egypt.
The systematic advance of the British Force from Romani to the Egyptian
Border was covered by Australian and New Zealand horsemen, British
Yeomanry and the Imperial Camel Corps, ably assisted by the reconnaissance
of the R.F.C. and Australian Flying Corps. The victories of Magdhaba
and Rafa completely cleared the enemy from Egyptian territory and opened
the way for our advance into Palestine. The operations which began
with the capture of Beersheba and concluded with the capture of Damascus
and Aleppo, and eventually led to the complete surrender of the Turkish
Forces, are dealt with in this volume, and I will say no more of them than
that the brilliant part in those operations played by the Australian and New
Zealand mounted troops has more than upheld the reputation they
established on the battlefield of Romani.
The splendid record of the 1 st Squadron of the Australian Flying Corps
speaks for itself. It was formed in Egypt and has grown with the campaign
to a state of efficiency which places it second to none of the same arm.
The casualties in action in this campaign have been light compared with
the results achieved. In a very large measure this was due to the dash
of the troops, which saved heavy losses on many occasions; but many
brave fellows have given their lives through diseases contracted in areas
which the exigencies of the service required to be occupied and fought in.
Before concluding, I would like to say a word for the Medical Services,
which have endured the same hardships as the combatant arms, and always
performed their duties cheerfully and efficiently under the most adverse
conditions.


LIEUT.-GENERAL SIR H. G. CHAUVEL, K.C.8., K.C.M.G




Fighting for Palestine
Three Years’ Campaigning
IF the Turks had not aspired to the capture of the Suez Canal, and the
reconquest of Egypt, they might still have been in quiet possession of
the whole of Palestine. This campaign, so rich in brilliant exploits and so
appealing to the imagination of the people of the world s three greatest
religions, was the direct result of Turkish aggression. Prompted by
Germany, the Turk had, early in 1915, penetrated Central Sidia and,
moving down the ancient route of the Wady Muksheib, attempted with a
very inadequate force to cross and hold the Canal. He was easily driven
off by a British force, which included a few Australian units. That was
before our attack upon Gallipoli. It was not until the following year, when
the heroic failure on the Peninsula had removed the menace to the heart
of his Empire at Constantinople, that the enemy was able to attack Egypt
with an army that gave him any promise of success.
AROUND ROMANI
Soon after the return of the Australians from Gallipoli, in 1916, at a
time when the future of the Light Horse, which had fought as infantry at
Anzac, was in considerable doubt, the Turk appeared in strength in
northern Sinai. Thirty or forty miles across the desert from Port Said,
there is a widely-scattered area marked here and there by hods, or little
palm groves, which tell of the presence of water at shallow depth. The
Romani area, as it is generally called, has always been of prime
importance to the armies which, since the dawn of history, have marched
east and west across the Sinai Desert between Egypt and Syria and Persia,
and lands even further afield. Napoleon rested there before that precarious
leap at El Arish which nearly cost him his army. Ancient invaders of
Egypt always refreshed their thirsty and desert-worn troops around Romani
before sweeping down upon the rich prize of the Nile Delta.
In 1916 the Turks began their forward operations by a raid in great


strength, which beat down the resistance of Yeomanry posts at Katia and
Oghratina. At that time, the organization and training of the Anzac
Mounted Division was being completed at Salhia, west of the Canal. The
2nd Brigade, under Brigadier-General Ryrie, was immediately rushed out
to Romani, where it was found that the enemy had temporarily withdrawn
further east.
THE TURKISH ADVANCE
Steps were taken at once by the British Command to make the Romani
area secure. The remainder of the Anzac Mounted Division, commanded
by Major-General Chauvel, went out in support of the 2nd Brigade;
British infantry followed. The railway was pushed vigorously forward.
The Ist and 2nd Light Horse Brigades, with their camp at Romani, were
engaged in ceaseless reconnaissance in force. Taking the task alternately in
24-hour shifts, they kept substantial touch with the enemy, who was all the
while adding to his numbers, bringing up guns over the desert from
El Arish, and pressing steadily onward. By the beginning of August a
line of infantry strong posts extended at a right angle towards the north
from the sea, covering Romani to the east. There we were invincible; so
the Turk, moving swiftly and in strength, to the number of about 18,000,
on the night of 3rd August attempted a great flanking movement past the
south-western flank of the infantry line. His scheme was to drive in
behind the infantry and Romani, cut our railway and other communications
with the Canal, and envelop our entire forward force. Anticipating this
move, however, General Chauvel had that night placed the 1 st Light Horse
Brigade, under the temporary command of Brigadier-General Meredith
(General Cox being absent on sick leave in England), on a line of outposts
joining up with the desert end of the infantry line, and thence swinging
towards the Canal at a right angle. This disposition completely frustrated
the enemy, and won us the battle of Romani.
FIGHTING IN THE DARK
The Turkish vanguard reached the Light Horse posts soon after
midnight and attacked immediately. For hours an extraordinary hand-to-
hand fight was waged in the dark among the sand dunes. The Light Horse
line, ten times outnumbered, was pressed steadily back, but maintained an
unbroken front to the enemy host. Soon after dawn the 2nd Light Horse
Brigade, temporarily commanded by Brigadier-General Royston, a South


African veteran (General Ryrie being absent on leave in England), was
galloped forward in support and, dismounting, carried on the fight while
the Regiments of the 1 st Brigade passed through them to the rear for a brief
breathing-space. All that day, the 4th August, the Turks gained ground
on this flank, and at the same time kept our infantry in their posts by
heavy shelling and a demonstration in strength from the east. A small
number of infantry available was put in to support the Light Horse line,
which, by nightfall, had been pushed back so close to the camp that
some units were served with tea by the regimental cooks as they fought.
But the end was now in sight. The New Zealand Mounted Rifle Brigade,
and a Brigade of Yeomanry, both under Brigadier-General Chaytor,
supported by a British infantry force, came swiftly down on the Turkish
left flank, which was high in the air. By nightfall we knew that the
battle of Romani was ours. At dawn next morning there was a slashing
general attack with the bayonet. The enemy’s line broke, his retreat
became a rout, and only the physical impossibility of getting speed out
of our horses, many of which had been without water for nearly fifty
hours, saved the whole Turkish army from destruction. The horses,
burdened with an average load of 240 to 250 lbs., and often up to 280 lbs.,
laboured gallantly, but slowly, over the deep, hot sand.
KATIA
Many thousands of prisoners, several guns, great quantities of
munitions and other material were captured ; but it was not until the
retreating Turk had reached the large palm area around Katia, six miles
away, and had been able to re-form his firing line in a reserve position
there, that we were able to collect our scattered Brigades and give him
fresh battle. The fight at Katia was drawn. On our side it was marked
by a stirring charge of the Ist and 2nd Light Horse Brigades and the New
Zealand Mounted Brigade, in an unbroken line across the sands. In the
preceding weeks the horses had frequently been watered in the hod at
Katia, and this, doubtless, contributed to the spirit they displayed in the
charge. The three Brigades, however, which had the support of a Brigade
of Yeomanry, were compelled by heavy fire from the enemy batteries to
dismount and fight on foot. The 3rd Light Horse Brigade, under
Brigadier-General Antill, which had undertaken a wide flanking move-
ment on the south, was held up by the enemy in Hamisah, where, in a
brilliant little engagement, they smashed the Turk and took 440 prisoners,


with a trifling loss on our side. The delay, unfortunately, kept the 3rd
Brigade off the Turkish left flank at Katia, and enabled him stoutly to
resist the frontal assault of the Australians and New Zealanders. Towards
nightfall the engagement was reluctantly broken off.
BIR EL ABD
Touch was maintained with the retreating Turks, and, a few days later,
the same Brigades again engaged them at Bir el Abd, some fifteen miles
further east. Once more a gallant dismounted frontal attack was made by
our forces, but again the 3rd Brigade on the flank was obstructed, and
its enveloping mission frustrated. In the main fight, which was much
hotter than that at Katia, our men pressed in close with the rifle. The
Turk was strongly supported by guns and machine guns in a very
advantageous defensive position, and the Australians and New Zealanders
were unable to reach him with the bayonet. The engagement was marked
by many splendid acts of heroism and self-sacrifice, but it was doomed
to be indecisive. The Turks evacuated the position the following day
and were pursued to the edge of the oasis area, withdrawing with the
remnant of their shattered Romani army to the neighbourhood of El Arish,
fifty miles away.
After the fight at Bir el Abd there was ceaseless heavy reconnaissance
and patrol work for the Light Horse, as the railroad, and with it the full
strength of what was now an established British army of invasion, moved
slowly, though inexorably, across the desert. On 21 st December the Light
Horse and Imperial Camel Corps entered El Arish and received a demon-
strative greeting from the Arabs of that old village.
ON THE FLANK
During these Romani operations, fraught with so much significance for
Palestine and Egypt, the extreme right of the British line was entrusted to
Colonel C. L. Smith, V.C., M.C., afterwards Commander of the Camel
Brigade, who had under him a composite force made up of the 11 th Light
Horse Regiment, from Queensland, a London Regiment of Yeomanry
and four companies of “ Camels,” drawn from Australia, Scotland and
Wales —a truly Imperial lot. A Turkish force, reported to be three
thousand strong, was moving down from Magara in a south-westerly
direction, with the intention of cutting in between Romani and the Canal.
This estimate of enemy strength proved to be exaggerated, but our column


JERUSALEM, FROM BELOW THE MOUNT OF OLIVES
Rr/ Lieut. G. W. Lambert




had some sharp little fights against superior odds, and its work was warmly
commended by the Commander-in-Chief. At Ameidat the Camel com-
panies went into action for the first time since their hurried formation;
but as most of the Australians were old Light Horse and infantry veterans
from Gallipoli, they were not strange to fire, and, like the remainder of
the Australians fighting at Romani, they rejoiced in open warfare after the
confined trench work of the Peninsula. A day or two later, the column
fought sharply at Hilu and Baud, each time mauling the enemy severely
and contributing substantially to the general disaster in store for the Turks.
MAGDHABA
On the night of the 22nd December, the Anzac Mounted Division,
made up of the Ist and 3rd Light Horse Brigades, commanded by
Generals Cox and Royston, the New Zealand Brigade (General Chaytor),
and the Imperial Camel Brigade (General Smith, V.C.) which included a
majority of Australians, moved upon the Turkish post at Magdhaba,
twenty-three miles away up the Wady El Arish. Again marching all
night, they came at dawn within striking distance of the garrison settlement.
Deploying swiftly, they soon had Magdhaba surrounded, and, galloping in
as close as the Turkish fire, which came in strength from a number of
well-concealed entrenched positions, permitted, dismounted and pressed
forward in troop rushes with the bayonet.
The chief trouble for the Anzac Mounted. Division at Magdhaba was the
supply of water for the horses. If the Turks could not be smothered by
nightfall, a withdrawal was imperative, for it was impossible to contemplate
another day’s fighting with the horses still thirsty. In a country like this,
where all the chargers are brought from far overseas, horseflesh must not
be lightly thrown away. The struggle for Magdhaba was, therefore, as
at Rafa a fortnight later, a struggle against time, a gamble against daylight.
The Division, with the Imperial Camel Corps, fighting still under the able
command of Major-General Chauvel, scored just on the call of time. As
the day was closing vital Turkish strong posts fell almost simultaneously to
our assaulting units on three sides of the settlement. In a wild rush the
encircling troops overwhelmed the Turks, and met —with an extraordinary
mingling of units coming in from every point —in the centre of the ring of
battle. The survivors of the Turkish garrison, some 1250 officers and men,
were made prisoners. Our total casualties were fewer than 150. Darkness
fell swiftly, and, in the early hours of the night, there was an amazing scene


22J57-D SE-A.


as the prisoners were collected, and officers and men sought their units and
searched for their led horses. Before midnight the Division was re-formed
and, with the exception of a few squadrons left to clear the battle-ground
and escort the wounded, our victorious little force was riding—for the second
night in succession—back to water and rest at El Arish. As they tracked
along in the darkness there were whole squadrons with not a man awake
a strange Christmas Eve !
RAFA
Next came Rafa. On the evening of Bth January the Anzac Mounted
Division, made up of the Brigades which had fought a few days before
at Magdhaba, strengthened by the Camel Brigade and a Brigade of
Yeomanry, cleared camp near El Arish and, riding all night, appeared
before Rafa at dawn. The Turks held a strongly entrenched position
consisting of three main systems of redoubts with many outlying rifle-pits
on high ground, culminating in a knoll. On this knoll was a solitary tree,
visible for many miles ; and this, roughly speaking, was our objective.
As at Magdhaba, the enemy was rapidly surrounded by Brigades moving
at the trot and the gallop. Then the horses were raced back to places of
safety, and the circle closed in on foot. The ground was more open than
at Magdhaba, and our advance lay up long, bare slopes, swept by enemy
fire. All day the cordon drew closer. Again, until the last moment,
there was uncertainty as to whether the Turk could be smashed before
nightfall. Again our horses were without water. And again victory came
at sundown; this time after a series of long, sustained charges with fixed
bayonets in the face of expert Turkish riflemen and German machine
gunners, shooting at their best over specially prepared zones of fire. Rafa
was a grim, deadly fight, waged up to the moment when our exhausted, but
still excited, troopers jumped down on the Turks in their trenches.
That spirit of mercy which has distinguished so many Australian fights
was shown here at its best. The Turks, who had shot at our men merci-
lessly and effectively until they charged home into the very trenches, then
dropped their rifles and held out their hands —to have them warmly shaken
by Australians! Such incidents, occurring frequently as they have in this
campaign, may not be according to the rules of war, and the psychology
disclosed may be difficult to follow; but the recollection of them, while it
always moves our men who were concerned to shamefaced laughter, must
clearly be a source of lasting gratification. At Rafa, practically every Turk


A BRIEF HALT RICHLY EARNED
JERUSALEM FROM THE AIR


DAMASCUS FROM THE AIR
(Official ‘Photograph)
3rd L.H- CAMP AT BELAH, A FAVOURITE RESTING GROUND BY THE SEA SOUTH OF GAZA


who survived was made a prisoner, and we also secured many guns and
much war material. Even in more marked degree than Magdhaba was
Rafa placed to our credit at the eleventh hour, for not only was our force
threatened by the lack of water and the approach of darkness, but heavy
enemy reinforcements were rapidly approaching.
This marked the passing of the desert. On the evening of the night
march which brought us close to Rafa, our troops were still in the waste in
which they had spent nearly a year without a glimpse of civilization or
verdure. Travelling all night through the heavy sand, they came, just
before dawn, on sounder going for their horses, and daylight showed them
a wide, rolling landscape, gay with brilliant winter flowers —the fringe of
Palestine.
DESERT ADVENTURES
No survey, however incomplete, of this fine campaign should fail to
mention the countless little desert expeditions in Western and Central Sinai,
in the early days of the fighting. These had various purposes. Sometimes
they were political, but more than once they led to sharp fighting. The first
time Australians were actually engaged east of the Canal was when the 9th
Light Horse Regiment (chiefly South Australians, with a few Victorians),
by a long night march and clever manoeuvre, swooped down and bagged
the Turkish outpost garrison at Jifjafa. Then there was a fine dash by the
1 Ith Light Horse Regiment to Nekhl, the British pre-war administrative
centre in Sinai. Later, two interesting expeditions were made up the Wady
Muksheib, the ancient and central route across Sinai by which the Turks
came in their feeble attack on the Canal, early in 1915. The drawback
of that route was the shortage of water, and along the Wady bed some
ancient power had excavated huge cisterns which filled during the rains.
These cisterns are still intact. Once, the Light Horsemen pumped them
out, and so closed the route for that season to the Turks ; going out again,
they sealed and covered them so as to make their rediscovery by the enemy
very difficult.
Australian units from the Camel Brigade more than once rode across
the desert to Akaba, at the head of the Persian Gulf. In October, 1916,
a force marched thirty-five miles across the sandhills from Bayud to
Maghara, and engaged in a vigorous reconnaissance in the foothills below
the almost inaccessible, high-built Turkish garrison position. As an
instance of the man-power and transport necessary to maintain a force in


FIRST GAZA
action on the desert for even a few days, the details of this little enterprise
are remarkable. The column contained only 1100 rifles, and the operations
covered but a few days; but no fewer than 7000 camels, 2300 horses and
(including natives) 5000 men were employed to provide supplies of food
and water for the force.
All these little side-shows necessitated long night marches across
countless desert hillocks. To the untrained eye, one square mile of country
in Sinai is indistinguishable from any other square mile, even by daylight.
At night all movement was by compass and the stars, and the task of our
guides was complicated a hundredfold by the constant change of route
imposed by the steepness of many of the sand dunes. Very early the
Light Horseman displayed that apparently inborn sense of direction which,
almost alone, would have made him famous in this campaign. After a brief
trial, the native guides provided by the Imperial authorities were found to be
too slow and uncertain, while, if the enemy was close, fear usually reduced
them to a state of imbecility. As soon as this was recognized, the whole of
the guiding was done by our own officers, many of whom developed a
certainty of location, whatever the circumstances, which amounted almost
to inspiration.
Ten weeks after Rafa, on 26th March, came the first battle of Gaza.
The scheme for the capture of this old gateway of Palestine proper was
similar to that which succeeded so decisively at Rafa and Magdhaba. We
were to move by night and envelop and isolate the town, with a view to its
capture before the Turk could bring up reinforcements. But it was a
far bigger enterprise than the two earlier raids. Modern Gaza is a fairly
compact old town, which, before the war, contained 30,000 inhabitants.
Most of the houses are of mud and straw, but there are also many
substantial modern residences. Ihe little city is graced by many mosques
and minarets. Standing on a low hill on the inland edge of the wide belt
of sand dunes, which, on this coast, everywhere fringe the Mediterranean,
it is bounded on the north, east and south by an occasional fine orange
grove, wide areas of olives and an intricate network of huge, sprawling
cactus hedges surrounding hundreds of tiny fields. The Turks were soundly
dug in, and well supported by many guns in commanding positions, while
the irregular system of cactus hedges made an ideal barrier between them
and the naked plain over which the attacking troops had to advance.


Since Rafa a notable change had taken place in our force. The mounted
troops had been reinforced by the arrival of large numbers of Yeomanry and,
for the first time in the campaign, a substantial force of infantry was available
for frontal attack. Marching in the darkness, part of our army surrounded
Gaza, while a strong mounted force took up positions to the east and north
to prevent the intervention of heavy Turkish reinforcements, which were
within easy striking distance. British infantry attacked from the south and
east. On their right flank was a Brigade of Yeomanry. Next came the
New Zealanders, and on the extreme right, pushing in from the north, with
their flank on the sea, was the 2nd Light Horse Brigade, with Brigadier-
General Ryrie back in his old command. Unfortunately, a heavy morning
fog prevented the infantry from getting into grips with the Turk in the
earlier part of the day.
AMONG THE CACTUS
The mounted troops, moving faster, galloped first through the scattered
groves of olives and then pressed forward, still on their horses, amidst the
maze of cactus hedges. For our men it was a wonderful day of detached,
individual fighting. Exact conformity was impossible. Regiments and
squadrons, and even troops, fought wild little hole-and-corner combats of
their own. There was much excited steeplechasing over the cactus. At
times, our men and the Turks fought each other from either side of a hedge
a few paces in width, the enemy on foot and our troops firing from their
horses. Then the Light Horse, dismounting, hacked their way through
the cactus with their bayonets, and did effective work with the steel. Our
machine gunners, advancing in rushes in front and to a flank of the 2nd
Brigade, maintained a clever and deadly covering barrage.
The fighting was marked by countless fine incidents. One Light Horse
squadron gallantly rushed an important Turkish observation post. The New
Zealanders, assisted by a Light Horse troop, took a number of enemy guns.
Swinging one of these round, and sighting through the open barrel at point
blank range, they demolished with a single shot a stone house containing a
number of troublesome Turkish riflemen. By nightfall, both the infantry
and mounted troops had won into the outskirts of the town, and captured
large numbers of prisoners. But the garrison was still strong, and heavy
Turkish reinforcements were closing in rapidly from three directions. We
had missed by a hairsbreadth. The fight was broken off and our men,


suffering a sense of disappointment scarcely less than that felt at the
evacuation of Gallipoli, were withdrawn.
SECOND GAZA
Three weeks later, on 19th April, the second battle of Gaza was fought
on a long line extending from the sea eastward towards Beersheba.
The Australians fought dismounted out on the right flank, and the day was
the bloodiest our men have known in their Palestine fighting. For many
hours they pressed forward in thin lines, up long, bare slopes, in the face
of heavy and well-directed high explosive, shrapnel, machine-gun and rifle
fire. In places they made substantial headway and bent the Turks back.
At one point, since known to fame as “ Tank Redoubt,” two Australian
companies of the Camel Brigade, co-operating with the British infantry on
their flank, won temporary possession of a main key in the enemy line.
Many splendid deeds distinguished this day’s hard fighting; they will rank
with the best performances of Australian infantry in the war, and the exploit
of the “ Camels ” at the Tank Redoubt with the greatest achievements of
British arms in any age. But the Turk, though badly shaken, stood firm.
The simple fact was that, in this Gaza-Beersheba line, which lent itself
admirably to stout defence, we had encountered enemy forces so superior
in number and equipment, that further advance was, for the time, physically
impossible.
BEERSHEBA
Between then and the end of the following October, when the Turkish
position was shattered, significant additions were made to our strength. We
were reinforced by some Divisions of infantry, and many guns of different
calibre, while the Desert Mounted Corps was formed from the old Desert
Column, consisting of the Anzac and Australian Mounted Divisions, and
a Yeomanry Division. During this period, too, General Allenby arrived
from France as Commander-in-Chief. In the great attack which demolished
the enemy’s strong defensive system on this line, the Turk was outwitted and
outfought. By a wide detour, covering several days and notable for its long,
exhausting marches, and the remarkable performances of the Engineers in
the development of water in desert areas, the Anzac Mounted Division
appeared as a bolt from the blue to the south-east of Beersheba, on the
morning of 31st October. Beersheba marked the end of the Turkish line
of defence. Seen from the surrounding hills, the scattered modern town,


By Lieut. G. W. Lambert
ROMANI. MOUNT ROYSTON IN THE DISTANCE
IN A VILLAGE STREET




with its wide, dusty streets planted with straggling eucalyptus and pepper
trees, is not unlike some western townships in Australia. It lies in a basin
below the southern end of the Judean Range, and had been strongly fortified
by the enemy. The attack from the south-east, however, was a complete
surprise to the Turk.
GALLOPING THE TRENCHES
In the early morning the New Zealanders moved swiftly to the assault
of Tel es Saba, a formidable mound, bristling with machine guns and rifles.
At the same time, the Ist Light Horse Brigade went in to the south
on the New Zealanders’ left, while the 2nd Light Horse Brigade dashed
away on a long gallop under heavy shell-fire, and took up a position to the
north, to cut off the retreat of the Beersheba garrison along the road
leading over the Central Range, through Hebron and Bethlehem, to Jeru-
salem. After very heavy fighting on foot, over broken ground, the New
Zealanders, supported by the 1 st Light Horse Brigade, scaled and captured
Tel es Saba. The day was well advanced. Beersheba had not fallen, and
it was patent that, if we relied upon a dismounted attack, the town would
certainly resist until nightfall; which would have given the enemy an
opportunity to adjust his forces and perhaps upset our whole offensive.
Four miles away to the south-east, the Australian Mounted Division was in
reserve, and, shortly before sunset, Brigadier-General Grant received orders
to attack the town with the 4th Light Horse Brigade. Between him and
Beersheba lay a definite system of strongly-held Turkish trenches. As it
was recognized that time did not permit of a dismounted advance, the
decision was made to go in mounted, at a gallop. This hazardous enter-
prise of galloping infantry into an entrenched position was entrusted to the
4th Regiment, from Victoria, and the 12th Regiment, from New South
Wales.
A FAMOUS CHARGE
Moving off at a trot, and soon quickening the pace to a gallop, the
regiments swept in a bee-line towards Beersheba. They were soon under
heavy shell and machine-gun fire, but this only served to speed the
the horsemen. Charging wildly down on the Turks, despite heavy rifle fire,
leading troops of Light Horsemen jumped the advanced trenches at a gallop,
going clean over the Turkish bayonets. Once within the enemy trench


system, part of the force dismounted, and, jumping down with their
bayonets among the startled enemy, soon cleared the position. Meanwhile
the mad gallop of the other squadrons was continued through enemy
resistance into the very heart of the town. The Turks were thrown into
hopeless disorder, and, believing that the handful of Australians formed but
the advance guard of a great cavalry force, put up an indifferent fight.
Upwards of 1100 were captured, but the darkness, which fell immediately
after our horse clattered into the town, enabled many more to escape. Nine
field guns and a large quantity of material fell into our hands. The Light
Horsemen had charged with fixed bayonets, not that they could make any
use of them on horseback, but for the moral effect upon the enemy. This
magnificent enterprise, establishing as it did that Turkish nerves were not
proof against a resolute body of galloping horse, led to highly important
results in the Great Drive which followed. The Yeomanry, who were
equipped with cavalry swords, a privilege not then enjoyed by any of the
Australian Light Horse, routed greatly superior numbers of Turks in a
series of charges which rank with the greatest performances of British
regular cavalry.
UP THE PHILISTINE PLAIN
A few days after Beersheba the Turkish line was broken by the infantry
at Sheria, and again between Gaza and the sea. The mounted men were
turned loose on the heels of the retreating enemy, and the wild stern chase
was continued for nearly fifty miles. The speed of the horsemen was
regulated chiefly by difficulties of transport and water supply; but all the
way the Turk fought clever rear-guard actions, making therein especially
effective use of his strong equipment of machine guns. The Australians’
work was fast and bold throughout. There were scores of fights by night
and day, which brought credit to the staff work and Brigade and Regimental
fighting. Up till then it was the grandest cavalry drive in the war, and
perhaps it has no equal in any campaign of the past. When the British
forces came to a halt on a line running roughly from the coast a few miles
north of Jaffa eastward to the mountains, the cessation of the pursuit was
due not to enemy resistance, but to the impossibility, at that time, of
extending our lines of communication any further. During this great
cavalry drive, the Desert Mounted Corps, which embraced all the
mounted troops, was under the command of Lieut.-General Sir H. G.
Chauvel, who enjoys the distinction of being the first Australian to rise to


the leadership of a Corps. And, with the 3rd Light Horse Brigade under
General Wilson and the 4th under General Grant, the four Australian
Mounted Brigades were, for the first time, all under Australian commands.
JERUSALEM AND JERICHO
In the wars of the ancients, cavalry and chariots were always used
down on the Philistine Plain, while the Judean Hills were regarded as
practicable only for infantry. It is the same to-day. The Great Drive
on the Plain finished, the British infantry, with Yeomanry dismounted,
moved eastward through the narrow passes and up the harsh, rocky hill-
sides of Judea towards Jerusalem. The Turks stubbornly resisted our
capture of the Holy City, and the fighting, at times, was bitter and bloody
in the extreme. But the gallant little Londoners, to whom fell the honour
of most of this significant advance, won their way steadily forward. Only
one Light Horse Regiment, the Western Australians, played any immediate
part in the operations which, on 9th December, culminated in the surrender
of Jerusalem.
A few weeks later, the Ist Light Horse Brigade and the New Zealanders
marched secretly, at night, from Bethlehem by steep mountain tracks, and,
co-operating with the 60th (London) Infantry Division, after a sharp fight
at Nebi Musa captured Jericho. This exploit was distinguished, as the
Anzacs’ work in the campaign has always been, by the remarkable work of
our guides. A squadron of the Ist Brigade had the honour of being the
first to enter the village; but the winning of the Jordan Valley, like the
capture of Jerusalem, was, in the main, due to the solid fighting qualities of
the men of London. To-day, all through the Judean Hills, you come upon
little wooden crosses which tell of the spirit and self-sacrifice of our good
ally, the fighting Cockney.
AMMAN
A brief pause, and then, the Desert Mounted Corps Bridging Train
(B Troop, Australian Engineers) having thrown the first bridge across the
Jordan, the Anzac Mounted Division, together with the Imperial Camel
Brigade and, once again, the Londoners, made their famous rush for the
Hedjaz Railway, far out across Jordan to the east, where the Plateau of
Moab begins to merge into the sand of the wide Arabian Desert. This
expedition, which, so far as the Colonials were concerned, fell chiefly upon


References: Ain.Ayun, Well- Bir ,-Spring . Gebel, Mountain . Ras, B/o^ x Tell, Mound. Wady, Watercourse. TrecKa , Telegraph


the 2nd Light Horse Brigade, the New Zealanders and the Camels, was
perhaps the severest we had had since crossing the Canal. Rain fell
almost unceasingly for many days. The mountain tracks were so narrow
and broken that the Brigades, travelling only by night, moved in single file,
leading their horses and camels. The weather was piercingly cold. Men
were wet through for several days and nights in which they knew no sleep,
and were almost ceaselessly engaged in heavy fighting. In these circum-
stances, the destruction of some miles of the railway, and the safe
withdrawal of the force, was an especially good performance.
ES SALT
A few weeks later practically all the Australian mounted troops, with
the exception of the Camels, again crossed the Jordan, and, cutting in
behind the Turks after some rare mountaineering feats in the darkness,
took possession of Es Salt, a considerable Turkish base. In this enterprise,
the 3rd Light Horse Brigade particularly distinguished itself, the Bth
Regiment of Victorians alone taking prisoners equal to at least twice their
fighting strength. The same Regiment also captured thirty machine guns
and large quantities of other war material.
JORDAN VALLEY
During the spring and summer, which were spent in Jordan Valley,
there were many highly successful little defensive fights. One of these, in
which the Turkish attack fell mainly upon the 2nd Light Horse Regiment
of Queenslanders, left nearly two hundred enemy dead within a few
chains of our barbed wire. At about the same time, the foe assaulted the
Musallabeh knoll, on the other side of the river, held by the Ist Battalion
(Australians) of the Camel Brigade, and got to close quarters, in which
bombs and bayonets, and even stones and hands were freely used on both
sides. The Turks were beaten off with some hundreds of casualties.
On 12th July, a day on which the shade temperature stood for hours at
120 degrees, a stout attempt was made by a considerable force of German
infantry against the Ist Light Horse Brigade under Brigadier-General Cox,
on this same Musallabeh sector. Our line there was a series of small
strong posts over a long and broken front. The Germans, advancing in the
dark, penetrated between two of the posts, and actually reached the centre
of our advanced position. A feature of this fight was that every little post,


except one which was overwhelmed, successfully resisted the German
attack, although all were surrounded and isolated for hours. In some,
practically every officer and man became a casualty. The Germans were
routed by a brilliant counter-attack of the Ist Light Horse Regiment (New
South Wales), which was in reserve, and the affair cost the Germans 360
prisoners and about 1,200 casualties. Our losses were slight. Troops from
four States, Tasmania, South Australia, Queensland and New South Wales,
shared in the victory. On the same day, also in Jordan Valley, a troop
of Queenslanders, men from the sth Light Horse Regiment, twice left their
lines with bombs, and, surprising enemy forces many times their number,
brought in forty-five prisoners, and they had killed and wounded as many
more in the fight. The casualties suffered by the troop were one officer
and two men slightly wounded. Two cars of No. 1 Australian Light Car
Patrol also took part with the Imperial Service (Indian) Cavalry in a
brilliant counter-attack east of the Jordan.
PREPARING FOR DAMASCUS
The long, distressing summer in Jordan Valley died hard. In September,
when the Anzac Mounted Division was there, the hottest days of the
whole year were endured. The various mounted troops had held the
Jordan sector in turn, those in reserve enjoying brief periods of rest on the
bracing uplands about Solomon’s Pools, a little to the south of Jerusalem.
There the sunny days were cool, and at night men who had known little
sleep down on the Jordan rejoiced in the mountain mists and the unwonted
comfort of their blankets.
In the course of the year there had been another interesting change in
the composition of General Allenby’s army. Many of the Yeomanry and
British infantry had gone to other battle fronts, and in their place came
one hundred thousand Indian horse and foot. Many of our Light Horse-
men had fought beside the Gurkhas and other Indians on the Peninsula;
some of us had seen the Indian cavalry in France in the early days of the
war; but to most of the Australians the Indians were strangers. To-day,
after a few months and a stirring campaign together, the bond between the
two races is a remarkably strong one.
AUSTRALIA’S NEW FRIENDS
The Australian soldier has, for a man of insular breeding, shown
an extraordinary capacity for making friends. He has an easy way


with peoples of all races and colours. In France he is completely at his
ease among the French peasantry; and he saunters through the Arab
villages in Palestine as familiarly and as confidently as he used to walk the
streets of his townships and cities at home. His old enemy the Turkish
ranker is his admired personal friend. But the strong bond which sprang
up so quickly between the Light Horseman and the Indians was perhaps
the strangest of all his new war friendships. They were divided by colour,
the language barrier was absolute, and, most unpromising of all, there was
the barrier of caste, which prevented the devout Indian from sharing his
rations, and so made little acts of camp hospitality impossible. But the
barriers, although they seemed impassable, were miraculously surmounted.
The Indians made no secret of their admiration of the Light Horseman as
a past-master at the game of combined mounted and dismounted fighting,
while the Australian was genuinely appreciative of the splendid soldierly
qualities of the highly-trained regular Indian cavalry. Moreover, nearly all
the Indians rode Australian horses!
Every trooper in Palestine knew that a great campaign would be
launched in the early autumn. General Allenby would, according to the
camp-fire strategists, “ hop in ” during the brief season between the extreme
heat and the beginning of the heavy rains in November. Further, the
C. in C. would, in all probability, assail the enemy line at the full of the
moon, so that we should have light for the great cavalry night marches
that were anticipated. But it is doubtful whether any soldier in Palestine,
who was not in the official secret, forecasted a scheme so bold as that
General Allenby had resolved upon. Certainly, none dared to hope for a
triumph so dazzlingly swift and complete.
THE WONDERFUL FORTNIGHT
The great campaign opened at dawn on the morning of 19th September,
1918. A fortnight after General Allenby flung his artillery bombardment at
the enemy line, the great Turkish and German force in Western and Eastern
Palestine had been destroyed, and our prisoners numbered 75,000. Of the
4th, 7th, and Bth Turkish Armies south of Damascus only a few thousand
foot-sore, hunted men escaped. Practically every gun, the great bulk of the
machine guns, nearly all the small-arms, and transport, every aerodrome
and its mechanical equipment and nearly every aeroplane, an intricate and
widespread telephone and telegraph system, large dumps of munitions and
every kind of supplies—all had, in fourteen swift and dramatic days, been


TURKS MARCHING OUT OF OLD CITY OF JERUSALEM AT BEGINNING OF WAR, 1914
(Captured German Photograph)
GAZA


THE MOUNT OF TEMPTATION
ALL THE WORLD OVER


stripped from an enemy who for four years had resisted our efforts to smash
him. It was a military overthrow so sudden and so absolute that it is
perhaps without parallel in the history of war. And it is still more
remarkable because it was achieved at a cost so trifling.
It was a stupendous result, gained by a simple scheme. The
strategy was strikingly bold, but perhaps the most impressive thing about
General Allenby’s triumph was the superb manner in which his plan was
carried through. The campaign went with a bang from the moment the
line was broken until Damascus, more than 1 50 miles distant, was taken.
It galloped all the way. There was never a moment’s indecision, never a
semblance of fumbling. Here was a British Army at its best, every man
efficient, every man enthusiastic.
The scheme was obviously the conception of a confident leader of horse.
General Allenby is a cavalryman, and he had under his command the most
powerful cavalry force in the war. And he knew the quality of his mounted
men. All of the Australians and New Zealanders and Yeomanry had been
in the sixty-mile drive from Gaza, of the previous year, and most of them
had been in the saddle in Egypt and Palestine for two and a half years. The
dashing Indian cavalry had been with him for many months and had given
many examples of their speed and love of battle. Again and again in the
summer their advanced patrols had galloped down bodies of Turks, and
their terrible use of the lance in those little actions had a highly useful effect
on Turkish nerves. The cavalry was General Allenby’s special weapon for
the campaign, but in addition, he had a substantial and fit force of veteran
infantry. He had, too, a particularly brilliant lot of airmen, and in his
supply services he possessed a vast organization of railway, motor, camel,
horse, mule and donkey transport, which was efficient and resourceful in
the highest degree, and had already performed miracles.
Altogether the British Army of Palestine was, when the finaf campaign
opened, as near to perfection as any force ever was. All ranks were
veterans and all were animated by that spirit which every army feels when
confident of victory and happy in its leaders.
A BOLD SCHEME
This was the scheme. We faced the Turks on a fifty-mile line running
from a point on the Mediterranean coast about twelve miles north of
Jaffa south-eastward across the Plain of Sharon, thence eastward over the


Mountains of Samaria at a height of 1500 to 2000 feet, falling to
1000 feet below sea-level where it crossed the Jordan Valley, and
terminating in the foothills of the Mountains of Gilead. The Sharon Plain
sector was some fifteen miles in length, across Samaria fifteen miles, and
the stretch in the Jordan Valley about eighteen. The Turkish position
was a strong one. On Samaria, or the Central Palestine Range, south
of Nablus, the enemy had ideal defensive country, rugged and broken,
yet well served by rail —on the north-west to Haifa, and on the north-east
across the Jordan at Beisan and by way of Damascus to Turkey ; he had
also good roads to Haifa and to Damascus by way of Nazareth.
To push the Turk on the mountains by a frontal attack would have
meant at best the gradual withdrawal of his forces. In Jordan Valley the
enemy’s safety lay in the fact that his guns on the foothills of either side
covered the limited ground which was practicable for horse and transport.
And, even if we had galloped up Jordan Valley, it would have been
extremely difficult from there to swing in behind the Turkish position on
the Central Range. General Allenby took the Plain of Sharon for his great
enterprise. Forty miles behind the Turkish position the Jordan Valley and
the Plain of Sharon are joined to the Esdraelon Plain —the old Plain of
Armageddon. In other words, the Jordan and Sharon and Esdraelon
formed a half-circle round the main central Turkish position on the moun-
tains. All the enemy lines of communication led across Esdraelon. If we
could seize the Plain swiftly, cut the railways and hold the roads, the
Turkish army west of the Jordan was in our hands. It was a scheme
calculated to test the mettle of any army. If we were to succeed, every
branch of the service had to show at its best. First our airmen had to des-
troy or drive off the German aeroplanes and so keep the enemy ignorant of
our plans; then the artillery barrage had to make the way possible for our
infantry; in its turn, the infantry had, in one rush, to drive a gap for our
cavalry, and the cavalry, galloping through the gap, had to cover fifty miles
and reach Esdraelon Plain on the night of the first day. Lastly, the cavalry
must hold the communications they had cut, and to do so, they had to be fed.
The transport necessary for feeding tens of thousands of men and horse had
to travel almost as fast as the cavalry. The scheme had to go through to
time-table or it might not go through at all. If the artillery had failed to do
its work in a swift half-hour’s bombardment, or if the infantry had faltered,
the enemy would have had time to redistribute his forces, and General
Allenby might have been robbed of his victory.


By Lieut. G. W. Lambert
MAGDHABA, SHOWING THE WADY BED ABOUT ONE MILE FROM TURKISH BUILDINGS




FIGHTING FOR PALESTINE 27
CAMOUFLAGE
General Allenby took no chances. He followed the sound principle of
fighting under the best possible conditions. By the aid of clever and greatly
successful bluff, the Commander-in-Chief delivered his smashing blow
at an unexpected point of the Turkish line. The enemy was led to
believe that the British offensive would fall on the eastern sector. While a
huge force of cavalry, artillery and infantry was being smuggled by night
marches to the Plain of Sharon on the west, active and amusing camouflage
preparations were being made in the Jordan Valley. For instance, many
dummy camps were brought into existence, and large numbers of realistic
canvas horses were tethered in them. Mules drawing sledges were
driven about in the dust to suggest heavy traffic. Fast’s Hotel at
Jerusalem, then being conducted for officers by the Canteen Board, was
ostentatiously emptied of its inmates, two sentry-boxes were placed at
the entrance, and a whisper was started in the bazaars that the hotel
would be General Allenby’s advanced headquarters during the coming
offensive. Simultaneously, the Arabs east of the Jordan made realistic sham
preparations for an attack on Amman, out on the Hedjaz. They put dow T n
a big base, engaged in bold reconnaissance, and cut the line between
Amman and Damascus. The deception of the enemy was complete. We
know now that he expected and prepared for the blow on the east, and
was stiffening his defences there until a few hours before our bombardment
opened on the west, near the Mediterranean.
The airmen materially assisted in this hoodwinking. During the eight
weeks preceding the offensive, the German air service was practically driven
out of the sky. Fifteen machines were destroyed or forced down and
enemy aerodromes were bombed. So complete was our ascendancy that
not an enemy plane was seen over the threatened sector for eight days
before the offensive began.
Blind as to our movement of troops, and mistaken by fifty miles as
to where his line was to be assailed, the enemy’s plight was further
accentuated by the destruction of his communications on the very evening
of the bombardment. Pulling out at night from their sham camp near
Amman, the Arabs rushed away up north, and cut the railway and
telegraph communications between Deraa and the great Turkish base at
Damascus. This left the enemy on his whole front without supplies for the
fight. Other telegraph lines further west were severed at the same time,
and a bomb from an Australian plane on the night before our advance


destroyed his great forward telephone exchange at Nablus, which dislocated
all his lateral communications. When our guns opened at dawn on
19th September, the Turks were already in a desperate plight.
THE NIGHT BEFORE
On the night before the bombardment there was an atmosphere of
perfect confidence in our camp close behind the line. Every man was
moved by the prospect of a successful adventure, which would
give vast immediate results and have an incalculable influence on the
world war. The tropical intensity of Jordan Valley, where the Australian
Brigades, with one exception, and some of the British and Indian cavalry
had spent the whole summer, had left its mark. We had suffered much
from malaria and other fevers, which, it was feared, might recur when we
moved into the cooler north. The horses were, if not in poor condition,
certainly on the light side; but these things were forgotten as the critical
day approached. The Australian Mounted Division, commanded by
Major-General Hodgson, and now made up entirely of Light Horse,
except for one dashing, picturesque regiment of French Colonial regulars,
had recently been armed with swords. The period of training in the new
arm was very brief —for many Regiments only a few hours; but the men,
taking very keenly to it, soon reached a high standard of efficiency. Every
trooper was excited at the thought of a true cavalry charge. The Anzac
Mounted Division was still in the line in Jordan Valley.
During many nights before the push every road on the coastal sector
was crowded with slow-moving, well-ordered traffic. By day all was normal,
except for significant glimpses of camps in the wide olive groves around
Ludd, and in the orchards and orange groves about Jaffa. But as darkness
fell the whole countryside would become thronged with masses of horse and
foot and guns, and every kind of transport, groping their way through blinding
clouds of dust. The roads were impassable outside the organized columns ;
the night was loud with the shouts of drivers speaking divers languages.
A few hours before the great push began this night traffic culminated in a
general move northward, the cavalry moving up close behind the infantry,
and the supplies following the cavalry. Every road was massed with
motor-lorries and horse transport; every track with endless strings of camels.
Each unit in the great army was pressing up as closely as possible to the
starting gate.


Showing the pretty little


IN THE JORDAN VALLEY
SPRING WATER, CLEAR AND COLD


The bombardment opened at dawn, a heavy barrage. For half an hour
the startled Turks were battered in their trenches. Then, abruptly, the
bombardment ceased. “ Now the infantry,” said a Brigadier of horse “ and
then !....”
THE ADVANCE
Our battalions leaped forward as the gunnery died away, and carried the
Turkish trenches after a brief struggle. They simply overwhelmed the
enemy riflemen, and even the German machine gunners and Austrian
artillerymen, after a wild burst of bad shooting, were forced to flight or
submission. Within half an hour the infantry had made a gap for the great
force of Indian and Yeomanry cavalry waiting near the coast, and soon
afterwards they opened another a few miles inland. The expectant horse-
men jumped off like thoroughbreds from the barrier.
THE GREAT RIDE BEGINS
They rode away in the sunrise, the advanced squadrons trotting out after
the ground scouts, the flank patrols galloping wide; Brigade after Brigade
rode out over the rolling sandhills. The men were eager, the horses fought
for their heads. The swords of the Yeomanry flashed and Indian lances
glinted from each successive sky-line. It was like a war scene of the picture
galleries. Quickening the pace, the Regiments raced on past our guns,
most of which were already limbered-up for the pursuit. The infantry,
busy with their prisoners, cheered them as they passed, and soon they were
speeding down on Turks who had fled from the onslaught of the infantry.
But their sport with sword and lance was brief. In this Sharon sector, the
enemy had no forward reserves, no second-line trenches. The Turkish
front here had depended for its safety on a one trench system. From the
crossing of the trenches until they reached the Esdraelon Plain, late in the
night, the cavalry encountered no resistance. Once or twice they sighted
small bodies of the enemy and made for them at the gallop. But the
Turks would not give battle. Before the campaign was three hours old
there began the long series of almost bloodless surrenders which were to
be the most amazing feature of the sleepless fortnight.
The perfection of our organization was revealed very early. The cavalry
was scarcely clear of the trench system before scores of field guns were
rumbling in their wake. And, pressing on after the artillery by many
tracks, good and bad, went mile after mile of camels and wheeled transport.


Where the cavalry went the supplies must follow; and the cavalry rode from
forty to fifty miles between sunrise and midnight. With nothing to check
them, their pace was controlled only by the endurance of their horses. The
men rode light; they carried only one blanket, and that as a saddle-cloth.
Tent sheets and waterproofs were forbidden. It was a wild ride against
time. But horses were loaded with three days’ rations, and few carried less
than 2501bs. —many of them more than 2801bs.
ESDRAELON PLAIN
At dawn next morning the Yeomanry were across the Esdraelon Plain
and in Nazareth, where they caught most of the garrison of 3000 and the
whole population still in their beds. They secured the town at the expense
of eighteen casualties. By noon the Esdraelon Plain was in our hands, and
the Turkish Army in Western Palestine left without a line of communi-
cation or retreat, except at Beisan on the north-east corner of the trap; and
the capture of Beisan was already assured. How completely the enemy
was deceived, and how light were his forces on the sector broken for the
cavalry, is shown by the fact that on the first day, although our horse
travelled fully forty miles on a wide front, only 900 prisoners were taken by
them. Next day, as the net closed round the forward enemy forces on the
Central Range, and they attempted to retreat across the Esdraelon Plain,
our cavalry took upwards of 12,000.
DOOMED TURKISH ARMY
At the beginning of the second day, we contained the Turkish western
army on the south, west and north. The Anzac Mounted Division, which
is two-thirds Australian and the balance New Zealanders, and a light
infantry force, all under Major-General Sir E. W. C. Chaytor, were moved
up the Jordan Valley on the east of the Turks and so the net was
completed. But the task of the Anzacs was difficult. Before they could
move, the enemy guns dominating the narrow ground on either side of the
river had to be silenced or shifted. This meant that the Turks had to begin
their retreat on the Samarian Range before the Division could race them for
the crossings. Not until the second day did this come about, and then the
Anzacs, riding fast, closed the fords and the Turkish Western Army was
doomed. Forty hours after the fight commenced, as the second day was
closing, the enemy began to stream down the tracks leading on to the
Esdraelon Plain from his forward mountain position. He had already


abandoned guns and transport, a tragedy which he owed mainly to the
appalling havoc wrought with bombs and machine guns by our airmen.
At dusk on the second day a large force was reported to be heading
towards Jenin, on the northern edge of the Esdraelon Plain. General
Chauvel, who was directing the battle from Megiddo (now Lejjun), the
actual site of ancient Armageddon, at once ordered the 3rd Light Horse
Brigade to move to the attack. An hour later, the Brigade had captured a
mass of prisoners, who subsequently counted out at more than 7000 ; and
we had the first evidence of the demoralization of the enemy. As the
Brigade approached Jenin, with the 10th Light Horse Regiment (Western
Australians) leading and the 9th (chiefly South Australians) working round
to the rear of the village, the Turks ran out and surrendered in thousands.
We had one officer and one man wounded. The only shots fired at us
came from nine German riflemen, who fought to a finish, although two of
our machine guns were laid on them at a range of sixty yards. The plan
had put our troops into certain positions and the Turks, as at sham fight,
recognizing the checkmate, were surrendering without bloodshed. Any
resistance which followed on the long ride to Damascus came almost
entirely from the Germans.
CUT OFF
An endeavour has been made in the preceding pages to show how the
galloping cavalry cordon was thrown round the main enemy position on
the Samarian Range. Before the close of the second day, our horsemen,
stoutly armed with machine guns and automatic rifles, in addition to
rifle and sword and lance, and further strengthened by many batteries
of horse artillery, held all the roads and railways behind the Turks and
Germans. The enemy was practically cut off from supplies and retreat.
Worse than that, he was already irretrievably smashed by the attack of the
British and Indian infantry on his front. Recoiling from this blow, and
hastening to reach the Esdraelon Plain before the cavalry completed the
net, he was caught by our airmen in narrow mountain passes, subjected to
terrible bombing and harassing machine-gun fire, and forced to abandon
most of his guns and transport. At the same time, the sth Australian
Light Horse Brigade under Brigadier-General Macarthur Onslow,
accompanied by one regiment of French cavalry, was thrown in during the
first day on his right flank, about halfway between the old front line and
the Esdraelon Plain. The Australians, moving very fast, scattered with


3
3° i
feAcre
#S^l(T
|S t \ J3 6
• ''""
1 1
s' hp
ftK' T/ o/z u/j,
T lx
XT _
1 S\ STA
OUTLINE MAP
OF* Cape Carme
.Bay i/c l>
of* #i[\
% -S-n
V
, E/Meiderd
eiWy\/ ' m^T
ffiTabqh>< gry
I^4KE / l
rmr/RTAsl .XvA >S
PALESTINE
11 '«»Sherd Amr
,. j.Nimrin _ w -cvy / *vy
fatten (Sea of j 'xf
'v4^ 2 @s=T^,^a2aeeA frW8rft A >
iys
c % x
y ..30
i \yX£T;
Scale |3
1 I
Rthlil
. ( (/ Kinnereth *
V-~^»
Mezerib
Miles Miles I
0 5 10 20 1
t~ i—i >— i t- 1 i III
Tantura Uj
L
ElAfUle
C "80 r
r Mtx J
|(^/Au/e
• — XX.
y%
t-J&juNcridTr^—^^
>*«tV 1735
1 3
5 ‘Z//S
; '“\0
•,J
Y k Ve/r Esdudy Beit Ras ( . 1
*?£/ Remte NX
/m
Katsarie i
arin - le -U u T\<$. \
\' S %}
\y El Muntar
ShutLd
V
X £/ TMiyibe^ —. *’/rb/d / (
# \
•' <k
« '
'yA
Yuba / L
X •£/Hosn\
)
Nasita
Kf
<0 r I
Tell el AkKdar/ /./Are
fa • 1278
IrJenriT'• v ;'
4 7 *Tibne J
l f
/
1/
f
* H
\%
\ X 1 J.
k % K30Q / -&6oV
X 2404 / \
y-* C
, 4Ailuh'
\
f
x f SH ?276
/r /
w \
1 K**/f ,fJeba
( s’TtasJedir (
pci //X ■— R'asJet
a / ElMafrak \
V
\ 1 kSebusL/e V 2326 (
7t y*KaMnji ( y
/ # \
/ *
/ A77 <?/ Zeba
bd e jjj
J { jMfSS UDIE STA f) L- f
yyjy j <
—-—— y i
l *J^bso
/ J£^
Tell el Rekkeit y
yj^y.
$jr}uk
Lj&i
*' l
vyyyyi
u y . • B/d/ e 11
r Kasim \L-
)] J el \
f -J <?X A
\ E|Tawanik^^
\ (
1360
ftSAMRA STA
,£> > 5/7 Abdel Nebi /• £^Mule&bi6\\
/ XSSarona !
N ;
ft
\ r
p/ f-^X' L^ >3 \ 'i \J[
SinjilV'^N
|J//
SR £L DARI IE s&£ )
—^* X X\
• 4 ooo / \ Ain e
E s S altviT^X_^=^5utve//e^
i Zerka
\Ikalaatel ZERKA STA
/F 2030
/Ras Zerka
32 V / \VX-r~f/
~P || __^MI70
Vj . ) $A/nHemar./'T\ ' ’ /
PM CEl 1 ll i A
:3= tpWJ
32°
>0 /
\ £i_ T _ _ ffichort teZ/on« Lvi(Id
TO al5 W \
‘TELLASUR \\
Yebnud
/ J a \
-%— y Trim
cr
Jebel
£/ DekakmM
Va&Han&n»/ /De,ra ' r \/\ A
1 f-*| K* V // \ ft "Tn. _ 7 »-...,’
/\ Rahm Alla~-/pBireh Vs H£/Au/cr[-iz°o '•/ V
/y S3'" 1 2“^— n
/ 4 yqYebna .'t
il-—
OH ORA N! YCH j yusjy / 1 \
.
/ V ■
/ \V/ X. : l
atron •Nebi\^~^,
“Xciy 1 X/ M
HebiYunishTWZ e/f/ST * r ~A<#F J S'J
° / \ \ A
V 3Z4
/ /vv y'/ x&xv
, -yAinKar/WShn:
m
• —
r^Fs
s
Esdudf* \ «
/ / l ,0gsf S 1,5
/ /
/y >
EJ Mejden -:0? A /y/ '
Deir el
\ w -^imL/
/
'tat
iMeshetta
ptoT, 0n O n 3!rtMo ,
/ Talatel Benat / SA^sl
/ 2580 ( y 'A
Askalan , l a^V
)) \
/ ops z et^e/
/ — <s~ / y *'\
/ C \
/ ~ A y >
/ \y/y *EI f V_ BeitJibrirk
/ /
/ j v
i/4/n (
yf~X\ L
lEBAASJA
/ TjrDgirSmeid ) q
j * e^'^Js/ V ~v-. 5/»4// —-a
/ aza
fV aza nTpII el Neiiian \ rvx—
- b V
\ IbebronL
Khulil) '^ _N -
'l X 7
I O y
s.y
*-
.. KHAN ZZBIB STA.
Tell N y\ V
AfjmarS. X Ss*AmeidaL
•Yutta
5,
y— I
\
cMerik//^ n . CK Dhaheriya
—X Jell el Sheria » -o= s r i m£
V v Tel Khuweilfe A J
lb
Xy C)
)
J
5
1
/ \
f XXX-i . >
\ N /}
T /
y r \
l
Snellal —. \ f l
Masada / J \
M
Vwii ei r 5T>r\ %%
yl O esSaba
, w
_
/
\ c // 41 \
l/fyEI Katrarn
—cv / r* v °
\ '- s (lA' Cl: y
jijElKerak
j
\MdbaJa.ga. — qf * *<
J
If' \ '
7 /y \ // <{^
c // L // <S;
\ // nL ♦
\ ) ' >CvS
Magrun / j/
? x V
H h\
II
/
\±rfjZjr7
\
'
3
\ckf.l
— ~~ — L
36°
References
Ain, We//. Jebel, Mountain . Jisr, Bridge.
Khurbet , Ruins . Nahr. River
Has , o/utt orLape. lell, Mound . Main Roads, =
= . Other Roads,


their swords a force several thousand strong north of Tul Keram and took
two thousand prisoners. Then, riding all night, they cut the enemy front-
line railway close behind Nablus. A few hours later, the Brigade captured
Nablus itself.
TERRIBLE AIR WORK
But before this the airmen had commenced their work in the passes.
When our infantry broke the enemy’s line on the Plain of Sharon, many
thousands of Turks, who were on the foothills eastward of the gap our
cavalry had galloped through, had endeavoured to swing round and retreat
to the highlands of Samaria. But the movement was at once detected by the
Australian airmen, The Turks, with their transport, were seen to be
heading for a narrow defile leading up from Tul Keram to Anebta. Using
their wireless, the airmen called up aerodromes where dozens of British and
Australian pilots were awaiting the signal. The doomed column, extending
over upwards of two miles, was deep in the pass when the first flight
arrived with its bombs. Beginning on the leading troops and vehicles, the
airmen, flying low, had, in a few minutes, blocked the narrow track. Pilot
after pilot, flying in perfect order, dropped his bombs, and then, assisted
by the observers, raked the unfortunate Turks with machine guns. Their
ammunition exhausted, the airmen sped back to their aerodrome for more,
and returned again to the slaughter. Some pilots made four trips on that
day. While the airmen attacked the column, the sth Light Horse Brigade
came up over the hills on either side of the track, and caught the Turks
with their swords as they attempted to escape. Blocked in front, the
battered, distracted procession closed up and telescoped, and fires broke out
among the massed and broken vehicles.
Still more appalling, because of the greater magnitude of the disaster,
was the fate of a column between Balata and Fermeh on its way down
the range towards Beisan, on the Jordan. Flying over Samaria, you
appreciate the opportunities which this retreating army offered to the
airmen. The stony hills are not so rugged as in Judea, but they are still
too steep to permit masses of troops to move off the narrow roads. These
roads wind along beside the wadies and are flanked nearly all the way by
abrupt hillsides. The Balata column contained the bulk of the enemy’s
forward transport. It stretched, slow-moving and in full view from the air,
over seven or eight miles of the confined track. An Australian reconnais-
sance pilot sighted it soon after dawn and, an hour later, dozens of British and


Australian bombers and machine gunners, flying within a few hundred feet
of the ground, were smashing it to splinters. Again they began at the
head, and forced the helpless drivers to pile up from the rear. For hours
the bombing was continued. Here the airmen worked unaided by any
other arm of the service, and they had wrecked or disabled the whole of
the transport before the infantry came up from the south and took the
dazed survivors. The broken material afterwards collected in the pass
included 90 guns, 840 four-wheeled and 76 two-wheeled horse and cattle
vehicles, 50 motor-lorries and a large number of miscellaneous transport,
such as water carts and travelling kitchens. The horror of the scene
during the bombardment and afterwards need not be dwelt upon. As the
bombs rained down with pitiless regularity, scores of lorries and wagons
were overturned and dashed to pieces as they went hurtling down into the
rocky beds of the wadies. Included in the column were large formations
of infantry, and these and the drivers, rushing from the track to escape the
bombs, were shot down by airmen. These air attacks were repeated many
times on a similar scale in the first two days.
FINE STAFF WORK
Rarely have the various services of an army worked in such perfect
accord. The infantry drove the enemy from his front, the Australian and
French cavalry, at the same moment, struck from the flank at his very heart
at Nablus ; as he attempted to retreat in good order, the airmen wrecked him
from the skies, and, in a few hours, turned his army into a shell-shocked
rabble, with few guns or munitions, and little food. The wretched Turks,
in their tens of thousands, urged on by officers, came at last to the outlets
into the Esdraelon Plain. When first the cavalry galloped down upon them,
and they surrendered in hordes without the least attempt at resistance, we
were astonished. It was not until we learned what had happened in the
mountains that we understood the tragic state of their morale.
The air force achieved a notable victory. They had not only inflicted
very heavy losses, but had incalculably lessened the task of both our infantry
and cavalry. They had prevented the Turk from fighting effective rear-
guard actions against the pursuing infantry, and had hammered him so
soundly that he was incapable of any attempt to burst through our cordon
of cavalry. Without this help from the airmen, General Allenby must still
have won a great victory; but it would have been much short of the


sensational one achieved. Progress must have been much slower, and our
casualties heavier by many thousands.
Before the fight was two days old our aeroplanes were using aerodromes
captured from the enemy. At one point on the march to Damascus, when
we were a hundred miles from our starting-place, a number of airmen came
up and established a flying ground abreast of our cavalry advance guard.
Throughout the operations an air-post service was maintained between the
leading troops and General Headquarters. An Australian Brigadier and a
Colonel of the Light Horse, who were in hospital far down the line when
the campaign opened, surprised their troops by alighting from aeroplanes in
their midst, a hundred miles from our starting-point.
GERMANS FIGHT WELL
The few thousand Germans who were with the Turkish 7th and Bth
Armies west of the Jordan met the same fate as their allies; nearly all were
destroyed or captured. But one must give the Germans credit for a stout
resistance. Throughout, they fought resolutely to avert the great disaster,
and if all of them did not continue the struggle to the death, it must be
remembered that they were in a desperate situation. They handled
nearly all of the hundreds of machine guns, which were the most for-
midable weapons possessed by the enemy. All the way to Damascus
they fought stout rear-guard actions.
Having the great body of Turks on Samaria safe, and most of them
already accounted for, General Allenby decided to clear Haifa ; the operation
demonstrated the relative morale of the Turks and Germans. A flying
reconnaissance of armoured cars and smaller cars of the Light Car Patrol
was pushed into the outskirts of the town. About three miles from the
town our force saw the heads of a party of Turks in a strong redoubt two
hundred yards from the road. The armoured cars halted and swept the
Turkish parapet with their machine guns. The white flag was at once
hoisted, and about eighty Turks came out without firing a shot. Two
miles further on, the British came upon an Austrian battery of light field
guns, supported by German machine gunners. Our little probing expedition
was at once brought to a standstill, and was not sorry to pull out. Next day
the Indians and Yeomanry, supported by horse artillery, rode into the town,
and again the only opposition came from the Austrians and Germans.
“We tried to cover the Turks’ retreat,” said a captured German officer, “ but


By Lieut. G. W. Lambert
THE ROAD TO JERICHO




we expected them to do something, if only keep their heads. At last we
decided they were not worth fighting for.”
EAST OF JORDAN
Before Haifa fell our troops were moving swiftly east of Jordan. A
Division of Indian and Yeomanry cavalry crossed the Jordan about Beisan
and rode eastward. Simultaneously, the Anzac Mounted Division forded
and swam the river further to the south, and moved on Es Salt and Amman.
The Australians and New Zealanders were familiar with the country. This
was their third expedition to the Plateau of Moab and the heights of Gilead.
They knew every goat-walk on the steep mountain side. This time they
had come to stay; the Fourth Turkish Army on the East was to share the
fate of the 7th and Bth Armies on Samaria. The tactics employed on both
sides of the river were broadly similar. General Allenby depended for
success upon the speed and stamina of his horses. Before the operations
commenced, the Turk held a defensive position which was roughly an
extension of his line west of the Jordan. He was strong in the foothills of
Gilead; on the mountain he had his base at Es Salt, and at Amman he had
a substantial force guarding a vital series of tunnels and viaducts on his
Hedjaz railway. Beyond the railway the Eastern Palestine Range flattens
out on the wide desert, which extends right across to the Euphrates. On
the fringe of the desert was the Army of the Sherif of Mecca, a picturesque,
galloping, thrusting, well-armed force. The Arabs harassed the Turk by
day and night, repeatedly dashing in and cutting his railway and telegraph
communications with Damascus. When attacked, they would fade away
into the wide desert and leave the slow-footed Turk in the air. While the
Anzacs marched upon Es Salt and Amman, the Arabs made a detour in the
desert, appeared on the flank of the enemy north of Deraa, and cut the
railway where the Hedjaz line junctions with the line which supplied the
Turks west of the Jordan.
THE RACE FOR DAMASCUS
Meanwhile the Indian and Yeomanry Division had crossed Eastern
Palestine and reached Deraa, where it joined hands with the Arab army.
Then the Arabs, the Indians and the Yeomanry sped on towards Damascus.
There was still a chance of escape for some 20,000 Turks, who had moved
northwards of Deraa before the arrival of our forces. These struggled
gamely towards Damascus, hoping either to make a stand at that great base


or to escape by rail to the north. But General Chauvel still had in hand
the Australian Mounted Division and a strong force of Indians and
Yeomanry, which had returned to the Jordan after the capture of Haifa.
With the Australians leading, he marched from Esdraelon Plain north-
east across Jordan for Damascus. Then ensued one of the grand races
of the war. Our tired horses were called upon for the heaviest work of the
lightning campaign. Marching by Beisan, the 4th Light Horse Brigade,
after a stiff fight—the most expensive cavalry fight in the campaign—took
Semakh, and then, co-operating with the 3rd Brigade, which had come
down from Nazareth, occupied Tiberias. After a day’s partial rest, during
which our men swam and fished in the blue waters of Galilee, the Australian
Division marched swiftly for the Jordan crossing, a few miles south of Lake
Huleh. But the enemy was now seized of our intention, and the German
machine gunners put up a fine resistance. Their stand at Semakh aimed
at preventing us reaching Damascus before the 20,000 Turks, who were
retreating from the direction of Deraa, and to give time for the removal of
as many military stores as possible from the city. South of Lake Huleh, also,
the Germans fought well and delayed us for a few hours. We then ran
through as far as Kunneitra, but, a few miles further on, were again held up
by machine guns and a field battery.
GREAT-HEARTED HORSES
Our horses had covered, with marching and fighting, an average of thirty
and forty miles a day. Thousands of Australian-bred animals must have
covered some 400 miles in twelve days, a very fine performance when it is
remembered that they carried a load exceeding an average of 2501b5, and
had been on short rations. On our ride to Damascus, the excellent work
of the staff was demonstrated again. As the advance guard of the 4th
Light Horse Regiment (Victorian), travelling north-east, came within view
of the green and generous plain of Damascus, we saw, some eight miles
away on our right, and moving north-west, a great converging column
of the fugitive Turks from Deraa. Nearly all of these were captured,
the Germans once more fighting well with their machine guns. But even
the Germans had now almost given up hope, and on this last day before
Damascus, and in the two days which followed, they abandoned their
machine guns, and fled at the galloping approach of the Australians.
That evening many thousands of prisoners were captured by the 3rd and
3th Australian Light Horse Brigades, and the city was enveloped.




A MEAL OUTSIDE THE BIVVIES


THE DEAD SEA (SUNRISE)
By Lieut. G. W. Lambert
SCOTTIES ON A ROUTE MARCH




ABANA GORGE
At dusk, in the Abana Pass, which leads out from Damascus towards
Beirut, another disaster befell the enemy. Here, a column many miles in
length was committed in a deep and narrow and singularly beautiful
gorge. The floor of the gorge is less than a hundred yards across, and it
is crowded with the Abana River —a rushing, mountain torrent, —a rail-
way and a road. The river banks are overgrown with trees and bushes ;
the railway and road cross and re-cross the tumbling stream. On either
side rise the gaunt cliffs of the desert. In this brief survey it is impossible
to describe the fight between the long enemy column and the handful of
dismounted Light Horsemen of the 3rd and sth Brigades, who were perched
in pockets of the cliffs on either side. The Germans, working their machine
guns from the tops of motor wagons and lorries, fought to the death. Three
hundred and seventy officers and men were killed, and fell among the dead
and dying horses in the wild tumult of the chaotic column. We had scarcely
a man hit. That ended the attempt to leave Damascus by the west; but
the enemy was streaming out by the north along the road to Aleppo.
Their run, however, was brief. Early next morning the 3rd Light Horse
Brigade—the first force to enter Damascus —was in hot pursuit. The
German machine gunners again attempted a rear-guard, but they could not
withstand the charges of the elated Light Horsemen. Thousands of
prisoners and hundreds of machine guns were taken by the Brigade.
On the morning of Ist October a squadron of the 4th Light Horse
Regiment received orders to patrol into the city. Winding along the
crooked lanes between the irrigated orchards and gardens, it came upon
the great Turkish barracks, swarming with troops. The Turks did not at
once surrender, and the squadron leader, before attacking, awaited the
arrival of the remainder of the Regiment. Then followed a fitting termina-
tion to the wonderful, and practically bloodless, British ride. A few hundred
of the 4th Light Horse took nearly 12,000 prisoners in Damascus before
noon, together with dozens of field pieces and scores of machine guns.
Scarcely a shot was fired. There was no formal surrender; each body of
men laid down its arms as the Australians rode up.
EXULTANT ARABS
The Victorians entered the city and joined up with the exulting Arabs.
These two forces, which had started hundreds of miles apart with two


mountain systems intervening, were mingled together in the midst of the
swirling, madly-excited populace. To the Arab, Damascus was the
dazzling prize, the promised reward. Here he was to proclaim and set
up his government. Riding forth from his tent on the desert, or his little
mud village, he was, in Damascus, the lord of a city of 250,000 souls —the
oldest city in the world, and distinguished by the richness and strange
character and beauty of its surroundings. Fired with pride, his long robes
touched with brilliant patches of silk, he rode the streets on his sprightly
desert horse, caparisoned with richly woven Persian saddle-bags. His
scabbard of gold and silver flashed in the sunlight, and he fired his rifle
freely at the skies. Ameer Feisal, the third son of the Sherif of Mecca,
who was soon to be proclaimed the new ruler, rode into the city. The
Arabs of the city gave an almost fanatical greeting to the Prince.
THE GALLOP INTO DAMASCUS
Although the Victorians secured the great haul of prisoners, the first
troops to enter Damascus were the Light Horsemen from Western
Australia, who, also, had had the distinction of being the first mounted men
to enter Jerusalem, in December. The Western Australians found their
way into Damascus by accident, and their ride was one of the most dramatic
and picturesque incidents of the campaign,
The 3rd Light Horse Brigade, to which the Western Australians belong,
spent the night in the Abana Gorge, a few miles from Damascus, to the
west along the Beirut Road. Brigadier-General Wilson was under orders
to move at dawn and seize the road leading from the city northward
towards Aleppo. It was hoped that a track would be found around the
outskirts of the town, but this proved impracticable. The Brigade, therefore,
with a troop of scouts leading, and the Western Australians following, came
down the Abana Gorge, clearing a track through the shambles of dead
Turks and Germans and hundreds of camels and horses, heaped on the
road in the fighting of the evening before. It soon became plain to the
officer second in command of the Western Australians, who was riding
ahead with the scouts, that the only way to the Aleppo road lay through the
heart of Damascus. The city had not surrendered, and he did not know
how many of the enemy it contained. But he decided on the bold course,
and pressed on. As the scouts passed the outskirts of the city, riding a
narrow road with the river on one side and a prolonged, mud-built garden
wall on the other, there was a sudden burst of Turkish rifle-fire. No one




MAJOR-GEN. CHAYTOR RECEIVES A DEPUTATION OF ARAB CHIEFS
NEAR AMMAN
JERUSALEM


was hit, and the officer in command, checking the scouts until the advanced
squadron of Western Australians came up, ordered drawn swords, and
dashed on at a gallop. Across the river, two or three hundred yards away,
were thousands of Turks at the barracks. For a moment, the enemy
decision was in the balance. But the sight of the great Australian horses
coming at a gallop (the Turks and natives never ceased to marvel at the
size of our horses), the flashing swords, and the ring of shoes upon the
metal, turned the scale. “ The shooting by the Turks,” said one of our
officers, “ gave way, in a second, to the clapping of hands by the citizens.”
The Australians rode hard, scattering the excited people from their track.
The firing increased, but its character had changed. The shots were now
coming from native Arabs, who were expressing their feelings, in the popular
Arab way, by blazing at the heavens. Across the river ahead, in front of
the large new Town Hall, a huge crowd was assembled, and clattering over
a bridge, the cavalry pulled up at the steps of the building. Instantly, there
were hundreds of eager horse-holders, and an intense demonstration of
goodwill. The East was greeting the victors of the day. Three officers, all
carrying their revolvers, entered the building, and demanded the civil governor.
They were at once taken upstairs to that personage, a trim, little middle-aged
Turk, who greeted them with complete calm and much dignity, and begged
to know their wishes. He was told that a great British force of cavalry
was entering the town, and that he would be held responsible for good order
and the protection of property; the shooting in the streets must instantly
cease. The Governor replied that there was nothing to fear from the civil
population, that the shooting was merely the expression of an excess of
feeling, and that the British wishes would be respected in every way.
He then begged the Australian officers to accept his hospitality.
A reliable guide was obtained and the party hurried forward. As the
Australians continued their ride through the city they received the honours
traditionally lavished on conquerors. The stalls were emptied of their
incomparable grapes and pomegranates, which were handed up to the
passing horsemen. Crowds hung to their stirrups and ran along with their
hands on the bridle reins. They were smothered with perfumes. Every man
who smoked enjoyed a gift cigar. Dark-eyed women and pretty girls
appeared in every window, some of them the wives, doubtless, of Turkish
soldiers, timidly, and showing no pleasure; others boldly waved their hands,
smiled their welcome, and threw down scents and other favours.


I ( \ \ ) u , .... / Y.enicf/p . (Adana \ ! A e f)
I l . l V. IKarabulaii ( Jv*-— -4— <d.'/ETZr t / tv =0/
\ I \ \ o 7> '" r 'V.y£y* \ Kurt Kulak I q Erzin C / / \ (
II 'N \ \\ r>f x-jr/ CT // ) oGeulKeui
v. 1 < j/dChindam). , . „ ._^u; • .3Ly / Herakli // J/ /' ?5 // / A<
\ 1*1 V \ A °<7 XGemirhKeuifjF kA'/ W : •*>' // f Kurnao yw
Vi \ — V YPA « V? / // yKestabof. VJ =C / fl / (
\ >.— —^ <r 5^i>^ rv t S / y ll Kha&saq y L /
> V' \ -
> Duvali y
/) f / /'
Andjik o IX»* Ji/Jli*..
" / *' ' li oZdmbur- --z
SAT. /r' t *“''-'u. \ < !\ ; /'/r~ ly yTmurtalik ) \/d Bulbul o Marsova?) o h ' arna 9t'' iXr Kantara / w>^/"
\Vy A' < K \V ,s4cT/ / //[Killis i f'^jy^SGauvrille
P/irdemlu ' 1 «7 \ /Mashka / />,. !
f Lamas Af A V Alfaro ''Af/' l Membidjt
KaratashBurun jW /f(;,X f . **//. Khan dP \ f/fakhterin
fAA
Xo ;'
LV 4 \ / j
z. M <*</ / 1
7 ,-i, \ 1
JjV 0
7\T
\( 4 » [Heiisa /
/ Amberjfik 1
I r
'v
_ yV ‘ Ka'ramurt/' ' { —
5- 1 i Kffara'rafe
/7I V \ <7fV /
■> Ras el Khanziry
is \ v
’ A El Bah Afif
' y >V '
\ irXr^
. o 1 // *V
/
-ilk - — -
\
V
\
yJ Mustimiya /
/ Sarsur t
jS \ -
ff: / p
\ S/£r*(Utf-dn \,
V v s /r' o Turmain
X
\
\J/y A El Bab
MAM 6 . ’.. /:-■:--T^r
IS ' V. Nasrulla ' * -
j Chen Ilk}
\o
', i^nAntakia
/ v / Harim
\ A
I P Sal km .j
V/ \endjaA j Kiftir? K £'rfffeb \
\ ■ • 1 / / ,s
M
, TeH°Khasaf
y • 1
r 1 v
i . /
SbDerkush y— •—
-IJ
E/Harfridiveh ' '.
b ai ,{. n J Idlib
' v u 'i/ .<- »■
•^7
'<' . . oi±^>
N s H/ ubl Z er !,$r !l -l£blll arn ra
Rasel-Baslt «< -' £/Wnflf</
V f / &as/t r
\ i •
/ '" /
1 ' Seraikin
klr.. , /?/Aa /
fDpsresh o /
yoe/ame . A ' v _o. '' -
y x s vStad/at
5 Te/edjin ' \
\
)
CYPRUS j/'
Cape Andreas ._■* f/
0 y' /
erala / ,
/"/astal B^kk
£k hen Ah me dRan
L » °Selma t
v Shoghur / Tue/m
» ' o Rama /
fjsA fELL NEBI AIYUB
\ Maarit en c - v ” 7 /-. o (
\i 'KurbZenr \
! Siyaiatx. _1\ J
\ Abuduhur . ' /
( 6 _ v /
Ramie N x /
o Rjzokarpaso J
>- 1
A
■*£/Bahiulia ° i
A 0 1 i
A; ' \ l
'll... 1 V / v
' " - , . t-LL.
_. ,. / '+.Anderm
Smd/ar EsSekege Y~ - -, . C'/
O Ga//a opormi’ La d i kiy 3 4t?^r
A
,—'KalaSahyun J
/i
\ 1
loRnkia i '. o/,, ,., i \
Li i * ' N /Umerdjim i \ .
I , ' / < jf-.y;
l ( /\ 1 Senyafyfj/*’ "
So
V
\ * fo Tarnb
v \
1 -V'; y
f Kasr/bn We rdan
'DJebe/io
1
1 1
w \ »
V *
\ A- 8 „* a6 / / I
V?sA//a e 9 /
Y/\ i
Jj£ \^Ka/ate/A/e/ka^
’/ Banias d
o Hamidiyeh \ liKumhana
V / <
°leiba /
Oar Shemai!
\ '
/
___-Toyama
\ ' '''
I 1 E/Kadmusb- A * x's*
t Masyad f! * \
J'o-7- ' . / ■ I Dial fa
i\ Zimrm Teffa Oeirel Ferdis cr J /
\;
r
'prSefemiya
! "^ojlarr/
Ruad o
b\
k'
/ ° Dreikish
< Tartus
\ s O Saf/ta
Y
<j E/Beiadiya/ \ oAbuHammama ''^jMasudlya
\P Barin'? \ rtpEr Rastan 1
/ / #
_«'*Zuweir& ) li .- N * X. „ -«r- *
,/ . v
( ' TT rrrr. //? t> - - - 7*2jd" LJ „ _
X\Ain esSoda o Hadidi V%/ i nom 5
'<
■ '
\\
<^y.o v \Ay/ 1
Jit Furk/us
)Y 'y o Sheikh Muhammad j tf \
o EsSait °
f/ Mina .
Jy° o o \ Y Kusseir to Shamsin
A? o D DJebrail .. J‘ ( ,, > \jf|
f' Berka/I *£. ■ X /KI *
0 dAA/yAyf fflb/e i
Ai'k r E LL A B U RA B A
/%> Tr^inoli Ja\S>
/TV J ) ' ry> T .. 7/ ry \sw/. i
T J y,Er\fi(\ s \V v \r; <5 £f JyEIKaa-.f'\\\
// J S' 'n Bureise\ £>Huri
/\kj I* '-~T\«c— >/ ;£yrl, l y **<1/ ,<> Ras Baalbek A Sadud
)‘ Datrun 'vS /
S (! ° Duma i .■.£'\ n L''?7
[y— w ° o /4 lir \v N \| > /fora^
0 Hawarin fj
° Ma hi n |
.P Kgryafain .'
Y ’ J J • '"> [
! '\[ r - .
/y/ '-■== co-'-'-iy ) Baalbek / /
a
/
/
/
/
/
/
/ -
✓
A O “ < - ✓
" '.MV\ VV m 7
✓
.\ a' /
o BekfeyP.
] Meri Zal
‘
A y - ' Barukf
A>> \i~~
7 /; AJ -Al ;
A r
N \**
-•■"V
>. ✓
o 'BirZobeida
„ /Maalaka l
A" as fL„M>
A mm$
c:..'' i ; ,-- f
'f-Liany,/ ../"
MjxSf * nR ‘ h J- b ~
1 / Adbra
%o».
«?/ i!
_/__ 1
t| 5 1
L ), A o Mezbub Rr r o DfebDj4nin''.^*i£!2ghl
1 /'o-2iSy--- L
a i
~ Y^«ascus
pS^hnaiya
r OUTLINE MAP
£/ Taiyibi o 4 f / o El Had/ > / X, 1 *— MNL IV|/\|
1" o Diuwaiya -l\) y> „
1" Tibnino AY^ Bama \
* Zerakiya fc
\ Brak
O F
(/' 6 Haia Shema \
r'
xGhabaghib f
C/b/. lY/fr SYRIA
UmmDjQten\jL.Hu.leh ,4q /o w 8 6e6 B 1 X 1 rX
1 '^..Safar/ X l r oE/l
Khushniva \ °J e ? el
- S p q 1 p
i '<\v < / y
A 1
u L dl L
A _ / ' Yerka -O , i' -N ) y /
Ac re _-.- § ' ; JV \
/ ! \ El Mughar r /^^\
; V. . . r/ter/L iLTibei
a ;lj> \Lubbein o ....
/ U « Miles.
rt/ YEzra 10 ° *0
Miles
20 30 ' 40 50 60
1 1 < i
# Tsi, A77]$ J
‘J oLS A/J Z d /
Kerepences.
AthtitM. Nazareth mhiy
li ■/'•,•■ h iL/oe/na/r/j
V Z/~Mez e rfb
Roads & Tracks
Te/. L/ne.*-*-- -■ *
; -:=5 ; IL ..o
\ / A/. . ~ n , t
V ® * \Deraa 7 '^-
X[Zirkm*rin %.* ()£ bumma . V Rums..'.
/y° o ' l i\ 5/jatta 11? » \
// V ° /r6 /d \ , A
Caesarea ft \ fcnpnr o £, Ho sn \ N 3S/b
fort, o


VETERANS
It was a wonderful hour for our young Australian countrymen. But
the long war had made them into reserved men of the world, and the streets
of old Damascus were but a stage in the long path of the war. They rode,
very dusty and unshaved, their big hats battered and drooping, through
the tumultuous populace of the oldest city in the world, with the same easy,
casual bearing, and the same quiet self-confidence that are their distinctive
characteristic on their country tracks at home. They ate their grapes and
smoked their cigars, and missed no pretty eyes at the windows; but they
displayed no excitement or elation. They had become true soldiers of
fortune. And their long-tailed horses, at home now, like their owners, on
any road in any country, saw nothing in the shouting mob or banging rifles,
or the narrow ways and many colours of the bazaars, to cause them once to
start, shy, or even cock an ear. The 3rd Brigade rode out to a series of ugly,
but highly successful, actions with stout rear-guards of German machine
gunners. Few men, in any age, have passed through twenty-four more
adventurous and gratifying hours than they during this first day around
Damascus.
BEAUTIFUL DAMASCUS
The district of Damascus is an irrigation settlement on a vast scale, set in
the midst of comparative desert. So rich and close are the orchards, and so
tall the plantations of poplars and other decorative trees, that, looking over
the city from the neighbouring hills, all you see of the city of 250,000 people
are the stately minarets of its many mosques and the roofs of the larger
residences of the rich. Immediately to the west of the town rises the bare,
glaring mountain side, and to the east and north and south of the green
expanse of gardens you ride out upon the harsh and treeless plain.
Damascus owes all its wealth, even its very existence, to the torrential
Abana River, which, surging down from Anti-Lebanon, bursts from the
mountain gorge on to the plain and, splitting up into several beautiful
streams, has made a rural paradise on the edge of the Arabian wilderness.
In Palestine the troops looked in vain for the Promised Land “ flowing
with milk and honey.” The Plain of Philistia was fertile, but apart from the
few Jewish and German colonies, and the orange groves about Jaffa, it was,
with all its natural possibilities, a land bare and neglected, a reproachful
ghost of a great life that is gone. But Damascus was a prize worth the
winning. Here, after nearly three years of desert and exhausted, unfruitful


AUSTRALIANS ON THE ROAD TO JERUSALEM
AN AUSTRALIAN FLYING SQUADRON IN PALESTINE
Photos, in colour by Capt. Frank Hurley




regions, was an area good to look upon, and teeming with an active people.
Few of us were sorry that we had at last outrun our supplies, or rather,
that the huge capture of prisoners had somewhat strained the wonderful
commissariat which had so gallantly kept at the heels of the galloping
cavalry, and that a brief halt was necessary for the Australian Mounted
Division. For a month some of the Regiments were in camps in the gardens
around the city, and man and horse never accepted rest more gratefully.
After thirteen days on bully and biscuit, it was good to know fresh meat
and bread again; the mutton was of the best, and the bread, if dark and
coarse and heavy, was still a long way ahead of biscuit. We were too late
for the famous Damascus apricots, but there were grapes for the multitude,
and pears and apples and pomegranates, and, also, raisins and other dried
fruits and specialties in Eastern sweetmeats. Best of all, every camp was
within sight and sound of many running waters.
Noisy little streams crossed our path a hundred times a day. Follow
one along, and it suddenly disappeared into an underground passage, to
burst forth like a spring a hundred yards away. In the streets, many of the
gutters are river-fed waterways, and, to reduce the dust, the tired civic
authorities block the drains and cause an effective little flood, which is
extended by boys splashing with their hands. You buy grapes at the stalls,
and carry them a few yards to dip into the waters of a mountain stream.
But Damascus is dirty and insanitary. Without the purge of the Abana
waters, flushing through it and under it, the city would die of its filth in a
single summer. And even with its beautiful streams it proved a false friend
to great numbers of Australians. The Australian Mounted division suffered
more sickness in the Damascus area than anywhere else in the campaign.
THE ANZACS’ PART
In most of the operations which cleared Sinai and Palestine of the
Turk, the lead was entrusted to the veterans of the Anzac Mounted
Division. In this last and greatest campaign of all, the Division found
itself away from the spectacular side of the enterprise. A trusty mounted
Division was needed for the subsidiary, but highly important, work on
Moab and Gilead, east of Jordan, and the choice fell upon the Anzacs.
The Australians and New Zealanders complained about their luck.
But their task made one strong appeal to them. Twice before they had
been across the Jordan, and twice they had returned leaving not a few of
their men in enemy graves. The two great raids over the river, early in the


year, were brilliantly successful, as raids. Each time our purpose was
achieved. But each time our men broke off the fight strongly against their
inclination, and prayed for the day when they would get orders to go over
and see the job through, and stay. Old Amman, the ancient Philadelphia,
was especially coveted by our men. There, in March, 1918, we had fought
for days over sodden ground in extreme winter weather and come away,
the railway having been well broken, just after the New Zealanders had
won into the town. This time, Australians and New Zealanders competed,
in a sporting way, for first entry, and the sth Light Horse Regiment,
from Queensland, narrowly gained the honour.
At the outset, the Anzacs, and the small infantry force operating with
them, made up chiefly of the Jewish Battalion, the British West Indians
and troops from India proper, had no chance of breaking out of our bridge-
heads east of the river. Their orders were to keep in very close and firm
touch with the enemy, and to demolish him as soon as he began to withdraw
in consequence of his defeat on Samaria. Also, this Jordan Valley force
was to push northwards up the Valley, and complete the cordon round the
two Turkish armies on Samaria. Both missions were admirably accom-
plished. While the New Zealanders and infantry were advancing up the
Valley, the Australians were probing the strongly-entrenched and wired
positions along the Moab and Gilead foothills, across the river. As soon
as the Turk moved the two Australian Brigades pounced upon his rear-
guard, and fought him as he climbed the narrow wady tracks up on to the
tableland. Meanwhile, the New Zealanders, crossing away to the north at
Jisr el Damie, ascended the goat-track which leads from there to Es Salt,
and, for the third time in the campaign, that old stone-built town was in
Australasian hands.
All the way our men had evidence of the success of the British bluff.
The Turks’ defences on the foothills, and higher up, were particularly
strong. Had our main attack gone that way, the fight would have been
very bitter, with the enemy in a strong natural position. But now the
Turks were compelled to abandon their stronghold because of their disaster
in the west, and, also, because the Arabs had broken their communications
to the north, and were joining hands with a British and Indian cavalry
Division right across those communications. As the Australians passed
Shunet Nimrin, they discovered a long-range navy gun lying on its side, a
piece known to them as “ Nimrin Nellie ” and “ Jericho Jane,” with which
the Turk had often made our camps near Jericho dusty and unpleasant.


ORANGE SELLER, JAFFA
IN THE SHADE




JAFFA
AUSTRALIANS PRIOR TO THE FIGHT FOR HEIGHTS OF NALIN




AMMAN CAPTURED
It was not until our men were far across the tableland, and close to
Amman, that the enemy showed fight. There our advance guard came
under machine-gun fire; but the Division’s rapid advance on the town
was not stayed. As the scene of the severe March fighting came into
view the Australians appreciated the disaster which had so suddenly fallen
upon the Turkish arms. In March, the only possible approaches to
Amman led through hurricanes of machine-gun fire, together with shells
from several field batteries. But now, the broken foe, although he fought
gamely at this particular spot, was quickly out-witted and out-classed by
Light Horse manoeuvre, and soon the Australians, after trifling casualties,
were riding in the streets of the squalid modern village, and marvelling at
the glory of the ancient Roman amphitheatre. Contact with the Roman in
this hour of our triumph did us good. It subdued our vanity. In these
far outposts of the old Roman Empire, on the very edge of the barbarian
desert, the massiveness of the stone-work and the fine quality of the
decorative carving proclaimed to the least imaginative mind the culture
and mighty physical achievements of our great rivals in the task of Empire
building. “ The splendour that was Rome ”is told far more convincingly
in distant Amman and Baalbek than in the ruins of Rome itself.
The Australians took 350 prisoners in Amman, and the New Zealanders
another good bag as the Turks attempted to escape to the north. But the
chief, and by far the most amusing, exploit of the Anzacs’ campaign, fell
to the 2nd Light Horse Brigade under General Ryrie, at Ziza, about
twenty miles to the south. News came through that a large Turkish force,
which had been far to the south on the Hedjaz railway at Maan, was in
an entrenched position at Ziza, and a regiment of Queenslanders rode
down to spy out the land and, if possible, to smash them. The C.O.
reported that he was in touch with 5000 Turks, who wished to capitulate,
but they would not lay down their arms until they were sure that a great
force of hostile Arabs, by whom they were surrounded, would be kept
away from them. So the Colonel of the Queenslanders suggested that the
whole Brigade should hurry down to assure the Turks of their safety.
General Ryrie at once decided to go, and the twenty miles were covered in
less than three hours.
'T 3 '


ARABS AND TURKS
The Brigade arrived shortly before dark, and an extraordinary situation
was discovered. The Turks were in a strongly defended position around
the village. They were made up, in the main, of Anatolians, regulars and
the cream of the Ottoman army. Moreover, they were well armed and
capable of a good fight. Our Brigade was not complete and was out-
numbered by about ten to one. The Turkish commander rode out to meet
the Australian Brigadier. “ I will surrender,” he said, “if you will protect
us against the Arabs.” “ Certainly,” said the Brigadier. “ The Arabs are
our allies; if you surrender, you have nothing to fear.” But the Turkish
leader would not be convinced, and he demanded that the Australian force
should be greatly increased before his men gave up their arms. Otherwise,
he would be pleased to fight. General Ryrie was anxious to complete the
surrender and save casualties, and the Australians and Turks spent the
night together in arms around the same camp fires !
Next morning, the Turks laid down their arms and marched as prisoners
to Amman. The incident was an interesting sidelight on the feeling of the
Turk towards the Arabs, whom he has so long governed. But it is a
highly significant fact that, in the long campaign, the Arabs took 17,000
Turkish prisoners, and the Turks not a single Arab. To the Arab, the
Turk has been an enemy in arms. To the Turk, the Arab has been a rebel,
and deserving of a rebel’s fate.
Zira practically finished the Anzacs’ brilliant little campaign. In all,
some 11,000 prisoners were taken. The total battle casualties for the
Division did not exceed a few score.
THE TECHNICAL SERVICES
The writer of this sketch has been obliged to keep severely to the work
of the Force as a whole, and has recorded little or nothing of the great
achievements of the many technical services, lacking which the victorious
progress of the Light Horsemen would have been impossible. The
performances of the Australian No. 1 Flying Corps Squadron, the first
Commonwealth Flying Squadron engaged in the war, deserve a volume to
themselves. Recruited chiefly from the Light Horse Regiments, both
pilots and observers excelled in resource and daring, and in their golden
chivalry to their foes, and in their many fine rescues of fallen comrades
far behind the enemy lines, shone the spirit of Saladin and King Richard.
They were the modern Knights of Palestine.


ANZAC RIDGE, GAZA
By Lieut. G. W. Lambert


■


Then there were the Engineers (no attempt is made to place these
services in order of merit —a hopeless task), who found us water at
will, as with a magician’s wand, beneath the blistering sands of Sinai;
who bridged the Jordan under heavy fire for the crossing to Moab, and
who, so often, blew enemy railroads, bridges and viaducts heavenward.
Working over every kind of country from the desert to the mountains, they
won through because of their indomitable spirit, and their boundless gift
for improvization.
THE M.O.
In the whole war there has not been a campaign which depended
so much for its success upon the native wit of the individual. Conditions
changed with dramatic suddenness from battle to battle. What served
to-day, was useless to-morrow. As an example of this, take the superb
work of our Medical Services. The Medical Officer was, all the way, a
man of many inventions. In the desert the wounded were habitually
carried on sledges made of sheets of galvanized iron, and, later, upon an
improvement of this device ; as the campaign progressed, they were borne
on camels; and once, at least, in the mountains east of Jordan, they were
carried lying flat on rough beds made of greatcoats on the backs of horses ;
and as the road improved, they were carried in two-wheeled sand-carts,
in ordinary G.S. wagons and every kind of motor. The Light Horse
galloped, and those who would serve them must gallop too. The almost
miraculous rapidity and efficiency with which the Medical Units would
establish their various stations and communications, at the very heels of
a fight, distant perhaps a hundred swiftly-covered miles from railhead,
made them worthy peers of the sparkling horsemen. And, thanks to the
establishment of the mobile operating theatre a veritable galloping
machine, like the rest of the force —under a gifted surgeon, it was possible
for the most intricate skull and abdominal operations to be carried out at
the edge of the zone of fire. All honour to our doctors and their devoted
staffs ! And especially dear in the memory of Light Horsemen will always
be the mounted stretcher bearers. No wounded man was beyond their
gallant reach.
Of the Light Horseman’s debt to the Nursing Sisters this narrative will
not dare an estimate. As long as memory lasts, every officer and man will
think with deep gratitude of the sustained, self-sacrificing devotion of these
noble Australian women. Fighting in this alien and uncivilized land,
thousands of young Australians for years never spoke to a British woman,


THE A.S.C.
except when in hospital. What the ever-ready sympathy and helpful
friendship of the Sisters meant to them only these lonely soldiers could
tell.
The supreme masters of improvization were the officers and men who
handled the supplies. Not only the Australians, but the whole of the
Imperial Cavalry—the greatest mounted force in the war under a single
command —led by General Chauvel, depended for their rations upon the
distinguished ability of the Queensland Colonel who was responsible for
the direction of the supply and transport for mounted corps in the Desert.
A cavalry force requires about four times the quantity of supplies which
suffices for infantry, and, on occasions, it travels four times as fast. During
the ride to Damascus, the horsemen, more than once, covered sixty miles
in twenty-four hours ; and on the whole advance, no man or horse went
short of a mobile ration. British railways, captured Turkish railways and
rolling-stock, motor lorries, four-wheeled G.S. wagons, two-wheeled limbers
(their off-side horses carrying pack-saddles, so that, if the vehicle failed, the
load could be transferred), camels in tens of thousands, countless mules and
donkeys—the interminable, sleepless procession on the roads during General
Chauvel’s final triumph was a fitting culmination to the great transport
record from the Canal onward.
Of our Australian machine gunners and signallers, and of the model
Veterinary Service, which cared for our sick and wounded walers as
promptly and faithfully as the Medical people cared for the men, and of
the British batteries of Horse Artillery, which unfailingly advanced to
extreme limits with their guns and shot so unerringly (never was man so
welcome as a galloping gunner in a sticky dismounted fight)—of all these,
it is enough to say that without them Palestine could not be ours to-day.
The fighting ceased for the Australians early in October, with the capture
of Damascus and Amman, though No. 1 Australian Light Car Patrol (Captain
James), accompanying the sth Cavalry Division, took a prominent part
in the capture of Aleppo, and in the pursuit of the Turko-German forces
north of that city. The final campaign yielded prodigious results at a
trifling cost in battle casualties. Of the 75,000 prisoners made by
General Allenby’s Army, more than 40,000 were taken by the Australian
and Anzac Mounted Divisions. The losses in killed and wounded,
in the two Divisions, were nominal. Unfortunately, however, the


Force then suffered the worst spell of sickness it had known since leaving
Australia. The terrible ordeal of Jordan Valley during the summer took its
suspended toll. Malaria ran like wildfire through the regiments, and
there was also much acute influenza with pneumonia following, sand-
fly fever, and other more or less serious diseases peculiar to the Holy Land.
Many brave men, who had survived four years of hard fighting and
extremely rough living, lost their lives by sickness in the moment of victory.
The Australian Mounted Division was pushing on from Damascus
towards the country north of Aleppo, and the armistice was signed as they
reached Homs, which marked the northern limit attained by the Light
Horsemen.
To-day, the force asks only one question: “Who goes Home —and
when ? ”
Palestine, December, 1918.


Anthem Bells
Heard ye the bells, the chapel bells,
Pealing in Bethlehem ?
The vibrant swells, the solemn knells,
On the eve of a requiem ?
Saw ye the trees
When the gentle breeze
Caressed the leaves of them ?
Heard ye the guns, the distant guns,
That thundered down the vale,
When comrades strode the mountain road
To brave the battle gale ?
O, see the worn, returning men whose march
no fire could stem,
And hear their song as they surge along
The road to Bethlehem !
O, hear the hoofs, the iron hoofs,
Falling in Bethlehem,
While sunlight flames on the ruddy roofs
In the hills of Jerusalem!
And if you’ve crossed the wilderness by well
and palmy hod,
Pray heed the bells, the heavenly bells,
That call the folk to God.
“ gerardy:


Palestine Poppies
ROM the hills to the sea, a scarlet trail of flowers in
the spring, when the little grey larks are singing
and all the low country is green with barley. Wild
flowers everywhere, yellow and purple and butterfly-
blue —but the poppy is our choice. It glows on
Australian graves in the plains and down by the sea
where the surf croons all day long; it makes beauti-
ful old battle-grounds, and flakes the wady’s brown
banks with scarlet. The blood-red poppy is
Palestine’s flower. At the wind s touch petals fall from the slender stems
to lie softly in the grass, as if some rare and lovely bird had shed its
plumage there. The red poppy is our flower of War, and in the tranquil
days of Peace will be our flower of Memory.
Among the sea dunes white lilies grow, and they, too, will have power
to win us memories of Palestine, unclouded by sorrow ; memories of the
blue Mediterranean, serene as a summer sky, or flinging ramparts of foam
alongshore. When we camped at Malala or Marakeb beach, heeding all
day the call of the surf, the land wind bore to us faintly the scent of
blossoms unseen. A colour, then, and a fragrance of flowers are the gifts
we shall take overseas. One will bring memories tinged with sadness ;
the other of golden hours.
Palestine is a wild garden in spring. Many plants blossom on through
the summer, fading at last in the season of mists, when dawn comes veiled
like a bride and the earth is pearled with dew. In spring, when the wattles
shower gold on our streams, Palestine poppies are blooming. From the
white sea-dunes to the long blue hills the land is alight with flowers. And
all the larks of the world and all the butterflies seem to be gathered there.
Over every blossom some bird is singing or a butterfly floating on sunlit
wings. A murmur of bees in convolvulus bells ; grasshoppers leaping over
the tall grass ; wagtails gleaning in sheltered places ; white vultures high
in the blue ; and kestrels hovering over the barley, keen-eyed for prey.


Those long rides across the plains, before the Turks were driven back
to the hill country, were wonderful. Our horses breasted a green sea of
barley, and it was hard to urge them on. Often we drew rein to look at
leisure on the earth’s green mantle inwrought with flowers. The plains
and the valleys were beautiful. We rode inland along the blue ways of
Dawn, rode on till noon, then, after rest, took the sunset trail, when cloud
shadows were skimming over the earth. We gazed at the purple ranges
and wondered what lay beyond. Under the stars we slept well.
One ride I remember more vividly than all others. We started at
sunrise from Belah, rode through a village, and came to a place of little hills
whose slopes were bare of trees. Here the Bedouins had pitched their
tents, some on the hills and some in the valleys, singly or in groups. When
we cantered past men came from the tents to look at us, and children
followed after, wailing for backsheesh. The women remained at their
tasks. Dogs barked at our horses’ hoofs till their masters cursed them,
when they slunk back snarling. We travelled on, with Fara on our left—a
great grey bulk against the sky—coming at length to old pasture-lands that
War had restored to Nature. Where dust had lain deep, and all plant life
had perished under the feet of an army, Nature had won loveliness, healing
earth’s wounds with grasses and flowers. It seemed an idle dream that the
red tide of war had surged where poppies flamed in the sun and the
little speedwell’s eyes of blue shone amid the grass.
Far as our vision ranged the land was bright with flowers —tulips, blue
salvias, scarlet pimpernels, asphodels, white daisies, anemones, and lilies
swaying on tall stems ; hollows brimming with sunshine and pink with
cyclamens ; acres of red poppies set in emerald; sky-coloured lupines ; a
green knoll fringed with “ pheasant’s eye ” ; and away to the west a long,
brown field flaked with white convolvulus flowers.
For a mile we rode along the wady, seeking vainly an easy descent for
the horses. Every cleft was starred with flowers; over the ledges melon
plants trailed, making caves of tiny crevices haunted by lizards and spiders.
Down a steep track we rode carelessly, letting our eyes dwell on blossoms
and giving the horses free rein. We won to the other side safely, then on
again through flowerland, with the white tents of the Camel Corps gleaming
afar at Shellal. A long, glad ride from dawn till dusk across the plains in
spring.
When we carried war to the Judean hills we found wild beauty there;
flowers among the terraced hills and olive trees in the valleys. Pink holly-


hocks grew on the heights along the Jerusalem road. The valleys were
gardens. Gehenna’s goat-tracks, winding among old tombs, were bordered
with scarlet poppies.
Wild flowers are Palestine’s glory. No one has named them all. From
Dan to Beersheba, among the hills of Moab and Judea, on the wide plain
of Esdraelon, on Hermon and Tabor, in Gilead and Bashan ; everywhere
in Palestine Spring casts down her kindling buds. We have seen them all
in our long campaign, and out of the shining company have chosen two
for remembrance : the little red poppy (symbol of sleep), and the lily that
grows by the sea.
CHARLES BARRETT.


Farming in Arcady
T TP in fanatical, uncorrupted old Hebron, where, happily, the cheap
tourists are afraid to venture, you see the rude but expert craftsman
making the plough. Seated in his gloomy little recess, hewn out of the
stone of the hillside, he works swiftly with toes and fingers. Seizing a
rough bent branch of an olive tree, he stands it up and grasps the lower
end firmly with his deft and supple toes. The pieces fly. Slashing and
turning, he lops the smaller limbs, hacks it here and prunes it there, and, in
a few minutes, flings it aside complete, except for the steel tip which plays
the part of the share.
For a few shillings the plough is bought by the Bedouin. The selection
of the land for cultivation is equally simple. Over most of the Palestine
we covered, there is little regularity in the tenure of the small holder. The
Sheik of the village has a loose control over a wide area, for which he
pays tribute and taxes in grain to the Turk. The Bedouin is granted a
plot the size of which is according to his capacity to cultivate and his
inclination to work. He is rarely ambitious, and always lazy. If he has
more than one wife, or has children of a working and a hungry age, he will
extend his area. But, like the piece of glass bottle in Grimm’s fairy tale,
he loves best just to lie about and glitter in the sun. That is better than
any exceptional success as a farmer.
As a cultivator he has complete confidence in Allah. He has never
heard of artificial manures, or of the rotation of crops; he rarely troubles to
irrigate even when water is available. Here, as all over the Eastern Turkish
Empire, there is fertile land for every inhabitant, and to spare. So the
Bedouin roams wide with his plough. He crops here this year, and next
year tries a patch a few miles away, which has been resting for a season
or two under the thin native grasses. His selection made, he appears at
dawn one morning, riding on his mournful ass and carrying his plough in
front of him. Or perhaps he rides one of his little black oxen and leads
the ass ; or he may ride either the ass or the oxen and lead a horse or
camel. The point is, that he always rides and carries the plough, and that
his wife, if she is in attendance, always walks and carries half-a-hundred-


HARVEST TIME
PLOUGHING AS OF OLD
NATIVE STOCK


THE FRANCISCAN MONASTERY
- . *
■
„ t "* -.Jj ,|
""m' jj | jppp|, -vjfeB||wL,-
R yl ■ | |£
LAKE OF TIBERIAS


weight of something on her head. It is a significant commentary upon
his neighbours that he always brings his plough home at night.
In his team he seldom drives two of a kind. It is a cow and a donkey,
or a scabby, bony ghost of a pony and a camel. You can yoke them as you
please. Palestine is a land that knows no shame, and so the horse does
not rebel at being harnessed with a cow. Lazy as he is, the Bedouin is
always up at dawn. At dusk he goes to his mat to sleep; he cannot read,
and the villages burn no night-lights.
Cleverly holding his simple plough upright with one hand, he pelts
clods at the team or wields a long goad with the other. Up and down he
scratches little gutters a few inches apart, his camel towering ludicrously
above his ass. Usually, he sows his seeds in strips before the plough. He
rarely harrows and never rolls, but sometimes he shows a sense of the value
of fallow by ploughing twice. The rest he leaves to Allah.
Sometimes, in the spring, he will pluck the wild turnip and radish and
other tares from the growing corn. As a rule he prefers to sit in his
coloured rags in the pleasant sunshine. Or he may go off to Jaffa with
his asses and his women, and traffic in oranges. Then you see him, with
both asses and women brutally overloaded, goading the donkey, or perhaps
astride behind the burden of fruit, as the little long-eared slave totters along
the tracks. The women, like the asses, never protest. The man is master.
It is the way of the East.
The beautiful lilies and poppies vanish as summer comes upon the
rolling, treeless plain. The corn ripens and harvesting begins. Machinery
plays as little part here to-day as it did among the “ alien corn ” near
Bethlehem long ago, when pretty Ruth worked for Boaz. In Palestine the
world has stood still for a thousand years or more, or when it moved it
moved backward. Much of the barley and wheat is pulled up, roots and
all, but some is cut with sickles. In each village there is a harvest floor—a
patch of clean, hard ground, where each man builds his little stack and sees
about the threshing.
Occasionally you see the flail at work, but it is not popular. To wield
the flail is hard work. So the Bedouin employs his cattle, his wives
and his children. He spreads the loose crop in a little circle about two feet
deep. Donkeys and oxen and ponies are then tied together, from two to
four abreast, and goaded round and round upon the straw. Sometimes the
threshing is done by their hoofs alone ; but often a rude wooden sledge is
drawn after them. Time is of no concern. The cattle barely move ; the


owner sits with his friends under the shade of an olive tree, smoking many
cigarettes and occasionally dreaming luxuriously over his hubble-bubble;
pleasant breezes blow across from the gleaming Mediterranean. The season
has been generous : Allah is good. Why hurry ?
The threshing finished, rough wooden forks are used to remove the
coarsest straw, and then the winnowing begins. Day after day the harvest
is thrown high into the air, and, slowly but surely, the chaff and dross are
separated from the grain by the Mediterranean breezes.
Then the Turk comes —or he did before the war and takes from thirty
to sixty bushels out of every hundred ! That is why the Bedouin is so fond
of glinting in the sunshine, like the piece of glass bottle in the old fairy tale.
H.- S. G




OUTPOSTS
JORDAN VALLEY DUST






Fmy early life I remember but little. I have a dim
recollection of golden sunlight, of wide-sweeping
plains, of a huge dam down by a homestead, of
tall trees like some I have seen around Jaffa, and
others with golden blossom, and of a long trip in a
railway truck to Homebush —ah! you know the
place ? —where I was sold.
Since I have been in the Army my comrades
have often taunted me with not knowing on what
station I was born, and have called me a town-bred scrub ; but I cannot
help that. I will not bore you with details of my early career at Surry
Hills as a “ week-end ” horse (I was then owned by a prosperous butcher),
nor will I inflict upon you my first impressions of Army life at Moore
Park; but I must say that I was at Broadmeadows, learning Sections
right,” “ Form troop,” and “Walk march, before they would put me in a
unit. _ .
On the 20th November, 1914, our troop was taken down to a big dock
and put on board what our masters called a transport. (I have heard them
call it a ship, a tub—and other names as occasion demanded). We horses
had a rough time all the way across ; and judging by the manner in which
our masters cursed when they came to feed us ana perform their stable
duties, or to lead us about the decks for exercise, I think they had a rough
time, too. I remember a remarkable incident on our deck when we were
somewhere in the tropics. (If you know anything about the tropics and


about ships, you will know how we and our masters existed). Ginger, who
never wore anything to speak of except a pair of shorts, shoes, and a grin,
looked after the horses on my off side; he also used to hitch baskets on to
a long rope, which disappeared through the deck above. “ Haul away!
was all he ever said, and the basket disappeared. Later, a voice would
echo from above: “Under below!” and Ginger would stand well back
until it landed again. One day when the rope slipped, the chap up above
forgot to say “ Under below,” and the big basket fell down on Ginger and
extinguished him. When he got clear, his conversation with the chap on
top was so unrestrained and vivid that three horses broke out of their
stalls and tried to climb up on deck. I did not mind —I had often heard
the expressions Ginger used. v
We reached. Alexandria at last and were taken ashore. At first I
thought that a peculiarity existed in the ground of Egypt, for it kept rocking
and swaying under my feet like the movement of the ship ; but this feeling
went away in two or three days. We were taken to Gabbari, put into
trucks, and rattled to Ma’adi, a pretty little suburb of Cairo. At Ma adi we
had plenty of feed, good stables which kept the sun off us during the day,
and very little work while the boys were away at the Peninsula. Sometimes
we went out on route marches and dummy stunts, and always on Sundays
our masters used to take us out on to the desert behind the camp, to gallop
us until we were tired. Those gallops were great sport. There would be
horses all over the desert, some of them with riders clinging affectionately
to their necks, others without riders, and all of them thoroughly enjoying
the fun, and kicking their heels playfully into the air. We were at Ma adi
right up till February, 1916, and then we were pushed off to Serapeum and
dumped in a camp close to the Canal. After the delights of Ma adi,
Serapeum came as a shock to me; and in a few days I was feeling very ill
on account of the sand I had swallowed with my food. I could not stand,
so I rolled about in agony. Up till then I had never had a day’s sickness,
so this experience was quite a new one. The farrier-sergeant visited me on
the evening of my collapse, administered a “ball” to me, and told Bill (my
boss) that I would be all right in the morning. A lot he knew about horses !
He ought never to have left that boot factory. He also told Bill to give me
a bit more berseem. Bill stopped with me for a while, talking ; then a
whistle blew and he cleared out. “ Good-night, Baldy ” (that is the name
I always got) he said as he departed, “ you’ll be O.K. at reveille. In the
morning I was almost better, and by lunch time, when Bill gave me a big


sth LIGHT HORSE BRIGADE ENTERING NABLUS
WATERING HORSES, ES SALT


HORSES THIRSTY


feed of berseem that he had pinched from somewhere, I was as good as
ever again.
We had been at Serapeum only a few weeks when I was taken up to
Salhia, where I was promoted on the strength (I think that is the term) of a
new Squadron. Bill came with me, so I had no complaints to make not
even about the tibbin. Bill always was a good master, and he was never
tired of looking after me. In heat, in dust, in mud; across the desert, over
the plains, amongst the hills —anywhere at all —Bill always groomed me
and saw that I got my full issue of tucker. We used to have long talks
together; and I really think he understood what I had to say to him. He
was always considerate in the way he loaded my saddle,, and rather than
sacrifice my bag of grain, he would dump his own gear. He could not do
enough for me; and, believe me, I could not do enough for him. Unfor-
tunately, all masters are not like Bill, or (pardon my vanity) all horses like
Baldy.
My first real stunt was from Salhia to Kantara across the desert; and I
think that it will live as long in my memory as that Amman show. We
travelled all night by short stages —Bill would ride for ten minutes, then
walk beside me during the next ten, and then we rested for ten minutes.
I had a fair load on the saddle, but this was Bill s first desert stunt, too, and
he had not realized exactly how severe desert stunts can be. After that he
always let someone else have the heavy gear, while he looked after the light
stuff. That was in April, 1916. The long months from then until March,
1917, were one nightmare of bombs and sand, out of which our stunts
Romani, Bir el Abd, Mazar, Magdhaba, Rafa, and many minor ones —
stood like the milestones I have seen along the roads at home. At the
commencement of things in Sinai tucker was plentiful, and we waxed fat
in the land and thrived on brackish water ; now we no longer get the same
amount —or so it seems —but the water is good. I did not notice the
change until yesterday, when I had recourse to chew through my headrope
so that I could visit the feed-heap while the piquet slept. Yet the change
has been very gradual, and it has not been severe on me. lam still pretty
sound in wind and limb, although I have seen old Bill look sorrowfully at
me, and say, “ Baldy, ten pounds of grain without fixings isn’t much to
offer a man’s best cobber, is it ? Never mind, old chap, we’re coping very
well —very well, you and I.”
Once Bill was away for seven days; and when he came back I noticed
that he was stable-guard for a whole fortnight. I thought it rather good of


Bill to look after the horses for such a long time without a break. I heard all
about it afterwards. Bill and the sergeant —a big, ugly bloke like a Gyppo—
were talking near me, and I overheard Bill’s final remark. “ Yes,” he said,
“ I’d be a stableman for a month if I could get those three days in Cairo
again.” Ah, Bill! what were you doing ? While he was away in Cairo
we had a little stunt to blow up a railway line; and because I was a good
worker, the big Gyppo bloke passed me on for the occasion. The chap
who rode me was a dopey kind of individual, and, although the stunt was
only to occupy thirty hours, he loaded me up with all sorts of gear, and
forgot my lunch-bag. We came home in the night time in a fog, tried to find
Tel el Fara, and circled about all over the place until I got tired of it, and
wanted to make for home and a feed; but my dopey rider kept with the
column, refusing to be guided by me. On another stunt, I just side-stepped
the “ Killed in Action ” return by a hair. Jacko sent across a few shells
in our direction, and one of them landed right underneath a horse next to
me and sent him West. Two others were as full of holes as a colander, but
we got them home. Strangely, the horses on my side of the burst were
untouched, and merely suffered from slight shock.
The summer of 1917 was what Bill called a “ snifter ” —he also called it
other things. Day after day, on those wind-swept, dust-covered plains of
Southern Palestine, we stood in the heat and sweated from sunrise to sunset;
during the night we shivered with the cold, and were wet with the dew and
mist. Then there came rumours of a big stunt. It was good to hear that a
big stunt was at last spoken about, not only because we got more attention
prior to it, but because we would be leaving these sun-baked plains behind,
and doing something towards earning our tibbin. It was on 28th October
that Bill loaded my saddle, and rode me away towards Beersheba with
the Squadron. From there onwards to Jaffa we dodged shells and planes,
and existed on a very scanty ration. (Even Bill complained now and
again.) We went without water on more than one occasion for sixty hours
on end; and we had many weary night marches. Just after we left Beer-
sheba I lost a good pal. She was following the General’s car, and had a
despatch-rider in the saddle; and while doing a stiff gallop she stumbled,
fell, and rolled over —dead. I think her death was due to lack of water,
since she had had none for three days. She was a dear old thing, and I have
yarned away many an hour with her. She died as I would like to die —a
soldier.
Winter caught us at Jaffa, and the rain came down unceasingly day and


night. Here I had a lot of trouble with our labour corps —the mules.
They were a hungry lot of cannibals, and, not being satisfied with a ration
of grain, they used to break away from their lines at night and eat our rugs.
Some of them even gnawed the hair and tail off a sick pal of mine—he did
look a wreck in the morning! Another inconvenience was that I shivered
so much that I always shook the rug off, no matter how careful Bill was
about putting it on. The early part of 1918 was a time of wind, cold, rain,
rocks and mud, and stunts amongst tremendous hills. We had a most
exciting time then, and I often wonder how it was I kept out of hospital.
Later on, when we stopped in the Valley, I tried to “swing it” a bit, and
succeeded in bluffing the sergeant; but the vet knew too much for me, and
so I remained. Fortunately, we moved back to Bethlehem, where the
bracing hill air, and the sight of the olive trees, made a new horse of me.
Our last big stunt was rather pleasant, as well as most profitable.
(Bill agreed with me in that.) We again went to Amman, and this time
captured all the Jackos in that part of the world; it was quite a different
affair from that first Amman stunt, when I slipped on the muddy track
and almost went overboard into a wady some hundreds of feet below.
After we had collected all the gear which Jacko had left behind, we turned
our heads west, came through Jericho, and passed up into the hills. We
stopped for a day at Jerusalem, and then travelled down to the coastal
plains near Jaffa. We returned to Richon to recuperate, and to await
further developments.
Now our masters are talking of going home, and I hear them
whisper in the lines —“ Yes, they’ll remain behind ” —“ Ah ! They’ve done
their work bravely and well” —“I wonder what will happen to them?”
Bill is going home; to-day he came to me and told me so. “ Good-bye,
Baldy, old comrade. You’ve been a good pal to me,” he said; and then he
was gone. Here at Richon I would like to stay with Bill, and end my
days. Richon, with its trees, its vines, its orchards, recalls my early life in
some strange way; its fertile fields and pleasant surroundings make the
desert days seem but a bad dream of long ago; and in its shady lanes, the
toilsome hills and the rain, and the dust of the Valley, are forgotten. But
Bill is gone ! I must stay behind ! Let them shoot me —and quickly—for
I would go to that land of eternal sunlight, there to wait until Bill calls to
me Then together we shall gallop for ever over the plains.
E. L. D. HUSBAND.




EVENING AMONGST THE JUDEAN HILLS
A CAMP IN THE DESERT
Photos, in colour by Capt. Frank. Hurley


*
i


One Too Many
T was a hell of a night. Thunder enough to wake
the “ Jacko ” dead, and raining fit to swamp old
Solomon’s Pool. I was a good ten miles from
camp, and it was with a dinkum bullocky’s curse
that I swung into the saddle again and turned the
pony’s nose for home. For about an hour we
battled along, and then the supply dump at S
hove in sight. Glad of a brief respite, I guided him
toward it, and for a few minutes we rested in the shelter of a huge stack of
tibbin.
The rain had eased off, and for a brief second a sickly-looking moon
gazed down on things earthly. That was what started the trouble.
An Algerian guard was on duty, and, to the initiated, there is no need to
say more than that. You might trick a Tommy or induce a Billjim to look
the other way, but the man who beats an Algerian is going some.
But, as I was saying, it was the moon that caused the trouble. When
she took that peep from behind her cloud bank she gazed fair on to four
shadowy figures, each surmounted by a bag of barley and a felt hat.
Chuckling a little, she dodged behind the clouds again; but it was too
late. The mischief had been done, and in a trice the “ shadowy figures ”
found themselves surrounded by about a dozen sons of the Sahara and a
like number of business-like bayonets.
The result was a confused babble of voices for ten minutes, and then a
procession to the Supply Officer’s tent. From where I was standing I
could see and hear everything that passed, and everybody seemed to be
trying to talk at once. As the “ shadowy figures ” could not speak a word
of Arabic, and the Algerians vice versa, the result was laughable. But with
the advent of the Supply Officer things took a different turn. He had been
wakened from a sound sleep, and was arrayed in the pink pyjamas the girl
had sent him, and a desire to be “ firm in the matter.” He had no know-
ledge of Arabic, and was placing the “shadowy figures” under guard
pending the arrival of an interpreter in the morning.
That would have been serious for the said “shadowy figures,” so I
decided to see whether I could help them at all. I had borrowed a cobber s


flash civvy raincoat in the morning, and that and the Jacko pony I rode
must have made the S.O. think I was an officer. Anyhow, he greeted me
very decently; and when I told him I could yabber Arabic pretty fluently,
he was more than delighted at my arrival.
Well, for a good ten minutes I did the interpreter stunt, and then I got
him to dismiss the guard.
Then I opened the case for the defence. I pictured to him the love
of the Colonial for his horse, the long night rides, and a dozen other pitiful
things, and altogether put up such a beautiful tale that even old Judge
Jeffreys would have had to declare the accused “ Not guilty. So the S.O.
decided to give the “ shadowy figures ” a stern lecture, take their names and
numbers, and refer the matter to their O.C. next morning. Forth came the
note-book and down went the particulars. lam pretty hard in the dial, but
I was glad he was not looking my way then. For every one of the four had
a number with six figures in it and belonged to the 19th Light Horse
Regiment, 9th Light Horse Brigade.
Luckily, he was a new man out, or the bluff wouldn’t have worked. But
it did, and that was all that mattered then. He gave them the lecture,
and in it repeated often, “ I’ve been one too many for you fellows this time,
what! ” Then he let them go, and as they left the tent the last one winked
at me, and in that wink there was a world of mystery.
Five minutes later I was in the saddle again and thinking hard. I was
wondering where the “ shadowy figures had left their horses, and whether
they would bump further trouble on the way home. Then I remembered a
young wady that runs by the side of the dump and turned the pony s head
toward it. Half-way to it, I met them coming back. But where there had
been four “ shadowy figures ” there were SIX, and where there should have
been four horses there were ten. And the spare nags were loaded heavily,
too. The chap who gave me the wink told me the rest of the yarn, and
here it is.
Two of them had acted as horse-holders while the other four had
carried out the raiding part of the business. Three times they had
returned without mishap, and it was on the fourth trip that the moon
peeped out and made a mess of things.
It started to rain again then, so we parted; they to their bivvies and I
to a sharp trot home.
Two hours after the sun came up, the chap who was “ one too many
rolled out of bed and prepared his report for the O.C. 19th Light Horse
Regiment, 9th Light Horse Brigade.
“ANON"




MEAL TIME
SHE’S BOILING


“The Light that Failed”
(And some that didn’t)
A MONG the many examples of ingenuity displayed by Billjim on
** service, the manufacture of illuminants, if you will pardon the
prolixity, shines out the most brilliantly. The Sun itself is considered to
be a pretty perfect and economical source of light, but it is not infallible.
The annoying habit it has of dodging off about sundown excludes it from
the category of the perfectly perfect, and Billjim is forced to procure a
substitute to enable him to relieve the tedium of his evenings with the
exhilarating influence of two-up, poker, swapping yarns and other harmless
pursuits.
The issue candle is, of course, the recognized form of illuminant; but by
the time the Greatest, the Sub-Greatest, the Q-Emmer, the Orderly-Room
Ogre and the Sigs get their cut, the stock is usually depleted to a mere
skeleton of its former fat self, and the insignificant stump that is left to
shed its radiance around the humble bivvies of the rank and file, is, as
often as not, irretrievably lost to sight owing to the shortage of telescopes
in the unit’s equipment. Hence the exercise of Billjim s ingenuity.
Some devices were truly efficient, others resembled the seeds that fell
on stony ground ; while one I know of was positively dangerous. The
one in question was disapproved of from its very inception. The wise ones
shook their heads dubiously, and opined that it was sheer flying in the
face of Providence to use one s issue of rum for the sacrilegious purpose
of making air-gas for a blooming light. After the explosion occurred,
and the blasphemous one was struck off the strength, they said, “ I told
him so,” and everybody was satisfied.
The most popular form is the slushlight, which is simply composed of
any old thing that will hold grease, and any kind of grease that will fit into
it; first, a layer of sand or clay is dumped into the jam, milk, cigarette or
other tin; then a wick made of “ 3 x 2,” or issue flannelette, wrapped
around a thin pine stick, is stuck upright in the middle of the sand or clay;
and finally the grease is introduced, the quantity being governed by the


amount one has been able to acquire. It is on record that some chaps
have had the effrontery to use dubbin, yes, “ dubbin ! ” but, of course, this
is not official, just common furphy.
Next to the slushie comes the bottle-o ; but to employ this it is neces-
sary to have the above-mentioned rarity, candle. For candle one is not
wholly dependent on the “ issue ” brand, for it has been known to be
purchaseable at the canteen —when those institutions are in the vicinity.
Supposing the possession of candle to be an established and material fact,
the next necessity is a clear-glass bottle; old lime-juice bottles are excellent,
and they can be found outside any officers’ mess, or the messes of
troopers who “did a trot.’’ The bottom of the bottle is knocked out by
insistent but vigorous tapping with the marlin-spike of a jack-knife till a
hole is broken through, and then the rest is chipped off in small instalments
till the end is quite out. The candle is then pared at the bottom end to
fit the slope of the bottle neck, and a deep groove gouged in it, the candle,
to admit air. Apply a match to the candle, drop it into the inverted bottle,
and there is your light. If it is not very windy, of course, all that is
necessary is to drop some melted grease on someone else’s tin hat, and stick
the candle in it; simple, is’nt it ?
There are a few of the lesser Edisons who eliminate disturbance by
wind by curling a legging around the candle; but only a very narrow chink
of light exudes from its gaping edges, and the odour of singeing leather
is not pleasant.
One of the finest ideas was a combination of the slushie and the
bottle-o. A squat chutney-bottle that fitted snugly into a toffee tin, was
found, and the quality and steadiness of the light generated made drawn
filament look painfully experimental. Some wire tibbin bands secure the
“ globe ” to the body, at the same time forming a handle.
The designs, elaborations and embellishments of the original idea are
practically numberless ; they range from the primitive cremation of a religious
aunt s epistles and incriminating love effusions up to the princely slushie-
cum-bottle-o; and they radiate in all classes of bivvies, and shed their
glory on the tangle of the newly erected as brightly as on the white-stoned
splendour of the resident.
With these remarks, and any necessary apologies to the Dinkum Military
Scribe, I shall leave them to shine on the just and the unjust, like their
mighty lord, the Sun.
" SARG."


DEFENCES IN THE GHORANIYEH BRIDGEHEAD


A TYPICAL ARAB VILLAGE
4th LIGHT HORSE BRIGADE WATERING HORSES AT THE JORDAN


A Night March
AT twilight, when the air is cool, we prepare for our second consecutive
night march. Overcoats and mufflers are put on, saddles are in-
spected to see that all is secure. Later it will be too dark, and we too
tired to attend to such matters.
After a short wait we move off. Two to three hours steady plodding
through the darkness, with the effects of fatigue scarcely noticeable. Then,
suddenly, an utter weariness assails us, numbing limbs, distorting vision,
and rendering minds a prey to tantalizing and disturbing thoughts thoughts
that mock and taunt; thoughts of feather beds and roaring fires; thoughts
that accentuate our weariness and awake us to the realization of the cold.
We ride, with drooping eyelids, a swaying body, and a precarious seat,
surrendered to the inevitable.
The column halts, and simultaneously we fall forward on our horses’
necks, hoping to ease our aching limbs. Hoping against hope to hear the
order to dismount. A jerk, our horses move forward again, and dis-
appointedly we resign ourselves to the further delusions of minds tortured
from want of sleep.
Visions become distorted, we visualize the objects of our thoughts. A
thought of water, and the road becomes a flowing stream. Thoughts of
horses and trees, and in the darkness arises a village—a village that remains
ever in the distance, and endures only so long as our thoughts are of vil-
lages. The horse ahead moves strangely; it appears to be dancing, and
has taken unto itself the shape of a beast of prehistoric ages. By an
effort of will we shake off this state of semi-somnolence, and, for a time,
see things in their normal shapes again.
At last, the order to dismount. Tumbling off we throw ourselves down
at our horses’ feet, indifferent to our position and its possibilities. With
heads pillowed on arms, water-bottles or haversacks, we endeavour to
win a few minutes respite. Follows sleep and blissful unconsciousness,
until friendly hands awake us, and wearily we rise to a repetition of the
last hour. On moving off some walk and lead their horses, stepping out


briskly in an endeavour to dispel the ever-increasing drowsiness. It
succeeds whilst walking, but a reaction sets in on regaining the saddle,
leaving the walker in worse plight than ever.
With nerves on edge, we curse the numerous and apparently purposeless
halts, become uncomplimentary about our leaders, revile horses for jogging
and stumbling, warn companions of the damage they are likely to do if
they persist in being careless with their rifles. Cheerful and good-tempered
soldiers are few at 03.00.
And so on until we hail with relief the approach of dawn, which dispels
the hallucinations of darkness.
“ ARAM.”
ROMAN FORT, JERICHO




A Gloomy Outlook
A MIDST the universal joy—booming of guns, ringing of church bells,
** cheering, and the screeching of ships’ sirens—l am gloomy and ill at
ease. I cannot share in the thanksgiving and tumultuous welcome of Peace ;
my mind is dark with foreboding, oppressed by thoughts of three things that
have made so many happy lives miserable during the Great War.
With the knowledge that huge stocks of dubbin, bully and biscuits are on
hand, how can a chap be joyful ? They must be disposed of —not cast into
the incinerator —and thoughts of the woe that they will cause make me
sorrowful.
The war has ended, and with it the need for dubbin. Stacks of the
beastly stuff must be disposed of before we are demobilized. There is no
market for it, and nobody would take it as a gift. Offer it to a Light
Horseman or a driver, and you would see stars not of the firmament. But I’m
sure that The Heads won’t let it be wasted. It’ll be read out in orders
soon, that all saddery and harness must be anointed with dubbin once daily
and twice on Sundays. There’s a good time coming !
Bully and biscuits are even dearer than dubbin to the granite hearts of
Q.M.’s, but they’ll have to issue them now by the ton. Rapid consumption
is the only way to get rid of the pyramids of B and B left on hand through
Fritz throwing in the towel sooner than the Supply Office anticipated.
Army biscuits are beyond the capacity of Gyppos and Bedouin; if we
strewed them broadcast over Palestine, they would lie there untouched, and
ruin all agricultural prospects: even a stump-proof plough would crumple
up if it struck an army biscuit. We can’t dump our stocks in the sea : think
what would happen in a collision between a liner and an A. B.! No;
we’ve got to eat the lot, empty every tin of bully and biscuits, and take the
consequences like heroes.
“ARAM.”




0/d Turk Line
FROM GENERAL
CHAYTORS HD, QTS
After the Batt/e of BJR EL ABD
THE FIELD of BATTLE
FOR
Gaza Deersheba Road
Corpsjnfantry
HI CHON LE ZION
THE BATTLE of BEER.SHEBA
Morning 15"'Nov.
Drawn for Anzac Hd Qts KH/fSHIM Z/JNH






“'"THE MAIL’S IN !” The glad tidings are tossed from lip to lip and
shouted down the lines, outstripping, and for the time suppressing,
the current furphies, “Furlough to Australia,” “Peace Negotiations, “A
big Stunt,” and similar creations of the idle imaginative mind.
“ There’s a mail in ! ” —A magic wand has been waved above the
troops by an unseen hand and weariness and even sleep are banished from
the war-worn soldiers. Even the sick are interested, and their eyes light
up with an eager look of expectancy.
“ There’s a mail in ! ” The chronic grouser forgets to grouse, the lead
swinger lays aside the lead and, for the time, his petty pains, and they join
the eager throng around the perspiring orderlies who are struggling with the
jumbled mass of letters, papers and parcels, bringing chaos to order,
sorting mail into squadrons and then into troops, ere it can be distributed.
What a study are the faces of that watching throng; what a joyous
gleam leaps into the sleep-laden eyes of a tired youngster who has caught
a glimpse of a letter addressed in the well-known hand of the mother who
waits at home.
There is a youth just from school, who has not yet tasted the mad joy
of battle, of a ding-dong mix up, when death shrieks through the air
missing one by inches, by hairbreadths. Here, too, is the war-hardened
warrior, who knew Anzac before the Suvla advance, who has met, fought
and beaten the Turk from Romani to Jericho, the hero of a hundred fights,
of scraps fought out on lonely patrol, that the world knows naught of,
though to the individual they are more fraught with peril than a big
battle.
To soldiers mail day is a day of bliss. Recruit or warrior, their faces
portray the emotions that are surging through their breasts. Their eyes


grow bright with eagerness as they watch the pile of mail assume shape
and order under the deft hands of the postal orderlies.
Men moving out on outpost or patrol shout to their mates, “ Get my
mail, Jack,” “ Get mine,” and ride off casting longing eyes at that waiting
crowd; with joyful hearts they move out into the night, to outwit the
enemy or return no more. But what care they—for it is mail day!
Before dawn, outpost and patrol return, weary and with sleep-laden
eyes. They off-saddle and picket their horses, and dash into the bivvies
for their mail. Matches are struck surreptitiously, candles are lighted and
hidden by blankets, for lights are forbidden when in touch with the enemy;
and thus are the letters eagerly read. Often Billjim falls asleep from sheer
exhaustion, the last letter still clutched in his hand, and dreams of his
Australian home; the fragrance of gum and wattle blossom are wafted to
him from overseas on the cool night breeze.
Mail day, the most joyous and most tragic in a soldier s life, brings
messages of love and trust from dear ones, messages of faith and praise
from friends; and at times news that is sorrow-laden.
“WIL COX.”


A Day Over the Lines
N the language of the Corps, “ there was something doing,” for
from dawn till dark machines had been coming and going on
the aerodrome almost without a break; in fact, it was some
iipLi da y-” , , .
ijßWr Just as the first grey streaks of dawn crept over the horizon
the roar of a couple of hostile aircraft patrol machines taking
off woke an otherwise peaceful camp. An hour later the orderly
officer was bustling round two more machines, which were to leave
on the early morning reconnaissance of the country behind the actual
scene of operations and along the Turkish lines of communication,
to search for any signs of fresh concentrations or reinforcements being
hurried up.
At two hour intervals machines left in couples to patrol above our lines
and prevent any possibility of Boche machines sneaking over, either to
watch the movements of our troops or to bomb them ; for, during a stunt,
it was just as important for us to keep the Hun blind as to keep our own
eyes well skinned.
To me fell the first patrol, and a call from the Orderly Officer at 3.30
a.m. was not received with the utmost courtesy. After hot tea and toast
by candle light, we scrambled into warm leather coats, woollen-lined boots,
gloves and helmets, and climbed aboard. By the time I had inspected my
guns and the usual contents of the cockpit, the engine was ticking over and
we were ready to start. It was still dark enough,
as we took off, for the pilot to need all his lamps
alight to see the various instruments, and, as we \ 7
climbed, the crisp morning air set our blood x \' C IUHK
tingling with the joy of living. When above the
clouds at about 8000 feet the first rays of the
rising sun shot across the sky, and very shortly
the clouds, which until then had been snowy
white, were bathed in a crimson glow that held
us spell-bound with its beauty. Primarily, the
V... i*JV


By Lieut. O. H. Coulson
GOT HIM COLD




crests of those billowy mists were tipped as with a wand of fire whilst, as
we ascended into space and the sun gradually rose above the horizon, the
colour spread over that sea of cloud until it appeared
like a stupendous stream of lava belched forth from
some volcano which, after years of quiescence, had
suddenly burst into activity.
I have seen many sunrises under varying conditions,
sunrises at whose beauty I marvelled, but never before
had I witnessed anything that could come within coo-ee
of the riotous blaze of colour that lay spread beneath us,
covering the Holy Land, as it were, with a cloth of gold.
It disappeared from view, however, all too soon, for, as
the sun gained in strength and we in height, the colour
slowly faded from fiery brilliance to a delicate pink
until, finally, the clouds once again showed up in all
their glistening purity.
It seemed impossible to realize, whilst nature was all aglow beneath us,
that war was being waged with all its relentless cruelty, that guns
were sending forth their messengers of death and pain, and, above all, that
we, who had been privileged to witness the glory of God’s handiwork, were
scanning the heavens for something in the way of Hun airmen to kill. To
me it seemed a sacrilege that, on such a glorious day, hate should be
animating the hearts of men, and that I should be a willing agent, eager for
an opportunity of sending a fellow-mortal crashing to earth and death. The
Hun, however, evidently deeming discretion the better part of valour, did
not put in an appearance, and when, after three hours’ cruising up and down
the lines, we returned to the aerodrome, I believe I was pleased that I had
not been, by force of circumstances, compelled to share in sending some
creature to meet his Maker.
So, throughout the day, the work went on, and, as a Hun bus was
reported to have bombed our troops in the early morning, every one of our
machines thereafter carried four bombs to drop on any suitable target that
offered itself.
Whilst on afternoon reconnaissance, the observer located a large body of
enemy troops, and, immediately on receipt of his report, a bomb raid was
ordered on which every available machine was to be sent. Luckily, I was
detailed for escort duty, and it was a pleasant experience to watch the
bombing machines assembling overhead, as they arrived from the different


aerodromes, and took up the allotted formation. About 5 p.m. the leader
fired his light and thirty machines, like a flock of great birds, set off on their
journey to play havoc with our old friend, the Turk. After dropping the
bombs, all machines swooped down on the troops and used their spare
machine-gun ammunition in shooting them up and generally giving them a
devil of a time.
All good things come to an end, and, finally, we set out for home, which
we reached just as the sun, a ball of fire, was sinking to rest. The machines,
glistening white in the reflected sunlight, resembled a flock of swans coming
home, as, in slow, stately circles, one by one, they glided to earth.
The Mediterranean, as calm and unruffled as a mill-pond, reflected the glory
of the sun until its surface glowed like a sheet of burnished gold. By the
time we, as escort, had seen the last of our charges land in safety and
commenced our own descent, the sun was well below the skyline, and the
narrow ribbon of the pink afterglow that skirted the horizon was all that
remained to remind us of the sun and its glory.
H. BOWDEN FLETCHER.


Lieut. O. H. Coulson
THE END OF THE SCRAP




TURKISH PRISONERS AT ES SALT
JERICHO


NAZARETH FROM THE AIR


Mounts and Remounts
N my arrival at the Unit, I considered myself fortunate
when the corporal presented me with a fat, sleek
remount, only lately up from the Base. My suspicions
were not aroused until, preparing to mount, I dis-
covered what an enormous supply of cameras the
Troop possessed. All classes seemed to be repre-
sented, from the V.P.K. pip-squeak to the ponderous
P.C. “ Jericho Jane ” variety. Maintaining a professional attitude, I
mounted.
In my youthful days I’ve paid two shillings to see a horse perform
evolutions and gyroscope stunts not to be compared with the tricks that
animal unearthed. I had an irresistible tendency from the first to fall off
over the place where, in normal times, his head and neck should have been.
Finally, yielding to impulse, I descended to good Palestine mud amid the
shrieks of an ill-mannered crowd. Some imbecile sauntered up and said,
“ By jove, matey, if you could only have stopped up another five secs. I
would have had one of the best snaps in the Unit.” I wouldn’t trust my
reply to a green envelope. The sergeant remarked that horsemanship
didn’t seem to be my forte, so I informed him that my marching-in papers
proclaimed me a flag-wagger, not a Bronco Buster.
“ Right,” said he, “ take Maaleesh. ”
I took him, for better or for worse, and went to make his acquaintance.
That horse didn’t belie his name. Maaleeshness fairly radiated from him,
from his huge, out-of-proportion head that an A.S.C. mule might envy, to
his stump of a tail, the missing part of which had provided food for a hungry
moke on the Jaffa stunt. What was left of it provided me with food for
reflection.
He wasn’t a bad horse. As the Troop farrier said, he had no vice in
him. The trouble was, he was as devoid of energy or grey matter as he
was of vice. He progressed at a lumbering shuffle, with his head low
down after the manner of a cow-catcher on a locomotive. He had also
acquired a taste for feed-bags, and was blessed with a very good appetite.


Every time I fed him he disposed of tibbin , grain and nose-bag. The day
before we went on the stunt Maaleesh contracted Spanish Influenza, and
on the vet administering that panacea for all equine ailments, a ball,
he barraked and refused to move.
Then I was handed over to the tender mercies of “ Lofty.” The lance-
jack, who knew a bit about horses, confidently informed me that Lofty was
one of those horses that never carry much condition, and he knew a horse
at Cunnawulla I hastily agreed with him, especially the former part
of his statement. We looked at Lofty, who favoured us with an apathetic
stare. If the third generation theory is correct, Lofty s granddad was a
camel. Going through a neighbouring town I was No. 1 of the section, and
being of a sensitive nature, it hurt me to see the people laugh; but Lofty
appeared indifferent.
The first day out he chewed up two signal flags and all the straps on my
mate’s gear. Half-way through the stunt he faced the East, struck a prayer-
ful attitude and, with a don’t-give-a-hang-if-you-shoot-me-I-wont-move
expression in his eyes, prepared to rest. Our sergeant shot him, whereupon
he displayed more agility than anyone had hitherto thought he possessed,
and gambolled off over a ridge. A sympathetic New Zealander recaptured
him, but took warning from the black looks and wild gesticulations of the
mob. Shortly afterward a report was heard. Lofty s soul had gone
West. Visions of the photo I intended to send to my best girl, of my
illustrious self mounted on a fiery charger, faded into oblivion ; and as I
transferred my trappings to a spare mule, I vaguely wondered, from force
of habit, what characteristic and peculiarities my new mount possessed.
“ ACRABAH.”


A LIGHT HORSE TYPE


Concerning Medical Blokes
r ’PHE Army Medical Corps is a chain of many links. Let the lay mind
which has condensed its conception of the Corps duties into “ picking
up the wounded,” reflect upon an interwoven organization of Base
Hospitals, Convalescent Homes and Rest Camps; Auxiliary Hospitals,
Isolation Hospitals and Dermatological Hospitals; Stationary Hospitals
(which are liable to move about) and Casualty Clearing Hospitals—we are
working up the chain from the back to the front —Motor Ambulance Units
and Hospital Trains and Hospital Ships ; Divisional Receiving Stations, Field
Dental Units, Field Operating Units and Field Laboratories (these all hear
the firing of the guns); Field Ambulances (which comprise within
themselves Field Hospitals), Dressing Stations and Advanced Dressing
Stations (these get bullets through their tents and shells in their bivvies);
and, end of the chain, the Medical Blokes with the Regiments. They are
the last link; they are the tip of the longest tentacle of the Medical octopus.
Truly, modesty forbids me from adding that they are the sweetest violet in
the bunch.
The Medical Blokes are detailed from the Ambulance at the rate of an
N.C.O. and one man to each Regiment. Thereafter they become part and
parcel of that Regiment; live with it, move with it, minister to it; share
its trials, troubles, tribulations, triumphs and rum issues. Nevertheless, in
cold, official fact, they still belong to the Ambulance, being upon its
supernumerary strength—“ attached for duty and discipline to the Xth
Regiment.” This little complication has its unsuspected advantages, for it
sometimes breeds in the mind of an R.S.M. a shade of doubt as to exactly
how far the Medical Blokes come within his jurisdiction, and he is
constrained to permit them a certain independence of existence and
exemption from routine. They obey “ Reveille; ” they approximate their
appearance on the horse-lines, to groom, feed and water, as nearly to the
Regimental schedule as the exigencies of the medical service permit; they
generally manage to scratch an instant to be present at the cook-house at
meal times ; at the Quartermaster’s bivvy when he is doling out rations, and
at the Orderly Room on pay-day. Their liabilities discharged, they are left


free to order their time as they please. They are usually to be found
lurking in the medical tent, though they sometimes go to earth in a bivvy
pitched somewhere in its vicinity.
In addition to the two above-mentioned stalwarts, the Regimental medical
establishment carries a Medical Officer and an offsider, a trooper of the
Regiment, detailed for the job, who, in course of time, is likely to become
so imbued with the spirit of his surroundings that he is not to be
distinguished from genuine Medical Blokes themselves. Nominally he is
intended for water duties; to carry out daily at the area drinking-water
supply the mysterious rite (known to the uninitiated as “ chlorinating ”
and to the rank and file as “ poisoning ”) by which the further existence of
cholera and other germs in the water is discouraged. He is the man
responsible for making the water taste as if there were a very dead camel
lying a hundred yards further up the stream whence it was drawn; while
tea made with it always seems to have been cut with an oniony knife. Yet
he deserves a certain amount of pity. If he over-chlorinates, the whole
Brigade will blaspheme him and his activities ; if he under-chlorinates,
Medical Officers accuse him of encouraging epidemic; and the happy
medium of chlorination is so deucedly elusive that he never strikes it!
By way of transport for their chattels the Medical Blokes have a cart,
called Maltese, a square contrivance on two wheels and no springs, drawn
by three horses abreast. You can pick it out on the road at the tail end of
the Regimental transport in company with the water-cart. It is invariably
overloaded with what looks like a lunatic’s purchases at a bargain auction
sale —or somebody’s goods undergoing a back street removal—baskets,
bottles, barrels, boxes, bedding, brushes, blankets, bivvies, buckets, to say
nothing of all the things which begin with other letters of the alphabet.
The driver of the cart is not a Medical Bloke; he is a Philistine from the
transport lines.
There are cinema-and-picture-nourished imaginations at Home who
fancy war as one unending, crimson, bloody pageant of battle, whereas it
is merely a different sort of humdrum existence from their own, with
occasional violent patches of excitement. Also, they worship the A.M.C.
man as the Red Cross Hero of the Piece, whereas . . . never mind.
But you will grant me that, of all the A.M.C. personnel, the Medical Bloke
gets nearest to the heroic role. He shares the hazards of a fighting unit;
he is an all-but combatant. When the squadrons go out to fight he sloughs


all his bulky baggage, puts gauze, wool, bandages, iodine and scissors into
his haversack, and follows. Comes at dawn —we have branded dawn for
ever as the battle hour —a moment when a ragged, scattered line of men
begin to walk forward up the gentle slope of a low ridge. This is attack.
The split and scatter of shrapnel, the hiss-bang-crash of H.E., and z-z-z-en
of flying fragments, make death a chance in the shallow gully. But the top
of the ridge is the edge of open, machine gun-swept country. It is a
hundred yards to the crest —and death for someone. This Medical Bloke,
the wind well up, has shrunk himself into a crevice and waits for a call.
He desires nothing better than to stay there. He watches the men walking
up the slope—such everyday, wise, silly, plain, good, bad, smart, childish
men —just simply walking up the slope. And in that moment our Medical
Bloke realizes that they are better men than he, because they are walking
up that slope of which he is afraid. Are they better ? He is walking,
rather slowly, up the slope now. He runs a few steps and drops behind
cover on the crest, and waits for the need that will call him. Fate grants
him a few minutes’ spell, and then puts him to the test. “ Stretcher-
bearers ! ” they cry to the left. The Medical Bloke can see two men
bending over the third, and he faces one of those decisions which mould
character. Quite properly, he may wait until they carry the man to him,
behind cover (there are troopers whose hazardous duty it is to act as
stretcher-bearers), or he may walk out and help. He walks out as steady
as he can; it is quicker and . . . well, what peculiar right has a Medical
Bloke to the safety of cover when the men are “ out there ?
It is little enough can be done in action for the wounded ; to cut away
the blood-clotted clothing, to clap a rough dressing of iodine and gauze on
the wound, or a crude splint on a smashed limb; to get the man to com-
parative cover, to rig some sort of a shade over him and to give him water;
and then to wait —for the M.O. to come with the skill that soothes and the
hypodermical needle of comfort. But the bitterest game of patience on
earth is played when the tide of battle fails to flow onward, and the
wounded lie all the livelong, sun-tormented day in the fire-swept zone,
and the Medical Blokes can only watch and wait for nightfall to give safe-
conduct to the ambulance carts or the camels, with great, unwieldy, white
cacolets, which come to carry their poor shattered charges to sanctuary.
Believe me, romantic reader, that I will now reveal the true raison d etre
of Medical Blokes; the nature of their life-work, their excuse for existing.
It is not, bless you, ministering to the wounded under fire. It is merely to


bandage up septic sores and to distribute a variety of pills, most commonly
known in the proportion of “ two of these and one of those.”
The daily life of the Medical Bloke hinges on “ Sick Parade.” It is the
Daily Event. The M.O. sits enthroned in the Medical Tent. Orderly
corporals present their list
of competitors. One by
one they enter and face
the Presence. Pulses,
tongues, throats, eyes,
temperatures are sub-
mitted to scrutiny. The
questing stethoscope
roams over bared bosoms
and backs. Each man
speaks his piece the
most sick say least and
the least sick say most, as
a general rule.
these and one of those,”
prescribes the M. 0., and
' the victim, a handful of
tablets clutched in his fist,
retires. The rewards to
be gained by braving “ Sick Parade ” run up a scale from “ Medicine
and Duty,” through “ Light Duty ” and “ Exempt Duty,” to “ Evacuate,”
which last is the coveted prize.
“ Go and get your gear together and be ready to go to the Ambulance,”
directs the Medical Bloke, and the patient sees at once visions of the cushy
comfort of a Base Hospital, wherein he may hope to wallow shortly. He
has netted a trip !
Medical Blokes have a restless job. Sickness and accidents call upon
them at any time. Men drop into the Medical Tent at all hours of the
day and night for “ a couple of pills for a headache,” or something else.
“ Got any liniment ? ” is the next inquiry, followed by a request for eye-
lotion. In this country a scratch or a graze does not heal in the course
of things—it is just as likely to turn septic. Neglected, it spreads and
develops initiative ; it breaks out in fresh places without waiting for the


skin to be knocked off. Hot foments and ointment dressings are the cure.
Bandaged hands are the badge of the Palestine campaigner. Half the
men, half the time, have either boils or septic sores. They meander into
the Medical Tent in pairs, and out of hours, to get them bandaged. They
are met there with scant courtesy —probably they are the umpteenth
interruption to the letter which the Medical Bloke is trying to write ; but I
do not think it is often that they turn away unattended to. The Medical
Blokes are just . . . your friends, servants and comrades, the Medical
Blokes.
“ LARRIE.”


CONVALESCENT By W. O. David Barker




MOUNTING FIRST GUARD IN JERICHO
HALT AND REST




The Signal Service
CATTERED throughout Egypt and Palestine and
Syria, in the community of war-worn Australians,
is a certain section known to the initiated as the
Engineer Signal Service of the Australian Imperial
Force in Egypt. To the casual Light Horseman
they are “ Sigs ” —a vague and most inadequate
designation. Little is known of the Engineer
Signaller and his work by his brother of the Light
Horse, whose one idea of signalling begins and ends with the Regimental
signaller, a being who shares with him the pleasures and hardships of all
stunts, but who is on a plane above, because no piquets and fatigues are
his. At home, the popular conception of signalling is of a soldier standing
on the last, lone, bullet-swept ridge, coolly flag-wagging a message which
turns a forlorn hope into a brilliant victory, and earns for him Oblivion.
Signalling, as the Signal Service know it, is far from being a flag-wagging
occupation; they find themselves part of a well-planned business, which is
based on efficiency, and conducted with that thoroughness for detail only to
be found in an army.
* * * *
“ Sapper Smith, get your horse saddled up right away and report at the
Signal office. You need not worry about your tea —I’ll see it is kept for
you. You are only going to Romani.”
The Squadron horses, after their first stunt on the desert of Sinai in
April, ’l6, had been off-saddled and fed at Hill 40, so the order came as a
surprise.
“ Right-o ! Corporal! ”
The horse was soon saddled, and Smith reported at the Signal office at
five o’clock.
“ What’s doing, Mac ? ”
“ Light Horse Brigade, Romani.” The signal-master read out the
address as he handed over the despatch to Smith.
“ Where’s Romani, Mac ? ”


bush. Am I near Romani yet ? ”
“ Yes, it’s a light.”
* * *
Mac, the signal-master, came outside and pointed across an unbroken
stretch of desert to the east.
“About five miles in that direction, I think,” he replied. “ Keep near
the railway line and you’ll be pretty right.”
Smith departed, and rode out into the gathering dusk of the East. He
had never heard of Romani before, nor did he know how many miles he
had to travel across this desert, where the Turk had been but a few hours
ago, to reach the place; so he spurred his horse on over the heavy sand
and covered four miles in quick time.
“We ought to be there before dark.” He spoke to the horse rather
than to himself. “We’ve covered a good four miles now.”
He rode on over the level places, climbed the loose sand of the steep,
razor-backed dunes, and slid down their opposite slopes to the level again,
until another four miles had been crossed ; yet he had not reached Romani.
The darkness found him still pushing east over the toilsome, never-ending
sand, with a set of new northern stars for guides.
A desert dog started up at his horse’s feet, yelped away into the night,
and threw the horse into a panic of fear; a stunted bush loomed in the
darkness ahead and took on the shape of a crouching figure, sinister in the
gloom. Here was a dilemma !
“ Shall I let the horse bolt while I try to loosen my rifle ? or
is it better to hang on to the horse and chance —ah ! It is only a
Eight more weary miles slipped slowly by, the sand-hills
pressed in on all sides, and ever the horse stumbled on gamely
over loose sand and steep ridges.
Smith swayed in the saddle and spoke again.
“ Hooray! I’ve arrived,” he said.
Some time after ten o’clock a wearied despatch-rider came out of the
night, handed in a despatch at its Romani address, obtained a receipt
and departed. Next morning Smith reported to the signal-master and
handed him the receipted slip for his despatch.
“ How far is it to Romani, Mac ? ” was all he remarked.
At Ed Dhaberiye, and at Tel Khuweilfeh, in the hills to the north-east of
Bir el Saba, the fight waged hot during the first week of November, ’l7.
That week is one to be remembered by the cable troop of the squadron ; in






it they knew no rest, for they worked night and day on the communications,
and laid miles of cable to and from the Brigades.
“ Corporal Dawk ! ”
“ Here, sir,” responded Dawk from behind one of the cable-wagons
where he had been trying to dispose of a hasty meal.
“ Hook in your team and get away to the 2nd Brigade with that line.
“Very good, sir.
Dawk turns to the drivers.
“Get your horses in, Charlie; we’ve got another job. Hey! Gunner.
“ What, again ? ” says Gunner, as he looks at his half-finished meal.
“ Come over, Baldy ! Back, Ginger ! ”
The polers are hooked up, and in a short space the wagon moves off to
the Signal office for final instructions. Gunner jumps down from the body
of the wagon, drags the end of the wire into the Signal office, and then
mounts and pulls out over the hill.
The wagon rolls steadily over the rocky hills, reeling out the cable as it
proceeds. Darkness settles down, but this does not deter the cable detach-
ment.
“ Whoa ! ” roars the lead driver as a wady-bed opens up below him in the
darkness. “ Steady with those horses behind —who’s in the pole ?
“ What’s the matter ? ” inquires Dawk, riding up to the leaders.
“ Oh, another wady; it looks pretty solid, too.”
Dawk looks ahead, rides off to the right, and after a few minutes calls
out directions to the drivers.
“ This way with that wagon; you can get across here.
Charlie swings his leaders round and heads for the spot where Dawk s
voice is heard. The wagon jolts over a rock, and lurches toward the wady
so closely that a huge lump of earth detaches itself from the steep bank and
rattles down on to the boulders beneath.
“ Get over to the right! ” yells Gunner from the back of the wagon.
“ What the blazes are you drivers doing ? You 11 have the whole box and
dice in the wady in a minute ! ”
“ Get up, Tiger ! Up, Ginger ! ”
“ Come over Baldy ! Come over, you ! ”
The wagon draws away from the dangerous edge, swings round, and,
with rattling and bumping, descends into the wady-bed in a cloud of dust.
The horses bend their backs to the opposite bank and are urged up by the
drivers, who have risen in the stirrups and are leaning over their necks.


“ That was a snifter ! ” he says.
“ My oath ! a beaut.”
“ Yes, sir ? ”
“ Yes, sir. Have you any idea when we move out ? ”
“Ive no idea; in about a week, possibly.”
With a last effort the team pulls forward, the wagon jolts over the top, and
then stops.
Harry, who was thrown from his seat at the back of the cable-wagon
as it bumped the wady-bed, comes limping up the slope. As he climbs into
his seat he makes a remark to Gunner.
More wady-beds open up, more detours are made, more dizzy descents
and stiff ascents are negotiated, until, at last, the wagon draws in to Brigade
Headquarters. The line is through, and everything is in readiness for the
attack at dawn.
“ When you’ve done with that pack-saddle, I want to ‘ inergate ’
scheme with you.”
“ This stunt is going to be a tough one, so I want you to see that all
your pack-sets are in good-going order, and that those pack-saddles are
fitted properly. Where are you putting the aerial load, Hook ? ”
“ Everything is ready now; I’m fixing this saddle for the masts.”
“ Right-o! And see that the farrier gets to work on those mules
straight away.
Hook busied himself with the pack-saddle, fixing gadgets here and
knocking bits off there, until he had it to his satisfaction. All the technical
equipment—wireless sets, cable gear, etc. —had to be converted for use on
pack-saddles in this Amman business during March, ’ 18.
Six days later the Squadron moved out in the rain, wound its way
through the Judean Hills, travelled over the Jordan Valley, crossed the
river, and passed up into the hills of Moab.
No wagons or wheeled transport of any kind could possibly traverse
those tremendous hills, where the narrow track clung to the steep sides of
the hills and threatened to fall away over precipices into rock-fanged valleys
beneath. The rain poured down, and along the slippery track the column
wended its way, toiling in single file up steep hills and down into precipitous
valleys. The path became a river ; water poured over the rocky sides of the
hills and rushed into the valleys below. Everybody was wet through and
greatcoats flapped soggily about weary legs; dripping horsemen led


their horses and stumbled and splashed along the track ; pack-horses and
mules struggled and scrambled as their loads slipped; but the column
pushed on and reached a position at Amman after two days and two nights
of rain.
“ We cannot use the helios, and the cable is ‘ dis * somewhere back in
the hills. Is the wireless set up yet ? ”
Rip-p-p-p-p-p. Rip-p-p-p-rip-p-p-p-rip-p-p-p-rip-p-p-p-p-p-p.
The crash of the transmitting sent echoes through the rain-sodden air and
the singing spark sent its message through space, and then whined away
into silence. The engine had “ karked ” —communication had ceased. *
No. A basket crate was brought from one of the packs, a message was
written on a special form, of thin paper, and placed in a small aluminium
tube; a carrier pigeon was taken from the crate, and released with the
small tube containing the message attached to one of its legs. The bird
circled round uncertainly for a few moments and then flew off in a straight
line toward the leaden clouds in the West.
Communication was still maintained.
* * # * *
These are but three incidents —three of many —which have happened in
the Signal Service. The Service calls for initiative, coolness, and devotion ;
all these it has in its ranks. In the desert of Sinai, on the dusty stretches of
Southern Palestine, on the plains of Philistia, in the hills of Judea —every-
where “ east of the Canal ” —the Signal Service has always maintained a
high standard which has brought credit to itself, and to the Australian
Imperial Force in Egypt.
“ ACK-7IC-ACK.”




The Little Bint of Wady Hanein
H ROUGH OUT the long campaign the fighting
was fairly constant, but there were occasional
brief seasons of rest, and the happiest of these
were spent in the neighbourhood of the Jewish
orchard settlements. The Ist Light Horse Brigade
and the New Zealanders favoured Richon, where
the wine vaults are said to be the largest in the
world ; and the Jewish girls are the prettiest in all
Palestine. But the 2nd Brigade was loyal to modest little Wady Hanein.
The three Jewish villages of Richon, Wady Hanein and Deiran stand about
three miles apart in a rough line across the sandhills. Deiran, where the
polyglot lassies were wooed by the troops associated with Desert Mounted
Corps headquarters, is, like Richon, a large village, almost a town, with
considerable social pretentions. There the Jews hold political meetings,
and the girls dress with an eye on distant Paris. But Wady Hanein is
demure—a true little Arcady set amidst hills and hollows beautiful and
fragrant with orange groves and orchards of almonds. In the early spring
the settlement was a glory of pink and white blossoms, and, later, its
lanes were scented with the breath of the flowering oranges. As I
write, the 2nd Brigade is in Wady Hanein for the last time, having come
down from its strenuous work around Amman, across the Jordan; and
the plump round oranges are coquetting between green and golden.
It was from Wady Hanein that the Brigade moved out on the long
trek across Judea and Jordan Valley and the Mountains of Moab for the
first attack on Amman, in March, 1918. Nearly every Australian feigns
qualification in his regard for the Jews in Palestine. But as the Regiments
made ready for the road that morning it was pretty to see Jewish families
visiting their favourite officers and men in the bustling camp, and wishing
them God-speed with a sincerity and a touch of distress quite unmistakable.
And all ranks rode to that bitter fight the stronger and better for those
Jewish good wishes.


The 2nd Brigade also chanced to be in the village in December of 1917,
when Jerusalem was captured, and the citizens entertained the Brigadier
and his officers at a feast, a speech-making and a dance. Proceedings
were, for a time, somewhat formal and cold. The Brigadier and his senior
officers sat at a central table in a large hall with the village fathers and
notables. The girls, expectant, their toes tingling for the dance, sat
stiffly in a row down one wall and the matrons along the other —a very
convenient arrangement, because the dashing young Light Horse subalterns
could seek a pretty partner without feeling obliged to ask for the programme
of her elderly chaperon. The young men of the village stood with the junior
officers of the Brigade at one end of the hall.
The eloquence was terrific. The erudite village schoolmaster proposed
the “ Health of the King of England,” coupled with the name of the
Brigadier, the British Army, the Australian Army, and the British universe
generally. He spoke fluent and faultless Russian —or so it seemed to us.
(Our linguistic attainments will startle Australians when we come home.
There is not a man amongst us who cannot now say Bread and Wine and
Darling, in all the languages of East and West.) He made happy reference
to great British apostles of freedom, instancing Cromwell, Lord Byron, and
Gladstone. He garbled the names, but we caught his drift; and, anxious
to get in, we cheered tumultuously ; and then, in an unhappy moment, some
one on our side released the Brigade interpreter —a dusky fellow of dubious
nationality—who rose eagerly to make the meaning of the village school-
master a little clearer to us. His success was indifferent, but he brought
down the house with references to Lord Cromwell, Mr. Byron, and Sir
Gladstone.
Then the Brigadier hopped up to respond. He was at his best. He
referred to the joy which we, as Christians, experienced in driving the
infidel from the Holy Land, and then, after an apt allusion to the Crusaders
and King Richard, he became so eloquent and forceful, and slammed the
table so hard, that all the village matrons gave play to their religious and
patriotic feelings in subdued but prolific tears; which, when you consider
that they did not know a word of English, was a unique testimonial to the
eloquence and dominating personality of our versatile Brigadier. And then
came the swelling triumphant peroration in which the “ Old Brig., declared
that “ Palestine had been conquered and Jerusalem delivered by the help of
God, but mainly by the might of the British Army. After that we danced,
and very gay it was, despite our unanimous opinion that speaking Russian


was an easy task, compared with attempting correctly to foot a Russian
measure with a pretty Jewish maiden. To be honest, it was a dumb show ;
but eyes were eloquent.
But we have been a long time coming to the story of the Little Bint.
She was one of many of her unhappy kind in Palestine. In that country,
as in all the East, the rich know no compassion for the poor. If you starve
it is the will of God and no concern of the more fortunate. That
interference with the ways of Allah is the cardinal sin is a satisfactory
article in the creed of the rich in Palestine. So the poor starve,
unsuccoured, about the doors of the wealthy.
The Little Bint of Wady Hanein was first seen slinking around the out-
skirts of Brigade headquarters. She was a wretched little Arab of seven or
eight years, clad only in a tattered filthy shirt which came to her knees ; with
matted verminous hair, sparkling black eyes and a pitifully skinny little body.
She sneaked round the lines at meal time, pouncing like a hungry dog on
empty bully tins and jam tins, scooping out the remnants with a deft fore-
finger and flashing happy smiles as she put the finger to her mouth. The
men were quick to notice, and soon the Bint had ten times more than she
could eat. But she did not thrive. The vermin on her wretched body, and
her unsheltered winter nights, kept her thin and miserable.
The grooms and batmen on Brigade conferred on the subject of the Bint
and her future. The ringleader, whom we shall call Pine, a groom whose
Regimental reputation was far from the best, led a deputation, accompanied
by the interpreter and the Bint, up to the Bey, a fat Arab with a comfortable
home and substantial wealth. Pine was forceful and the interpreter glib
and honest. But the sleek Bey was obdurate. “ There are many such,”
he said suavely and finally, disowning any responsibility for the Little Bint,
and he was not at all moved at the nasty reflections which the outspoken
Pine cast upon his mother as the deputation withdrew. The missionaries
returned to camp, baffled but not defeated. “ We’ll adopt the little beggar
ourselves,” declared Pine, “ and take her on as a blasted mascot.” And
they did. The preliminary work was decided. First the Bint must, as
they say in plain army English, be “ deloused ” and bathed. Nobody
wanted the job. But Pine was determined to see it through, and with the
Brigade Major’s batman he cut the Bint’s hair, disinfected her and scrubbed
her until her dusky colour was in danger. Other clumsy but Christian
fingers cut up shirts and made her clothes ; the remainder contrived a bivvy
in which she was to sleep. And the Little Bint of Wady Hanein waxed


fat and happy, and was a touch of soft femininity and a source of much
delight to Brigade headquarters.
Then came marching orders for Amman. You occasionally find Arab
boys travelling with the Light Horse, keen little beggars who act as cooks’
offsiders and batmen’s batmen, and officers smile and sympathetically shut
their eyes to it. But it was clear that the sprightly little black-eyed Bint
could not be taken out over the mountains into the bitter cold and bloody
fighting at Amman. So Pine sought the Padre, and the Padre went off
twelve miles to Jaffa and talked to the Mother Superior at the convent.
Next day the Brigadier lent his car, and Pine—his leggings gleaming and
spurs shining, and amusingly self-conscious —accompanied the Bint to Jaffa,
and handed her over to the kindly nuns. Perhaps, as he left her, he gave
her a big brotherly kiss and a trooper’s rough benediction; but probably
he was too shy. Ido not know.
“CAMP FOLLOWER”


BRIG-GENERAL RYRIE INSPECTS THE “BULLY”
BRIG-GENERAL COX ON RIVER JORDAN


A WALLAD OF PALESTINE


Algy, Misfit
ULLO, old chappa ! ”
It was Algy, an old camp acquaintance from
Australia, whom I hadn’t seen before over this
way. By his greeting, you will probably be able
to imagine Algy; yet, with all his “ haw-haw,” when
you got to know him, he was quite the opposite to
what was suggested by his manner of speech.
He had the habit of unbosoming himself to everybody regarding his
career, past, present and future, so when I met him, I knew that I would
get the whole story of his army life. And I did.
“ How have I been getting on ? Top hole. The only thing is that my
failure to rise in the army worries my mater. With my brains, or at least
the brains mater believes I possess, I was expected to rise in big leaps. But
the only rise I’ve made has been from my blankets in the morning, and then,
too, only by the greatest effort. Awful bore, old chappa, these early
reveilles.
“I try to explain to mater why it is that I am still ‘ just merely one of
the men,’ and seek to console her by quoting that well-known pictorial post
card, ‘We can’t all be officers ; somebody’s got to do the work.’ You know,
the poor old lady believes in me so much that she lives in the hope of some
day seeing me wearing a whole string of ribbons on my bally chest. No
hope. You know, some people have most peculiar ideas regarding the
military. They talk about ribbons as if the military were in the habit of
issuing such things in lieu of something—say as a sort of consolation when
the rations are short. If they did, well, I’d be wearing all the variegated
colours of the bally rainbow.
“ I’ve had a most varied career in the army. I was originally in the
infantry—a private. You see, I started right at the bottom of the ladder,
scorning all offers of assistance to get a commission. I was quite determined
to go right up the ladder by my own unaided efforts. Eh, gad, I was an
egotistical ass, that’s what I was. I never for one moment imagined that
the rungs of the ladder leading to stripes and stars were so wide apart.


With a “ Cheeryo,” Algy was gone.
“ But about the infantry. Goodness, shall I ever forget the beastly
infantry. The unnecessary walking, and the enormous packs one had to
carry, and the really rude sergeant-major, who always roared at me when
on parade because I could not execute the fantastic movements he insisted
upon —really, when I think about it I shudder. I always did my best, but
marching used to make me so exhausted, and I never could succeed in
keeping in step with the other fellows.
“ Finding the infantry uncongenial, I concluded that if I HAD to be a
soldier I might as well sit down to the bally job, so I got a transfer to the
mounted. I had never ridden a horse other than that of a merry-go-round,
but I was satisfied that I could master the art. I’ve got a different idea
now. I was quite all right while the animal walked, but when it trotted,
oh, goodness me, I could never harmonize with the beast.
“ Ultimately, I came over here with a unit which did not use horses and
was not required to do much, if any, walking. At least, that is what they
said, though I should have thought at the time how the unit was to move
itself. Maybe, the authorities, when I left, were contemplating providing
privates with motor-cars. I’ve found out, since I’ve been here, how the unit
moves itself. Don’t do any walking ? Well, look here, if there is a piece of
accessible ground in Palestine, and not forgetting Syria, that I haven’t
trampled on trudging behind heavily-laden G.S. wagons and limbers in the
course of many and frequent camp shiftings, I’d like to find it and have it
photographed.”
" BILLZAC.”


A weary, stricken people,
So long enslaved;
A spire and broken steeple,
By lanes ill-paved :
A thousand superstitions;
A hundred creeds;
The beggars’ vain petitions
That no one heeds.
Palestine
Some fertile plains
After the rains.
Vast valleys, lorn and lonely;
Smiling and green:
Dead cities, telling only
What might have been
Tower of rfie Forty
A league-long line of mountains :
Bright, rippling, purling fountains,


A field of poppies blazing:
Orchids new-born:
A wealth of flowers amazing
Fringing the corn :
A line of camels stringing
Across the brae:
The skylark sweetly singing,
To welcome day.
A home of races, mingled
Gentile and Jew:
Women with veiled faces :
Rogues, not a few.
A Sacred Land, and Holy
Beersheba to Dan;
Where once a King so lowly
Lived
man.
MOSQUE OF OMAR
A land of milk and honey,
In Moses’ day:
A place of paper money
Since Abdul’s sway:
A prophets’ land and sages’,
By right divine :
The heir of all the Ages,
Poor Palestine! !
“TROOPER BLUEGUM.”


(AN AUSTRALIAN TROOPER WITH GERMAN HELMET)
QJy James Mcßey, British Official Artist
SOME SOUVENIR




The Camel Brigade
HERE are, maybe, ten thousand Australians who
will never see a map of Egypt or Palestine, never
hear of the Great War, never sing or listen to
a Christmas Carol, and, perhaps, never even boil
a billy, without thinking of camels.
Nor is it altogether surprising; for camels
played so prominent a part in their lives in the
days of Armageddon. They lived on camels;
they always slept near, and often on camels;
and camels carried their tucker, their water, their
clothes, their blankets. The last thing they saw
as they fell asleep at night was a string of long-necked camels silhouetted
against the bare horizon. The first thing they heard after reveille was the
raucous noise of a camel lifting up its voice in the wilderness. Nothing but
camel, day and night, from the Senussi stunt to the Jerusalem-Jericho-
Jordan scrapping.
None of us really liked our camels. Frankly, most of us loathed them.
They were a necessary evil. In a desert campaign they were indispensable :
so they were tolerated. But for many, many months the Cameleers cursed
them without ceasing for the vilest, stupidest, craziest beasts that ever
cumbered the earth.
Then, suddenly—it was about midsummer, 1918 —we began to realize
some of the many virtues of the much-maligned camel. We remembered
that even on the scorching sands of Sinai, we were rarely short of water.
We reminded each other that, while Light Horsemen shivered on the freezing
Judean Hills, we snuggled cosily ’neath a bivvy and four blankets. We
thought of all the little extra canteen delicacies we had carried in our
capacious saddle-bags. And we talked about the good times we had at the
camel sports with Horace, and Mange Dressing and Starlight.
The reason for this volte-face , this sudden revulsion of feeling in favour
of the camel, lay in the fact that our camels were to be taken away from


us. We were to be transformed into cavalry for that Big Push which we
hoped would result in the smashing of the Turkish Army. And remember-
ing the comparative luxury of the Cameleer s life, we tried to make the
amende honorable and say kind things of and to our old hooshtas.
THE MIDDAY HALT
The Australian Camel Corps was formed early in 1916, when the
Senussi became troublesome. Four companies of infantry just back from
Gallipoli formed the nucleus of the corps. They proved a most valuable
asset, so more were demanded. But it was not certain that a sufficient
number of Australians could be provided, so the 2nd Battalion was com-
posed of English and Scotch Territorials, and the force became known as


BRIG-GENERAL C. L. SMITH, V.C., M.C.
OUR WATER SUPPLY


the Imperial Camel Corps. Later, a third Battalion was made up of
Australians and New Zealanders, and, at the end of the year, a fourth
Battalion, of Australians.
The Camel Corps was handicapped because of the general ignorance
concerning it. The A.I.F. in Sinai knew little of it; Australia knew
less. Often it was confused with and mistaken for the Camel Transport
Corps, a valuable unit, which has done splendid work, but is not a fighting
unit like the I.C.C. The members of the Imperial Camel Corps had all left
their parent Regiments, and so, for a long time, missed those welcome
parcels that the different Comfort Funds so generously sent to the boys.
Later, however, the A.I.F. Comforts took a kindly interest in the poor
Cameleers —and the Cameleers were unfeignedly grateful.
Coming back to Egypt from the Western Desert, the Cameleers spelled
awhile, then moved over the Canal to Sinai and participated in the Romani-
Bir-el-Abd fighting. Then came the big trek east towards El Arish with
its attendant patrols and skirmishes. When Abdul bolted from El Arish
the Army followed, the Light Horse and the Camel Corps in the van.
Maghdaba and Rafa followed, two of the most picturesque and decisive
battles of the campaign; and in each the Camel Corps distinguished
itself greatly. Then on to Khan Yunis —where lived Delilah of old —and
then to historic Gaza: the lion in our path. The story of the three battles
of Gaza has already been told. There is no need to recapitulate here the
part played by the Camelry in those engagements, save to mention that in
the second battle the I.C.C. rushed and captured their objective, suffering
about 75 per cent, casualties; while in the third, and victorious, battle, they
held the line at Kouelphi and Ras el Nagb in face of heavy counter-attacks.
The army had now turned the corner, and, under General Allenby’s
inspiring leadership, the Camel Brigade pushed north with the remainder of
the force until Jerusalem was captured. Then the army settled down in the
stalemate line of trenches stretching from just north of Jaffa to the Jordan
near Jericho ; by which time the Cameleers had suffered so many casualties,
and the camels were in such deplorable condition, that they were sent back
to Rafa to recuperate —and hold a sports meeting.
Mention should be made of the Hong Kong-Singapore Indian Mounted
Battery, known to the Camel Corps as “ The Bing Boys.” These Indian
soldiers participated in all the fighting in Palestine.
In March, 1918, the Camel Corps trekked through Palestine to
Richon, where they sampled the wine of the country. Then, after the


WATERING TIME, CAMEL BRIGADE
“PREPARE TO MOUNT”


rains, they ploughed their way through mud and slush and wire to
Bethlehem. From the wintry heights of Judea they descended by way of
Jericho to the midsummer of the Jordan Valley and on to Amman. Much
has been written about the adventure, or misadventure, into the hills of
Moab. Never will the Cameleers forget that night journey over slippery
goat-tracks to Es Salt. Never before or since was there ever such a journey.
Hour after hour the cavalcade struggled onward and upward, crawling
round ugly devil’s-elbows on mountain tracks, slipping and floundering in
the mud. Time and again camels would collapse, bogged and helpless,
and some toppled over the precipice. But the Brigade got to Amman and
blew up the Hedjaz Railway.
Back to the Jordan Valley again, the prey of snakes and scorpions and
spiders, mosquitos and flies and Turkish shells —but the mosquitos were the
worst. Scores and scores of men went sick with malaria, which recurred
during subsequent operations. The last big scrap of the I.C.C. was the
defence of Musallabeh, which the Turks attacked with grim determination.
In spite of very heavy casualties, the Cameleers held on and beat off the
enemy. Because of this gallant defence, General Allenby decreed that
henceforth Musallabeh should be called “ The Camel’s Hump.”
With Sinai far behind and well-watered country ahead, it was seen that
the Camel Brigade had outlived its usefulness. So, in May, the Cameleers
returned westward towards Jaffa, handed over their camels, and were
mounted on horses and armed with swords for the Big Push.
TROOPER BLUEGUM.”


PORTION OF CONVOY OF 8,000 CAMELS BEARING SUPPLIES ON THE PHILISTINE PLAIN


HERE’S a
delightful
sound about
that little
word “Rest.”
it conjures up
delicious vis-
ions of breakfast in bed, scrambled
eggs on toast, lying about in the sun,
nice books to read, etc., etc., as the
imagination wills. Now, we didn’t
expect all these things, but when we
got the word, “ The regiment is going
for a rest behind the lines,” every-
body’s ears pricked up, and we were
all on the qui vice for the few days
following.
Sure enough, we moved out all
right, and camped one moonlight
night on a gently-sloping plateau to
the west of the hills, taking up our
abode comfortably in bell tents, six of
us to a tent. We’d had a long day,
so soon turned in and slept the sleep
of the conscienceless. Behold us next morning, at that cold, cheerless grey
hour which just precedes the dawn, lying in various picturesque attitudes,
with the cold wind playing on us, as yet untouched by the sun’s compen-
sating warmth. A bugle gave out its brass-mouthed message, and one of
those necessary evils known as corporals invited us to “ turn out and fall
in.” Now, it was the witching hour of 4 a.m., and we didn’t like “ turning
out or “ falling in, or any kindred mysterious movement; but necessity


BEDOUINS CAPTURED AT HASSANIYER
STREET MARKET, JERUSALEM


BEDOUIN VILLAGE
TURKISH PRISONERS, NABLUS


knows no law, so, to the accompaniment of many an ungracious “ Blarst
the war,” “ What sort of a rest is this ? ” we crawled out of bed, dressed,
and wended our weary way to the stables.
The next hour or two saw us busy among the horses —removing the
superfluous dirt from their coats, cleaning up the stable lines, and watering
and feeding our jaded mounts. We were then marched to the Q.M.’s to
be issued with an extra blanket. In the usual way of Q.M.’s, this just
allowed us back in time for six o’clock breakfast. During the meal they
broke the news gently to us that there was a mounted parade at seven, to go
through a “ little training.” More grumbles, of course, but the time was
too short to allow of any delay for grousing, so we got out for our “ little
training.” This delightful exercise consisted of a gruelling couple of hours
in the sun, after which we had to groom and stable our horses, had a
quarter of an hour’s “ smoke-o,” and then the pleasure of lecture for
half an hour or so.
Dismissed to our tents, we distributed ourselves behind the covers of
various journals—ranging, according to taste, from “War Cry to the
“ Bulletin.” Hardly was our interest fixed, when there was borne in
on our ears a stentorian cry which resolved itself into the voice of our two-
bar artist yelling “Fall in for water ! ” and away we went again like lambs.
A struggle with four horses, two on each side of you, and each couple
desiring to go in a different direction, is not calculated to improve one s
temper ; but we got the job done and returned for dinner. This meal was
not the one of our dreams, but we settled down after it as though we d
lunched at “ Shepheards,” and began to think that the “ rest part of the
stunt was at hand. Then the orderly sergeant announced that there would
be a grazing parade at two o’clock. So out we all had to turn again and
spend a couple of hours on the grassy slope a mile or so away, thinking
sad thoughts and uttering strong utterances.
Back again, stable the horses, we finished just in time for tea, to which
we did ample justice, and allowed ourselves to drift into a better frame of
mind. After tea we at last settled down in our tents, and had just dealt
the cards for a quiet game of poker, when, lo and behold! the orderly
corporal looked in and said, quite pleasantly and off-hand, too, “ There will
be an inspection at 9 a.m. to-morrow; all saddlery and gear to be cleaned
and placed outside tents at 8 a.m.” Well, we looked at one another


we were past words. Slowly the hands were thrown in; more in sorrow
than in anger we cleared the card-blanket away, and the last scene saw six
queerly silent figures listlessly polishing up bits and
stirrup irons and greasing leather gear, with the
mutely suffering look in each face akin to the look of
the dog which has just received a kick in the ribs as the
grand finale to a series of ill-usages. So ended a day
of rest. In that tent, that night, men went to bunk
murmuring, “If this is rest, send us back to work.”
TRALAS.”


CAID Breezy Bob to Baldy Bill, “ I’m giving you the oil;
There’s whips of blinking eatables on this ’ere virgin soil.
So what abart a forage hunt, me bold and noble chief ?
It’s time we had some mutton now instead of bully-beef.”
Now, Baldy Bill was leader of an enterprising mess;
His cobbers all would back him up in deeds of wickedness.
So when Old Bob suggested that the gang should have a hunt
For tasty chops and cutlets, they agreed upon the stunt.
It happened that the n’th Light Horse were camping in a grove
Of olives, figs and oranges, the hedges interwove
With prickly pear grown very thick, and on the other side
The grazing land by cattle, sheep and goats was occupied.
An Arab Chief, or Mukhtar, was the owner of the flock,
Named “ Abdul el Mahomed,” a monopolist in stock.
Now Baldy Bill and Breezy Bob were socialistic coves
Who spouted on equality amongst the olive groves.
THE MUKHTAR3


And so in tones of ecstasy the plot was duly laid,
And in the hedge of prickly pear a hole was quickly made.
Then Bob and Baldy sallied forth —a ration bag of oats
Was carried by the doughty pair to snare the Mukhtar’s goats.
They crawled along in silence, seeking shade from tree to tree,
Until they came upon the flock all feeding peacefully.
The Mukhtar, squatting in the shade, engaged in silent thought,
Was dreaming of the prosperous times the “ awful war ” had brought
Now, Baldy in the ration bag had made a little spout,
And as they crawled along the grass the oats were trickling out;
But as they neared the Mukhtar’s flock they rose upon their feet,
Salaamed in true Australian style, the pastoralist to greet.
In friendly pidgin-Arabic they talked a little while,
Then bade farewell to Abdul in the dinkum Aussie style;
And as they sauntered back to camp they noticed with a grin,
That Abdul’s goats had found the oats, and all were “ wiring in.
The feeding flock came slowly towards the hedge of prickly pear.
A fine big “ billy ” led the lot, quite eager for his share,
And as he wandered close enough the prickly pear to feel,
He “ got it ” quickly in the neck—a blade of polished steel.
Then Bill and Breezy dragged their prize into the Squadron’s lines,
Cut up the mass of quivering flesh in various designs.
With plenty swords available they soon got off the hide ;
In less time than it takes to tell the billy-goat was fried.
That night the stew was “ counted out ” and mutton reigned instead,
And when old Abdul “ counted in ” his flock he hit his head
In anger, for he came upon the remnants of the oats
That Breezy Bob distributed to snare the Mukhtar’s goats.
Since then the Military Police are looking for a clue;
They never made enquiries about discarded stew,
Or else they might have found the truth; and Bill and Breezy gloat,
To tell the yarn in secrecy about the Mukhtar’s goat.


BUYING ORANGES, JAFFA
By W. O. David Barker




ounl" of all wisdom
who knows jusf what we
but very seldom lets il'c
T heOenerolb
iTh stand To Arms at ba
i n cold and wet and
Whob rm§s a nice,warm cup of
"My Batman! 1
V bo knows foe movement of all Iroo
and brings the din hum wifh my boots V
Who finds but never, never, loots
"My Barman’ 1
he lasi" to sleep,tbefirst To rise,
who sorb the rumor qd if flies,
whisper puts me wise,
*My Barman."


Damascus
nr HE first charm of Damascus as a whole city lies in the contrast which
those brown sandhills behind it make with the green strip of the
Barada Valley. Journeying from Ludd through the monotony of lank,
brown growth that straggles to the horizon from the road, you give up hope
of ever seeing foliage again, until you pass El Kunneitra. Then you see the
green of Barada; and it is the richer for the hills behind it —browner, more
desolate by far, than any landscape skirting Galilee or the Jordan. Far up
the clay feet of those rocky hills straggles the brown-and-white suburb of
Salahiye, all square-built and flat-topped—from the distance like bricks
inserted in the clay soil. The line of hills is cleft cleanly by the Pass, the
scene of that hideous slaughter by our machine guns. If you climb into
the fringe of Salahiye you see the curious shape of Damascus —a jagged
comet-form, all the angles and serrations of the brown tail defined with
unnatural clearness by the depth of the green about it. In the amorphous
head are a few minarets —like jewels. In Cairo there are too many minarets
as you look from the Bey’s Leap: they protrude like a porcupine’s quills.
In Damascus the city’s flat brownness is just relieved by them. When we
came to Damascus it was drought-stricken. Soon afterward, it rained
torrentially for a day. Then the sun shone and drew from the city such
colour as we never dreamed was there. Nor had we dreamed that the
trees were dusty— so green they seemed after the southern country. But,
washed, they helped to throw up the wonderful colour of “ that great city,”
as it is called in Scripture.
It is a relief to be delivered from the sight of the everlasting cactus-hedge
of the southern towns. The cactus does flourish in Damascus ; but so thick
is the foliage that it is lost in the mass. You cannot look down on Nazareth
without being obsessed by the übiquitous pest. You can look down on
Damascus and be unconscious of it. It straggles about the leafy roads in
patches beside the mud walls. That you can bear, because it does not rise
above the all-enclosing foliage.
The smells of Damascus you will remember for ever. Cairo is clean by
comparison : the alleys of Cairo are not foul. The stinks of Damascus are


literally overpowering. There is offal, refuse, foul puddles in every street of
the Bazaars. The Abana is a foul river. “ Are not Abana and Pharpar,
rivers of Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel ” ? The answer is :
Certainly not. There is an ill-kemptness about the place that carries Oriental
slackness a bit too far. In the streets that thread the heart of the city are
ruts and holes that break the springs of M.T. every day. The tramline
protrudes eight inches. This gives rise to deadlocks in traffic that hold up
movement for an hour. Incredibly narrow and tortuous are the highways
of the city. The only decent road is that which skirts the fountained
promenade near the Hedjaz Station. lam sure the Damascans look on this
bit of orderliness as a Western intrusion; just as I am sure that if they
found themselves in an English town guileless of smells they would call it
insipid.
In the bazaars there is a baffling complexity of colour, of race, of wares.
The Mousky is less heterogeneous. In the Square, in the street which is
called Strait, in the gold bazaar, grain bazaar, sweets bazaar, silk bazaar,
you have all the various colour of tarbooshed Cairo, and more. Here the
soldiers of the King of the Hedjaz throng; there is endless variety in their
clothes and their flowing head-dress. The Moslem women, who veil their
faces, affect far more variety than the Mohamedan women of Cairo, with
their yashmaks. The French are here. The Australian hat and plume is
everywhere. I never saw so great a number of Australian soldiers moving
at random in any city. There is great jostling in these narrow streets, more
than the normal jostling you get in any crowd.
The dusty bazaars are in semi-darkness; their streets bear a covered
roof of iron; they must get protection from rain. In Cairo all is open; for
there it rains but rarely. Not only are the bazaar streets in Cairo without
roofs that would stop a shower, but the shops, themselves, full of treasures.
Here the rain comes in a deluge. From some of the street roofs the
enemy had taken the iron for military use. What the state of these
roofless streets will be when the rains come is sad to think. They will be
flooded all winter.
Except that there is greater diversity of peoples—both buyers and sellers
—the bazaars of Damascus are much like those of the Mousky. There are
the same well-defined areas for specific commodities ; the same little cubicles
for shops, where vendors squat and “ reach for things ” ; there is the same
voluble haggling—the same conversations carried on in tones that you would
first mistake for quarrelsome ; there are the same crying, peripatetic vendors


of limonade, quoit-shaped cakes and toffee; the shoe-blacks are here, but
they are ahead of Cairo, with their gongs to attract the uncleanly-shod.
There is a more incessant stream of laden donkeys through the bazaars
here. In Cairo the donkeys are chiefly for pleasure riding; here they are
mercantile, over-laden with the striped sacks of grain and fabric. There are
additions to the bazaars of Cairo in the goldsmiths’ bazaar, the sweets
bazaar. The goldsmiths work with their blowpipes and tiny forges and tiny
tools, moulding and fashioning. It is curious to see the workshop as part
of the sale-shop. The belts, brooches, rings and trays exposed for sale in a
showcase were made two yards away by that cunning Oriental fashioner
squatting on his haunches. The sweets bazaar tempts you hideously.
Eastern nutted sweets and Turkish-delight and toffees look as well as they
taste. Mere assorted chocolates —such as you get at Groppi’s—are crude
by comparison. There are great serpentine coils of Turkish-delight lurking
in icing-sugar—nut toffee that is all nuts —none of your miserable paucity of
nuts such as one gets in English almond-rock : nuts form the matrix here.
. . . . But enough of that; here, if ever, you are tempted to generate a
liver the size of your hat.
Public baths abound in the heart of the bazaars. Fronting the street is
the final, open, divaned, cooling-off room —an amphitheatre of couches
upholstered with a kind of gay-coloured towelling. A fountain plays in the
midst. The bathed sit swaying in the ecstasy of reaction from the steam,
with closed eyes. No Roman ever bathed more voluptuously. No one
minds your going in nor your penetrating to the bowels of the establishment.
Room after room you pass, with swinging doors ; each is hotter than the last.
In the last, and hottest room, the smell of man is overpowering; you
hastily retrace your steps through the series of chambers and regain the
comparative sweetness of the bazaars.
Foul as this city may be, there is beauty in every foot of it. The
beauty of Cairo lies rather in the view you get of “ chunks ”of it —the
vista of the street, the space of a market-place, the mass of a mosque.
Here the beauty lies in little pieces of wall, looked at minutely, in a tiny
piece of domestic architecture. It is a beauty in colour rather than in form.
Form in Cairo counts for much —in Damascus for almost nothing. Here
there is dilapidation in a degree undreamt of in Cairo. But dilapidation
does not necessarily make for beauty, though some people think it does. I
believe the beauty of colour in Damascus lies in extreme age—in the mel-
lowing of age. After Cairo, the intense antiquity of the older city—of every


fragment of it —comes to you impressively. You feel the age of it as you
pace every yard of its alleys. Cairo is comparatively modern, and com-
paratively garish. There is a fine, if filthy, harmony in Damascus.
Intimate in the memory of most Light Horsemen will always be certain
features of Damascus. Our men will not forget the Hedjaz Headquarters
in the heart of the city, the German Club, the Local Resources Office, the
filthy Turkish hospital, the English and French hospitals in the suburb, the
littered railway station, the suburban roads, unspeakably rough and muddy,
the afternoon perambulations of blatant under-dressed bints in gharries, the
guards— on the aerodrome, on the Ottoman Bank, on the captured grain
stores, on the captured guns —the plentiful lack of ordnance and canteen
stores, the corpses of dogs and horses in open spaces, the multitudinous
beggars, the exorbitant prices asked for German razors that cost their
vendors nothing, the moderate cost of silver and brass ware, the Hedjaz
recruiting processions, the glut of matches, the potency of arak, the cunning
of the plausible English-speaking small boys, the puzzling complexity and
fluctuation of the currency, the paucity of mails, the liberty and the use-
fulness of Turkish prisoners, the fitful and lawless discharge of firearms
about the city all through the night, the suddenness with which sickness
made its descent upon the apparently immune, the daily receipt and
despatch to time-table of official mails by air, the dancing lights of Salahiye
that burned till dawn .
H. W. D.


Malaria
OU,
Than this,
Malaria! Malaria!
Those of your fevered kiss !
Than this,
Malaria! Malaria!
with your winding, creeping course,
What of the men of our Southern Horse ?
Valley of night, with your winged pest,
What of our heroes now at rest,
Down by your Dead, salt Sea ?
What of the ones we have left behind ?
What of these men of our kith and kind,
Nigh where your blood streams hiss ?
Better the true and unerring shot!
Better the Death when their blood runs hot —
You, with your aged river’s flow,
What of our Riders laid below ?
Valley of Death, with your torpid heat,
Look where your swirling hill streams meet,
Down by your Dead, salt Sea!
Look to the ones on your mounded knoll!
Look to the ones of your chosen toll!
Better the blast of the rending shell!
Better the toll of the War God’s knell,
KOOLAWARRA,


Fall Out the 1914 Men
are in strange lands, their deeds imperishable memories.
“ Boys ” —it was the Old Man speaking—“ we come
together to say good-bye.” He outlined his associa-
tion with the Brigade, and touched briefly on the
outstanding incidents of its career. He humorously
alluded to their “ weakness ” in a few respects, but
■Grtfe/rtf/**/*
A FTER four years’ service, the remnants of the First and Second
Contingents were assembled preparatory to return to Australia.
Such a prolonged absence from their homes might have led one to expect
a wild emotional outburst; but they received the tidings casually.
As they fell into line to be farewelled by the Brigadier, they presented
an inspiring sight; shoulder to shoulder, each man a history in himself; true
mates, every one of them: their fellowship cemented by the blood of fallen
comrades. Alert they stood, hardened by the privations and hardships of
long years of campaigning, but —true test
- f. of manhood ready to face it all over
?•.*. . 4 again if their principles were involved.
«r. As they waited for the “Old Man,” as
; * y the Brig, is affectionately termed, visions of
Cy/,* the past began to take form before their
eyes. Mine saw the silent, winding streams
of human life, being hurried through the
streets of sleeping cities on their way to grim, silent
transports. No gay farewells, no playing of bands, no
gathering of gaily-dressed crowds to wave them farewell
on their way to foreign shores. As they strained their
eyes for a last glimpse of their native land, many must
have tried to visualize their return. None realized how
or when, and many of the stout hearts on those sea-
sprayed ships who gazed with loving eyes on their
sunny land were saying the last farewell. Their graves


he was proud to say that no man had ever complained of his punishment.
Everybody had played the game, and his life was infinitely richer because
of his association with them. He wished all a bright future, and they
were never to forget him if they were ever in any difficulty.
At the close of the homily, I am afraid, the etiquette of military discipline
was violated in many ways. “ Good old Brig., the whitest ever made,” and
such-like remarks were punctuated by cheering and the waving of hats. A
personal handshake with each man and wishes of “ good luck ”; and
then came the farewells round the camp, when mates of years bade each
other good-bye, and turned away.
Friendship such as this will stand the test of time.
“ BATAGGI.”
MRS. CHISHOLM’S CANTEEN AT KANTARA


BETHLEHEM


TROOPERS ENTERING JERICHO
DAMASCUS


“Old Horse o’ Mine”
All the grit of your loyalty;
But deep in the sand of a lonely land,
Out on many a far flung trail,
Your old hoofs spoke of a heart you broke
For me, that you might not fail.
That danced or dulled at the whim mayhap
Of a fancy unaware —
Brave Soul that sprung in the colt of you,
Unguessed in the years far back,
O ! If then there be for the likes o’ me,
A Heav’n —it must hold you, too.
IT OOF-BEATS, that rang on the crowded street,
A * Had never beat unto me
All the wealth of the gold in your old black hide,
Great eyes, that dusked in the green gums’ wave,
Though I recked not that you were there,
How the mateship grew in the depths of you,
When the waste spread its gauntness wide.
How you parched with me, how you marched with me,
Through that Hell of a thirst denied.
Ere your Fate ran out from a land of streams
To the drought of a sun-blazed track —
For the days since seen, for the pals we’ve been,
When Old Time sees us through—
T. V. B.


Concerning Machine Guns
“ Light Automatic, *303,” so saith the machine gun handbook.
Further on, it informs the reader that the gun weighs 38 lbs. when
the water jacket is filled. These statements have been the subject of many
bitter outbursts, and not a few have wondered whether they had a pair
of scales at the War Office (this unfortunate institution is, of course,
responsible for everything that goes wrong).
There have been countless instances where a sweating, cursing
Billjim, struggling up a scorching precipice with the said Vickers Light
Automatic, would have betted all his deferred pay that it weighed at
least ten times as much as the handbook implies. Even on such
kindergarten exercises as gun drill, wonder has often been expressed that
“they” had the blooming neck to print such a fib. Still another proof
that the real weight greatly exceeds the official figures. Watch the hefty
No. 2, capable of lifting an 18 pdr., as, after continuous firing, he gets the
order, “ Out of action ! ” In a flash, the pins are wrenched out, he seizes
the smoking gun where the protecting piece of puttee, numnah pad or
sock isn’t, and instantly drops the weapon to the ground. Isn’t that
convincing ?
There are other minor details about the machine gun handbook that
are apt to be misleading. It states that there is a No. 1, who is the boss
and only carries the tripod—a flimsy toy of some 48 lbs. of brass and
steel; next, a No. 2, who juggles with a Vickers Light Automatic; also a
No. 3, who has nothing to do but carry a few boxes of ammunition, these
being mere tin cases no bigger than the handbag he used to carry his
pyjamas in, and containing only one belt; then there are a few other
superfluous hangers-on; a No. 4, who aids the No. 3 ; a No. 5, who aids
him ; and so ad infinitum down to that humble creature, the pack leader, who
holds three horses during an action.
Thus far, the handbook is perfect, photographic plates and all.
Where the discrepancy comes in, is that there is no advice regarding a
hitch. It has nothing to say about this : A person is observed toiling


along with the tripod, a box of 250 cartridges hanging on each leg, straddled
across his shoulders; some distance behind him wobbles another sagging
individual, bearing the gun, more belt boxes, a pick and a shovel; while
a third —sometimes —struggles on with still more belt boxes, range-finder,
spare-parts wallet, a can of water, steam escape tube, a bag to prevent dust
at the gun’s muzzle, and a few other trifles; and down in some more or
less protected hollow, three or four distracted pack leaders curse away
their last remaining hope of salvation trying to keep untangled the twenty-
odd hungry brutes that crane their necks to nibble at infinitesimal, dead
grass stalks. Let us dismiss the handbook.
The machine gun can be put to many uses. As a seat, it is admirable,
also as a clothes horse for small gear ; and as a horse rack, providing the
animal doesn’t pull it over, it stands alone. It has also been known to
remove Turkish folks from their ration strength—but accidents will happen.
The gunner is at his best when using his gun as anti-aircraft. He
reverses the position of the gun on the tripod in order to get a sharper
angle, and lies down on his back beneath it, pillowing his shoulders on
some soft substance, such as the spare parts box. The No. 2 crouches
alongside to tuck in—at this angle—the reluctant belt; the Taube
approaches at a reasonable altitude, and then ratta-tatta-tatta stutters the
gun.
A heartrending episode occurred in the Jordan Valley one morning.
The guns, at the top of the precipitous cliffs lining the Jordan, were being
snugly tucked away in their little dust-proof positions for the day, when
sinister humming in the sky was heard. Out of the woolly, cumulus clouds
a flock of Taubes dived and began their fell work. In a twinkling,
the guns were violently slammed on the tripods, fresh, full belts rattled
into the feed-blocks, and the gunners flopped into their positions, grimly
inviting the visitors to come a bit closer and “ have a fly.” They did,
and answered the prompt leaden stream with their own guns.
One gun had been firing merrily at the wheeling Taubes for some time
when the prostrate, grim-jawed No. 1 uttered a wild, squealing ye'll, and
writhed fearfully. “ Good God, Percy is hit ! ” cried young Bobbie, the
No. 2, and he turned in alarm to his friend, who was out-writhing any
live wire.
The No. 1 gasped and stuttered in his agony, but managed to
ejaculate: “ Hit, be dinged! It’s the bloomin’ hot shells that trickled
inside me shirt. Hop into ’em! ”


I give this illustration merely to show the risks attached to machine
gunnery.
The Machine Gun Squadron is regarded as a desirable unit. It has
numerous advantages over the Regiments; notably, there are no duties
or fatigues to speak of, except, perhaps, stables, watering, rations, cook’s,
Q.M.’s, road-making, laying interminable miles of stones in line, white-
washing same, erecting this, that and the other, cleaning saddlery,
polishing reluctant steel work, an odd guard or two (mostly odd), and a
few other trifles, which the conscientious soldier performs with assiduity
and alacrity.
There is little else about machine guns to learn, they are so perfect that
a machine gunner is now made in six weeks instead of six years. They
have performed some remarkable work during the war, moral effect being
one of their greatest assets —observe the sprightly vigour with which the
officer inspecting outposts bounds away from the front of a machine gun
position, where he has wandered by misadventure, when the man on
guard sings out, “ Machine gun here, Sir! ”
The boys will be sorry to say good-bye to their vicious, stuttering pets;
and let us hope that, the guns, when they are returned to Ordnance, will
cease to (metaphorically) curl their lips in disdain at their humble and
erratic poor relations, the Hotchkiss rifles of the Regiments.
“SARG.”


Delivered!
A wounded earth is free again,
The barriers of the East are down;
With many a mound above the slain,
The zones of battle, bare and brown,
Shall feel the tears of wintertide,
(War’s aftermath of sorrowing)
Till Nature heals their scars of pride
And flowers perfume a deathless spring.
"GERARDY




ANGUS & ROBERTSON’S AUSTRALIAN PUBLICATIONS.
THE ART OF ARTHUR STREETON. Edited by Sydney Ure Smith, Bertram Stevens
and C. Lloyd Jones, with critical and biographical articles by P- G- Konody, Julian Ashton
and Lionel Lindsay. With coloured reproductions of 35 of Streeton’s best landscapes and
20 others in black-and-white, 10J x 8| inches, 425. [Ready in October.
THE ART OF CONRAD MARTENS- Edited by Lionel Lindsay, assisted by
G. V. F. Mann, Director of the National Art Gallery of New South Wales. With
reproductions of 60 of Martens’ pictures, mostly in colour, 10J x 8f inches, 425.
[Ready in October.
THE ART OF J J. HILDER. Edited by Sydney Ure Smith, with a Life of Hilder by
Bertram Stevens, and contributions by Julian Ashton and Harry Julius. V6th reproductions
of 36 of Hilder’s pictures in colour and 20 in black-and-white, 10| x 8| inches, 425.
SELECTED POEMS OF HENRY LAWSON. Selected and carefully revised by
Mr. Lawson, and containing several new poems, wholly printed from new type, with
portrait in colour, and 9 full-page illustrations by Percy Leason, xl\ inches, 12s. 6d.
DOMESTIC ARCHITECTURE IN AUSTRALIA. Special Number of Art in
Australia. Edited by Sydney Ure Smith and Bertram Stevens, in collaboration with
W. Hardy Wilson. With 5 articles by leading Australian Architects and 47 full-page
illustrations, llj x 9 inches, 21 s.
ART IN AUSTRALIA, No. VI. With reproductions of War Pictures by Sir Wm.
Orpen, R.A., Fred Leist, H. Power, C. Bryant, Will Dyson and Bombardier Waller;
colour plates by Mr. and Mrs. Spencer Macky, Frances Hodgkins (N.Z.), Cumbrae Stewart,
Hilda Rix-Nicholas, Percy Leason, Hans Heysen, Howard Ashton and W. B. Mclnnes,
and of two etchings by Norman Lindsay. The Articles include one by P. G. Konody on
Sir Wm. Orpen, R.A., and one by Charles Marriott on Will Dyson’s War Pictures,
10 x 1\ inches, 7s. 6d.
ART IN AUSTRALIA, No. V. With 13 coloured and 10 other plates, by Rupert Bunny,
Bernard Hall, M. J. McNally, Eliot Gruner, Hayley Lever, H. Van Raalte, W. Hardy
Wilson, Thea Proctor, Will Ashton and others, also a number of interesting articles. 10 x 7|
inches, 7s. 6d.
THE MAGIC PUDDING. A story in Prose and Verse, by Norman Lindsay. Illustrated by
him in 100 pictures, mostly full-page, 11| x 9 inches, 21s.
THE POETICAL WORKS OF HENRY KENDALL. Enlarged edition, with
biographical note by Bertram Stevens, and portrait, 6s.
THE LILT OF LIFE: New Poems. By Zora Cross, author of “ Songs of Love and Life.” ss.
SONGS OF LOVE AND LIFE. By Zora Cross. Fourth edition, with portrait, ss.
AN IRISH HEART : Poems. By David McKee Wright. With portrait, ss.
THE PASSIONATE HEART: Poems. By Mary Gilmore, author of “ Marri’d,” etc. With
portrait, ss.


ANGUS & ROBERTSON’S AUSTRALIAN PUBLICATIONS
SONGS OF A CAMPAIGN. By Leon Gellert. New edition, with 25 additional poems and
16 pictures by Norman Lindsay, 4s. 6d.
THE AUSTRALIAN, AND OTHER VERSES. By Will H. Ogilvie. With frontispiece,
title-page and jacket in colour, by Hal Gye, 4s. 6d. Pocket edition, complete, 4s.
THE CHANT OF DOOM, AND OTHER VERSES. By C. J. Brennan. With
portrait, 3s. 6d.
DIGGER SMITH. A New Volume of Poems. By C. J. Dennis. With frontispiece, title-
page and jacket in colour, and 13 full-page illustrations, by Hal Gye, 4s. 6d. Pocket edition,
complete, 4s. ‘
BACKBLOCK BALLADS AND LATER VERSES. By C. J. Dennis. New Edition,
revised, with 16 new pieces, wholly printed from new type, with frontispiece, title-page and
jacket in colour, by Hal Gye, 4s. 6d.
THE SONGS OF A SENTIMENTAL BLOKE. By C. J. Dennis. With frontispiece,
title-page and jacket in colour, and other illustrations by Hal Gye, 4s. 6d. Pocket edition,
complete, 4s.
DOREEN : A Sequel to The Sentimental Bloke. With coloured and other illustrations by Hal
Gye. In envelope ready for posting, Is.
THE MOODS OF GINGER MICK. By C. J. Dennis. With frontispiece, title-page and
jacket in colour, and other illustrations by Hal Gye, 4s. 6d. Pocket edition, complete, 4s.
THE GLUGS OF GOSH. By C. J. Dennis. With frontispiece, title-page and jacket in
colour, and other illustrations by Hal Gye, 4s. 6d. Pocket edition, complete, 4s.
SALTBUSH BILL, J.P., AND OTHER VERSES. By A. B. Paterson. With coloured
frontispiece, title-page and jacket by Lionel Lindsay, 4s.
THE MAN FROM SNOWY RIVER, AND OTHER VERSES. By A. B. Paterson.
New edition, with coloured frontispiece, title-page and jacket by Norman Lindsay, 4s.
RIO GRANDE, AND OTHER VERSES. By A. B. Paterson. New edition, with
coloured frontispiece, title-page and jacket by Hal Gye, 4s.
WHERE THE DEAD MEN LIE, AND OTHER POEMS. By Barcroft Boake,4s. 6d.
AT DAWN AND DUSK: Poems. By Victor J. Daley, 4s. 6d.
WINE AND ROSES : Poems. By Victor J. Daley, 4s. 6d.
THE SECRET KEY, AND OTHER POEMS. By G. Essex Evans, 4s. 6d.
HOW HE DIED, AND OTHER POEMS. By John Farrell, 4s. 6d.
WHEN THE WORLD WAS WIDE, AND OTHER VERSES. By Henry Lawson
4s. 6d.
VERSES, POPULAR AND HUMOROUS. By Henry Lawson, 4s. 6d.


ANGUS & ROBERTSON’S AUSTRALIAN PUBLICATIONS.
WHEN I WAS KING AND OTHER VERSES. By Henry Lawson, 4s. 6d.
THE THREE KINGS, AND OTHER VERSES. By Will Lawson, 4s. 6d.
FAIR GIRLS AND GRAY HORSES : Poems. By Will H. Ogilvie, 4s. 6d.
HEARTS OF GOLD : Poems. By Will H. Ogilvie, 4s. 6d.
POETICAL WORKS OF BRUNTON STEPHENS, 4s. 6d
THE GOLDEN TREASURY OF AUSTRALIAN VERSE, edited by Bertram Stevens,
4s. 6d.
CHILDREN OF THE BUSH : Stories. By Henry Lawson, 4s. 6d.
JOE WILSON AND HIS MATES : Stories. By Henry Lawson, 4s. 6d.
ON THE TRACK AND OVER THE SLIPRAILS. By Henry Lawson, 4s. 6d.
WHILE THE BILLY BOILS : Stories. By Henry Lawson, 4s. 6d.
THREE ELEPHANT POWER, AND OTHER STORIES. By A. B. Paterson,
author of “ The Man from Snowy River,” etc., 4s. 6d.
TALES OF SNUGGLEPOT AND CUDDLEPIE, AND THEIR ADVENTURES
WONDERFUL. By May Gibbs, author of “ Wattle Babies,” “ Gum-Blossom Babies,”
Gum-Nut Babies, etc. With 23 coloured and other plates and many pen drawings in the
text. 10 x7| inches, ss.
BUSHLAND STORIES. By Amy Eleanor Mack, author of “ A Bush Calendar.” With
coloured illustrations, 3s. 6d.
SCRIBBLING SUE, AND OTHER STORIES. By Amy Eleanor Mack. With coloured
and other illustrations, 3s. 6d.
GEM OF THE FLAT. A Story of Young Australians. By Constance Mackness. With
coloured and other illustrations, 3s. 6d.
DOT AND THE KANGAROO. By Ethel C. Pedley. Illustrated by F. P. Mahony. 3s. 6d.
CHRISTOPHER COCKLE’S AUSTRALIAN EXPERIENCES. By J. R. Houlding
(“ Old Boomerang ”). 465 pages, 3s. 6d.
A BOOK OF AUSTRALIAN VERSE FOR BOYS AND GIRLS. Edited by
Bertram Stevens. With 14 portraits, 3s. 6d.
BORONIA BABIES. By May Gibbs, author of “ Snugglepot and Cuddlepie,” etc. With
2 coloured and 12 other pictures. 8f xsf inches, in envelope ready for posting, Is. 6d.
WATTLE BABIES. By May Gibbs. With 2 coloured and 12 other pictures, 8f x 5f
inches, in envelope ready for posting, Is. 6d.
GUM-BLOSSOM BABIES. By May Gibbs. With 2 coloured and 12 other pictures,
8f x 5f inches, in envelope ready for posting, Is. 6d.


ANGUS & ROBERTSON’S AUSTRALIAN PUBLICATIONS.
GUM-NUT BABIES. By May Gibbs. With 2 coloured and 12 other pictures, 8f xsf
inches, in envelope ready for posting, Is. 6d.
THE CHARM OF SYDNEY. 22 coloured and other illustrations by Sydney Ure Smith,
with appropriate quotations selected by Bertram Stevens. 7i xsi inches, Is. 6d.
THE CITY OF RIDDLE-ME-REE : A Fairy Story in Verse. By Zora Cross, author
of “ Songs of Love and Life.” coloured and other illustrations by Olive Crane, x
51 inches, Is. 6d.
BACKBONE : A BOUNCER FOR THE BLUES. Hints for the prevention of Jelly-
Spme Curvature and Mental Squint—A Straight-up Antidote for the Blues and a Straight-
Ahead Sure Cure for Grouch. New edition, to which is added A Message to Garcia-
Is. 6d.
THE MUD LARKS. By Crosbie Garstin, Lieutenant, Ist King Edward’s Horse. Is. 3d.
THE MUD LARKS AGAIN. A New Volume of Humorous Stories by Crosbie Garstin,
Is. 3d.
EXPLORATIONS IN CIVILIZATION. By Randolph Bedford, coloured cover, Is. 6d.
BOXALL (G. E.), HISTORY OF THE AUSTRALIAN BUSHRANGERS
390 pages, 4s. 6d.
CAMPBELL (Joseph), SIMPLE TESTS FOR MINERALS; or, Every Man his
own Analyst. Fourth edition, pocket size, cloth, round corners, 3s. 6d.
THE FARM GARDEN. By A. E. Cole (“Bouquet”). A Practical Handbook of
Australian Gardening, with about 100 illustrations. Cloth, 3s. 6d.
THE STATE AND FEDERAL CONSTITUTIONS OF AUSTRALIA : With
a tabulated comparison of the Federal Constitutions of the World. By K. R. Cramp, M.A.
Second edition, revised. With portraits and illustrations, 3s. 6d.
HISTORY OF AUSTRALASIA: From the Earliest Times to the Present Day. By
Arthur V 7. Jose, with 1 1 maps and 78 illustrations, ss. School edition, complete, 3s. 6d.
LIFE OF CAPTAIN MATTHEW FLINDERS, R.N. By Professor Ernest Scott.
Over 500 pages, with 40 folding maps, full-page plates, and manuscripts in facsimile, 21s.
THE BUTTERFLIES OF AUSTRALIA. By G. A. Waterhouse, B.Sc., F.E.S., and
G. Lyell, F.E.S. With four coloured and 39 other full-page plates, and numerous figures in
the text. 11x9 inches, 425.
ANGUS & ROBERTSON LTD., Publishers, Sydney,
London Agents : The Oxford University Press.
And at all Booksellers.






ht ~* j ~


fgfMß
111 1


JUST OUT


SEVENTEENTH THOUSAND
/Australia in Palestine
A PICTORIAL RECORD OF THE WORK OF THE A.I.F. IN PALESTINE, WITH
LITERARY CONTRIBUTIONS IN PROSE AND VERSE. WITH 4 FOLDING MAPS,
3 BATTLE-PLANS, AND 263 OTHER ILLUSTRATIONS, MANY OF THEM COLOURED.
SAME SIZE AS THIS PROSPECTUS, PRICE 10/6
Brisbane Courier says : “It is a glorious story, briefly -but splendidly told
..It is a book in which not a line need be skipped. Even the maps appear
to be more interesting than those in most war books, because of the associations
of the past A brief article such as this cannot do justice to the merits of
‘Australia in Palestine.*’ Every Australian ought to read the book from begin-
ning to end, and not once, but two or three times, and study the maps carefully.
Then he will feel proud indeed of his great and dashing Light Horsemen.”
PRESS
Melbourne AGE says: “Few war books have contained
so many merits, or deserve to be more widely circulated.
. . . Verse and story are of excellent literary quality.
. . . Many beautiful coloured pictures enhance the
book.”
THE QUEENSLANDER says: “If it were not so
closely associated with the deeds of our Light Horse-
men; if it were not such a delightful record of their
achievements; and if it were not so beautifully illus-
trated and produced, it would still be a book that one
would be glad to possess.”
LYTTELTON TIMES (Christchurch, N.Z.) says:
“A finer tribute to the Australian and New, Zealand
mounted troops in Palestine could not well be imagined.
. . . Panoramic views of battlefields and some excellent
maps add greatly to the interest.”
The Melbourne ARGUS says: “It is a handsome
volume consisting of serious history, light sketches and
stories, and a generous supply of beautiful illustrations.
. . . a worthy memento of a stirring period of history.”
The Melbourne LEADER says: “The book is one
which will be highly valued, not only from its personal
aspect, but also from the artistic side. . . . Special
mention should be made of the excellent series of maps
which accompany Mr. Gullett’s vivid account of the
operations, and which enable the reader to comprehend
clearly the course of the movements.”
DAILY TELEGRAPH (Sydney): says “Interesting
from start to finish; sets and maintains a high standard
of art; gives excellent examples of the photographer’s
skill both in black and white and colours, and is inter-
spersed with serious reading and bright pen sketches.
NOTICES
Adelaide ADVERTISER says: “This handsome
volume will remain for years one of the most interesting
and significant of the many Australian records which
have resulted from the experiences and achievements of
the great war. The illustrations are a revelation.”
The DOMINION (Wellington, N.Z.) says: “Should
find an honoured place in every library of the Dominion,
as well as of the Commonwealth.”
WEEKLY PRESS (Christchurch, N.Z.) says: “The
book is a delight to the eye; and its letterpress a refresh-
ment to the soul. . . . Full credit is given to the New
Zealanders a§ equal sharers with the Australians in the
hardships and glories of that terrible Palestine cam-
paign.” •
SUNDAY TIMES (Sydney) says: “The illustrations
are, on the whole, the best we have seen yet ir\ any book
dealing with the war. They range from accurate maps
and plans to the most rapid sketches.”
CHURCH STANDARD (Sydney) says: “No small
part of the value of the book is its vivid presentment of
the present condition of the Holy Land.”
OAMARU MAIL (N.Z.) says: “Mr. Gullett is a very
graphic writer, and his description of the fighting in
Palestine is not only entertaining but highly instructive.
. . . It is a work of permanent value.”
The Melbourne HERALD says: “For a thousand
years it will be told in every part of Christendom and
Islam that early in the twentieth century armies from
Australia helped to capture the Holy City.”


Press Notices of “ Australia in Palestine” (continued)
THE BULLETIN (Sydney) says: “No more
attractive Digger book has been published than this, and
we don’t expect a better. It is so varied in its interest.
There is the historical, a review of the ‘Fighting for
Palestine,’ done by H. S. Gullett; the pictorial, a really
remarkable collection of prints in colour and line and
half-tone, including work by G. W. Lambert and David
Barker, colour-photos by Frank Hurley, drawings by
David Barker and half a dozen others, and a hundred or
so photographs, for the most part admirably produced
and of absorbing interests reproductions of a few of
Barker’s etchings; 150 pages of simple, direct sketches of
the life the Diggers found in Palestine and the life they
lived themselves told by themselves; nature notes by
Charles Barrett, one of the editors; verse by ‘Trooper
Bluegum,’ ‘Gerardy,’ and others; aerial photographs of
Damascus, Jerusalem and other cities that are older even
than Parramatta. . . . The Australian horse was nearly
the equal in grit of the Australian man.”
FARMER AND SETTLER (Sydney) says: “The
series of large maps must be very valuable to a student
of the Palestine campaign, and must have a strong
personal interest to the man that took part in it.”
Adelaide REGISTER says: “Has a far greater per-
sonal value than could be attained by any official record
of history and facts. . . .”
The CHRISTIAN COMMONWEALTH (Adelaide)
says: “Our youths will read this book with interest and
pride, and will be moved to stand up with all their
inches, and say—‘7, 100, am an Australian.' ”
The SUN (Christchurch, N.Z.) says: “There have
been many similar records of one campaign and another,
but none more crammed with human interest than this
one. ... A galaxy of talent has brought forth a book
dirt cheap at the price asked. . . . ‘Australian in Pales-
tine’ is in the heavy-weight champion class of war
books.”
MELBOURNE PUNCH says: “It reflects the utmost
credit on everyone concerned. Handsomely printed, its
dignified style accords well with the swelling theme.
The illustrations are superb.”
ANGUS & ROBERTSON LTD.
Publishers and Booksellers to the University,
89 CASTLEREAGH STREET, SYDNEY.
Please send me cop of Australia in Palestine, price 10/6 (post. 3d)
Name
Address
HOBART MERCURY says: “The short sketches of
typical events, written by different men from their
personal experiences, are excellent, reflecting the spirits
of men who found always in danger, in toil, and in priva-
tion, something humorous. Some of them have con-
tributed short poems, very good ones, too.” ,
DAILY MAIL (Brisbane) says:
“Mr. Gullett’s
vivid description of the campaign. . . .
. On the artistic
side the book is equally strong. . . . The entire pro-
duction forms a worthy memorial of a wonderful cam-
paign, and reflects the highest credit upon all responsible
for its publication.”
The GISBORNE TIMES (N.Z.) says: “Though the
New Zealanders are not included on the outside of the
book, their assistance and loyal help are cheerfully
acknowledged throughout, and they are given equal
prominence with the Australians. . . . The most valuable
contribution in the book is undoubtedly the story of the
three years’ campaign by Mr, H. S. Gullett. . , . With-
out doubt ‘Australia in Palestine’ is one*of the best
publications yet issued in connection with the war, and
as a literary and artistic production would rank very
high in any country of the world.”
OTAGO WITNESS (Dunedin) says: “‘Australia
in Palestine’ is a handsome and beautifully illustrated
book that will be treasured and increase in value as time
goes by. . . . While Mr. Gullett’s task was to chronicle
the doings of the Australians, he makes frequent, and
generous mention of the equally splendid work of the
New Zealand Mounteds, and also gives credit to the
Yeomanry and, in the later stages of the campaign, to
the splendid Indian cavalry, with whom the Australian
became very friendly. Nor is the fine work of the
infantry, and especially the Londoners, overlooked, while
reference is made to the excellence of the staff work,
as was evidenced by perfect co-operation pver widely-
extended fronts in difficult mountainous country.”
WESTERN MAIL (Perth): says “It is a real soldier’s
book, and should be thought much of in years to come.’’


Will be ready on Ist October. Orders should be registered
at once as the edition will be limited.
Australia in Palestine
A Pictorial Record, with literary contributions in prose
and verse, of the work of the A. I. F. in Palestine
Size 11 x 8% inches, handsomely bound, with
14 full-page and 8 smaller colour plates; 22
full-page, 38 half-page, and 81 smaller black
and white and photographic illustrations,
together with several maps and battle-plans.
important Force in the War has had so little published about it
as the A.I.F. in Egypt and Palestine. This is perhaps as it should
be, but it is now felt that steps should be taken to give the members or
the Force a handsome pictorial souvenir of the life and operations in
Palestine. The proposal met with the cordial approval of General
Allenby, and Lt.-General Sir H. G. Chauvel, K.C.8., G.0.C., A.I.F.
in Egypt, has contributed a preface to the volume.
The volume has been edited by Lieut. H. S. Gullett (Official Press
Representative at the Front), Sergeant C. Barrett (Editor Kia Ora Coo-ee),
and Warrant-Officer D. Barker (Art Editor Kia Ora Coo-ee). The letter-
press is the work of gifted writers who have served at the front, and the
illustrations in colour and black and white are by artists and
OVER


official photographers attached to the Expedition, the whole being
supervised by a Committee consisting of —
Lt.-General Sir H. G. Chauvel, K.C.8., K.C.M.G., G.O.C. A.1.F., in Egypt.
Maj.-Gen. Sir E. W. C. Chaytor, K.C.M.G., C. 8., A.D.C.
Major-General H. W. Hodgson, C. 8., C.V.0.-
Brig.-General G. de L. Ryrie, C. 8., C.M.G., V.D.
Brig.-General C. F. Cox, C. 8., C.M.G., D. 5.0., V.D.
Brig.-General W. Grant, D.S.O.
Brig.-General L. C. Wilson, C.M.G.
Colonel J. M. Arnott, C.M.G.
Lt.-Col. D. Fulton
Lt.-Col. R. Williams, D.S.O.
In short, Australia in Palestine will be a reflection of all that is
best and most picturesque in the Force. It will tell as nothing has told
before the story of its varied fighting during the past two or three
years. It will vividly depict a wonderful old land and how the A.I.F.
served in it and conquered it. As a general survey of the campaign
.from Suez to Aleppo, authentic yet fragrant and racy, it will be a book
each member of the Force will be proud to have in his home, and one
\
which will ever be cherished by his relatives and friends.
ORDER FORM
Please send me
cop of AUSTRALIA IN PALESTINE,
price 10/6 (postage 6d.)
Name '
Address
