

AUSTRALIAN
NATURE
STORIES
HV_
CONSTANCE HSPAII. BA.
.--s. - . : r ri. ----as,--
i Wm


;% ' >
' !> i
i—a —
Convent
OF THE
Tfytaxt,
MELBOURNE.
— 51 —
DAT SCHQOn.
Distribution of prises.
51
I Q iXug CJVL.OJL.
G&JLtt _
prise Hwarfcefc to
£t.Sc*L4**fu£ *.$,/: y*
" Suprt'ior
————
PRINTER BV M. G. APPLEPORD MALVERN
flF* '




i
i




TO^^S. \ljjI n^/lf
c £^ r / \iil¥ii *- .^’nall
■ '-• .• v _**r j jvwni
■tj£r fV4 j ■ , -jp *. j . .StSM Hcr_ ' .■* - '*Tt* . *.^
o
<v
t£
«
Cl
t£
c
5
>s
U
rt
b*
o
OJ


flustraliar?
Stones
<Soi)Sta[)ee Sisdall, B.p.
PUBLISHERS
James 9 5°Q
227 Cittle Street, /T)elbourpe


CONTENTS
The Laughing Jackass ... ... ... 5
The Story of Two Magpies ... ... ... 13
The Clever Lyre Bird ... ... ... 21
The 111-Used Emu ... ... ... ... 28
Little Jean and the Great Grey Kangaroo ... 35
The Native Bear ... ... ... ... 45
Mr. and Mrs. Platypus ... ... ... 54
Louisa and Her ’Possums ... ... ... 60
The Gift of the Gnome—Wattle Blossom ... 68
The Lonely Honeysuckle ... ... ... 76
The Spirit of the Eucalyptus... ... ... 84
The Fairy Ring ... ... ... ... gi


THE LAUGHING JACKASS.
Of course you all love the dear old
jackass, or if you don’t it is because you
do not know enough about him. Perhaps
when you have read his story you will have
learned to love him.
Once upon a time Mr. Laughing Jackass
thought to himself, “ I am a very handsome
bird. My head is so fine and large, and
my brown feathers shine like bronze. I will
ask Miss Brown Kingfisher to come and live
with me. I am sure she will.”
So off he flew to Miss Brown King-
O
fisher to ask her to marry him. She said
“yes’ at once, for she was very fond of Jack.
As soon as she became Mrs. Jackass,
the first thing was to find a house, because
no jackass can build a nest.
And what do you think ? He flew into
a lovely garden, and there he saw an old


kerosene tin hanging on a pine tree. It
was half full of pine needles.
Back he hurried in great joy to tell
Mrs. Jack. She flew to it at once, got in
and tried it, but said the pine needles pricked
her. So that place wouldn’t do. Wasn’t
it a pity ?
But in a little while they found an old
gum tree with a large hole in it.
The hole was full of soft, rotten wood.
That was the very thing they wanted.
Mrs. Jack had soon laid in it two lovely
eggs.
“ How happy we shall be,” she said,
“with our two dear children when they are
hatched.”
She was proud of the eggs. They were
perfectly round, not like some jackass eggs,
which are a little flat at one end. That
would have been sad, because every really
nice Mrs. Jackass lays a perfectly round
pearly white egg.
Mrs. Jack had to sit on the eggs for a
lons while, and could never leave them, so
O '


&T '
J-t/ *
I l(*Qv ' jif Wfe
qg SM lar ::rM f
jfe 1 - ■ lt *l Knp a
Sf dy
W Sf
Jack supplied all her wants, and saw that
no harm came to her or to the eggs.
They were never unhappy for one moment.
They were so amused ar everything, and
every morning Jack used to tell his wife
funny stories. Then they would laugh so


much that if you had heard them you would
have had to laugh too.
Jack laughed very loud up and down the
scale, while Mrs. Jack said, “ Kook, kook,
kook, kook,” all on one note. That is why the
natives call the jackass “ Kookaburra.” It
was just like a laughing duet.
One day a naughty boy tried to climb
the gum tree to get one of the two pretty
eggs, and oh ! how frightened Mrs. Jack was !
She thought the boy would kill her, and
yet she would not leave her eggs because
of the two dear children lying snugly with-
in them.
Just then Mr. Jack came home with a
nice juicy mouse for his wife’s dinner. When
he saw the boy he dropped the mouse, and
tried to drive him away.
When the boy saw how distressed Mrs.
Jack was, he felt quite ashamed. He slid
down the trunk of the tree and ran home.
But never more did he touch the eggs of
the laughing jackass.
Now I will tell you what Jack used to
bring his wife for her dinner. Sometimes


he caught mice and rats, and sometimes
insects or lizards or snakes.
You don’t like snakes, do you ? Most
snakes carry in their mouths a little bag,
in which is poison. If they are angry with
you, they prick your skin with their teeth —
a fang presses the poison bag, and the poison
runs down into the wound. Then if nothing
is done to keep the poison out of your blood,
you die of snake-bite. Well, Jack did not
like snakes either, as they love to eat birds’
eggs. He liked to eat them though.
When he saw a big black snake gliding
in the long grass he would pounce on it and
carry it up into the air. Then he would
drop it and catch it again several times till
the snake was quite dead.
If I lived in the countty where snakes
are, I’d like to have a jackass, wouldn’t
you ? But not in a cage, for that would be
cruel ; besides, they are so tame and friendly
that you can soon make pets of them by
being kind to them and having big hollow
trees in your garden or paddock.
bor some time Mrs. Jack sat in the nest,
and at last the two eggs were hatched.


At first the fledglings were very fat and
clumsy looking, but in a month they looked
just the same as their father and mother,
except that they were browner and had not
so many pretty colours near their wings.
Jack used to feed them with insects and
frogs, and nice bits of snake for a treat.
At six weeks old they began to learn to
fly, and how Jack did laugh at their clumsy
attempts and their falls.
But very soon they could fly quite well,
and then their father taught them to kill
snakes and mice just as he did.
All the family were very happy, and used
to have great fun. Sometimes they would
sit on a branch looking very solemn, and
watch men working, but as soon as anything
went wrong they all began to laugh. This
would make the men laugh too.
Every evening they had a concert before
going to bed ; the children who live near
said: “ Listen to those dear old jackasses.
We do love them so.”
Once I saw one of Jack’s children sitting
on a tree quite close to the road looking


so kind and good; And what do you think ?
Two horrid boys were going to throw stones
at him.
So I just frightened him away. I was
sorry to do that, but what else could I do ?
He flew back to his brother, and they
lived happily ever after.
My story is finished, and I hope you
love the dear old jacKass now, even if
you did not before you Knew all about
him.


MR. JACKASS AND MISS KINGFISHER.
Miss Kingfisher sat on a chimney tall,
Kook ! kook ! kook ! kook !
/ didn’t care for her song at all,
Kook ! kook ! kook ! kook !
It seemed so foolish to always say,
Kook ! kook ! kook ! kook !
I wondered whether she’d sing all day,
Kook ! kook ! kook ! kook !
A jackass once sat on a three rail fence,
Ha ! Ha ! Ha ! Ha !
He laughed, but / couldn’t see any sense
In his Ha ! Ha ! Ha ! Ha !
Not a snake nor a mouse had he killed that day
Ha ! Ha ! Ha ! Ha !
Then why in the world should he -always say,
Ha ! Ha ! Ha ! Ha !
He was thinking, “ I’ll take to myself a wife,
Ha! Ha! Ha! Ha!
Then happy I’ll be for the rest of my life,
Ha! Ha! Ha! Ha!”
Away to the chimney at once he flew,
Ha ! Ha ! Ha ! Ha !
I think Miss Kingfisher was glad, don’t you ?
Kook ! kook ! kook ! kook!
The queer thing was that I loved their song,
Ha ! Ha ! kook ! kook !
I hoped their duet would last all day long
Ha ! Ha ! kook ! kook !


THE STORY OF TWO MAGPIES
They were sitting on the branch of a
tree near me, but I did not see them till I
was quite close. They were both magpies,
though they were not at all alike.
Before I spoke to them I looked long at
them to see just what they were like so that
I could tell you.
One was the common kind of magpie,
the curious, impudent sort that you may see
flying about anywhere in the country.
He was white on his shoulders and back,
and on part of his wings and tail, but the
feathers on his head and breast were a deep
glossy black. He had very bright hazel eyes
and a beak just the color of your slate.
Altogether he was a very fine fellow, and
he knew it.
The other bird was of a kind that you
seldom see, unless you live right in the bush
where magpies and jackasses are at home.


He was very shy as a rule, but had
forgotten his shyness in the heat of a quarrel.
People call his family the blue magpie
because they are a pretty slaty blue all
over. He had yellow eyes and strong, black
legs.
As soon as they saw me the birds began
to chatter both at once, till I was nearly
deafened, and had to ask them politely would
they please speak one at a time.
They were quarrelling because their
feathers and whistles were different. Each
thought his own feathers prettier and his
own whistle sweeter. I said that both were
very lovely, and that when I wanted a
morning song I liked the black and white
magpie better, but that if I wanted to call
anyone lost in the bush, I would ask the
blue magpie to do it.
This did not content them. Each now
wanted to tell his own story, and they both
began to talk at once. I soon stopped that,
saying that the black and white magpie was
to speak first as he was not so shy.
“My name,” he began in a great hurry,
“is Piping Crow. This name was given


me because of my beautiful song, which is so
much more lovely than that of any other bird.”
“ Your turn will come soon,” I said hastily
to the blue magpie, who was looking very
much offended.
So the black and white magpie went on,
“My father was just as handsome a bird as
I am, but my mother had feathers almost
grey where ours are white. Father and
mother met early one September morning,


and sang each other such pretty songs that
they made up their minds to live together.
“ Losing no time they began to build a
nest. It was a flat open nest made of twigs
and sticks, and was warmly lined with some
dried grass, some horse-hair, and some white
wool that mother found in a garden. In
this nice nest she laid six eggs.
“Some magpies lay eight eggs, but some
only five, so I think she did very well.
“ The eggs were larger at one end than
the other, bluish grey, with blotches of
purplish grey all over. They were pretty,
but we were very glad when mother helped
us out of them.
“ We stayed in the warm nest some time,
and ate a great many insects and worms
that father used to bring us.
“Then we learned to fly and sing. We
used to have grand concerts after sunset,
and sometimes, if it were moonlight, we used
to sing all night.
“One day a boy caught me and took me
to his home in the city. I must say I


enjoyed it very much, except when they
used to clip my wings.
“ I used to go into the garden where they
were digging, and eat all the worms they
turned up. Besides this, the girls often gave
me crumbs, and bits of chopped up meat.
“ They sang queer songs in that house.
In the morning early I used to try to sing
them. I got so angry if I went wrong,
and, puffing myself out, sang my own songs.
“ But oh! what fun I had with the flowers!
If the people planted any, as soon as they
were gone, out I came. Then I pulled them
out, and put them in again leaves down and
roots in the air. After that I sang to tell
them what I had done.
“There were two cats there, and a dog,
with which I had great fun. Fan, the dog,
would come in panting and with her tongue
out, and I used to hang on to the tongue.
She was a good-natured creature, and never
angry with me.
I do not like children though, and used
to peck them if I could.
Once I got four big girls in the corner
by the gate. They were afraid to come in,
B


and 1 sang at them till my mistress came
and chased me away. She was not afraid.”
“ You’ve said enough,” said the blue
magpie suddenly.
“Just one more thing,” I asked, “ Let
him tell us how he got here.”
“ Oh! they forgot to cut my wings,” he
replied. “ Some of my friends wanted me
to come back into the bush, and here I am.
“Well, now I will tell you my story,’
said the blue magpie.
“ My family is the orgampipe magpie, so
called because of our sweet clear call, which
no other magpie has,” and he looked proudly
at the black and white magpie. “We can
warble beautifully as well.
“My father and mother called to one
another, and they built a nest in the middle
of the bush so strong that it lasted them
all their lives.
“ My mother laid five eggs, they were a
beautiful creamy pink, with dark blotches
(I don’t care for blue eggs). All my brothers
and sisters lived just as their parents had,
hidden in the bush, except me and Stumpy.


'“I lived with a very nice family in a
country town. The} r must have been cleverer
than most men, for they learned to answer
when I called.
“ I was very happy
bush most, and after a
home again.
there, but I love the
while I had to come
“ But Stumpy liked
what I told him of
the family so much, that I took him there.
“He was not content with garden worms
though, but would go into the house for
crumbs. So they cut his wings and tail, and
called him Stumpy,
“ Often from the top of a tall pine tree
I watched him play hide-and-seek with the
cat. It seemed to me very silly.
I used to call him, and he came up the
tree, hopping from one branch to another,
for he-could fly very little.
“One day, I am sad to say, he was on
the branch of a tree near the street, and a
horrid boy threw a stone and killed him.
After that I did not go near the house
much, but came home for good.


“I often go to visit my cousin the black
magpie, and am now thinking of settling down
to married life.”
I was very much interested, and was going
to ask them to tell me more, when they saw
a cloud of magpie larks coming towards
them. “Two cannot beat a dozen of them,”
they said, and flew away.
But I saw them later with two others,
chasing the magpie larks.


THE CLEVER LYRE BIRD
Once upon a time there lived a lyre bird
whose name was Menura. This means that
he had marks on his tail like a half moon.
Perhaps you would like to know also why he
was called a lyre bird.
Many years ago people used to make
music with a lyre. It had strings, and was
something like a harp. • Menura’s tail was
exactly like a lyre, so he was called a lyre
bird. His tail was much the prettiest part
of him, and it stuck up ever so far into the
air when he spread it out. It had light grey
feathers, with stripes of brown in the grey,
and I wish you had seen how it shone in
the sun. He used to spend all day trying
to mimic every sound he heard, and trying
all kinds of queer dances.
But at last he thought he would take a
mate. Pie did so, and also asked a great


many other hen birds to live with him and
his wife. These hens helped to do the work.
As soon as he was married, Menura looked
about till he found a space in the bush
without trees.
Here he cleared away all the sticks, and
scraped up the soft brown earth into a mound
about as big as a kitchen table.
This done, he called to the hens with a
loud shrill call like a bell, and they came
and perched on the trees around him.
Then he began to show off his cleverness.
He spread out his beautiful tail (the
hen birds have nothing like it), and did all
sorts of queer exercises with his body, hopping
and dancing around. And all the hens said,
“ How lovely.”
He began the concert with an ugly shrill
note all his own. In another minute you
would have been sure you heard a flock of
black cockatoos. These cockatoos liv ein the
mountains, and only come down into the
valleys when it is going to rain.
It was clever to make a noise like the
squawking of fifty cockatoos, wasn t it? That


was what Menura thought, and all the wives
said, “Did vou ever?”
J
Almost before the sound of the cockatoos
had died away, you thought you heard five
or six parrots screeching. The hen birds looked
around, but there were no parrots. Menura
did it all ; they were delighted.
After that he mimicked the laughing of
o o
the jackass, the warble of the magpie, and
the note of the coach whip bird. “ This is
clever! ” said the amused hen birds.


The lyre bird told them he would do this
for them every day if they liked. So they
flew off to build the nest.
While they were building it, they got a
fright once, thinking they heard wood cutters
chopping and sawing quite close to them.
But it was only Menura having a bit of fun.
They thought of building the nest on
rocks where no man could climb, and on
stumps of trees with hollows in them, but
they were very hard to please.
At last they went into a deep gully, and
there in the fork of a sassafras tree, with a
great fern tree behind to keep the wind off,
they built a splendid nest.
It was shaped like a dome with a door
at the side. They built it in this way so
that the hen bird could easily fly away if
anything frightened her. All the lyre birds
are very shy.
Here the mother bird laid one beautiful
egg. It was pale green, and about the size
of a hen’s egg. She sat on the egg with
her tail over her head, for it would have


been a pitv to sit on her tail and crush it.
Don’t you think so ?
While she was sitting on the egg, Menura
used to amuse himself by flying down the
gullies from the top of the hills, for he can-
not fly upwards. He was also very' fond of
jumping from one stump to another.
They all used to have for dinner insects
and worms of every kind, and enjoyed them
very much.
Well! after a time the egg broke, and
out came the little lyre bird. It was a ball
of fluffy feathers, and quite blind and help-
less, but it soon began to grow big and
handsome.
One day Mrs. Lyre Bird left it in the
nest while she went to one of Menura’s
concerts. Everything was going very well,
when all of a sudden a crackling of sticks
was heard, and the lyre birds were all afraid.
The hen birds uttered a loud call, and
Menura slunk away, while they fluttered near
some men who had come to try to shoot
him.
They were fluttering to make the men
notice them and not Menura. This was very


brave, for they were afraid. But Menura
was a sad coward, and they wished to help
him to get away.
However, the men knew the ways of hen
lyre birds. “Bother it!” said one of them.
“ The male bird has gone. These are only
hens.”
But Mrs. Lyre Bird tried to go back to
her young one, and, thinking she was Men-
ura, they shot her. Poor Mrs. Lyre Bird !
The men were so sorry when they found
what they had done. They found the nest,
and fed the young bird with worms and
insects. But after living in this way for a
few weeks, 1 am sorry to say that it died.
When the men went back to Melbourne,
they told the people who care about these
things that this beautiful nest was in the
gully. So they cut a road to it, and carried
it, tree and all, to the museum in Melbourne,
where you can see it any day.
Menura was very sad at first at the loss
of his wife and child, but after a while he
remembered that he was a very clever lyre


bird. He went on dancing and singing to
the other hen birds, and for all I know he
is up there still.
the BOY AND THE LYRE BIRD
■ Hark ! the black cockatoos come to the plain,
Mother, we’ll surely be having some rain.
“ Child, ’tis the lyre bird. Listen again.
“ Parrots are screeching above in the sky,
Yet I can’t see them. Do mother, tell why ? ”
\ u ’pis but a lyre bird hidden near by.”
“ I hear a whip cracking, oh mother dear, say
Is it a coach that is passing this way?”
“ Only the lyre bird still at his play.”
“ Mother, it’s lonely for you and for me,
How I wish father were home to his tea.
I’m not afraid, only—we’d happier be.
“ The bush is so silent, its growing so dark.
Soon all the dingoes will howl and will bark.
There is a sound— not the lyre bird—Hark !
“ Yes, it is father, I know he will say :
‘ What were you doing when I was away ?
Did you take care of your mother all day ?


THE ILL-USED EMU
Once upon a time, long long ago, a man
came to Australia from England. He did not
know what this country was like, and many
things in the bush surprised him.
One day he was riding along a lonely
road on the plains, when all of a sudden he
thought he saw a troop of soldiers marching
towards him.
When they came nearer he found that it
was only a flock of emus. They w 7 alked so
well together, and in such a stately way, that
it easy for the Englishman to think
they were soldiers.
He had crossed the plain, and was by
this time near the thick scrub. As he came
on to the bush road the emus followed him.
Emus are very curious, and want to look
well at anything strange.
These emus walked up quite close to the
man, craning their necks, and saying to one
another: “ What strange bird is this ? ” They
knew that birds have only two legs while other


animals have four. This is why they thought
that the man was a bird.
As soon as he spoke to them they scuttled
away, only to return again in a few minutes.
At last one, who seemed to be the biggest
and bravest, came up to the man, saying
to the other emus; “Go away, and let me
talk to this strange bird. I saw one before
chopping wood; his name is man.
Then he said to the man : “O ! man,
have you any children?” And the man sighed
as he said, “Yes,” for he thought of his dear
little boy and girl far away.
“Do you have to take care of them, and
feed them, and teach them ? ” said the emu.
“ I have to work for money to buy them
food,” answered the man, “ but their mother
takes care of them and teaches them.”
“ I knew it ” said the emu. “ I have
asked the lyre bird, and the jackass, and the
magpie, and they all say the same. I am
a very ill-used emu.”
“ What do you mean ? ” asked the man.
“Will you tell me why you are an ill-used
emu ? ”


. “ Very gladly ” said the emu, for he liked
to have someone to whom he could tell his
troubles.
I will tell you what he was like, for the
man told me. And he said I was not to
forget, and that I could write it in the
story.
Mr. Emu was something like an ostrich.
He was far taller than any of you, about
as tall as the man himself, with great strong


legs so that he could run very fast away
from his foes.
For, although they are birds the emus
have only very tiny wings. Indeed, unless
you look very closely, you cannot see that
they have any wings at all.
This emu had a parting all along his
back, and the dull brown feathers hung down
gracefully on each side. These were at a
little distance more like hair than feathers.
All over the brown were patches of a dirty
grey colour.
The man understood what the emu said,
but if you had been there you would have
only heard a low sound like the boom of a
distant cannon.
“ I have always been ill-used,” the emu
began. “ When I was young I was so proud
of my looks. I was really pretty, and look
at me now! I used to be a pretty greyish
white, with black and white stripes on my
body, and white spots on my head. It was
a great grief to me to lose my beauty.
“ I got used to that after a while, and
had rather a nice time.


“ I ran races with other birds, and could
always beat them. Besides, I knew where
to find the nicest fruits and roots, and the
juiciest young grass. But soon my troubles
began.
“You know the black men like to eat
emus, so, as I was such a big fat bird, they
were always hunting me. Two or three times
they set dogs after me, but 1 always got
away because I can run so fast. Once I
killed a dog with my foot.
“ Another time I nearly drank water in
which the black men had put some poison.
I saw another bird drink some; it put him
to sleep, and then the blacks killed him.
“At last I was very worn out with all
these dangers. So I went further into the
bush and took a mate.
“ She wished to lay the eggs in the sand,
as her people do in Western Australia. But
I thought that wasn’t grand enough. Instead,
we gathered together a great deal of dried
grass, and trampled it down till we had made
a fine nest.
“ Then every second night my wife laid
an egg, till we had twelve. Great beautiful


things they were; a lovely dark green, and
three times as big as a duck egg. I took
great care of them, as I knew that men like
to eat emu eggs.
“ I did not think it at all fair that I had
to sit on the eggs all the time. My wife
wouldn’t do a thing. She said she had done
enough in laying all those eggs.
“ Six weeks after, as I was sitting on the
eggs, thinking that in a couple of weeks
they would be hatched, two white men came
up and tried to frighten me away. They
were egg hunters. I would not leave the
eggs till they just pulled me off.
“ They put the eggs into some long bags
they wore round their necks. Then they
tied a piece of string round the bag between
each egg, and left me.
“ 1 was very sad, and my only comfort
was that the eggs would be no good to eat.
But then they tell me that men will buy
the shells alone for their beauty.
“My wife was very angry with me. And
it wasn’t my fault, was it ?
Next year she laid five more eggs, and
she promised to help me to sit on them.


But alas ! I was to have no peace. She
was shot, and for eight long weeks I had to
sit on the eggs.
“ When the thicks came out, I taught
them, and fed them, taking them where I
knew we should find juicy grass and fruits.
I have got quite fond of them, and now
they are all grown up, and are going to
leave me.”
The emu sighed as he looked sadly at
the other emus who had come up again.
“ Come home with me,” said the man, “ and
my little girl will take care of you, for soon
she is coming out here from England.”
The emu at first was afraid, but at last
he went home with the man. He was no
longer an ill-used emu. The little girl loved
him, and he lived happily with her for
many years.


LITTLE JEAN
AND THE
GREAT GREY KANGAROO
Once upon a time there was a little girl
called Jean. She with her father and
mother right up in the mountains, far away
from other people.
Their house had only two rooms and one
fireplace, but there was a lovely large
verandah with a stone floor, and a shingle
roof covered all over with creepers.
Jean did not mind there being only two
rooms, for she played out of doors all day
long. The house stood on a lonely hill with
thick bush on all sides.
Jean’s father had cleared the land just
round the house so that there was no bush,
only stumps and a few very tall dead gums
stretching their white arms to the sky.
Close to the house was a pretty little
garden, fenced in by great logs and dead
branches.
One evening, when her father was away
clearing the scrub, and her mother was in-


side washing the tea things, little Jean slipped
out of the gate and began to go down the
hill into the valley.
She had heard that fairies were in the
gullies, and she wanted to see them.
When she was so near the bottom of the
gully that she could hear the trickling of the
little creek, Jean came upon a thick forest
of wattle trees. Pushing her way through
them she saw a strange sight.
Two big kangaroos were in a clear space,
wrestling with their arms round each another,
just as men do.
There were ten or twelve other kangaroos
quietly feeding on the grass, and taking no
notice of the fighters.
Now and then one of the two would
strike out with his fore paw, and the other
would defend himself very cleverly.
Sometimes they would both roll over
quite tired out, but in another moment they
were up and fighting again.
At last one thought he had fought long
enough, and bounded off with his body bent
over, and his long tail stuck straight out


behind; he went over bushes and rocks with
great leaps and bounds. The other chased
him, but was not able to catch him.
Poor little Jean, although she loved all
animals, began to be very much frightened
by these fierce kangaroos.
Just as she was thinking what she should
do, up came a kind looking old kangaroo
and asked her who she was.
“ Only Jean,” said the little girl, “ and
I am so afraid of those two cruel kangaroos.”
“ The )’ are not cruel,” said the kangaroo
kmdh, the} only wanted to see which was
the stronger, just like men do. Do you hunt
kangaroo ? ” he added.
“Of course not,” said little Jean. But
though she did not say it, her father had
often done so, for he liked kangaroo tail
soup.
I am called the Great Grey Kangaroo,”
her new friend went on proudly. “ And I
am the leader of a mob. Would you like
to see my wife and m 3' baby?”
Oh }-es, very much,” answered Jean,
and she went off happily with the kind old
creature.


He was very funny to look at. His hind
feet were as long as his hind legs. He
hopped along on them with his tail out be-
hind, but as Jean was only a little girl, he
could not go very quickly when she was
with him.
His tail was as long as his body, and
whenever he stood still, he used it to prop
himself up. He had beautiful thick grey fur,
with white spots on his face, but his hands
and feet and the tip of his tail were black.
He took Jean along a path which was
made by the hopping of kangaroos from one
scrub to another.
On the way he told her that she ought
never to eat meat. “ I am far bigger than
you are,” he said, “ and yet we kangaroos
only eat the green grass and fresh young
leaves.”
Jean did not like to tell him that she
could not eat grass and leaves, so she said
nothing. But she made up her mind that
she would never eat kangaroo tail soup any
more.
Soon they came to the scrub, formed of
gum saplings and bracken fern, where the


• ' ,.- V :
.
" \ ’ r wV''
Jf
2fi£y i/a *•
kangaroos stay in the daytime. “At night,”
he told Jean, “ they feed and camp on the
open side of a hill, where there are only
big trees.”
In the scrub they found Mrs. Kangaroo.
She was only half the size of her husband,


and just like him except for one thing. She
had in front a natural pocket of fur, which
was called a pouch.
Jean screamed with delight when she saw
it, for poking out of it was the pretty head
of a dear little baby kangaroo.
These pouches are made to hold the
young kangaroos till they are old enough
to go about and feed and defend themselves.
At first they stay all the time in the
pouch, but after a while they come out to
feed and play about, jumping in again when
they are tired or afraid.
“ Isn’t she pretty?” asked the Great Grey
Kangaroo, pointing to his baby. “ Her mother
has been wanting a little doe to take care
of. Last year we had a buck. It was he
whom you saw beat the other kangaroo just
now.”
“Who is this?” said Mrs. Kangaroo.
“ Will it hurt my doe ? ” and she got ready
to spring away.
But the Great Grey Kangaroo said it was
only a dear little girl ; so after a while she
became less shy, and even let little Jean
stroke the pretty baby head.


“It is a pity,” said the father, “that men
should want to hunt us kangaroos. We don’t
want to do them any harm. When I was
a young buck, black men hunted me with
boomerangs, and white men hunted me with
dogs and guns.
“ Once I had a great run, and onlv
escaped by swimming two miles across an
arm in the sea.
“ Another time I would have been killed,
but I put my back against a tree, and killed
a dog with my foot. What else could I
do ? They would have killed me.”
“ I remember once,” said Mrs. Kangaroo,
• O /
“just a little after our first buck was born,
that some men chased me. ‘ There’s a flying
doe,’ they cried, and came after me on
horseback.
“ After a long run 1 felt my baby very
heavy, so I dropped him out of my pouch,
telling him to keep quite still. He did so,
and the dogs passed without seeing him.
“ Then afterwards I went back and found
him again. I had a narrow escape though.


I might have died of fright, just as a sister
of mine once did.”
Jean felt very sad at this, and angry with
the horrid men who hunt the dear, timid
kangaroo.
Just then up came the young buck who
had been fighting. “ I won,” he said to his
mother, without looking at Jean. “ The other
fellow has never been beaten before. He
says he is going to live alone in the next
valley for the rest of his life. He’ll have
good feeding there anyway.”
“ Now then, boy, where are your manners?”
cried his father. “ Don’t you see our visitor?
She lives at the top of the hill, and I want
you to take her home.”
It was dark in the gully by this time,
but on the hill it was moonlight. There
Jean saw her father and a party of other
men coming down with lanterns to look for
her.
“ Goodbye,” she said to the young buck.
“Do go away quickly, or they might hunt
you. Tell your people how much I enjoyed
myself.”


Then she coo-eed to her father, and he
came down very quickly, and took her in his
arms. Jean was surprised to find he was
nearly crying.
“Oh ! my little girl ! ” he said, “we
thought we had lost you.”
“ I was all right papa,” she answered, hug-
ging him tightly. “ The kangaroos took care
of me, and oh! Daddy, don't hunt kan-
garoos any more.”
When they got home she found her poor
mother and uncle and auntie waiting and
hoping for them to come. Oh ! wasn’t the
mother glad to have her little girl safe at
home !
They all sat round the great fire while
little Jean, on her mother’s knee, told her
strange story of the Great Grey Kangaroo.
They thought she had dreamt it all, but
she knew better.
Then her auntie and uncle, who had lived
in Western Australia, told of the red kangaroo
whom the natives call goon-gur. They told
how, when they were riding along the sandy


roads, the kangaroos peeped out between the
bushes, half afraid and half curious.
Auntie also told how, when she was a
little girl in Western Australia, she had a
puppy. One day they were out for a walk,
and she lost the little dog. All of a sudden
she heard a faint barking and yelping far
away, and across the plain she could see
what looked like the puppy, with a smaller
speck behind it. Both were coming towards
her.
But when they got closer, what do you
think ? The puppy was behind chasing a
kangaroo five times its size. Jean did laugh
at that story.
Then the mother put her little girl to
bed, and all night Jean really dreamt of
kangaroos.
Her father no longer hunted them, for the
sake of his little girl who was lost, and long
after, when Jean was grown up, the Great
Grey Kangaroo still lived in the valley below
the house.


THE NATIVE BEAR
Alice and her father were riding along in
a beautiful country in the South of Victoria
called Gippsland.
Alice had lived the whole of her short
life in a deep narrow valley in the mountains.
She was now going for the first time, at six
years old, to the country, where there are
little hills instead of mountains, and where
the valleys are wide and grassy, instead of
narrow, and covered with thick bush.
Her father was riding their dear old horse
Captain, and he held his little girl on the
saddle in front of him.
Sometimes she would lean forward and
pat Captain on the neck, for they were great
friends. But most of the time she cuddled
close into her father’s arms, for she knew
that there she was quite safe.
All this time they were travelling along
the sides of the mountains, on a narrow


path, just wide enough for two horses to
pass each other.
Up above them rose the steep top of a
mountain, and hundreds of feet below them,
in the valley, ran sometimes a little creek,
sometimes a sparkling river. On each side
of the path were great tall trees, white gums,
lightwoods, and many other kinds.
Then the mountains became lower, and
it was not so far to look down into the
gullies.
All of a sudden Alice saw, sitting on the
branch of a blue gum, far out of reach, a
dear little native bear.
“Oh papa ! ” she cried, “do look at the
little bear with an indiarubber nose ! ”
Her papa looked up, and, sure enough,
there was the pretty creature looking straight
down at them, and his funny little black
nose did look as though it were made of
indiarubber.
He was about the size of a poodle, a
queer little fat thing, with bright, curious eyes.
Alice was so pleased, and looked at him for
a long time,


.flfc
' i*«- 1 11Tr " :
gw *» .
*- •
VhHkL *p& 9 •yHjR.--
* V
Soon she saw another, and another, and
found it great fun looking for the little bears
with indiarubber noses.
At last it began to grow dark, and the
stumps of the white gum trees took all sorts
of queer shapes.
They looked like kangaroos, and cows,


and dogs, and some even looked like little
old men.
Alice was rather frightened, and hid her
face in her father’s great coat.
Then she said; “Papa, tell me a story.”
“Why, you little' Turk,” said papa, “I
have told you all the stories I know.”
“Well, make up a new one,” she com-
manded, “ all about little native bears.”
“Oh ! I can do that,” said her father,
“ for many of them lived near us when I was
a boy.”
“ Did you live where we do ? ” asked
Alice.
“Oh no! we lived in the hill country, not
in Gippsland at all, but north of Mel-
bourne. We had a great deal of land, and
our sheep used to feed on the green grass
which grew all over the hills and valleys.”
“ And there were native bears there ? ”
asked Alice eagerly.
“Yes,” said her father. “ They lived on
the blue gum trees, quite near our house.”
“Why did they live on the blue gum
trees ? ” said Alice.


“ They used to eat the leaves,” he
answered.
“ But why did they want to eat leaves?”
asked the little girl, sitting up to look at
him.
“Now Alice,” said her father sternly, “am
I telling this story, or are you ? ”
“ You are, papa,” she said, and cuddled
down again. “Go on.”
“Very well,” said papa. “Now I will tell
you all about Auntie Mary’s little pet bear.”
“ Oh ! did she have one ? ” Alice asked.
“ I’d like one myself, dear little soft things.”
“ One day,” began her father, “ I had been
out in the bush with your grandfather. We
were almost home when we saw, close beside
the road, a pretty native bear with her baby on
her back.”
“Oh ! how lovely ! ” murmured the little
girl. \\ e didn’t see any on their mothers’
backs. Go on.”
The mother bear,” her father went on,
“had soft, thick, woolly fur. The little bear
had its feet quite buried in it, and was
clinging tightly.”


“What colour was the mother?” asked
Alice.
“ Mostly grey,” said her father, “ but all
white underneath. She had feet with long
claws, so that she could climb easily, even
with her little one on her back.
“As soon as she saw us she began to
climb, as quickly as she could, out of sight,
for native bears like to come out at night
better than in the daytime, and are a little
afraid of men.
“ She must have been very much frightened,
for she left her little one at the foot of the
tree. Then she climbed slowly and heavily
out of sight.
“ I picked the baby bear up, and took
it into the house. It slept for a long time,
and seemed quite content, but early in the
morning I took it to the foot of the same tree,
and went behind a bush to watch what would
happen. In a short time the mother bear
clambered down the tree, the little one jumped
on her back, and off they went.”
“ Wasn't she glad to get it back ?
Alice murmured.




“It roamed about all over the place at
night, but in the daytime it always came
into the house to be fed, and also to sleep
on chairs and sofas. What it liked best
was to sleep with its soft arms round Mary’s
neck.
“ A lady from Melbourne once came to
stay with us. She was not fond of animals,
and was much afraid of Mary’s bear.
“ One day the bear put its little paws
into her hair as she lay asleep. She woke
with a scream, which frightened it, and it
clung still closer, till at last mother pulled
it off, and set the angry lady free.
“ After that, it was banished from the
house, but used often to come up to see
your Auntie.
“At last it had a baby bear of its own,
and, fearing that some one would hurt it,
went into the bush and never returned.”
“ Is that all ? ” said Alice.
“ Yes,” said her father, “ I cannot tell
you what became of it, but I expect it
was very happy with its dear baby, and


took care that no one should shoot his
mother.”
“Tell me another story,” Alice commanded.
But she said it very softly and sleepily, for
she was tired out.
The father said nothing for a few moments,
and soon his little girl was fast asleep.
She did not know when they got to the
end of their journey. They undressed her,
and popped her, still fast asleep, into a
warm bed, where she dreamt of little native
bears till morning.


MR. & MRS. PLATYPUS & FAMILY
Mr. and Mrs. Platypus lived in a water-
hole. The creek, rippling over the stones,
widened out and deepened in one place,
forming a sort of tiny lake. Then there was
a waterfall, and the creek became narrow
again, and rushed on towards the river.
In the waterhole the water was still and
quiet. This was just what Mr. and Mrs.
Platypus wanted.
Mr. Platypus was a very queer creature,
something like a bird, something like a snake,
and something like a beast.
First, he had a bill, just as a bird has.
For this reason he was sometimes called
Mr. Duckbill. The bill was wide like that
of a duck, only it had a skin all round the
edge, by means of which the platypus could
feel anything almost as well as you can
with the tip of your finger.
He was also webfooted like a duck, and
on his two front feet the web came out


beyond his toes. This web would have been
in the way when he wanted to burrow, but
he was able to fold it up nicely underneath
his foot.
His bones were nearly all just like the
bones of a snake, and his wife laid eggs
as snakes and birds do.
But then he was like a beast too. He
was about the size of a large rat, but he
had hardly any legs, only feet.
He was covered with dark fur, short and
soft underneath, but longer on his back.
Wasn’t he a queer kind of animal ?
On the hind part of his foot was a spur
which held poison. This spur he could thrust
into anyone who tried to hurt him.
In his mouth were pouches in which to
store food, and for teeth he had only two
hard, sharp gums.
Well, after splashing about in the water
for some time with his brothers and sisters,
Mr. Platypus thought that he would like to
have a home of his own. So he asked
Mrs. Platypus to be his wife, and they swam
further down the creek to another waterhole.


One of its banks was over-grown with
blackberries, and it was shaded with lovely
wattles and gum trees. The other bank was
bare and rather sandy. It was just the place
for the home of a platypus.
They burrowed with their feet and bills
till they had made the loveliest little under-
ground house. It had a long passage leading
to one wide room, and there were two en-
trances.
The door by which they generally entered
was under the water ; the other was ever so
far up in the bank out of sight, under some
thick bushes. The room was as nice as could
be, lined with grass and leaves to make it
warm and soft.
Here Mrs. Platypus laid two beautiful
white eggs. After a time the little ones were
hatched, and at first they were quite blind
and helpless.
But they soon grew big, and then their
father and mother taught them to swim and
dive, and also to find insects and worms.
These they put into the pouches in their
cheeks, and afterwards they lay down and
ate them. Most of the day they all lay


curled up in a ball, fast asleep in their snug
house, but in the evening they came out to
swim and dive and play with all their friends
in the water.
Sometimes in the daytime, instead of
sleeping, they would tell each other stories,
either about what had happened to them-
selves or to others.
One day Mr. Platypus told them about
his grandfather. “He had just built a house,”
Mr. Platypus said, “when a great many black
men came to camp near the waterhole. These
black men wanted to eat my grandfather and
his family. They began to dig holes with
a sharp stick near the water.
“ In this way they found the passage, and
at last the end room where the young ones
and their parents lay. They soon caught my


grandfather and grandmother and one of the
young ones. The other was able to escape.
It was my father. He often told me the
story, and said he should never forget the
fear he felt that day.”
Then said one of the young ones to their
mother: “Cannot you tell us a story too?”
“ I will tell you one thing that I saw
myself,” answered the mother, “ and I shall
be glad if the story makes my children more
careful.
“ One day as I was floating about on the
water I heard the noise of a man passing
by. I was soon under the water and in my
hole, trembling with fear.
“ After a while, when all was quiet again,
I came out and forgot my fear in seeing a
large worm in the water. I made a grab
at it, but my brother was too quick for me.
Alas ! it was on a fish hook, and my brother
was caught and quickly pulled out of the
water. He was never seen again.”
Mrs. Platypus sighed as she finished her
story, and the two young ones made up their
minds to be very careful in future. They


had seen two girls on the bank that same
day, and had watched them catching fish.
It amused them less now that they knew
that they also might be caught.
The children went on telling stories till
Mrs. Platypus told them to cease talking and
go to sleep. Let us leave them now, fast
asleep in their warm burrow.


LOUISA AND HER ’POSSUMS
Louisa was very fond of all animals, but
most of all she loved the opossums, or, as
she called them, ’possums.
She was born in the bush where ’possums
and little native bears abound. Here she
lived till she was ten years old.
Louisa used to spend most of the day
with the ’possums. They were her friends,
and she wanted no others. She used to
peep into hollow gum trees and see three or
four ’possums asleep, all on top of one
another.
She did not disturb them in the daytime,
but in the evening she would go back to
the same tree, and her friends would come
out and talk to her. Then the mothers
showed her their little new babies; “j° e y s ”
she called them, and in return she often
brought them green grass and gum leaves
for their supper.
At night they swung on the branches of
trees, roamed all over the place, and some-


times would even creep through the pantry
window to steal bread and cake, or on to
the verandah to steal the ripe grapes.
But Louisa could not tell tales of the
naughty little ’possums. She was afraid that
her father might shoot them.
When they wished to call Louisa to see
the babies, they would utter a loud cry almost
human. They only have one or two little
ones at a time, and Louisa did love to see
the wee things clinging to the backs of their
mothers.
One day when her father had been out
shooting, he brought back to Louisa a little
orphan baby ’possum. It was very pretty,
with soft, grey fur, a black, bushy tail, and
white ears.
The tail was all covered with thick fur,
except at the very tip and a strip under-
neath. These parts were quite bare.
Louisa soon loved the little joey very
much, and they became fast friends.
He used to tell her all about his family,
and most of all about his dear mother, whom
he was so fond of.


In the daytime he would go to sleep
curled up in the sleeve of one of Louisa’s
old dresses, which hung in the bathroom, but
whenever Louisa had time to sit down and
read, she would take him out of the sleeve
and allow him to sleep on her lap.
In the evening he began to get lively,
and it vvas then that they had great games
together.
One night Louisa’s father and mother had
several visitors, so Louisa put on a pretty
blue evening dress without a collar.
Before she went into the drawing-room
she had to do her lessons, so she set to
work, with Joey as usual twined round her
neck.
He would now and then run about the
table and then come back again, poking his
soft little nose into her neck.
At last the lessons were finished, and
Louisa went into the drawing-room, thinking
how nice she looked in her new frock. But
as soon as she in everyone smiled, and
her brothers even burst out laughing. What
do you think amused them so much ?


* __ - '*-’-51'* IF i|||i®aP^
jL •
» * | jSk
|||||
— i —.— —jdi
Right round her white neck were little
dabs of ink! Joey had been dipping his
nose into the inkpot and then burying it in
Louisa’s neck.
He was used to jumping on to his mis-
tress’s back from all sorts of places, but one
day Louisa’s grandmother, who had come to
stay with the children, was much startled to
feel something suddenly jump on her shoul-
der.
There sat Joey as happy as possible. But
the grandmother was very much frightened,


and Joey could not understand why every
one scolded him.
Poor little Joey! He had a sad end.
A young friend who was staying with Louisa
one night left the bath full of water. She
also shut the bathroom door, not knowing
that Joey liked to roam about at night.
In the morning poor Louisa was nearly
heart-broken. Joey had fallen into the bath
and was drowned. For a long time she was
very unhappy, and this made her friends the
’possums unhappy also.
So one evening they all met, and called
Louisa to come to them.
The eldest of the ’possums asked her to
sit down on the low branch of an old gum
tree, and he said:—
“We ’possums are all sad because of
your loss, and we do not like to see you
unhappy. A ringtailed ’possum has just died,
leaving her one baby, with no one to take care
of it. Will you have it instead of poor Joey?
“1 cannot love another ’possum as I did my
Joey,” answered the little girl, “ but I do love
all ’possums, and I will take care of this little
one that has no mother. Where is he ? ”


-There he is,” said the eldest of the
possums, and he pointed to a small hollow
in the gum tree. She peeped in, and there
she saw the dearest little ringtailed ’possum
curled up like a ball.
Louisa was delighted at once. She took
him very gently out of the hollow, and, to
her great joy, he snuggled down into her
arms, and curled his tail round her finger.
“ 0h ’ > ou dea r little thing! ” she cried.
“ How Ido love >’ ou - I Will take great care
of you, and make you forget you hare no
mother. Goodbye, dear ’possums, I must go
m and make my little baby warm and snug.
I shall call him Tiny because he is such a
wee little thing.”
“ 1 told y° u so >” said the eldest of the
’possums, when the little girl had gone.
“She will be happy now that once more she
has one of us to take care of.”
Louisa ran all the way home to her
mother, who was waiting to put her little
f d t0 bed * She was gLd to see Louisa
appy again, and helped her to make a soft
bed in a box near the great fireplace, where
the logs alight all night long.


At first they were afraid Tiny would die,
because he was so weak and feeble, but,
with great care, after a few weeks he grew
well and strong. He learned to love his
little mistress very much.
In the night he roamed about the house,
and sometimes in the morning Louisa would
find the flowers scattered all over the dining-
room table, and the vases upset.
She used then to scold Tiny, who did
not mind very much, as he knew she could
not long be angry with him.
Tiny, when he grew older, used to wander
farther and farther from the house, till
once he stayed away for such a long time
that Louisa was very sad about it. When
she had quite made up her mind he had
gone for ever, he came back one day and
asked her to come into the bush with him.
There, in a hollow tree, he showed her
another ringtailed ’possum with a little
’possum in her pouch.
After that he often brought them up
to the house, that Louisa might give them
bread and cake, and while they were being
fed the little one clung tightly to his
mother’s back.


When Louisa was ten years old, her
father sent her to a boarding school in Mel-
bourne, where there was no bush, and where
there were no ’possums.
At first she was very lonely without them,
but in a little time she liked her lessons and
games and the other little girls so much, that
she did not want to go back into the bush.
But she never forgot her friends the
’possums, and let us hope they never forgot
her.
THE NAUGHTY ’POSSUMS
Creeping, creeping in the moonlight
Naughty little ’possums see,
They have seen the ripe grape glisten
Far too high for you and me.
Climbing, climbing up the sapling,
On the shingle roof they light,
And the ripest grapes selecting,
With their sharp white teeth they bite.
Stealing, stealing in the window,
Pantry window left undone,
Cakes and nuts in plenty spying,
Soon they’ve taken every one.
Sleeping, sleeping in the gum tree
All next day the 'possums lie ;
For their stealing if we find them,
Shall we harm them, you and I ?


THE GIFT OF THE GNOME
Far away in England, the mother country
of Australia, there lived a gnome. He was
a funny little man, a kind of fairy.
Now, of course, all gnomes live inside the
mountains, but in most stories they live all
among the gold, and dig gold mines for
themselves. They store up all kinds of
treasure, and guard it so well that only
the Prince in the fairy tale can find it.
The gnome about whom I am going to
tell you did not live in a gold mine. He
lived in a coal mine in a place called Wales.
For a long time he was very happy, but
bye and bye men found out that there was
coal in Wales. They sank shafts and drove
tunnels everywhere. The poor little gnome
was forced to go further and further down
into the earth, till he was nearly as far as
the palace of the king of the gnomes. This
could not be allowed, and so the servants
told him.


But the king heard of the poor little
gnome, and he said ; “ Will you go to a
new land ? ” “ Yes,” answered the little
gnome, “ if there are mountains, and if I can
dig for treasure.”
The king of the gnomes owns all the
mountains in the world, so he asked them
to give a home to his poor little subject.
But most of them were either too full of
gnomes, or else men had gone there.
The only place left was Australia, which
the king had at first forgotten. So the little
gnome only had to say, “Hey! Presto!” and
there he was in Australia, in the very place
where the mountains full of gold are. It was
a great change from black coal, and the more
he saw of it the more he liked it.
On moonlight nights he used to go out
and look at the beautiful rivers and the dear
little creeks in the gullies. It amused him
\en much to see some of the rivers dry
up into water holes in summer.
In the daytime he worked very hard in
the mines till he had a beautiful palace.
The walls were of white and grey quartz,


with rich veins of gold running everywhere
through the quartz.
At night he would go once more to
look at the rivers and creeks he loved,
where everything was green, and the little
gnome thought to himself, “ How lovely it
would be if the tree tops shone with gold
like the walls of my palace.”
Then a thought struck him, and he went
into his caves, to the place where he kept his
treasure. In one corner stood a box full of
coal, which he had brought with him from
Wales.
He broke it all up into tiny pieces, and,
by a magic which he had learned from the
king of the gnomes, turned them into tiny
black seeds.
“Trees shall grow from these,” he said
to himself, “which I shall call wattles.” He
called them wattles because some day men
were to use the thin branches for building
houses. These branches were woven in and
out like basket work, and this in England
is called wattling.
He scattered the seeds over all the moun-


-\s^7
i~ . r.gCTft*-" v-’Tt_> •* -** I
tains, but mostly along the banks of creeks,
rivers, and lakes.
“Australia has given me a home,” said
the little gnome, “so I will add to her
beauty.”
He loved the gold in his mountain palace,


and he wished the birds and animals to share
his joy in its rich colour.
The little seeds grew and grew and became
tiny plants. The tiny plants became trees,
and then they began to flower.
The gnome danced and clapped his hands
for joy when the wattles along the river
became one blaze of gold.
After this he did his work of digging at
night, so that he might watch the wattles in
the bright sunlight.
“ They shall do more than this,”
laughed the little gnome. And sure enough
one day a man came along and looked at
the golden wattle blossom.
It was lovely to look at, but, oh! the scent
pleased him still more. “In the winter there
will be no scent,” said the man sadly.
“Why not preserve the scent?” the little
gnome whispered to him. The man saw no
one, so he thought it was quite his own idea.
Then he plucked some of the blossoms
and made them into the scent called wattle
blossom, which we can have in winter,
when there is no true wattle blossom.


“ They shall give still more to Australia,”
said the little gnome, looking at the wattle
trees, which were not all alike.
First there was the silver wattle, which
grew along the river banks. He called it
silver because, though the flowers were
golden, the bark was a soft, silvery grey.
Oh! the leaves were so pretty, just like
lovely, silvery green feathers. On all the
flowers was a fine gold dust, and inside
them was honey.
Now a very queer thing happened. When
the bees and insects came for the honey,
a great deal of the gold stuck to them.
Off they would fly to another flower, and
some of this gold dust would fall on to it.
Then the dust went right inside and, with
another part of the flower, formed a new
seed.
The gnome was so amused because the
bees only thought of the honey, and did not
know they were helping him in this way.
Another kind of wattle he called black-
wood. Something must have gone wrong
with this tree —it had no leaves! The


gnome was much vexed, for the plant breathes
through the leaves, and it cannot live with-
out breathing.
So vhat do you think he did ? He made
stalks come out from the stems all over
the tree. These flattened out and looked
ver y like gum leaves. Now the plant could
breathe, and it was all right. He was a
very clever gnome.
He found afterwards that all the good
must have gone away from the leaves to
these stems, for when men came to Aus-
tralia they used the wood of the blackwood
for many things.
This wood looked lovely when it was
sawn into pl?.nks and polished, and beauti-
ful things were made out of it.
Then there was the golden wattle, and it
also had stems for leaves, but, oh ! its flowers
were so big and beautiful. Ever}’ one stopped
to look at them.
It was very useful too, because men used
the bark of it for turning skins into leather.
There were a great many other wattles,
but all had the flower of gold, and Australia


thanked the little gnome for his gift.
He had not yet finished. There were
places in Australia where all through the
summer the grass could not grow and the
cattle had nothing to eat.
Here the little gnome planted another
tree of the wattle family, which the natives
called mulga.
This mulga scrub kept the poor cattle
alive when the hot sun had burnt up all the
grass.
The little gnome, feeling he had done
his duty, then went back to his mountains,
and though hundreds of people dig for gold
in Australia, he has still his palace of gold,
which no one has ever found.


THE LONELY HONEYSUCKLE
Near the coast of a quiet bay south of
Victoria there grew a tall and beautiful
tree. This tree was called the honeysuckle
because its flowers were filled with such a
quantity of honey.
Its leaves were hard and stiff but very
pretty. On one side they were a dark-
green, but on the other white and downy,
with tiny pricks along the edge to keep off
all harmful insects.
Now, although she was very lovely to
look at, the honeysuckle was not happy.
She thought she was alone in the world,
and instead of thinking of other people she
thought too much about herself.
Near the paddock in which she grew
stood a house, with a lovely garden in
front and an orchard at the back.
In the house lived many people, and, oh !
how the honeysuckle wished to know some
ot them. But they never noticed her.


On the front lawn there grew a splendid,
shady oak, under which were seats and a
wooden table. Here the people were very merry.
The “ grown-ups ” had afternoon tea under
it, and under it the children played “ ladies.”
“ How happy the oak must be,” thought
the lonety honeysuckle. “My leaves are all
erect, and are not flat like his, so no one
would want to sit under me, for I give no
shade.”
By and by, when autumn came, the
leaves of the oak turned yellow and began
to fall. But this did not make the honey-
suckle glad that she had kept her leaves.
No; instead of that she watched the people
of the house, and saw that now they liked
to be in the orchard, where all the trees
were covered with apples; for the “ grown-
ups ” as well as the children were fond of
climbing the trees to get the fruit.
The honeysuckle knew that they could
not eat her fruit. It was a hard, dry cone,
full of very hard, brown nuts. You could
not break these nuts if you tried, but in
time they burst open by themselves, and let
the seed fall.


Her other trouble was that she had no
relations. The oak tree belonged to an
ancient family, and the apples were related
to the beautiful roses.
Yet, wherever she looked, the honey-
suckle could never see a tree that was like
herself, and, what was more, she had never
even heard of such a tree.
One da} as she was thinking, as usual
1 • 4 ° *
and making herself very unhappy, a spirit
came and stood before her. He was some-
thing like the people of the house, but far
more beautiful.
The honeysuckle was glad to think he
had noticed her at all.
Why are you so unhappy?” asked the spirit.
“Because I am so lonely,” said the
honeysuckle, “No one wishes to sit near
me, for my leaves give no shade, and the
children cannot eat my fruit. Besides, in
all the world I have no family and no
relations.”
Then the spirit said gently, “The Great
Master sent me from another world to take
care of a family of trees here in Australia.
Shall I tell you about them ? ”


“Oh, yes, do tell me,” answered • the
honeysuckle.
No one had ever talked to her before,
and she had never thought of anyone but
herself.
“ One of the family,” the spirit said on


IS called the hakea. I take great care of
this tree, because sometimes in Australia
it is very hot, and sometimes very, very
wet * 'I he trees must be made to live in
spite of such weather.
“None of this family of mine give any
shade, because their leaves all have the
edges, instead of the flat sides, upward.
IOU know the ' sun is hottest in the middle
of the day, when it shines straight down
on the leaves, and might scorch them all
up.
“But the leaves must have light, so that
by having the edges upwards the flat sides
get the morning and evening sun, which is
not so fierce and hot.”
The honeysuckle now knew why she gave
no shade, but she said nothing as she felt
ashamed of her complaining.
Another queer thing about the leaves
of my trees,” the spirit went on, “is that
the little holes through which they breathe
are deeper and more covered up than in
many other plants. They are made like
this so that in summer the hot sun shall


not take away the water too quickly, and
in winter the heavy rains shall not make
the leaves soaking and useless.
“One of these trees is called a grevillea.
Its flowers are very lovely, pale pink, and
white, and sometimes even scarlet. The
children in the bush think so much of
them that they go for long walks in search
of them.
“ Most of my trees contain a great deal
of honey. This makes the bees love them
very much.”
Again the honeysuckle was sorry she
had thought so much about herself. She
had forgotten the bees, who were thankful
for her honey, and who carried her gold
dust far away to other honeysuckle trees,
to make new little plants.
“ But do tell me more about this happy
family of trees,” she asked the spirit.
“ Well, there is one kind of tree,” the
spirit went on, “out of which the kangaroos
eat the honey. Then the gold dust sticks
to their noses, and, without meaning to at
all, they carry it to another tree, where
F


some of it goes into the flower and helps
to form a new plant.
“There are many kinds of trees, which
all belong to this family, but the queen of
them all, though smaller than the others, is
the waratah. She is a beautiful shrub, and
her flowers grow in great red clusters, so
that the whole world thinks them very
lovely. The other trees are all proud to
belong to the same family.”
The honeysuckle was very pleased at
the stories the spirit had been telling.
Most of all did she love to hear of their
queen, the lovely waratah. “ How happy 1
would be,” she said, “if I, too, belonged
to this great family.”
“ Very well, then,” answered the spirit,
“ you have only to show that you are
worthy of belonging to it, for the family
is your own. None of them look like
you at the first glance, but your flowers
and your fruit are like theirs. You,
too, can keep insects from eating your
leaves; you, too, give honey to the
bees.”


The honeysuckle was for a few moments
too happy to speak. Then she said slowly,
I will try to be good and to be worthy of
the family and our Queen W aratah.
After the visit of the spirit, the honey-
suckle always thought more about her family
and less about herself. So she was very
happy. The spirit must have spoken to the
children, for they picked the beautiful flowers
of the honeysuckle and played games with
her hard cones.
She no longer envied the oaks and apples.
For was she not of the same family as the
lovely waratah, and did not a good spirit
take care of her? Now there is no happier
tree in Australia than the once lonely
honeysuckle.


THE SPIRIT OF THE EUCALYPTS
In a beautiful country, far, far away,
lived the Great Master who gave us all
that is good upon earth. He made the blue
skies and the twinkling stars, great rivers,
and little streams.
In this far country were many beautiful
spirits.
Now to each spirit the Great Master
gave a work to do, and this work he was
to do as well as ever he could. He was
given many other spirits to help him, but
he had to think out the work all by him-
self.
Some of them worked in the beautiful
world where the Great Master lived. Others
were sent to the stars and to the worlds
around them.
One day the Great Master saw a large
island in this world of ours. Its name was
Australia. Here he saw that there was
plenty of room to do much good.
So he called to him a beautiful spirit
whose name was Eucalypt, and said to


her: “Go to this land of Australia, and do
as much good as ever you can.”
First she looked
and then went away
sat down to think,
of a plan.
In all Australia
carefully at Australia,
to a quiet place and
Soon she had thought
were no trees, only
sandy wastes and bare hills and valleys.
But there was plenty of water, and she
knew that if trees and grass were planted
there soon would be birds and animals, and,
lastly, men. She was now ready to work.
Calling all her little servants together,
she gave to each a small seed, and bade
them go North, South, East, and West,
and put them in the ground.
To each seed a queer thing happened.
Each had two parts, and between them
came a small white feathery leaf pointing
up, and a tiny rootlet pointing down.
The feathery leaf grew up into a tiny
plant. The two parts of the seed went up
with it, hanging on to the stem for some
time. The root grew down and fixed the
plant firmly in the ground.


At the very beginning all the plants
looked alike, but soon you saw that Euca-
lypt had given to her servants different
kinds of seeds.
While they were doing all this she
planted grass herself, and it was ready long
before the trees were grown up.
Then the Great Master sent animals and
birds to Australia, so that it became very
beautiful.
Men came too. They loved the trees
very much and used them for many things.
But one family of trees the spirit loved
best. She had more seeds of this sort, and
she worked harder at them than at any of
the other trees, because in all the world
there were none like them. She called
them by her own name, eucalyptus.
Of course there were many kinds of
eucalypts, and the men called them gums
because a gum comes out of the stems.
The spirit had not forgotten that she
was to do all the good she could, as you
will see when you hear about these gums.
One was the blue gum. For the first


' ■ -t, JgM&ti- aTkP?»~- &i*9i ■ yJanHI
rV ~V» ..
f Bp
•■■• •■ *"' ,J ' ■L2L__ __ B R y
few years its leaves were large and white,
and grew straight out from the branches.
But when it was older they were like thick
blue-green swords hanging downwards.
They were among the largest trees in
the world, and Eucalypt loved them very
much.


She taught men to find in the leaves a
kind of oil that they called eucalyptus oil.
If you have a cold it will make you better,
and it also helps to cure people who suffer
m other ways. So you see the spirit was
doing good in the world.
The flowers, too, were very beautiful,
growing in bunches of white or cream or
scarlet.
On each bud was a little cap, which
fell off when the bud became a flower.
Ihe children loved to make these little
caps into necklaces. They were pretty.
But the greatest good these blue gums
did was this. Their roots took in so much
water, that if they were planted near a
swamp it soon became dry. Now stagnant
water makes people very ill if they breathe
the bad air which comes from it.
Men soon found out this power of the
blue gums, and planted more blue gums
where there were swamps. They even
planted them far away from Australia, near
the swamps of Italy, and many people were
saved from fever and death.


Another kind of tree was the white gum.
It was very beautiful, and grew, oh ! so tall.
When the spirit was on a hill, and looked
down into a deep valley full of these tall
trees she would think of the white pillars
in the churches of her far off land.
In autumn there comes from the leaf
stems a kind of small white grain. It is
quite sweet, and magpies and rabbits love
to eat it ; so do the children, and they call
it manna.
Men cut down some of these white
gums to make firewood, to keep themselves
warm in winter, to cook their food, and to
work every kind of steam engine. Now,
indeed, the spirit knew that her work was
doing good.
The red gum (a third kind) had a very
hard wood, which was useful for building.
With it they built houses, churches, and
schools. One kind of red gum lasted so
well that they could build piers and wharves
of it right in the sea.
At last the spirit of the eucalypts felt
that she had done all she could. Men had


timber and firewood, medicine and manna,
and besides this there was the bark of some
of the trees for making roofs, and some-
times even houses.
The trees were beautiful to look at, too.
The tall, white trunks, the white and scarlet
blossoms, and the lovely evergreen leaves
made the land of Australia almost as
beautiful as her own beloved country.
Then the Great Master said, “ Well
done!” and she returned home to her own
people, happy because she had done so
much good to others.


THE FAIRY RING
In a gully seldom visited by men the
fairies had their home. No one knew that
they lived in this gully but one little girl
whose name was Faith. She was afraid her
people might frighten the fairies away, so
she kept her secret well and went every
day to the place she called the Fairy Dell.
There she would see fairy rings so beautiful
that she knew the fairies had been dancing
there the night before.
One beautiful night Faith woke up to
find the moonlight streaming on to her
little white bed. She sat up and pinched
herself to see if she were dreaming. But
no, it was quite true. Sliding down the
moonbeam was the sweetest little golden
blackberry leaf, just like a tiny boat.
In it was a pretty little fairy, dressed
in the most delicate grey gossamer, which
the spiders had spun that very day.


Faith gave a long sigh of happiness as
the fairy boat lighted on her bed.
“ I knew there were fairies,” she said
softly, “though everybody laughed at me
for saying so.”
Then the fairy spoke. “No one can ever
see a fairy if he does not believe in them.
That is why the grown-ups laugh ; they
have never seen one.
“ But I must tell you what I have come
for. The fairy king, Osmunda, is holding
court, so the queen, Mimosa, asked me to
come and take you to them. Will you
come with me?”
“° h yes, please,” said Faith. “ I should
love to come.”
Then she added shyly, “Will you tell
me how you make the fairy rings ? ”
“ That is the reason you are sent for,”
answered the fairy. “We saw that you always
looked at the fairy rings. There is a fairy
called Agaricus, who made the ring for the
king’s ball to-night, and he is to tell the
king everything that he has done.”
In a few minutes Faith found that she


was as small as the fairy herself, and the
boat seemed quite large. She stepped in,
and they floated out into the quiet moon-
light night. Faith could hear the distant
O O
barking of the dingoes and the dismal cry
of the mopoke, and she saw many opossums
and native bears on the tall trees. But
she did not feel afraid, for she knew that
the good fairies would take care of her.
At last the boat stopped in the beautiful
gully where the fairy king, Osmunda, held
his court.
A great tree had fallen right across the
gully. It was quite near the ground, but it
seemed far overhead to Faith, who was now
as tiny as the fairies.
This tree made a perfect bridge, shaded
by tall white gums, and it shaded the
sweetest little bit of gully.
There were slender green saplings bending
over to form a roof; there were the trunks
of a few wattle trees, whose heads were far
out of sight; there were ferns, and ferns,
and more ferns; there were creepers every-
where.


In the middle of this tangle of ferns
and creepers stood the summer palace of
the king. Behind it ran the little rippling
creek, which to him seemed like a noble
river.
Faith cried out with delight at the sight
of the palace. It was built like a cave.
The walls and roof were of soft black earth,
in which were growing the tiniest of tiny
green ferns. The roof outside was a mass
of most lovely moss, while Irom the ceiling
hung sprays of moss and brown fern roots.
The floor also was of black earth,
carpeted with green moss, and a beautiful
fern stood upright to guard the entrance.
At one side was the dancing green. The
fairies would not have a ballroom, for they
loved best to dance m the moonlight. So
they danced instead on the green, around
which grew a beautiful fairy ring. It was
bright green, and seemed very large to the
fairies and to tiny Faith.
Around the fairy king was a ring of
lovely soft pink button mushrooms, forming
a sort of fence.


Dotted here and there, outside, were
flattish dark red toadstools, on which the
dancers might sit when they were weary.
At one end Faith saw a very lovely
sight. The thrones of Osmunda and his
queen, Mimosa, \vere two snow white toad-
stools, more delicate and finer than anything
you can think of.
The little king was dressed in the green
tips of the leaves of the fern tree. They
shone beautifully, and were trimmed with
brown spots like those you see at the back
of fern leaves. Queen Mimosa wore a dress
of the pale pink skin which grows under
fresh, young mushrooms. Her veil was of
the finest gossamer, and round her neck
she wore strips of the gold dust which
comes from the golden wattle blossom.
“ Play first and work afterwards,” the
king was saying. “ You may dance now,
and then we shall hold our court. Ah !
whom have we here?” he added as he saw
little Faith, who was bowing and smiling m
a pretty, shy way.
“It is your guest for to-night, your


majesty, said the fairy who had brought
Faith, She believes in us and loves us.”
“Come hither, child!” commanded Os-
munda, “ and speak to my queen, Mimosa.”
The queen was very nice to Faith, and
made her sit on a tiny brown toadstool at
her feet. Then they watched the fairies
dancing on the green grass in the moon-
light, and Faith thought she had never seen
anything so pretty.
When the dancing was over they had
supper, but most of the *dancers were too
hot to take anything except some drops of
dew and honey.
Then two or three fairies shook some
little, grey, bell-shaped toadstools, and these
tinkled with lovely fairy music. The rest of
the fairies at once sat around on the red
toadstools, and the king called for the fairy
Agaricus.
“Everyone,” he said, “has enjoyed the
lovely dancing green that you have made.
Be so good as to tell our guest how it was
done.”
Poor little Faith felt hot all over as she


saw every one look at her, but quite forgot
herself in hearing the story which Agaricus
told.
“Your majesty,” he began, “knows that
thirty moons ago I was ordered to prepare
this fairy ring. 1 began by asking one of
my sen-ants, the mushrooms, to allow me
to plant it in this wide grassy spot that I
had found.
“ 1 planted it right in the middle.
Before it died there grew from its roots a
ring of other mushrooms around it. Around
them again grew a ring of other mush-
rooms, and so on. The last became the
large ring you now see.
“Wherever the live mushrooms were, the
grass grew brown and faded, but just inside
it, where the dead mushrooms lay, it grew
up again better and greener than all the
grass around. The fairy ring was formed,
and it only remained to let your majesty
know that your orders had been obeyed.
“It is well,” said Osmunda, “and you
shall be rewarded.”
At that moment all the fairies began to


look up at the moon. “It is twelve
o’clock,” the}' whispered to one another,
and they all disappeared one after the
other.
Faith jumped up to see where they were
going, and found herself sitting up in bed
with a moonbeam shining straight down on
her face, and a blackberry leaf on her
pillow. Then she knew she must have
come back on the moonbeam.
The next day she heard her father talk-
ing with a visitor about fairy rings. They
did not notice little Faith watching them
with big eyes.
“ Funny old idea,” said the other man,
“ people used to think fairies made them,
and now science has taught us that it is
only the growth of a mushroom.”
Faith looked straight up at him. “Well!
who makes the mushrooms grow like that?”
she asked.
The other man turned awav to hide a
✓
smile, but “ the little one is in the right,”
said her father softly.


TINY GIRL
“ What makes the ferns,” said Tiny Girl.
“ Curl up so round and light ? ”
“ We fold them so,” the fairies said,
“ When you’re asleep at night.”
“ The logs grow soft,” said Tiny Girl,
“ And black. What makes them so ? ”
“ We make them soft,” the fairies said,
“ To help the ferns to grow.”
“ What makes the moss,” said Tiny Girl,
“ So damp and green and bright ? ”
*• We water it,” the fairies said,
“ We bring it welcome light.”
“ What makes the little violets,”
Said Tiny Girl, “ grow sweet and small ?
“ We plant them so,” the fairies said,
“ We tend and watch them all.”
“ What makes you work ? ” said Tiny Girl,
“ Just Love,” the fairies said.
“ I’ll work for Love,” sang Tin.y Girl
As home again she sped.


Echo .Pres




Ai
T\^>


3 1508 02086178 2


