

Price Sixpence
AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE
The Defence
of our Country
is the Duty
of all.
Published by the Australian National Defence League (N.S.W. Division),
No. 4, First Floor, Denman Chambers, Phillip St., Sydney. Lloyd C.
Hutchinson, Hon, Secretary, and printed by Patterson & Beck, 11 Shepherd
Street, Sydney.


Principal Docks in Pacific and
Indian Oceans
(British Empire and U.S.A.)
BRITISH— J , . . 0 .„
Length Breadth Depth at Sill
Singapore—King’s Dock* ... . 879 ft. 100 ft. 34ft. (L.W.)
Hong Kong
Sydney—Sutherland Dock! —
Over blocks 630 ft. 84it. S2ft. (H.W.)
Woolwich Dock .. . 588 ft. Soft. 28ft.
Fremantle--Large Government
Dock-Construction aband-
oned in 1912 owing to bad
foundations
Durban (S. Africa), new ... 1154 ft. 110 ft. 41ft.
Esquimau!! (Vancouver), new,
nearing completion 1000 ft.
Pearl Harbour (Hawaii),
Graving Dock (projected)—
Large Floating Dock
Balboa (Panama Canal) —
Graving Dock 1000 ft. 110 ft. 41ft.
San Francisco (Hunter’s
Point), and others 1050 ft. 92-144 ft. 344 ft.
(Overall)
Bremerton, Washington 837 ft. 513 ft. 86ft. .
Manila (Philippine Islands) —
Dewey (Floating) 500 ft. 100 ft. 35ft.(18,000-ton
Lift)
Guam (Caroline Islands) —
projected ~~
*This Dock is not large enough to accommodate the principal British
"Capital” ships; provision is being made for these in the new Singapore
Naval Base, first, by means of a large Floating Dock.
tThe Commonwealth Government proposes to subsidise construction of
a Floating Dock of 20,000-ton lift. It is also proposed to increase length
of Sutherland Dock.
LLOYD C. HUTCHINSON.






PREFACE
The primary object in publishing this Pamphlet is to mark
the twentieth anniversary of the foundation of the Australian
National Defence League, N.S.W. Division, which was formed
in September, 1905, to advocate the adoption of Universal (Com-
pulsory) Military or Naval Training as the basis of the Citizen
Force Defence System of Australia. The contents deal with
various aspects of Australian Defence, and, in addition, include a
short history of the work of the League, which describes how
Universal Training was brought about and adopted by the
Federal Parliament.
The Executive Committee of the League also puts forward
this Pamphlet as a publication of value in the Federal Election
Campaign, now upon us, in indicating the needs of Australia
in matters of defence and some of the improvements which are
required to make our Defence System reasonably sufficient for
the purpose for which it is designed.
GERALD R. CAMPBELL
President.


CONTENTS
1. Universal Training in Australia.
2. Australian Defence.
Australia and the Air.
4. The White Australia Policy,
a. Australia and the Pacific.
G. Dominion Neutrality in a British War.
7. Cadet Training.
8. Military Training Camps.
THE
Australian National Defence League
N.S.W. DIVISION.
Denman Chambers, No. 4, First Floor,
Phillip Street, Sydney
A non-party Association, the object o" which is to take such measures as
may be necessary to secure—
(a) Universal compulsory training (Military or Naval) of the boy-
hood and manhood of Australia for purposes of national defence,
the military training to be on the lines of the Swiss system and
the naval training on the lines of the British Royal Naval Re-
serve, modified to suit local circumstances.
(b) An adequate and effective system of national defence.
President:
Hon. Brig.-Genl. G. R. Campbell, V.D. (Retired List).
Vice-Presidents:
Rt. Hon. S. M. Bruce, P.C., M.C., M.P. Professor Sir T. E. David. K.8.K..
Prof. W. M. MacCallum, LL.D. F.R.S., &c.
Rt. Hon. W. M. Hughes, P.C., M.P. Dr. William Chisholm.
David Fell, Esq. Hon. J. C. Watson.
Executive Committee:
Brig.-Genl. A. T. Anderson, C.M.G. Captain A. W. Jose (Retired List).
Mr. F. Berman. B.A. Lt.-Col. W..K. S. MacKenzie, D.S.O.
Major-Genl. C. H. Brand, C. 8., D.S.O. Major Marr, D. 5.0., M.H.R.
Major C. A. Buchanan. Major J. M. Maughan, D.S.O.
Brig.-Genl. G. R. Campbell, V.D. Mr. V. J. Rundell Miles, M.A.
(Retired List). Mr. A. H. Nathan.
Dr. William Chisholm. Mr. Parker.
~ .I n u . • Rev. C. J. Prescott, D.D.
Mr. H. E. Hairing on. Maj.-Gen. Sir Chas. Rosenthal.
Professor E. R. Holme, 0.8. E. ' k.C.8.. D. 5.0., &c„ M.L.A.
Rt. Hon. W. M. Hughes, P.C., M.P. Mr. F. A. A. Russell, M.A.
Hon. Secretary:
Mr. Lloyd C. Hutchinson, 8.A.. LL.B
Assistant Hon. Secretary:
Mr. J. Dyneley Fell, B.A.
Hon. Treasurer:
Mr, Alan N. Brierley, B.A.
Subscription Rates.
Life Membership £lO 10 0
Life Membership (Lady) 5 5 0
Ordinary Membership (Annual) 1 1 0
Associate Membership (Annual) 0 5 0
Associate (Annual) not less than 0 1 0


Universal Training in Australia
[The object of this Article, which is condensed from a Paper read by
me in 1922 to the United Service Institution of N.S.W., is to record the
main facts connected with the bringing about in Australia of Compulsory
or Universal Military and Naval Training for as Joint Hon. Sec. (with
Hon. W. M. Hughes, M.P.) of the Australian National Defence League,
N.S.W. Division, for many years, I had a special opportunity of learning-
all that took place in connection with the movement.
—Gerald R. Campbell, Col. (Hon, Brig.-General), Aust. Mil. Forces,
Moss Vale. Retired ListJ
Prior to Federation in Australia (Jan. Ist, 1901), various individual
thinkers on military matters had advocated in Australia some kind of
scheme of Compulsory Military Training as the basis of the State’s De-
fence Systems. For example, in S. Australia, in 1895, Col. (now Major
General) J. M. Gordon, C. 8., then O.C. South Australian Mil. Forces, induced
the Premier (Hon. C. C. Kingston) to provide a Reserve power of compul-
sion in his Defence Bill, but even this was restricted by Parliament to
the “case of actual invasion or the immediate prospect thereof declared
“by the Governor by Proclamation.” Again, in N.S.W., in 1899, Capt. (now
Maj.-General) J. G. Legge, C. 8., made a distinct individual effort by ad-
vocating the application .of the broad principles of the Swiss Military
System (based on compulsory training) to the Defence System of Australia,
and pointing out that he did not “claim the suggestions as new: most of
“them have been put forward of late years in some form or another by able
“and distinguished officers and by many leading statesmen.”
These were purely individual and isolated efforts, which made no
practical impression, at the time on the minds of the politicians or general
public of Australia.
After Federation of the six Australian States had been accomplished
on January Ist, 1901, one of the early acts of the Federal Government was
to submit to Parliament a Defence Bill to consolidate the existing Military
Forces of the various States. In this Bill, introduced in 1902, there was a
section providing in time of War Compulsory Military Training and Service
for the whole fit male population of military ages (18-60), but only for
service in Australia. Discussion on the Bill continued on into 1903, and in
August of that year the Hon. (now Rt. Hon.) W. M. Hughes, M.P. (then
of the Federal Labor Party), took the momentous step of moving an
amendment to the section referred to, in order to make the proposed war
service of some value; the amendment provided that the male population
of the ages, 18/19, 19/20 and 20/21 should be trained, in time of peace,
for 14 days, in Continuous Camp, and for 32 detached parades, in each of
such years. At first he stood alone in support of the proposal—jeered at
even by members of his own Party—but promptly to his side came two other
members of his party, Hon. J. C. Watson, his Leader, and Hon. W. G.
Spence; however, no further progress could then be made.
In the middle of 1905 an attempt was made by Senator de Largle
(W.A.), to get the system of Compulsory Military Training adopted by
the Triennial Conference of the Labor Party as a plank of its platform,
but he failed, as he had failed at the previous conference in 1902. In the
Press, the “Bulletin” (Sydney) continued to advocate the adoption of the
system as opportunity offered.
About the same time—middle of 1905—a copy of the Journal of the
National Service League of Great Britain, formed to advocate the adoption


there of Compulsory Military Training for the Auxiliary Military forces,
the Swiss Military System being put forward as an excellent model,
came into my hands, and it soon occurred to me to establish a similar
league here, and augment the individual efforts of the past by concerted
public effort, and propaganda in favor of Compulsory Military and Naval
Training, the military training to be on Swiss lines, and the naval training
on those of the Royal Naval Reserve, both modified to suit local circum-
stances. This was the germ of the concerted movement which ultimately
brought about the enactment by the Federal Parliament of Universal train-
ing as the basis of the Australian Defence System in place of voluntary
enlistment,” which, it was felt, was quite unequal to provide the numbers
and efficiency needed for Australian defence.
At the outset it was decided that such a movement must be carried
out on non-party lines as far as political action was concerned; and this
decision had much to do with its ultimate success. The federal political
position at that time was not a simple one. There was, first, the Deakin
Party which was in power, with Hon. A. Deakin, as Prime Minister, Hon.
T T Ewing, Vice-President of the Executive Council, and Senator Hon. 1.
Plavford, Minister for Defence; in direct opposition was the old Liberal
and Free Trade party, led by Hon. (later Sir) G. H. Reid; there was also
the Labor Party, led by Hon. J. C. Watson, with Hon. W. M. Hughes as
one of his principal henchmen, which generally supported the Deakin
Government.
My first step, naturally, was to get in touch with Mr. W. M. Hughes,
as a pronounced advocate of Universal Training, though I had not then
made his acquaintance. He readily agreed to take an active part in the
formation of the proposed League. In discussing the matter, he made two
statements which impressed one with his keenness on the subject. One
was that he- didn’t know what would become of our Country and people if
the youth did not get some sort of discipline instilled in them; the other
was that he was a staunch Imperialist, one who believed in a United
Empire, although he couldn’t say that all the members of his party held
similar views.
It was then decided to proceed with the formation of a non-party League
—afterwards named the “Australian National Defence League, N.S.W.
Division” —to advocate the adoption of—
(a) Universal Compulsory Training (Military and Naval) of the
boyhood and manhood of Australia for the purpose of National
Defence, the Military Training to be on the lines of the Swiss
System, and the Naval Training on the lines of the British
Royal Naval Reserve, modified to suit local circumstances.
(b) An adequate and effective system of National Defence.
In the nature of things, Naval Service must be mainly under a
or Permanent method of voluntary enlistment, and so in this article the
military side of the movement is mainly dealt with.
The next step was to seek the aid of prominent citizens. Sir Norniand
MacLaurin, M.L.C., Chancellor of Sydney University, and many leading
men of every profession and calling, who held very diverse views °t“ er
matters, readily agreed to help. The Prime Minister, Hon. A. Deakin, also
p-ave a general assent in favor cf Universal Training, but his idea, at first,
was that this could be attained almost entirely by Voluntary means, the
application of Compulsion only being needed to yard in the few remaining
intractables! However, in 1907. during a visit to England he became a
strong supporter of the complete system. At first Hon. (later Sir) G. H.
Reid M P leader of the Opposition, was in accord, but he soon drew
back' satisfying himself with Compulsory Cadet training; later, however.


he approved of Compulsory Training for those under 21 years of age, and
ultimately he approved of the extension of such training to later years
as defined by the 1910 Amending Defence Act after the visit of Lord
Kitchener. The leader of the Labor Party, Hon. J. C. Watson, was a tower
oi strength to the movement all through.
Progress in the initial arrangements was so rapid that it was possible
to hold the preliminary meeting at the Australia Hotel on September sth,
1905. This was presided over by Sir Normand MacLgurin, and largely
attended by representative citizens of all political parties, and the meeting
unanimously decided, on the motion of Sir Julian Salomons, K.C., seconded
by Hon. W. M. Hughes, M.P., to proceed with the formation of the proposed
League, as a non-party organisation and having as its objects those already
set out above. A committee was appointed with Sir W. P. Manning and
Capt. W. Henderson as Hon. Treasurers, and Mr. W. M, Hughes and
myself as Hon. Joint Secretaries to draw up a constitution and arrange for
the public launching of the League at the Town Hall, Sydney, at an early
date.
The first General Public Meeting to inaugurate the formation of the
Australian National Defence League was held at the Town Hall, Sydney,
early in the following month (October), the Lord Mayor being in the
Chair. The various Resolutions for the formation of such a League on
non-party lines were carried unanimously after speeches in support from
Sir Normand MacLaurin (the first President of the Defence League), Sir
Julian Salomons, K.C. (who became the second President of the League),
Hon. T. T. Ewing, M.P., Vice-President of Executive Council (Deakin Gov-
ernment), Sir William McMillan, Senator J. T. Walker (Reid Party), Hon.
J. C. Watson, and Hon. W M. Hughes (both of Federal Labor Party), and
W. A. Holman (N.S.W. Labor Party).
The League then settled down to work, and registered itself under
the N.S.W. Companies Act (‘not for gain’ Section), enrolled members
and proceeded with its educative propaganda. .The modifications of the
Swiss Military System, ultimately approved of by the League, provided
for the following Compulsory Military Training of adults (in addition to
Cadet Training):—
In Recruit Year (18/19th year of age).—6o days Continuous Camp
Training, or as near thereto as possible, but not less than 42
days, plus 5 detached day parades.
In Seven Subsequent Years.—7 days Continuous Camp Training, plus
5 detached day parades, in each of such years.
In JOth year of age|—Reserve Training—4 days Camp.
In addition, up to 40th year of age.—Musketry Course and Inspection
of Arms every year.
Mr. Hughes brought forward again in this year (1905) in the Federal
Parliament, his Compulsory Training Resolutions already referred to, but
still failed to pass them.
Towards the end of the year, Field Marshal' Earl Roberts became
President of the National Service League of Great Britain, our prototype.
This proved of great advantage to our Australian effort, for we were now
able to point to that great soldier and patriot as our Leader, and all
through the Australian League received the greatest help from the British
League and its officers, which contributed greatly to the early success of
the movement here.
Shortly afterwards an attempt was made in Victoria to establish a
Division of the Defence League there, but though at first the proposal
was supported by many leading Victorians, including Mr. Deakin, it failed
to make good, owing to the restriction of its aims to “Voluntary” Uni-
versal Training, and it soon passed out of existence.


During 1906 the membership of the Defence League grew slowly—
-112 members in September—educative propaganda was kept to the front,
and in August the publication of the first number of its journal, “The
Call,” took place. Its object was “To awaken Australians to realise that
the defence of their Country is the duty of all;” it was published quarterly
and proved a most efficient means of propaganda, and was carried on for
four years till July, 1910, and until the success of the movement was
reasonably assured by the passing of the Amending Defence Act of 1910.
As the League’s Central Revenues were never large—on the average, under
£2OO p.a., up to August, 1911—the publication of “The Call” was alone
rendered possible by the strictest economy—no salaries, no rent, all articles
contributed without fee, etc.: mhny distinguished writers and artists con-
tributed to its columns, amongst whom may be mentioned, F.M. Earl
Roberts, Viscount Milner, and “The Military Correspondent of the Times”
(Col. a’Court Repington), and Mr. Norman Lindsay, who, amongst othet
contributions, supplied the striking cover design for “The Call.”
In this year, too, it was decided to form Country Branches, and early
in 1907 the first Was formed at Millthorpe. Shortly after, others were
formed in towns of the Northern Rivers of N.S.W. (mainly due to a tour
by Mr. W. M. Hughes), and at Tamworth, Newcastle, Orange, Bathurst,
Goulburn, Moss Vale, Albury, etc. —19 in all—the most successful being
that at Tamworth, of which Dr. G. P. Stanley was the energetic Hon. Sec.
As early as 1906 it became evident that the propaganda was affecting
the political mind—the most convincing piece of evidence being the
despatch by the Deakin Government of Colonel (later Sir) W. T. Bridges
of the General Staff, to Europe to report on the Swiss Military System.
About the end of this year, or early in 1907, a Fediral Election took
place, which resulted in the defeat of the Minister of Defence, Senator
Playford; in the necessary reconstruction of the Deakin Government, the
Hon. (later Sir) J. T. Ewing, succeeded him as Minister of Defence—a
great gain to our movement, for, from the outset, Mr. Ewing strongly
supported the adoption of Compulsory Training as the basis of the Aus-
tralian Defence System.
During 1907, both Mr. Deakin and Mr. W. M. Hughes visited England,
and both came in touch with the National Service League and Lord
Roberts, its President, from whom they received a hearty welcome and
opportunity to speak on the question of Military Training. To our great
satisfaction, Mr. Deakin, in his speech, came out as a supporter of the
principle of Compulsory Training as the best basis of the Australian De-
fence System; and on his return to Australia he announced in the Federal
Parliament in December, 1907, that his Ministry had decided to introduce
this principle into the Australian Defence System, outlined his proposals in
a very notable speech, and slated that his Minister of Defence would place
the necessary Bill before Parliament in due course.
This decision of the Deakin Party and Ministry necessarily called for
Defence policy decisions by the other political parties. So in the middle
of 1908 we found the Federal Labor Party at its Brisbane Conference, at
the instance of its leader, Hon. J. C. Watson, adopting, by a large majority,
Compulsory Military or Naval Training as a Plank of its platform. The
Reid party, as a whole, still limited itself to its Compulsory Cadet training
only, though individual members strongly supported the compulsory pro-
gramme of the Defence League.
It was not till September of this yea:; (1908) that the Minister of
Defence (Hon. T. T. Ewing) introduced the Defence Bill promised by Mr.


Deakin; this Bill provided for Compulsory Training for Citizen Force
adults (in addition to Compulsory Cadet Training), as follows:
I. In Recruit Year, 18/19 year of age.—lnfantry and Cavalry, etc., Com-
pulsory Training, not exceeding 18 working days, in a Recruit
Battalion, etc., or their equivalent.
In next two years.—Similar period (18 days) in each year, but in a
Militia Battalion, etc.
In next five years.—Training, not exceeding 7 working days in
each year.
11. —ln the case of the Naval Militia, and the Artillery and Engineers,
the training in the first five years was to be 28 days in each
year, and for last 3 years, 7 days in each year.
No pay was to be given to Privates, except for training in excess
of 18 days.
In the debates on the Bill weak points, e.g., insufficiency of training
in Recruit year, were stressed. Nevertheless, to Mr. Deakin’s Ministry
(and his Minister of Defence) belongs the high honor of being the first
Australian Government to introduce a Bill embodying the principle of
Universal or Compulsory Training as the basis of Australian Defence.
Before the Bill could be passed a political crisis occurred, and towards
the end of 1908 the Deakin Government was defeated in Parliament (not
on the Defence Bill), and a Labor Ministry* under the Hon. A. Fisher,
succeeded to office, the Hon. W. M. Hughes being Attorney General. The
new Ministry’s existence was short-lived, for it met with defeat in May,
1909, but not before Mr. Fisher had announced at Gympie a Defence
policy embodying the principle of Compulsory Training, as follows:
Recruit Year (18/19 year of age).—Compulsory Training for 16
days in Continuous Camp, also 12 Half-day Parades, and 24
Night Parades.
19/20 year. —Similar Compulsory Training period to that in Recruit
year.
20/21 year.—Compulsory Training for 7 days in Continuous Camp,
and similar Half-day and Night Parades to those in Recruit
year.
In the 21/22nd year and 22/23rd year.—Only Voluntary training was
provided for—7 days each year in Continuous Camp.
Pay for Privates was to be 10/- per week during Camp training in
first two years, and then 12/- per week during Camp in each remaining
year.
A Coalition Ministry of the Deakin and Reid Parties succeeded to
office on the defeat of the Fisher Ministry in May, 1909 —the leaders being
Mr. Deakin (Premier), and Mr. (later Sir) J. Cook (Minister of Defence),
as Mr. Reid had eased off somewhat in his political activities. Mr. Reid,
however, in July, in the face of the growing German menace, handsomely
admitted in relation to Defence matters, that after all Mr. Hughes had
been right and he had been wrong in his reading of the Empire’s dangers.
The Defence proposals of the Coalition Ministry naturally took on
a “Fusion” complexion, the Cook party, hitherto in favor only of Compul-
sory Cadet training—i.e., up to 18 years —yielding to an extension of Com-
pulsion up to 20 years of age. The Coalition Government accordingly
submitted the following Defence training proposals (omitting Compulsory
Cadet training) to Parliament, and they were ultimately on December
13th, 1909, embodied in an Amending Defence Act:—


Recruit Year, 18/19th year.—Compulsory Training for 16 days (of
which 8 days in Camp), or their equivalent in a Recruit Battalion.
19/20th year. —Similar training to that in Recruit year, but in a
Militia Battalion.
Four Subsequent Years.— Voluntary training for IG days in each of
these years.
The training of Artillery, Engineers and Naval Militia was pre-
scribed as 25 days yearly, instead of 16 days.
Pay for Privates was; —
21/- per week in Camp in Recruit Year.
28/- per week in Camp in Second Year.
56/- per week in Camp in each subsequent (Voluntary) training
year.
This was a weaker dose of Compulsory Training for the Citizen Force
than that of either the Deakin-Ewing Bill, or the Fisher Ministry’s pro-
posals; still something was gained, for the principle of Compulsory Adult
training—as well as Cadet training—was accepted. During the debate on
the Bill the Minister of Defence announced that the Ministry were inviting
Lord Kitchener to visit Australia and report on our Defence System and
the new Bill’s provisions: so hope sprang up that the inadequate proposals
of the Bill would be developed into something really valuable. The New
Zealand Government was also getting to work, and by December, 1909,
its Parliament had passed an Act providing for Compulsory Training for
the Citizen Force (as well as for Cadets), as follows; —
Recruit Year, 18/19.—14 days Camp training, plus 12 Half-days
(detached parades).
J9/20th year.—l 4 days Camp training, plus 12 Half-days (detached
parades).
20/21st year.—l 4 days Camp training, plus 12 Half-days (detached
parades).
followed by a similar period of Voluntary training in the Terri-
torial Force in each of the three subsequent years, with a pro-
vision for the application of Compulsion if a sufficient strength
was not achieved under Voluntary enlistment.
Pay for Privates.—2l/- per week.
Early in 1910, Lord Kitchener arrived in Australia, inspected the Mili-
tary Forces in Camp, investigated the general military position and the
terms of the new (1909) Defence Act, and in March sent in his Report
to "the Government; his Recommendations were*:—
In Recruit year (18/19th).— Compulsory Training as provided for in
New (1909) Defence Act.
19/20th year.— Compulsory Training, as provided for in New (1909)
Defence Act.
In 20/21st year. —Compulsory Training, of 6 clear days in Camp
(Monday to Saturday).
•lord Kitchener in 1910, estimated the m litary requirements of Australia at a Citizen
Force actU training of about 107 000 of all ranks, and 12,500 Reserves
Hevelonment of same to be sp ead over a seven year training period. To-day
° r ritirpn Force Army in training, numbt rs about 42.600. including those voluntarily
wStaKl '• .... th.. th.t pr.scribe.l by th, D.f.nc A«,
and is spread over a 3 year period.—G.R.C. *


In 21/22nd year—Compulsory Training of G deal- days in Camp
(Monday to Saturday).
In 22/23rd year.—Compulsory Training of 6 clear days in Camp
(Monday to Saturday).
In 23/24th year.—Compulsory Training- of G clear days in Camp
(Monday to Saturday).
In 24/25th year.—Compulsory Training of 6 clear days in Camp
(Monday to Saturday).
In 25/26th year—Muster Parades only.
This moderate extension of Compulsory Training Was recommended on
the assumption that Home Training—short frequent drills near the soldier’s
home—would be carried out by the Soldier voluntarily throughout the year.
This Voluntary Home Training was an essential feature of Lord Kitchener’s
proposals, and if it failed to materialise sufficiently—and it did so fail—
then as the late Col. Foster, R.E., Director of Military Science, Sydney
University, pointed out, “there is little hope of forming an efficient
National Force unless the Compulsory periods were extended.”
Before the Deakin-Cook Ministry could deal with Lord Kitchener’s
Recommendations, another Federal political crisis occurred, which resulted,
after a general election, in the return to power of the Labor Party with
Hon. A. Fisher (Prime Minister), Hon. W. M. Hughes (Attorney General),
and Senator Pearce (Minister of Defence). Later in the year, the new
Ministry not only gave effect to Lord Kitchener’s proposals, but actualy
increased the Compulsory Training periods for the Citizen Force, as follows,
by the Amending Defence Act (December Ist, 1910): —
x i
‘ In' Recruit year (18/19th year), and in each of the following six
years—up to 24/25th year.
Artillery, Engineers, Naval l| Infantry and
Mjlitia. 11 Light Horse. &c.
25 days, of which at least 17 || 16 days, of which
days in Continuous Camp. at least 8 days in
Continuous Camp
Total Days. Compulsory Training—l7s days and 112 days respectively.
In the 25/26th year.—A Muster Parade only.
Pay for Privates. —4/- per training day in Recruit year, and 5/- per
day in subsequent years.
Colonel (now Lieut.-General, Sir) G. M. Kirkpatrick, of Lord
Kitchener’s Staff, who was shortly after appointed Inspector-General of
the Australian Military Forces, supervised the new scheme, saw to its
development during its early years. On Julv Ist, 1911, the training of
the Senior Cadets' (four yearly classes, with a total strength of about
90,000) began, followed on July Ist. 1912, by the commencement of the
Compulsory adult training in the Citizen Force of the oldest quota of the
Sefiior Cadets (now of the age, 18/19), about 17,000 of them.
The work of the Defence League was now largely finished, except
to watch sympathetically the working of universal training—the organisa-
tion, however, remaining intact and ready for further action at any time.
The aims of the League had not been fully achieved as far as the training
in the Recruit year was concerned, but so much had been gained that it
was decided not to press further for the time being.
As the Compulsory training proceeded its many advantages, both from
a Civic and Military standpoint, were fully realised by the community as


a whole, and erstwhile opponents became enthusiastic supporters of the
new System.
At outbreak of the Great War (August sth, 1914, in Australia) the
Australian Citizen Forces consisted of three drafts (July, 1912; July, 1913,
and July, 1914) of Compulsorily Trained Soldiers, plus the old Voluntarily
enlisted militia, who still continued their service. The total strength was
approximately 60,000, of whom about 2,500 were officers; i.e., over 30,000
more than there would have been had the old system of Voluntary Enlist-
ment still continued. The strength in Officers was about 50 per cent,
greater than it would have been under the old conditions. Equipment,
Arms, Ammunition, etc., were on a far greater scale than previously, and
some factories had been established to, turn out further supplies. The
first batch of Cadets from the new Royal Military College, Duntroon,
recommended by Lord Kitchener, was just about ready to graduate and
form the first quota of the new Staff Corps—and. in fact, did join the
First Division of the Australian Imperial Force.
During the War the annual training of the Citizen Forces —of whom
at least 35,000 served in the A.I. Force —was either abandoned altogether
or reduced, except in 1918/19, when a really good 3 weeks’ camp training
was carried out, until the influenza outbreak, early in 1919, put a stop
to it.
After the Armistice, for some years, the training was very meagre.
In 1919, Federal political parties showed signs of a desire to interfere
with the Universal Training Scheme of the Defence Act. The Labor
Party as it then existed—having lost, over' the Conscription issue in
1916, ’leaders like the Rt. Hon. W. M. Hughes, Senator Pearce, and Mr.
W A Holman —turned back on its tracks and removed Compulsory Mili-
tary Training from its platform; the Country or Progressive Party plat-
form was by no means clear and satisfactory, and even the National Party
for some time showed signs of favoring a reduction of the Compulsory
Training Periods. ,
Under these circumstances the Defence League felt the need for
fresh action, and in its Annual Report for 1919 pointed out the dangers
to which the Universal training system wasi exposed, and urged that,
instead of any reduction, what was really needed, in view of the war
experience, was a re-arrangement of the Compulsory Training periods of
the Defence Act, whereby (without any increase of the total number of
training days already provided for) the training period in the Recruit year
should be largely increased, whilst the subsequent yearly trainings were
diminished in number, so that the soldier might go free of training at
an earlier date.
And it was with much satisfaction that the League found the Prime
Minister (Rt. Hon. W. M. Hughes) in September, 1920, proposing to Parlia-
ment a scheme for the re-organisation of the Compulsory Training System,
very much on the lines suggested by the Defence League, viz.:—
In Recruit Year, 18/19th year.—7o days Continuous Camp—for all
Arms.
In each of three following years.—l 6 days, of which Bin Continuous
Camp.
In each of three subsequent years. —Muster Parade only.
Total Training Days.—llß days, as against 112, for Infantry, etc.,
and 175 for Artillery, etc., under existing Defence Act.
Unfortunately, though Senator Pearce, in November, 1920, elaborated
these proposals in the Senate, the Prime Minister did not appear to have
been able to carry his party with him, and not only has this excellent re


organisation not been given effect to, but the training provided for in the
Defence Act as well as the personnel to be trained, have both been largely
reduced, by Government, supported by Parliament, rendering our Defence
System both inefficient and inadequate.
In view of all this, the Defence League feels that it must once more
actively take up the role for which it was founded, and appeals to all to
strengthen its membership, so that every effort may be made to preserve
Universal Training (preferably improved as suggested), which has proved
of such great value to Australia.
Australian Defence
(By Brig.-General A. T. Anderson, C.M.G.)
Turramurra.
I suppose that every Australian agrees in the doctrine of a White
Australia and even the most thoughtless must sometimes realise with
a feeling’ of uneasiness the temptation presented by the large empty
spaces of his country to foreign Pacific Powers, over-populated and eager
to find some vacant ground into which they can expand,
Australia has a coast line of 12,000 miles, and an area of 3,000,000
square miles; about 49 per cent, of this area is situated within the tropics,
and only 3 per cent, of the total population live in this tropical portion.
She has a population of barely 6,000,000, with a density of 1.8 per square
mile- while Japan, to take one instance, has a population of 77 millions
and ’a density of 370. Even if, as Professor Griffiths Taylor says, an
area of about 1,200,000 miles (i.e., about 40 per cent, of the whole of
Australia) can be ruled out as a possible region of close settlement for
men of any race, the danger remains a serious one; subtract this arid
40 per cent, altogether from our calculations, and the population has
still only a density of 3.4 to the square mile.
Of course, the best remedy is for Australia to increase her population,
and so remove the temptation, or at least the pietext, foi invasion y
another Power. But the process of building up a population, whether
by emigration or by natural means, is a slow one, and meanwhile the
country must be defended. Can we, as a matter of fact, say that our
arrangements for defence are adequate ?
Australian defence is in the main a naval problem, and though we
cannot provide and maintain a fleet sufficiently strong to cope with that
of any great Power, we must at least be prepared to protect ourselves
agains invasion or bombardment by the use of aeroplanes, submarines
and destroyers, and to take some part in the protection by cruisers of
our sea-borne commerce. Since the Washington conference we are faced
with an entirely new naval situation; the reduction of the British Navy
to a one Power standard, and the fact that the Singapore base has not
yet been constructed, make it certain that a considerable time will elapse
after the outbreak of war before a superior British fleet will be ready
to co-operate effectively in the naval defence of Australia. During pus
period an enemy possessing temporary naval ascendancy might well find
it possible to take offensive action against this country. It follows,
therefore, that a strong land force is also essential.
Let us examine briefly how the defence of Australia stands at present.


Since the sinking of the Australia, the Australian fleet has no capital
ship, and it now consists of four light cruisers, eleven destroyers and
a few other craft. The Federal Government has now r made provision
for the building of tw'o large (10,000 ton) light cruisers, and tw r o ocean-
going submarines; and it is also proposed to construct a seaplane carrier.
The total defence expenditure for this year (excluding submarines and
cruiser building) is £4,203,322, or about half a million less than was
expended in the year immediately preceding the great war. There is
also a further sum voted of one million pounds to cover the first year
of the five years Developmental Programme for increasing arms, arma-
ment, ammunition, etc. There are as yet no naval bases in the country,
and it is very doubtful if the chief ports are furnished with adequate
artillery defence.
Up to the present the Air Force has been a sadly neglected branch,
but there are hopeful signs of better things to come. A Royal Australian
Air Force station is to be constructed at Richmond, and a scheme has
been approved for the establishment over a period of five years of an
air force nucleus of 63 machines, with a personnel of about 500 officers
and men. Four amphibian aeroplanes of the seagull type are to be
provided forthwith, and, if they prove satisfactory, the number will be
increased during the year.
As regards land defence, there is not much room for adverse criticism
—theoretically. The Defence Act lays down that all male inhabitants oT
/Australia, between the ages of 18 and 60 years, shall in time of war
be liable to serve in the citizen forces, and that all males from 12 to
20 years shall be liable in peace time to undergo military training. By
this Act. brought into law in 1909, the principle of universal liability
Lo Defence Force training in time of peace was made law for the first
time in any English-speaking community. The liability to military
training was prescribed as follows:
(a) From 12 years to 14 years of age, in the junior cadets.
(b) From 14 years to 18 years of age, in the senior cadets.
(c) From 18 years to 25 years of age, in the citizen forces.
(d) From 25 years to 26 years of age, in the citizen forces.
Provided that, except in imminent danger of war, service under para.
(d) shall be limited to one registration or one muster parade.
The amount of training prescribed in the Act is not so satisfactory.
It is laid down as follows: —
(a) In the junior cadets, 90 hours,
(b) In the senior cadets, 4 whole day drills, 12 half day drills, and
24 night drills.
(c) In the citizen forces, 16 whole day drills or their equivalent, ot
which not less than 8 shall be in camps of military training.
It will be seen then that but for the period of training, which is
lamentably inadequate, the land defence of Australia leaves little to be
desired in theory. Unfortunately, it has been decided that the operation
of the universal training law be restricted to the more populous centres
and to certain quotas only.
Junior cadets are no longer to be trained at all, while


Senior cadet training is confined to lads of 17 (one quota instead of
four), and citizen training to youths of 18, 19 and 20 (three quotas instead
of seven). The organisation is still kept up to the original scale, on
paper, i.e.:—
60 Battalions Infantry.
23 Regiments Light Horse.
•66 Batteries Field Artillery.
and a due proportion of Engineers and Medical and other services. In
actual fact, however, there has been a disastrous falling off, and the
compulsory trained strength in 1925/26 will be only some 45,000 men,
as compared with the strength of 122,000 in 1921. Another serious blow
has been struck against the efficiency of the force by reducing the annual
period of training from 16 days to 12. The former period was inadequate,
but to attempt to train a soldier in 12 days, of which not more than 8
are spent in camp, is manifestly ridiculous. Small wonder that the
Inspector-General of the Military Forces declared in his report for 1922
that with such reduced strength and training “it is quite out of the
question to train an army for the defence of Australia.”
In 1913, when the population of Australia was about four and a
half millions, the appropriation by Parliament for military expenditure,
exclusive of the amounts voted for works and buildings, was £1,603,880.
In 1925, with a population of six millions, and at a time of far greater
national danger, the appropriation is only £1,051,816.
It may be of interest here to compare the cost per inhabitant for
defence in Great Britain and Australia at each extreme of the decade
1913-1923.
1913.—Great Britain, 33/9. Australia, 19/5.
1923. —Great Britain, 51/2. Australia 15/7.
In other words the cost to the citizen of the mother country increased
by over 50 per cent., while it decreased by about 20 per cent, in the case
of his Australian cousin.
Such is the present state of Australian defence, and it is safe to say
that no naval or military expert would consider it adequate in any
branch.
Even with the two new cruisers which are to be built, our naval
force is far too weak for the work it will be called upon to perform, and
we have no naval base on our coast. We have good cause to be thankful
that the Singapore base is now to be constructed. This work is intended
for purely defensive purposes, and it is absurd to suggest that it can offer
any provocation to Japan; its importance lies not chiefly in the Pacific,
but in the Indian Ocean, through which goes the greater part of our trade,
and round which lies about threequarters of the Empire. From the
point of view of an Australian, however, the chief consideration is that
the project will give a first-class base for the main fleet directly on_ the
flank of any possible expedition for the invasion of his country. This is
true, but at least one similar base on our own coast is necessary before
we can feel any security.
The naval policy, therefore, urged by the National Defence League
is: (1) Provision of an adequate squadron for Australian waters in peace


time, the capital ships being found by arrangement with the British
Government; (2) provision of a base in Australasia, with a dock cap-
able of docking the damaged capital ships, as well as smaller ships, of
such squadron; (3) provision of adequate garrisons and coast defences
to protect our naval base and ports.
As regards air defence, the Federal Government has now at least
made a beginning, though much still remains to be done. Our Air Force
must have, to quote Sir Keith Smith, “single-seater scouts for spotting
purposes, two-seater fighters to attack the swarms of enemy aeroplanes,
long-distance bombers to get the first blow in upon the aircraft carriers
and airships, and reconnaissance machines. In addition, we would need
in this country of long distances huge troop-carriers; and above all, we
have no airship to accompany the defending fleet. The Government
should give every encouragement to commercial aviation, and to tne
establishment of aeroplane works in Australia. A commercial air ser-
vice would provide an invaluable reserve of airmen and material tor t e
expansion of the fighting forces in time of war.
As has been said, the Defence Act already provides for an army
of sufficient numerical strength, but although it is still the law its pro-
visions have been so whittled down for reasons of financial stringency
that the army exists for the most part on paper only. The remedy us to
enforce the Act as it now stands, and also greatly to extend the period
of training. The National Defence League urges a prompt return to the
full number of training days prescribed by the Defence Act, but to
concentrate the training within a small number of years, as propose:! y
Mr. W. M. Hughes when Prime Minister in 1920 —the main concentration
(70 days’ camp" training) being in the 18th/19th (Recruit) year, followed
by short trainings in the three following years.
Let me say in conclusion that the National Defence League is no
advocate of militarism for the sake of militarism, as the Pacifists seem
to believe We are Pacifists ourselves in the true sense of -he word, but
we are convinced that the only way to ensure peace is to be so strong
that no foreign Power will ever be tempted to attack us. I read the
other day a pamphlet on defence issued by a Peace Society m Australia.
It is an ingenious example of special pleading, and its author has di -
torted history in a very diverting manner to suit his own arguments.
His conclusion is that we should cease to suspect other nations o
harboring sinister designs, and should disarm at once. But he deliberate!
shirks the obvious difficulty—if, after having followed his advice and
rendered ourselves helpless, we find that some nation has in ac
bored these sinister designs against our independence, what are we
to do? I do not wonder that he has shirked this question, tor )t is one
to which the Pacifist can give no answer. They must be blinded by
prejudice indeed, and deaf to all the warnings of history, who, casting
their eyes round the world as it is to-day, can deny that the old proverb
is unhappily as true now as it has always been,
SI VIS PACEM PARA BELLUM.


Australia and the Air
(Captain Geoffrey Forrest Hughes, M.C., A.F.C., late Royal Air Force.)
Hunter Street, Sydney.
“We cannot make the Air Force the great weapon it must be unless we
have the backing of the whole country.”
Air Chief Marshal Sir Hugh Trenchard, G.C.8., D. 5.0., A.D.C., in an
address to the Cambridge University on 29th April, 1925.
The remarkable development of aviation in the last ten years has
not only added new problems to war both on land and at sea, but has
now definitely reached the stage where a new form of warfare with new
problems of its own has been inflicted on the world—war in the air. This
does not mean that air war will supersede other forms of war, or that the
next war will be fought and won in the air, for in the long run, to quote
a favorite phrase of Mr. C. G. Grey, Editor of the Aeroplane, the
only thing that wins a war and keeps it won is a soldier with a rifle in
his fist standing on his own flat feet in the enemy’s capital city.”
Before the war of 1914 air power was untried, and though during
five years of war great air forces were gradually built up on both sides,
the possibilities and the problems of war in the air to-day are vastly
different from those of 1914-1918. From occasional duels with revolvers
or rifles between two scouting aeroplanes in 1914, air fighting developed
so that in 1918 engagements between squadrons of 20 or 30 aeroplanes
on each side were not uncommon. These squadrons were at best a
number of individuals, without means of proper co-ordination, flying to-
gether into the combat, and once an engagement became general
it was still a case of single combats—each individual for himself—the
resulting turmoil being admirably described in war-pilots’ slang as “a
Dog Fight.” But to-day, with aeroplanes equipped with efficient wireless
telephones, a squadron of eighteen machines can be manoeuvred and
drilled by its leader, with the precision of an infantry platoon on the
parade ground, and it is not looking far ahead to picture fleets of aero-
planes manoeuvring in battle under the orders of a commanding officer.
This is only one phase of war in the air, taken as an example to
show how war-flying is to-day far ahead of even the end of the European
War. TVlany other examples could be given, but space must confine this
paper to general principles and their application to Australia.
On the 29th April this year, Air Chief Marshal Sir Hugh Trenchard,
GC B D. 5.0., A.D.C., Chief of the Air Staff, speaking at the Cambridge
University, said: “The aeroplane to-day is the most offensive weapon that
has ever been invented. It is a shockingly bad weapon of defence, but
it is the only defensive weapon against the aeroplane that has yet been
discovered, and even in these days of great scientific improvements and
inventions, I have grave doubts that any other weapon will take its
place for another hundred years, if then.”
There is no doubt that to-day Australia is practically unequipped with
this “most offensive weapon,” and the extent of Australia’s weakness in
this vital arm of defence can best be realised by a short study, firstly, of
the problems of air defence and the organisation and equipment that is
essential to national safety in the air, and then of our present position.
The organisation of an air force as outlined by Sir Hugh Trenchard
falls under three main divisions: —


(1) A section responsible for defence against aerial invasion.
(2) A section to co-operate with the Navy; and
(o) A section to co-operate with the Army.
1. Defence against Aerial Invasion.
This section must be capable of defending the nerve centres of the
country (capital cities, ports, railways, telegraphs, factories, etc.) against
hostile air forces, for the most efficient fighting force would be useless
if the enemy could cripple the vital services ol the country and so dis-
organise the nation itself.. This section should consist of three branches:
(a) Defensive aeroplanes, which are normally single-seater fighting
machines, capable of attacking enemy aircraft seeking to invade
the home territory.
-b) Offensive aeroplanes, which are powerful bombing machines,
capable of flying long distances and carrying great weight of
bombs. These are needed to attack the enemy’s aerodromes,
bases, dumps and all his vital services. In air war the soundest
of all defences is to attack.
(c) Ground defences at vital points, consisting of anti-aircraft guns
and searchlights.
2. Co-operation with the Naval Force.
The work of this section is to assist the fleet with scouting and obser-
vation of gun fire, to patrol home waters and protect convoys against
submarine attack, and to attack hostile craft with bombs and torpedoes.
For these purposes it needs various types of seaplanes and flying boats—
fast fighting machines for defence against enemy aircraft, large bombing
machines and torpedo planes for attack, deck-flying machines for use on
individual units of the fleet, and machines specially equipped for long
sea patrols. In addition, the naval air arm should have large seaplane
carrier ships to form mobile bases for its operations, and small
airships, which are of great value for the protection of convoys. Needless
to say, the personnel of this branch must necessarily be trained in
Naval matters.
3. Co-operation with the Army.
This section has to carry out the work of spotting for the artillery,
photography, co-operation with infantry in action, reconnaissance, bomb-
ing, and, of course, defence against enemy aircraft. The organisation
is divided into two groups —one to carry out tactical work, the other
strategical work. The former group consists of “Corps Squadrons,”
which do the artillery spotting and infantry co-operation, and the “tacti-
cal” reconnaissance, photography and bombing immediately connected
with local operations. The latter group consists of “Army Squadrons,”
some of fighting machines to carry out the offensive defence necessary
to minimise enemy aircraft activity and to protect the corps machines
in their work, and others of heavy bombing machines for day and night
raids well back in the enemy’s territory, and others of fast high-flying
aeroplanes for long strategical reconnaissances and photography well
behind the enemy lines.
All units must be very mobile and squadrons must be equipped with
travelling workshops, and all the other ground equipment necessary for
establishing bases from which the aircraft can operate. With so many
varied duties to perform, an air force must be equipped with a great


many different types of aeroplanes, for each branch of its work requires
a special machine—fast single-seater fighters, heavy bombers, specially
armored machines for low flying in contact with infantry, defensively
armed two-seaters for artillery spotting and reconnaissance, fighting sea-
planes, bombing seaplanes, torpedo carrying seaplanes and many other
specially equipped machines, including amphibians capable of flying and
alighting both on land and water.
The first great problem is the supply of personnel, including pilots,
observers and gunners, each trained to the special work of his branch,
mechanics to handle aeroplanes, engines, guns, bombs, - wireless and photo-
graphic equipment and all the other highly technical equipment, staff
officers, supply and equipment officers, engineer officers for repair depots
and so on. The expense involved is such that the most any country can
afford to maintain is a highly efficient permanent nucleus backed by a
reserve partly trained, but capable of being rapidly brought up to war
efficiency.
In Australia we undoubtedly have material second to none from
which to select the personnel of an air force, but we have at present only
a very small permanent nucleus, and until quite recently no organised
reserve at all.
After the war a great number of first-class war-trained pilots and
observers and mechanics came back to Australia, but, unhappily, the vast
majority were allowed to drift back to civil life. A comparative handful
were appointed to the Royal Australian Air Force, and the rest were
allowed to scatter and lose all touch with the air. For nearly six years
nothing was done, but now at last steps have been taken to form a Citizen
Air Force, and a few of the old war-trained men are attached to two
squadrons maintained by a nucleus of the permanent force—one in Vic-
toria and one in New South Wales. The R.A.A.F. to-day has about 40
permanent officers of all ranks and about 20 officers holding short service
commissions. Of these, about 12 are stores and equipment officers, and
2 are medical officers, so that we have under 50 general service officers,
which includes staff and flying officers. In addition, there are perhaps 20
officers in the newly-formed Citizen Air Force. This means that our Air
Force and Reserve to-day contains barely sufficient officers for two ser-
vice squadrons. It is not necessary to point out how hopelessly inadequate
this is even as the nucleus of an organised air force.
Further steps are now being taken to form yet another reserve by
offering free flying training to university and other young men between
the ages of 18 and 23, on condition that they undertake to serve with
the Air Force and reserve for 8 years. This also is a belated step in the
right direction, and will undoubtedly meet with a good response, but it is
not enough. Of course, the political answer to all this is that there is no
money to do more, but it is time Australia realised that national safety
is at stake and that money must be found to provide at least reasonable
safeguards.
Our air force should at least have the personnel necessary to provide
the peace-time nucleus of a complete air force, with a reserve of partly
trained personnel sufficient to bring the force to a war footing without
undue delay. Behind that reserve there must be yet another reserve of
men, at least qualified as pilots, available as raw material, capable of
being converted into war pilots in any emergency. A scheme is now on
foot co do this by the formation of Flying Clubs equipped by the Govern-
ment with low-powered aeroplanes, in which young men can learn to fly
at little cost. The Sydney and Melbourne sections of the Australian Aero


Club are endeavoring to carry out this idea, and it is hoped that early
next year there will be active flying clubs in both cities.
In the air defence of Australia the problem of personnel is serious
enough but it is simple in comparison with the problem of equipment.
This problem has two phases; firstly, the necessity for keeping equipment
up to date in time of peace, and, secondly, the replacement of casualtie.
in war.
The vital equipment of an air force is aeroplanes and engines. With
aeroplanes inferior in performance to those of the enemy, the most
gallant pilots and observers are at a disadvantage so enormous that even
the highest skill may be of no avail. Every day the design of aeroplanes
and engines is being improved, and the best fighting aircraft ot to-day
are at least thirty per cent, better in performance than the best machines
in use at the end of the war. Fighting machines capable of a top speed
of 120 miles an hour, which was the best of 19118, would be hopelessly
outclassed by the best machines of to-day, which, though more heavil>
armed, can fly at 160 miles an hour or more. And the progress in other
types has been no less marked.
In the face of this we must realise that in Australia to-day, with the
exception of two or three seaplanes of now obsolescent post war type,
our only equipment consists of what remains of the British Government s
gift of 100 aeroplanes of types in service in 1918, which are now quite
obsolete The Australian Air Force does not possess even one rea y
modern aeroplane, and our only means of acquiring any modern type
of aeroplane is to purchase it in England or elsewhere, because Australia
itself cannot yet produce one. It is bad enough that our equipment is
out of date, but our position as regards replacements is even worse.
England has an organised aircraft industry capable of producing some
of the finest aircraft in the world, but on the problem of replacements Sir
Hugh Trenchard said: “In the event of war, and a war in which this
country is seriously attacked by an air power, the great problem to be
faced is that in the first clash of the opposing forces the casualties
will be very high and the question of replacing from reserves wi
be very difficult. In fact, they will be almost insuperable, not only foi
this nation, but for any other nation. Let me explain. Supposing the
two forces consisted of—let us take the figure at something like 100
aeroplanes on each side. Within a month this figure would drop to some-
thing like 20 or even 10 aeroplanes. How are the casualties to be replaced .
For the first month you will have your reserves, both pilots and machines,
but beyond that there will be no reserves that I can see —at any rate, none
that Ire fit to take the field at once—and the two opposing armies will
go on fighting each other on the basis of 20 machines a side, of
100. From this you will see that whichever side can re-equip first both
in pilots and machines and get back to the original number of 100
machines will probably win the war.”
If war comes to Australia, where are we going to replace the enor-
mous wastage of 80 per cent, of our equipment in the first month? We
have not to-day a single factory capable of producing an aeroplane or an
engine. Our only source of supply would be Europe or America. I
would mean months of delay before a single machine could be obtained
and even then it would almost certainly have to run the gauntlet of a
blockading navy. Until Australia can build its own aircraft and engines
its position in the air is one of grave peril in the event of war. _ If war
comes to Australia it will come from a nation prepared and equipped to
wage war, and the air will play a vital part. It is useless to discuss
in detail abstract plans of aerial defence when we have not the means


to defend ourselves. Before Australia can plan its aerial defence it must
have the weapon to use, and the first great task is to forge that weapon.
The immediate problems are firstly to organise a real and complete
air force; secondly, to equip it with modern aircraft; and, thirdly, and
possibly most vital of all, to build up an industry capable of producing
aircraft and engines, which alone will make Australia independent of
external sources of supply.
All these problems can be solved, but to solve them the nation must
spend money. They can never be solved while governments allow only
niggardly sums for air defence.
Only a few months ago a new Air Force Station was established at
Richmond, and it was necessary for the aeroplanes to be flown from Point
Cook in Victoria to Richmond. The newspapers were full of the pitiful
story of most of the machines delayed and damaged along the route. Two
or three machines goth through within the first few days; the rest either
straggled in later or finished the journey ingloriously by train. We cannot
expect much more than this from our air force equipped with obsolete
machines and with inadequate financial backing.
The people of Australia must get in touch with the air, and must
realise that it brings war to towns far from the firing line, into the very
homes of non-combatants, and that without sound air defence the very
heart of the nation is laid bare to the sword of the enemy.
The White Australia Policy
(H. S. Nicholas.)
Phillip Street, Sydney,
The past six years have been crowded with events bearing on the
relations of Australia with the other members of the British Common-
wealth and with other countries. The Imperial Conference which fol-
lowed the end of the war witnessed a sharp division of opinion between
two groups of Dominions and was followed by the Washington Conference
and the substitution of a Four Power Pact for the Anglo-Japanese Alliance.
The League of Nations has issued the Mandates for the former German
possessions South of the Equator in the form desired by Australia, but
not until after repeated protests by the Japanese delegates and subject
to a reservation of their right to bring forward again their demand
for equality of treatment. The Assembly of the League has also dis-
cussed the famous protocol and approved of an amendment proposed by
Japanese representatives and intended to bring every question of inter-
national relations in one form or another within the cognisance of the
International Court.
Within the Empire the settlement of Kenya has brought about a
conflict, in which both sides claimed to be in the right, and of which
the conclusion has aroused expressions of bitter resentment from certain
of the Indian leaders. In Great Britain a Labor government has appeared
for the first time and has reversed the plans of its predecessors for the
defence of the Pacific, only to have its own plans reversed at the end of
a short reign. It has been followed by the return of a Conservative
Ministry with a huge majority, which, like other Ministries before, has
found its first serious crisis in internal divisions on the defence estimates.


What inference should be drawn from these events by those of us
who believe that 'the maintenance of the White Australia policy is °|
vital importance to the future jvell-being of Australia? It is clear that
the nations of the world are looking for peace, and that in many coun-
tries there is a widely felt desire to reduce the burden of armaments.
There are sections which believe that prolonged peace is unattainable
or perhaps undesirable, and in some countries they may be strong
enough to direct the national policy, but the general trend of popular
governments is to find a means of settling international disputes other
than by going to war. Does this furnish a reason for the Australian
people Y to believe that they can preserve their White Australia ideals
witnout sacrifices or without being prepared to defend their country i
need be? The lesson of events is fairly clear. In the first place, one
nation will be more reluctant than ever to come to the assistance of
another unless its own vital interests are directly involved. In the
second place, nations newly rising into strength and dignity are inclined
to attach more importance than ever to the attitude of people overseas
towards their exiled or emigrant fellow-countrymen The Kenya settle-
ment affected a very few people, but it was made a test case J^ y
people of India. The White Australia policy affects very few Japanese,
for it is so administered as not to interfere with merchants, students or
tourists, but it has been the subject of protests time after time, and
however carefully it has been explained, has been treated as inconsistent
with the doctrine of equality among civilised peoples. In almost every
instance the desire for peace and disarmament is subject to a reservation
of those interests which each nation considers vital to its honor or its
security. There is no interest which Australia considers more essentia
to its security than the maintenance of the White Australia policy, and
none which other nations consider nearer to their honor than the righ
of their nationals to be treated on the same footing as those of other
countries.
The White Australia policy entails two obligations on the Australian
people. The first is to be able to explain it to the peoples of other
countries and to the British people in particular. Some English writers
assure us that the interests of the people of Great Britain and of Aus-
tralia are one, as we believe they are, and that therefore Australia s
quarrel will always be Great Britain’s, which by no means follows—
others writing with apparent authority declare that the two countries
have nothing in common, and that Australia must be prepared to defend
herself The one thing clear in this divergence is that our policy must
be explained; it may or may not be accepted, but it will n »f be faken
on trust. The second obligation is that we must be prepaied to defe
ourselves so far as our resources will permit. r lhe two obligations are
from one point of view the same. We cannot expect to convince other
nations of our belief in a policy unless we are ready to. defend it and
can -ive proof of our readiness. It is no use asking other people to take
a share in our defence if we also say that it can never be in danger. In
the early days of the Australian Navy and of the Citizen h orces, readiness
for self-defence, was treated as a test of self-respect, it should be the
same to-day. To say that we will adhere to the White Australia policy
at all hazards and yet that we will submit to no sacrifices is to make our-
selves ridiculous. We issue a challenge and then refuse to put ourselves in
readiness To call ourselves a nation and yet not to fit ourselves for
defence when other nations have still their armies and navies is bad
enough, but to call ourselves a nation with a policy and yet not to have
an organised defence force is humiliating.


Australia and the Pacific
(Arthur Jose.)
87 Castlereagh Street, Sydney.
The interests of Australia in the Pacific are concerned chiefly with
defence. Her actual trade with the Pacific Islands, Bxitish and other,
amounts to very little—about one per cent, of her imports originate there,
and less than 1.4 per cent, of her exports have that destination (consider-
ing Australian-made exports only, the proportion is about .88 per cent.).
But quite 25 per cent, of her export trade and at least a third of her
import trade pass either across or along the edge of the Pacific Ocean, and
would need safeguarding in time of war; and among the non-British island;
in the western area—fewer now, no doubt, than they were—lie several ex-
cellent harbours that would provide an enemy with handy bases for an
attack on the continent. By calling them “bases” one does not necessarily
imply that such harbours need be seriously fortified, as would have been
implied in or before 1914. It is highly improbable that any Great Power
would, in view of the undertaking entered into at Washington, attempt
now to fortify any harbour within a week’s steaming from Australia; it is
doubtful whether any such harbour was so fortified before the Washington
treaties were signed. But nowadays fortification is of less importance
than we used to think it, except for the great permanent bases where
fleets can be refitted and replenished with stores. Oil fuel, and the im-
mensely wider range of aeroplane and radio work, have vastly increased
the value to combatants of any harbour that can provide a sheltered
hiding place not too far from the hostile territory. Consider, for instance,
the value of the Marshall Islands lagoons to Admiral von Spee in the early
days of the war; consider, too, the value to the “Emden” of Diego Garcia,
and to the “Wolf” of Sunday Island in the Kermadecs and “Pirate Cove”
in Dutch New Guinea. The point need not be elaborated further.
It must not be forgotten, too, that one group of Pacific islands, and
that a distant one. is of peculiar importance to the Commonwealth.
Fanning Island, the halfway house of the Pacific cable, is a vital link in
our communications with the outside world; it and its near neighbours
Washington and Christmas Islands need ample protection as soon as the
vaguest suspicion of war troubles the minds of men.
Having, then, these interests in the Pacific —a small trading interest,
a narrow but vital interest in the maintenance of communication with
America, and a vaguer but far-reaching interest in the security of our
overseas trade—what is Australia doing to conserve them? What should
she do? and what can she do? She is doing practically nothing; partly
through lack of long experience in world affairs, partly through mere slack-
ness, she is scarcely even trying to minimise her own danger. She can
do, of course, comparatively little; that is made certain by her paucity of
ponulation, her diversity of regional interests (what genuine interest has
a Western Australian in Pacific affairs?), and "her ever-growing need of
resources applicable to internal development. And, because she can do
comparativelv little, she appears to be sinking back into the attitude of
forty and fifty years ago, the lazy, unintelligent reliance on the mother
country’s good nature which so nearly left us exposed in 1914 to f he attack
of von Spec’s cruisers.
Little as it may be, she one-ht to be doing all she can. Not for her
own sake only: she is no isolated dweller in a country bungalow, but the
occupant of one wing of a great mansion. And as for depending, unin


teiligentiy or otherwise, on the good nature of the Imperial Government
and those who stand behind it, why should there be any good nature to
depend on? In other words, what, outside the interests of Australia (and
New Zealand), are the interests of the Empire in the Pacific?
Three, mainly; those concerned with trade, territory, and the main-
tenance of racial purity. This does not mean that the Empire, as a whole,
thinks so, more especially about racial purity; for a large part of the
population that in fact provides the defence of the Empire, habit in the
first place, and the importance of Eastern trade in the second, are the only
reasons that prevent them from dropping their burden. Now British trade
is very little concerned with the Pacific. As we saw during the war—as
the choice of Singapore, so remote from the Pacific, for a permanent naval
base indisputably demonstrates —Eastern trade for Britain means the China
trade, and that can be safeguarded without worrying about the Pacific at
all. Consequently the only sure base for our reliance on British help in
guarding the Pacific for us is a desire among British statesmen to pre-
serve the integrity of the Empire; and, candidly speaking, there seems
little reason why anyone else should wish to keep Australia within the
Empire if she does not show any such desire herself.
It is important to emphasize this point, that practically the sole reason
for any British interest in the Pacific is the existence in that ocean of
Australia and New Zealand. In a despatch of 31st October, 1903, the then
Secretary of State for the Colonies wrote: —
The whole of Fiji, some 88,000 square miles in the part of New
Guinea nearest to Australia, almost all the great chain of the Solomon
Islands, the Gilbert and Ellice Islands, the Cook group, and a large
number of scattered islands have been added to the Empire during
the last thirty years. Most of those acquisitions have been made in
consideration, mainly (sometimes entirely), of the interests and senti-
ments of Australia and New Zealand.
And as far back as 1875 Lord Carnarvon was writing:—
It would be impossible for a very large proportion of the tax-
payers of this country (Britain) to understand or. what principle they
should bear, while the colonies immediately concerned should be
exempted from, the burden of expenditure that may be incurred in
connection with such places.
All that is as true now as it was 22 and 50 years ago—or, at any rate,
as firmly believed by the Colonial Office and the men who control or
influence it. Britain is induced to interest herself in the Pacific by our
trade, not by hers; by our existence and our desires, which she will
assuredly neglect if we do; and by a demand for the maintenance of racial
purity here which we assert without supporting, and in which quite a large
proportion of Britons do not believe. This seems an insecure basis for
the continuance of her former good nature.
If, then, we are to hope for a spontaneous and steady support from
the rest of the Empire, we must take on ourselves some part of the burden
that is involved in the maintenance of British power in the Pacific. This
means (a) working far more strenuously at our own defences, both land
and sea; (b) making it easy, by the construction of adequate permanent
bases along our shores, for a strong British squadron to operate in
western Pacific waters; (c) taking over, as Alfred Deakin and Andrew
Fisher lone ago proposed, a share of the police work and possibly other
administrative work among the British groups: Id) setting ourselves to
vi a k° Australia—the whole continent—a great Imperial base for the
Pacific, as the mother country is for the Atlantic, self-contained as regards
all the necessaries of life and the material needs of war, and self-defended


from end to end by an adequate and effectively-trained white population.
It vail be the work of years; but every year that does not see it begun
adds two to the period of its completion.
Dominion Neutrality in a British War
(Professor A. H. CHARTERIS, LL.B., University of Sydney.)
Phillip Street, Sydney.
Fifty years ago, when the Little England Policy of the English Liberals
was at its height, there arose in Australia, as a sequel of the grant of
Responsible Government, and the withdrawal of Imperial troops from the
Colonies, a vigorous, if short-lived, campaign, led by Mr. Gavan Duffy,
of the Victorian Parliament, for Colonial Federation, combined with an
optional neutrality of the Australian Colonies in a British War. The latter
point it was proposed to secure by the grant from the Crown of treaty-
making powers in order to establish neutrality by direct agreement be-
tween the Colonies and the Great Powers in Europe. Mr. Duffy even
succeeded in securing the appointment of a Royal Commission, to examine
and report upon his proposals. The Commission, which consisted of Con-
servative and Liberal members of the Victorian Parliament, with the latter
in slight preponderance, issued its favorable report at the psychological
moment when the news of the Franco-Prussian War had reached Australia,
and when a French squadron was reported to be cruising off her coasts.
The recommendations of the Commission endorsed the proposal for optional
contractual neutrality on the part of the self-governed Colonies, with
power to them, however, to lend England a helping hand if so disposed,
and pointed out that recognition of their neutrality would not “deprive
them of the power of aid by the Mother Country in any just and necessary
line.” To a country practically defenceless as Australia then found her-
self, the proposal held out an attractive prospect of immunity from attack,
which some of the local newspapers were not slow to praise, although the
“Argus” and the “Daily Telegraph” condemned it as impracticable. The
Victorian Legislature, however, took little stock of the proposals (1). Apart
from all other objections the technical point weighed with Parliamen-
tarians. viz., that in the absence of treaty-making power (which the
Imperial Parliament was unlikely to concede for the purpose contemplated)
the Colonies could only approach the European States through the Colonial
and Foreign Offices, which would be certain to pigeon-hole the Colonial
overtures as soon as made. They might have added that a neutrality ter-
minable at Colonial option was not worth making a treaty about. In
England the agitation attracted no attention at all. Those who learned
of it dismissed it as separatist in tendency, if only because its advocacy
by Mr. Gavan Duffy, who also was suspect for his Irish associations. In
Australia itself the agitation subsided almost as quickly as it had arisen.
No other Colony moved for the idea. And the last flicker of interest in it
died when, ip the early eighties, renewed interest of the Australian
Colonies in Pacific affairs, demonstrated that without Imperial intervention
this interest could not be effectively asserted. The existence of French
penal settlements in New Caledonia, which offended Australian sentiment
as a whole, the German ambitions in New Guinea, which offended Queens-
land sentiment, the German-Spanish Dispute regarding the Caroline
Islands and the general scramble for the Islands of the Pacific—these cut
the ground away from the Neutralists and, indeed, created the demand
(1) Fuller details of the Victorian agitation will be found in the
Political Science Quarterly, 1922, p. 415. Reference may also
be made to Keith’s “Responsible Government in the Dominions,”
Vol. 111., p. 1155, where the relevant paragraphs of the Re-
commendations of the Royal Commission are quoted.


for the very opposite of their desire —an Australian Monroe Doctrine to
be promulgated via Downing Street. Moreover in the earlier eighties it
became known that in the last Anglo-Russian crisis the Vladivostock
fleet had received instructions to bombard the Australian coast towns in
the event of war.
In our own day the demand for Dominion Neutrality in a British War
has been revived by people who do not seem to have out the
implications of neutrality in reference to membership of the British
pire. The demand draws strength, not merely from the increase , of stiature
(if not of status), which the war brought upon the Dominions but also
from the abortive proposal of Germany on the outbreak of the Great
War to exclude the African Colonies of the respective belligerents from
the theatre of war by agreement. Germany offered to maintain her re-
cognition of the neutrality of the Belgian Congo as already declared in
virtue of provisions in the Final Act of the Treaty of Berlin 1885 and
to recognise and respect during the War the neutrality of all the African
possessions of the other Allied Powers on terms of reciprocity For various
reasons the proposal was unacceptable to the Allies, to the Bntisl
Empire, if only because of the powerful wireless station in'
land, by which Germany could maintain communication with The Emde
and her cruisers still at large. No sooner was it declined, than Uga
was invaded by German forces from German East Africa under that
elusive paladin von Lettow.
The quasi-independent status which the Treaty of Versailles has
secured to the self-governing Dominions and India has, no doubt been
taken into account in certain military commitments which the B i
Empire has since undertaken or proposed. It was safeguarded, for
ample, in the abortive Anglo-French Alliance which was mooted by Mr
Lloyd George on the eve of the Cannes Conference, 1922 as a guarantee
of French security against unprovoked German attack and as facilitating
a final settlement of Reparation and Inter-allied Debts Conforming
exactly with a provision in the Anglo-French Alliance of 1919, which
Mr. Hughes countersigned on behalf of Australia, but was never ratified
owing to American repudiation of a similar defensive measure, the draft
Agreement of 1922 provided in S. 4 that the Treaty obligation to assist
France should not bind any British Dominion unless and until it had been
approved by the Dominion concerned. But this very provision contem-
plated the possibility that—say—Australia might reject the alliance while
the rest of the British Empire accepted it. The result on the status of
Australia as belligerent or neutral in the event of the Empire requiring
to go to the assistance of France was, of course, !act specified there
can be no doubt that Australia’s continued membership of the Empire
would have involved her, at the very least, in participation in the state of
war with all its consequences on the civil side.
In the Irish Free State Treaty, the distinction between participation
as a Dominion in a state of war and participation of Irish forces in actu
hostilities is more clearly expressed, as was both possible and desira c
ir a constitutional agreement with none but incidental international signi-
ficance Thus in the Irish Free State (Agreement) Act, 1922 (which gives
the force of law to the so-called Irish Treaty) Art. 0 provides that until
the Irish Free State undertakes her own coastal defence by virtue of an
agreement with the British Government:—
“the defence by sea of Great Britain and Ireland shall be undertaken
“by H.M. Imperial Forces. . .
(this provision to be reviewed by a joint conference in five years time).


And by Art. 7, the Government of the Irish Free State shall afford
to H.M. Forces. . . .
“(b) In time of war or strained relations with a foreign Power such
“harbor and other facilities as the British Government may require
“for the purpose of such defence, as aforesaid.”
On the other hand, Art. 49 of the Irish Free State Constitution, which
the Imperial Parliament declared (subject to certain conditions) to be
law by virtue of the Act of that title (Session 2) provides that:—
“Save in the case of actual invasion, the Irish Free State. . . .
“shall not be committed to active participation in any way without
“the assent of the Oireachtas” (Parliament).
These provisions, it is conceived, merely declare explicitly in regard
to the Irish Free State, the powers actually possessed at present by any
of the other Self-Governing Dominions concerning the use of armed forces.
It is perfectly consistent with this view, that the much debated
guarantee clause (Art. 8) on the Straits Convention, 1923, draws a distinc-
tion between the British Empire (which is the sole contracting British
party and of which a single plenipotentiary, Sir H. Rumford, signed the
Treaty), and Great Britain as the part of the Empire immediately bound
by the guarantee. The Article provides:—
“The High Contracting Parties agree as follows. . . . should
“the freedom of the navigation of the Straits or the security of the
“demilitarised zones be imperilled by a violation of the provisions
“relating to freedom of passage or by a surprise attack or some act
“of war, the High Contracting Parties, and in any case, France, Great
“Britain, Italy and Japan, acting in conjunction, will meet such viola-
tion, attack or other act of war or threat of war, by all the means
“that the Council of the League of Nations may decide for this
“purpose.”
Presumably this means that in the event of a state of war requiring,
or resulting from, the intervention of the four specially named guarantors,
it would legally extend to the entire territory of each of these High Con-
tracting Parties although the obligation to take such hostile measures
as the situation demanded and the Council authorised would bind only the
guarantors specially named. *
This was ultimately admitted even by the Canadian Government, which
had declined to submit the Treaty to Parliament for approval, on the
ground that Canada recognised no obligation binding her in honor to co-
operate with Great Britain in this guarantee, since she had not been repre-
sented at the Lausanne Conference.
There is an important distinction, then, between (a) participation of
Dominions forces in a war in which the British Empire is a belligerent,
and (b) Dominion participation in a state of war which applies to the
Empire (e.g. through hostile attack on any part thereof). Consent of
the Dominion Parliament would normally be necessary for participation
under (a), while under (b) it would not. Effective neutrality is an
Empire war, such as is desiderated in some Dominions, could only result
from agreement with the Empire’s opponent. Effected by the will of the
Dominions alone, it would never amount to more than neutrality on suffer-
ance of the “enemy.” Thus the implications of the Smut’s Theory of
Dominion Status:—


“In future the Dominions have in principle authority and power
“not only in respect of their domestic questions, but also of their
“international and foreign relations and the questions of peace or
“war which may affect them. If a war is to affect them, they will
“have to declare it. If a peace is to be made in respect of them,
“they will have to sign it” (2)
are at least as likely (in the General’s recent phrase) to “take the heart
out of the Empire,” as the proposed Security Pact (which he dreads).
It is not possible to remain at one and the same time a member of the
British Empire and neutral while the Empire is at war. Not only does
a claim to this position destroy a Dominion's moral ground for expecting
(let alone demanding) Imperial co-operation in a Dominion war. but even
if it were practicable in war, such “neutrality on sufferance” would be
-certain to turn, if the enemy should win, into most vital participation
on the Empire’s misfortunes.
If anything more is needed to bring home to the plain citizen the
elementary fact that legally there is no escape from Dominion participa-
tion in a state of war, let him be reminded that from the moment of the
outbreak any merchantman registered in a Dominion and found at sea
would be liable to capture and condemnation as an enemy vessel at the
hands of an enemy possessing a navy. No doubt the enemy might waive
the right of capture or, for lack of opportunity, be unable to enforce it,
but neither of these alleviations depend on the will of the Dominion.
Cadet Training
(Dr. C. J. Prescott.)
Newington College, Stanmore.
I have no sympathy with the idea that the training >f boys as cadets
tends to what men call militarism. Of course, it does not imply that there
is at least a remote possibility that the boy, when grown to manhood,
may be required to serve as a Soldier; but he must be singularly lacking
in intelligence and commonplace information if he does not see that that
may be demanded of him, anyhow. If he is an English boy, he knows
that just across the Channel there are other nations with which his
country has fought in the past; and if he is an Australian he has sense
enough to know that even in the island continent he is within striking
distance of swarming Asiatic nations. But little of this enters the head
of the average cadet.
If everything that may encourage a war-like spirit must be cut
out of his life, it is surprising how much will go. British history ana
every other kind of history is full of the records of wars and battles:
if it has to be admitted that these have taken a disproportionate place
in the story, it is yet impossible to write history without reference to them.
We cannot read our nation's literature and its glorious poetry without
(-) Speech of 3rd December, 1920, quoted in Round Table, March,
1921, 442.


hearing its battle music; the Bible itself is a record of conflict, of stress
and storm, and some of its finest psalms are war poetry. Whatever
heights of happy pacifism humanity may reach in years to come, it
cannot forget the pathway that leads to them, and he would be a strange
boy that could read the old story without some quickening of the pulse
and some stimulating emotion.
Nor must it be forgotten that contest and strife are the very essence
of a boy’s games. No doubt, it would be possible to plan out some sort
of physical training, scientifically designed to develop in him every
organ and every muscle of the body. But it would be the tamest and
most distasteful training in the world. Under the stimulus and excite-
ment of his games, the normal British boy will put out three times, five
times as much zest and energy as he would if he went through some
monotonous round of exercises. Quiet tennis, the old man’s bowls, rough
football have this in common, that they all involve rivalry and contention.
Rob them of that spice and much of their attractiveness is gone. Many
a soldier moving to battle has been reminded of the matches he played
as a schoolboy, and found that these have been an unexpected training
for the stern game of war. But very few schoolboys playing football
are ever led to think that if it is football to-day it may be war to-morrow.
Boxing is a wholesome game for boys. It calls for numerous activities
of the body. It is strenuous, it demands patient endurance, as well as bold
attack, and it puts a fine restraint upon the temper; yet in its essence
it is a veiled form of fighting. Scouting has a fascination for thousands
of boys, and girls have responded to the call for girl guides, and this is
a recreation suggested by warfare. Rifle-shooting, apart from any use
in warfare, is an excellent sport, and attracts its votaries in large num-
bers. If everything that savours of war and conflict must be cut out of
boys’ lives, it is surprising to see how far logic will carry us.
Yet the sum total of the influences of all these things in encouraging
a military spirit is almost negligible. If, indeed, they are deliberately-
intended to awaken such a spirit, and are directly used for such an end,
then they may become military stimulants. But with our national
temper there is no real danger of that.
In favour of cadet training the physical gains naturally come first.
With our schools constituted as they are, and setting store upon the
physique of their boys and girls, provision is made for a large number
of them. But many are not thus reached, and cadet training makes
compulsory for all what otherwise would be the privilege of a few. At
the early stages this physical training is naturally by the most prominent
feature, and to gather into its sweep all the boys of the land is to give
the opportunity for healthy physique to hundreds who otherwise would
miss it. A Commonwealth obligation becomes a Commonwealth bene-
diction. Untold benefits result from the medical inspection given to all
children in the elementary schools. Cadet training carries the benefit
further still, for it provides the means by which the defects noticed may
be remedied. A wise nation wishes to consist of able-bodied men and
healthy women; and the way to secure that is to deal with the children
first and then the growing boys. No doubt thousands of children grow-
up, especially in the country, in conditions favourable to robust health.
Yet even there some are missed, and for town children the oppor-
tunities are by no means so great Is it not obviously a national gain
to have a system that gives guarantees that none shall lose the privilege
of it, except those that cannot profit by it? If nothing resulted from
cadet training but the physical benefits, it would be a national boon
gained at trifling expense.


The second great advantage is the training in team wo.k and mutual
social help. Apart from its physical benefits, drill is the method by
which numbers are brought to act as a unity, liere again school life
contributes its lessons. A football team, for example, comes to under-
stand that any one player is useless by himself. Everything depends upon
co-operation. * Fifteen separate units could kick and carry the ball a
long way, but welded imo compact unity they would carry everything
before them were they not met by a similarly organised unity opposed
to them. So a few brave firemen could do much to put out a fire, but
we should never read of success in confining city fires to one block of
buildings were it not that all the firemen know how to play up to one
another and act as a compact crew. It is the same with the police. A
single stalwart officer may be a match for a pair of ruffians and maj
restore some sort of order in a small mob, but it is only drilled and
trained bodies of police that are able to control large crowds.
Common drill, including marching, is one of the earliest lessons of
this kind of a boy‘s life. Its very essence is order, discipline, obedience to
the word of command and respect for authority. And there is so little
of this in many young lives, and so much ox self-will, lack of restraint,
egotistic self-assertion, defiance of authority, that a system striking at the
root of these evils is a national gain. This is specially needed in a society
constituted like that of Australia. The assertion of liberty, laudable m
itself, can be carried, and is carried, among us, to excess. It is a whole-
some thing that young Australia should learn that liberty has its necessary
limitations.
The third gain is that it is a provision for the defence of the land. A
military spirit, domineering, truculent, overweening, bent on aggrandisemen
and self-assertion is a very different thing from the calm determination
to be prepared to defend the nation’s land and liberties, homes and families
against an enemy from without. Such preparation is of the nature of an
insurance against risks. Insuring against accident does not cause acci-
dents; insuring against fire does not, except in a few unprincipled cases,
cause fires; insuring against shipwreck does not cause wrecks Is it not
equally true that insurance against attacks on life and liberty does not
cause such attacks? Why are our ferry boats provided with lifebelts, our
tall buildings with fire escapes, our big vessels with bulkheads . ma\
never be of service, but prudence ordains that they shall be provided.
Would to heaven we could be sure we had no risks to run! But at
present the life of the nations is not resting on so stable a foundation that
we can count upon it as permanent. Voices come to us from many quarters,
warning that there are rocks ahead. We all hope we may pass them
saf3ly. But to leave the defence of our country to chance is of all unwise
things the most unwise. And if our boys have to learn that, in the last
resort, the protection of their country must come from its men, it is only
one way of reminding them that the price of liberty is unceasing vigilance.
Military Training Camps
(By the Bishop of Goulburn, Rt. Rev. Dr. Radford, Chaplain
14th Infantry Brigade, C.M.F.)
Goulburn.
This paper is intended to vindicate the value of military training
camps against the criticism and suspicion with which they are regarded
m various quarters. It is a transcript from the expenence of chaplaincy
service in many camps during the last ten years, and it is written frankly
for the purpose of steadying and stiffening public opinion in defence of
Compulsory Military Training.


There is a great deal of talk in Australia at the present time against
"militarism.” What is militarism ? Militarism may be defined as a policy
and as a temper. As a policy militarism means what the world saw in
Prussianism, a nation organised for war, and a constitution in which the
soldier outweighs the citizen. As a temper militarism means exalting
the glory of war and forgetting its agony,—believing in the might of big
battalions rather than in the strength of national character. Militarism as
a policy is a bogey as far as Australia and the Empire are concerned. The
key-note of what military system we have is “defence, not defiance,” to
quote the motto of the old English volunteer forces. And there is nothing-
in our military system that is inconsistent with a Christian belief in
the duty of peace and with a whole-hearted advocacy of the League of
Nations. It is a perfectly consistent position to work haH for the estab-
lishment of a League of Nations for the prevention of war, and at the
same time to provide for the defence of your country if the League should
fail to prevent war. The League of Nations, in spite of a record of
achievements far beyond what its critics realise, is still on its trial. It
is working for the reduction of armaments with a view to reducing expen-
diture on non-productive activities, and to reducing the perils of presump-
tion and provocation, which are fostered by the existence of great arma-
ments. But it would be not faith, but folly, to make no provision for
national defence. The League may prevent great wars, as it has already
prevented local wars, between European nations. But it is doubtful
whether it could prevent a great racial war between East and West.
“Put your faith in God, and keep your powder dry,” ran the old proverb.
Work for the establishment of Christian idealism among nations, but be
prepared meanwhile for the peril that may gather and break before the
new order is established. And this young nation of Australia, with its
rich heritage of racial and imperial tradition, and its rich promise of
national development and destiny, is deliberately committed, by the policy
of its governments and the approval of the people, to the principle of
compulsory training for defence. It is the democratic way. The pro-
tection of all citizens is the responsibility of all citizens. Universal
safety demands universal service.
The purpose of our annual training camps is to train each quota of
young Australian manhood in turn to a basic standard of soldierly know-
ledge and ability, and so to provide the nucleus of a citizen army in time
of need. There is nothing militaristic in such a system. Neither is there
in the war-trained officers who are carrying on, or rather building up,
this system. Any padre who has heard and observed them in mess or
with their men is impressed by their dual character and outlook. There
is, of course, a permanent staff of whole-time soldiers, as a guarantee of
continuity of tradition and as a repository of experience. But the over-
whelming majority of the officers who handle the young troops are civi-
lians who served as soldiers in the day of national peril, and after a
war-service unsurpassed by professional soldiers returned to civilian life
and work. They would serve as soldiers again if need arose, but they
hate war. They are possessed by a stern conviction of the necessity of
training in view of the possibility of war, but they are honestly con-
vinced also of the value of that very training for all purposes of all-
round manhood in civil life. There is a sectional group-mind at work
in Australian politics which is busy undermining the basis of national
defence with a blind prejudice against anything that trains boys and
men to obey authority. But any padre’s experience in camp proves in
practice, what he has alwavs believed in principle, that “obedience is the
very seal of a gentleman.” It is incredible that the strict, and prompt
obedience demanded by officers, and followed often immediately by the
THE BOGEY OL MILITARISM.


simplest human relationship of older and younger brother or father and
son, could possibly weaken the true manly independence of free and equal
citizens. Conversely, the lads reveal frankly enough that they are proud
of their officers as men who suffered and achieved great things in the
war, but they show no sign of the virus of war spirit, or of an incipient
servility. They show instead unmistakable signs that camp discipline is
helping them to find themselves as men.
None the less we shall do well to analyse and answer the warning
against militarism or rather the fear of militarism which is being preached
in various quarters. First, there is the outcry of certain Labor platforms
against compulsory military training. This is amazing. The Labor Party
before the war was proud of its share in instituting compulsory military
training. What has happened to turn Labor against its own principle of
universal responsibility for the defence of country and Commonwealth ?
Can it be that the men who claim to represent Labor are really opposing
military training because they feel that it is likely to teach lads the lesson
of discipline and obedience and unity, and so to safeguard them against
the temptation of revolution and anarchy? Then there are the honest
but misguided pacificists who think that a Christian must never shoulder
a rifle even in a righteous cause. These good people are past all argu-
ment, but they are as negligible as they are innocent. But there are
other citizens who recognise reluctantly (and surely we are all reluctant
to recognise) the possible necessity of fighting in defence of Australia
and all that Australia stands for, but are anxious about the moral influence
of camp life upon their boys. They may be afraid of the militarist temper,
but chiefly they are afraid of the bad tone and habits that their boys may
pick up in association with other boys from bad homes and evil environ-
ments.
THE VALUE OF CAMP TRAINING.
Now those of us who have the duty and privilege of serving as chap-
lains to the forces are convinced that such anxious parents would lose
their anxiety if they could themselves see what the camp life was like.
In the first place, they would find company officers and camp staff all of
one mind on one point, and that is that the good boy is not dragged down
by the bad, but himself lifts the tone of the hut. There is no place where
a manly lad who keeps his face and his tongue clean exerts a stronger
influence than in a camp hut. “You can back the good home influence
every time,” said a sergeant-major. A good lad may have an unpleasant
time now and again, but he comes out all the better and stronger, and he
does more good than he knows. The great majority of boys are attracted
much more by decent comrades than by the other sort.
Then again, even decent and good lads have lessons to learn which
a military camp teaches in a supreme degree. There is a marked contrast
between the ragged slouchy walk of the first day in camp and the smart
steady swing of the same company on the last parade of the week. Those
boys were once a crowd shuffling along anyhow; now they are a company
moving like one man, and every lad has found himself in losing himself
in the company. There is a moral to be heard even in the cries of the
spectators at the boxing tournament; “Go it, B Company.” The lad who
was boxing had ceased to be himself; for the moment he was B Company.
Each lad that tried at all was trying not for himself, but for his company.
The main impression that would be left on the mind of a visitor would
be the all-roundness of the week’s experience. Here is an average day’s
time-table: Reveille at 6, wash and dress, coffee, first parade at 7, chiefly
physical exercise, breakfast at 8, battalion parade at 9, under the vigilant
eyes of the camp commandant, who missed nothing that required criticism


or commendation; then company and platoon drill, broken by “smokos”
and varied by physical exercises, sometimes in the form of games; then
back with the band into camp for dinner at 1; parade and drill again
from 2 to 4.30 as in the morning; tea at 5; visitors permitted and leave
given; canteen open and Y.M.C.A. hut in full blast; free movies, care-
fully chosen, at the Y.M.C.A. from 7 to 9 or later; news of the day,
romance, comedy; officers enjoying themselves as well as the lads. In
the 1921 camps the, troops were all paraded in mass at a certain hour
during the morning or afternoon for a talk about camp discipline from
a padre or a medical officer. At one of these parade talks the camp M.O.
drove home five nails in a row—filth, flies, fingers," food, fever—the
sequence told its own tale. At another a distinguished A.I.F. medical
officer told a wonderful story of the gradual victory over dirt and
disease in an army, with a plain moral for lads at home. Thursday night
was set apart for a boxing tournament; Friday afternoon for a splendidly
organised programme of athletic sports; Saturday night for a concert.
The fact is that the tx-aining of the defence forces of the Commonwealth
is being regarded and conducted more and more as a continuation school
for the lads of Australia. When I was asked to speak to the whole body
of these young troops, I took the line that their military training was
intended not merely to make them good soldiers if ever they had to do a
soldier’s work, but to teach them lessons which would make them better
men and citizens for all purposes of life and work—attention, obedience,
comradeship and loyalty to the good name of the big thing of which they
were members—a regiment, a union, a society, a nation. It was in the
course of a talk with senior officers after this parade that I saw how
broad and sound was the view that they took of their camp work, viz.,
that a good soldier is a better man all round, and that this work was
putting good stuff into the fabric of Australian citizenship. As for the
view the lads took, I believe a vote of all ranks would have resulted in a
solid majority for another week in camp. One lad on sick pai'ade on the
last day but one asked me, “Please, sir, can’t you get us another week?”
and the rest of the squad echoed his appeal. They knew their officers
had been trying to do them good, and they knew they had had a good
time.
CHAPLAINS IN CAMP.
Public opinion is scai’cely alive yet to the increasingly generous re-
cognition which- is given to religion in our defence system. Even as
recently as 1918 there was something grudgingly reluctant in the recep-
tion given to chaplains by some camp commandants. They were re-
garded as superfluous, except for church parades, and had to prove by
sheer hard work that they- were worth their field allowance. But my
experience in four camps since then has been that commanding officers
are not merely willing, but eager, to make the most of the chaplaincies
provided by the defence system. It might perhaps be argued that the
religious needs of 19-year-olds in camp could be met by giving facilities
for services to be conducted by visiting clergy on Sunday. But wisely
and happily the defence system is working on the principle of identifying
ministers of Churches with the whole plan of training. Brigade staff and
regimental staff alike give facilities for all sorts of service and influence
day by day. The padre is as welcome in the officers’ mess as in the men’s
lines. There is only one further step that I think should be taken, and that
'"s to cai’ry out moi’e fully the principle of attaching chaplains permanently
to particular brigades. Such permanent attachment would enable a padre
to establish closer personal association with the staff and txmditions of a
brigade, and would make for the continuity, and therefore the greater
effectiveness, of his work and influence. I speak from experience, as I
have been attached for nine years to one brigade, the old 11th. now
the 14th.


Camp means a gloriously busy time for a chaplain who is prepared
to put in seven days in and out among some 2,000 young troops from sick
parade at 7 to “lights out” at 10, in the lines or in field hospital, on the
road or at the range. In one camp, for example, there were three of us,
Anglican, Presbyterian and Congregationalist; and “Mac” at the Y.M.C.A.
was a padre of all sorts in disguise. We did our best to play the game
by each other and by the boys. We met early each morning to pray to-
gether for the boys, their homes, the Camp and the Commonwealth. On
Sunday I had an early Communion at seven. At ten the other padres had
their church parade at the Y.M.C.A., while the Anglican church parade
was in the open with the band. At night the Y.M.C.A. gave us a sacred
picture film, “The Star of Bethlehem,” and the Presbyterian padre and
I took turns to explain the different parts of the film. The Commandant
gave the chaplains every facility for their work, and spoke very strongly
of the value set by the military authorities upon the chaplains’ presence
in camp, especially chaplains of senior standing in their own Church.
“Last week we had the headmaster of a great public school, and this week
we have a bishop. We take it to mean that the Churches recognise the
importance of this camp training, and we are grateful.” Two Generals
who visited the Camp spoke to the same effect, one of them adding, “We
want this camp work lifted to the highest level and recognised as a big
thing for Australia.”
Chemical (Gas) Warfare
Gerald R. Campbell
(Moss Vale )
It is interesting - to note that “supply of Gas Masks for units of I* ield
Army” is one of the items mentioned in the recent Budget speech of the
Federal Treasurer for which provision is made in the Defence Estimates.
Evidently the Washington Conference Treaty (No. 4), which was intended
to abolish Poison Gas warfare as between the Signatories to it, is not
considered sufficiently effective. This Treaty has been ratified by Great
Britain, U.S.A., Italy and Japan, but not by the other. Signatory, France;
it therefore remains ineffective, as it does not take effect until all the
Signatories have ratified it. Great Britain has passed an Act (12 and 13,
Geo V.), and Proclamation carrying the submarine sections of this Treaty
into effect as from 15th Oct., 1923, but if there is no general ratification of it,
as appears to be the case, then Great Britain can repeal her Act or
Proclamation, so far as it affects it, at any time she chooses.
In this connection the attention of the reader is called to a recently
published book, “Callinicus,” a Defence of Chemical Warfare, by T. B. S.
Haldane, a distinguished Bio-Chemist of Cambridge University. He main-
tains that the use of Gases can be made the least cruel and most effective
of all methods of fighting, and as he speaks from personal experience in the
Great War of the different methods, his conclusions deserve the fullest
consideration. Whether Gas warfare will be as effective in the sunshine
and dry climate, and sandy soils of Australia as in the heavier, moister,
and duller atmospheres and clayey soil of France and Flanders, needs
investigation—also what facilities we have in our chemical factories for
producing gas for use in war-time.


Comparative Statement.
The Citizen Military Force* of the three Dominions of the Southern Hemisphere ere ait
based on Compulsory Peace Training, voluntary enlistment, however, being permitted in
varying dag r . * indicated below, and compare with one another in this way:—
Dominion.
Population (1925)
! Numbers of Citizem
Troops (not including Peace Training (1626).
Senior Cadets in ; (Not including Senior Cadet Training.)
Training).
Australia—
5,910,000
3 Quotas of —
18/19 years of age
19/20 years of age
20/21 years of age 12 days (of which 8 in Camp) for each
Compulsory x raining quota in each of S Consecutive years.
in Populous At eat- Total |< days'
•»Voluntary enlisted * The total provided for in the Defence
personnel, ma> ly m is 112 days for infantry, etc., more
country districts. 1 Tor Artillery, etc., spread over 7 years.
Total; About 40,000
under Comp. Train-:
ing and about 6,r»oe:
voluntary enlisted.
Union of South
Africa.
1,630,00#
(approx.)
4 Quotas of—• Normal Training Period 4 yean
17/18 years of age) (l) Normal initial Training (usually in
18/19 years of age first 12 months) ;—
19/20 years of age) 50 Says continuous training
20/21 years of age (not exceeding).
Total: j (2) Two subsequent continuous trainings:
25,000 (approx.) 30 days in all (not exceeding),
allowing for wastage.) (#) Non-Contimious training may also bo
♦Every male is liable required, up to 26 days in all.
to Peace Training N.B.—The initial training is shortened
between 21 and 25;I by 10 days in the case of those who have
but he may enlist, received Senior Cadet Training and show
voluntarily between satisfactory efficiency.
17/18 and 20/21 year-
and perform his
Training during the
following 4 years.
If the authorised
strength is not ob-
tained in this way.
(he deficiency is made)
up by means of n
Compulsory ballot of
those of 21 years who
have not served —the
balance not required
being subject to »
Training in a Rifle
Association.
New Zealand—
1 860.000 * Quotas of—
(including MaorU) 18/19 year* of age
19/20 years of age
20/21 years of nge
Compulsory Training.
Total:
■j 16,000 (approx.)
For each quota in each of 8
consecutive years.
6 days Continuous Camp.
$ Half-day Parades.
12 Drills of 1%-hr. each.
Approx. 86 days.
Military Training in the Dominions
The training prescribed in South Africa is much the best of the three for turning out
n well trained soldier, though the classing of the 17/18th-year-010 youth there ns a Soldier,
and not as a Senior Cadet (which is tho practice in Australia and N.Z.) is a serious
defect. The South African periods of training approximate fairly closely to those put
forward here in 1920 by Mr. W. M. Hughes, when Prime Minister, which the Defence
League strongly supports. . ... .. „
It must not be forgotten That in the last war months elapsed before 25,000 Australian
troops were sufficiently trained to go into action against Turkish trnops-and time to do
this was only granted us because the Armies and Navies of the Empire and its Allies were
holding the field outside Australia whilst we got ready. In the next War we cannot count
upon this advantage—the fighting may be on our own shores at the outset--and so we need
to have our army trained —and a much larger one than 25,000 -before '• \r breaks out,
fit to oppose an early hostile attack here by highly trained euemy troops, and this can t
be done in twelve day# a year for three years'
GERALD R. CAMPBELL Moss Vale.


The Australian
National Defence League
N.S.W. DIVISION.
DENMAN CHAMBERS, No. 4 FIRST FLOOR,
PHILLIP STREET, SYDNEY.
A Non-Party Association, the object of which is
to take such measures as may be necessary to secure —
(a) Universal compulsory training (Military or
Naval) of the boyhood and manhood of
Australia for purposes of national defence,
the military training to be on the lines of
the Swiss system and the naval training
on the lines of the British Royal Naval
Reserve, modified to suit local circumstances.
(b) An adequate and efficient system of
national defence.
Support the Australian National Defence League
by becoming a Member.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES.
Life Membership £lO 10 0
Life Membership (Lady) 5 5 0
Ordinary Membership (Annual) 1 1 0
Associate Membership (Annual) 0 5 0
Associate (Annual) not less than 0 I 0
Sir, —
Please enrol me as a iMemher of the Australian Defence League
(N.S.W. Division), for which I enclose cheque or postal note or
stamps value £ s d
Name
Address
To the Hon. Treasurers, A.N, Defence League,
No. 4. First Floor, Denman Chambers,
Phillip Street, Sydney.
