

Australian Newsprint Mills Ltd.
Boyer, Tasmania.


AUSTRALIAN NEWSPRINT MILLS LIMITED
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
H. D. Giddy, Chairman
S. L. Kessell, Managing Director
Sir Lloyd Dumas
R. A. G. Henderson
E. J. K. Thompson
Sir John Butters
W. Dunstan
REGISTERED OFFICE:
Boyer, Tasmania.
Mill Secretary: E. A. Smith.
COMPANY OFFICE:
51 Queen Street, Melbourne.
Secretary: G. B. Me Indoe.
EXECUTIVE AND ADMINISTRATIVE STAFF 1953
L R. Benjamin, General Superintendent
R. W. Henry, Deputy General Superintendent
C. K. Pengilly, Chief Engineer
OPERATING:
E. W. G. Cooper, Paper Mill Supt.
W. D. Read, Technical Control Supt.
E. J. Bugg, Groundwood Mill Supt.
R. Moon, Woodmill Superintendent
J. H. Alder, Asst. Paper Mill Supt.
H. V. Bromfield, Paper Mill Night Supt.
FOREST b LOGGING (MAYDENA):
D. T. Kitchener, Logging Supt.
J. R. Wylie, Deputy Logging Supt.
C. Harwood, Plant Engineer
RESEARCH:
J. L. Somerville, Chief Chemist
F. R. Neale, Senior Research Chemist
PURCHASING b STORES:
E. H. Olney, Purchasing b Stores Supt.
ENGINEERING:
G. L. Armitage, Electrical Engineer
G. A. Hughes, Project Engineer
L. W. Hepper, Field Engineer
R. A. Howard, Mechanical Engineer
D. J. Scoles, Chief Draughtsman
W. J. Orr, Asst. Electrical Engineer
A. Cox, Asst. Mechanical Engineer
PERSONNEL:
C. C. Murdoch, Personnel Supt.
D. S. McEachern, Personnel Officer
ACCOUNTING:
A. L. Farrell, Mill Accountant
SHIPPING (HOBART):
F. W. Bennett, Shipping Officer


Newsprint from
Eucalypts
This brochure tells in brief form the story of the
establishment and development of the newsprint
industry at Boyer in Tasmania.
Boyer is of special interest in that it is the only
newsprint mill operating in the Southern Hemisphere,
and is the first mill in the world established to make
newsprint from hardwood. The principal raw material
is eucalypt timber (E. regnans, E. gigantea, E. obliqua)
drawn from the forests of the watershed of the Upper
Derwent River and its tributaries.
The story of growth at Boyer is one of faith and
hard work. It represents a major Australian achieve-
ment in technical research and productive skill. Today,
over 900 men are employed, and the Australian News-
print Mills Limited represents a capital investment
approaching £6,000,000.
The first newsprint was produced at Boyer in
February, 1941, but it was more than 20 years before
that notable occasion that a start was made with
experiments in the manufacture of newsprint from
eucalypt timber.
Experimental work was begun in Perth, Western
Australia, in 1919, under the aegis of the Commonwealth
Institution of Science and Industry. Some years later,
investigations were transferred to Tasmania, and funds
were supplied for a continuation of the work by news-
paper companies.
A




Transporting logs over company
road from the Florentine Valley
to the rail depot at Moydena,
How Boyer Industry Developed
The Herald and Weekly Times Limited of Melbourne took a leading part in
the investigations in Southern Tasmania and in 1935 obtained long term rights
from the Tasmanian Government over substantial tracts of mountain forest in the
catchment of the Upper Derwent, which were beyond the reach of the sawmilling
industry. John Fairfax & Sons Pty. Ltd., proprietors of the Sydney “Morning
Herald,” had during these early years been interested in paper investigations and
forest areas in the north of Tasmania and later joined with the Melbourne
“Herald” as equal partners in developing the newsprint industry at Boyer.
IN 1938, WHEN AUSTRALIAN NEWSPRINT MILLS PTY. LTD.
WAS INCORPORATED, THE ORIGINAL SHAREHOLDERS WERE
HERALD & WEEKLY TIMES LTD. (MELBOURNE), JOHN FAIRFAX
& SONS PTY. LTD. (SYDNEY), ASSOCIATED NEWSPAPERS LTD.
(SYDNEY), ADVERTISER NEWSPAPERS LTD. (ADELAIDE), NEWS
LTD. (ADELAIDE), QUEENSLAND NEWSPAPERS PTY. LTD. (BRIS-
BANE), DAVIES BROS. LTD. (HOBART), WEST AUSTRALIAN NEWS-
PAPERS LTD. (PERTH), AND A NUMBER OF OTHER PUBLISHING
COMPANIES WITH SMALLER SHAREHOLDINGS WHICH THEY AC-
QUIRED FOLLOWING THE RECONSTRUCTION OF THE EARLIER
EXPLORATORY PAPER MAKING VENTURES IN THE NORTH OF
THE ISLAND.
The Tasmanian Government also provided £250,000 of preference capital in
1940 to make up the initial capital needed to get the industry started. Later the
Argus & Australasian Ltd. (Melbourne) and Consolidated Press Ltd. (Sydney)
joined in the ownership of the Company.
In 1947 the Company was converted to a public company, preference capital
owned by the Tasmanian Government was paid off, and £1,000,000 of preference
shares were taken up by public subscription.
Under the Company’s constitution all ordinary shares must be held by news-
paper publishers who are, in fact, the consumers of the whole of the Company’s
production. The ordinary capital which has been provided by Australian news-
paper companies now totals £1,846,191.
Among those who have played a leading part in the development
of the industry are the late Sir Keith Murdoch, who was Chairman of the Company
from 1939 to 1950; Mr. H. D. Giddy, an original Director, who took over the Chair-
manship when Sir Keith Murdoch resigned; Mr. Warwick Fairfax, and Sir Lloyd
Dumas, who are still actively associated with the Company.
Another pioneer of the industry, who has been with the Company as General
Superintendent since its inception, is Mr. L. R. Benjamin. Starting work on the
early investigations in Perth in 1919, Mr. Benjamin was actively engaged in
technical aspects of the experiments up to the time the mill began production at
Boyer. Mr, J. L. Somerville, who is now Chief Chemist at Boyer, was associated
with Mr. Benjamin in his early work.
Mr. S. L. Kessell joined the Company as Managing Director in 1946 and has
guided the large expansion programme which has been carried out since then, in
the course of which the capacity of Boyer mill has been increased two and a half
times, the number of houses erected by the Company for employees has been quad-
rupled, new forest headquarters with store and
workshop facilities have been established, and an
extensive road system has been developed through
difficult mountain country to bring in heavy logs
from forest that was previously inaccessible.


Statistical Information
Erection of the Boyer mill was commenced in 1938. Production started in
the dark days of the war in 1941, and output of the mill played an important part
in maintaining newsprint supplies to Australian publishers throughout the war
years.
Originally planned as a two machine mill, the first plant installed included
only one paper machine with a capacity of 30,000 tons of newsprint a year. Further
expansion was delayed by the war, and it was not until the end of 1946 that the
Company was able to proceed with its plans for extensions, which were completed
in 1951 and increased the potential capacity of the plant to 80,000 tons of newsprint
a year.
Severe power restrictions permitted the operation of only one paper machine
for more than two years, and it is only since October, 1953, that the full plant has
been in operation.
APPROXIMATE WEEKLY FIGURES ARE:—
Logs railed to Boyer 2,750 tons
Chemical Pulp used 260 tons
Coal Consumed 850 tons
Filtered Water used 37,000,000 gallons
Electrical Energy required 25,000 h.p.
Men employed Boyer 760
„ „ Maydena 160
Newsprint produced 1,400 tons
Western half of mill showing administrative block (foreground), store, bleachery
and steam plant.


The following figures indicate the scope of the industry and the money in-
vested in it:
FIXED ASSETS:
Boyer Mill £4,176,677
Logging Branch 769,105
Store and Wharf, Hobart 86,527
HOUSING:
New Norfolk and Boyer 483,631
Maydena 185,066
STOCKS AND OTHER LIQUID ASSETS 1,433,987
£7,134,993
MAJOR OUTGOINGS ON ANNUAL BASIS:
Salaries and Wages £860,000
Materials, Stores and Services 2,310,000
State Power and Transport Charges 270,000
Tasmanian Coal Purchases 212,000
Federal, State, Municipal Taxes exceeding 100,000
Approximately half of the Company’s income is distributed in Southern Tasmania,
Interior of Engineering shop.


How Newsprint is Made
Early Chinese paper makers felted together easily macerated vegetable fibres
in small hand moulds. At Boyer huge hardwood logs go through many processes
before they are reduced to pulp and converted into paper on two huge machines
which produce continuous sheets of paper, 230 inches and 170 inches wide respec-
tively, at speeds well over 1,000 feet per minute. The Walmsley machine, which
commenced production in 1941, makes more than 30,000 tons of paper a year, and
the new Dominion machine, the erection of which was completed in 1951, is pro-
ducing, after a few months’ operation, at the rate of over 40,000 tons a year.
Among the services necessary for this output are large supplies of electrical
power, steam and water.
The Hydro Electric Commission provides 25,000 horse-power to a sub-station
situated at the mill site.
The boiler plant has a capacity of 120,000 lbs. of steam per hour at 200 lbs. per
square inch pressure, and delivers an average of about 90,000 lbs. per hour, of which
the major portion is used to dry the paper passing through the two paper machines.
It burns 850 tons of Tasmanian coal each week in addition to sawdust and refuse
from the wood mill.
6,500,000 gallons of water a day are pumped from the River Derwent above
tidal influence, through 4 miles of pipeline, to sedimentation basins and pressure
filters before being distributed through the mill. In addition, up to 3,000,000
gallons per day of unfiltered water, drawn from the River at the mill site, are used
for cooling, washing down, and carrying away of boiler ash.
Large buildings house other important ancillary services, including engineer-
ing workshops, wood working and pipe fitting shops, garages, stores, etc.
Filtration plant and Hydro-Electric Commission sub-station.


Log carriage and band saw.
WOOD MILL.
Logs varying from 1 ft. 6 ins to 9ft. diameter, and up to 40 ft. long, are de-
livered from Maydena to Boyer by the Tasmanian Government Railways on
Company-owned logging waggons.
Logs greater than 6 ft. diameter are first quartered by a vertical frame saw.
Logs from 3 ft. to 6 ft. diameter are passed direct to the Band Mill, whilst
logs less than 3 ft. go to the Splitter Mill.
The Band Mill is designed for 20 ft. logs weighing up to 20 tons. These logs,
after first being de-barked, are landed by crane into a log haul, pushed out onto a
sloping deck, and then await their turn to be manipulated onto the log carriage by
means of a massive Symonson loader and turner. The log carriage is all-electric
with holding dogs actuated by air pressure.
Seven inch planks or flitches are cut off at each pass through the 60 ft. x 16 in.
band saw, and the flitches are then lowered on to driven rollers which convey them
to the multiple saw edger. This machine is equipped with seven 36 inch circular
saws set 7 inches apart which cut the flitches to cants. The cants then pass on to
conveyers and move at right angles from the edger through slasher saws which
cut the cants into 4 ft. billets.
The billets pass onto speed-up rolls to single them out in line ahead and then
to an automatic loading station where they drop into small trucks and are bundled
into lots of about 50 billets by means of a single wire rope sling which is tightened
around the centre of each bundle. These bundles are then conveyed to the Grinder
Room or to a storage area which can hold over 3,000 of them—sufficient to run the
mill for over ten days.
Billets rejected because of rot or bad colour are conveyed to a recovery section
where anything useful is sent back to process, and the remainder is passed through
a hog where it is converted into chips. These chips, together with sawdust from
the various saws in the mill, are conveyed to the Steam Plant to be burnt as fuel.
Logs less than 3 ft. in diameter are docked to 4 ft. lengths by a 96 inch swing-
ing cut-off saw and are then reduced to billets by a steam operated horizontal axe
splitter.


Billet storage gantry between woodmill and grinder room.
GROUNDWOOD MILL.
It is in the manufacture of groundwood that we find the major differences
between overseas and local practice.
1. Eucalypt wood contains acids, the principal one being tannic, which reacts
with iron to give the familiar blue-black iron tannate and with copper to pro-
duce a reddish compound. All metallic parts of equipment in contact with
eucalypt pulp must therefore be stainless steel.
2. The fibre length of eucalypt is much shorter than overseas softwoods and re-
sultant groundwood is therefore not nearly as strong. Also, the quantity of
fines, i.e., the material which will pass through a screen having 200 meshes to
the inch, averages 52% compared with 10%-15% with softwoods.
3. The colour of eucalypt woods varies from light pink to dark brown and special
steps are necessary to bring it up to a satisfactory brightness for newsprint
production.
Six two-pocket Great Northern grinders are installed, each producing 14 tons
of pulp per day, and seven Tidmarsh Ring grinders, each producing 22 tons of
pulp per day. The Great Northern grinders are arranged in pairs, each pair driven
by a 3,600 h.p. motor, while each Ring grinder is driven by a 2,500 h.p. motor.
Artificial pulpstones 5 ft. in diameter and 4 ft. 6 ins. wide are installed in all
grinders.
The pulp from the grinders is treated with zinc hydro suphite to brighten it.
The pulp then passes through a coarse screen, to remove large slivers, up to
vacuum washers to remove soluble colouring matter and residual materials from
the zinc hydrosulphite reaction, and, finally, through fine screens to remove small
slivers. The screened and washed groundwood is then thickened to about 3.5%
solids and pumped to large storage tanks with buffer capacity sufficient to supply
the paper machines for sixteen hours.


Grinder room with six
Great Northern grinders in
front and seven Ring
Grinders in background.
Electric motors driving
grinders. Three produce
3,600 h.p. and seven 2,500
h.p. each.
E


CHEMICAL PULP.
On leaving the storage tanks the groundwood passes to proportioned where
it is mixed with chemical pulp. All newsprint contains a proportion of chemical
pulp and most mills in the Northern Hemisphere use Sulphite pulp for this pur-
pose. Following traditional practice, Boyer for the first ten years used only Sul-
phite pulp obtained from Western Canada for its chemical furnish. Research
work carried out at the mill showed, however, that Sulphate (or Kraft) pulp was
more satisfactory and economical for use with eucalypt groundwood, and supplies
of this pulp are now obtained from the Kinleith Pulp Mill of N.Z. Forest Products
Ltd. The Sulphate pulp when received is dark in colour and is semi-bleached by
treatment with calcium hypochlorite before it is mixed with the groundwood. The
bleach liquor is prepared from lime and chlorine.
The chemical pulp arrives at Boyer in wire tied bales. It passes through the
bale pulpers and stock makers where large quantities of water are added, and the
pulp is reduced to a condition of individual fibres in water suspension before it goes
to the Bleachery. The quantity of chemical pulp added to the groundwood im-
mediately before the mixed stock reaches the paper machines is governed by a
number of factors, but amounts to less than 20% of the furnish pulp.
Bales of chemical pulp being fed into Bale Pulper.


General view of paper machine room from Southern end. The Wamsley machine
with 173-inch wire is on the right and the Dominion machine with 247-inch wire
is on the left.
PAPER MACHINES.
The carefully controlled mixture of groundwood and chemical pulp is watered
down to a milky suspension containing only 0.6% of fibre, and in this condition is
known to the paper maker as “stock.”
Stock is pumped to oscillating screens with openings one-eighteen thousandths
of an inch wide, which indicates the extent of careful separation of the fibres im-
mediately before they pass onto the paper machine.
From these screens the stock passes into the head box of the paper machine
where the height of the head of liquid is varied to suit the speed at which
the machine is running. It is less than a minute from the time the stock emerges
from the slice of the head box until it is finished newsprint at the far end of the
huge paper machine.
In this brief space of time the stock first flows through a half-inch opening
known as the slice—the full width of the machine—onto a fast moving endless
wire cloth. As the stock is carried on this wire cloth, water first drains from it
by gravity and is then sucked out by perforated flat boxes connected to vacuum
pumps. At the forward end of the wire cloth there is a perforated driving roll
(known as the couch roll).




Fourdrinier of Dominion machine.
The couch roll has two large vacuum boxes inside it which draw away further
water from the paper sheet, which has by then been formed on its travel along the
wire. At this stage, when it leaves the wire and is transferred to a woollen “felt,”
the sheet still contains almost 80% of water.
The sheet, carried on woollen felts, then passes through two presses, each of
which consists of a top roll of polished granite and a perforated rubber covered
bottom roll fitted with a vacuum box. The presses squeeze and draw further
moisture from the sheet, and the moisture content is down to about 65% when
the sheet leaves the second press.
The sheet is then threaded through a long series of steel cylinders, 5 ft. in
diameter and heated internally with steam to a temperature of about 235 degrees
F.
These cylinders serve the purpose of reducing the moisture content of the
sheet to between 6 and 7% before it passes to the calendar stack which consists
of eight highly polished steel rolls mounted vertically one above the other.
The bottom roll of the calendar stack is driven and the remaining rolls ride free on
it. As the sheet of paper winds through this stack it passes through seven nips
where the pressure and movement of the steel rolls has a polishing effect.


The sheet is then wound into parent rolls which, on No. 1 machine weigh 1J
tons, and on No. 2 machine 4J tons. The parent rolls are then transferred to
winders where they are re-wound onto paper cylinders and at the same time slit
into widths to suit the requirements of the various newspapers.
The finished reels are then wrapped in heavy kraft paper and weighed before
they are sent down a conveyer to the wharf warehouse for loading and despatch by
lighter to Hobart.
Pope reel and Calender stack of Dominion machine. Width of the parent roll is 230 inches.
Research Work and Operating Control
Recognising that no great industrial undertaking can stand still, Australian
Newsprint Mills Limited is spending more than £lO,OOO a year on research into new
and improved processes.
The object behind the research work is to increase the wealth recovered from
each acre of forest, and above all, to make the industry permanent and competitive
with overseas supplies.
Other trained technicians of the Technical Control section are all the time
making laboratory tests and checks at every stage of the process. The data they
supply from hour to hour helps to guide the operatives who control and regulate
the machines.


STORAGE AND HANDLING.
Each lighter holds 140 tons of paper, and the lighters are taken in pairs by
Company-owned tugs to the Pavilion Point Store located upstream and close to
the Hobart Bridge. At the Store they are sorted and loaded onto motor lorries for
transport to the Hobart wharves for shipment to all States of the Commonwealth.
To make up large consignments for various ports and to cope with irregularities
in shipping schedules the newsprint stores at Boyer are designed to hold 3,000 tons
of newsprint and Pavilion Point Store 2,000 tons.
The same tugs and lighters bring the New Zealand Sulphate pulp from ship’s
side to Boyer.
Newsprint reels in wharf store at Boyer for loading into company lighters for river
transport to Hobart,


Pavilion Point store near Hobart bridge showing lighter wharf and unloading
shelter with rollway to store.
Community Services
A major contribution towards stability in industry is the creation of community
services in which employer and employee have a co-operative interest. Homes,
sporting and recreational interests are prominent among facilities the Company
has provided.
Building of more than 300 homes at New Norfolk and Boyer and 100 at May-
dena, the bush centre, at a total cost of nearly £700,000, has enabled family units
to enjoy modern housing amenities equal to any in the Commonwealth.
Broad streets on a 122 acre sub-division at New Norfolk have been planted
out with flowering shrubs and trees to set a new standard of civic development
in the Derwent Valley.
Most of the houses have an average size of 10-| squares, comprising living
room, three bedrooms and kitchen.


Company kindergarten at New Norfolk.
The Company provided materials for one of the best equipped kindergartens
in the State, and employees built the centre on a voluntary basis.
The Boyer oval provided by the Company, and maintained on management-
employee basis, is one of the best in the State.
Cricket, football, athletics, rifle shooting and tennis clubs have been fostered,
and social activities encouraged.
The Company participated in the inauguration of the A.N.M. Social Services
Fund, which provides sickness and accident pay benefits for wages employees and
pharmaceutical and dental benefits for all employees and their dependants. The
Fund is controlled by a board of trustees on which there are six representatives of
employees and four of the Company.
A Superannuation Scheme, to enable employees to make provision for retire-
ment, also operates, to which the Company contributes on a £ for £ basis.
The pattern of home building at New Norfolk and Boyer has been applied
to the bush centre at Maydena. This town in the past three years has grown
into the second largest centre in the municipality. The Company has shared in
the provision of sporting and other amenities for employees who reside in the
centre.
Boyer, the Company’s sub-division at New Norfolk, Maydena, and the rail
head Depot, have all the appearance of vigorous and rapid growth, which means
that in some respects they look unfinished. It is apparent, however, that they
l ave been well planned and that aesthetic values will increase rapidly as the
Company’s plans mature.


Company housing project at New Norfolk
Boyer Mill in middle distance.




Virgin forest in
Florentine Valley
with company log-
ging road under
construction.
SOURCE OF RAW MATERIAL.
The total forest concession area, which contains the raw material supply for
the industry, is about 340,000 acres within the watershed of the Upper Derwent,
and including the valleys of the Styx, Florentine and Counsel Rivers.
Of this large area, approximately one-third is rugged mountain country, carry-
ing only low scrub. Another third is poor quality forest which may some day yield
some pulp wood.
The remainder is high forest, which is being harvested systematically by
modern timber-getting methods.
Successful working of the forests, particularly in the Florentine and Styx
River valleys, has been practicable by construction of expensive logging roads by
the Company and by use of a wide range of log sizes and qualities, much of which
is below usual sawmilling standards.
Regrowth along
company forest rood
seven years after
cutting.


With the future of the industry dependent on forest protection and regenera-
tion a great amount of effort and thought has been put into this phase of the
undertaking.
The Company has had to prepare its own maps of the concession area, and
these, as well as a careful assessment of available timber, have been based on an
aerial photographic survey.
The road system is carefully planned so that blocks of forests are selected for
cutting and adjoining blocks are left untouched. Eventually the stage will be
reached where the main forests of the concession will appear in checkerboard
fashion, with standing forests helping to provide seed supply and protecting the
new growth until it is firmly established and the adjoining areas can in turn be
cut. Areas cut over by the Company since 1940 are now carrying a full stocking of
vigorous saplings, and there is ample evidence that in the years ahead these second
growth forests will provide a heavier yield per acre than the virgin forests, many
of which are over mature.
Assessment work carried out since the aerial photographic survey, made in
1947 and 1948, shows that the concession is carrying very much less timber than
was believed to be there when the concession was granted. This makes it ex-
tremely important to the Company, firstly that all existing forest shall be worked as
thoroughly as possible, secondly that the new crops shall be established on all cut
over areas with a minimum of delay, and thirdly that there shall be no wastage
of assets by uncontrolled fires of the types that swept portions of the concession
before the Company commenced operations.
Heel boom loader placing logs on truck for transport over company roods to rail depot.


To avoid destruction of this kind in the future the Company has established
look-outs and bush fire control posts and has invested more than £lO,OOO in fire
fighting equipment.
To reach the areas being logged an elaborate system of road construction has
been undertaken through difficult mountain country. One main logging road
has been pushed nearly 25 miles into the Florentine Valley, and the construction
of this main access road has involved the Company in an expenditure of nearly
£300,000. Such roads have been built for the operation of large logging trucks,
many of which are now carrying loads up to 40 tons, and as the haulage distance
increases still heavier trucks will be used.
From the main logging road spur roads extend to log landings, and from these
snig or haulage tracks radiate out to distances of 20 to 30 chains.
Large tractors, rated at 120 draw bar horsepower, pull logs to the landings
where heel boom loaders, which represent a new method of log handling in Aus-
tralia, are used to load the logs onto motor trucks for transport to the rail head.
Maydena depot showing logs being loaded on to Government railway trucks and
front end of log storage.


An assembly Depot for the logs has been established at Maydena, 35 miles
from Boyer by rail. Here, a stock pile of 30,000 tons of logs is maintained, and
each day between 600 and 700 tons of logs arrive from the forest.
Special trains convey the logs to Boyer from Maydena each day, and the
Company has invested more than £lOO,OOO in special railway waggons to carry the
logs over the Government railway line.
At the Depot the Company has built offices, store, workshops for tractor and
motor maintenance, a sawmill and seasoning yard. This sawmill is engaged
principally in cutting secondary species, such as Myrtle, to use the trees which
grow in association with the Eucalypts and to open up the floor of the cut over
forest to make way for eucalypt regeneration.
Company's housing project at
Maydena for forest workers.


53/5114 Mercury Press


