

390(o y
~ ■ F>
Australia
FOR THE
Australians.
A POLITICAL PAMPHLET,
Shewing the necessity for Land Reform,
combined with Protection.
A, B. PATERSON, Solicitor, Sydney.
Gordon & Gotch, Publishers
SYDNEY:
GIBBS, SHALLARD, and CO., GENERAL PRINTERS,
84A Pitt Street.




?■
Australia
FOR THE
SYDNEY:
GILMOUR’S BOOKSHOP
6 VICTORIA ARCADE
opp. Hotel Australia, SYDNEY
Australians.
A POLITICAL PAMPHLET,
Shewing the necessity for Land Reform,
combined with Protection.
A. B, PATERSON, Solicitor, Sydiey.
Gordon & Gotch, Publishers.
GIBBS, SHALLARD, and CO., GENERAL PRINTERS,
84A Pitt Street.




M3355' /PtZ
PREFACE.
In the limits of a pamphlet it 'is impossible to put any
argument thoroughly. I have had to leave unanswered,
for want of space, many arguments which will be raised
against my views: I have had to leave unmentioned
many facts which support my views. These matters I
hope to deal with some day in a more extended manner.
A. B. PATERSON.




INDEX
Chapter I.—The Need of Reform 7
Chapter ll. —The System of Production.
Chapter lll.—The Mistake in our System.
Chapter IV.—The Remedy. 23
Chapter Y.—Our Fiscal Policy. 26




AUSTRALIA FOR THE AUSTRALIANS.
CHAPTER I.
IT is of the greatest importance to every man amongst us
that he should have some clear idea of what position he
occupies in relation to other people, and that he should
understand what it is that fixes his prospects, and circum-
stances in life. It is not too much to say that this is the
most important question which any man can have to con-
sider ; but it is astonishing how few give any attention to
such matters. On coming to years of discretion, each man
adopts that trade, profession, or business to which circum-
stances seem to point: the clerk goes to his desk, the work-
man to his tools, the architect to his plans, the lawyer to his
books—each plods along to the day of his death, obtaining
as well as may be the market value for his work, but never
enquiring how that market value is arrived at. The
capitalist finds that interest on his money is obtainable at a
certain rate, and he too grumbles that he cannot get larger
interest on safe investments; but he never makes any inves-
tigation into the causes which determine the rate of interest,
and its rise or fall. The young man beginning life finds that
there is “no good opening,” but it never occurs to him to
ask why there is “ no good openinghe creeps into the first
vacancy he can see, and adapts himself to circumstances.
Every man is more or less a “politician,” and will
spout by the hour about freetrade and protection, but men
seem to treat political matters rather as abstract theories than
as things of practical importance to themselves. The
difference between freetrade and protection, etc., is not the
difference between one set of politicians and another; it is a
question of which is the best for us as a community, and as
individuals.
It is the purpose of this pamphlet to present a brief
summary of the principles which govern the prosperity of
individuals and nations; and to show that there might be,
amongst us Australians, much greater all round individual


prosperity and wealth than there is : that we might all be
much better off than we are : that it is possible for men
with willing hands and brains to obtain the means to live in
comfort and comparative affluence, much more easily and
certainly than can be done now. Which desirable results can
only be obtained by good laws.
It may appear at first sight that this is a personal and
selfish rather than a national matter, and that the title of
this book is hardly appropriate in such a connection; hut
the fact is that the only way to improve the welfare and
prosperity of the country at large, is to improve the
individual welfare and prosperity of the inhabitants. To
advance Australia we must advance the Australians, and the
question of individual advancement is really the question of
the greatest national importance.
It may be said that we are already the most prosperous
country in the world; that in no other place can a good
living be got so easily and certainly as it can here. Even if
we grant this, it does not prove that we are as prosperous as
we might be, or as we have every right to expect to be. And
when we come to look into the matter we find that we are a
very long way from any such happy state. It ought to be
possible in a new country like this for every man with a
willing pair of hands to be always employed, and at good
wages. There should be constant openings for our young
men with brains and ability to make good incomes. Poverty
and enforced idleness of willing men should be unknown.
Yet we find the working men constantly seeking employment
in vain. There seem to be less and less openings or chances
for the young men who are coming forward. In all the
colonies an absurd proportion of the population is crowding
into the towns. The professions are overcrowded.
In the year 1888 New South Wales paid over one
hundred thousand pounds for the support of men who could
get nothing to do. The trouble is temporarily disposed of,
but will certainly crop up again. It is a curious thing
that in a partially settled country we find one colony paying
over one hundred thousand pounds in a year towards charity
works, for those who can find nothing to do. Why should
there be any unemployed at all ? Surely there is work
enough to be done, land enough lying idle, desires enough to
be satisfied.
It is often alleged by people, especially of the “ upper ”
classes, that our labouring population are a great deal too well


off. 44 They are getting too independent altogether, these
fellows with their eight hours and their holidays: the colony
will never go ahead until we get cheap reliable labor.” This
idea is founded on a hideous ignorance of the most simple
rules of political economy. Cheap labour means degradation
of the community, and no country has ever been prosperous
or happy by reason of labour being cheap ; but the exact
contrary has always been the case. High wages have
everywhere and always meant prosperity, and low wages
have always meant bad times.
Let those who do not see the necessity for any change
or questioning of the present arrangement of affairs, take a
night walk round the poorer quarters of any of our large
colonial cities, and they will see such things as they will
never forget. They will see vice and sin and misery in full
development. They will see poor people herding in wretched
little shanties, the tiny stuffy rooms fairly reeking like ovens
with the heat of our tropical summer. I, the writer of this
book, at one time proposed, in search of novelty, to go and
live for a space in one of the lower class lodging-houses in
Sydney, to see what life was like under that aspect. I had
44 roughed it ”in the bush a good deal. I had camped out
with very little shelter and very little food. I had lived
with the stockmen in their huts, on their fare, so I was not
likely to be dainty; but after one night’s experience of that
lodging I dared not try a second. To the frightful
discomfort was added the serious danger of disease from the
filthy surroundings and the unhealthy atmosphere. I fled.
And yet what I, a strong man, dared not undertake for a
week, women and children have to go through from year’s
end to year’s end. And there were places compared with
which the one I tried was a paradise.
Some say of course that all this misery is the fault of
the people themselves; in some cases it is. There are people
who would be hard up, no matter what chances they got;
but there are a great many who, try as they may, cannot
make any comfortable kind of a living. Do you, reader,
believe that it is an inevitable law that in a wealthy country
like this we must have so much poverty ? Do you not think
there must be something wrong somewhere ? Of course people
are much worse off in the older countries. God grant that
we never will reach the awful state in which the poorer
classes of England and the Continent now are. Are we not
going in the same direction ? That is the question which


we have to consider. The same trouble is showing itself
here which has come up everywhere. Instead of the
position of the working people improving at the same rate
as the various appliances for getting a living are improved
and perfected, we find a woeful deficiency. The improvement
in productive power has been like the speed of a racehorse,
while the improvement in the position of the people who
ought to be benefited thereby has been like the speed of the
mud turtle, —if indeed any progress has been made at all.
If it be a fact that there is no help for this, and that it
is an absolute necessity that there should be unemployed
and paupers, it is a serious matter for us all, because there is
no hard and fast line dividing one class of workman from
another. All who work, whether by hand or brain, are equally
working for their living, and if that living is becoming harder
to get it is no joke for us. We who have no pressing cares,
look with indifference on the hardships of poverty-stricken
people; but it may be our turn next. It is a matter we
should look into. The accepted theory to explain all this is
one which was started by a clergyman named Malthus. He
said that people had to slave day and night, and women and
little children had to suffer hunger and want, because the
earth would not produce enough to support its population.
He said that just in the same way if a man kept on breeding
sheep he would in time overstock his run, so we human
creatures tend to increase and multiply so rapidly that we
would overstock the earth, were it not that our numbers are
kept down by starvation, disease, dirt, misery, and all the
evil consequences which follow on and spring from poverty.
Nine men out of every ten you meet subscribe unthinkingly
to this theory. They will say if asked—“ There must always
be poor people, because there isn’t enough to go round.”
It is hard to see how any one who believes in religion,
who believes in a God of justice and mercy, can believe this
theory—will for a moment believe that God puts people on
the earth just to starve them off it again.
This over-population theory, curiously enough, is accepted
by a people to whom it certainly does not apply, and who
never learnt it from Malthus. The howling black savages of
the interior of this continent are true Malthusians; they
believe in applying a positive check to the increase of popula-
tion, so they operate in a crude, but effective way, on the
female infants, and render them incapable of ever bearing
children. They do this to relieve the pressure of population


on subsistence, in a wonderfully fertile country where the
population is about one nigger to the square league. In their
view, the carrying power of the earth is limited to the number
of wild ducks, tree grubs, lizards, and snakes that it will
furnish. Having arrived at this conclusion, they lie on their
backs in the sun all day, and curse Creation for not having
provided them with more food. They endorse fully the
sentiment of John Stuart Mill, that it is not the laziness of
man but the niggardliness of Nature which is to blame for the
privations which they occasionally endure.
Whether this Malthusian theory be true or not is
luckily not a matter which we need consider; there can be no
question but that our country will support all the population
it has now, or is likely to have for the next few centuries.
It is difficult to imagine a number of people so great
that our country could not carry them. When we think of
the great rolling fertile plains of this continent, the wonder-
fully rich river flats, and the miles and thousands of miles
of agricultural land, spreading all over the country and hardly
yet trodden by man, it is very evident that pressure of
population on subsistence has nothing whatever to do with
our difficulties.
It can, I believe, be shown that the supplies of heat in
the sun will in time give out; that the earth will grow cold
and lifeless, and will stop turning round and round, and I sup-
pose it could be proved that the earth will some day be over-
stocked—but all these things are a long way off. Are we
going to give ourselves up as lost, and to make no effort to
put things straight, because at some very remote period there
may not be enough subsistence to keep everybody alive ?
We would indeed be chicken-hearted to give way to such
opinion.
It is generally alleged that these ideas of a better state
of things are visionary and unrealisable. If it is the dream
of a visionary, that in a new country like this, where we
have the most fertile soil and the greatest natural resources
of all kinds: where we can grow anything we want and make
all things we need for ourselves, or get them by exchange
from the older countries : if it is the dream of a visionary
that in such a country every man might be comfortably off,
and might get a living easily, certainly, and with a large
amount of leisure, then God help the people of such a
country. They deserve to have it taken from them and
given back to the blacks.


CHAPTER 11.
It must always be remembered that we are dealing here
with the simple question whether we can, by any means, be
enabled to make abetter living. We are not concerning our-
selves with the theoretical or imaginative part of life at all.
We are simply investigating the supply and demand of bread
and butter. We look upon the object of life as being to get
the best possible living. We live and work that we may
have good clothes to wear, good food to eat, may enjoy the
luxuries of life, may go to the theatre on occasions, may take
our leisure when we wish it, may help those in need,
patronise our friends, and insult our enemies ; and that
when we die we may leave a good name and a fair amount of
money to our posterity, and depart “ over the border ” with
a decent share of good deeds to our credit in the great ledger.
As Bastiat puts it, the rule is that man shall eat bread
in the sweat of his brow, and the object of us all is to get the
greatest possible amount of bread for the least possible
amount of sweat. We estimate our wealth in money, but
money is only valuable for the things it will buy ; it is a
medium of exchange; paper makes just as good money as
gold ; a bank note for a pound will buy just as much in any
Australian city as a sovereign. When we say, therefore,
that we work for money, we mean that we work for the
things which money will buy—for the desirable things of
this life which we may lump under the name of “ wealth,”
meaning not money, but articles of value. Now we have to
consider what are these desirable things, and how are they
obtained ?
Everything which we have, or desire to have, is
produced by the earth in some crude form or other, and is
worked up by human labour into the shape in which we use
it. A carriage is simply a hickory tree, and other trees, cut
into shape, and bound together with iron ore which has been
smelted and refined. A suit of clothes is wool from the
sheep twisted into shape by intricate machinery, which
machinery is also iron and other ores refined and properly
treated, and put in proper shape. Everything we have comes
from the earth ; there is no other wealth ; there is no other
source of supply. Manna does not drop from heaven in these
days. The next thing is to try and find out the system, if any,
on which we set to work to make these things. Once we can
find the basis, the system of the thing, we will have made a
good start.


The reader no doubt has been used to hear a good deal
of talk about productive and unproductive labour; about
producer and consumer; about supply and demand; about
scarcity and over production; everything seems mixed up,
and there appears to be no system whatever. One thing,
however, is clear, namely, that no one gets a living for
nothing. We hear about unproductive labourers, consumers,
and so on. What is an unproductive consumer ? A mere
mouth and belly, apparently, which other men supply with
food. There is no law whereby such people are maintained,
and as a matter of fact every one except absolute paupers
does something, or gives something for a living. No one is
an unproductive consumer; everyone helps in some way'in
the production of wealth. The Governor of the colony draws
a salary. Why ? Because he does his share in the work of
keeping order, protecting the people, and managing the
affairs of the State. Such share, perhaps, as we might easily
get done at less cost, but such as we have fixed at our own
valuation. Your services, we say, are worth so many thousands
a year—here are your wages. In the same way, through all
classes of the people, all are doing their share in production
of wealth.
There are men who do not actually make, out of the
produce of the earth, by applying their labour, any tangible
article of wealth; they do not themselves produce any
wealth, but they assist those who do. If we were all like
working bullocks, desiring grass and water, and grass and
water only, then we might well look upon any one, who
devoted his energies to any object other than the attainment
of grass and water, as a supernumerary and an unproductive
consumer. If we could do our work without amusement,
without recreation, without pleasure to the eye and gratifi-
cation of the senses, then might we dispense with all
“ unproductive ” labourers. We might all dress in moleskins
and flannel shirts, and if we did we might look upon people
who wove silk fabrics as unproductive and wasters. But
our natures are different from this ; we need rest, recreation
and amusement; we desire to have pretty things as well as
merely useful ones, and we have higher needs than eating
and drinking. For instance, actors and singers help us in
our work by lightening our minds and stirring up our mirth,
so that we go on our way more cheerful and contented.
They themselves produce nothing, but they help us so that
we produce the more. We pay them their “ wages,” holding


them to have given us an equivalent. Each does his share,
and if wc seek to weed out those whose labour might be
dispensed with, where will we draw the line ? Not until we
have dispensed with everything except the plainest clothes,
and the coarsest food, and the poorest shelter compatible
with health.
A civilized man does not choose to live under these
conditions, and the result is that many of us devote our-
selves to labour that might be dispensed with, if we were all
to become anchorites ; the principle remains the same,
namely, that we are all working for the desired wealth. We
merely extend the meaning of wealth from necessary things
to desirable things.
We can see, therefore, that all labour tends to the same
end, and we should not allow the intricate subdivision of
labour to blind our eyes to the great central fundamental
fact, that we are all working for the heat living we can get;
that such living can only he got out of the earth and its
; products , and that we are all engaged, more or less directly,
in obtaining and improving those products for our use.
This is the object of work; but besides the men who get
their living by their work, there are some that don’t work,
and still get a living: how do we classify these? We have
said that there is no law whereby a man gets his living for
nothing, and the reader will find it very easy to define the
position of the non-workers. They either own land and live
on the rent of it, or they own capital and live on the interest
of it. The brainless English new chum who comes out here
with £5,000 to invest, does his share in the aggregate pro-
duction by lending his capital.
These are the three factors of production of wealth:—
land, labour, and capital. Production is carried on by these
three factors and by nothing outside of them. If a man
gets a living at all, he gets it by working for it, or by using
his own money, or letting other people use it; or by using
his own land, or letting other people use it.
To hear the current speakers and read the current books
on this subject, one would think that, as each man came of
age, he was ear-marked and branded by Providence, one
u capitalist,” another “ landlord,” another “ labourer,” and
that they were then turned loose into the world to war on
one another. This is not the right way to look at it.
There is no hard and fast distinction between different
classes of men, and the troubles that continually come up


are due to mistakes, and ignorance of the great social prin-
ciples which govern such things.
This, then, is the system of our social life : We have, the
Australians, a nation possessing one of the finest countries in
the world, amply supplied with capital, or stored up wealth, of
their own and older countries. Their object being to get the
best living they can out of their country, they divide them-
selves into an infinity of trades, professions, and businesses,
ranging from those who directly till the soil and tend the
herds, up to the most officials of government.
Capital is easily available for any productive enterprise.
Land is plenty. There is (theoretically) no restriction what-
ever on the method in which they employ themselves.
Every man can go to the thing which he thinks will pay him
best. If this system were worked properly, it is the best
possible system, being the simplest. Under such a system
one should expect to get the best possible results.
We would expect that no one would be idle until every
want was satisfied, and there was nothing left to be done. So
long as there are bare backs to clothe in the old country, so
long as they want leather, minerals, and all the raw products
of our land, it surely must pay us to go on exchanging with
them, sending them the raw material and getting back
manufactured goods; so long as any other land wants our
goods, and is willing and able to give us in exchange for them
such things as we want, it surely should be possible for us all to
get a good living by going to work and exchanging with them.
We have so much land, and so few people. If they could not,
or would not, exchange with us, we could isolate ourselves if
we liked, and still make a splendid living by “ manufactur-
ing,” i.e., improving our own raw material for our own
benefit. Either way, we ought to be able to get the best
living that our capabilities will allow; whereas we are not
using half our natural opportunities, and rich land is lying
idle half a mile from towns where men are sitting idle, or only
half occupied, at professions for which there is little demand,
and trades in which employment is slack. To any one who
understands the system of production, the way in which our
inhabitants are crowding into the towns is something
appalling. We would call a man a fool who ran a station
with one-third of his hands at bookkeeping. We would
think a mine pretty well doomed where the overseers and
clerical hands numbered nearly as many as the working
miners ; and yet we have about one-third of our population


in Sydney and suburbs alone ! They are crowding into the
townships, cutting one another’s throats to get employment,
most of them half their time idle. Why is this ? The towns
can only live on the produce of the country. They don’t
grow anything in the towns. If there is a bad season in the
country, it means so much the less produce, so much the less
to export, so much the less to import and use up and enjoy,
so much the less to employ town labor on. This wonderful
preponderance of town labor is a thing which we may explain
as we go on.
CHAPTER 111.
Our system clearly does not work as it ought. Where we
have gone wrong was, firstly, in dealing with our land.
When our forefathers arrived here there was any amount of
land, and they started to grant it away wholesale to any one
that liked to take it; and the way in which they granted it
was on the English system of what is called “ fee simple
tenurethat is to say, that the grantees took the land from
the Crown, to hold it for ever and ever, for themselves, their
heirs, and their assigns, free of any rent or payment to any
one. No provision was made for the fact that, as population
increased, these lands would become more and more valuable.
They were parted with once and for all. It was, no doubt,
necessary to grant some sort of secure tenure, because no man
will produce anything by cultivating land, unless he knows
that he will be secured in the enjoyment of what he produces.
To this extent, therefore, they were bound to give security of
tenure. But that is a very different thing from granting a
man land in “ fee simple.” I intend to show that when the
land was granted away in fee simple, a cruel mistake was
made, which has thus early shown its effects on us and our
prosperity. The present system is absurd and unjust, in that
it enables some people to get a lot of benefit from the com-
munity to which they have no right, and it discourages
industry and prevents production. It encourages men to hold
land idle, and its effects extend to us all, as we all live by
what the country produces. “ Oh,” says the reader, “ this
man is simply a Henry Georgeite.” I certainly agree with
his arguments against fee simple tenures ; but I do not agree
in his remedy. It is a wonderful thing to me how so many


people persist in looking upon Henry George as the dis-
coverer of the evils of a system of fee simple tenure. After
reading his books, I took up the older writers, Adam Smith
and John Stuart Mill, thinking that it was always a good
thing to hear both sides of a question, and to my astonish-
ment I found that they agreed with George, or rather he with
them, in every particular. There is no other side. What
people call Henry Georgeism, i.e ., objection to fee simple
tenure in land, is no new doctrine. Every economist has
supported it. It was old before George was born.
John Stuart Mill says : —“ The plenty and cheapness of
good land are the principle causes of the rapid prosperity of
new colonies. The engrossing of land in effect destroys this
plenty and cheapness. The engrossing of uncultivated land
besides is the greatest obstruction to its improvement.”
Adam Smith says (page 392) I shall conclude this
very long chapter with observing that every improvement in
the circumstances of the society tends either directly or
indirectly, to raise the real rent of land, to increase the real
wealth of the landlord, his power of purchasing the labor, or
the produce of the labor of other people.”
I will add here a cutting from a paper read by Mr. J. T.
Walker, of Sydney, before the Economic Association. Mr.
Walker’s opinion will carry weight with many men to whom
the name of Adam Smith is as sounding brass or a tinkling
cymbal. Mr. Walker says : —“ I think that radical land
reform, with due regard for vested interests, and co-operation,
are the true solution of labor and capital difficulties.”
If the opinion of such men as Adam Smith and John
Stuart Mill goes for anything the mistake is here : but
before going further into this question, I would like to men-
tion one matter—more harm than good is done by the ener-
getic writers who persist in denouncing all land-owners as
“ monopolists,” “ oppressors,” and so on. Land-owners are
not different from other people ; we see them constantly and
do not feel that they exhibit any desire to “ oppress the
down-trodden laborer.” This sort of claptrap is largely
talked in debating societies, and by back-slum orators.
It only keeps thinking people from going into the matter
at all. The old saying, that he who has no case must abuse
the other side, is largely believed in ; and readers, who see
that the land-reformers constantly denounce the land-owners
as monopolists, grabbers, and extortioners, are very apt to
believe that they do so because their own arguments are weak.


Landownership in fee simple is a state ot things which we
ourselves have created, and was not forced on us. If we can
show that a grave mistake has been made in our dealings
with land, let us try and suggest some reform; but let us
not go into hysterical abuse of those who have profited by
the mistake.
The first objection is that the men who buy land
in the early days of a settlement, get a great deal of wealth
to which they have no moral right. To illustrate what I
mean, near Melbourne is a vast freehold estate owned by
one family, and valued at a million of money. Almost
all of this is in the same state as it was when Batman
first settled on the place where Melbourne now is, as being
a likely site for a village. It carries sheep and nothing
else. From Williamstown right down nearly to Geelong,
you travel through it. Near Sydney, on the North Shore,
is a vast unimproved block of water-frontage property, which
frowns on the harbor, bold and rugged, in just exactly the
same state as it was when Captain Cook brought his ships
round there. It is now worth hundreds of thousands of
pounds. What has given these properties their value?
Clearly not the labor and trouble of their owners, as they are
unimproved. They have steadily increased in value ever
since the settlements were founded, because as a country gets
more and more settled, and population gets denser, the
demand for such land near the capital cities becomes greater
and greater. When the community parted with these lands
they got a few pounds only, which was all they were worth.
Then the people set to work to transform the howling bush
into a wealthy city; they worked and worked, building houses,
making railways and wharves, extending the suburbs; they
added to the value of all lands about there. Meanwhile the
owners of these lands stood by and looked on. “We can wait,”
they said. They were paying no rent for the land, and they
saw that it was gradually going up in value, and that they
would in time make a handsome profit, not out of their own
exertions, but those of the community. The reader must re-
member that, as Henry George says, “ When a man makes a
fortune out of a rise in land value, it means that he can have
fine clothes, costly food, a house luxuriously furnished, etc.
Now, these things are not the spontaneous fruits of the soil,
neither do they fall from heaven, nor are they cast up by the
sea. They are products of labor —can only be produced by
labor; and hence if men who do not labor get them, it must


be at the expense of those who do labor.” To whom does
the finest house about Sydney belong ? It belongs to a man
who inherited a huge fortune, made solely out of the rise and
rents of real estate near Sydney ; a man who counts his for-
tune by hundreds of thousands, and spends most of his time in
England. He never did a day’s work in his life, and yet can
have every luxury, while thousands of his fellow countrymen
have to toil and pinch and contrive to get a living. The
more the country goes ahead the more he prospers, and the
less he need do. It looks rather as if he “ had the loan of
us,” as the unrefined say. Yet it is' not fair to blame the
man. We should blame the rotten, absurd system which
makes such a thing possible.
It may be said, “ We have plenty of land; there is no need
to make an outcry about it being granted away,—you can
get acres and acres out back at the selection price.” “ Out
back ” you can ; but every day the words “ out back ” mean
further and further out. At present the far back land has
little value except what the owners add to it; but every day
there is less and less available land worth taking up. It is all
very well to point to dry waterless plains and say, “ There is
land—plenty of it—what are you complaining about the land
system for? If you want land, go and take up some of this.”
But there is an almighty difference between such land as this,
and the rich lands on the coast rivers, down about Illawarra,
and on the banks of the Hunter and Macleay. The injustice,
the stupidity, of the arrangement, consists in the fact that
our immediate predecessors granted away for ever and ever,
in fee simple, free of rent, the best lands we had, and left
the present generation the wilderness. They should never
have allowed any absolute ownership free of rent to be
acquired in land. As the land gets more and more scarce,
those who enjoy the advantage of using the picked lands of
the colony should also enjoy the privilege of paying some-
thing to the community for it.
It is evident that once all the available land gets into the
hands of owners, they have the rest of us at their mercy.
Writers who deal with the subject as it presents itself in older
countries, are very fond of denouncing the tyranny of the land-
lord over the tenant. This phase of the matter has not yet
forced itself upon our community to any extent. The country
is too new for landlord and tenant disputes to have sprung up;
but we will have them sure enough. We are creating the largest
landed proprietors yet known—men who count their freehold


acres by the hundred thousand. As soon as we leave our cities
with their pitiful little subdivisions and crowded buildings,
we can run in the train through miles and miles of freehold
estates all belonging to individual owners. These will all be
cut up into farms some day and leased out, and then the fun
will begin. We will have all the things which make life in
Ireland so enjoyable—plenty of good landlord shooting then.
We all know the bitter hatred between the tenants and their
landlords, not only in Ireland, but in Scotland, England and
Wales. That sort of thing will come here some day— the
poverty and all, unless we mend our system.
As to the question of discouraging improvements; many
people are under the impression that our present system, of
what is practically absolute ownership, is the only one that
encourages improvements. “If you make the tenure of land
subject to a rent,” say they, “ or to any restrictions, there will
be no money spent on the land, no improvements made, and
great deterioration will set in. We will have wooden houses
instead of stone, paling fences instead of walls.” But a very
little thought will show them that this is erroneous. It is
only when the owner realises that he can only add to the
value of his land by making improvements, that improvements
will be made in real earnest. Under the present system it
generally pays better not to improve; improvements cost
money. Any man who has tried his hand at building and
laying out a garden, knows that in nine cases out of ten it
would have paid him better to let the land be idle, and wait
for an increase in value. It is only when we get rid of this
increase in value through no good deed of the owner, that we
will get proper increase in value by way of improvements
As to the locking-up of land ; it is astonishing how far
this locking-up system prevails. Nearly every country town
in New South Wales is cursed by the proximity of some large
estate, which can neither be bought nor leased. Think of
the loss to the community caused by this. Every day’s work
done on bad land while better land is lying idle is done at so
much loss. Every unfortunate selector who is driven out on
to the Macquarie and the Bogan to take up the dry plain,
while land is lying idle on the rich river flats all over the
colony, is working at a dead loss to himself and the com-
munity. .It is on the success of such men as these that city
men live. Our present system is direct encouragement to the
owners to hold land idle and wait for a rise. The thing has
taken a great hold in this colony, and the cleverest man is not


the man who can use a bit of land and make something out
of it, but the man who can make a rise out of a railway being
made to his property.
For city properties the evil is intensified. When we
hear of George Street property fetching a thousand pounds
per foot, we say —“ How prosperous the country must be!
What wonderful advances we are making! A few years ago
it could have been bought for a hundred pounds an acre!”
What we ought to say is—“ What a dreadful handicap on the
colony it is, that men should be able to get such a lot of the
colony’s products for land which was increased in value by
the State. What fools we are to allow it to go on!” That
is what we ought to say. To any one who understands the
matter, it is a cruel thing to see the settlers in the interior of
our colony, striving day after day on their little properties,
with no comforts, no leisure, no hopes nor aspirations beyond
making a decent living, and to think that it is owing to the
labour of these men and such as these, that the owners of
Sydney are living luxuriously, travelling between this colony
and England, drawing large rentals, or spending the large
values which they never did a hand’s turn to earn or deserve.
There is one stock argument which seems to go down
with a lot of people. It is said that the people who buy land
when it is worth little, and hold on to it till it rises in value,
are risking their money, and that if the land falls in value
they lose, so that they surely ought to be allowed to profit
if it rises. The answer to this is that we should never have
to go into the risk at all. It is too great a certainty that land
will rise in any fertile unsettled conntry. The man who buys
runs a very small risk, and has the chance of a huge profit.
The community on the other hand make very small profit if
the land falls in value after it it is sold, and they make a huge
loss if it rises.
Land which was bought for a pound an acre has often
risen in value to per acre by the exertions of the
community, and the owner has reaped the benefit. Land
buying in the early stage of a settlement is a kind of lottery,
in which the investor is pretty certain to win ; and where the
fortunate men profit at the expense of their fellow men, not
for once but for all time, and not merely for themselves but
for their descendants. We have prohibited all other lotteries,
and yet not one one of them ever did one millionth part of the
harm which this has done. There is no sense in abusing the
men who have taken advantage of this state of affairs. The


way was open to them, and they adopted it. I expect most of
my readers only wish that their forefathers had secured a few
acres about Sydney, at the time when they could be bought
for a keg of rum. Their descendants need do very little work
now; other people would have to work for them.
There is another argument sometimes advanced, which
looks well on paper but carries little weight. It is argued
that if a man pays money for land and lets the land lie idle,
he is entitled to profit by any advance in its value, because
he has lost interest on his money. This is a rotten argument.
If a man likes to lockup his capital in unproductive, unused
land, it is his own fault. The land is handed over to him to
use, not to look at. If he uses the land he can get a return
for it, which will pay his interest. If a man bought a
mare for £IOO, and never rode her or bred from her, by the
time she was twenty years of age he would, if he calculated
up the interest on her price, expect to get for her several
thousands of pounds, whereas he would really get nothing for
so old an animal, nor would he expect it. He would ride her
and breed from her, and so get a return for his money year by
year. In the same way let the owners use the land if they
want interest.
This is where we want to make a reform. Our land
system is bad : it drives the men into the cities; it causes
good land to be locked up ; it enables some men to live at
the expense of others ; it enables a man to say by his will
that for 21 years after his death no one shall use his land.
Fancy that; a dead man’s will can override the needs of
the living. We have created a land-grabbing mania—an
earth hunger. 552 persons in a population of over a million
own upwards of 17,000,000 acres of freehold ; they possess
in fee simple over one-half the alienated lands of New South
Wales. Squatters have been forced to buy where they would
rather have taken a good lease on secure tenure. To buy the
land they have had to borrow largely from English capital,
and our lands are mortgaged up to the hilt; the purchase
money has been spent in wasteful extravagance in public build-
ings, in useless courthouses, etc,, in one-horse country towns.
Where we ought to have spent money in irrigation we have
spent it in building tramways and bridges, and such like
city works, which add nothing to the productive power of
the country. This is the thing which cries aloud for a
reform.


CHAPTER IY.
What shape must our reform take? The followers of
Henry George say, “Resume all the land again without pay-
ing compensation, except for improvements.” At least,
they say, take all the annual value except enough to induce
the land owners to collect it. They purpose not only to
make land pay all taxes, but to go on to take all the annual
value, whether needed for taxation or not. (Progress and
Poverty, page 289.) This is too suddep a remedy altogether.
We cannot fairly resume the lands which we have
sold, even though we got but small money for them ; we
cannot fairly take “ all the annual return, except enough to
induce the owner to collect it.” The men who own the land
now are not, except in some few cases, the men to whom it
was originally granted. The present holders have paid well
for it in many cases; our whole credit system is founded on
those fee simple tenures; the banks have accepted the
money of the community, and have advanced it on security
of these tenures. It would be too great a jar, a dislocation
of industry and security to attempt any sudden method.
Henry George wants to burst up the present system on
which all our credit and business is founded, and leave us
without anything in its place. His plan, if adopted, would
make things very nice for our posterity, but would leave us
in a bad way.
The great key-note of the reform must be to let men
hold lands to use, and not to look at. We must try and
devise some means whereby the productive lands of the
country shall be available for use by individuals, under the
most favourable circumstances for themselves and for the
community; we must devise some means whereby no one
can hold land idle and unproductive while others are anxious
to use it, and whereby all value created by the State will go
to the State. We must secure to every man the benefit of
his labours, and so far as is needful for that purpose we must
give the holders secure tenure, and enable them to mortgage
their holdings to get an advance of money to aid in improve-
ments, and to allow them to sell out to others should they
desire it. We must conform to the tendency of the times to
concentration, and allow good large areas to be occupied.
We cannot touch the values already accrued, but what
we want to do is to find out the present unimproved values,
and see that any rise in them is reaped by the State. If the


owners like to let them lie idle they must pay for the
privilege, and above all, and beyond all, we must stop, once
and for ever, the trafficking in lands; if a man wants to
make money out ‘of land, let him do it by legitimate
improvements, not by “ holding for a rise.” If we have any
sense we will see that the State gets the benefit of all rises.
How can we do all this ? First of all as to country
lands—these are the productive lands of the community, and
if we take the matter in hand at once, there will be little
difficulty in dealing with these.
The generality of country owners would lose nothing by
any reform, because, whatever value their lands have, they
have themselves created by improvements and labour.
Almost any farmer in this Colony would cheerfully sell out
if you would pay him in full for all his improvements, and
the original purchase money of his land. They have got no
“ unearned increment” of value at the expense of the public.
We don’t hear of a farmer making a hundred thousand
pounds by the construction of a railway to his farm ; but
we hear of speculators and syndicates dealing in Sydney pro-
perty doing it often enough. The farmers have been working
at their farms to add value to city property, more than to
their own property. Some farm land, of course, has a value
over and above the improvements —such land as the Hunter
River Valley, for instance. There is farm land on the
Hunter worth, unimproved, £lOO per acre ; but all the com-
munity ever got for it was £1 or £2 per acre. The men who
own this sort of land have got a large rise in values for
which they never worked, and they are in the same position
as owners ot city property.
To put straight the tenure of country lands, I would
make every land owner send in a valuation of his land with-
out improvements. Let it be optional for the State to pay
him or his mortgagees the unimproved value, and become
his landlord at a rent to be assessed ; his improvements to
remain his own property ; or else let the State put a tax on
him calculated on the excess of his valuation over the original
price which he gave. We would thus get a true valuation,
because every owner would know that if he valued too high
he would find himself taxed on that value.
We would thus resume control of the lands, and the
existing credit system would not be disturbed. The owners
could hold for ever and ever, or until they liked to sell out,
but their lands should be revalued once in every five years and


a fresh rent imposed. This plan works very well in Japan.
The speculation in land would thus be done away with,
because no man would be able to hold land as a speculation;
the rent would make him use it, and he would not be able to
get much more than the original unimproved valuation,
because every five years such valuation would be overhauled and
rectified. His improvements he could at any time get full
value for, and he would thereby be encouraged to make im-
provements and discouraged from holding land idle, instead
of being, as now, encouraged to hold it idle and discouraged
from improving. Any bushman can tell hundreds of cases
where rich land is locked up in the big freehold runs, carrying
sheep, while miserable selectors are trying to get a living on
stony ridges. This rich land would be made pay a pro-
portionate taxation ; its present value would be fixed so that
the owner could never make anything by a rise in it. That
would be reaped by the State. The owner would be driven
to improve or to let others on to it who would improve it.
This plan would greatly help all small farmers and settlers.
Their holdings would pay no rent to speak of, having, with-
out improvements, no value above the original purchase money.
And the immense increase in aggregate production that would
result, would give us all a fresh start. Owners of rich land
would see that nothing would be gained by holding on to it
idle, and they would put it in use. There would be a demand
for Iqbor of all sorts. The prosperity of the country would at
once go ahead, and prosperity of the country would mean pros-
perity of the towns. People would be able to buy things,
employ professional men, and meet their bills more regularly
than they can now. The town values of lands I would deal
with in much the same way. Fix the present value without
improvements, by the owner’s own valuation, and let it be
clearly understood that the owner would reap no benefit from
any advance on that value. Such value as he liked to add
by improvements he would be welcome to. Once the owners
saw that they would make no profit by holding their land
idle, a lot of it would be brought into the market, and prices
all round would fall in consequence. The present absurdly
high value of land must be brought down somehow. It is no
use saying we can do it without any jar, because there must
be some jar. The present owners of Sydney for instance (and
there are not such a great many of them) could, if they liked to
combine together, rob the colony of thousands and thousands
of pounds by simply raising their rents. The business of the


Colony must be carried on in Sydney, and under the present
system we must pay the owners of Sydney what price they
like for the use of their land. There is no second Sydney to
go to. We have given them this vast power, and we cannot
take it away by any means which will be unfelt. I think the
fairest way is to do as I have suggested—don’t interfere with
the present values, but look after any future value, and the
result will be that prices for city land will reach their true
level.
The tremendous lot of unimproved land about Sydney,
which is patiently waiting for a rise is something wonderful.
Go up into the Post Office tower and look round. You will
see hundreds of acres of land, exactly in the state in which
Captain Cook found it, but all of it worth according to
present values from £lOOO per foot down to £3 per foot.
Once the owners get to know that no further advance is
possible, they will begin to use this land, and when all this
unimproved land comes into the market, the inhabitants of
Sydney will not have to levy such a heavy tax on their
country brethren as they have been doing, to pay the colossal
rents of city properties.
This is the great reform which must come sooner or
later. lam quite aware that it is little use arguing and
pointing out a thing which is not severely felt—the average
Englishman feels nothing unless it hits him with the force of
a club. Well, this fee-simple ownership, if not mended, will
hit us like a club, and that before very long. It has hit them
that way in the old country. They are compelling land-
owners to hand over their land to tenants who wish to use it.
I propose some day to go more fully into this land question,
and to point out in detail its bearings on the different kinds
of properties. For the present we are all agog over our fiscal
policy. Any change in the fiscal policy will mean only a
change in distribution ; it will add but little to production
of wealth. Nevertheless, as it is, at the time of writing, the
burning question, we may as well try. and get at the principles
of it, and see how it affects us and our prosperity.
CHAPTER V.
There has sprung up, for what reason I know not, an im-
pression that Land Reform and Protection are diametrically
opposed. The gentlemen who advocate the single tax theory,


meet the gentlemen who advocate Protection in deadly com-
bat on public platforms. There is no antagonism between
true Land Reform and Protection, as I propose to show.
They support each other and should go together. The single
tax men forget that if they make their tax as heavy as
George wishes, viz., a confiscation tax, it will upset all exist-
ing arrangements, and burst up the present system. If they
only make it a light tax it will have no effect, but will
simply be passed on by the landlords to the tenants. The
last time a land tax was proposed this was provided for in
all leases. The question between Freetrade and Protection,
when you come to the bedrock of it, is simply whether it is
better for a community such as ours to exchange its raw
materials for the manufactures of other countries, or to tax
its own people and so create manufactures.
It is quite clear that the stock protectionist arguments
hardly put the matter properly. It is rather feeble to talk
about being overwhelmed with foreign boots, and inundated
with cotton material. These things are not curses but
blessings. We. wear boots and clothes; the question is
whether it is better to make these things for ourselves, or to
get them from other countries where they can be produced
cheaper. The Freetrade theory is that so long as any foreign
country will furnish us with manufactured goods cheaper
than our own people will make them, it is advisable to let
them come in free, because our own people can go to some-
thing else more profitable. Bastiat, the great Freetrade
authority, says at page 210 of his “ Economic Sophisms/’—
“ Why are men attached to the system of Protection ? ”
v Because as liberty (of exchange ) enables them to ob-
tain the same result with less labor, this apparent diminution
of employment frightens them.”
“ Why do you say apparent ? ”
“ Because all labor saved can be applied to something
else.”
“ To what ?”
“ That I cannot specify, nor is there any need to specify
it.”
“ Why ?”
“ Because if the sum of satisfactions which the country
at present enjoys could be obtained at one-tenth less labor,
no one could enumerate the new enjoyments which men
would desire to obtain from the labor left disposable. One
man would desire to be better clothed, another better fed,
another better educated, another better amused.”


Again at page 212 :
“As long as a man has wants to satisfy and time at his
disposal, there is always something to be done.”
That is the whole theory of Freetrade ; and it is exactly
on this point that in practice the Freetrade arguments break
down. Something else ! Our people ought to be able to go
to something else, no doubt; they ought to be able to go
out into the bush and grow wool and dig up the minerals.
The market for these things is not yet over-supplied, and the
land is not yet exhausted ; but, owing to our land tenure
system, their chances of going to something else are lessening
every day. So long as there are unemployed or only par-
tially employed men, crowding into our cities eager for a
job of work, it is no use for the freetraders to say that there
is no need to foster manufactures, because the people can
go to something else. They can’t get anything else to go to.
So long as they try to keep up their wages, i.e., to maintain
a high standard of living, they cannot hope to compete with
the underpaid laborers of the continent and England. Henry
George, in his “Protection and Freetrade,” lays down a doc-
trine which amounts to this, that whereever wages are
highest production is cheapest, and he quotes the Americans
as a proof. The Americans have got a start of the world in
machinery, and can turn out manufactured articles cheaper
than lower wage countries. When those lower wage coun-
tries get the same machinery as the Americans (and this they
are doing every day), they will soon disprove this fallacy that
the more a man is paid for his work, the less expensive his
work is. The true reason of the American success is simply
that they have a huge local market secured to them by Pro-
tection. The bigger the market the cheaper can the articles
be sold. If any coachbuilder here were to try and make
buggies of the same quality as the Abbot or Fleming buggies,
he would promptly go smash. They have a huge home
market, and where he could sell one they could sell a hundred,
so that they can gain all the advantages derived from doing
things on a big scale. They can compete with foreign
labor because of their huge home market, because of their
immense start in machinery and scientific knowledge, and
because they are protected heavily against foreign competi-
tion both of goods and labor—no unemployed foreigner can
land in America without paying a tax, nor can his goods go
in without paying a tax. It sounds rather well for them to
talk about fair competition with the world 1 The fact is that


where labor is high no manufactures can stand without
protection. Adam Smith said that they would grow up
naturally; as a nation grew out of the infancy stage.its
surplus capital would, he said, “ naturally turn itself to the
employment of artificers and manufacturers at home.” Both
those artificers and manufacturers, finding at home the mate-
rials (in our case say wool and corn), and the subsistence ( i.e .,
capital) necessary for their work, might immediately, even
with less skill, be able to work as cheap as inhabitants of
mercantile states at a distance (say England), They might
not be able to compete at first, because they would not have
such good machinery; but in time they would be able to
compete, and be able to “jostle ” the manufacturing country
out of the local markets.”
Smith, in this paragraph, overlooks the fact that labor
will not reduce its wages sufficiently to compete with
“ mercantile ” states. They only hold their own by degrad-
ing their labor to the starvation point, and to “jostle ” them
out of our own, or any other market, we must reduce our
laborers accordingly, a thing which we are loth to do. He
says (page 17) that by this means any landed country will in
time manufacture and carry too. But the great wages ques-
tion he has overlooked. We cannot compete with German
iron goods, for instance, even though we have the iron here,
until our laborers like to come down to working 14 hours a
day, with no holidays.
The English operatives can beat our local cloth factories
in our own markets, although the wool has to be carried there
and handled by hosts of people, and brought back here made
up. If we could get men at English wages we would soon
beat them ; but the old, old question then comes up—are we
going to pauperise our labor in the strife for the world’s
markets ? It must be remembered that our object is to put
our working classes on a higher footing than they now stand;
and if we do this, we can never expect them to manufacture
things for us at the same rate of pay as the foreign makers
get. The trusts and monopolies whereby laborers are robbed,
and which grow up under protection, and which formed, so
far as I can see, almost the sole basis for Henry George’s book,
“Freetrade and Protection,” are not the fault of the system,
but of the way it is administered.
This question of Freetrade and Protection is purely a
wages question. While we have men unemployed, or half
employed, it is idle to talk about the economic value of their


labor, and to say that they need not manufacture, as they can
go to something else. It is for the freetraders to say to what
else they should go. Failing an answer to this question, the
country will inevitably go for protection. We can see pretty
clearly the reason why these men are unemployed: the bad
land tenure system is the reason of it. But even when
tenures are put right, I think protection is the correct policy.
We can, of course, all devote our attention to wool-growing
and farming, two things in which, by reason of our superior
natural advantages, we are bound (for the present, at any
rate) to find something to do. We can exchange our products
for those of other countries. With all our best land available,
we might command the markets of the world for raw material.
But is it a fitting destiny for such a nation as ours, that we
should have no higher objects than to grow wool and reap
corn ? Are we to have no arts nor manufactures ? These
things will only grow by protection. There is no question
what protection is: it simply means taking out of the pockets
of certain of the community a sum of money for the benefit
of the others ; and I say deliberately that such a proceeding
is right. We have now the best of the wool trade ; but the
South American supplies are catching on us. We cannot
export wheat to compete with America. It is better for us
to make for ourselves a local market, even as the Americans
have done. It is better to lay a tax on the exporting
producers, and enable some of our people to start manufac-
tures, so that as these latter grow up we can create a system
of exchange over which we have control. Our own farmers
and wool-growers will have a certain market with their own
manufacturers; and the manufacturers will have a certain
market with their country people, instead of having to
compete with auction sold goods sent out here in huge
batches, and made by starving wretches working 15 hours a
day. There is no doubt that there are quite enough of us to
get a good living, even when dividing our labor as I propose.
Every other country almost has done the same thing. If all
the world were one country, under one set of laws, it would
be a different matter. But we cannot long devote ourselves
entirely to wool-growing and farming, and as soon as we get
any surplus labor we must give it a chance.
Here is the gist of the whole matter. Adam Smith
says : —“ It is the maxim of every prudent master of a family
never to attempt to make at home what it will cost him more
to make than to buy.” No, but if he has to keep some of his


family doing nothing, it is better to make the article, even at
a loss, than submit to the loss of keeping the family idle, and
also buying the thing.
This, then, should be our policy: Eeform our land
tenure, so that we may get the best possible use out of our
lands; and reform our tariff, so that we may give our
industries a start on some other basis than that of cheap
labor. We will, of course, amass a huge revenue of Govern-
ment ; but I have yet to learn that that is an evil. There are
plenty of ways of spending Government money besides build-
ing the North Shore bridge. We can start irrigation works,
and go in for artesian water. We can afford to amuse our-
selves a little, and life need not be such a very “ root-hog-or-
die ” proceeding as it now is.
One question is much debated—Should trade be free
between the colonies ? Certainly, once we get all the
colonies under one Government, and get the land system
in each on a proper basis. At present our farmers out in the
back country, are clamouring for protection against Victorian
products. They say that the cost of carriage prevents them
having a chance. That is one of the beauties of our present
land system, that men have to go three or four hundred miles
inland to make a homestead, while better land is lying idle
near the towns; also, they say that they cannot compete with
the splendid land which the Victorian farmers enjoy. When
we get a proper land system, all such land will pay an
additional rent to the State, and the man that has the
advantage of using it will have the privilege of paying for it.
We must always keep in view that our object is the greatest
good for the greatest number; and as soon as we get all the
colonies under one government and under a proper land
system, then we will know that everyone has a fair chance,
and it will pay us better to put some of our people on to
manufactures and art, rather than to go on being “ a country
where they grow wool.’" This will be better than letting our
manufactures grow up, by our population growing down in
their standard of living.


. *




