

Australian Campaigns
in the
Great War.


ANGUS & ROBERTSON LTD.
New & Secondhand Booksellers
Publishers to University
89 Castlereagh St. Sydney.






AUSTRALIAN CAMPAIGNS IN THE
GREAT WAR.




AUSTRALIAN CAMPAIGNS
IN THE
CREAT WAR
BEING
A CONCISE HISTORY OF THE AUSTRALIAN
NAVAL AND MILITARY FORCES,
19 1 4 to 19 18
BY
LIEUT. THE HON. STANIFORTH SMITH.
F.R.G.S., F.Z.S. (44th Battalion, A.1.F.)
Administrator of the Territory of Papua.
WITH A PREFACE BY
ERNEST SCOTT,
Professor of History, University of Melbourne.
MELBOURNE:
MACMILLAN & CO. LIMITED.
Head Office: LONDON.
1919.


MACMILLAN AND CO. LIMITED,
LONDON . BOMBAY . CALCUTTA . MADRAS.
MELBOURNE.
THE MACMILLAN COMPANY,
NEW YORK . BOSTON . CHICAGO
DALLAS . SAN FRANCISCO.
THE MACMILLAN CO. OF CANADA LTD.
TORONTO.
Melbourne :
MoCarron, Bird & Co., Printers, 479 Collins Street.,


DEDICATED
WITH THE
DEEPEST ADMIRATION AND RESPECT
TO
THE HEROIC AUSTRALIANS
WHO FELL ON THE FIELD OF BATTLE
AND TO
THOSE NOBLE WOMEN
WHO GAVE UP THEIR DEAREST ONES TO MAINTAIN
THE WORLD’S FREEDOM.
“To live in hearts we leave behind is not to die,"




PREFACE.
By PROFESSOR ERNEST SCOTT.
There is already a very large literature concerning the part
played by the Australian forces in the Great European War.
There are books about the Australians in France, in Egypt
and in Palestine, and there is an especially thrilling collection
of narratives of the splendid adventure of Gallipoli. In due
course, we may expect to have an ample official history of the
Australian share in the War, based upon the authentic records,
and covered by official sanction.
The book which has been written by Lieutenant Staniforth
Smith is different in design and scope from any which have
yet been published, and of course is quite different from what
the official history will aim at being. He has endeavoured to
present, within the shortest compass possible, a general review
of the whole of the phases of the campaigns in which the Aus-
tralian armies participated. Monographs on particular cam-
paigns and “ shows” have their value. The comprehensive
review of the whole of the Australian military work will have
its dignified place on the shelves of. libraries. But there is
surely room for a book which, whilst being sufficiently com-
prehensive in its grasp of the entire scheme of campaigning,
also has a focussing efficacy.
The author of this book, therefore, occupied his time in
London for some weeks prior to his return to Australia after
serving in France, in working at the official records of the
Australian armies, and making copious extracts from them,
with a view of presenting such a short and complete review.
The reader will not find here any attempts at “ purple” de-
scriptive writing, but he will find throughout a sincere en-
deavour to describe battles and manoeuvres tersely, accurately
and clearly. He will find a survey of the whole of the opera-
tions from start to finish, with sufficient detail to make the
story valuable, but not so much as to overburden the narrative
with facts.


It is primarily a soldiers’ book ; but in telling what the
soldier wants to have recorded concerning the campaigns in
which he fought, it also performs a very useful purpose for the
Australian citizen generally, in gathering up for him the
threads spun so far afield, and weaving them together into one
compact fabric.
By founding his chapters on the official records, the author
has ensured that his narrative shall be composed from the
most reliable elements which could be obtained. He does not
pose as a critic of strategy and tactics, but is content to state
the things which he found in the records with as much concise-
ness as the expansive nature of the operations would permit.
Self restraint is a quality of the book which will commend it
to many who have read much war literature of quite the
contrary kind.
Mr. Staniforth Smith, for a man who has as yet hardly
reached middle age, has had an exceptionally varied life. The
reader of his pages may be quite certain that he is not in
inexperienced hands. A Senator in the first Parliament of
the Commonwealth, who “ did his bit” with the legislation
which laid the foundations of Australian national policy, he
has since concentrated his attention on the problems of
tropical colonisation and cultivation. He was serving his
country as Administrator of Papua when the war broke out,
and enlisted as a private in the A.I.F. While serving in
France he made up his mind that if opportunity presented he
would write a history of the whole of the Australian war
service, and this book is the fulfilment of that undertaking.
Experience of life and large affairs has shown him how
to separate what is essential and vital from what is transitory
and unimportant, and he has put that experience at the service
of the reader of these short and pithy chapters. Probably
there has not yet been a book about the war which tells so
much in a space so limited. That concentration is the
author’s deliberate choice. It stands as one of the many
merits of a very valuable piece of work.
ERNEST SCOTT.
The University, Melbourne.
Sept. 28, 1919.


INTRODUCTION.
Perhaps no one knew less regarding the general progress
of the war than the soldier in the front line. Beyond his own
immediate sector, and possibly the doings of the battalions
on the flanks, he learnt nothing, except information occasion-
ally gleaned from a belated and much-censored newspaper.
The reasons were obvious—there was little time to consider
anything beyond the immediate work on hand, while spies,
in various disguises, and enemy listening posts supplied with
microphones, were always liable to pick up ordinary con-
versations of soldiers in estaminets and in the trenches,
which might convey some valuable news to the enemy. The
policy of Headquarters was therefore not to impart any in-
formation except in regard to projects actually concerning the
unit.
While several excellent works have been published dealing
with various campaigns in the war, Australians may appreciate
a short connected account of the exploits of their friends and
comrades in Gallipoli, France and Belgium, of the Light Horse
in Egypt and Palestine, of the little bands of Australians in
Mesopotamia and elsewhere, of the doings of their fleet and
the story of the annexations in the Pacific.
Shortly after the capture of Messines, while filling the
humble position of a platoon commander, the writer was
invalided to Great Britain with a broken ankle, the result of
an accident in the front line. Placed for a time on home
service and attached to the Australian General Staff in Great
Britain, he was engaged, amongst other duties, in writing for
the War Records Section a history of the systems and methods
of military training at the Australian Imperial Force Depots
m the United Kingdom. This work afforded him an oppor-
tunity of consulting the Divisional Staff diaries of the cam-
paigns in Gallipoli, France, Belgium, Egypt, Palestine and


Syria, and as no short history of the whole of the Australian
operations was being prepared or contemplated, so far as he
was aware, he then decided to write on his return to Australia
a small volume, based on these official records and informa-
tion otherwise gained, giving a concise account of all the
Australian campaigns.
This is of course in no sense an official history. The
authorised history, filling several volumes, is being written by
Captain C. E. W. Bean—who was the official war correspond-
ent of the Australian Forces-assisted by Mr. H. S. Gullet
and Mr. F. M. Cutlack. In such able hands this standard
work will doubtless record fully and with a wealth of illustra-
tion and detail, Australia’s glorious achievements.
The Official History necessarily cannot be completed for
some time, and possibly many of our busy citizens may find
that their limited leisure will restrict them to a much shorter
account of the great deeds of Australia’s soldiers and sailors.
No attempt has been made in the present volume to
describe the strategy and tactics of the Great War, subjects
far beyond the capacity of the writer, whose role has been the
simpler task of narrating, it is hoped with accuracy, the
military actions which have conferred an imperishable fame
on our Australian troops.
It is believed that the statistics at the end of the book
will constitute a useful contribution to the efforts made to
clearly indicate the true position of Australia as an Ally in the
greatest feat of arms which history records.
The writer was fortunate in having information obtained
for him from the War Office, as to the casualties suffered by
the troops from various parts of our far-flung Empire, and
from the foreign legations in London particulars, not pre-
viously published, of the casualties of our Allies. This, with
details gathered regarding the Central Powers, has enabled
tables to be compiled, and for the first time published, of the
casualties of the whole of the belligerents.
Maps illustrating all the principal campaigns have been
specially prepared from Staff plans, and show full details
of the territories captured by the Australian Forces.


In preparing this short history the author has consulted
numerous reports, documents, and histories, but he especially
desires to record his obligations to The Times History of the
War, and, in regard to the Gallipoli campaign, to Australia in
Arms, by Philip F, E. Schuler, and the Dardanelles Campaign,
by H. W. Nevinson, as the official information regarding
the Gallipoli operations is somewhat meagre.
Among many officers who have given the writer very
valuable assistance, he wishes warmly to thank Major
F. Berriman, D. 5.0., and Major K. McKenzie, D. 5.0.,
graduates of the Royal Military College, Duntroon —although
these officers are in no way responsible for any of the views
expressed. He also desires to record his especial gratitude
to Professor Ernest Scott, for the helpful interest which he
has shown in the preparation of the work, and to Mr.
E. T. Hubert for valuable aid in various directions, including
the revision of proofs.




CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I.
PAGE.
Germany’s Policy. The British Isles. The Empire’s Rally.
Australians sent to Egypt. Attack on the Suez Canal.
Reasons for the Gallipoli Campaign . . . . .. .. 1
CHAPTER 11.
The Historic Landings at Gallipoli. Attack on Krithia. Turkish
Counter-Attacks. Great British Offensive. Capture of
Lone Pine. The Main Attack on Sari Bair. The Attack
from Suvla Bay. Capture of Hill 60. The Evacuation . . 19
CHAPTER 111.
The Senussi Campaign. Hospitals. Reorganization. The
Capture of German Possessions in the Pacific. The Aus-
tralian Navy. The Destruction of the Emden. Capture of
Tsing Tau. The Western Front, 1914-1916 .. .. ..44
CHAPTER IV.
Western Front ( continued ).
Attack towards Fromelles. The First Battle of the Somme.
The Capture of Pozieres. Mouquet Farm. The Somme
Winter. First Attack on Hindenburg Line. Bulleeourt .. 71
CHAPTER V.
Western Front ( continued).
The Battle of Messines. The 3rd Battle of Ypres. Battle of Menin
Road. Polygon Wood. Broodseinde Ridge. Passchendaele.
The United States of America .. .. . . . . 92
CHAPTER VI.
Western Front ( continued ).
The Second Battle of the Somme. Defence of Amiens. Villers
Bretonneux. Capture of Hamel. The Battle of the Lys .. 112


CHAPTER VH.
Western Front ( continued).
The Third Battle of the Somme. Attack on Bth of August, 1918.
Capture of Mont St. Quentin. American Co-operation.
Capture of Hindenburg Line. Capture of Le Catelet and
Montbrehain .. .. • • • • • • • • • • 132
CHAPTER VIII.
Conquest of Sinai. Ist, 2nd, and 3rd Battles of Gaza. Capture
of Palestine. Advance on Damascus. The Expedition
to Baku. The Mesopotamian Front. The Russian Front .. 147
CHAPTER IX.
Australia’s Share in the Great War. Britain’s Welcome to her
Kinsmen. The Armistice. The Peace Terms. The League
of Nations. The Future Status of Australia .. ..172
Appendix A. —Some Great Battles of the Past . . .. 193
Appendix B. —Approximate Cost of the Principal Wars of
Modem Times . . . • • • • • • • . . 193
Appendix C. —Nations Engaged in the Great War .. .. 194
Appendix D. —Total Troops Mobilized and Casualties . . . . 195
Appendix E.—Total Forces of the British Empire . . .. 196
Appendix F. —War Expenditure of the British Empire . . . . 197
Appendix G. —Percentage of Enlistments to Population in
the Australian States .. .. .. . • ..197
Appendix H. —Australian Casualties in the various Campaigns 198
Appendix I. —Comparative Table of Rates of Pay (Daily) in the
Armies . . .. . . • • • • • • ..199
Appendix J. —War Service Gratuities of Great Britain and her
Dominions . . .. .. . • • • • • • • 200
Appendix K.—War Pensions Act, 1914-16 . . .. • • 201
Appendix L.—Australian Imperial Force. List of Victoria Cross
Winners. Complete List of Decorations won by Aus-
tralians .. . • • • • • •• •• •• 204
Appendix M.—Gratuities, Annuities, or Pensions Payable in
respect of Decorations awarded to Soldiers of the A.I.F. 206
Appendix N. —Scholarships. Education and Industrial Employ-
ment .. .. .. •• • • • • • • .. 20 6


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.
~ FACING
PAGE
1. Anzac Cove, Gallipoli 32
2. Shrapnel Gully, Gallipoli 33
3. Walker’s Ridge, Gallipoli 48
4. A Forward Dressing Station in Battle Area .. . . 49
5. Trench, Pozieres, Ist Battle of the Somme .. .. 80
6. Bapaume. First Battle of the Somme 81
7. Wounded after Battle of Mbnin Road, 3rd. Battle of
Ypres .. • • • • • • •• • • .. 96
8. ZONNEBEKE AND THE LAKE, 3rd BATTLE OF YPRES . • 97
9. Advancing Field Artillery, 3rd Battle of Ypres .. 112
10. Ruined Village, Hindenburg Line, 3rd Battle of the
Somme .. .. •• •• •• •• •• ..113
11. Peronne, 3rd Battle of the Somme 144
12. Canal and Tunnel near Bellicourt .. .. •• ..145
13. Imperial Camel Corps, Palestine Campaign .. .. 160
14. Jerusalem, Palestine Campaign .. • • • • • • 161
15. Jordan Valley, Palestine Campaign .. •• •• 176
16. Official Entry into Damascus, Syria Campaign .. 177
MAPS.
At end of book.
The Gallipoli Campaign.
The Capture of German New Guinea.
Fi&st and Third Battles of the Somme.
Battle of Messines and Third Battle of Ypres.
Sinai, Palestine and Syria Campaign.




Australian Campaigns in the Great War.
CHAPTER 1.
Germany’s Policy. The British Isles. The Empire’s
Rally. Australians Sent to Egypt. Attack on
the Suez Canal. Reasons for the Gallipoli
Campaign.
GERMANY’S POLICY.
The policy of Prince Bismarck, as Chancellor of the
German Empire, was purely continental. His system of
European concentration created the German Empire, and
raised it to a position of unquestioned military supremacy in
Europe.
Having attained this end, he prevented by alliances the
possibility of a combination of European Powers being ar-
rayed against him. He formed the Triple Alliance, which
stretched across Europe from the Mediterranean to the Baltic,
effectually separating his two most dangerous rivals—Russia
and France.
As a “ reinsurance policy” over the German edifice
which his genius had reared after twenty-six years of labour
and ruthless diplomacy, he cultivated the most friendly re-
lations with Russia, even entering into a secret agreement with
that Power, in order to prevent any diplomatic rapproche-
ment between her and France, as the isolation of those two
nations, physically and in spirit, ensured the unquestioned
military supremacy of the Central Powers in Europe.
B


His far-seeing diplomacy detected a possible “ Naboth’s
vineyard” in the Balkans, where Russia s susceptibilities
were most easily roused. He therefore permitted this area
to remain a “ No-man’s-land between the political frontiers,
shrewdly professing indifference regarding the future of that
storm-centre, by giving it as his deliberate opinion, that the
Balkans were not worth the life of one Pomeranian grenadier.
When William 11. ascended the throne as German Emperor,
the external policy of the Empire was changed. That
aspiring autocrat decided that Germany should dictate not
merely the policy of Europe, but the policy of the world. The
Iron Chancellor was dismissed in 1890, two years after the
Emperor’s accession. The “ shining sword” and “ mailed
fist” continually reminded the world of the new policy.
France was bounced and hectored. The trident was to be
snatched from the feeble hand of Britannia, to be wielded
in future by the “ Admiral of the Atlantic.
The phenomenal growth of the German navy alarmed
British statesmen. The advent of the Dreadnought type
practically “ scrapped” the British navy, and the opportunity
was seized by Germany to endeavour to lay down keel for
keel.
The British policy of “ splendid isolation” was modified,
and an agreement arrived at with France in 1904.
Russia’s policy of adventure in Eastern Siberia and Korea
was sedulously encouraged by the self-appointed arbiter of the
world’s destinies, with the object of embroiling her with a
powerful oriental nation. The Russo-Japanese war ended in
Russia’s defeat, humiliation and loss of prestige both at home
and abroad. Meanwhile Germany stealthily took advantage
of Russia’s disaster to entrench herself in the Balkans and
assume the hegemony of the Near East.
Fortunately for Europe, and unfortunately for the Junkers,
this was a stab in the back which Russia could not forgive.
Her cherished dream, since the time of Peter the Great, of the
acquisition of the Golden Horn—the one ice-free port for her
great Empire—was rudely shaken. The majestic edifice so


laboriously reared by Germany’s great Chancellor was shat-
tered by the “ young man in a hurry.” Russia and France
arrived at an agreement in 1907. The change in Russia’s
foreign policy is revealed in an article written by Professor
Mitrofanoff in June, 1914—“ Russians now see plainly that
the road to Constantinople lies through Berlin.”
The great European Powers were regrouped. The hitherto
unquestioned supremacy of the Triple Alliance in Europe be-
came doubtful. Still infatuated with his “ world policy,” this
royal megalomaniac piled Ossa on Pelion, His gigantic
army was largely increased, his formidable navy almost
doubled. The “ shining sword” was rattled in the scabbard
more threateningly than ever.
By 1914 the Kaiser and his war party believed that their
colossal war machine was ready to destroy France and Russia,
as the first step in their great “ world policy.” The plan of
campaign had been worked out to the last button of the
soldiers. The crushing terms to be granted to their prostrate
opponents, and the stupendous indemnities to be levied, had
been decided upon.
The needed excuse was in due time manufactured, and a
holocaust of death and destruction soon swept over peaceful
Europe.
The German Empire, ably organized industrially, with a
population of seventy million people of high technical and
scientific training, robust, capable and industrious, was winning
by the peaceful victories of industry and commerce a high
position amongst the Great Nations of the World. It was the
“ shining sword” and the “ mailed fist” that shattered in-
dustrial Germany and beat the instruments of civilization and
progress into tools of human torture. The gaunt spectre of
war stalked through Europe, and its first victims were happi-
ness and prosperity.
The Kaiser—vigorously supported by Junkers, war lords,
professors and a subsidized press—was the evil genius of the
German people. His “ success’ in the Balkans converted
Russia from an ally to an enemy—while his self-imposed title
of Admiral of the Atlantic, ’ and his ambition to acquire


both military and naval supremacy, drove Great Britain into
an alliance with France and Russia. The Iron Chancellor
might well have turned in his grave as his great edifice was
torn down by his own Emperor to build a world edifice on the
shifting sands of universal distrust. Even after war had been
declared, the many acts of “frightfulness” succeeded in
forcing the remainder of the world into a state of active or
passive hostility to Germany.
It is difficult to overestimate the results of the Kaiser s
maladroit world diplomacy. By simply continuing Bis-
marck’s policy, he would have retained a natural alliance ot
the three great autocracies of Europe, with Italy as a further
buttress. Would it have been possible for France—-the only
other great military power —to have stood against an alliance
capable of placing twenty million men in the field ?
The rights and liberties of Europe would have been ground
to powder under the heel of a military despotism, which Great
Britain and America, having no foothold m Europe, could not
have combated.
“ Those whom the gods wish to destroy they first make
mad.”
THE BRITISH ISLES.
How fared it with the grand old Motherland, which the
Germans had confidently asserted was decadent—her limbs
paralysed by senile decay? She performed the greatest
miracle of the whole war. Her majestic navy swept from the
seas the warships of the Central Powers. From every clime
her immense mercantile marine transported Empire troops,
foodstuffs and material. A non-military nation, she instantly
sent her expeditionary force of a few highly framed divisions
to France—the heroic “ Old Contemptibles,” a name that will
live as long as that of the Spartans of Thermopylae and of the
Old Guard of Napoleon. A non-military nation, she created,
after the commencement of the Great War, mighty armies on
continental lines. She converted tens of thousands o
civilians into officers, and millions into trained soldiers. She
built thousands of factories and tens of thousands of machmes


to provide the arms and equipment for her troops ; manu-
factured immense quantities of guns and colossal piles of
ammunition. After denuding the country of men for her
armies and war factories, she nearly doubled the quantity of
agricultural produce which she had raised in pre-war days.
Five million of her glorious womanhood kept the home fires
burning, and gladly toiled on farms and in factories to provide
food for their men and ammunition for their guns. The in-
credible labour of converting a nation of industrial workers
into one of the greatest of military nations, while retaining the
guardianship of the seas, by no means exhausted her super-
abundant energies or immense wealth. She supplied raw
material, food, manufactures, artillery and munitions to her
Allies, and her apparently inexhaustible treasury assisted the
other allied nations to the extent of £1,332,000,000. She raised
during the war £5,000,000,000 by loan and £2,000,000,000
by taxation. After the collapse of Russia, her ships made
possible the advent of America’s stalwart millions into
France. She assumed the role of the Quartermaster and
Banker of the Allies, until America came in and shared the
burden.
It is no exaggeration to claim that the British Empire, with
her navy and army, assumed the leading role—amongst all
the great Allies—in crushing the gigantic conspiracy of military
despotisms to destroy the freedom and civilization of the
world. In two years the Empire produced such armies as it
took Germany forty years to create. The English, Scotch and
Irish fought with a deathless valour and bulldog pertinacity
which had never been exceeded even in the glorious annals of
Marlborough and Wellington.
THE EMPIRE’S RALLY.
The German conception of the British Empire in 1914 was
that of ill-disciplined groups of people, held in subjection by
Great Britain as the strongest power.
When the tocsin of war sounded through the world the
Germans believed the “Colonies’" would avail themselves of


the opportunity to assert their independence. India was
considered to be a dependency which England held by con-
quest as a useful field for economic exploitation, and a vast
dumping ground for her cotton goods and other manufactures.
In truth, these were largely the fashionable opinions in
Great Britain just one hundred years earlier. Fortunately,
since then a much nobler conception of a peaceful league of
British nations had enriched the minds of the great self-
governing nations composing the Empire.
The “ Colonies” had gradually evolved into a great partner-
ship of sister nations, free to mould their own destinies, their
young limbs unfettered, their coasts shielded by a puissant navy
that maintained the freedom of the seas, and all linked together
by the “ crimson thread of kinship,” a pride of achievement, a
community of interests, a common language and a joint
inheritance.
This constituted a League of Nations, which loved freedom
even more than it hated war.
When Germany slipped her serried millions from the leash,
a wonderful thing happened. “ The Men of the Blood” in
the uttermost parts of the world streamed from British and
foreign parts to the battle line, moved by the common impulse
of race instinct. Men splendid in their lusty vigour, versed
in all the arts and sciences of peace, but ignorant of the vice
of massed murder which is called war, came together gladly
for the Great Decision, the battle of Armageddon. The over-
seas contribution of the British Empire was over two million
men and a thousand million pounds—truly a noble effort.
The people of Australia had hoped till the last that war
could be honourably averted. Yet when the fateful news
arrived on 4th August, 1914, their decision was instantaneous
and unanimous. Messages flashed along the cables offering
Great Britain an expeditionary force, while Australia’s small
but efficient fleet passed automatically to the control of the
British Admiralty.
The Territory of Papua, Australia’s oldest colony, co-
operated gladly in patriotic endeavour, both in enlistments
(which included nearly half the whole public service) and in


generous donations to various war funds, Sgt. C. 0. Castleton,
of the sth Machine Gun Company, who was a resident of
Papua, received the Victoria Cross.
In the great crisis political differences ceased to exist.
Mr. (now Sir) Joseph Cook, Prime Minister and leader of the
Liberal party, at once offered to place all Australia’s resources
at the disposal of the British Government, Mr. Andrew
Fisher, head of the Parliamentary Labour party, and leader of
the Opposition in the Federal Parliament, declared that
“ should honour demand the Mother Country to take part in
hostilities, Australians will stand beside her to the last man
and the last shilling.” The Defence authorities worked day
and night. The Citizen Army was mobilized, the defences
along the coast manned and shore patrols organized. It was
decided that the first contingent of the Australian Expedition-
ary Force should consist of an infantry division and a brigade
of light horse.
In September the Labour party came into power. Mr.
Andrew Fisher succeeded Mr. Joseph Cook as Prime Minister
and Senator G. F. Pearce replaced Senator E. D. Millen as
Minister of Defence.
Late in November Senator Pearce was able to announce that,
on the military side, forty thousand troops had been raised for
service in Europe, and 1764 naval reservists and infantry had
taken part in operations in the Pacific, making a total of
approximately 42,000 men. In addition, 56,000 men of the
citizen forces were armed and equipped, the majority being
mobilized under active service conditions for the defence of
the Commonwealth.
AUSTRALIANS SENT TO EGYPT.
By the end of September the first contingent was embarked
or ready to embark, but delay arose in providing an adequate
naval escort for the New Zealand contingent, rendered neces-
sary by the presence in the Pacific of the powerful German
cruisers, the Scharnhorst and Gneisenau,


The combined convoy of 30,000 troops left Albany, West
Australia, on the Ist of November, 1914—22,000 Australians
and 8000 New Zealanders, in thirty-eight transports convoyed
by two British warships, the Australian cruisers Sydney and
Melbourne, and the Japanese cruiser Ihuki —the largest fleet
that had ever crossed the Indian Ocean, and bearing the most
valuable cargo that Australasia could send.
On the 9th of November the Australian cruiser Sydney met
the German cruiser Emden , which had done so much damage
to the shipping of the Allies, and captured and destroyed her
at Cocos Island. Particulars of the action will be given in a
subsequent chapter.
On the 28th of October, four days before the Australian
Imperial Force left the shores of Australia, Turkish torpedo
boats bombarded Odessa, and a large force of Bedouins, at
the instance of Turkey, invaded the Sinai Peninsula. Turkey
declared war on the 31st of October. On 3rd November an
Anglo-French squadron opened fire on the Dardanelles. On
the 19th of December Abbas Hilmi Pasha, Khedive of Egypt,
was deposed, and Prince Hussein Kamil, uncle of the Khedive,
was appointed by Great Britain Sultan of Egypt. On the
same day, Egypt was made a protectorate of Great Britain.
These happenings were important because they profoundly
affected the destination and destiny of the Australian Forces.
It had been decided by the Imperial War Office that the
troops from the sister nations of the Empire should, on arrival
in Great Britain, be trained and fully equipped at Salisbury
Plain. Camps for Canadians, Australians and New Zealanders
were being prepared there.
Early in November Sir George Beid, High Commissioner for
Australia, sent Colonel P. N. Buckley, R.E., Colonel Chauvel
(Australian representative at the War Office), and Dr. Norris,
the Commonwealth Medical Officer, to Salisbury Plain to
inspect the Australian camp. They found the site of the camp
a quagmire of mud, and no huts erected. On enquiry from the
contractors, they were informed that the material for the


buildings was not available, and even if it were, it could not be
got on to the ground ; that there was no chance of the buildings
being completed before April or May, 1915.
Colonel Buckley submitted a report to Sir George Reid,
supported by one from Dr. Norris, pointing out the danger of
bringing troops from a warm climate to a cold, bleak, windswept
plain in the depth of winter, without any shelter except tents.
The High Commissioner saw Lord Kitchener, and placed the
report before him. The Secretary of State for War expressed
astonishment at the reported non-erection of the huts, as,
according to the terms of the contract, they should have been
finished. He sent staff officers down to investigate the state-
ments in the report and subsequently told Sir George Reid
that these statements, were quite correct. Lord Kitchener
further informed Sir George Reid that he had been anxiously
considering the matter, and suggested for Australia’s con-
sideration that the Australian troops, which were now ap-
proaching Aden, should be disembarked in Egypt, where the
winter climate was warm and pleasant and where there were
excellent training grounds both for the infantry and light horse.
Sir George Reid thought this might be a satisfactory solution
of the difficulty, provided he could be assured that it was
intended to send the Australians from Egypt to France, as
they had come to fight the Germans and did not want to be
sidetracked on small adventures. Lord Kitchener said un-
doubtedly he intended to send the Australians to France from
Egypt, which was only the stopping place and training ground
for the Western Front. The assent of the authorities in
Australia was obtained, and a wireless message was sent to
General Bridges, which he received just before reaching Aden,
directing that the Australian and New Zealand forces were to
land at Alexandria.
It is certain that, at this time, Lord Kitchener had no
intention of sending the Anzacs to Gallipoli as, up to the 9th of
February, 1915, he refused to spare any men to assist the navy
to force the Dardanelles (see Dardanelles Commission, First
report). Further, a portion of the Australian Army Service


Corps was not landed in Egypt, but was sent on to Great
Britain to assist in the preparation of the Australian and New
Zealand camps at Salisbury Plain, which were to be ready for
Australian reinforcements after the winter.
At the same time, there is no doubt that —owing to the
Turko-Arabian occupation of Sinai (a part of Egypt), the unrest
caused by the deposition of the Khedive, and the greater
danger of a general rising of the Arabs in the Soudan and in
the country West of Egypt —Lord Kitchener recognised the
great moral effect of quickly landing 30,000 additional white
troops in Egypt, a portion of which were mounted men, to
frustrate the designs of Turkey and quell the mutinous spirit
in Egypt.
On the 3rd of December they began to arrive at Alexandria.
The Australian Division was camped at Mena, near the
Pyramids, the New Zealanders at Zeitoun, near Heliopolis,
and six miles from Cairo ; while the light horse were stationed
at Maadi, parallel with Mena but on the eastern side of the
Nile.
The 4th Australian Brigade, under General Monash, came
to Zeitoun at a later date to form part of the New Zealand
and Australian Division.
General Bird wood, while in India, was appointed by Lord
Kitchener as General Officer commanding the Australian and
New Zealand Army Corps. He had been a brigade major in
the South African War, and subsequently military secretary
to Lord Kitchener. He was again appointed military secretary
to Lord Kitchener when he was commander-in-chief in India,
and was at the time of this appointment secretary to the
Government of India in the Army Department, and member
of the Governor-General’s Legislative Council. General
Birdwood left Bombay with his corps staff on the 7th Decem-
ber, 1914. General Bridges still held the administrative
command of the Australian forces —a position which he re-
tained until his death at Gallipoli.


ATTACK ON THE SUEZ CANAL.
The Turkish army attacked the Suez Canal on 2nd February
1915.
Brigadier-General (now Sir) J. W. McCay, commanding the
2nd Infantry Brigade, was sent on the 3rd of February, with
the 7th and Bth Battalions, to Ismailia on the Suez Canal,
where two battalions of New Zealanders were encamped.
The Turkish column, under the direction of General Liman
von Sanders, the German commander-in-chief of the Turkish
army, was composed of Turks, Bedouins and Germans under
the command of Djemel Pasha ; it numbered 39,000 men.
The force was small, but the Turkish leader confidently
relied on the revolt of the Moslems in Egypt, and strenuous
propaganda had endeavoured to stir up a Holy War.
After skirmishes, the main attack was delivered on the 3rd
of February between Toussoum and Serapium, south of Lake
Timsah, where the enemy hoped to drive in a wedge. About
1000 Turks attacked Toussoum, while a larger body launched
about eighteen pontoons, which had been carried with them
—these were sunk by British fire. The main body, about
12,000 men, did not come into action, probably owing to the
destruction of the pontoons. Attacks were continued during
the day, a few of the enemy getting across the canal and en-
trenching themselves on the west bank. On the morning of
4th of Februarjr the Turkish force retired with a loss of six
hundied killed and, roughly, 3000 wounded and prisoners.
The losses of the British were fifty killed and two hundred
wounded.
REASONS FOR THE GALLIPOLI CAMPAIGN.
The Balkans have always been a danger centre to the peace
of modern Europe, a fruitful soil for the intrigues and ambitions
of Russia, Austria and Germany, while British diplomacy and
the threat of British force have always been exercised to main-
tain the status quo, as any great Power controlling the
Bosphorus largely controlled the destinies of the Near East.
Great Britain, for the safety of her own Asiatic interests,
had, with Austria, arrested the victorious advance of Russia


on Constantinople in 1826 ; and, with France, again prevented
Russia from annexing Constantinople as a result of the Crimean
War. Great Britain in the 70’s, during the Russo-Turkish
war and in the Treaty of Berlin, again safeguarded the
integrity of European Turkey. The Turkish Government had,
therefore, every reason to feel well disposed to Great Britain,
in spite of her denunciation of Turkish atrocities in Armenia,
and notwithstanding the British control of Egypt.
Turkey’s attitude towards Russia was, however, very
different. It was difficult to expect Turkey to ally herself
with her hereditary enemy, who, since the time of Peter the
Great, had openly, and perhaps naturally, sought to possess
herself of the Bosphorus and the Dardanelles, as the one ice-
free port for this huge nation which owned half of Europe
and a third of Asia, and possessed a population of 150 million
people. After the capture of Constantinople by the Turks,
the Tzars of Muscovy had also claimed to inherit the Eastern
Roman Empire.
Of the two nations which desired the control of Constan-
tinople, Turkey feared Russia even more than Germany.
She believed, if the power of Germany and Austria were
destroyed, she would be unable to exist by playing off one side
against the other, and that nothing could prevent Constanti-
nople from being occupied by Russia. Whereas, if Germany
and Austria won, she could perhaps at least maintain her
nationhood and the outward semblance of power, although
entirely subservient to Germany’s ambitions in the Near and
Far East.
r lThe policy of Turkey was undoubtedly to remain neutral
and by so doing obtain guarantees from both sides that her
independence would be respected. The Allies gave the Porte
definite assurances that if Turkey remained neutral her
independence and integrity would be respected in the peace
terms. But this policy would not have suited Germany,
which financed and assisted the Young Turkish party to secure
the reins of Government, and to force Turkey, against the
judgment of her older statesmen, to declare war.


The crisis was precipitated by the seizure on 3rd August of
two Turkish battleships, then nearing completion in
British shipyards. The following day the Turkish Government
concluded a secret alliance with Germany (Greek White Book,
24.8.17), Germany presenting Turkey with the warships
Goeben and Breslau, and obtaining the appointment of General
Liman von Sanders as commander-in-chief of the Turkish
Army. For nearly three months Turkey still maintained the
outward appearance of neutrality.
The Young Turkish party, which had come into power in
1908, was doubtless heavily bribed by Germany, and it played
into the hands of the Central Powers, which recognised that by
declaring war Turkey, besides making available a consider-
able armed force, could exercise a more important service in
crippling Russia by the simple expedient of blocking the
passage of the Dardanelles. The declaration of war by Turkey
was a masterpiece of German diplomacy, and a serious blow
to the Allied interests.
Having declared war, Turkey had every reason to fear that
Great Britain and France would attempt to force the Dar-
danelles, as Sir John Duckworth had done in 1807, and as
Italy attempted to do in 1911.
She was not long left in doubt ; Mr. Winston Churchill had
contemplated the forcing of the Dardanelles long before
Turkey had declared war. On Ist September, 1914, he had
arranged with Lord Kitchener that two officers from the
Admiralty should meet two officers from the Department of
the Director of Military Operations to examine and work out a
plan for the seizure, by means of a Greek army of adequate
strength, of the Gallipoli Peninsula, with a view of admitting
a British fleet to the Sea of Marmora.
The idea of opening the Dardanelles was Mr. Churchill’s.
In this he displayed a brilliant strategic conception, which was
subsequently marred by his impulsive tactics and by the half-
hearted support afforded by the War Office. The stakes
played for were high; success might have triumphantly
concluded the war during 1916. It would have paralysed
Turkey, given easy access to Russia in winter and summer,


enabling that nation to properly arm and equip her armies,
and put another million men into the field, with ample sup-
plies of guns and ammunition. It would have restored
Russia’s finances by permitting the export of vast quantities
of grain and other raw material for the benefit of the Allies.
It would probably have prevented the rise of the Bolshevists,
which was brought about by great national and military
disorganization and inadequate military equipment. It
would have severed Germany’s connection with Asia Minor,
secured Egypt and Persia, and probably would have rendered
unnecessary the costly and difficult expeditions in Meso-
potamia, Salonika and Palestine. It might have brought the
whole of the Balkans actively on the side of the Allies, and thus
have surrounded the Central Powers with a ring of iron.
The whole project was jeopardised and eventually defeated
by the precipitous, ill-calculated attacks of the British fleet,
and by the delays and indecisions resulting from the rival
parties of “ Easterners” and “ Westerners.”
By the end of 1914, a deadlock had been reached on the
western front. It was evident that Great Britain was not
ready to commence an offensive with any probability of suc-
cess, until her armies had been created and organized on
continental lines. This period did not arrive until six months
after the conclusion of the Gallipoli campaign. If this period
had been availed of to send an extra 50,000 men to Gallipoli
in May instead of in August, it would have enormously im-
proved the position.
Strategists lay it down that an expeditionary force is justi-
fied only if it diverts from the decisive theatre of war a larger
force of the enemy, and provided that the expeditionary force
can return quickly to the main objective.
Two policies were advocated by the “ Easterners” early in
1915. Lord Fisher, then First Sea Lord, proposed to enter
the Baltic, cut off supplies coming from Scandinavia to
Germany, and, with Russia, land in Northern Germany a
force protected by the naval guns, to divert German troops
from other fronts. The other policy, sponsored by Mr.
Churchill, was the attack on the Dardanelles.


Admittedly the difficulties were great. Lord Kitchener
believed in January that every available man was required
to hold the western front. The diversion of even 80,000 men
at that period was creating a grave risk. Kitchener’s “ New
Armies” did not begin to make their appearance in France
until the following May. To capture Gallipoli, which was of
such immense importance for the Allies, it was necessary to
strike unexpectedly with a strong land and sea force acting
in perfect unison.
Lord Fisher stated in December (Dardanelles Commission
First Report), “ I consider the attack on Turkey holds
the field, but only if it is immediate. However, it won’t be.
We shall decide on a futile bombardment of the Dardanelles.”
While Mr. Churchill was winning a reluctant consent from
Lord Fisher and Lord Kitchener to an “ amphibious” expedi-
tion, his impetuosity and impatience drove him to prejudice
the whole affair, and seriously minimise the chances of
ultimate success, by two naval attacks, which only stirred the
Turks and Germans to redoubled efforts to make the Penin-
sula impregnable.
The first Anglo-French naval attack took place on the 3rd
of November, two days before Great Britain had formally
declared war on Turkey. In this attack the War Council
had not been consulted and the commander-in-chief of the
Mediterranean fleet stated that the action was a mistake, as
being likely to put the Turks on the alert.
On 2nd January, 1915, Russia, hard pressed in the Caucasus,
urged Great Britain to make a demonstration against the
Turks in some other quarter. The British Government at
once promised a feint against the Turks, but feared it would
not result in the withdrawal of troops from the Caucasus.
On 28th January, it was decided, against the views of Lord
Fisher, to undertake a second naval attack on the Dardanelles,
The members of the Council recognised that a joint naval and
military attack would have increased the prospect of success,
but Lord Kitchener informed them that no troops could be
spared.


After the ships were despatched, Lord Kitchener began to
waver in his determination not to send troops (possibly this
was influenced by the defeat of the Turks on the Suez Canal),
and, for the first time, he may have contemplated sending
the Australians to Gallipoli.
On 9th February, Lord Kitchener advised the War Council
that if the navy required the assistance of land forces at a
later stage such assistance would be forthcoming.
On 16th February the War Council decided to send the 29th
Division at the earliest possible date to Lemnos, an island near
Gallipoli, and sanction was given for a further force to be sent
from Egypt if required. Transport was also authorised for
the conveyance of 30,000 troops.
It is significant that General Birdwood, commanding the
Australians and New Zealanders, had been sent to Lemnos to
report on the proposed attack on Gallipoli. He cabled to
Lord Kitchener, early in March, that he was doubtful if the
navy could force a passage unless assisted by military forces.
The fighting power of the Turks had been generally very
much underestimated, although Lord Kitchener had estimated
in January that the troops required for such an undertaking
would be 150,000. This, however, was not the general view ;
the Turks were judged by their feeble resistance against the
Bulgars, Serbians, and Greeks in 1912 ; and the fact that they
were now being reorganized and trained under skilled German
instructors, and supplied with loans, equipment, artillery and
munitions, was apparently overlooked.
Instead of waiting until the land forces were ready to strike,
' Mr. Winston Churchill, three days after the decision of the
War Council to undertake an attack on Gallipoli by naval and
military forces, ordered the naval attack to commence on
19th February. Admiral Carden had fourteen British and
four French warships, together with four light cruisers, sixteen
destroyers, six submarines and twenty-nine mine-sweeping
trawlers.
On 26th February landing parties of marines were put
ashore to complete the destruction of the forts, which had been
heavily bombarded ; the principal forts were four, two on


each side of the entrance—at Cape Helles and Seddel Bahr on
Gallipoli and at Kum Kali and Yenishehr on the Asiatic Coast.
The landing parties met with no serious opposition, except at
Kum Kali on the Asiatic Coast, and completed the destruction
of the forts.
If military forces had then been available to land and occupy
the forts as they were silenced, instead of waiting nearly six
weeks, a very different result might have eventuated.
The bombardment was continued intermittently until
18th March, all forts having been heavily bombarded up to
and including Kalid Bahr and Chanak on each side of the
entrance to “The Narrows,” but the straits could not be
forced, and the second naval attack had to be abandoned.
The German and Turkish Governments were now fully
aware of the determination of the Allies to capture Gallipoli
and during the five weeks’ calm that preceded the landing,
feverish efforts were made by an army of workers to so fortify
Gallipoli that it should be impregnable. Enormous quantities
of artillery were poured into the Peninsula, including two
hundred Austrian Skoda guns. The whole plan of the Allies
had been altered by the course of events —instead of a military
force supporting a naval attack, it now became a purely
military operation.
The first troops of the 29th Division reached Malta on the
23rd of March. Sir lan Hamilton left London on 13th March
to command the Mediterranean expeditionary force. In
the final stages of the Boer war he had been Kitchener’s
chief-of-staff. Transports also arrived at Lemnos with the
first contingent of 5000 Australians and the Royal Naval
Division, which had been at Antwerp. The French also landed
20,000 troops, partly Senegalese, under General d’Amade.
It was now discovered that the transports at Lemnos con-
taining equipment and supplies were wrongly packed, guns
were detached from their carriages, and units landing on
Gallipoli could not have their necessary impedimenta put
ashore with them, as it was not grouped according to require-
ments. In the absence of wharves and cranes, it was not
possible to re-sort and re-pack at Lemnos Island. On 25th
c


March the transports were compelled to return to Alexandria,
where they remained until 7th April.
The total attacking force was under 70,000. One portion,
consisting of the 29th Division, the Royal Naval Division and
the French expeditionary force, was to land near Cape Helles
at the extreme south of the Peninsula ; while the Australian
and New Zealand Army Corps (now known as “ Anzacs”),
consisting of two divisions and the 2nd and 3rd Light Horse
(unmounted) as corps troops, was to land on the western side
of the Peninsula, near Gaba Tepe. The Indian Brigade under
General Cox did not arrive until Ist May.


CHAPTER 2.
The Historic Landings at Gallipoli. Attack on Krithia,
Turkish Counter-attacks. Great British Offensive.
Capture of Lone Pine. The Main Attack on Sari
Bair. The Attack from Suvla Bay. Capture of
Hill 60. The Evacuation.
THE HISTORIC LANDINGS AT GALLIPOLI.
Mudros Harbour on the south side of Lemnos Island had
been chosen by the British as their advanced base for the
attack on Gallipoli, and by the middle of April, 1915, their
forces had been assembled there.
In drawing up his plan of attack Sir lan Hamilton hoped, by
simultaneous feints at other places, to leave the enemy in
doubt as to where the main offensives would be delivered, as
this would prevent them from concentrating their troops at
the two objectives chosen.
He decided to land the 29th Division at five points near
Cape Helles, at the extreme south of Gallipoli—the general
objective being the formidable hill of Achi Baba which,
rising in gradual slopes to a height of nearly 700 feet, dominated
the whole southern portion of the Peninsula.
The greater portion of the Royal Naval Division, without
guns, was to make a feint near the Bulair lines, at the northern
end or neck of Gallipoli, where the width does not exceed
three miles. These lines had previously been fortified by the
Allies during the Crimean War.
One infantry regiment and one battery from the French
Division, were to land on the Asiatic Coast at Kum Kali
below the entrance to the Dardanelles. The French were not
to remain there, nor advance beyond the Mendere River.


The Australian and New Zealand Army Corps (Anzacs)
was to land just north of Gaba Tepe on the west coast of the
Peninsula, about 15 miles north of Cape Helles and one mile
south of the position afterwards known as “ Anzac Cove.
At the time of the landing the strength of the enemy de-
fending the Dardanelles was : —Gallipoli Peninsula, 34,000 ;
Asiatic side of Straits, 41,000. Their first reinforcements
were 20,000, and their second reinforcements 24,000 (these
were hurried up shortly afterwards). The total was thus
119,000 troops.
The Cape Helles landing took place on the morning of the
25th April, 1915, and by the evening S beach (Eski Hissarlik)
was firmly held. At V beach, near Seddel Bahr, in spite of
the deathless courage of the Irish Regulars and the marines,
the attempted landing on the 25th had failed. At W beach,
the 86th Brigade Ist Lancashire Fusiliers gallantly won the
position, and stores, rations and water were landed. X
beach was captured by the 2nd Royal Fusiliers, Ist Borderers,
and Ist Inniskilling Fusiliers. Nearly 3 miles above X beach
was Y beach ; this was attacked by the Ist King’s Own
Scottish Borderers, one company of the South Wales Borderers,
and the Plymouth (Marine) Battalion (Royal Naval Division);
these troops landed, scaled the precipitous cliffs and dug in,
but were attacked by swarms of Turks, and decimated with
machine gun fire. After a most gallant fight lasting all day
and all through the night, against overwhelming odds, the
heroic remnant was forced to retire.
The French landed and after severe fighting captured Kum
Kali and Yenishehr villages, taking 600 prisoners. In spite
of violent counter-attacks they advanced along the coast to
the mouth of the Mendere River and drew the harassing fire
of the Asiatic guns away from the British positions. The
action was in every way successful. According to pre-
arranged plans the regiment re-embarked after nightfall on
the 26th, and joined the British at Cape Helles.
At the north of the Peninsula the Royal Naval Division
(less the Plymouth Garrison detailed for Y beach) carried out
a feint as though intending to land either at the Bulair lines


or at Karachali on the opposite coast. The destroyers opened
fire at various points along the coast and preparations as
though for a landing were ostensibly made. Only one person
went ashore (Lieut.-Commander Bernard Freyberg, of the
Hood Battalion). He swam to the coast—about 2 miles—
crawled 400 yards up to the trenches and lit three lots of flares
about a quarter of a mile apart along the coast and then swam
back to his ship. For this gallant deed Lieut. Freyberg
(a New Zealander) received the Victoria Cross.
The Anzacs made good their landing against fearful odds,
through barrages of artillery and tornadoes of machine-gun
fire, and at night dug in and grimly held on.
The permanent result of that fateful and glorious day’s
fighting by the Mediterranean expeditionary force was that
the 29th Division had made good its landing at Cape Helles,
and the Australians and New Zealanders had done the same
at Anzac Cove. The remainder of the eight months’ campaign,
detailed hereunder, consisted of extending those areas by con-
stant fighting.
The magnificent heroism of the 29th Division at the Cape
Helles landing has never been excelled at Gallipoli or on any
other front. The losses were appalling; in the first five days
the 86th Fusilier Brigade had 2218 casualties. By the 11th of
May the casualties, including sick, of the division were
11,000. When it was proposed to give a medal to the Anzacs
for the Gallipoli campaign, numbers of the Australian and New
Zealand forces said that they would refuse to accept it unless
the honour was also conferred upon their glorious comrades of
the 29th Division.
THE AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND LANDING.
COMPOSITION OF THE FORCE.
The Anzac Army Corps.
G.0.C., Lieut.-Gen. Sir W. R. Birdwood, K.C.5.1., C. 8.,
C.1.E., D.S.O.
8.G.G.5., Brig.-Gen. H. B. Walker, D.S.O.
G. 5.0., Lieut.-Col. A. Skeen (24th Punjabis).


D.A. and Q.M.G., Brig.-Gen. R. A. Carruthers, C.B.
Medical Officer, Col. (now Sir) C. S. Ryan, V.D. (A.A.M.C.).
Attached, Lieut.-Col. A. C. Joly de Lobiniere, C. 5.1., C.I.E.
Australian Division.
Commander, Major-General (later Sir) W. T. Bridges, C.M.G.
G. 5.0., Lieut.-Col. (now Sir) C. B. B. White (R.A.A.).
Comdr. Divl. Artillery, Colonel (now Sir) J. J. T. Hobbs,
V.D.
Comdr. Divl. Engineers, Lieut.-Col. G. C. E. Elliott (R.E.)
Ist Infantry Brigade.
Comdr., Col. H. N. McLaurin, Ist, 2nd, 3rd, 4th Battalions
(New South Wales).
2nd Infantry Brigade.
Commander, Col. The Hon. (now Sir) J. W. McCay, V.D.,
sth, 6th, 7th, Bth Battalions, Victoria.
3rd Infantry Brigade.
Comrpander, Col. E. G. Sinclair Maclagan, D.S.O. (York-
shire Regiment)., 9th Queensland, 10th South Australian,
11th Western Australian, 12th South Australian, Western
Australian, and Tasmanian Battalions.
Divisional Troops.
4th Victorian Light Horse Regt. *
New Zealand and Australian Division.
G.0.C., Major-General Sir A. J. Godley, K.C.M.G., C.B.
General Staff Officer, Lieut.-Col. W. G. Braithwaite, D.S.O.
(Royal Welsh Fusiliers). „ .r
Commander Divisional Artillery, Lieut.-Col, G. N. Johnston,
R.A.
Commander Divisional Engineers, Lieut.-Col. G. R. Prid-
ham, R.E.
New Zealand Mounted Rifle Brigade.
Commander, Brig.-General A. H. Russell, Auckland,
Canterbury and Wellington Mounted Rifles.


Ist Australian Light Horse Brigade.
Commander, Col. H. G. Chauvel, C.M.G. Ist New South
Wales, 2nd Queensland, 3rd South Australian, and Tasmanian
Regiments.
New Zealand Infantry Brigade.
Commander, Col. F. C. Johnston (North Staff Regiment).
Auckland, Canterbury, Otago and Wellington Battalions.
4th Australian Infantry Brigade.
Commander, Colonel (now Sir) J. Monash, 13th New
South Wales, 14th Victorian, 15th Queensland, and 16th
South Australian and Western Australian Battalions.
Divisional Troops.
Otago Mounted Rifles.
Corps Troops.
2nd Australian Light Horse Brigade (sth, 6th and 7th
Regiments), Commander, Col. (now Sir) G. de L. Ryrie.
3rd Australian Light Horse Brigade (Bth, 9th and 10th
Regiments), Commander, Col. F. C. Hughes, V.D.
Leaving Lemnos, the whole Anzac Force assembled, at
1.30 a.m. on the 25th April, at a point midway between
Imbros Island and the intended landing place.
The covering force consisted of the 3rd Australian Brigade
under Col. Sinclair Maclagan, but the landing party (1500 men)
came from Lemnos Island in the warships Queen, London
and Prince of Wales. They were towed in cutters by steam
pinnaces. As soon as the landing party had started the
remainder of the 3rd Brigade, conveyed in four transports,
was transhipped into 8 destroyers, and followed slowly towards
the shore until taken off by the returning cutters. When the
3rd Brigade had established a landing, the transports carrying
the remainder of the army corps were to steam close to the
landing and disembark. The Triumph, Majestic and Bac-
chante were to cover the landing by artillery fire.


At 4.30 a.m. the cutters laden with the landing party started
for the shore, followed by the destroyers at some distance.
The pinnaces, in the darkness, by some fortunate mistake
landed the party over a mile north of the appointed landing
place on a beach half a mile wide between Hell Spit on the
south and Ari Burnu on the north. This was the beach sub-
sequently known as “ Anzac Cove” (Anzac Army Corps
orders 26-5-1915). It provided a better position for landing
than the sector chosen, and was not strongly defended. Two
small trenches ran parallel to the beach and about 1000 Turks
were seen running north along the coast towards the landing.
About 5 a.m. they opened fire, doing considerable execution.
Before the cutters touched the beach the Australians leapt
into the water and rushed ashore. Throwing off their packs
they dashed straight inland, bayonetting any Turks in their
way. The two trenches were carried with a rush and the
troops then struggled up the high ground in front, afterwards
known as Maclagan’s Ridge. The remainder of the 3rd Brigade
landed and joined them. Crossing the ridge they came upon
a deep valley running north-east from Hell’s Spit (afterwards
known as Shrapnel Gully). Plunging into the valley they
pushed on regardless of shrapnel, snipers and machine-gun
fire from the front and flanks ; they became split up into small
parties by thick bushes and by gaps made in their ranks.
Up the steep heights they pressed on and crossing the ridge
they advanced till they could look down into the Turkish
camp at Koja Dere, 2\ miles inland. Major Brand, with the
9th and 10th Battalions, captured a battery of three Krupp
guns, which they spiked. It was impossible to get them away,
as the Turks were massing for a counter-attack. General
Bridges came ashore about 8.30 a.m., and Generals Birdwood
and Godley in the afternoon. The maps possessed by the
British staff were almost useless, no instructions could there-
fore be given as to the limits of the advance. Many Aus-
tralians, separated from the main body and refusing to sur-
render, were surrounded and killed. It is not yet known how
far the advance penetrated. Suffice it to say that during the
whole campaign the furthest advance towards Koja Dere was


made on that memorable day. It was not until maps were
secured from the bodies of Turkish officers that a reliable
knowledge of the country was obtained.
Under concentrated shell fire the remainder of the Ist
Australian Division landed that morning, quickly followed by
the New Zealand and Australian Division. Only two batteries
of Indian mountain guns could be landed that day owing to the
heavy shelling. The losses in the ranks of the Australians
were exceedingly heavy. In the confusion, battalions and
brigades became hopelessly mixed. General McCay, leading
the 2nd Brigade, had received instructions to push on to the
left of the covering brigade, but at the urgent request of
General Maclagan and after a hurried reconnaissance of the
position he threw his force into the line to fill a dangerous gap
on the right flank through which the Turks were beginning to
pour. This brigade crossed Shrapnel Gully and pushed on to
McCay’s Hill. The Ist Brigade advanced in support of the
dwindling numbers of the 3rd Brigade, while the left of the
position was filled by the New Zealand and Australian Division,
which stormed some high ground, afterwards known as
Plugge’s Plateau and Walker’s Ridge. The New Zealanders
also pushed north along the coast and captured a strong
position at Fisherman’s Huts, known as No. 1 Post. The 4th
Brigade had fought its way straight ahead from the landing
up a gully leading to a position afterwards known as Pope’s
Hill, captured by the Ist Australian Battalion ; the gully
leading to it was called Monash Gully, after the leader of the
4th Brigade. Quinn’s Post was very gallantly held for the
first three days by- the 14th Battalion. It was taken over
on the 28th by Major Quinn and the 15th Battalion.
The 4th Brigade formed the junction between the Ist
Australian Division and the New Zealand and Australian
Division. By the evening of that terrible day the front line
gradually formed in a triangular shape, the apex at Bloody
Angle and Pope’s Hill, 2000 yards west of the landing, while
the base spread along the coast for two miles. The total area
captured was 2| square miles.


There was no time for the gallant and exhausted troops to
dig in ; Turkish reinforcements poured in from the east,
north and south ; but, with thinning ranks, and streams of
wounded pouring back to the landing, our men grimly stuck
to their position. It was estimated that the Turkish troops
were as four to one. Fierce attacks by the enemy were
continuous, extending far into the night, but the heroic New
Zealanders and Australians held on against the fearful odds,
and eventually dug in on the following morning, protected by
the guns of the warships. Some 18-pounder guns were dragged
up with immense effort and placed near the front line. The
Turkish attacks continued on the 26th and 27th, when it was
estimated that one-fifth of the total Anzac force had been
killed or wounded. General McLaurin, the gallant leader of
the Ist Brigade, while reconnoitring, was shot through the
heart by a sniper.
The front as roughly dug in remained practically the same
for the following three months. It was not until the third day
that a commencement could be made to sort out the mixed-
up battalions and allow the exhausted troops a little rest.
It is difficult to recall any finer achievement of arms than
that of these young athletes, most of whom had never pre-
viously heard a gun fired in battle. They landed on an un-
known coast, and without any knowledge of the nature of the
country behind it. Swept by a hail of machine-gun and rifle
fire, torn to pieces by shell and shrapnel, hungry, thirsty and
worn out by stupendous exertions, yet for three days they
successfully withstood forces immensely superior in number,
belonging to the pick of the Turkish regulars. In the first two
days the 3rd Brigade had 1900 casualties, the 2nd Brigade
1700, and the Ist Brigade 900. By the end of the month the
Australian and New Zealand units had been sorted out and
the line reinforced by the Ist Light Horse Brigade and a
brigade of the Royal Naval Division.
With a view of improving the position of the line, an effort
was made on 2nd May by Australians and New Zealanders to
capture some high ground known as Baby 700 and Dead Man’s
Ridge, leading to Sari Bair. Two battalions of the Royal


Naval Division were in support ; some trenches between
Quinn’s Post and Bloody Angle were captured, but they could
not be retained owing to the dominating fire. The casualties
were 800.
By sth May a firm hold had been gloriously obtained on the
hard-won territory at Cape Helles and Anzac Cove, but it had
been accomplished at a cost of 14,000 in killed, wounded and
missing.
A small peninsula, south of Brighton Beach, known as Gaba
Tepe, was proving a thorn in the side of the Anzacs, on account
of the observation facilities it afforded the Turks, and the fact
that by its retention the enemy was able to enfilade the
landing parties and utilize it as a base for raid attacks.
Major Leane was chosen by Brigadier-General Maclagan to
undertake the difficult task of capturing this peninsula. He
selected his officers and men from the 11th West Australian
Battalion.
The attack was made on 4th May from the sea, as great
difficulties presented themselves in any attempt from the land
side. The party embarked on destroyers and was landed in
boats under heavy shell, machine-gun and rifle fire, causing
many casualties. After an heroic assault lasting nearly three
hours, Major Leane was convinced that his small party was
unable to capture this strongly-held fortress, and that any
further attempt would only entail a needless sacrifice of
valuable lives. He therefore signalled to the destroyers to
take his force off, which, including the wounded, was success-
fully accomplished.
The total number of wounded, owing to the terrific fighting
during the first three days of the attacks at Cape Helles and
Anzac Cove, was three times the official estimate.
On 30th April, as detailed later, the Australian submarine
AE 2 was lost at the entrance to the Sea of Marmora and
her crew were taken prisoners.
ATTACK ON KRITHIA.
The Second Australian Brigade and the New Zealand
Infantry Brigade, together with the Drake and Plymouth
Battalions of the Royal Naval Reserve, were withdrawn from


the line and formed into a composite division. This division
was sent from Anzac to Cape Helles to assist the 29th Division
and the French forces to capture Krithia. On Bth May the
New Zealanders, under Brigadier-General F. E. Johnston,
advanced by short rushes for nearly 300 yards, and dug in
after mid-day. The 2nd Australian Brigade under Brigadier-
General J. W. McCay was directed by General Paris, R.N.D.,
commanding the composite division, to advance into the
centre of the attacking line, on the right of the New Zealanders.
At 5.30 p.m. the whole line, after a heavy bombardment,
moved forward. The fiercest fighting fell on the Australians,
who (in the face of intense machine-gun fire) advanced on a
1000 yard front to the left of the Krithia Road. They swept
across a long Turkish trench to within half a mile of Krithia
itself, advancing the line 450 yards. The casualties in this
heroic charge were very heavy. General McCay, who gallantly
led the charge, and his brigade major (Major Cass), were both
severely wounded. Sir lan Hamilton issued a special order to
the Australian and British troops in which he said that in all
his past experiences he had never seen more devoted gallantry
displayed than in this attack.
TURKISH COUNTER-ATTACKS.
General Birdwood was slightly wounded on 14th May, and
the following day General Bridges, commanding the Ist Aus-
tralian Division,* was mortally wounded by a Turkish sniper,
in Shrapnel Gully. Australia mourned the loss of a lofty -
minded, fearless, and able leader. The command of the Ist
Division was taken over by Major-General H. B. Walker,
The Australian and New Zealand Brigades returned to
Anzac Cove on the 15th of May—three days before the Turks
made the most desperate effort of the whole campaign to drive
the Anzacs into the sea from the perilous edges of their rough
triangle.
* The Commanding Officers of the First Australian Division during the
Gallipoli Campaign were;—Major-General Bridges from 19/8/14 to 14/5/15; Major-
General Walker from 15/5/15 to 23/6/15; Major-General Legge from 24/6/15 to
25/7/15; Major-General Walker from 26/7/15 to 22/10/15; Major-General Hobbs
from 23/10/15 to 5/11/16; Major-General Chauvel from 6/11/15 to 20/12/15.


With new and powerful artillery and 30,000 reinforcements,
under the direct command of General Liman von Sanders,
the enemy attack commenced at 2.30 on the night of the 18th
by a sudden and devastating hurricane of shot and shell,
which was continued for nearly an hour. Then shoals of men
rushed the trenches along the whole front, but the attack was
especially severe near the centre of the line. The sun rose on
the surging masses, our machine-guns, rifles and bombs
mowed the assailants down, while fresh troops poured over the
piles of dead and dying. For 7| hours the gallant Anzacs
held them with smoking rifle, dripping bayonet and whizzing
bomb. At II a.m. the attack slackened, three thousand
Turks lay wounded or dead before the Anzac trenches, all of
which had been held intact. Six days later (Empire Day) a
truce was granted to bury the dead. It was in this glorious
feat of arms that Lance-Corporal (now Captain) Jacka re-
ceived the first Victoria Cross granted to an Australian in the
campaign.
A new menace suddenly confronted the Allies. On 25th
May, one month after the landing, a large German submarine,
the U5l, torpedoed the Triumph (11,800 tons), and two days
later the Majestic (14,900 tons). Attempts were also made to
torpedo the Vengeance, Lord Nelson, and three French
battleships.
This necessitated warships and transports being withdrawn
to harbours, resulting not only in the loss to our troops of their
invaluable gun-fire, but in the creation of a serious problem
regarding the continued supply of those vast quantities of
ammunition, food and supplies upon which the Allied troops
were dependent.
The island of Imbros, 12 miles from Anzac, became the
headquarters of the Mediterranean expeditionary force, while
all supplies had to be landed from Mudros in trawlers.
On 25th May, Mr. Asquith formed his Coalition Ministry,
replacing Mr. Churchill, the First Sea Lord, by Sir Henry
Jackson, thus the protagonist and “ live wire” of the Gallipoli
campaign was lost, and pessimism regarding the result of the
enterprise palsied the hand of the War Council.


In a statement issued by Sir lan Hamilton on the 25th of
May, he estimated that the Turks had poured into Gallipoli
130,000 troops, and that their losses had been 55,000. The
Allies’ losses at that time were 38,600 in killed, wounded and
missing. This proves, more eloquently than any words
could, the extraordinary intensity of the fighting during the
first month.
On the 29th of May, Major Quinn was killed at Quinn’s
Post, which he had gallantly held for a month against tre-
mendous odds. The following day No. 3 Post, a steep and
prominent hill on the extreme left flank of the Anzac area,
was recaptured by the Turks.
The disastrous retreat of the Russians on the Eastern front
enabled Turkey to recall four or five more divisions to Gallipoli,
and made it impossible for the Russian army corps of 40,000
men under General Istomine to advance on Constantinople,
even if the Dardanelles were opened.
As a set-off against these untoward happenings Italy de-
clared war against Austria on 23rd May, although this im-
portant event affected the other European fronts more than
Gallipoli.
In place of the two army corps for which Sir lan Hamilton
had asked, he received two divisions —the 42nd and the 52nd —
for the Cape Helles sector.
The Turks made a determined attack on the 29th of June
on the apex of the triangle known as “ The Nek” —masses of
the enemy swarmed over and were shot down by a terrific
fire of rifles and machine-guns. The assault was beaten back
at a cost to the Turks of about 600 killed.
On the 13th of June orders were issued that the garrison
required for the adequate defence of a trench might be cal-
culated at one man per yard, plus half as much again in sup-
port, not including reserves.
Lieut.-General Sir Frederick Stopford reached Imbros on
11th July, and took over the command from General Hunter
Weston of the VIII. Army Corps.
With the object of replading the loss of artillery fire caused
by the withdrawal of warships, monitors were sent to Gallipoli,


the first arriving on 13th July. These curious craft, each
carrying one 12 or 14 inch gun, played a useful part in the
subsequent operations.
The total British casualties on Gallipoli up to the end of July
were 8000 killed, 11,000 missing, and 30,000 wounded.
On the 31st of July on Brighton Beach, at the extreme
right of the Anzac position, four parties of 50 men each,
selected from the 11th West Australian Battalion, crossed
their wire entanglements and rushed a hundred yards of
trench which the Turks by means of a tunnel had been able
to construct within bombing distance of Tasmania Post.
Major Leane, who commanded this dashing assault, was
severely wounded.
GREAT BRITISH OFFENSIVE.
After three months of stagnation it was felt that a special
effort was necessary to conquer the whole peninsula and free
“ The Narrows” for the British fleet.
Reinforcements were despatched, and by the middle of
August Sir lan Hamilton had the following troops :
VIII. Army Corps—29th, 42nd and 52nd Divisions.
IX. Army Corps—loth, 11th and 13th Divisions.
Anzac Army Corps—Two divisions.
French Army Corps—lst knd 2nd Divisions,
together with the 53rd, 54th and Royal Naval Divisions,
The nominal strength was over a quarter of a million men, but
many of the divisions were very weak numerically.
The enemy’s entrenchments had been so strongly fortified
and protected with deep belts of barbed wire that it was
believed to be impossible to force them by frontal attacks,
either from Helles or Anzac.
The plan of attack was drawn up as follows :—Sari Bair
Range was to be attacked by British and Anzac troops, under
General Godley, in an easterly direction from Ocean Beach,
which is situated north of Anzac Cove. A surprise landing
was to be made at Suvla Bay, north of Brighton Beach, with
the object of seizing the heights on General Godley’s left
flank and joining in the assault on Hill 971 and Chunak Bair.


A brigade and a half were to be sent to Mitylene Island to
confuse the enemy as to the intentions of the British, while a
feint at landing was to be made by a small body of troops at
the extreme north of the Peninsula. Simultaneously strong
frontal attacks were to be made on Lone Pine at Anzac Cove,
and at Cape Helles in the south, to hold the Turkish troops at
those centres, distract the enemy’s attention from the main
attack, and if possible force the enemy back at those places.
During the night of 4th and sth August the 13th Division,
the Indian Brigade, and the 29th Brigade of the 10th Division
were secretly landed at Anazc Cove and hidden in previously
prepared dug-outs.
The troops at Cape Helles consisted of the 29th, 42nd, 52nd
and Royal Naval Divisions. The 29th and 42nd Divisions
attacked at 4 p.m. on the 6th of August. Fierce fighting
continued for seven days around “ The Vineyard” near the
centre of the line, but in all an advance of only about 200
yards was made on a narrow front ; it had, however, the effect,
by the violence of the fighting, of holding down the Turkish
troops, including two new Turkish divisions which had been
sent there.
ATTACK ON LONE PINE.
The Australian attack on Lone Pine, on the southern flank
of the Anzac position, began on 6th August at 5.30 p.m., and
was undertaken by the Ist (N.S.W.) Brigade, 2000 strong,
commanded by Colonel Smythe. The Turkish trenches were
roofed over with heavy logs, which were raised slightly above
the parapet, leaving a narrow space through which the de-
fenders fired. The fighting for the possession of this elabor-
ately fortified spot was perhaps unequalled for ferocity even in
the annals of Gallipoli. Under sweeping machine-gun fire
the Australians forced their way through the barbed wire
entanglements, only to find an almost invisible trench, which
they could not enter. Some tore at the logs, others passed
over and entered by the communication trench. Logs in
places were removed, and men slipped down into an inferno
of bombs, bayonets and blood, in a grim dark death-struggle,


GALLIPOLI CAMPAIGN.—ANZAC BEACH. SHELL BURSTING IN DISTANCE.
(Photo, lent by Warrant-Officer Daly).


GALLIPOLI CAMPAIGN,- SHRAPNEL GULLY.
Photo, H. J. by spgcial permission)


fighting like gladiators in a cage. Gradually the Turks were
killed or captured, but the shambles were continually refilled
by incessant counter-attacks. By 6.30 three trenches were
captured. At 7 o’clock the Turks made a massed counter-
attack and the bloody hand to hand conflict was renewed
and the enemy was beaten back. The Australian sappers
tunnelled through to the Turkish trenches, enabling the
wounded to be conveyed to safety. The attacks continued
during Saturday and Sunday. At dawn on Monday (9th)
another violent counter-attack failed, and Lone Pine was
secured and held. The position was of considerable strategic
importance, as it covered the approach of troops towards
Maidos. The extraordinary valour shown by the men of the
Ist Brigade is proved by the bestowal of no less than seven
Victoria Crosses amongst those who took part in this gallant
assault. There is no parallel to this achievement in the
records of this great Order.
Early on Saturday morning (7th August) an attack was to be
launched at four points north of “The Pimple” by the re-
mainder of the Ist Australian Division. These points were
Steel’s Post, Quinn’s Post, Pope’s Hill and Russell’s Top.
Three mines were exploded the previous night, and a heavy
bombardment was directed on the positions to be attacked.
The 6th Battalion (Vic.) attacked from Steel’s Post at midnight
and endeavoured to capture German Officers’ Trench, but
they were mowed down by concentrated machine-gun fire.
A second attempt was made at 4 a.m. with a like result.
About dawn the 2nd light horse regiment (Queensland)
attacked from Quinn’s Post in four lines of 50 each, but all
in the first line, with one exception, were killed or wounded
before they had advanced 15 yards.
The Ist regiment of light horse (N.S.W.) attacked from
Pope’s Hill in an attempt to recapture some trenches previously
occupied by the 4th Brigade. With two squadrons Major
Glasgow about dawn captured the first three trenches, but
owing to the supply of bombs running out the attackers were
forced to retire, bringing in their wounded.
o


At the same time an attack by 600 men from the Bth
(Victorian) and 10th (West Australian) regiments of light
horse, was made from Russell’s Top on “ The Nek and
“ Chessboard.” This position was a corridor which connected
Russell’s Top with Baby 700 and Sari Bair, and across this
a powerful redoubt, having something of the appearance of a
chess board, had been constructed by the Turks.
These heroic men, knowing that they were facing almost
certain death, sprang over the top into a tornado of machine
gun and rifle bullets and shrapnel, in 15 minutes 252 were
killed and 183 wounded. These fearful losses, amounting to
simple butchery, decided the authorities to stop the useless
sacrifice.
THE MAIN ATTACK ON SARI BAIR.
Sari Bair is the name given to a confused mass of peaks,
knolls, and outliers running from Lone Pine in a north-easterly
direction to a point south of Biyuk Anafarta. Its principal
peak is Hill 971 (Koja Chemen Tepe), others are Baby 700,
Battleship Hill, Chunak, Hill “ Q,” and Abdel Rahman.
The troops under General Birdwood at this time totalled
about 38,000 rifles and 70 guns ; of these Major-General Sir
A. J. Godley was allotted the following for the attack :
Two brigades of the New Zealand and Australian Division,
half the 13th Division, the 29th Indian Infantry Brigade and
the Indian Mountain Artillery Brigade, with 9 battalions of
the 10th and 13th Divisions as the Army Corps Reserve.
The attack commenced from Ocean Beach (between Anzac
and Suvla Bay) at two points. The New Zealanders and an
Indian mounted battery on the right were to advance up the
watercourses known as Salzi Beit and Chailak, and capture
Old No. 3 Post, Big Table Top and Bauchop Hill, and push on
to Chunak Bair, via Rhododendron Ridge.
The remainder of the force, including the 4th Australian
Brigade, was to capture Damakjelik Bair and push on to Hill
971 (Koja Chemen Tepe).
The New Zealanders commenced the attack at 9.30 p.m.
on 6th August by storming Old No. 3 Post (previously held by


the Anzacs), Big Table Top and Bauchop Hill, which they
accomplished by 1 p.m. (7th August). The way was now clear
for the attack on Rhododendron Ridge, a spur of Chunak
Bair. This was commenced at dawn under heavy shrapnel
fire, and at 8 a.m. they reached <- The Apex,” a point about
400 yards from Chunak Bair, where the exhausted troops dug
in after their magnificent work.
In the meantime the left column, starting from the mouth of
Aghyl Here, had advanced inland and captured Damakjelik
Bair by 1.30 a.m. on the 7th. Against strong opposition the
4th Brigade and the Indian Brigade under General Cox ad-
vanced up Aghyl Here. At the junction of two tributaries
that formed the watercourse which they had been ascending,
General Monash moved east up one tributary and at dawn
reached its source. He had kept one battalion well to the
left in the hope of functioning with the expected force from
Suvla Bay. General Monash now received orders to leave a
guard on the ridge which he had reached and to attack the.
massive Hill 971 (Koja Chemen Tepe), which was 2000 yards
inland from the starting point, a Sikh battalion of the Indian
brigade being sent up to support him. The enemy had now
mustered in great force. In the exhausted condition of the
Australians it was found impossible to advance further, and
the ridge held was hurriedly entrenched. The three Gurkha
battalions of the Indian brigade had advanced in a south-
easterly direction up the other tributary of the Aghyl Here
till they junctioned with the New Zealanders on Rhododendron
Spur, their front facing Hill “ Q.”
So far the attack under General Godley had been eminently
successful even beyond expectations. All the troops had
fought with magnificent courage, determination and success,
the only regrettable aspect being the non-arrival of the Suvla
Bay force, whose co-operation was indispensable for the next
and final advance, which, with their assistance, would probably
have secured all objectives. On the evening of the 7th of
August both columns were reinforced to the extent of a brigade
each. At daylight on the Bth the right column attacked to-
wards Chunak Bair ; the New Zealanders, after heavy casual


ties, captured the summit of Rhododendron Ridge (the S.W.
corner of Chunak Bair). In this exposed position they grimly
held on—certain companies were almost annihilated ; in
some cases every officer was killed or wounded. The Aus-
tralians, simultaneously with the attack of the New- Zealanders,
made an advance of more than half a mile to the slopes of
Abdel Rahman, where they were subjected to a torrent of
machine-gun and rifle fire. Owing to the non-arrival of the
Suvla Bay force their left flank was in air, and they were
heavily enfiladed from Hill W and Anafarta Valley. The ring
of fire was so deadly that the little band was almost over-
whelmed, and, with the wounded, had to hew its way back to
the ridge where it had entrenched. The casualties were 1000.
On Bth August Brigadier-General Baldwin, 38th Brigade,
with five battalions, was instructed to advance up Rhododen-
dron Ridge, and co-operate with the Noav Zealanders, but
although supplied with guides he either lost his way on the
night march, or was blocked by returning transport, and
eventually arrived at “The Farm, a cultivated plot situated
at the foot of Chunak Bair and to the left of Rhododendron
Spur.
The Ghurkas and two companies of South Lancashires
stormed Hill Q, the only point reached from the west coast
which afforded a view of “The Narrows.” However, neither
Baldwin’s battalions nor the Suvla support arrived, and this
Hill— a key position for an advance on the Narrows —was lost
for ever, the small but heroic force being compelled to retire.
The New Zealanders and British on the crest of Rhododen-
dron Ridge were relieved by two British battalions late on
Monday evening. This force, after enduring a terrific bom-
bardment, was crushed by an overwhelming counter-attack
(the odds being probably 12 to I), and forced to retire to a
line behind “The Farm.” The battle which had hung in the
balance for two days w r as lost, and the Gallipoli campaign had
failed. The total casualties in General Birdwood’s Army
Corps from 6th to the 10th August amounted to 12,000.


THE ATTACK FROM SUVLA BAY.
Lieut.-General Stopford commanded the forces at the
surprise landing at Suvla Bay. The troops under his com-
mand consisted of the 11th Division and two brigades of the
10th (Irish) Division, They were “ new army” men, and none
of them had previously been in action. The total number
landing was under 27,000, say 20,000 rifles. Two conditions
were in their favour the sea was fortunately calm
(greatly facilitating the disembarkation), and the landing
was a total surprise to the Turks. It commenced at
midnight 6th-7th August, and was completed before day-
light. One battalion captured Karajol Dagh, north of Suvla
Bay, another battalion cleared Hill 10, just north of the landing
place. The rest of the troops, instead of advancing to their
objectives, remained under the shelter of some high sand-
dunes. This fatal disorganization and delay, when time was
of priceless consequence, probably wrecked the whole cam-
paign. At that time it was estimated that there were less
than 4000 Turks in the whole district. The faulty staff work
was possibly owing to the troops being hurried to Suvla Bay
from different bases —Mitylene, Mudros and Imbros—in-
creasing the difficulty of co-ordinated effort. Six battalions
of the 10th Division were landed south of Suvla Bay, and the
remaining three battalions at the north of the Bay, con-
sequently confusion and delay arose in changing commands.
The advance on Chocolate Hill, instead of being carried out
under cover of darkness, did not commence until 3 o’clock in
the afternoon. The hill was occupied by sunset, where the
troops remained for the night, instead of pushing on to Scimitar
Hill and Ismail Oglu Tepe.
The three battalions which had been landed to the north of
Suvla Bay with another battalion, under Sir Bryan McMahon,
commander of the 10th Division, advanced on Kiretch Tepe
Sirt (a steep ridge on the coast north of Suvla Bay), and
captured the lower slopes before night, completing the capture
next morning (3th August).


The Turks had withdrawal their guns during the night of the
6th-7th. The whole of the Bth of August passed without any
further movement except that without a blow one battalion
occupied Scimitar Hill, and patrols were sent out and reached
the top of Tekke Tepe (over 5 miles inland), which was un-
defended. The really important points, W Hill, Anafarta
Plateau and Tekke Tepe, had not been secured, and no sup-
port had been afforded to the British and Anzacs further
south, who were attacking towards Chunak Bair. That
very night these positions were manned by swarms of Turks
who had been rushed up from all directions.
On Monday, the 9th of August, the 32nd Brigade advanced
to capture the high ground south of Tekke Tepe, but was
driven back to the starting point. This was the morning
that Hill Q had been captured by Gurkha and British troops,
from which they could see the Dardanelles for the first and
only time.
The losses on the three fronts during the second week in
August were approximately 30,000 —the forces remaining
being roughly 95,000, viz., at Helles 23,000 British and 17,000
French, at Anzac 25,000, at Suvla Bay 30,000. In addition,
the 2nd Mounted Division (from Egypt) and the 29th Division
from Helles were landed at Suvla.
On 15th August General Stopford gave up his command
of the IX. Corps, and Major-General de Lisle took it over.
On 21st August Sir lan Hamilton decided to make another
attempt to capture the dominating hills to the S.E. of Suvla
Bay. On the right the 11th Division attacked the Turkish
trenches across the Anafarta Biyuk Valley —which ran be-
tween Scimitar and W Hill. The 29th Division in the centre
attacked Scimitar Hill (which had been lost), this it re-
captured after a most gallant fight, but was unable to hold
it.
ATTACK ON HILL 60.
Hill 60 had been partly occupied by the 4th Australian
Brigade on 7th August during the attack on Sari Bair. The
Turks had now r converted it into a strongly fortified position,


and this interfered with the safety of our communications
between Anzac Cove and Suvla Bay. Hill 60 (Kaiajik
Aghala) was situated inland from Damakjilik Bair. The
troops under Major-General Cox consisted of the Indian
Brigade, two regiments of New Zealand mounted rifles, the 4th
Australian Brigade and some British troops. The attack on
Hill 60 commenced at 3.30 p.m. on 21st August, simultaneously
with the attack on Scimitar Hill ; by the evening the wells near
the foot of Hill 60 had been captured by the Connaught
Rangers, while the Anzacs had secured a portion of the
lowest trench of Hill 60. Next morning the IBth (N.S.W.)
Battalion, which had arrived the day before from Egypt—
the first of the 2nd Australian Division under General Legge—
captured a further portion of the trench. The position gained
was held for five days, with continuous and fierce fighting.
On 27th August the attack was renewed by two regiments of
the New Zealand mounted rifles, part of the 4th Australian
Brigade and British troops. The 10th (W.A.) Light Horse
gallantly stormed the crest of the hill and the line was dug
in along the summit, the eastern slope being retained by the
Turks. Lieut. Throssell received the V.C. for great gallantry
in this attack. This was the last battle on the Peninsula.
By the end of August the Anzacs and British on the west
coast of Gallipoli held a strip of coast 8| miles in length from
Chatham’s Post on the south, past Anzac Cove and Suvla Bay
to the coast on the Gulf of Xeros, having an average depth of
approximately 1J miles.
On the sth of October, 1915, the administrative control of
the A.1.F., in addition to the fighting command, was conferred
on General Birdwood.
The whole of the Anzac Force, which had remained in the
fighting zone from 25th April until 29th of August, was now
gradually withdrawn to rest at Mudros, their places being
taken by the 2nd Australian Division. They were reinforced
by the 54th Division from Suvla, while the 13th Division was
returned from Anzac to Suvla.
The six weeks following the August fighting was a period of
inaction. Dysentery and diarrhoea, which made their


appearance in June, assumed alarming proportions, and the
fierce winter gales and heavy rain caused further suffering.
Many reinforcements were required to keep up the strength
of the units.
During September 1915 Major-General Stanley Maude
arrived to command the 13th (British) Division, and Major-
General Sir Julian Byng to command the IX. Corps. The
Marquis of Tullibardine landed with 3000 Scottish Horse
(unmounted), and Lord Lovat arrived in charge of Lovat’s
Scouts.
THE EVACUATION.
Meanwhile affairs generally in the Balkans were becoming
very critical. Bulgaria declared war on 4th October,
Constantine, the King of Greece, repudiated the solemn
agreement to support Servia, against which a large German-
Austrian army under Mackensen was advancing. The few
troops landed at that time by the Allies at Salonika were
negligible. The direct road to Constantinople and Gallipoli
was now open to the Central Powers via Nish and Sofia.
On 11th October Lord Kitchener telegraphed asking Sir
lan Hamilton for an estimate of the losses which would be
involved in an evacuation of the Peninsula. Sir lan replied
that the possible loss might be 50 per cent.
On 16th October Sir lan Hamilton, the commander-in-chief
of the Gallipoli forces, was superseded by General Sir Charles
Munro—in the interregnum of 17 days General Bird wood
assumed command.
General Munro’s orders were to report whether on purely
military grounds the Peninsula should be evacuated and, if
not, to furnish an estimate of the troops required (a) to
capture the Peninsula, (6) to keep the Straits open, (c) to take
Constantinople. General Munro unhesitatingly recommended
complete evacuation as the only course. He pointed out that
our line possessed every possible military defect. The position
was without depth, the communications insecure, the entrench-
ments dominated by the enemy, the artillery positions de-
fective.


While the Asquith Government was probably quite decided
on withdrawal, it was thought desirable for this decision to
be endorsed by the highest authority in view of the possible
great loss of life in the evacuation. Lord Kitchener was there-
fore sent to Gallipoli to assume the responsibility for the de-
cision. He arrived at Anzac on 13th November. On Bth
December Sir Charles Munro ordered General Birdwood to pro-
ceed with the evacuation of Suvla and Anzac. This necessit-
ated the removal of over 80,000 men, 5000 horses, and 200 guns.
By 20th December the evacuation was completed without any
loss and without the knowledge of the Turks, although the
Turkish trenches were only from 15 to 300 yards from the
Anzacs’ front line. The arrangements for the evacuation were
excellently carried out by General Birdwood and his staff.
All the artillery, except a few more or less damaged guns, was
withdrawn.
On 30th December Sir Charles Munro handed over his
command to General Sir Archibald Murray.
On Bth January, 1916, the last of the British and French
troops left Cape Helles.
Total Casualties (excluding French and Navy).
Killed. Wounded. Missing. Total.
Officers .. 2,150 3,566 353 6,069
Other ranks 31,382 74,952 7,336 113,670
Totals .. 33,532 78,518 7,689 119,739
The number evacuated through sickness was about 100,000.
The Australian casualties at Gallipoli were 8587 killed and
19,367 wounded—one-eighth of their total casualties in the
whole war.
The Dardanelles commission in its report, Part 11., finds
that the Gallipoli campaign did not achieve results commensur-
ate with the heavy losses sustained. The Commission finds
that the failure of the Suvla Bay landing was due to unseasoned
troops who were officered inefficiently, and that this rendered
necessary the consideration of the question of evacuation.


Although the campaign ended in failure, it achieved very
important results. It practically crippled the Turkish armies
on the Egyptian, Mesopotamian and Caucasian fronts. It
held down 400,000 of their troops, including many of then-
picked regiments. They were compelled to keep on Gallipoli
greater forces than the Allies had, and immense reserves on
the adjacent coasts They certainly lost in killed and wounded
more than the Allies did.
The presence of the Allies’ army in Gallipoli delayed
Bulgaria for six months from actively joining the Central
Powers, and prevented the Greeks under Constantine from
declaring war against us. If the Turkish armies had not been
held in Gallipoli, they, perhaps, largely supplemented by
Bedouins, would have had to be withstood on the Egyptian
frontier.
The gaunt, stark peninsula of Gallipoli is a palimpsest
of great historical events. It was at the entrance to the
Dardanelles that Agamemnon tied up his ships to besiege
ancient Troy. The romance of Hero and Leander still clings
to those ancient shores. The island of Lemnos was the first
stopping place of the Argonauts in their quest of the Golden
Fleece. Gallipoli was the stepping stone between Asia and
Europe. The vast armies of Darius and Xerxes crossed
the Narrows in their attempts to subj ugate Greece. Alexander
the Great poured his warriors over Gallipoli (or Thracian
Chersonese) and across the Dardanelles, for the conquest of
Persia and India ; and Roman legions thundered by in then-
efforts to conquer and govern the then known world. It was
here that the Turks first secured a footing in Europe.
It was on this historic ground that Australians and New
Zealanders, coming from lands unknown at those remote
periods of time, landed under a hail of shot and shell, and
carved in strange sprawling hieroglyphics the name of
“ ANZAC,” the glory of which will remain imperishable.
The word was traced in uncouth trenches, saps and strong
points, illuminated with giant scrolls of barbed wire, and
studded with guns and ammunition dumps.


The Anzacs and their valiant British kinsmen—Paladins
in the shining armour of a righteous cause —were stayed in
their conquest only by physical conditions and international
developments which they could not control, but they were
never beaten.
These scarred warriors returned to their base, in the land
of the Pharaohs, to organize another attack. Advancing
across the Nile, they routed the German-led army of the
Turks, stormed the gates of the Holy Land at Gaza, rode
through the valley of Askalon and drove the infidel from the
Sacred City, restoring the Holy Sepulchre to Christian care.
With their glorious companions-in-arms, the ever-victorious
warriors advanced, freeing Bethlehem, Jericho and Damascus
from the paynim, and still swept on, until the humbled
remnant of the once proud armies of the Crescent surrendered
to these dauntless crusaders, the last, the greatest, and the
noblest of them all.
Then crossing from Syria the Anzac and British veterans
stood on the battle-scarred hills of Gallipoli the conquerors,
not only of that Peninsula, but of the wide realms of the
Turkish Empire.
Doubtless the name of Anzac. of Allenby, Chauvel, and
Chaytor, will be woven into many a romance by the peoples
of the Orient. Their valour will form the theme of stories and
legends, even as did the chivalrous deeds of Richard Coeur
de Lion and Saladin, in the earlier Crusades.
Our heroic dead gave their noble lives gladly, to restore
to mankind the inestimable boon of freedom and justice.
Their names are not engraven on brass or marble, but in the
hearts of all mankind.
“ On Fame’s eternal camping ground
Their silent tents are spread,
And Glory guards with solemn round
The bivouac of the dead.”


CHAPTER 3.
The Senussi Campaign. Hospitals. Reorganization.
The Capture op German Possessions in the Pacific.
The Australian Navy. The Destruction of the
Emden. Capture of Tsing Tau. The Western
Front, 1914-16.
THE SENUSSI CAMPAIGN.
The Germans working with and through the Turks had
been unceasing in their efforts to stir up the Mohammedans
to declare a jehad or “ holy war” against Great Britain. Their
efforts in Arabia, the Soudan, Syria, Mesopotamia and India
had been singularly unsuccessful.
The absence of religious intolerance in the British Empire,
the unvarying respect shown by the Administrations towards
the religious scruples of their Moslem subjects, had won the
respect of the religious leaders. Even when Great Britain
was at war with the Caliph, or successor of Mohammed, the
religious ruler of all Moslems, these co-religionists, so prone
to fanaticism, refused to be drawn into a religious or “ holy”
war. The most that could be secured by the commands of
the Caliph to the Faithful and by the ceaseless intrigues, the
extensive propaganda and lavish distribution of gold by the
Germans, was a few sporadic outbreaks, instead of a fiery
rising of the whole Mohammedan world, as they had hoped and
expected.
The Senussi sect was founded by a native of Algeria, a
little over 80 years ago—it was called es Senussi, after a famous
saint. The tenets of the faith were very strict, not only
alcohol, but even the use of tobacco was prohibited. The
punishment for drinking alcohol was 1000 lashes, and for
smoking, the loss of a hand. The power of the sect extended


all over the Eastern Soudan from Nigeria in the West to
Darfur in the East, with headquarters at Jof in the Kufra
oasis.
During the summer and autumn of 1915, the principal
anxiety of General Maxwell, who commanded the forces in
Egypt, was not the Eastern frontier but a rising in the West,
which might also include the tribes of Egypt. The Senussi
were the most powerful Mohammedan sect in North East
Africa, exercising sovereign rights and possessing a disciplined
armed force on a permanent footing. The Senussi had fought
fiercely against the extension of French influence in the
Soudan, and also against the Italian occupation of Tripoli
in 1911-12, The Italians had not completed their conquest
of Cyrenaica, east of Tripoli and adjoining Egypt. It was
those coastal towns of Cyrenaica still held by Turks and
Arabs which the Germans used as submarine bases and
the corridor for furnishing the Senussi with arms and supplies c
The strength of the force at the disposal of the Senussi was at
least 30,000, of whom 5000 were regulars, supplied with
machine-guns, pom-poms and a number of field pieces, with
ample camel transport. The Senussi had always remained
friendly to the British until 1915. In November, 1915, while
the Australian troops were still at Gallipoli, a considerable
force of Arabs, Berbers and Turks, under Sidi Ahmed, the
head of the Senussi fraternity, invaded Western Egypt from
Cyrenaica and was joined by thousands of Egyptian Bedouin.
The danger was very serious, especially if these troops gained
any striking advantage to encourage the Egyptians, but
prompt aggressive action by the British saved the situation,
and in five months they were driven back to the oases of the
Soudan. The force raised by the British included British,
Indians, Australians, New Zealanders, and South Africans.
This is notable as the first fight of the “ Springboks” outside of
East and Southern Africa. Their gallant fighting here was
only a foretaste of the magnificent bravery they showed at
Delville Wood and on many other battle-fields in France.
On 7th December, Major-General A. Wallace, C. 8., took up
his headquarters at Mersa Matruh, on the north coast of


Tripoli, 160 miles west of Alexandria. His forces consisted
of three composite yeomanry regiments, one composite
regiment of Australian light horse (from details of the light
horse brigades), a battery of the Royal Horse artillery and
ammunition column, a light armoured-car battery, and a
squadron of the Royal Flying Corps. The divisional train
was supplied by the Ist Australian Division.
An Australian Company of the Imperial Camel Corps was
also sent to assist in guarding the western borders of Egypt
against an attack by the Senussi from Siwa, an oasis which
once contained the famous oracle of Jupiter Ammon con-
sulted by Alexander the Great.
The first encounter with the enemy occurred on 11th
and 13th December, west and south of Mersa Matruh. The
yeomanry, aided by a squadron of the Australian light horse
and the armoured cars, cleared the Wadi Senaab, the enemy
losing 100 killed and wounded, the British 32. On the 13th
a further advance was made ; the British column was met by
a force about 1200 strong which, owing to the timely arrival
of reinforcements, it defeated. 180 of the enemy were
killed, the British losses being 9 killed and 56 wounded. In
the third week in December the Ist Battalion of New Zealand-
ers arrived. On Christmas Day a battle was fought near
Gebel Medwa, 8 miles south-west of Mersa Matruh. The
enemy forces numbered 5000 under Gaafer Pasha. The
British attack was supported by fire from H.M.S. Clematis.
After heavy fighting all day the main position in the Wadi
Majid was captured, and the enemy fled. 370 were killed
and 82 prisoners taken. The New Zealanders fought with
great bravery. The British casualties were 17 killed and 47
wounded. The Senussi withdrew to Halazin, 25 miles south-
west of Mersa Metruh. On 22nd January the British head-
quarters were removed to Bir Shola, and on the following
day the hardest fought action of the whole campaign took
place. Before 9 o’clock the advanced column of Australian
light horse was engaged. After a contest lasting eight
hours, the enemy was defeated, and fled. Halazin was
captured at a cost of 31 killed and 291 wounded, of the latter


136 were Sikhs. The enemy’s estimated losses were 200
killed and 600 wounded. In February the expeditionary
force received for the first time sufficient camel transport.
The peril to Egypt was practically over. The Sikhs returned
to India and the Australians and New Zealanders retired to
Egypt. General Wallace resigned his command on 9th
February, and Major-General W. E. Paton, C. 8., D. 5.0.,
took his place. On 26th February another battle was fought
at Agagia, 60 miles west of Mersa Matruh, and about 20 miles
from the coast; the enemy was routed and Gaafer Pasha, the
Senussi General, was captured. The British casualties
exceeded 100. The enemy left 200 killed and wounded on the
field. The advanced British base was now moved to Barrini
on the coast near the bay of Solium. On 14th March Solium
was captured. The enemy had now been driven out of
Egyptian territory on the coast, and it was not considered
necessary to follow him further.
The British auxiliary cruiser Tara had been torpedoed by
the German submarine U 35 on the sth of November, and 92
of the crew taken prisoners ; these were at Bir el Hakim
Abbyat. An expedition under Major the Duke of West-
minster, consisting of 9 armoured cars 26 other cars and 10
motor ambulances, was sent to rescue the prisoners. On
17th March, after travelling 112 miles, the prisoners, who had
been 19 weeks in the hands of the enemy, were rescued.
HOSPITALS.
The authorities evidently did not anticipate that the
casualties resulting from the landings on Gallipoli would be
so enormous. Originally only two hospital ships had been
provided for the Gallipoli wounded. The navy lent two
more. How inadequate this was may be understood from
the fact that before the end of the campaign nearly 50 hospital
ships were provided. Long streams of wounded were carried
down to the beach, till boats could take them to hospital
ships or to any transports that the navy could supply. On the
beach Colonel N. R. Howse, V.C., A.D.M.S., to the Ist Aus-
tralian Division, had erected a dressing station.


The wounded were taken to the Ist and 2nd Stationary
Hospitals at Mudros, and from there distributed by the
Admiralty wherever hospitals were available—to Malta,
Egypt and Great Britain. In Egypt, the Director-General
of Medical Services, Surgeon-General Williams, C. 8., Lieut.-
Col. Ramsay-Smith, and Lieut.-Col. (now Sir James) Barrett
did magnificent work. The only accommodation provided
there at the start for wounded cases was one hospital of 520
beds. This was rapidly expanded into hospitals totalling
approximately 10,500 beds.
It was decided to authorise the expenditure necessary to
purchase a large number of beds, bedding and equipment,
in case a rush of wounded arrived. Delivery could not be
obtained of iron bedsteads in any number; accordingly
large numbers of palm beds were made. It was fortunate
that this was done, as during the ten days commencing 28th
April, 1915, 16,000 wounded, principally Australians, were
landed in Egypt from Gallipoli.
By 25th January the hospital accommodation in Egypt
for Australians was as follows :
Beds.
Heliopolis Palace Hotel .. .. . • 1,000
Luna Park .. .. • • • • • • 1,650
Atelier .. .. .. • • • • 450
Sporting Club .. .. • • • • 1,250
Choubra Infectious .. .. .. . • 250
Abbassia Infectious .. .. .. •. 1,250
Abbassia Special Cases .. .. . • 2,000
Helouan Convalescents .. .. . • 1,250
Alexandria Convalescents .. .. .. 500
Montazah Palace Convalescents .. .. 500
Grand Hotel, Helouan* 500
10,600
* Australian Army Medical Corps in Egypt by Barrett and Deane,


GALLIPOLI CAMPAIGN.—WALKER’S RIDGE AND NORTH BEACH.
(Photo., H. J Lowe, by special permission.)


WESTERN FRONT.—AN ADVANCED DRESSING STATION.
( Australian Official Photograph, by special permission)


BRITISH AND AUSTRALIAN HOSPITALS.
On the 16th of May, 1914, the troopship Goorlcha arrived
at Southampton with the first Australian sick and wounded
from Gallipoli. They were immediately dispersed, with other
British casualties, to the hospitals. At that time the military
branch of the A.I.F. in Great Britain was under the Australian
High Commissioner (Sir George Reid), with Colonel P. N.
Buckley, staff officer, in charge of administration. An
Australian convalescent hospital was established at Harefield
Park, and a convalescent camp at Epsom. From these
institutions the patients, after furlough, were drafted to the
Australian and New Zealand Base Depot at Weymouth on the
south coast of England. This base was commanded by Col.
the Hon. Sir Newton Moore, K.C.M.G.
When the Western Front became the chief Australian
objective three base hospitals were established in France and
two casualty clearing hospitals. In Great Britain three
auxiliary hospitals were maintained for the convalescents.
The number of Australian nurses who volunteered and
were accepted for the front was 2250. Their glorious devotion,
their magnificent courage and their tender and unremitting
care will never be forgotten by the Australians who were
wounded in the great struggle for liberty and justice.
On all fronts (the most dangerous and uninviting seemed
to be the ones most sought after) these splendid women
were to be found as ministering angels soothing, comforting
and alleviating the agony of wounds, fever and disease.
Frequently under shell-fire, they carried out their
mission of mercy with a total disregard of all danger and dis-
comfort—in Siberia, East Africa, Palestine, Mesopotamia, New
Guinea, France, India, Egypt and Salonika, and in troopships
and hospital ships liable to be torpedoed at any moment.
Six Australian nurses were awarded the military medal for
acts of conspicuous bravery and devotion, ninety-eight were
mentioned in despatches and seventy-four received the Royal
Red Cross Medal.
E


The Australian women filled a magnificent role in the Great
War, not only in nursing but in countless vocations that
assisted the great cause, including the provision of comforts
and entertainment for the sons, husbands and brothers, who
were heroically fighting to preserve the hearths and homes
of Australia from the desolation of a ruthless invasion.
REORGANIZATION.
When the Australian troops returned to their base in Egypt,
the infantry was reorganised. From the Ist Division and
reinforcements two brigades were provided for each of the
new 4th and sth Divisions. Half of the Ist and 2nd Brigades
of the Ist Division formed the 14th and 15th Brigades of the
sth Division, while the Bth Brigade, which had arrived in
Egypt in November 1914, completed that division. From
the 3rd and 4th Brigades and reinforcements were formed the
12th and 13th Brigades of the 4th Division, and this division
was completed by being allotted the 4th Brigade, which had
fought in Gallipoli.
Training was carried on, and, at different times, all four
divisions were utilized to man the defences about Ismailia
and between Toussoum and Seraphim on the Suez Canal.
THE CAPTURE OF GERMAN POSSESSIONS IN
THE PACIFIC.
The policy of Australia has always been to prevent foreign
nations from appropriating the island outposts of Australia,
and converting them into a cordon of strategic bases round
our shores.
On the outbreak of war this instinct of self-preservation
caused the Commonwealth to at once take steps to remove
the German menace from our borders.
On 7th August, 1914, the Secretary of State approved
Australia’s project in the following cable : —“ If your Ministers
desire and feel themselves able to seize German wireless
stations at New Guinea, Yap (in the Marshall Islands) and
Nauru, we should feel this was a great and urgent service.”


The same day volunteers were called “ for immediate active
service in the tropics.” The forces required were ;
Six companies Royal Australian Naval Reserve, 1 battalion
of infantry (8 companies of 120 men each), 2 machine-gun
sections, signalling section and members of the Australian
Army Medical Corps.
On the 10th, Colonel Wm. Holmes, D. 5.0., V.D.,
was selected as officer commanding “ His Majesty’s
Naval and Military Expeditionary Force.” Lieut.-Colonel
Paton was appointed second in command, Commander
J. A. Beresford, R.A.N., in command of the naval men, Lieut.-
Col. W. Russell Watson, V.D., commander of infantry, Lieut.-
Col. Neville R. Howse, V.C., principal medical officer. The
troops, about 1500 strong, sailed in the Berrima on the 19th
of August under sealed orders. Calling at Moreton Bay the
force reached Palm Island on the coast of Queensland on the
23rd, staying eleven days, until the arrival of the two Australian
submarines, during which period training was assiduously
carried on. The infantry was a fine body of young men about
21 years of age, who had received their military training under
the compulsory sections of the Defence Act. Sun helmets were
issued to the men on reaching the tropics. On the 2nd of
September the Berrima, escorted by the Encounter, Sydney,
and submarines AEI and AE2, left Palm Island, reaching
Port Moresby two days later, where 500 Queensland troops had
arrived a week or ten days before in the Kanowna. The
destroyers Parramatta, Yana and Warrego, with oil tankers
and colliers were also there. The whole expedition sailed on
the 7th for Rossel Island, at the extreme south-east of the
Territory of Papua, where the flagship Australia (Admiral
Patey) was waiting on her return from Samoa. Here the
object of the expedition was revealed—an attack on Rabaul,
the seat of Government of German New Guinea, and the
capture of the German territories in the Pacific. The destroy-
ers Sydney, Warrego and Yana formed the vanguard, their
destination being Herbertshohe (the former seat of Govern-
ment) and Kaba Kaul, a village five miles further south.
The instructions were to land 25 men at each place to search


for the German wireless station which was known to be some-
where in the locality. The warships arrived on the 11th of
September. The Berrima, under escort of the flagship, went
to Blanche Bay to land the majority of the troops for the
attack on Rabaul, the Encounter, Parramatta and the sub-
marines following on as escort for the storeships. Herberts-
hshe, the old seat of Government, is situated on Blanche
Bay, almost an open roadstead, while Rabaul is placed on an
excellent sheltered harbour (Simpsonshafen) near the western
boundary of Blanche Bay. Both these places are situated
on the northern end of Neu Pommern, formerly called New
Britain (since its capture the old name has been revived).
Some little time previously two Australian destroyers ha
visited Herbertshohe in the hope of being able to destroy the
wireless installation, but, unable to find this, the officer in
charge of the landing party contented himself with destroying
the telegraph instruments at the post office. The Germans
thereupon assumed that there would be no attempt at capturing
the territory, as the British would require all then soldiery in
Europe, where the vital issue would be decided. They,
however, thought that it was possible another attempt might
be made to destroy their wireless station, and precautions were
taken accordingly. As the Germans had received no intima-
tion of the coming of the Australians, they were greatly startled
by the advent of so formidable a force.
On the arrival of the Sydney, Warrego and Yarra at Herberts-
hshe, two parties of Australian naval reservists were put
ashore, each of 25 men, one at Herbertshohe and the other at
Kaba Kaul, with instructions to search for the wireless
station The former party met with no opposition and hoisted
the Union Jack on landing at Herbertshohe. They proceeded
some distance inland and returned in the afternoon without
discovering the wireless station. The other party under
Lieut. Bowen, accompanied by Captain Pockley, of the Army
Medical Corps, landed at Kaba Kaul and advanced inland
about two miles under a sniping fire from natives posted m
coconut palms and in the jungle. Suddenly, at a bend in the
road, the small party came under steady rifle fire from a


trench cut across the track. Several were wounded, and
Captain Pockley, seeing his orderly in an exposed position
attending to a wounded man, unselfishly insisted on his
taking his own Red Cross brassard as a protection against
rifle fire, thereby exposing himself as a combatant officer.
Almost immediately Captain Pockley was mortally wounded,
being shot through the body, the bullet penetrating his spine.
The death of this courageous, talented and popular officer
was a heavy loss.
Lieut. Bowen sent back an appeal for reinforcements, while
the little party valiantly held its ground. Immediately every
available man was sent up from the destroyers under Lieut. -
Commander Elwell, R.N., who, unfortunately, was shot leading
his men in a charge. This force was quickly followed by a
further contingent of Australian naval reservists from the
Berrima.
A message was sent at 4 o’clock by the Admiral to the
Governor, threatening to bombard the town if resistance was
not immediately abandoned. The Berrima contingent
reached the fighting line under Lieut. Bond with Captain
Travers as intelligence officer. The enemy hoisted the white
flag, and the first line of trenches was occupied. Advancing
further the second line of trenches was also surrendered by
its defenders. Suddenly the prisoners made a dash for the
scrub, some being shot, but most of the remainder escaping.
Lieut. Bond and Captain Travers, with a captured German
officer and an interpreter, went forward without escort and
came to Bita Paka, an eminence with precipitous sides, except
for the track leading up to the summit. This was crowned
by the masts of the wireless station. The seven wireless
officials and 26 natives surrendered and the plant was dis-
mantled.
Later in the afternoon it was decided to despatch four
companies of infantry and one company of naval reservists
under Colonel Russell Watson. This contingent landed at
Herbertshohe and marched rapidly along the road leading
towards the fray, a screen of skirmishers preceding the van-
guard and main body. Colonel Watson’s party advanced


inland and established touch with the others, only to find that
the wireless station had already been captured—the party
therefore returned.
At the outbreak of the war the Germans had removed their
seat of Government from Rabaul ten miles inland to Toma, a
health resort among the hills. The enemy forces were now
reported to be falling back on that centre. In addition to
providing this rendezvous, stores of ammunition, food, treasure
and equipment had been sent by the German Government to
three places further inland, possibly with the intention, if the
attacking force had been a small one, of pursuing the same
methods as were successfully adopted in German East Africa.
However, the first line of defence had been captured. A
strong garrison was left in Herbertshohe under Commander
Beresford on 12th September. The following day four com-
panies of infantry were landed at Rabaul under Colonel Paton,
and the real capital was occupied. At 3 p.m. the troops were
formed up, the Union Jack was unfurled, to the accompani-
ment of a royal salute from the guns of the warships, and the
National Anthem was sung. In the presence of Admiral
Patey and the German officials, the Proclamation was then
read by Brigadier-General Wm. Holmes, D. 5.0., V.D., com-
manding His Majesty’s Naval and Military Expeditionary
Forces. The Proclamation declared New Britain and its
dependencies to be held in military occupation in the name of
His Majesty the King ; that the lives and private property of
peaceful inhabitants would be protected, that the laws and
customs of the colony would remain in force, so far as was
consistent with the military situation ; that if they so desired,
certain officials of the late Government might be retained at
their usual salaries ; that all male inhabitants of European
origin were required to take the oath of neutrality prescribed,
and that all firearms, ammunition and war material were to be
surrendered forthwith.
On the 14th of September four companies of infantry under
Colonel Watson —together with a twelve-pounder field gun —
commenced the advance on Toma, the new seat of Govern-
ment. The advance was preceded by a barrage of shell and


shrapnel, along the route to be taken, from the guns of the
warships. A plan of the route had been found amongst
German papers at Herbertshohe. The object of the shelling
was to drive back possible snipers and pickets.
The troops carried three days’ rations and 200 rounds of
ammunition per man.
After advancing half the distance, an officer carrying a white
flag met the Australian forces with a message from the
Governor, stating that the capital had not been occupied, as
the seat of Government was at Toma. Colonel Watson’s
reply was that he intended to advance on Toma, and sent a
message by the officer that the late Governor was to meet him
and surrender. The march was resumed, and on reaching
the vicinity of the Sanatorium at 3 p.m. a body of troops
was seen in the distance, at which two charges of shrapnel
were fired by the twelve pounder. After some delay a
messenger arrived to say that the Governor would come into
Herbertshohe the following day. At 4 p.m. the troops com-
menced their return march.
This march was a great test of endurance. The men were
in soft condition after a sea voyage, yet, loaded up with web
equpiment, three days’ rations, rifle and 200 rounds of ammuni-
tion (probably 60 lb.), they marched through the sweltering
tropical heat for twenty miles, ten of which were on an up
grade.
Dr. Haber, the Governor, arrived on the 15th of September
at Herbertshohe, and the capitulation was signed.
As Rabaul was the seat of Government of the whole of the
German Territories in the Pacific, with the exception of Samoa,
the virile sons of Australia had, in 27 days from leaving Sydney,
acquired possession of 98,000 square miles of territory, contain-
ing a population of 775,000. The small groups of islands lying
north of the equator, although included in the above, were
occupied by the Japanese on the 17th of October (Caroline,
Pelew, Ladrone, except Guam, and Marshall Islands). These
groups comprise only 960 square miles altogether, with a
population of 75,000 natives. On the 21st of September the
few German and native troops in New Britain surrendered,


numbering 5 officers, 35 white troops and 130 natives. It is
probable that this did not represent the full combatant force,
and that many German settlers and natives quickly demobilized
themselves and carried on their pre-war vocations, as there
were 482 Germans in the Bismarck Archipelago.
On the day of the capitulation, a body of troops arrived in
New Britain from Friedrich Wilhelmsland as reinforcements
for the Germans. This tends to confirm the statement
that the arrival of the Australian forces was quite unexpected,
as the enemy’s efforts at concentration were evidently too
late to be effective. These reinforcements surrendered on
learning of the capitulation. The Governor (Dr. Haber)
was sent to Sydney on his parole, while the troops were allowed
to surrender with full military honours. All the leading
officials at Rabaul were also deported.
The stores and munitions deposited by the Germans at
three bases, 23, 28 and 30 miles inland from Rabaul (known as
Places A, B, and C), were taken possession of by the Aus-
tralians. At Place B'another powerful field wireless station
was found, which the Germans used after the capture of the
main station at Bita Paka. At B and C Stations 50 cases
of gold and notes, together with some silver, of the total value
of £24,000 were secured.
On the 16th of September the sad news was received of the
loss of the Australian submarine AEI. She had been
despatched by Admiral Patey for patrol duty the previous
evening, and had been sighted off Gazelle Point, south of
Kaba Kaul, steering for Herbertshohe. She was never seen
again. Most probably she struck a coral reef, perhaps un-
charted. The actual cause of the loss of the first unit of our
fleet and her gallant crew of 35 officers and men—the majority
of whom had come with the vessel from Great Britain —is up
to the present a mystery.
The total losses of the Australian forces in land fighting
were two officers, Captain Pockley and Lieut.-Commander
El well, and three able seamen, while four able seamen were
wounded (one of whom subsequently died). These were the


first of the brave Australians who laid down their lives in the
Great War.
New Britain being now in full military occupation in the
name of His Majesty the King, it only remained to occupy the
outlying centres governed by German Imperial Commissioners
under the Governor at Rabaul.
The Australia, the French flagship Montcalm, the Encounter
and the Berrima with half a battalion of infantry, a machine-
gun section and naval reservists, left Rabaul on the 22nd of
September to occupy Friedrich Wilhelmsland, the chief
settlement on the mainland of German New Guinea, or Kaiser
Wilhelmsland. Their destination was reached two days
later. Captain Travers went ashore with a copy of the
articles of capitulation and demanded the surrender of the
territory. No resistance was offered.
Brigadier-General Holmes, Brigade-Major Heritage, Colonel
Howse and Lieut. Holmes, A.D.C., landed. The German flag
was lowered and the Union Jack run up. There were 17 Ger-
mans there. A body consisting of 1| companies of infantry
and half a company of naval reservists, with ample stores,
was left as a garrison under Major Martin.
Kawieang, the seat of Government in New Ireland, was
occupied on 21st October by Major Heritage.
On the 28th of October Brigadier-General Holmes and
Captain Travers, with 50 men, left in the Messina to occupy
Nauru Island, situated almost on the equator. This island
has an enormous outcrop of phosphatic rock, said to be worth
between £300,000,000 and £400,000,000. Nauru Island was
reached, via Ocean Island, on 6th November. No resistance
was offered. All Germans were arrested and taken away by
the Messina. The Melbourne had visited the island some time
before and hoisted the Union Jack ; it was stated that after
her departure the Germans had tom it down and burnt it.
The Admiralty Islands were occupied on the 21st of
November.
The last expedition was despatched on the sth of December,
to occupy the northern portion of the Solomon Islands
(Bourgainville and Buka), previously held by the Germans.


The Meklong carried a force of 250 men under Colonel Russell
Watson. The islands were occupied without opposition
Sixty men under Lieut. Maughan were landed as a garrison.
The following German vessels were captured;—The gunboat
Komet (renamed the “ Una”) 980 tons, 1750 horse power,
4-in. guns ; the steamers Nusa, Meklong, Sumatra, Siar,
Madang, Samoa, and half a dozen motor boats.
On the 9th of January, 1915, 250 members of the expedi-
tionary force returned to Australia with the Administrator
(Brigadier-General Holmes) and Colonel Watson, Colonel
Paton assuming command of the remaining forces.
On the 10th of February the remainder of the troops of the
First Australian Naval and Military Expedition were re-
turned, being relieved by smaller garrisons of older men from
Australia.
The members of the returned force were discharged on the
4th of March, having completed their six months’ term of
service. They carried out their work in a manner which
reflected the highest credit on Australia and clearly forcasted
the imperishable renown which was in store for the Australian
troops on the sterner fields of Gallipoli, France, Belgium and
Palestine.
The choice of Brigadier-General Holmes as leader of the
First Australian Expeditionary Force was a singularly happy
one. Judging by the excellent results achieved on a difficult
mission, and by the unanimous opinion of his officers and
men, he proved himself a soldier and diplomat of high qualifica-
tions.
He was appointed the first Administrator of the conquered
territory, but the great world issue was being decided on the
blood-stained fields of Gallipoli, France and Flanders, and he
hastened to the fray. After bravely leading his men in many
hard-won conflicts, he laid down his life on the Messines
battlefield as General Officer Commanding the 4th Australian
Division.
Commander (later Sir Samuel) Pethebridge, C.M.G., was
appointed Australian Commissioner for the Pacific Islands,
and Commander of the Australian Naval and Military Ex-
peditionary force.


CAPTURE OF SAMOA.
One thousand New Zealanders left Wellington on 15th
August, 1914, in the troopships MoeraJca and Monowai.
They were convoyed by the Australia, the Melbourne and three
British cruisers, and were joined at Noumea (New Caledonia)
on 23rd August by other Australian warships and the French
flagship Montcalm. The flotilla reached Apia, the capital of
German Samoa, on 29th of August. The troops landed (with-
out any armed opposition), and on 30th of August hoisted the
British flag, and proclaimed the territory in military occupa-
tion of His Majesty the King.
THE AUSTRALIAN NAVY.
For many years prior to 1907, the whole question of the
naval protection of Australia had been far from satisfactory.
Australia had paid an annual naval subsidy to the Imperial
Government, in amounts varying up to £200,000, for which
the Admiralty placed in our waters a number of obsolete or
obsolescent war vessels at a cost largely exceeding the subsidy.
Australia wanted effective ships, the Sea Lords wanted an
adequate subsidy, and neither party was satisfied.
At the same time Australia was informed by the Admiralty
that the protection of Australia rested entirely on sea su-
premacy, which would be decided not in the Pacific but in the
North Sea. This was perfectly true, so far as it went, but the
experience of the Great War quickly proved Australia’s con-
tention that while our naval supremacy might be decided in
the North Sea, the concentration of the Grand Fleet in British
waters would not protect our coasts and shipping from the
attacks of predatory warships like the Scharnhorst, Gneisenau
and Emden, any more than it prevented the Emden from
bombarding Madras, destroying vessels lying at Penang, and
sinking nearly three million pounds worth of merchant
shipping in the High Seas.
The initiative and self-reliance of the Australian people in
deciding to have an Australian Navy in addition to the
supremely important Grand Fleet (with which it worked in
entire unison) proved of great value to Australia and the


Empire, and initiated a system which will in all probability
be followed by the other sister nations of the Empire.
By the Commonwealth Naval Agreement Act of 1903, the
naval subsidies previously paid by the six States and New
Zealand were, with certain alterations, renewed for ten years.
At the Colonial conference of 1907, Mr. Deakin and Senator
Pearce, who represented Australia, fought for Australia s
contention that her naval contribution to the defence of the
Empire should be in men and ships and not in money, and they
carried their point. The scheme for the youngest navy in
the world was worked out, the cost estimated, and the ex-
penditure was approved by Australia. No subsidy was paid
after 1913. Since that date her annual naval expenditure had
increased, until, by 1917, it amounted to £4,447,000, while
during the five years ending 1915 the Commonwealth Naval
Forces (permanent and reserves) had increased from 240 to
10,000, the sea-going forces alone numbering 3700.
During the financial year 1915-16, the Navy Office of the
Commonwealth, owing to its increasing importance, was
separated from the Defence Department and constituted an
independent department.
With a view of eventually providing that the Australian
warships should be entirely officered and manned by Aus-
tralians, the Royal Australian Naval College was established
in March, 1915, at Jervis Bay, New South Wales, for the
training of midshipmen-cadets. The training ship Tingira
was commissioned in 1912 to train boys for the personnel of
the Royal Australian Navy.
In March, 1909, the Australian Government contracted with
Messrs. Denny Bros, and the Fairfield Shipbuilding and
Engineering Co. Ltd. for the construction of two torpedo boat
destroyers, to cost £81,500 each, delivery to be given in 15
months.
This was quickly followed by the construction of other
vessels in Great Britain and Australia. Of these the battle
cruiser Australia has a displacement of 19,200 tons, an
armament of eight 12-inch guns, sixteen 4-inch guns, and two
torpedo tubes. The three light cruisers, the Sydney, Mel


bourne and Brisbane, each of 5600 tons displacement, have a
speed of 26 knots. The last-named was built in Australia.
Six destroyers, the Parramatta, Yarra, Warrego, Torrens,
Swan, and Derwent, each of 700 tons displacement, have a
speed of 26 knots, and carry one 4-inch gun, three twelve-
pounders and three torpedo tubes. The three latter vessels
were constructed in Australia. The two submarines, AEI and
AE2, of 800 tons displacement and 1750 horse power, were
built in Great Britain.
The fleet is as far as possible manned by Australians,
supplemented by Imperial officers and men.
The 12-inch guns of the Australia proved to be not only
worth the cost of the navy several times over, but saved
Australia and probably New Zealand from humiliation and
the total dislocation, for a crucially important period, of their
coastal and overseas trade.
If the Australian Government had known the year that the
Great War would break out, it could not have selected a more
appropriate time to provide a small fleet of the most modern
ships. The Australia did not reach Australian waters until
1913. On 6th August, 1914, word was received that the
Scharnhorst, Gneisenau, Niirnberg and Titania were in the
vicinity of the Marshall Islands, and the chase at once began,
but the German vessels eluded our fleet by fleeing towards
South America.
On 9th September a German cruiser, probably the Niirnberg,
visited Fanning Island, an intermediate station of the Empire-
owned cable between Canada and Australia, and cut the cable.
Not a single British or Australian merchant ship was
molested in Australian waters during the whole war, with the
exception of the kidnapping of an Australian merchantman.
The German fleet in the Pacific was rendered almost innocuous
by being driven, through dread of the Australia, into the
comparatively safe waters of South America. Twenty-five
enemy vessels, aggregating 104,730 tons, were interned, and
11 vessels totalling 12,000 tons captured.
An officer of the Scharnhorst wrote, “ No, we did not raid
any Australian port or sink any Australian shipping, and why ?


Because we knew our 8.2 guns were no match for the armament
of the Australia.” (E. C. Buley, “ Glorious Deeds of the
Australians in the Great War.”)
The Australian navy played a brilliant part in the Empire’s
great achievements.
It must be borne in mind that it would have been impossible
for Australia and New Zealand to capture the German posses-
sions in the Pacific, had it not been for the existence of the
Australian navy, as while the Gneisenau and Scharnhorst were
in the Pacific, it would have been madness to attempt to
transport troops to islands in the Pacific without the pro-
tection of the battle cruiser Australia.
These possessions having been captured, the Sydney and
Melbourne were available for other pressing duties. They
convoyed the first Australian contingent to Egypt, and then
joined the British North American Squadron till June 1916,
when they were merged into the Grand Fleet. The Australia
meanwhile had resumed her hunt for the German warships in
the Pacific, until the battle of Falkland Islands on the Bth of
December, 1914, finally cleared the ocean of German war-
ships.
THE DESTRUCTION OF THE EM DEN.
When the leviathan fleet of 40 transports left Albany,
Western Australia, on the Ist of November, 1914, conveying
the first contingent of 30,000 Australians and New Zealanders
to Egypt, the Melbourne and Sydney, with two British war-
ships, formed the convoy. From Perth two further transports
conveying the West Australian contingent, escorted by the
Japanese cruiser Ibuki, joined them en route.
At 7 a.m. on Monday the 9th of November, the Sydney,
commanded by Captain Glossop, was seen to be preparing for
action, and a few minutes later she dashed away in a southerly
direction towards Cocos Island, 50 miles distant. The German
cruiser Emden, which had proved the scourge of the Indian
Ocean for months previously, reached Cocos Island, almost
midway between Perth and Ceylon, on the evening of the Bth
of November. With an extra funnel, a dummy (making


apparently four), she was mistaken at the cable station for the
British warship Newcastle. The Emden lay off all night,
steaming into the harbour before dawn. The first intimation
of the true character of the vessel was the hauling down of the
canvas funnel. At the same time the Emden sent off a landing
party, but fortunately, before it was able to reach the wire-
less station, the operators rushed to their posts and sent off
the message, “ Strange cruiser at entrance of harbour,”
followed by the “ 5.0.5.” or help call. This was the call that
had been picked up at 6.30 a.m. by the convoy. The Emden
opened fire at 9.30 at 10,000 yards, the extreme range of her
guns. For the first quarter of an hour she fired broadside
after broadside as quickly as possible ; after this, owing to the
havoc wrought by the salvoes of the Sydney , the enemy’s fire
became intermittent, her steering gear was smashed and some
of the gun crews were killed. Fire burst from her decks, and
she steered by her propellers for the shores of the North Keeling
Island. The action lasted one hour and forty minutes,
although the Emden was beaten in the first half hour. The
enemy’s collier (which proved to be the captured British
merchantman Buresk ) at this time came in sight and engaged
the attention of the Sydney. The crew of the collier scuttled
the vessel and were rescued by the boats of the Sydney.
When the Emden again came under notice it was found
that her flag was still flying, and as she refused the command
to strike it, further broadsides were poured in until her ensign
was replaced by a white flag. On the Sydney the casualties
were 3 killed and 13 wounded, of whom one subsequently
died. The losses on the Emden were 12 officers and 119 men
killed, 56 wounded and 115 prisoners, amongst the latter being
Captain von Muller, and a nephew of the Kaiser (Prince
Joseph of Hohenzollern), who was torpedo officer. The
Emden was reduced to a ghastly mass of wreckage and dead
bodies. The Sydney had fourteen noticeable hits and many
grazes from the 1500 rounds fired by the enemy. The Emden ,
with smaller guns and slower speed, had fought most gallantly.
This was the first fight in which a warship of the Australian
navy—the youngest in the world—had been engaged. It was


carried out with a valour and a dash which showed that the
traditions of Nelson still lived. The crew of the Sydney were
largely British seamen. Their gunnery was admitted by
those captured on the Emden to be extraordinarily accurate.
Before the Emden sighted the Sydney she had sent ashore
a party of 3 officers and 50 men to capture and destroy the
wireless station ; these men had not time to rejoin their
vessel, and noting the Emden's defeat they seized the 70-ton
schooner Ayesia lying in the harbour and sailed away, eventu-
ally reaching the south coast of Arabia, where they joined a
Turkish force.
After the destruction of the German warships on the Bth
of December, 1914, by Admiral Sturdee at Falkland Islands,
which freed the ocean from German warcraft, the Australia
joined the Grand Fleet in February, 1915, and was made the
flagship of a battle cruiser division, sharing with those
leviathans the glory of keeping free the seas of the world.
The Australia would have taken part in the battle of Jutland
had not a collision with the New Zealand unfortunately
necessitated her being in dock at the date of the naval engage-
ment.
The Australian cruiser Pioneer, with the East African
squadron, convoyed the South African Expeditionary Force
to German East Africa.
The Australian submarine AE2 was sent to assist in the
great naval attack by the British and French on the forts of
the Dardanelles and rendered excellent service. She was the
first submarine to penetrate the Dardanelles and enter the
Sea of Marmora. On 30th April, 1915, after destroying some
Turkish shipping, she was sunk by gun fire of the enemy,
her 3 officers and 29 ratings being captured by the Turks and
released after the armistice. Her sister ship, the AEI (as
already narrated) was also unfortunately lost off the coast of
New Britain, during the capture of German New Guinea, and
all her crew were lost.
The Australia, Sydney and Melbourne were present at the
humiliating surrender of the German High Sea Fleet.


•Never was the saying more true that Britannia rules the
waves, although full credit must be accorded to the assistance
of the powerful fleets of our Allies—America and France.
CAPTURE OF TSING TAU.
True to her treaty obligations, Japan declared war against
Germany on 23rd August, 1914. Four days later her fleet,
at the request of Great Britain, was in front of Tsing Tau,
bottling up two or three German cruisers which might have
seriously interfered with the vast trade that centres at Hong
Kong.
Apparently one of the many miscalculations of Germany
was the confident belief that her very strongly fortified and
garrisoned naval base at Tsing Tau would remain impregnable
to all assaults for the duration of the war. Indeed there is a
strong probability that her confidence would have been justi-
fied had not Japan declared war against Germany, as none of
the other Allies could have spared the troops, warships and
enormous transport necessary to reduce that elaborately
prepared fortress. The Japanese landed near Tsing Tau on
2nd September, 1914. Their land forces were 22,980 officers
and men, with 142 guns. A British force of 1369 officers and
men arrived on 23rd September. With the might of Japan
against Tsing Tau capitulation was inevitable, although it
took 24,000 troops two months to reduce the fortress, with a
total loss to the Allies of 248 killed and 1892 wounded.
By the fall of Tsing Tau, Germany’s dream of commerce
destruction largely vanished, as she had not a single naval
base of any kind outside of European waters, and her raiders,
without either a fortified base or the command of the sea,
could not exist for any length of time.
A British officer wrote after the capture of Tsing Tau,
“ There is no doubt the Japanese are wonderful soldiers,”
and their magnificent valour quickly freed Australia and the
Allies from a hostile base in the Pacific which might otherwise
have proved a source of constant trouble and anxiety.
The Japanese navy also did exceedingly valuable work in
the Mediterranean Sea and elsewhere. A Japanese army
was employed in Siberia against the Bolsheviks.
p


THE WESTERN FRONT, 1914-1916.
While the British, French and Australians had been fighting
in Gallipoli, the titanic struggle on the western front had been
waged with fluctuating fortunes. The German avalanche had
burst through the hurriedly created barriers and had poured
on almost to the environs of Paris, where it was stayed and
rolled back by the battle of the Marne on 6th September,
1914, which forced the Germans to retire to their prepared
positions on the northern bank of the Aisne. The fighting
had come to a deadlock by 28th September, a line had been
fixed on the Aisne and the momentous question now was
where the line should be drawn from there northwards on the
one hand, and to Alsace on the other. The entrenched lines
were pushed eastward by the French through the Argonne
Forest and formed a salient round the great fortress of Verdun,
they then turned southward through the plains of Woeve
along the western frontiers of Alsace to Switzerland. Simul-
taneously an attempt was made to envelope the German right
flank. General Manoury’s army was reinforced and pushed
northward from Compiegne ; the Germans, foreseeing the
movement, kept extending their line northward as fast as the
French, the latter hoping to save lille, the key of the whole
position in Flanders, while the Germans strove to secure the
Channel ports. The race ended in a compromise, Lille was
lost but the Channel ports were saved, and the possession of
the shortest route between France and Great Britain was
retained.
Sir John (now Lord) French, anxious for the Channel ports,
and hoping to develope an attack on the communications of
the Germans, proposed that the British army should be moved
from the Aisne to take up a position between La Basse and the
sea. By the 19th October the Second Cavalry Corps (under
General Gough) and the two British infantry corps had arrived
at St. Omer in the north of France, where the headquarters
were established. The Belgians had been fighting gallantly
against overwhelming odds to stay the German wave which
was advancing irresistibly over their native land. Antwerp


was attacked on the 26th of September, and on the 4th of
October the Royal Naval Division, rushed up by Mr. Churchill,
arrived, but owing to the superior gun-power of the Germans,
Antwerp had to be surrendered on 9th October. Three days
before the surrender General Rawlinson, with the 7th Division,
had landed at Ostend and Zeebrugge for the defence of
Antwerp, but he met the retreating Belgian army at Ghent.
General French was most anxious that he should seize Menin,
but the line of defence was taken up from Nieuport on the
North Sea, along the Yser canal and east of Ypres and Armen-
tieres—the Germans seizing Ghent, Bruges and Ostend. The
first battle of Ypres was fought from the 21st to the 30th of
October, and the German advance to the Channel ports was
stopped by the indomitable courage of 40,000 British, with a
French corps on either flank, against 250,000 Germans. This
was one of the most momentous battles of the whole war, and
constituted the last and most brilliant victory of the “ Old
Contemptibles. ’ ’
By the end of 1914 the battle line from the North Sea to
Switzerland had been defined and both sides had entrenched
their positions. The preliminary stage of the western cam-
paign had been concluded.
During 1915 the German objective was to break through the
Allies’ line, while the French, British and Belgians were
principally on the defensive. The general line was main-
tained with little alteration. Great Britain, during 1915 and
the first half of 1916, was creating her armies on continental
lines.
On 22nd April, 1915, the second battle of Ypres was
initiated by the Germans with dense clouds of poison gas,
which the Germans used for the first time. The Turcos and
other troops were forced back before the deadly fumes. Many
were suffocated on the spot, others died during the retirement.
The gallant Canadians, who had recently arrived in France,
signalized their baptism of fire (and poison) by heroically
holding their ground under these appalling conditions, and
saved the situation. Reinforcements were hurried up,
although no protection was available against the lethal


poison of the gas. The introduction of such poison gas into
warfare was distinctly forbidden by the Hague Convention of
29th July, 1899, which had been signed by Germany on 4th
September, 1900. The battle lasted a month, and by the
beginning of May, owing to lack of reinforcements, the large
salient around Ypres was reduced by Sir John French, and the
line considerably shortened. By 24th May our troops were
provided with respirators. While the Canadians and British
were making heroic resistance against this new and terrifying
“ frightfulness” of the Germans, the Australians and New
Zealanders were landing on Gallipoli at Anzac Cove.
During May the first divisions of Kitchener's “ new armies
—the first 100,000 —began to arrive, having been trained and
equipped during the winter. The lack of a sufficient supply
of high explosives had long been seriously handicapping the
British forces and enormous efforts were now made to remedy
this deficiency, with most gratifying results, although the
first rounds manufactured by the Ministry of Munitions did
not arrive until August, 1916. On the 25th of this month the
welcome news was received that Italy had thrown in her lot
with the Allies.
On 25th June, during the German offensive, in the Argonne
Forest, against the French, liquid fire was first used by the
enemy.
The increased arrival of British forces enabled our front to
be extended over 30 miles further south, from a point south of
Arras to the River Somme.* The British line at this period
was held as follows The Second Army, commanded by Sir
Herbert Plumer, from Ypres to Armentieres. The First
*The total length of the We stem Front from the ®ea to Switzwland
Riv eO October* 9 8
ion miles (contraction due to German withdrawal), May 94 mies.CJctoOer
™November 101 miles (increase due to Cambrai advance), Decembei 97
miles’ March 1918 126 miles (the greatest extension). This does not imply that
toe French did most of the fighting. The French flghting front was principally
from the Somme to Verdun, a distance of 160 miles The rest of their front
“British Army (bayonets and sabres only) on the
July 766,000, December 605,000.


Army, commanded by Sir Douglas Haig, from Armentieres
to Grenay, opposite Lens. The Third Army, commanded
by Sir Charles Munro, from Grenay to the Somme.
Lord French retired from the command of the British forces
in France and Flanders on Isth December, and was succeeded
by Sir Douglas Haig. The strength of these armies in France
had now increased to 800,000.
The Germans, foiled in their efforts to break through the
British line at Ypres, commenced a tremendous attack on the
French. The battle of Verdun lasted from 16th February to
10th April, 1916. After terrific fighting the enemy’s attempt
to capture this great bastion was defeated by the heroism of
our gallant ally, who had borne the great brunt of the fighting
in France up to this date. For one year and eight months
she had valiantly withstood the terrific onslaught of the
German armies in the height of their morale and physical
vigour, until Lord Kitchener had created and trained five
British armies for the Western Front.
One Frenchman in every 27 inhabitants of France was either
killed or is missing, while in Great Britain the proportion is
one in fifty-seven.
The dash and gallantry of French troops are proverbial,
but in addition to these qualities they revealed another, in
their stubborn determination and sustained effort that gained
the admiration of the world. Their fearful casualties are a
pathetic witness to their noble resolution, their glorious
devotion and their unflinching sacrifice.
The victories on the Mame and at Verdun not only saved
France, but the whole world from the heel of military despot-
ism. The democracies of the world owe to France a debt
inexpressibly great, and a debt which cannot be paid except
in heartfelt gratitude and in an undying friendship.
On sth June, Lord Kitchener, the Secretary of State for
War, while voyaging to Russia to study the situation there,
lost his life in the North Sea, the vessel on which he was
travelling striking a mine. The Empire mourned the loss of a
great soldier, whose magnetic influence and commanding


abilities had done so much to make the Empire a great
military power.
From March to June 1916 the four Australian infantry
divisions arrived in France from Egypt, and were placed in the
line south-east of Armentieres, where patrols and raids could
be carried out, and where, preparatory to the Allies’ first
great offensive on the Somme, the troops could be accustomed
to the more highly specialized type of fighting in France—the
creeping barrages, gas attacks, flammenwerfer, aeroplane
bombing, and the use of trench mortars and Mills' bombs.


CHAPTER 4.
WESTERN FRONT — {continued) .
Attack towards Fromelles. The First Battle of
the Somme. The Capture of Pozieres. Mouquet
Farm. The Somme Winter. First Attack on the
Hindenburg Line. Bullecourt.
THE ATTACK TOWARDS FROMELLES.
The first big engagement in France in which Australians
took part was the battle of Fromelles, fought on the 19th of
July, 1916. The object was to prevent the Germans with-
drawing troops from that sector to reinforce their armies on
the Somme.
The number of British troops engaged was insufficient for
the enterprise as laid down, and the artillery was quite in-
adequate.
Originally it was decided that three divisions would attack
after three days of artillery bombardment by the 4th and sth
Australian Divisional Artillery, an extra brigade of Royal
Field Artillery, and a large number of heavy guns.
It was subsequently decided that the attack should be made
by the XI. Corps with two divisions —the sth Australian
Division (lent by the 2nd Anzac Corps), and the 61st (British)
Division. The objectives were the enemy’s front and support
lines north and south from the apex of The Sugarloaf.
The Australian Division was on the left, its right flank resting
on the point where the Laies stream crossed the German line.
The divisions were to attack with three brigades each in
line, each brigade to have two assaulting battalions.
The attack was commenced at 6 p.m. ; the 61st Division
was unable to capture The Sugarloaf, a strongly fortified
nest of machine guns which the inadequate artillery bombard-
ment had not seriously damaged. The concrete gun emplace


merits remained intact, though the earth was blown away
from their fronts. The 59th Battalion (15th Australian
Brigade) on the right sector after advancing 50 yards was
struck with machine-gun fire in enfilade from The Sugarloaf.
It pressed on some 300 yards, where it was brought to a stand-
still in some slight cover.
The 60th Battalion on the left pressed forward, losing
heavily ; it reached the enemy wire at 6.30 p.m., but was
held there by machine-gun fire from The Sugarloaf, and by
musketry fire from the trenches. Some men on the left
entered the trenches and reached the support line, capturing
prisoners.
The 53rd and 54th Battalions (14th Brigade), centre sector,
seized the front line trenches by 6.45 p.m., and, advancing,
took the second line.
The 31st and 32nd Battalions (Bth Brigade), left sector,
captured the Ist line trenches at 6.15 and the German 3rd line
at 6.45 p.m.
At 7.30 it was learnt that the 61st Division had failed in its
attack on The Sugarloaf, and was unable to make any advance,
although two companies of the 15th Brigade rendered assist-
ance. The positions of the Australians were rendered unten-
able by the enfilade fire from The Sugarloaf, and at 5 a.m.
on the 20th the Australians were ordered to withdraw to the
original front; the withdrawal was completed by 9.30 a.m.
About 120 prisoners were brought back, a number of others
being killed in coming to our lines over No-man’s-land.
The casualties of the sth Division were :
Killed. Wounded. Missing. Total.
Officers .. .. 30 103 45 178
Other ranks .. 476 3,224 1,655 5,355
Total .. .. 506 3,327 1,700 5,533
General Haking, commanding the XI. Corps, in his report
stated, “ I think the attack of the Australian Division, which
was new to fighting here, was carried out in an exceptionally
gallant manner. There is no doubt that the men advanced
with the greatest determination. Their difficulties on the


right flank were caused by the failure of the 61st Division to
carry The Sugarloaf. On their left flank the Australian
Division was unable to consolidate sufficiently during the
night, and consequently when that flank gave way the re-
mainder of the line was compelled to withdraw.”
General Sir Herbert Plumer, commanding the 2nd Army,
wrote, “ The -army commander has received with great
pleasure the report of the operations carried out by the sth
Australian Division under the XI. Corps. He wishes to con-
vey to the commander and all ranks his appreciation of the
gallantry displayed during the first serious engagement in
France, and his congratulations on the success achieved.”
General Sir Douglas Haig, Commander-in-Chief, wrote,
“ Please convey to the troops engaged last night my apprecia-
tion of their gallant effort, and of the careful and thorough
preparedness made for it. I wish them to realize that then-
enterprise has not been by any means in vain, and that the
gallantry with which they carried out the attack is fully
recognised.”
The Germans held Fromelles and Auber’s Ridge in great
strength, as it protected the northern flank of Lille. On the
10th of March, 1915, the British, at a cost in casualties of over
6000, had failed in their attempt to capture Auber’s Ridge.
The task set the divisional commanders in the battle of
Fromelles was an impossible one with the forces and artillery
available, but they carried out their instructions to endeavour
to capture certain trenches, and the attack had the effect of
holding up, and even turning back, forces that were moving
south to Pozieres.
THE FIRST BATTLE OF THE SOMME.
Since the battle of the Aisne in October 1914 the Germans
had for 20 months held the British and French up by their
powerful fortified entrenchments, which they believed were
impregnable.
During this period the British were creating their five
armies, and providing vast quantities of guns, ammunition,
and equipment. After nearly two years of unexampled


effort, thanks to the labours of Lord Kitchener (who, as already
narrated, had lost his life on sth June), of Mr. Lloyd George,
the Minister of Munitions, and of countless devoted workers
of both sexes, the British artillery was superior to, and muni-
tions more plentiful than, the German. The air service had
now become better than that of the enemy. Our light trench
mortars, machine guns and hand grenades were the best in
Europe, while the British “ tanks" were an entirely new
departure in the art of war. This was a fine performance for
“ the unwar like islanders.” as Treitschke called them.
It had been decided that, no matter how great the tempta-
tion might be, the great attack should not be delivered until
the new British armies had reached then- full strength. This
wise resolve was steadily adhered to.
General Haig did not send any British troops to assist the
French in their colossal struggle to prevent the Germans from
capturing Verdun (16th February to 10th April, 1916), but
he was responsible for making an army available to reinforce
the French by extending the British line 30 miles further south
from Herbuterne to the Somme River, making the total length
of the British line from it joined the Belgian
in the north—to the Somme, a length of 82 miles. By this
means General Haig released the 10th French Army for the
defence of Verdun. . ~
The Allies, who had attempted no big offensive smce the
battle of the Marne, felt that the time had now come to assume
a continuous offensive and wrest from the enemy the imtiative.
The section of the front on which the offensive was to be
concentrated was probably decided not so much by strategical
considerations, as by the dispositions of the Allies troops.
It was to be a joint attack, and the easiest method of ensuring
co-operation between the British and French was to deliver
it in the district where the lines joined—the region on both
sides of the Somme and its tributary the Ancre.
front was from Gommecourt to the Somme. Sir Doug as
Haig had planned the battle on a wider front than he actually
advanced upon, owing to the left flank on the Ancre being
held up.


In front of the British position was a ridge stretching south
from Thiepval through Pozieres, Longueval and Ginchy,
forming a watershed. The first German system of defence was
sited along the lower slopes of the ridge ; near the top of the
ridge was a second line, and on the reverse slope a third line—
the whole connected by a perfect maze of communications
and switches.
On the Western Front was the flower of the German army
awaiting attack on the ground which it had occupied for
the better part of two years, and had fortified with such
ingenuity and skill that it believed it would be impregnable.
Against these legions were the French, the new British
armies (who had not fought in any big operations), the Canad-
ians, Australians, New Zealanders and South Africans. The
impending struggle was to be the first big attack in which
the British armies were commanded by Sir Douglas Haig.
It was in fact the greatest military effort that the British
had ever attempted. They had at that period in France
660,000 bayonets and sabres, including the overseas forces.
The total of the combatants in the first battle of the Somme
aggregated between two and three millions, and the casualties
came to about 750,000. Although the German losses were
extremely heavy, they probably were not greater than the
British and French combined.
The principal object of the great offensive was to break
through the German line, although Mr. Lloyd George stated
on 22nd August, “ that it was not reasonable to expect a
break through.’’
The result achieved was to throw the Germans back from
their carefully chosen line of strongly fortified ridges, stretch-
ing from the Somme to the North Sea, and to wear down the
morale and strength of the German armies.
It was a single continuous campaign, but it is convenient
to divide it into five great battles :
The first Battle of the Somme (Ist July to 14th November,
1916).
The Battle of Vimy Ridge (which was captured by the
Canadians and British (April 9th-12th, 1917).


The Battle for the Hindenburg Line (15th November,
1916, to 30th May, 1917).
The Battle of Messines (7th-Bth June, 1917).
The third Battle of Ypres (31st July to sth November, 1917).
Roughly the objective of the British at the first battle of
the Somme was Bapaume, and of the French, Peronne.
The battle commenced on the Ist of July, 1916. It had
been continued for over three weeks, and the British front
had advanced some distance up the ridge, especially on the
right, when the Ist, 2nd and 4th Australian Divisions arrived
from Northern France.
The Capture of Poziebes.
Between the 12th and 19th of July the Ist, 2nd and 4th
Australian Divisions arrived on the Somme to take part in
the great offensive. The sth Division, delayed by the battle
of Fromelles, did not reach the Somme until the 19th of
October. The Australian divisions were attached to the
Reserve (later Fifth) Army under Sir Hubert Gough. On the
22nd of July the Ist Division (General Walker) received orders
to attack and capture Pozieres, a town on the main road from
Albert to Bapaume. The sky to the north east was lit up
by the continuous flash of artillery, the atmosphere was sickly
with the heliotrope scent of German tear shells and poison
gas, high explosive shells burst amongst the Australians and
British in the attack trenches. Our artillery had deluged
the town and ridge with a rain of shells, and had destroyed the
barbed wire entanglements. The attack commenced from the
south west at 12.30 a.m. on the 23rd ; the troops during the
final bombardment were moved forward as close to the
artillery barrage as possible. As the British barrage lifted
the Australians dashed over the top with the bayonet and went
steadily forward through a storm of shell and shrapnel, over
the 500 yards of ground between them and the first German
trench, their figures lit up by the enemy rockets. The trench
was quickly captured and secured. They then advanced to
the second trench on the outskirts of the town, and secured
it after a sharp fight ; after a second pause they attacked and


fought through the orchards into the town. The Ist Brigade
on the left succeeded in reaching its final objective—Albert-
Bapaume Road—with comparatively small losses. The 3rd
Brigade on the right reached the second objective after severe
fighting and heavy casualties. Its position was a difficult
one, as the ridge on the right flank was strongly held by the
enemy and the troops were subjected to a deadly enfilade
fire. The 7th Battalion (2nd Brigade) moved up in support.
By 9 a.m. that morning the whole of the buildings on the
south side of the Albert-Bapaume Road had been captured
except one or two on the extreme north-east.
The following morning (24th) by 9 a.m. the main portion of
the town had been captured, and the rest of the day was spent
in consolidating the position and preparing for a further
attack. At 7.4 p.m. the enemy counter-attacked in force
along the Bapaume Road ; the advance was smashed by the
divisional artillery, machine-gun and rifle fire.
On the 25th the attack was pushed by the 2nd Brigade into
the north-west portion of the town, which was captured,
including the cemetery north of the town. The Ist Brigade
advanced, bombing along the whole of the western side of
Pozieres for nearly 700 yards. The enemy delivered a heavy
counter-attack at 8.30 a.m. on the 26th, which was beaten
back. The Ist Division had not succeeded in getting into
touch with the 48th Division on the left. The whole attack
was carried out under the heaviest shell fire, the trenches
were obliterated, and a great quantity of lachrymatory shells
was used by the enemy. Notwithstanding repeated heavy
counter-attacks the Australians held all positions gained.
The accurate shooting of the divisional and heavy artillery,
and the extraordinary rapidity in which barrages were thrown
down when a critical situation arose, assisted considerably
in the success achieved. The Germans for the first, time
began to understand the enormous volume and deadly
accuracy of the British artillery on the whole front. On an
average the British guns fired half a million shells every day.
The 2nd Division, which had been in support, commenced
to take over from the Ist Division on the night of the 25th-26th


July, and the Ist Division, less artillery, was relieved on the
27th.
On the 29th the 7th Brigade (2nd Division) attacked
trenches OGI and OG2 on the ridge east of Pozieres. The
first position was captured but the attackers were forced
back.
The total Australian casualties in the capture of Pozieres,
up to the 31st of July, were 319 officers and 9629 other ranks.
On the 4th and sth of August trenches OGI and OG2 were
captured, including “The Windmill, ” and the crest of the ridge
above Courcelette and Martinpuich, with many prisoners.
In these fights the Germans used their flame-throwers.
On the 6th of August the 4th Division relieved the 2nd in
the line.
On 7th August, at 5 a.m., after two days’ heavy bombard-
ment, the Australians were attacked in their new lines north
and north-east of Pozieres. The Germans who reached the
trenches were all captured, and most of the others shot down
In these fights, with the new experiences of flame-throwers
and poison gases, the Australians had acquitted themselves
as stoutly as they had done at Gallipoli, fulfilling Lord
Kitchener’s prophecy made in Melbourne on 11th January,
1910, “ There is no reason, as far as I can see, why the national
forces of Australia should not make their standard of efficiency
on a par with, if not higher than, those of the military powers
of Europe and elsewhere.”
Mouqtjet Farm.
From Pozieres the Australian troops pushed north-west,
with Surrey troops on their left, towards Mouquet Farm, a
little more than two miles away. Opposite to them were two
parallel lines of trenches with intermediate support trenches,
deep dug-outs, galleries and redoubts, while to the right was
the strong position of Courcelette, and behind Mouquet
Farm were Thiepval and The Wunderwerk, which shared with
Bullecourt the dread distinction of being one of the strongest
positions in that part of France. The whole area consisted
of elaborately prepared trenches and fortifications, under


ground tunnels so deep as to be impervious to shell fire and
capable of housing large bodies of the enemy, who could appear
after a bombardment and with their machine guns sweep the
attacking troops, while in the rear an enormous concentration
of artillery swept the fighting zone with death and destruction.
On the 10th of August the 4th Division captured Circular
Trench, Strong Point 78 and other trenches, advancing 200
yards on a front of 600 ; it received the congratulations of
the Army Commander. The action was fought in rainy
weather, the period of fine weather having come to an end on
the 9th. As a further experiment in “ frightfulness” the
Germans fired over the Australians shrapnel embedded in
phosphorus which burnt the flesh of those who were hit.
The operations were continued on the 13th and 14th, the
objectives were reached, 200 prisoners were captured, and the
front line advanced to within 200 yards of Mouquet Farm.
On the 14th and 15th the 4th Division was relieved by the
Ist Division. On the 16th the Ist Division repulsed with
heavy casualties a series of German counter-attacks, the
enemy advancing in six waves. On the 18th of August the
Ist Brigade attacked Mouquet Farm, the 2nd Brigade ad-
vancing north-east astride the Albert-Bapaume Road. Some
of the objectives, including Mouquet Farm, were captured,
under the most intense fire, but were subsequently lost,
the total casualties being estimated at 57 officers and 1524
other ranks. On the 23rd the 3rd Brigade with the 48th and
28th British Divisions attacked east of Mouquet Farm,
making a considerable advance in the centre and left.
Casualties, 20th to 22nd, 24 officers and 727 other ranks.
The Ist Division was relieved by the 2nd on the 21st of
August. On the 22nd to 24th the 4th Division took over part
of the line held by the 2nd. On the 26th the 2nd Division
attacked south-west of Mouquet Farm, but the advance was
held up. On the 29th the 4th Brigade (4th Division) attacked
Mouquet Farm and captured it the following day, but was
forced to retire. It was plainly impossible to hold this place
so long as Thiepval and Courcelette remained in the hands of
the enemy. The dugouts were most elaborate, one consisted


of six rooms, the upper story being 15 feet below the surface,
the lower story 30 feet ; this dugout contained a signalling
station with water and electric light laid on. In another
dugout there were bunks for 120 soldiers. The greatest
obstacle was, however, the flooded trenches and the continu-
ous rain.
The Australian casualties for August were 412 officers and
11,793 other ranks.
On the 3rd of September Mouquet Farm was again captured
by the 13th Brigade of the 4th Division. The struggle was of
the most stubborn and bloody description against a regiment
of the Ist Division of the Prussian Guard, but through shrapnel
and machine-gun fire the Australians advanced and overcame
the Kaiser’s picked troops. Again the Australians were
forced to retire owing to intense artillery fire. On the sth of
September the 13th Brigade again attacked Mouquet Farm in
conjunction with the Canadians, surrounding it on two sides.
This was the first occasion on which the men of the sister
nations fought side by side. The total casualties of the 4th
Division were 1345. Mouquet Farm was eventually occupied
by the Canadians on 25th September after the fall of The
Wunderwerk on 14th September.
On 23rd August the Ist Division went to Flanders, followed
by the 2nd and 4th Divisions a fortnight later. They all
went into the line at Ypres.
From the 14th to the 30th of September the British armies
had captured 26,735 Germans and 279 guns. Between Ist July
and 17th September the French had captured 34,500 prisoners
and 1449 guns. The Germans up to this date had put 67
fresh divisions into the line. The Australian casualties for
September were 91 officers and 2003 other ranks.
The three Australian divisions returned to the Somme
during the last week in October, and were placed under the
4th Army, in the meantime the British had succeeded in
pushing the enemy back an average distance of about two
miles.
The sth Division took over the line from the 30th Division
at Flers on the 22nd October. The whole area forward of


1ST BATTLE OF THE SOMME.—CAPTURED GERMAN TRENCH AT POZIERES.
(Australian Official Photograph, by special permission.)


1ST BATTLE OF THE SOMME.—AUSTRALIAN PATROL PASSING THROUGH BAPAUME.
( Australian Official Photograph, by special permission.)


Fncourt Chateau was a sea of mud, and operations had to be
postponed. On the 3rd November the 2nd Division relieved
the sth m the line. The strongly fortified position of Flers
had been taken on 25th September by a method which had
been kept a strict secret, and which filled the Germans with as
much consternation as the poisoned gas did the Allies when it
was first used by the Germans. On the 25th September the
enemy were amazed to see advancing steadily towards them
iron monsters which negotiated trenches and other impedi-
ments, crushed machine-gun positions, and dealt out death
and destruction by machine guns. The British tanks had
made their first appearance, and were a big factor in capturing
a very difficult position.
The Australian casualties for October were 38 officers and
1099 other ranks.
The first Anzac Corps on 2nd November took over the line
between Gueudecourt and Le Sars.
On the 3rd November the sth Division was relieved by the
2nd Division. On the sth the 7th Brigade (2nd Division)
captured Gird Trench and The Maze, its left flank reaching
Bayonet Trench, west of Gueudecourt. For this successful
attack the 7th Brigade was temporarily under the command
of Major-General McCay, commanding the sth Division.
These trenches were subsequently lost.
On the 14th November the 2nd Division captured some
trenches east of High and Delville Woods, the left boundary
of the division being the Flers-Ligny-Thilloy Road.
The total Australian casualties in the First Battle of the
Somme were—Killed, 7487; wounded, 22,555; gassed,
183 ; shell shock, 539 ; total, 30,764.
The Somme Winter.
On the 22nd November the front line was handed over to
the Ist Division.
The total Australian casualties for November were 175
officers and 4195 other ranks.
A conference of the military representatives of the Allied
Powers was held at the general headquarters of the French
G


in November, 1916, to discuss generally future plans and
operations. It was at first agreed that there should be a
simultaneous attack by all the Allies on the armies of
the Central Powers. This plan had subsequently to be
modified. Italy was not ready for a joint attack, and Russia
was involved in the throes of a revolution. Even the agreed
policy between Great Britain and France had to be modified
during 1917 owing to the changes in the control of the French
armies, Generals Jeff re and Neville not seeing eye to eye on
certain important details. It was further agreed that the
British should take over the whole of the Somme front which
the French had occupied during the Somme advance, as far
south as the town of Roye, making the total length of the
British front 120 miles. This necessitated some change m the
sectors held by the five British armies in France. General
Plumer’s 2nd Army held the Belgian front, with the Belgians,
and the Armentieres sector; General Horne s First Army
held the front from the Armentieres sector in northern France ;
General Allenby’s 3rd Army carried the line to south of Arras ;
General Gough’s sth Army held the ground won by the British
on the Somme, and General Rawlinson’s 4th Army the ex-
tension taken over from the French. Gough’s army consisted
of three army corps, the sth, north of the Ancre ; the 2nd,
immediately south of the River ; and the Ist Anzac Corps,
stretching to Rawlinson’s army on the south.
The Somme winter of 1916-17 will always be remembered as
the most trying experience of the troops during the whole war.
The weather was bitterly cold —on the 18th of December the
temperature was below zero all day. The constant rain
turned the whole country into a sea of mud and an almost
impassable morass. No decisive fighting took place from
14th November, 1916, to 24th February, 1917. On the 17th
of December Major-General McCay, still suffering from the
wound received in Gallipoli, left for Great Britain under medical
orders, and Brigadier-General Hobbs took over command of
the sth Division. On the 28th Major-General Legge, com-
manding the 2nd Division, was evacuated owing to illness, and
Brigadier-General Smyth took over command. On the 31st


Brigadier-General Holmes became 0.0. C. of the 4th Division
vice General Cox,
The total Australian casualties for December were 45 officers
and 1282 other ranks.
On the 12th of January, 1917, the Field Artillery was
reorganised into six gun batteries, giving 36 eighteen-pounders
and 12 howitzers per division.
The total casualties for January were 49 officers and 1478
other ranks.
On the Ist of F'ebruary the 4th Brigade (4th Division)
attacked in front of Gueudecourt and captured all the ob-
jectives. The 4th Division on the 12th had been in the
trenches 100 days.
On the 15th of February, owing to a change in army
positions, the Ist Anzac Corps came under the sth Army
commanded by General Gough.
On the 23rd of February the Germans, who had put 500,000
men into the Somme battles, and whose armies had been
driven back from the high ground and strongly entrenched
positions, were forced to retreat to the Hindenburg line, but
fought strong rearguard actions all the way.
On the 23rd of February the 4th Division captured Stormy
trench and occupied Miramont the following day. On the
24th the Ist Division occupied “ The Maze,” Chord Line and
Gird trenches and the following day advanced 1| miles,
capturing Ligny-Thilloy and Thilloy. On the 25th Warlen-
court was occupied by the 2nd Division. By the 28th they
had advanced to within miles of Bapaume.
The Australian casualties for February were 138 officers
and 2829 other ranks.
On the Ist of March the 2nd Division captured Malt trench
after stubborn resistance. On the Bth of March the number
of Lewis guns allotted was increased to 16 per battalion. On
the 10th the enemy evacuated Loupart line and the 2nd
Division occupied Grevillers ; many villages were in flames
beyond. The Germans in their retreat carried away every-
thing they could, destroying all else possible, including
the cutting down of fruit trees. On the 17th the 2nd


Brigade occupied Biefvillers, Bihucourt and Favreuil. The
Bth Brigade (sth Division) got into Bapaume on the 17th, and
drove the German rearguard out after a machine-gun duel.
It also entered Till. Le Transloy-Beaulencourt was evacuated.
Patrols of the 2nd Division entered Bengnatre, Sapignies
Mory and Vaux-Vraucourt. The advance of the Corps' front
continued rapidly, the light horse co-operating. On the 18th
of March the Ist Division occupied Villers-au-Flos, Remcourt,
Beaucourt and Fremicourt. On the 21st the sth Division
occupied Beaumetz—after sharp fights the village was taken,
lost, and retaken, with considerable loss on both sides. A single-
seater Albatross aeroplane came down in the Australian
lines, the pilot being Prince Frederick Charles of Prussia,
who was taken prisoner by the 26th Battalion (2nd Division),
after being wounded in his effort to escape.
On the 25th of March there was a violent explosion in the
Bapaume town hall, caused by a clockwork infernal machine
which had been set and left there by the Germans before
they evacuated the town ; several people were killed, in-
cluding two French deputies and the mayor.
The German retreat was stiffening as the Hindenburg line
was approached.
On the 26th of March Lagnicourt was captured by the /th
Brigade (2nd Division), and two counter-attacks were beaten
o ff i n this the advanced guard of the sth Division partici-
pated Owing to the number of delayed explosions in German
dugouts it was considered unsafe for our troops to occupy
them.
On the 31st of March the Corps’ main line of resistance was
the Beugny-Ypres line.
The Australian casualties for March were 133 officers and
2933 other ranks.
On the 2nd of April the 4th Division under General Holmes
attacked Noreuil between Lagnicourt and Ecoust, making a
considerable advance and attaining all objectives. The
attack was carried out by the 50th and 51st Battalions of the
13th Brigade. Casualties, 3 officers and 340 other ranks.


The official report stated, “ Firing from the hip proved
very effective in the Village” ( i.e., Noreuil).
On the 9th of April the Ist Division captured Hermies,
Demicourt and Boursies. Prisoners, 203. Casualties, killed
184 ; wounded and missing, 506.
On the 10th the attacking brigades of the 4th Division
were formed up on their “jumping-off” line to attack the
Hindenburg line in co-operation with the tanks. As the
tanks did not arrive the attack was postponed and the attack-
ing troops were withdrawn from their exposed position in the
daylight under the observation of the enemy—although,
owing to the fortunate occurrence of a snow storm, observation
was not good, and the casualties were very small.
FIRST ATTACK ON THE HINDENBURG LINE.
On the 11th of April the 4th and 12th Brigades of the 4th
Division under General Holmes attacked the Hindenburg
line between Bullecourt and Riencourt. There was no
artillery preparation. The tanks were relied upon to flatten
out the wire entanglements and destroy the strong points.
Unfortunately on this occasion the tanks proved a failure.
Most of them were put out of action before they could render
any assistance. Six of the twelve tanks were destroyed before
they reached the wire, and most of the others shortly after-
wards. In spite of this both brigades took their first ob-
jective, a section of the Hindenburg line—and some of the
troops advancing through a hurricane of bullets, shells and
shrapnel reached within 100 yards of their second objective—
Riencourt. Very heavy fighting took place, and the advance
continued until ammunition ran out, owing to the carrying
parties being decimated by machine-gun fire from both flanks,
i.e., Bullecourt and Riencourt. There was therefore no
alternative but to retire to the original lines. The 62nd
Division on the left was unable to capture Bullecourt, other-
wise the advance could have been maintained.
The Australian casualties were between three and four
thousand. The whole operation was in some respects similar
to the attack of the sth Division at Fromelles in July, 1916 ;


in both cases the successful attack was rendered ineffective by
the troops on the flank being unable to advance.
On the 13th of April orders were received from the Ist
Anzac Corps to advance the Ist Division line during the night
to within 1000 yards of the Hindenburg line with the object
of threatening that line to the east of Queant. The advance
was commenced at 10 p.m., fighting occurred at several
points, and the line was successfully established as ordered.
The 4th Division was withdrawn from the Hindenburg line
on the 14th of April, and trained in the back area until 16th
May, when it was sent to Bailleul and transferred from the
Ist Anzac to the 2nd Anzac Corps under General Godley, for
the Messines attack.
On 15th April there was a very heavy counter-attack by
four picked divisions of the enemy on the front of the Ist
and 2nd Divisions. This pressed the line back in places in
spite of the most heroic resistance, and Lagnicourt was
temporarily lost ; in some posts, notably that of Lieut. Pope,
of the 11th Battalion of West Australians, the Australians
fired away all their ammunition and refused to retire, fighting
heroically with their bayonets against hordes of Germans,
until the last man of the little band was killed. This, like
many other acts of supreme bravery which will never be
recorded, stands on a par with the most glorious deeds of
valour chronicled in history.
Seventy German corpses were subsequently found in front
of this little company of dead heroes. Lieut. Pope was
awarded a posthumous Victoria Cross.
A splendid rush by Queenslanders and New South Welshmen
drove back the Germans from Lagnicourt, and recaptured
some guns which had been lost, took 350 prisoners and killed
a great number of the enemy. In the whole fight it is esti-
mated that 1500 dead Germans were left on the field, while
the wounded were probably between 5000 and 6000.
During the night a new line was dug, known as the Morchies-
Beaumetz line. The 2nd brigade advanced the line on the
left by 500 yards, meeting with no opposition. On the 25th,
the second anniversary of the landing on Gallipoli was cele


brated by the Australians. On the 30th the polling took
place for the Australian Federal elections.
The Australian casualties for April were 246 officers and
6719 other ranks.
By 2nd May the offensive had pushed the Germans back to
the Queant-Oppy or Wotan line. The following day the
3rd and sth Armies attacked the Hindenburg line on a 16-mile
front. General Gough, Avhose sth Army co-operated on the
right of General Allenby’s, again attacked the line between
Bullecourt and Queant, with the Ist Anzac Army Corps.
The attack was commenced at 3.45 a.m. by the sth and 6th
Brigades of the 2nd Division after a three hours’ barrage of
extraordinary intensity. At 4.32 a.m. the 6th Brigade re-
ported that the first objective (Hindenburg line) was captured,
but the sth Brigade on the right was temporarily held up by
enfilade fire from Queant, which the 62nd Division, on account
of the extraordinary strength of the defences, was unable to
capture. By 5.45 the 6th Brigade had fought right through
and taken its second objective. The 25th Battalion (7th
Brigade) was sent to assist the 62nd Division to capture
Bullecourt. At 6.45 the capture of Bullecourt was reported.
At 7.10 the two left brigades of the 62nd Division were beaten
back to their forming-up line. At 12.15 p.m. the 7th Division,
attacking through the 62nd, entered Bullecourt but was
bombed out.
Bullecourt.
Bullecourt will rank with Thiepval and The Wunderwerk
as one of the stoutest defences ever set up by German troops
in France ; it remained the storm-centre around which the
battle raged for 13 days. The great strength of Bullecourt
lay in its concrete machine-gun emplacements and cellars
connected by deep tunnels through which reserves were con-
stantly brought up. Its cluster of cottages lay between a
large brick building on the south-west and a sugar refinery at
the rear. These buildings lay on the side of a hill overlooking
the Hindenburg line. On the south it was surrounded by a
deep trench and broad belts of thick barbed wire. The 62nd


Division of Yorkshire Territorials and the 7th Division fought
valiantly to keep their appointments with the Australians —
that they failed in their efforts was not due to any lack of
valour or determination.
In the meantime, with dogged courage, the Australians held
on to the Hindenburg line. The sth Brigade (New South
Wales), advancing on the right flank, found the German line
so strongly held that all those who reached it were killed ; the
remainder joined the Victorians and bombed down the German
trenches. The fight was continued by the Ist and 7th
Brigades and by the end of the day 1200 yards of the Hinden-
burg line were held.
All through the night the Germans made the most desperate
efforts to turn the Australians out of the line by continued
heavy counter-attacks. Wave after wave of their best storm
troops were hurled in, assisted by flame throwers and a wither-
ing enfilade fire from Bullecourt on one side and Queant on
the other. The heroic survivors of the Ist, sth and 6th
Brigades held on, their ranks continually thinning under the
thrusts of the enemy hordes. It seemed impossible for human
flesh and blood to cling to this priceless gap in the main
German defences. Word came to them to retire, they refused,
determined if necessary to die to a man where they stood.
A French expert wrote in the middle of May : “ Everyone
knows the importance which the Germans attach to this
position, which faces Queant and forms a hinge uniting two
networks of enemy trenches, of which one descends towards
St. Quentin to the south and the other proceeds towards Lens
in the north. The village of Bullecourt was a regular nest of
machine guns, and a formidable fortress. Thanks to the
possession of this key position our Allies now have a point
d'appui of the first order for future attacks against Riencourt
and Queant, which form the last redoubts of the German
defences in this sector,”
General Gough (sth Army) sent the following message to
General Birdwood, “ The action of all troops under your
command in so stoutly repulsing all hostile attacks last night
and this morning is beyond all praise.”


General Haig despatched this message : “ Please convey
to General Bird wood and Ist Anzac Corps my warm con-
gratulations on the fine work they have done and are doing.
The capture of the Hindenburg line east of Bullecourt and the
gallant manner in which it has been held by the 2nd Australian
Division and the troops associated with it under General
Smyth’s command, against such consistent and desperate
efforts to retake it, will rank high among the great deeds of the
war, and is helping very appreciably in wearing out the enemy.
The fine initiative shown by all commanders is admirable.”
Although the Ist Division was not specifically mentioned
in this message, the artillery and infantry and two companies
of pioneers were engaged in the great conquest.
On the sth of May the Ist and 3rd Brigades (Ist Division)
relieved the sth and 6th in the Hindenburg line.
The fighting on 4th May brought no change. The Aus-
tralians had a stern struggle, as until Bullecourt was taken the
Australian position formed a salient.
One of the war correspondents wrote on 4th May, “It is
a curious situation, which has involved fighting of a highly
complicated character. Since we have not taken Bullecourt
there does not appear to be any reason—in the opinion of the
puzzled German strategists—why the Australians should be
allowed to continue in an apparently impossible position.
Yet the Australians, ‘ these mad men from the Antipodes,’
to quote the tribute of a captured Prussian professional
soldier—insist on defying all principles of warfare, and cling
to a position in mid-air, from which they should have long ago
been ousted, if the text books are to be believed. They
hang on imperturbably, and appear to like it. They have
Huns to the right of them, Huns to the left of them, Huns
behind them, and Huns in front of them, but they stick in the
deep trenches and concreted dug-outs of Hindenburg’s fine
new fortress which they have helped to transform into a jig-
saw puzzle.”
On the 6th May the Ist Brigade made a bombing attack
along the Hindenburg line towards Bullecourt in conjunction
with an attack by the 7th (British) Division. Both attacks


were successful and Bullecourt was taken, although some
buildings still remained in German hands. The pressure of
the Australians was relieved by the partial capture of Bulle-
court, but the German counter-attacks contmued until t e
end of May. ,
By Bth May the Germans had counter-attacked thirteen
tIJ At S dawn on 12th May Bullecourt was assaulted on three
sides, the Australians (15th Brigade) attacking from the
south-east, capturing the remaining buildings, except a strong
point near the refinery. This widened the gap in the Hmden-
burg line to nearly two miles.
At 3.45 a.m. on 15th May, a great counter-attack was made
by the men of the 3rd Prussian Guards Division (nicknamed
the “ Cockchafers”) on the Australian right flank, which was
still “in the air.” They came over in four waves, the width
of no-man’s-land being only 49 yards, many were mown down
by machine-gun fire and bombs ; about 200 or 300 who reached
the Australian front trench, which they held for three hours,
were all killed or captured. Next day the last strong point at
Bullecourt was captured by British troops.
With the exception of a 2000 yards front adjoining u e
court on the north-west, the Germans had lost the whole of
the Hindenburg line south of Fontaine-lez-Croiselles.
As events turned out, the capture of Bullecourt was not
made use of in any further advance in this part of the line
The French offensive further south had terminated, and it
was decided to transfer the British attack to Messmes an
Passchendaele. ~
If General Haig had had only himself to consult he wou
have terminated the offensive after the capture by the
Canadians and British of Vimy Ridge on 14th April, and this
would have enabled the third battle of Ypres to be commenced
a month earlier, but it was essential for British troops o
continue the attack on the Hindenburg line to help the French
under General Neville in their offensive.
On 31st May the command of the sth Army front was taken
over by the 3rd Army under General Allenby, the former


army going to the Ypres sector. The Australian casualties
for May were 335 officers and 8613 other ranks.
During June, July and August, 1917, the Ist, 2nd and sth
Divisions were resting and training after the heavy and con-
tinuous fighting from January to May against the Hindenburg
line.
The total Australian casualties from the 15th of November,
1916, to the 31st May, 1917, were 8295 killed and 23,280
wounded.


CHAPTER 5
WESTERN FRONT — {continued)
The Battle of Messines. The Third Battle of Ypres.
The United States of America.
THE BATTLE OF MESSINES.
The great offensive of 1916-17 had moved north from the
Hindenburg line and Vimy Ridge, across the northern
boundary of France into Belgium, where an attack onMessines
Ridge had been planned since the middle of 1915.
The Germans had had over two years to prepare the de-
fences of the Messines-Wytschaete Ridge, the retention of
which they considered of great strategical importance, as a
gateway to Dunkirk, Calais and Boulogne. The isolated
elevation of Cassel and the 8 miles ridge of Mont-des-Cats
were the only considerable eminences on the vast plain
between Messines and the North Sea. A large number of
prisoners of war had been continually at work on this sector,
the ridge was seamed with trenches and dotted with concrete
redoubts surrounded by enormous belts of barbed wire
entanglements. General von Laffert commanding the 4th
Corps was entrusted with its defence. In an order he stated,
“ These two strong points (Messines and Wytschaete) must
therefore not fall into the enemy’s hands, even temporarily,
both must be defended to the utmost, and be held to the last
man.”
The retention of this ridge by the Germans was looked upon
by the Allies as a continued menace to their occupation of
Western Flanders and the safety of the Channel ports.
General Sir Herbert Plumer was organising the new armies
in England until January, 1915, when he crossed to France
and assumed command of the V. Corps of the 2nd Army, under


Sir Horace Smith-Donien ; when the latter returned to
England in April, 1915, General Plumer assumed command
of the 2nd Army.
The capture of Messines and Wytschaete was a masterpiece
of modern tactics. In this great attack—one of the most
ably conceived and successfully carried through in the whole
war—General Plumer’s army in one day captured nine miles
of commanding country from the southern boundary of
Belgium to Hill 60 and Observatory Ridge in the north,
which constituted the whole front of the 2nd Army. The
acquisition of the Messines-Wytschaete Ridge was one of the
deciding factors in the war.
The famous Messines Ridge was captured by General
Godley's 2nd Anzac Army Corps, consisting of the 3rd and
4th Australian Divisions, the New Zealand Division and the
25th Division.
Wytschaete was taken by the IX. Corps under General
Gordon Hamilton with the 19th, 16th and 36th Divisions,
and the 11th in support. The northern sector was captured by
the X. Corps under General Morland, comprising the 23rd,
47th and 51st Divisions, with the 24th in support.
The front of the 3rd Australian Division (General Monash)
stretched from St. Yves, north-east of Ploegsteert Wood, to
Donnington Hall, the 9th Brigade being on the right, the 10th
Brigade on the left.
The 11th Brigade (General Cannan) was not engaged in the
taking of Messines, but went into the line on the Bth, 10th and
11th of June, with the exception of the 44th Battalion, which
was attached to the 10th Brigade (General McNicol).
The New Zealand Division was opposite Messines Ridge,
while the 4th Australian Division (General Holmes) was in
support. The 25th British Division, with the Cheshire
Regiment, was opposite L’Enfer, between Messines and Wyt-
schaete. This was the first great battle in which the 3rd
Australian Division had been engaged.
Preparatory to the attack, 19 mines stretching along the
front from Messines to Hill 60 were exploded. Tunnelling
had been commenced as early as June, 1915, but not on a large


scale until January, 1916. Twenty-four mines were prepared,
of which four were outside of the front in the Messines-
Wytschaete attack ; one was destroyed by a mine blown by
the Germans. Many of the mines were completed 12 months
before the attack. The Australian Tunnelling Corps under
Professor David accomplished a considerable portion of
this work. The enemy also had a deep mining system.
At Hill 60 continuous underground fighting took place
for 10 months prior to our attack. Over 4| miles (bOOO
yards) of galleries were driven in the construction of
these mines, and over a million pounds (446 tons)
of explosives were used. The simultaneous discharge was
without parallel in land mining. The whole country
shook with the deafening explosions ; flames, smoke,
dust and debris seemed to fill the sky as though the earth had
been burst asunder. As great secrecy had been maintained
regarding the mines, some of our troops thought for the
moment that German mines had been exploded under our
positions. The Spanhockmolen mine opposite L’Enfer Hill
formed the largest crater —the area of complete obliteration
had a diameter of 140 yards and a depth of 70 feet. The
accumulation of artillery was the greatest on the western
front up to that date. The effect of the massed fire and
colossal explosions was appalling, they simply obliterated the
German front lines and their garrisons. The mines were
exploded at 3.10 a.m. on the 7th of June. This was the signal
for the advance, just as the dawn of the summer day was
becoming noticeable. The whole area in front was drenched
with German gas. To complete the ghastly weirdness and
horror of the scene, myriads of masked men poured out of the
trenches in the dim light, like demons loosed from hell, and
dashed forward to the attack.
The 3rd Division advanced between St. Yves and Donning-
ton Hall in a north-easterly direction, crossing the narrow
Douve, in no-man’s-land, over six single-span bridges which
were carried by the men of the first wave. One of these
bridges was quickly smashed by a shell. The attackers fought
their way through and reached their final objective, joining


up with the 4th Australian Division at Huns’ Walk, their
eastern boundary running south from Septieme barn through
Grey Farm to St. Yves.
On the left of the 3rd Division the New Zealand Division
(General Russell) had captured Messines Ridge by 8 a.m., and
had dug in over the crest of the rise ; there was no very severe
fighting, but numerous casualties occurred that night and next
morning from shell fire.
To the left of the New Zealanders was the 25th Division
(General Bainbridge) with a front of 1200 yards, between
Messines and Wytschaete. Its advance was very successful.
L’Enfer was captured. At one point (Middle Farm) there was
strong resistance. The full objective was gained after an
advance of 3000 yards.
At mid-day a counter attack was attempted, but it was
smashed by machine-gun and rifle fire.
At 3.15 p.m. the 12th and 13th Brigades of the 4th Aus-
tralian Division passed through the New Zealanders and the
25th Division, and carried the line forward 2000 yards on their
left and 800 on their right, reaching their objective, and joining
up with the left flank of the 3rd Division.
The 2nd Anzac Army Corps had captured and consolidated
the supremely important Messines Ridge. The 9th Corps,
attacking Wytschaete—which was the northern and higher
end of the Messines-Wytschaete Ridge—consisted of Nugent’s
36th Ulster Division, Hickie’s 16th Southern Irish Division,
and Shute’s 19th Division. The northern and southern Irish-
men dashed up the bullet-swept slope, crushing down all
resistance, and never stopped until they had reached their
full objectives. It was in the assault of the village that a
great Irishman, Major Willie Redmond, fell mortally
wounded while leading his men ; he tried to speak, but his
strength failed ; his last act was to raise his right arm and
point to the foe, and his brave followers rushed on ; by 7.30
a.m. the third objective had been achieved. A German
officer stated, “ I have heard that the Irish were great fighters,
but I never expected anyone to advance like that.” Later
in the day the front line was again pushed forward to the


Oostaverne line by the 33rd Battalion. The total advance
across Wytschaete Ridge was over two miles.
Shute’s 19th Division kept pace with the Irishmen on the
right, and finally captured the Oosta verne line on its front.
Morland’s 10th Corps on the north captured the long causeway
called the Dammstrasse, the Ypres-Commines Canal and
Battle Wood as far north as Observatory Ridge.
In one day of terrific fighting the huge salient between the
Hooge and Lys River had been torn away from the Germans
and 7200 prisoners had been captured.
The British casualties were over 10,000, divided amongst
twelve divisions. The losses of the Germans are not known,
but they have been estimated at 50,000 men.
The total Australian casualties for June, 1917, which in-
cluded the battle of Messines and the holding of the lines in
front of the Messines-Wytschaete Ridge from Bth to 30th of
June, were 2298 killed and 6701 wounded. The casualties
during the capture of the Ridge were not heavy considering
the strength of the position. The colossal explosions and the
hurricane of shell fire stunned the defenders, and those who
were not killed or injured were unable to offer any sustained
resistance. The British tanks did very useful work. German
snipers, machine-gun fire, high explosives and shrapnel
caused the principal casualties.
It was in the holding of the area captured that the heavy
losses occurred, the whole area being deluged with heavy shell
fire and shrapnel. Captain C. E. W. Bean, the official war
correspondent of the Australian Imperial Forces, wrote ;
“ The 44th Battalion was shortly afterwards involved in one
of the most trying periods ever experienced •by Australian
troops, the nineteen days during which the line beyond
Messines was for the first time really being dug in, well under
the eyes of the Germans and beneath a constant and nerve-
racking shell fire. It is hard to realise, but the battalions
which held this part of the line during the midsummer months,
when the sky opened and drenched this low country in water
and mud, had to withstand trials in some ways approaching


3RD BATTLE OF YPRES.—WOUNDED AFTER THE BATTLE ON THE MENIN HOAD AWAITING TRANSPORT. GERMAN PRISONER ACTING AS
STRETCHER-BEARER. ( Australian Official Photograph , by special permission.)


3RD BATTLE OF YPRES— ZONNEREKE AND THE LAKE THE SCEN OF HEAVY FOGHTING.
(Australian Official Photograph, by special permission.)


those of the Somme winter of 1916—and the 44th was one of
these.”
During the ensuing four days the Australians captured La
Potterie Farm towards Warneton and Gapaard east of Mes-
sines, causing the Germans to fall back, abandoning their
hold on the Lys River as far as La Basse Ville, although it was
not till 31st July that this village was captured.
In this battle the Germans used for the first time the anti-
tank gun, and the British, as a set-off to the German flame-
throwers, used incendiary shells, which contained a large
amount of highly inflammable liquid.
THE THIRD BATTLE OF YPRES.
The most regrettable feature of the third battle of Ypres
was its unavoidable postponement until too late in the year.
The British forces had been retained at Arras and on the
Hindenburg line to hold the German armies there pending the
attack by the French towards Chemin des Dames. The battle
of Messines took place on 7th and Bth June, 1917, and the 2nd
and sth Armies had taken up their positions early in July
for the third battle of Ypres. It was intended to commence
the attack on 15th July, and all the hospitals in Belgium
and Northern France right back to Boulogne were cleared by
that date. The success of the enterprise, in that low-lying
country, depended on fine weather, and June and July are
usually the finest months. General Haig stated : “Given a
normally fine August the capture of the whole ridge within
the space of a few weeks was well within the power of men who
had done so much.” The weather from the 15th of July
until the 29th of July was fine, clear and rainless. Why was
this great opportunity missed ? It was rumoured that the
delay was inevitable owing to the Ist French Army not being
ready by the 15th of July ; then the 25th was fixed for the
attack, but unexpected difficulties arose in bringing some of
the artillery forward. The opening day for the attack was
again advanced to the 31st of July. On the 29th there was a
thunderstorm. On 30th July rain fell almost continuously
all day, and with the exception of one day it rained every day
H


until 6th August . It was hoped that the third battle of Ypres
would result not only in the taking of the ridges but that,
having overcome the fortifications and natural defences, the
Allied armies would be able to push on to Moorslede and Ghent,
which would have forced the Germans to retire from Ostend
and Zeebrugge, thus striking a deadly blow at the U boat
campaign. The almost ceaseless rain and the continual sea
of mud which the Allied armies had to fight through were all
in favour of the Germans. Sir Douglas Haig wrote; The
physical exhaustion of the men due to the weather and the
resultant pauses was the reason why the full fruits of each
success were consequently not always obtained. Time after
time the practically beaten enemy was enabled to reorganize.”
The fight lasted uninterruptedly for over three months, and the
magnificent stamina, heroism and dogged determination of the
British and French troops during that terrible period form one
of the brightest pages in the glorious annals of these two great
nations, equalling in lustre the most heroic actions in the
campaigns of Marlborough and Wellington in the earlier
battles of Flanders, but the casualties were enormous. The
army of General Antoine—the victor of Moronvilliers—had
taken up its position between the British and the Belgians,
holding the Yser Canal from Noordschote to near Boesinghe.
Gough’s sth Army of four corps occupied the line from
Boesinghe south to the Zillebeke-Zandvoorde road, while
Plumer’s 2nd Army, composed of the IXth and Xth Army
Corps and Ist and 2nd Anzac Army Corps, stretched from
that point south to La Basse Ville on the Lys.
The objective of the opening attack was the crest of the high
ground east of Ypres. Facing the British the Crown Prince
Rupprecht of Bavaria had the 4th Army, of 13 divisions.
This was under the command of Sixt von Armin, a veteran
of the Franco-German war of 1870-1, who had commanded a
corps on the Somme.
Sixt von Armin had constructed the defences on a different
system from those on the Somme. He abandoned the deep
dug-outs under the parapets of the front trenches, because it
was found that they were destroyed or choked up by artillery


fire, or else the Allied troops following the barrage caught the
defenders in a trap before they could get out. A German
army order dated 30th June laid it down that successful de-
fence depended on concealment of strong points ; instead
therefore of lines of trenches which could be easily photo-
graphed and could be quickly ranged by hostile guns, a deep
zone of 1000 to 2000 yards was to be organized in several lines,
the front ones being broken up into separate sectors, or centres
of resistance in shell holes, manned by machine-guns, and
arranged checker-wise to enable direct or enfilade fire to be
brought to bear on the attackers, the whole to be protected
by powerful wire entanglements of irregular formation, some
running at right angles to the attack and some in the direction
of the forward movement so as to isolate the advancing troops
and render a counter-attack successful. The main lines of
resistance were to be further back and four to five hundred
yards apart, if possible on reverse slopes, with concrete machine
gun emplacements or pill boxes protected by a further line of
wire entanglements. Behind the three main lines the batteries
were ranged and the reserves located.
The whole front to be attacked was 15 miles from the Lys
River, forming the boundary of France and Belgium, to
Steenstraat, 5 miles north of Ypres. The southern portion of
this front was covered by General Plumer’s 2nd Army as far
north as Mount Sorrel ( i.e ., the front captured in the battle of
Messines). The northern half of the line was held by Gough’s
sth Army, which was to make the principal attack, the Ist
French Army on the left protecting the northern flank.
Plumer’s Army was to advance only a short distance, in order
to confuse the enemy as to where the principal attack was to be
made, and to protect the right flank of the sth Army.
The attack commenced at ten minutes to 4 on the morning
of 31st July, after an artillery barrage and a volley of incendiary
oil-drums and thermit against the German first line. In
spite of bad weather the French captured Bixchoote and had
made a considerable advance. Gough’s Army made an ad-
vance of about 3500 yards, capturing Pilkem and, later on,
St. Julien (on 3rd August). Further south Plumer’s Army


met with success. British troops captured Hollebeke and the
railway line to the east. Below Hollebeke, between Rooze-
beek and Warnbeek and east of Wytschaete, the Australians
moved forward with the New Zealanders on their right, and
after fierce fighting made a considerable advance. La Basse
Ville was captured by the New Zealanders after a stiff struggle.
No further advance was attempted by the 2nd Army, as the
attack was more in the nature of a demonstration.
On account of the pouring rain no further concerted attacks
were made by the sth Army and the Ist French Army until
10th August. The French then attacked towards Merckem
with the view of ultimately turning Langemarck from the
north-west. General Gough attacked between the Ypr es -
Roulers railway and the Ypres-Menin road in the direction
of Passchendaele Ridge. No great advance was made.
On Thursday, 16th August, the second phase of the third
battle of Ypres opened. By able manoeuvres General
Antoine’s army advanced and attained all its objectives except
Les Lilas and Mondovi forts, which were captured on the 1 Ah.
The French and British stormed Langemarck. While the
advance on the north had been most successful, no appreciable
advance could be made further south, except between Broen-
beek and St. Julien, and the British losses had been heavy.
The resistance was most formidable along the slopes of the
ridge from Westhoek to Passchendaele east of Ypres. To
capture these ridges, which afforded natural defences and
observation positions and which the Germans had fortified by
every method which science could suggest, required greater
concentration of men and artillery, and it was decided to move
up General Plumer’s 2nd Army to capture the sector from the
Ypres-Roulers railway south to the Ypres-Commines Canal.
BATTLE OF MENIN ROAD.
The Ist Anzac Army Corps formed the spear-head of the
2nd Army. The front of the attack on the 20th of September
was from Langemarck to the Ypres-Commines Canal—
about 8 miles. The Ist and 2nd Australian Divisions attacked
side by side, the Ist Division on the right advancing in the


direction of Polygon Wood and the racecourse. The 2nd
Division on the left advanced from a point a little to the east
of Westhoek. The attack commenced at 5.50 a.m. By 7.35
the red line was captured and they pushed on to the blue line
at 7.45. At 11.45 a.m. the troops had reached their final
objective and consolidated the line. This was a splendid
achievement. The broken farm buildings known as “ Anzac”
were captured and the Australian flag hoisted by the 18th
Battalion. Carlisle Farm at the west end of Polygon Wood
was held and consolidated. Glencorse Wood and Blackwatch
corner were taken and a third of Polygon Wood was captured.
The two divisions had made an advance of 1400 yards on a
width of 2000 yards and a counter-attack had been smashed.
Next day the 4th Division relieved the 2nd Division, which had
lost 242 killed, 1735 wounded, and 330 missing. The Ist
Division was relieved by the sth Division on the 22nd of
September —its casualties had been about the same as those
of the 2nd Division. On 25th September the enemy attacked
along the Ypres-Menin Road and captured part of the front
line. The sth Division was then advancing to take over the
front line, and the 58th Battalion and one company of the
60th Battalion took part in the counter-attack which restored
the line.
Polygon Wood.
On the 26th of September the 4th and sth Divisions attacked
at 5.30 a.m. The front now ran from a little south of the
Ypres-Roulers railway to the south side of Polygon Wood,
the attack being towards Broodseinde. The weather was
fine. The fighting was very heavy, particularly on the right
in Polygon Wood. All objectives were attained, including
Polygon Butte captured by the sth Division, and the line was
consolidated. An advance of 1200 yards had been made on a
front of 2300 yards.
On the 28th of September the Germans used “ mustard
gas” for the first time. On the 30th of September the 4th
Division was relieved by the Ist Division, and the 7th and 21st
British Divisions relieved the sth Australian Division in the
line.


Broodseinde Ridge.
On 4th October, the 2nd and sth Armies again attacked
along the whole front. The Australian sector was the Brood-
seinde Ridge, which necessitated the front being pushed 1000
yards further north. The reason for this was that the Aus-
tralians were advancing from Ypres in an easterly direction,
while the ridge they were attacking ran north-east. The 3rd
Division, which was under the 2nd Anzac Army Corps, now
came into the battle line and took up a position north of the
Ypres-Roulers railway line, while the Ist and 2nd Divisional
fronts were south of that line. The total front of the three
Australian divisions was over 3000 yards. The attack was a
complete surprise to the enemy, and was carried through
magnificently. The Ist Division during the advance was shut
in both on the front and rear by our own and the enemy’s
barrages. The co-operation between the three divisions was
excellent. A notable event was that an enemy attack on the
Ist Division front began simultaneously with our own at
6 a.m.; the clash occurred in no-man's-land. The Australians
had been under an intense barrage for half an hour while the
Germans had not been touched by any bombardment. The
light was bad and the troops were able to see only 30 yards.
It was a straight-out gladiatorial combat requiring the
qualities of instant decision, valour and skill. Australian
bayonets soon decided the issue. The Germans were brushed
away without slackening the Australians pace. Our men
moved forward behind an advancing barrage, and at 8.45
had gained all objectives. The fighting had been very heavy ;
out of concrete defences the enemy were routed with bayonet,
bullet and bomb. The casualties of the 3rd Division alone
were 61 officers and 1660 other ranks, and their prisoners
24 officers and 1014 other ranks. By 11.45 a.m. all
their objectives were attained —the whole of the Broodseinde
Ridge and Celtic Wood had been captured and the front line
pushed forward to within 2300 yards of Passchendaele, which
proved to be the final objective of the campaign. The aver-
age advance was 1300 yards.


The three Australian divisions and the New Zealanders
had attacked side by side and formed the centre of the whole
struggle. Never before had so many Australians been in
line simultaneously. The Anzacs had driven the Germans
from the Broodseinde Ridge, which was the line originally
held by General French’s troops before Ypres, and which for
three years subsequently had constituted the most important
centre of the German defence system and observation work in
front of Ypres.
The weather, which since the 20th of September had been
fine and clear, on the 4th of October became dark and lowering,
which militated against aeroplane observation.
The Australians had three times within a fortnight struck
sledge-hammer blows at the most vital defensive positions of
the Gormans. They had done their work cleanly and quickly,
and had not lost a foot of ground in spite of intense barrages
and numerous counter-attacks. Without for a moment
disparaging the heroic valour of the British and French troops,
these three great contests were the outstanding features of
the third battle of Ypres. But they had been won at an
enormous cost in casualties.
From this time onwards the continuous and strenuous
fighting, the heavy rains and waterlogged trenches, the sea
of mud and the intense cold told severely on the physique of
the whole of the troops, but nothing could quench their
spirit or damp their ardour.
On 9th October the 6th and 7th Brigades of the 2nd Division
attacked on a front running from a point east of Broodseinde
north to the Ypres-Roulers railway line. The attack com-
menced at 5.30 a.m., all objectives were captured by 9.45,
bringing the line to within 1600 yards of Passchendaele, the
advance made on the left flank being 800 yards, including the
capture of Nieuwemolen village.
On the 10th the 2nd Division was relieved by the 4th
Division. Since the 20th of September, in spite of rain and a
sea of mud, the advance of the Australians against strongly
defended ridges had been carried out with extraordinary
valour and determination, every objective the Australians in


each advance had been asked to capture had been taken, but
while the spirit was still willing the extremely heavy casualties
and continuous fighting had worn out the troops of the 2nd
and sth British Armies and the Ist French Army. The
weather was getting worse and the mud more nearly impass-
able. Sir Douglas Haig decided to bring up from Loos the
four Canadian divisions, the heroes of the second battle of
Ypres, Vimy Ridge and many other gallant actions. The line
had been advanced to Passchendaele Ridge and the front
narrowed to five miles. General Haig decided that this
ridge must be taken at all costs before a halt was called for the
winter.
On the 12th of October, 1917, the 3rd and 4th Divisions
attacked at 5.25 a.m. along the Ypres-Roulers railway. The
first objective was captured at 6 a.m. Our troops were held
up by shelling and enfilade machine-gun fire owing to the
troops on the flanks being unable to advance ; this necessitated
the 3rd Division, and eventually the 4th Division, falling back
at dusk to their original line. The ground was a quagmire of
mud, rendering movement very difficult. Another great
disadvantage to the attackers was that it was impossible to
bring up the heavy artillery owing to the dreadful condition of
the roads ; the German heavy artillery therefore could smash
up our lines and formations without any chance of retaliation
on our part, except by our field artillery, which had no effect
on the concrete emplacements and pill boxes.
Passchendaele.
The Canadians came into the line on 20th October, and on
the 22nd they attacked with the Ist Australian Division on
their right. The Australians captured Decline Wood, thus
securing the flank, while the Canadians by a valiant charge
got astride of the main ridge close up to the edge of Pass-
ehendaele.
On 30th October the attack was renewed by the Canadians
with the Ist Australian Division on the extreme right and the
63rd Division on the left. The Canadians captured Crest
Farm, on the edge of the village, against a terrific concentra


tion of German guns. Five strong counter-attacks were
beaten back by the Canadians.
At 6 a.m. on 6th November the Canadian infantry, advancing
with heroic dash, captured the last stronghold of the Pass-
chendaele village and the ridge, and thus brought the cam-
paign to a successful conclusion.
The third battle of Ypres had been a battle of artillery to
a greater extent than any previous engagement. The field
artillery, in spite of seas of mud and other almost incredible
difficulties, had been somehow got up to the front, and in this
splendid work none had acquitted themselves more gloriously
than the Australians.
On the 15th of November the 3rd Division was transferred
for the first time to the Ist Anzac Corps, and for the first time
too the whole of the Australians in France came under the
command of General Bird wood.
The total casualties (excluding the French and Belgians)
in the third battle of Ypres were :
British, 10,795 officers, 207,838 other ranks.
Australians, 1,656 ~ 39,063 ~
Canadians, 496 ~ 11,917 ~
Totals 12,947 258,818
Grand Total, 271,765.
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
At the outbreak of the Great War the American people were
strongly imbued with the policy laid down by George Washing-
ton—that the United States was to remain aloof from the
jarring discords, wars, and entangling alliances of Europe.
Secure behind her ocean frontiers, where she could develop
her noble ideals of freedom and equality, America was to offer
to the oppressed of other nations a haven of democratic
fraternity.
This great principle of national policy grew in strength as
years went on until it became the fundamental article of
American political faith, developed and buttressed by the
Munroe Doctrine. America had drawn her vast population


from every white nation and thus became ethnologically a
new Europe, but with national divisions and class distinctions
swept away. _ , ~
Of the total foreign population in the United states,
Germany and her Allies represent 33 per cent, and Britain and
her Allies 54 per cent .—nearly twenty million citizens of the
Republic are of German blood.
This great commonwealth of nations maintained for 2 2
years its attitude of neutrality in the Great War, although m
1916 President Wilson expressed the doubts which were
stirring the national conscience, when he said “ The circum-
stances of the last two years have revealed necessities of
international action which no former generation can have
foreseen. We hold that it is the duty of the United States to
use its power not only to make itself safe at home ...
but in the interests of humanity to assist the world in securing
settled peace and justice.”
The “ German educational campaign’ had been commenced
on 25th August, 1914, by Herr Dernberg and Count von
Bernsdorff, supported lavishly with German gold (said to have
amounted to £400,000 weekly). They filled the press of the
United States daily with columns of mendacious statements
regarding German innocence and British brutality. New papers
were created and others purchased. The vast propaganda was,
however, a dismal failure ; the American people clearly saw
that the arrogant ambition of one nation was responsible for
the war and the many atrocities connected with it, and that
the unrestricted submarine campaign which had been carried
on was simply a brutal act of piracy on the high seas. They
were also aware that Great Britain had used every possible
effort and inducement to avoid a rupture with Germany,
declaring war only under the compulsion of honour and duty.
During this period of neutrality, the United States had
rendered the greatest assistance to the Allies by sending
overseas vast quantities of munitions of war, foodstuffs,
clothing, machinery, steel and other commodities, m spite of
the strongest protests by Germany. The American loans to
the Allies, before the United States declared war, amounted to


£383,000.000, while none was floated on behalf of Germany.
Germany’s request that the United States should purchase
her interned vessels so that the proceeds might be remitted to
Germany was refused.
Mr. Gerard, the American Ambassador at Berlin, did noble
work for the Allies in mitigating the hard lot of their prisoners
of war in Germany, while millions of American money were
given to the starving populations of Belgium and Northern
France.
Germany’s submarine atrocities, which had been tolerated
by America for over two years, finally forced an outraged
people into the great struggle. The United States declared
war on Germany on the 6th of April, 1917, and her entry
into the arena was the outstanding development of that year.
It was the first time in their history that the American people
had joined in any great conflict in the Old World. The advent
of the United States into the Great War gave the final stamp
and seal to the character of the conflict, as a mighty struggle
of the democracies of the world against the serried ranks of
military autocracy. The free people of the United States
inherit the noble tradition of having never engaged in a war
except for liberty. There was no suspicion regarding the
purity of her motives —she desired neither territory nor gain.
President Wilson in a speech said : “ We have no selfish ends
to serve. We desire no conquests and no dominion. We
seek no indemnities for ourselves and no material compensation
for sacrifices we shall freely make.” The one object of the
American people was to co-operate with the Allies in destroying
the military colossus and restoring the rights and liberties of
the nations of the Old World. In the words of Mr. Asquith,
“ It was one of the most disinterested acts in history.”
The American people did not come into the war when the
issue was certain, but at a period when the mighty Russian
nation was in the throes of a revolution, which ended three
months later in the general retreat of the Russian armies.
Never was aid more opportune or more welcome in this
mighty world-contest. The German armies on the eastern
front were being freed to hurl themselves on the depleted


ranks of the Allies in France and Flanders, whose reserves
had been largely used up during three years of titanic struggle.
The Allies were threatened with difficulties regarding finances
and food-supply. Vast quantities of German artillery were
soon to be hurried to the western front, to be supplemented
later by the Russian artillery which Germany had captured.
While the Allies felt that they could not be defeated by
Germany, yet without the assistance of America, the bloody
struggle would have been prolonged indefinitely, and might
have ended in a peace less conclusive than proved to be the
case.
In April, 1917, Marshal Jo fire urged the United States to
send an expeditionary force to France without delay. France,
he frankly admitted, was not as strong in reserve man-power
as she had been, and even a small expeditionary force would
fill her with enthusiasm and Germany with dismay at the
thought of the limitless reserves behind that force. The
military members of the British Mission supported the Marshal
of France. The expeditionary force was sent without delay.
On the 17th of May, six weeks after the declaration of war, the
Conscription Act was passed by the United States, although it
had taken Great Britain nearly two years to overcome the
prejudices of her people against conscription. When war was
declared the United States was even more unprepared for
hostilities than Great Britain had been. Her regular army
numbered 71,038 and the State militia 200,000. Having
entered the war the determination and unanimity of the
American people were wonderful. They were prepared to
submit instantly to any disability which might further their
war aims. Without a murmur they accepted conscription,
a rigid censorship, nationalization of essential industries,
heavy taxation, the raising of enormous loans, rigorous food
control and prohibition of the sale and manufacture of liquor.
When Lord Rhondda urged the United States to send largely
increased supplies of flour, a vast number of people in America
voluntarily denied themselves beyond the imposed limit,
and many hotels put up notices that no wheaten bread would
be supplied at their establishments.


The three loans which Great Britain had floated with
difficulty in the United States through J. P. Morgan & Co.
were at 5 and 5| per cent. The American Government
floated loans for Great Britian in April, May and June, 1917,
a 3i per cent. This generous financial aid removed grave
monetary difficulties, as Great Britain could otherwise pay
for her enormous purchases from America only in gold, the
supply of which had already been drained by the United States
to a dangerous limit.
America’s contribution to the winning of the war is not to
be measured merely by the performances of her armies on the
western front, valiantly as those armies bore themselves on all
occasions in the great battles of 1918. America accorded vast
financial assistance to the Allies (over £2,000,000,000), and
the incalculable value of her industrial energies, her enthusiasm
and self-sacrifice. Perhaps the greatest service, however,
was none of these things, but the immense moral effect of her
action as the great counterpoise to the Russian debacle.
When the German hordes broke through the line on 21st
March, 1918, the number of American troops in France was
375,000. This may seem at first view a small number, seeing
that the United States had been at war for nearly twelve
months, and some impatience was expressed by the sorely
tried Allies, who were in a position more critical than at any
time since 1914. It must, however, be remembered that the
first of Kitchener’s new armies did not arrive in France until
May, 1915 —nine months after the declaration of war ; and that
Great Britain was not in a position to assume the offensive
on a large scale until April, 1916 —one year and nine months
after the war commenced. Great Britain’s reserve of man-
power was dwindling; the only new men she could reasonably
expect to put into the field were little more than sufficient to
make up the losses of the second battle of the Somme. The
French, although they had larger reserves than the British,
owing to their comparative immunity from fighting during the
latter half of 1917, were sorely tried. If any material reserve
of manhood was to be tapped it could come only from the
United States, and America responded nobly to the call.


On 30th June, 1918, there were 1,018,000 Americans in France,
and four months later, at the date of the armistice, there
were 2,063,000, including casualties. Britain’s ships brought
over two-thirds of these men and her navy escorted them with
a most gratifying immunity from submarine casualties.
Admiral Sims acknowledged that “ the British Grand Fleet
is the foundation-stone of the cause of the whole of the
Allies,” and there was nothing finer in the war than the
whole-hearted co-operation between the British and American
naval forces ; the addition of the powerful American fleet
was of enormous value to the Allies.
General Pershing, Commander-in-chief of the United States
armies, said: “ This war would have been lost but for the
tenacity of the British people.”
One of our Allies, Japan, provided 100,000 tons of shipping
for the transport of troops from America to Europe, to be
increased by a further 150,000 tons in each of the years 1918
and 1919.
When the Germans burst through our lines on the
21st of March, 1918, their man-power and their artillery
were superior. In their great pushes towards Amiens,
Chateau Thierry and Hazebrouck they probably did not
lose more men than the Allies, and they had captured an
immense quantity of artillery and stores. Yet on the 18th
August the Allies, with no more reinforcements, except from
America, than enabled them to make up their losses, hurled
the Germans back across all their fortified lines and compelled
the enemy to sue for peace on the terms dictated. What
were the factors which brought about this stupendous volte
face ? They were the unified command under Marshal Foch,
and the relative morale of the troops engaged on each side.
When the Germans broke through they were, as Hindenburg
said, certain of victory; they were confident that they could
capture Amiens, push through to the sea (thus dividing the
British and French armies), and force a decision before
America’s power could be felt. Their advances were stopped
by the matchless valour of the British and French troops.
The Germans, finding their advances definitely stopped in


every direction and their reserves used up, were dismayed by
the rapidly accumulating American troops, which had been
arriving since April at the rate of nearly a quarter of a million
per month, forcing on the Germans the conviction of ultimate
defeat.
This transport of troops from overseas also proved to the
amazement of the German people that the U boat campaign
had not been as effective in destroying the Allies’ mercantile
marine as a carefully censored press had led them to believe.
Admiral Tirpitz says in his Memoirs—“ That such an enormous
number of American troops was raised and transhipped took us
all, including the army administration, by surprise.”
Napoleon said that the moral factor in troops as against the
physical is as three to one. Without the American reserve of
1.500.000 men it is doubtful whether Marshal Foch would have
felt justified in commencing the great attack of 18th July, which
eventually drove the Germans out of France. The American
contribution to the actual fighting was of great value. Mar-
shal Foch’s brilliant counter-attack on the Marne salient was
taken largely on General Pershing’s initiative,* and its success
was largely due to the American divisions which co-operated
with the French.
The capture of St. Mihiel salient by American troops, which
the French had previously failed to take, was, with small
loss, accomplished by excellent staff work.
The subsequent capture of the formidable and powerfully
defended Argonne Forest by 22 American divisions, broke the
important railway communications by Mezieres and Sedan,
and deprived the Germans of the Briey iron mines upon which
the enemy largely depended. These operations greatly con-
tributed to the final victory.
To indicate the ultimate relative proportions of the man-
power contributions of the various Allied nations, it may be
stated that the ration strength of the armies, of the Allies in
France at the date of the armistice was ; —French, 2,559,000 ;
United States, 1,950,000 ; British (including Dominions),
1.700.000 ; Belgians and Italians, 200,000 ; Portuguese,
25,000.
* Timet “ History of the War.”


CHAPTER 6.
WESTERN FRONT ( continued ).
The Second Battle of the Somme. Defence of Amiens.
VILLERS BrETONNEITX. CAPTURE OF HAMEL. The
Battle of the Lys,
THE SECOND BATTLE OF THE SOMME.
Since the revolution in Russia in March 1917, the military
situation on the eastern front had been causing the Allies
increasing alarm. The Russian people, suddenly released from
the galling fetters of a selfish despotism, found themselves
without a constitution or any constituted authority, and with-
out any framework of government. Owing to the callous
indifference of former Governments the great majority of that
vast population were unable to read and write, and had no
practical knowledge of social science.
In their pathetic endeavours to create a government of the
people, free from autocratic and aristocratic power and
privileges, they fell into the hands of German agents and
Russian fanatics, who eventually forged for the people more
terrible fetters than those from which they had lately freed
themselves. The new rulers of this freedom-loving people
made a shameful peace with the greatest military autocracy
in the world, and so mismanaged the internal affairs of the
nation that industries almost ceased to exist, chaos reigned
everywhere, and the people starved.
On 16th May, 1917, a short-lived coalition government was
formed as a last attempt at democratic rule, and on 19th July
the vast and undisciplined Russian armies were in headlong
retreat.
Consequently by the end of the year the 61 German divisions
on the eastern front were mostly available for reinforcing the


3RD BATTLE OF YPRES. —HURRYING UP AN AUSTRALIAN GUN AFTER THE BATTLE OF BROODSEINDE RIDGE, SHOWING THE ALMOST INCREDIBLE
DIFFICULTIES OUR GUNNERS OVERCOME. ( Australian Official Photograph, by special permission.)


3RD BATTLE OF THE SOMME.—AUSTRALIAN ARTILLERY PASSING THROUGH RUINED VILLAGE IN THE HINDENBURG LINE.
(Australian Official Photoghaph, by special pemission.)


German armies on the western front—this would afford our
enemies a preponderance not only of man-power but of
artillery as well.
It is true that the American nation had declared war on
Germany in April, 1917, and the Allies knew that her assistance
would be generous and unstinted ; but while her great armies
were being created, the Central Powers had an opportunity
of trying, by one supreme effort, to force a final decision
before the gigantic power of the United States could be used
to counteract the effect of Russia’s collapse. Early in
December it had been recognised by the Allies that the
greatly increased German strength on the western front would
compel them to confine themselves to the defensive until the
arrival of the Americans in sufficient numbers enabled them
to again assume the offensive.
The German forces had been continually increased on the
western front since the beginning of November, 1917. In
three and a half months twenty-eight infantry divisions had
been drawn from the eastern theatre of war and six from the
Italian front, while others, it was reported, were to follow.
By the 21st of March, 1918, the enemy altogether had avail-
able on the western front 192 divisions, while the accumulation
of artillery was stupendous and unprecedented. General
Haig had 58 divisions on the western front, but the continuous
and sanguinary struggles of 1916 and 1917 had left the British
armies at a low ebb as regards numbers. Owing to want of
reinforcements each division had been reduced from 13 to 10
battalions.
Sir Douglas Haig considered the various directions in which
the contemplated German attacks might be delivered. It
appeared probable that the enemy would attack the British
line south of Arras with the object of separating the French
and British armies and capturing Amiens. In his despatch
he said : —“ To meet this eventuality more than half my
available troops are allocated to the defence of this sector,
together with the whole of the cavalry.”
The general direction and the date of the attack were both
correctly anticipated by Sir Douglas Haig,
i


Negotiations between the British and the French had pro-
ceeded since September, 19X7, regarding a further extension
of the British line, and, with some reluctance on the part of the
British, the request was complied with, and the line was
extended 28 miles, to relieve the French 3rd Army. This
prolongation, which took place at the end of January, 1918,
brought the British line to Barisis, seven miles south of the
Oise, and made the total length of the British line 125 miles.
The sth Army (General Gough) occupied the southern sector
as far north as Gouzeaucourt, a front of 42 miles, and this was
held by four army corps. About ten miles of this line on the
south were believed to be protected by the marshes of the
Oise River. General Gough had 14 infantry and 3 cavalry
divisions, of which 11 divisions were in the front line and 5 in
reserve, each division occupying a front of about 6600 yards,
practically one man per yard.
The 3rd Army (General Byng) held a front of 27 miles,
from Gouzeaucourt to near Gavelle, with 4 army corps of
15 divisions, of which 8 were in the front line and 7 in reserve.
Each front line division occupied an average width of 5800
yards.
The total force thrown by the Germans against the 32
British divisions in the first few days of the offensive was 78
divisions, a proportion of 5 men to 2.
The German authorities were quite confident of success-
Ludendorff stated in the middle of March : “We are entirely
confident that the battle that is bursting forth will be success-
ful for us.”
The great strength of the German position was brought
about by conditions over which the Allies had no control,
but the dangerous position of the British line south of Arras
was the result of a divided command on the western front.
The extension of the line for 28 miles shortly before the attack
was probably a mistake. It was intended to make this ex-
tension earlier, but owing to General Byng’s successful a
vance against Cambrai in December and the subsequent
fighting it was postponed until the end of January.


The Grand Army of Reserve under General Fayolle,
alleged by the Germans to consist of 60 divisions, but probably
very much less, was primarily intended for use on the French
front, and was too distant to render assistance without danger-
ous delay. It had been generally considered by the authorities
that the German advance would not have been so rapid, but
the extraordinary strength of the German armies was under-
estimated.
The German attack commenced a little before 5 a.m. on the
21st of March by a tremendous bombardment of high explosives
and gas shells against the whole front of the 3rd and sth
Armies, from the Scarpe to the Oise. No such mass of artil-
lery had ever been brought into action before. The Germans
boasted that their artillery was four times as numerous as that
of their opponents. At 10 o’clock the German infantry
advanced under cover of a mist. By 12 o’clock two consider-
able breaches had been made in the line held by the 3rd
Army, including the capture of Bullecourt, although General
Byng with a smaller frontage held the enemy better than the
sth Army. Further south the Germans broke through at
Ronssoy towards Peronne, at Roupy south of St. Quentin,
at Essigny and at Tergnier near the Oise. By the 23rd the
German front had advanced an average of nearly 10 miles
running south from Morchies, east of Bapaume, to and includ-
ing Peronne, thence down the Somme to Ham. General Pelle
commanding the French 6th Army on the right of the sth
Army, immediately sent to the assistance of the British the
125th Division and the 9th and 10th Cavalry Divisions, and
on the 24th of March the 35th Division. By 28th March the
German line was ten miles west of the British and French lines
of June, 1916. Albert and Mondidier had been captured, and
the enemy lines were within 11 miles of Amiens. Thus in one
week all the territory wrested from Germany in 1916 and in
the struggle for the Hindenburg line, had been lost, with the
exception of Vimy Ridge. A little later the hard-won ter-
ritory between Ypres and Passchendaele was also lost, and the
Allies were in a worse position territorially than in June, 1916,
when their offensive began. The magnificent qualities of the


British and French people never shone more brightly than
at this crisis. There were no recriminations, no Allied dis-
trust, no talk of compromise, but a unanimous determination
to continue the war until a just peace could be dictated.
Throughout the terrible retreat the British troops, over-
whelmed by numbers, had fought with extraordinary gallantry.
Even the Germans were forced to admit this. A German
paper of 24th March said : “ The English defended themselves
with all the stubbornness of their race, but up to the present
have been unable to bring the fight to a standstill. The
German headquarters’ report of 25th March speaks of “ the
stubborn enemy resistance.” A German wireless of 26th
March said : “ Neither in Russia nor in Italy were the sacrifices
so high. This fact is explained by the stubborn resistance of
the British and their massed counter-attacks, supported by
the French and Americans.” Ludendorff acknowledged the
tough resistance of the British, but added that still greater
acknowledgment was due to what the German infantry, sup-
ported by other arms, had done. M. Clemenceau stated :
“ Never has France more admired British valour and never
has she had greater confidence in British leaders.’
The Germans claimed to have captured 1100 guns and
75,000 prisoners from the 3rd and sth Armies. This is pro-
bably an exaggeration. The Berliner Tageblatt of 29th March
explained that “ the great number of English guns captured
was owing to the “ great self-denial with which the artillery
tried to cover the English retreat. It continued firing when
within case-shot range, and only then thought of its own
safety.”
This great set-back to the Allies’ arms showed clearly, but
almost too late, the absolute necessity of a unified command.
The situation on the south was saved by the advent of the
French forces, which were poured in by rail and motor lorry
and thrown into the line as they arrived,
A Supreme War Council had been formed in the middle of
November, 1917, to co-ordinate military action on the western
front, to watch over the general conduct of the war, to prepare
“ recommendations” for the decision of the Governments,


but it had no executive authority and was therefore practic-
ally useless in a crisis. As Mr. Lloyd George admitted, it
was only “ an effort at a remedy.”
It was not until 26th March that the logic of events forced
the great decision. General Foch was then placed in supreme
control of the operations of the British, American and French
forces, and, on 17th April, of the Belgian Army. Up to this
time Petain had perhaps thought that the protection of Paris
was his most important duty, as to the British the Channel
ports had appeared of the most supreme moment.
General Foch was appointed, not Generalissimo, but “ Com-
mander-in-Chief of the Allied Armies in France.” The former
title would have conferred on him the administrative control
(as well as the fighting command), with the power to dismiss
or promote Generals of the British, American or Belgian
forces, while the latter appointment embraced only the
strategical and tactical control of the troops.
At this desperate crisis in the affairs of the Allies, the enor-
mous value of the British and French air services was proved as
never before. On the 24th of March General Petain sent up
every aeroplane available, both British and French, and the
Australian squadrons played their full part. Their machine
guns sprayed bullets on the advancing columns and dropped a
deluge of bombs on their lines of communications, which at
times were hopelessly blocked, paralysing the movements
of the enemy’s troops. Never did men fight with more
ceaseless energy or to better effect, considerably delaying the
advance of the enemy when minutes were worth millions of
pounds.
On Ist January, 1918, as previously mentioned, the First
Anzac Army Corps became “ The Australian Corps,” and
embraced the five Australian Divisions. The Second Anzac
Corps then became the XXII. Corps.
Owing probably to the absence of any valid Australian
authority in Great Britain, the Australian divisions, up to this
date in France, were separated into two Army Corps—
generally fighting in different sectors of the front. It was
consequently not possible to know what the Australian


infantry, fighting as one body, was capable of achieving.
Right up to the last great campaign this nullified to some extent
the national pride in achievements. General Godley (Second
Anzac Corps) commanded at various times the sth, 3rd and
4th Australian Divisions, with the New Zealanders and a
British division, while General Birdwood (First Anzac Corps)
commanded the remainder of the Australians. In no import-
ant engagement was General Birdwood ever able to command
the five Australian divisions, as although he commanded the
Australian Army Corps for the first four months of 1918, the
Ist Division during that period was fighting in Belgium (in the
battle of the Lys), while the other divisions were on the
Somme.
The reasons given for placing the Australian divisions in
two army corps, were that the normal organization of a corps
is three divisions (although in practice it was frequently four,
and sometimes six), and to increase these to five would
destroy the uniformity of organisation and create adminis-
trative difficulties. Nevertheless during 1918 the five Aus-
tralian divisions did fight together as one army corps under
General Monash, during the third battle of the Somme, which
was the most successful campaign the Australian infantry had
ever engaged in. If it were right then, presumably it could
have been adopted from the first.
The real trouble was apparently that the Australians
(unlike all the other sister nations of the Empire) never during
the whole war controlled the administration of their forces.
During the period of the war the Australians never had in
Great Britain an Overseas Military Council (as Canada had)*
or any Australian of military authority who could approach
the War Office with the right to speak on behalf of Australia.
The only person who could have done this was General Bird-
wood, who was fighting on the western front.
Overseas Military Council of Canada was organized in Great Britain
mnistoTnipSl MtaSLtSftrthe GenerTS Td^utant-Glneral
except when in the battle line.


From the third battle of Ypres to March, 1918, the Aus-
tralian. divisions held the front occupied by the 2nd Army at
the battle of Messines. No battle of any importance occurred
during this period, but during the long winter nights Aus-
tralian fighting patrols had continually roamed over no-man s-
land, much to the discomfiture and loss of the Germans.
The genius and temperament of the Australian peculiarly
fitted him for this class of warfare, much preferred by him to
organized raids carefully worked out with definite objectives
laid down, which he could not exceed if favourable oppor-
tunities presented themselves.
Armed patrols gave freer play to his individuality, developed
the sense of locality and created a feeling of confidence in him-
self under all conditions. The impromptu fights of the
patrols taught him to guard against and to effect surprises,
and to become expert in reconnaissance work.
As the weather improved the success of the raids and patrols
excited the keenest rivalries amongst battalions ; the bags
of prisoners were compared, and nightly the lives of the
Germans on this front were made unbearable by the most
daring “ scraps” and dare-devil attacks of these young
gladiators. Occasionally the enemy would attempt a reprisal
raid, which invariably ended in a bloody repulse.
This work was not only excellent training for the strenuous
task that was in front of the Allies, but developed the com-
bative instinct and kept the men physically fit and in excellent
spirits.
On the night of 10-11th February the 37th and 38th (Vic-
torian) Battalions made a raid on the German lines at Warne-
ton, bringing back 33 prisoners and killing from 90 to 100
Germans. Their casualties were less than a quarter of this
number.
On 19-20th February the 54th (N.S.W.) Battalion cut out
Whiz Farm in the enemy’s front line system, south of Holle-
beke, captured three enemy dug-outs and returned with 7
prisoners.
The Germans made a counter-attack on the night of lst-2nd
March near Moat Farm, and were beaten back with heavy losses*


On Thursday morning, 21st March, the whole line was
electrified by the news of the great attack on the 3rd and
sth Armies on the lines facing Cambrai and St. Quentin. It
was joyfully predicted that “ Australia would be there” as
information arrived of the break-through and the fall of
Bullecourt and Lagnicourt, where the Australians broke the
Hindenburg line early in 1917. Almost simultaneously a
fierce German bombardment took place all along the line
from La Bassee to Messines.
On the Australian front the Ist, 2nd and sth Divisions were
in the line. The 3rd Division was training right back at
Lumbres, south-west of St. Omer, The 4th Division was in
support billeted in the Merris-Meteren area. The whole of
the Australian troops were ordered to the Somme, as well as
the Canadians and New Zealanders.
The ten divisions of the sister nations of the Empire had
engaged in no great battles since the termination of the third
battle of Ypres in November. They were therefore in ex-
cellent heart, strong and vigorous and well trained. It is
not too much to say that this army suddenly confronting the
legions of Germany on both sides of the Somme, played no
small part in arresting their advance on Amiens and prevent-
ing a cleavage between the British and French forces.
The 3rd and 4th Australian Divisions, being out of the line,
were immediately rushed to the Somme, followed in a few
days by the sth and later by the 2nd and Ist as they could be
relieved in the line by exhausted British divisions sent from
the Somme to Flanders.
The 3rd Division reached Blaringhem district on the 23rd
of March. Next day they entrained at St. Omer, Arques and
Steinbecque, and took up positions at Doullens and Monde-
court Pas to patrol certain areas and cover roads with a view
of repelling any attempted break-through near Hebuterne.
On the 26th the VII. Corps informed General Monash that the
3rd Division would take up the line between the Rivers Somme
and Ancre on the frontage Sailly-le-Sec and Maricourt FAbbe.
Here they dug in, with divisional headquarters at Franvillers,


thus securing Ribemont and Mericourt I’Abbe, while the 11th
Brigade secured Sailly-le-Sec and the ridge above it.
It was at first intended to place the 3rd and 4th Divisions
south of Arras, as an immediate support, but the German
advance caused them to be sent further south—the 4th
Division travelling in motor lorries via Doullens and Idllers
to Hebuterne. The 4th Brigade went into the line between
Hebuterne and Bucquoy, where it remained a month. It is
interesting to note that it was here that the “ whippet” or
medium-sized swift tank first went into action, armed with
only four machine guns. Its lightness and mobility made it a
most useful adjunct to the service.
DEFENCE OF AMIENS.
The 12th and 13th Brigades (4th Division) continuing their
journey, joined the 3rd Division on the Ancre, to stop the
direct German advance on Amiens, They took up then-
line fronting the Albert-Amiens railway between Ribemont and
Dernancourt, with the 35th Division on their left. The
Australians arrived none too soon, as they went into action to
repel the advancing Germans about midday on the 27th of
March, and succeeded in bringing to a standstill the German
advance on that sector. The French residents welcomed the
Australians with demonstrative joy, after nearly two years’
absence. On the 28th and 29th of March the 11th Brigade
(3rd Division) and 12th Brigade (4th Division) attacked the
enemy and forced him back 1000 yards on the south side of the
Albert-Amiens railway, capturing Treux Wood ; their line
then ran from a point on the Somme between Sailly-le-Sec
and Sailly Laurette, north to the Ancre at Buire.
The important city of Amiens had been saved from de-
struction by Australian valour. The apparently irresistible
forward thrust of Germany’s overwhelming numbers against
the sth Army had been stopped and even pushed back at the
most critical point. The gratitude of the French residents
was very touching. They hailed the Australians as “the
saviours of Amiens,” and have since erected in the glorious
cathedral of that city a memorial to their fallen comrades,


crowned by an Australian flag which the Commonwealth
authorities presented.
The same day, after a violent bombardment further north,
the Germans attacked between Hebuterne and a point north-
east of Arras. Five divisions north of the Scarpe made a
determined effort to throw the British back to the line Vimy-
Bailleul-St. Laurent, with a view of capturing Vimy Ridge,
with three special assault divisions, the following day. South
of the Scarpe there were 13 German divisions between Arras
and Hebuterne ; two of these divisions attempted to capture
Arras and the heights above the town, while the remainder
attacked along the line as far as Bucquoy (where the 4th
Australian Brigade was stationed). The day was clear, and
astride the Scarpe enormous numbers, advancing shoulder
to shoulder, were mown down by British artillery (at point
blank range), machine guns and rifle fire, and after fierce
fighting the enemy was thrown back with heavy losses.
Further south the repulse of the enemy was even more
decisive ; three British divisions drove off two attacks from
the direction of Ablainzeville, while the 62nd Division and the
4th Australian Brigade crushed a succession of heavy attacks
about Bucquoy, with severe losses to the enemy. The
important strategical position of Vimy Ridge had been held
and the German advance repulsed everywhere north of the
Somme. A German victory on this sector would have been
a serious blow to the Allies.
On 29th March the 15th Brigade (sth Division) arrived from
Belgium and relieved the 9th Brigade (3rd Division), which
was sent south across the Somme to Hangard to assist the
French on the Luce River. The following day the Germans
advanced from Demuin astride the Luce ; on the northern side
they were driven back by the 66th Division and the 9th
Australian Brigade. The same day Gorman troops attacked
on each side of the Somme, but were driven back with heavy
loss by the Ist Cavalry Division, the 10th and 11th Brigades
of the 3rd Australian Division, to which was attached a bat-
talion of United States Engineers.


As the British troops were being forced back at Hamel,
south of the Somme, the reserve brigades of the 2nd and sth
Australian Divisions were put into line a mile and a half east
of Villers Bretonneux.
On 4th and sth April the Germans launched two heavy
converging attacks on Amiens —one south of the Somme to-
wards Villers Bretonneux on the 4th, the other north of the
Somme against the Albert line on the sth of April.
At dawn on the 4th violent artillery fire ushered in the
assault. At 7 a.m. the infantry attack began on Villers
Bretonneux. The exhausted British troops after a most
gallant defence were driven in north-east of the village, but the
Australian front held and the British cavalry in a spirited
counter-attack restored the line. In the afternoon the troops
to the right of the Australians were pressed in and the
Australian right flank was bent back to conform to the altered
line, but a counter-attack by two Australian battalions and a
London regiment restored the line here also. Further north
the line was pushed back and Hamel and Vaire Wood were
lost. The artillery of the 3rd Australian Division (General
Grimwade) on the north bank of the Somme, firing over open
sights, did excellent work by inflicting very heavy losses on
the flank of the advancing enemy.
In the evening the sth Australian Brigade arrived, the fore-
runner of the 2nd Division. Next day it went further south
to the French left flank at Hangard Wood. The remaining
two brigades of the sth Division arrived from Flanders on the
6th and came into the line between Hill 104 and the Somme.
The Australians now held the whole line on each side of the
Somme from Albert in the North to Hangard in the South,
a front of 15 miles. It was the most vital part of the line,
being right in front of Amiens.
On sth April, after a deluge of shell-fire which lasted 2\
hours, the Germans commenced an infantry attack, with four
divisions, from Dernancourt, against the 12th and 13th
Brigades of the 4th Division on the north bank of the Ancre.
After desperate fighting throughout the whole day the


Australians were forced back towards Lavieville Hill. In the
evening the exhausted Australians, by a most gallant counter-
attack drove the enemy back, with heavy losses, practically
to the original line, recapturing their defence positions. As
the attackers were in the proportion of 6 to 1 this was a very
fine piece of work.
The Ist Australian Division was relieved in the line in front
of Wytschaete on the 4th of April ; it marched to Locre,
embussed to Strazeele, where it entrained for Hengest-sur-
Somme on the 6th and marched to St. Ouin. It reached
Vinacourt on the Bth and Querrien, near Amiens, on the 10th.
Owing to the break-through of the Germans at Bois Grenier
on the 9th, instructions came for its immediate return to
Belgium. The division entrained at St, Boche and reached
Hazebrouck on the 11th, where it was at once thrown into the
battle of the Lys.
VILLERS BRETONNEUX.
Owing to the casualties suffered by the Australians in the
heavy fighting, and the return of the Ist Division to Belgium,
the Australian line was shortened, about the middle of April,
from Albert across the Somme to Hill 104 —about a mile
north-east of Villers Bretonneux. The British Bth Division
took up the line in front of Villers Bretonneux, while the 58th
Division continued the line three miles further south to the
French at Hangard.
On 24th April, after an intense bombardment of three hours,
four German divisions attacked the British front south of the
Somme. German tanks broke through the line south of
Villers Bretonneux and wheeling north and south created a
passage for the infantry. After a fierce and costly struggle the
enemy captured Villers Bretonneux and advanced 1000 yards
into the outskirts of Abbe Wood, where a counter-attack by
the Bth Division held them up. To the north all attacks were
repulsed. The loss of this town, which was the key to Amiens,
was so serious that the same night the 13th Brigade (4th
Division) and the 15th Brigade (sth Division) of Australians
made a dashing counter-attack under most difficult conditions,


neither of these brigades having been over the locality of the
advance, and the night being very dark. The 13th Division
attacked from Cachy about 10 p.m. Advancing two miles,
under heavy machine-gun and rifle fire the whole way, it
forced the German troops back and captured Monument
Wood on the southern outskirts of the town.
The 15th Brigade commenced its attack at midnight and
advanced against the strongest opposition right up Hill 104,
which it succeeded in capturing before daylight.
On the morning of the 25th the village, surrounded on three
sides, was taken by British battalions of the Bth Division, and
the 57th Australian Battalion ; 1000 prisoners and 80 machine
guns were captured.
This was a most gallant feat of arms, which again barred the
enemy advance on Amiens, and was a fitting commemora-
tion of the anniversary of the landing of the Anzacs at
Gallipoli.
On the 14th of July, 1919, the grateful citizens of Villers
Bretonneux presented to the Commonwealth a stone tablet
as a mark of their respect. In making the presentation the
Mayor stated : “ The Australians had chased an enemy ten
times their number from a position dangerous to the muted
armies of the Entente. The veneration of your supreme
devotion will rank with that of the greatest heroes of the great-
est epoch.”
After this repulse the Germans did not make any further
serious attempts to capture Amiens by a direct attack.
The Australian brigades continued to hold the line from
Villers Bretonneux to the Ancre for the next 14 weeks, which
they utilized in ceaseless raids on the enemy lines, and in
continual nibbling of territory held by the Germans.
On the 30th of April the 10th Brigade (3rd Division) drove
the enemy further back from Treux Wood and the railway line
towards Dernancourt. The 9th Brigade (3rd Division) on
the 3rd of May captured some territory north-east from Sailly-
le-Sec, and on the 6th continued the advance further north
towards Morlancourt. These captures were amplified by the
9th and 10th Brigades on the 7th of May.


On the 19th of May the 6th Brigade (2nd Division) pushed
forward the northern line towards Morlancourt, capturing
Ville-sur-Ancre after a stiff fight.
On 27th May the Germans, foiled in their efforts to reach
Paris via Amiens, launched their great offensive against the
French on the Aisne front along a line of 35 miles between
Rheims and Soissons. Six British divisions were placed at the
disposal of Marshal Foch. The Aisne and the Vesle were
crossed by the enemy, Soissons captured, and the Allies,
fighting heroically, were pressed back to the Marne and
Chateau Thierry. A large reinforcement of American troops
arrived on 31st May and with the French drove the Germans
back at this point, and eventually recovered the large area of
invaded territory south of the Aisne.
On the Ist of June General Bird wood was appointed to the
command of the sth Army, and from that date relinquished
the fighting command of the Australian Corps, which was
attached to the 4th Army. General Birdwood, however, still
retained the administrative command of the Australian
forces on all fronts.
The Australian people were fortunate in the choice Lord
Kitchener made of an officer to command the Australians in
Gallipoli and later in France. They recognised in General
Birdwood a most able general and a brave man —and felt that
no happier selection could have been made.
While rejoicing that General Birdwood’s splendid qualities
had been fittingly recognised by promotion, Australia felt,
as a sister nation of the Empire, that after four years of war it
should be possible to choose an Australian general for the
corps command.
It was therefore entirely in accordance with the aspirations
of Australia that General Sir John Monash, who had shown
such outstanding ability as commander of the 4th Brigade in
Gallipoli and the 3rd Division in France, was appointed to
command the whole of the Australians in Europe during the
last and greatest campaign of the entire war.
Major-General Sir Brudenel White, p.s.c., the distinguished
Chief of Staff of the Australian Army Corps, remained with


his old chief, accepting the position of Chief of Staff of the
sth Army. Although temporarily relinquishing his connection
with the Australian Corps, his great abilities have fortunately
not been lost to the Commonwealth.
On the Bth of June the 7th and Bth Brigades drove the enemy
back a further stage in the centre of the line.
On the sth and 6th of June the 6th Brigade (2nd Division)
pressed back the Germans in front of Villers Bretonneux and
Hill 104, On the 4th of July the 11th Brigade (3rd Division)
drove the Germans back a further stage towards Dernancourt.
On the Bth and 9th of July the sth, 7th, 12th and 14th Brigades
advanced their lines towards Warfusee-Abancourt and Sailly-
Laurette. From the 14th to the 17th of July the sth, 6th
and 10th Brigades advanced the line towards Marceleave and
up to Arquaire Wood.
CAPTURE OF HAMEL.
On the 4th of July an attack was made on Hamel, Vaire
and Hamel Woods, and the high ground east of these localities,
which afforded observation positions over the Somme valley.
A series of conferences was held by the Australian Corps, at
which all points were brought up and decided. The operations
were entrusted to the General Officer Commanding the 4th
Division. The total frontage to be attacked was 6000 yards
by a depth of 2500. The 4th, 6th, 11th and 15th Brigades (or
portions of them), ten battalions in all, were detailed for the
task.
A feature of the attack was the large number of tanks used —
sixty in all, or 5 companies. The tanks did excellent work,
and the manoeuvring ability of the Mark 5 was clearly demon-
strated. Each fighting tank carried up two boxes of Lewis
gun ammunition drums, and water for the infantry. Four
supply tanks carried Royal Engineer supplies and ammunition.
The artillery consisted of 326 field guns and 302 heavy guns,
gas and smoke shells were also used ; 200,000 rounds of
ammunition were fired, and 147 machine guns were employed.
The aeroplanes rendered great assistance. Besides dropping
on the enemy 1100 bombs of 25 lb. each, and 58 bombs of


1121 b. each, the aeroplanes also brought up ammunition for
the infantry in the front line. Gun sections that were short of
ammunition laid out a white cloth with arms 6 feet in length
on the ground, and aeroplanes dropped two boxes of ammuni-
tion by means of a parachute. In all 114,000 rounds of
ammunition were carried forward in this manner.
The attack commenced at 3.10 a.m., and the final objective
was captured at 5 a.m.
The success was due to the ability, care, and skill with which
the plan was drawn up, the excellent co-operation between all
arms, and the valour of the troops. The total casualties were
only 800. Two guns were captured, 26 trench mortars, 171
machine guns. The prisoners taken were 41 officers and 1431
other ranks.
This may be said to be the first considerable offensive under-
taken by the Allies since the Germans broke through in March.
A pleasing feature of this very successful operation was the
co-operation of American troops. It was arranged that a
battalion should be incorporated with the Australians. Be-
fore the attack began the arrangement was vetoed by higher au-
thority, much to the grief of our American cousins, who were
extremely anxious to go over. Many of them borrowed
Australian uniforms, others owing to the lateness of the final
instructions could not be withdrawn in time, and went “ over
the top” with the greatest enthusiasm. It is needless to say
that no troops fought more valiantly.
The fact that the attack on Hamel was fought on Inde-
pendence Day sent a thrill through the hearts of the American
troops. General Bell told them before going into action that
they were alongside about the best fighting men in Europe, and
it was their business to see that on the 4th of July the national
reputation was upheld.
These American troops belonged to the 33rd Division. They
carried out General Bell’s instructions to the letter, the verdict
of the Australians after the capture of Hamel being that they
had never seen braver or more determined fighters, and a
mutual respect and comradeship were commenced between the
young democratic nations—a respect and comradeship which


deepened with further acquaintance during the great and final
campaign of the war, and augured well for the future of two
nations which were brought together by a common kinship, a
common language, and the peaceful interest of trade and com
merce across the broad Pacific, which it appears to be the
destiny of the two nations to largely control. Indeed it
seems to be a reasonable expectation that, as is already taking
place in Canada, in time to come the vast vacant lands of the
continent of Australia will be filled up with the progressive
and stalwart sons of Great Britain and America.
THE BATTLE OF THE LYS.
The ten Dominion divisions drawn from the Belgian front,
to assist in blocking the German advance on Amiens, had been
replaced by worn-out divisions from the Somme, whose losses
had been made good by raw and half-trained reinforcements
which had been rushed over from Great Britain. The Ger-
mans, repulsed in their rush on Amiens, foiled in their efforts
to widen their salient by the capture of Vimy Ridge and Arras,
and fully seized of the necessity of prompt action owing to the
ever-increasing reinforcements from America, determined if
possible to break through further north, and advance on
Hazebrouck with the view of capturing the Channel ports,
and at the same time cut off the British forces in
Belgium. The Germans were fully aware of the depleted
condition of this line owing to the reinforcements hurried to
the Somme. Under normal conditions active operations on a
large scale could not be undertaken in Flanders before May,
owing to the water being so near to the surface and the sea
of mud that would be created by shell-fire and the movement
of troops. The dryness of the spring of 1918, however,
favoured the Germans.
The Portuguese divisions had been continually in the line
for months and required a rest. Arrangements had been
made for their relief, but before this could be carried out the
attack commenced.
On the 7th and Bth of April the whole line from La Bassee
to Bois Grenier, a width of 28 miles, was heavily bombarded.
j


At 7 a.m. on the 9th the enemy in great strength attacked,
under cover of a fog, the left brigade of the 2nd Portuguese
Division and succeeded in breaking through. The 40th
Division, north of the Portuguese, was pressed back at 9 a.m.
to a line from Bois Grenier through Fleurbaix to the Lys.
By the 12th of April the thinly-held line had been pushed back
in some places 12 miles. It now ran from Givenchy in the
south to Merville, Merris, Neuve Eglise, and Wytschaete.
At Merris the Germans were only three miles from the import-
ant centre and railhead of Hazebrouck ; the position was very
critical. The 29th and 31st Divisions had fought magni-
ficently to hold up the advance at all costs until reinforce-
ments arrived.
The Ist Australian Division (General Walker), which had
been sent to the Somme, was hurried back to Hazebrouck
on the 12th of April, and the same night took up a line in
front of the forest of Nieppe extending north to the
Armentieres-Hazebrouck railway, and dug in. The Germans
made strenuous efforts to capture this wood. The fighting
was severe, often in hand-to-hand encounters, but the Aus-
tralians were able to hold their ground and permanently stay
the advance at this critical point.
On 17th April another fierce attack was beaten off by the
33rd and Ist (Australian) Divisions.
On the 19th the Australians were relieved by British troops
and went into support at Borre. On the 22nd the Ist Division
went into the line north of the railway between Strazeele and
Merris, with Mont-de-Merris in no-man’s-land. Until then-
return to the Somme in August, the Australians held this
front, with one brigade in the line, one in reserve and one
training. During this time constant raids and patrols were
sent out, and on the 29th of July Merris was captured by two
companies of the 10th Battalion, with 169 prisoners and
numerous machine guns.
At General Haig’s request Marshal Foch sent eight French
divisions to Flanders to help to stay the attack on the northern
sector. These troops took up the line Meteren to Spanboeck-
molen, covering Kemmel Hill.


The Germans claim that the British lost 20,000 prisoners
and 400 guns in the battle of the Lys. The German losses
are not known exactly, but they were extremely heavy.
On the 3rd of August the Ist Australian Division was
relieved by British troops, and entrained for Amiens to join
the other Australian divisions in time for the commencement
of the third battle of the Somme.


CHAPTER 7.
WESTERN FRONT ( continued ).
The Third Battle of the Somme. Attack on Bth of
August, 1918. Capture of Mont St. Quentin.
American Co-operation. Capture of Hindenburg
Line. Capture of Le Catelet and Montbrehain.
THE THIRD BATTLE OF THE SOMME.
The third battle of the Somme marks the zenith of the fame
of the Australian infantry as a fighting force^
In the first battle of the Somme both the British andA -
tralian troops were inexperienced in the technical an g 7
specialized system of offensive warfare which had been
evolved on the western front after nearly two years of fighting.
Kitchener’s “ new armies” had never been engaged m any
big offensive except at Loos, while the Austrahan^ visions,
although permeated with the veterans of Galhpo i, a
experience of intense creeping barrages, poison gas, trench
mortars, Mills’ bombs and rifle grenades.
General Foch, speaking of the British at the first battle of
the Somme, said; “They were very gallant; like all young troops
very confident, but inexperienced. They thought that
bravery by itself was a match for bullets. They bought their
experience dear on the Somme.” {Times, 19/4/19).
Since then the British armies had been fighting continuously
in one great campaign that had rolled majestically north
from the Somme to Passchendaele, and there were no more
highly trained or effective veteran armies m the world.
For the first time the whole five Australian mfan ry
divisions fought together in one Australian corps commanded
by an Australian General. This afforded the Australians free
scope to develop still further their individuality and those


distinctive characteristics which have made them famous as a
fighting force.
The principal officers of the Australian Corps, during the
third battle of the Somme, were ;
General Officer Commanding, Lt.-Gen. Sir John Monash.
Chief of Staff .. Brigadier-General T. A. Blarney, p.s.c.
Ist Division .. Major-General T, W. Glasgow.
2nd Division .. Major-General Sir C. Rosenthal.
3rd Division .. Major-General Sir J. Gellibrand.
4th Division .. Major-General E. G. Sinclair Maclagan.
sth Division .. Major-General Sir T. T. Hobbs.
Artillery .. Brigadier-General W. Coxen.
Brigadier-General T. A. Blarney assumed the position of Chief
of Staff of the Australian Army Corps upon the transfer of
Major-General White to the sth Army. No better choice
could have been made. The Staff work of the Australian
Corps during the last great campaign was, in the opinion of
those competent to judge, of the very highest standard.
During the successful offensive of the French and Americans
in the second battle of the Marne, commencing on the 18th
July, 1918, preparations were put in hand by the British for a
powerful attack on the Bth August between the Luce and the
Ancre. The position allotted to the Australian Corps was in
the centre, from Villers Bretonneux to the Somme, with the
Canadians on the right and the 3rd (British) Corps on the left.
These three corps belonged to the 4th Army under General
Rawlinson.
There was no preliminary bombardment, so as not to forfeit
the important element of surprise. Tanks were to be used to
engage the strong points. The advance commenced at 4.20
a.m.
The attacking brigades on the Australian front were the
sth, 7th, 9th and 11th of the 2nd and 3rd Divisions, the 6th
and 10th Brigades being in reserve. They were to penetrate
an average depth of over two miles, which they accomplished
by 6.20 a.m., when the 15th, Bth, 12th and 4th Brigades of the


sth and 4th Divisions passed through them, with the 13th
and 14th Brigades in reserve. At the end of the first day the
Australians had captured all objectives (except on the extreme
left, owing to enfilade fire from across the Somme). The
Australians had broken through the German defences for a
distance of nearly six miles, capturing Bayonvillers, Har-
bonieres, Warfusee, Marceleave, La Motte, Morcourt and
Gailly. The total captures were 183 officers, 7742 other
ranks and 173 guns. A German 11-inch railway gun captured
by the 31st (Queensland) Battalion at Harbonieres has a
range of 20 miles and weighs 183 tons. It has been brought to
Australia as a war trophy. The Canadians on the right had
kept pace with the Australians. The effect of this smashing
blow was tremendous, and the battle had assumed the char-
acter of open warfare. Ludendorff subsequently stated,
“ After the severe defeat of Bth August, I gave up the last
vestige of hope.” The Commander-in-Chief of the British
forces stated in his despatch : —•“ The effect of this victory,
following so closely after the Allied victory on the Marne, upon
the morale both of the German and British troops, was very
great.”
On 9th August the attack was pushed on by the Ist and
2nd Divisions. The Ist Division joined in late owing to an
approach march of 5 hours, and the right brigade of the sth
Division temporarily filled the gap and captured Vauvillers.
The left flank was exposed to enfilade fire, owing to strong
resistance retarding the advance of the British troops north of
the Somme, but the right pressed on, capturing Framerville
and securing a great haul of machine guns.
The Australian artillery brigades at this time were placed
directly under the command of the infantry brigadiers.
The 2nd Brigade pushed through the 15th towards Lihons
Hill, which rises very gradually in a glacis slope ; the country
is very open and admirably adapted for defence. Consider-
able opposition was met with from field and machine guns,
in spite of which a good advance was made.
On the evening of the 9th the line ran east of Framerville
and through La Flaque.


On 10th August the Australian front was extended north-
ward to get astride of the Somme. The 4th Division took
over that sector and was joined by the 131st American regi-
ment. Crepy Wood was twice taken and lost, but was finally
held.
At 4 a.m. on the 11th August the Ist and 2nd Divisions
attacked between the Amiens-Nesle railway and the Amiens-
Brie road, with the Canadian corps on the south. Lihons
and Rainecourt were captured by 6 a.m. and held against two
counter-attacks, and a junction was effected with the Canadians
at the railway-line to the north of Chilly. The 3rd Brigade
took Auger Wood. When relieved at night the 2nd Brigade
had lost nearly 200 killed and 800 wounded, and the 3rd
Brigade 117 killed and 160 wounded. The latter captured
13 field guns and 142 machine guns. St. Germain, Gateaux
Woods, and the town of Mericourt were captured, the right
wing digging in at La Flaque.
The 3rd and 4th Divisions carried out an encircling move-
ment on the night of the 10th-11th August to capture the
Etinehem Ridge, north of the Somme, and the ridge east of
Proyart, south of the Somme. The action north of the river
was successfully undertaken by the 13th Brigade (4th Division).
The 10th Brigade (3rd Division) met with heavy enemy
artillery and machine-gun fire and suffered heavy casualties
in its attack on Proyart, but with the assistance of the 9th
Brigade, succeeded in capturing the position on the morning
of the 12th. The line now ran from La Flaque north across
the Somme to a point west of Bray-sur-Somme.
A provisional formation, known as the “ Liaison Force,”
was constituted on the 12th of August under Brigadier-
General Wisdom to take over the front north of the Somme
from the 4th Division. It was composed of the 13th Brigade
and the 131st American regiment with the 58th Divisional
Artillery. The same day the 13th Brigade completed the
capture of the Etinehem Spur.
There was a cessation of big attacks for the next seven or
eight days to allow the Australian divisions to be rested and
reorganized.


On the 22nd of August the Canadian Corps front (on the
right), with the Ist and 4th Canadian Divisions and the 32nd
British Division, passed to the Australian Corps Commander.
On the same day the 9th Brigade of the 3rd Division formed
the right wing in a successful attack by the 3rd Corps on
Meault, north of the Australian sector, with the object of
bringing forward the line on the left of the Australian front.
In the evening the enemy made a strong counter-attack on the
47th Division on the left of the 9th Brigade, and forced the
British back, leaving the Australian left flank in the air. The
reserve battalion (34th) of the 9th Brigade pushed out a
defensive northern flank, and the Australians held then-
ground all that night and next day (23rd) until relieved by the
10th Brigade of the 3rd Division, which continued the attack.
The position was improved by the success near Bapaume,
and on the right of the 10th Brigade by the successes of
the Ist Division and the 32nd British Division on the 23rd
in capturing all the Chuignes Ridges and advancing the line
ll miles. The line now ran in front of Herleville and Chuignes
and west of Gappy ; 3092 prisoners and 21 guns were captured
on the 23rd.
The 32nd Division was attached to the Australian Corps
from Bth August to 11th September. It suffered many
casualties from a heavy gas shelling.
At Arcy Wood the Australians captured the broken 15-inch
naval gun which the Germans had used for long-range firing
on Amiens.
The Ist Division pressed on and captured Marly Wood,
Garenne Wood and Froissy Beacon near the Somme Canal.
By this excellent advance the line was pushed forward south
of the Somme, past Bray, and the whole south bank of the
Somme Canal was held. During the night of the 23rd August
the 40th Battalion of the 10th Brigade, with a total loss of 2
killed and 41 wounded, captured Bray and approximately
200 prisoners.
The 4th Canadian and 4th Australian Divisions were re-
lieved on the 25th by the 36th French Corps. During this relief


both the French and 4th Australian Divisions suffered very
severely from an unusually heavy gas attack.*
In the early morning of the 25th the 10th and 11th Brigades
of the 3rd Division captured the high ground east of Bray,
and advanced to a line just west of Suzanne, securing over
100 prisoners.
In the afternoon the 3rd Brigade (Ist Division) attacked
south of Gappy, but was held up by deadly machine-gun fire.
The attack was continued next morning. Gappy and Fon-
taine were captured and an advance of over a mile was made.
North of the Somme the 39th Battalion (3rd Division) captured
Susanne, and the 10th and 11th Brigades of that division
pushed on the line as far as Curlu. On the 27th the line ran
—Foucaueourt (exclusive), Fontaine-les-Cappy (exclusive),
Suzanne (inclusive). From south to north the order of battle
was 32nd Division, sth Division, 2nd Division, 3rd Division.
The advance was rapid for the next three days. On the
evening of the 29th the Germans were driven back towards
Clery, and Hem north of the Somme was captured. The
13th Australian light Horse did excellent work on the front
and flanks. South of the Somme the 32nd (British) Division
and the 2nd and sth Divisions pushed forward the line on the
29th to a point south of Peronne, forcing the enemy over the
Somme Canal.
On the night of the 29th of August the engineer field com-
panies of the 2nd Division built a bridge over the short-cut
canal south of Omiecourt, but the crossing was impossible
owing to machine-gun fire. The sth Brigade (2nd Division)
therefore left the 19th Battalion to hold the line opposite
Omiecourt, and the remaining three battalions marched back
two miles and crossed the Somme at Feuilleres by a bridge
which had been repaired by the engineers.
* As showing the very deadly degree to which “mustard” and other gases
had been brouaht, it is instructive to note the ever-increasing casualties from
this brutal method of fighting. From March to December, 1916, the total gas
casualties amongst the Australians on the Western Front were only 229, during
1917 they were 4460, and from January to November, 1918, they were 11,888.
The total number of shell-shock cases amongst the Australians on the Western
Front was for 1916 631, for 1917 868, for 1918 only 115.


On the evening of the 29th the 3rd Division attacked Clery
north of the Somme, and captured it, with the exception of a
few houses in the eastern outskirts.
By midday on the 30th, the 17th, 18th and 20th Battalions
were assembled at Clery, and advanced half a mile along the
north bank of the Somme, where they came upon a great
number of Germans occupying an elaborate trench system.
The 19th Battalion crossed at Omiecourt and joined the sth
Brigade.
CAPTURE OF MONT ST. QUENTIN.
On the 31st of August the sth Brigade (2nd Division) with
the 3rd Division and the 58th (British) Division on the north,
advanced towards Feuillancourt, taking Clery Copse, Wood
Road and Bouchavesnes Spur, and capturing a battery of 7*7
guns, reaching a line west of the main road to Feuillancourt.
The sth Brigade (17th, 19th and 20th Battalions) with
desperate valour forced its way through a maze of strongly
held trenches —Prague, Fiorina, Gottlieb, Save, Galatz-Agram
to Elsa Trench close to the main road at Mont St. Quentin,
capturing Feuillancourt and portion of the village of Mont
St. Quentin, but after fierce fighting in a counter-attack it
was forced back by overpowering numbers to Fiorina and
Gottlieb trenches half way down the hill, one company
losing all its officers. Here the brigade beat off five successive
bombing attacks. The left flank of the 20th Battalion could
not establish touch with the brigade on the left. The enemy
worked round this, forcing the commander to withdraw the
brigade to Oder Trench.
The sth Brigade had made a magnificent advance, and had
stormed a veritable fortress, although it was impossible for
it to hold all its gains. The casualties for the day were 17
officers and 366 other ranks.
At 6 a.m. on Ist September the 11th Brigade and the I37th
(British) Brigade captured the spur overlooking Allaines ;
The 6th Brigade (2nd Division) relieved the sth Brigade at
2.30 p.m. on 31st August. It was supported by eight brigades
of artillery, five east of Clery and three west of the river.


Under fierce machine-gun fire from St. Denis and Anvil Wood
they pressed steadily on. All the officers of two companies
and all the sergeants except one became casualties, but with
perfect steadiness the men fought on to Elsa Trench and, with
thinning ranks, pushed on to the St. Denis-Mont St. Quentin
Road, where they joined the 6th Brigade. Here the 6th
Brigade and the 14th on their right were held up till 1.30 p.m.,
while the artillery brought heavy fire to bear on the strong
points held by the enemy.
The 21st Battalion came up to reinforce. Two companies
of this battalion and the 23rd rushed Mont St. Quentin
village. The 24th Battalion advanced north of the village,
and the 21st Battalion on the south. The struggle was in-
tense, against picked troops who fought to the death. Few
prisoners were taken, the dead and dying strewed the whole
area. The advance was continued to the Wood, and a line
was established 600 yards east of the village. The casualties
of the 6th Brigade were 25 officers and 298 other ranks.
The 74th Division was attached to the 3rd Corps to press
the advantage. It was to advance due east while the 3rd
Division would be gradually squeezed out by the convergence
of the 74th Division and the 7th Brigade, the Australian
brigade making a defensive flank.
The 7th Brigade attacked on a three-battalion front—the
25th, 26th and 27th Battalions in the line, and the 28th in
support. Fighting against exceptionally heavy machine-gun
fire, the villages of Allaines and Haut-Allaines were captured,
and the line pushed half way along the road to Aizecourt, with
a frontage of 5000 yards. The 74th Division on the left was
unable to hold its objective, while the 14th Brigade (sth
Division) on the right was held up by machine-gun fire from
St. Denis and the brickworks. The 7th Brigade having
pushed forward with both its flanks unprotected, the ter-
ritory which it had captured formed a sharp and narrow
salient and the position was extremely precarious.
The 14th Brigade (sth Division) had crossed the Somme west
of Peronne at 2.20 p.m. on the 31st of August. On 3rd
and 4th September, the sth Division cleared Peronne. On


the 4th the 7th Brigade advanced its left and functioned with
the 74th Division, the line facing Aizecourt. On the sth the
command of the front passed to the 74th Division.
In spite of the loss of their officers by some of the companies,
the men of the 7th Brigade fought with wonderful bravery,
determination and skill. The casualties were 32 officers and
417 other ranks.
The ground captured by the 2nd Division was of immense
strategic importance and the loss of the position which the
Germans had believed to be almost impregnable hastened
their withdrawal to the Hindenburg line. The total casualties
of this division in the capture of Mont St. Quentin were 117
officers and 1636 other ranks. Prisoners captured were 30
officers and 1591 other ranks.
A captured order signed by the commanding officer of a
German battalion portrays the German view of the Australian
soldier. It reads —‘ ‘Forces confronting us consist of Australians
who are very warlike, clever and daring. . . . The enemy is
also adept in conceiving and putting into execution important
patrolling operations. The enemy infantry has daily proved
itself to be audacious.”
Peronne had been captured by the sth Division after heavy
hand to hand fighting, and the attacking battalions had
gained a footing in the brickworks between St. Denis and Mont
St. Quentin. By a vigorous attack the enemy was compelled
to withdraw from St. Denis, with its steel and concrete fort.
The ramparts and the north-east end of Peronne were captured.
On the 3rd and 4th of September, Flamcourt and Chair Wood
were taken by the sth Division.
On sth September the Bth Brigade (sth Division) advanced
to Aizecourt le Haut, and the 15th Brigade captured Le
Mesnil. The 3rd Division advanced on the right of the sth.
Other villages captured during the day were Doingt, Brie,
St. Christ and Bussu.
■S During the next five days, owing to the steady pressure of
our troops, the enemy retired far more rapidly than he desired,
and on the 11th of September he organized a strong local


attack on a battalion of the Ist Division, preceded by a heavy
barrage, forcing back the outposts temporarily.
In the fighting from Mont St. Quentin to the conclusion of
the campaign the wonderful successes of the Australian
divisions are still more remarkable when it is remembered
that all the fighting battalions were very weak numerically.*
On the average they were less than half their full strength, and
yet accomplished tasks and occupied a front where full
battalions might well have been expected to fail. General
Rawlinson stated that the Australian attack (Ist and 4th
Divisions) on the 18th of September created a record in
major operations from the point of view of small casualties
to the attacking troops.
CAPTURE OF THE HINDENBURG LINE.
On the 18th September the Ist French Army and the 3rd
and 4th British armies attacked the outer defences of the
Hindenburg Line. The Australian Corps had the HI. Corps
on the left and the IX. Corps on the right.
The attack commenced at 5.20 a.m. ; the heavy rain had
made the ground very sodden. The opposition was generally
not very vigorous except round Le Verquier, and the first
objective was reached along the whole corps front by 10 a.m.
The Ist Division captured the whole of this section of the
* Owing to heavy casualties the following 11 battalions were broken up :
State. Date. Battalion. Brigade. Division.
New South Wales .. 29/6/18 36th 9th 3rd
Queensland .. .. 6/7/18 47th 12th 4th
Queensland .. .. 6/7/18 52nd 13th 4th
Wctoria .. 21/9/18 37th 10th 3rd
Victoria .. .. 28/9/18 21st I 6th 2nd
New South Wales .. 5/10/18 19th sth 2nd
On pens land • • • 5/10/18 42nd 11th 3rd
Victoria na !! !! 5/10/18 29th Bth sth
Victoria .. .. 5/10/18 60th 15th sth
New South Wales .. 5/1.0/18 54th 14th sth
Queensland .. .. 12/10/18 j 25th 7th 2nd
N.S. Wales contributed 19 Battalions, of which 3 were broken up.
Victoria „ 18 » .. * •»
Queensland „ 10 ~ “* »>
S. Australia „ 6 „ „ 0 »
W. Australia „ 5 .» ” n ”
Tasmania „ 2 „ » u •>


outpost system of the Hindenburg Line, which was of great
strength. The 4th Division effected an advance of 500 yards
and completed its objective after severe fighting that night.
Over 4000 prisoners, 80 field pieces and 350 machine guns
were taken.
On the 19th the corps’ front was moved further north with
the left flank near Le Catelet, On the 20th and 21st strong
fighting patrols were sent out by the 4th and Ist Divisions
in the line. They succeeded in establishing a new line from
500 to 800 yards in advance. On the 22nd the 4th Division
was relieved by the 46th British Division belonging to the
IX. Corps.
AMERICAN CO-OPERATION.
The 11. American Corps, comprising the 27th and 30th
Divisions, arrived on the 22nd and relieved the Ist Aus-
tralian Division in the line. This corps became affiliated
with the Australian Corps for the attack on the Hindenburg
line. An Australian “ Mission” was attached to the American
Corps to co-ordinate the methods and procedure. Every
American unit down to companies had an Australian officer
or senior non-commissioned officer attached.
The 27th and 30th American Divisions advanced their line
at certain points on the 26th and 27th. A concentrated
bombardment, by our artillery, using the new mustard gas,
was carried out on the night 26th-27th September. This was
the first time this gas had been used by the British.
The combined American and Australian Corps was to
attack the main Hindenburg system on the Nauroy-Gouy
line, the 30th American Division being on the right and the
27th on the left. The sth and 3rd Australian Divisions were
to pass through the American divisions and gain the Jon-
court-Wiancourt-Beaurevoir line.
The attack commenced at 5.50 a.m. on the 29th
September. The 30th American Division made good progress
in spite of the confusion of barbed wire and intricate trench
systems. They broke through the main Hindenburg Line,


and pushed on beyond Nauroy. The leading brigades of the
sth Australian Division now advanced, encountering some
opposition from machine-gun fire and from snipers who had
not been discovered in the American advance, but these were
eventually overcome. The Australians then captured the
village of Bellicourt, and took over the sector from the
30th American Division. During the further advance the
sth Division experienced very strong opposition ; a large
number of troops from the American Division went forward
with the Australians,
The 27th American Division had an exceedingly difficult
task to perform. It had to take three lines of formidable
trench systems, including the powerfully fortified villages of
Le Catelet, Gouy and Bony. It experienced intense machine-
gun fire, while a number of the tanks supporting this division
were put out of action by enemy shell-fire and anti-tank
mines. In the maze of trenches and barbed wire entangle-
ments the line was necessarily broken, but the troops pushed
on with great gallantry over the canal tunnel, advancing as
far as Gouy. Unfortunately numbers of concealed dugouts
were not noticed and cleared out, with the result that machine
gunners appeared in the rear of the advancing troops and fired
into them, causing heavy casualties.
In this arduous and difficult attack on the Hindenburg
line (or Siegfried system) with its triple line of formidable
trenches bristling with machine guns and fortified and
strengthened by every device that ingenuity could suggest,
the American divisions went forward with the utmost im-
petuosity and the most dauntless courage. They made the
same gallant mistake as other fine fighting troops did—as the
Australians did at the Gallipoli landing. In their burning
zeal to conquer the whole objectives set them, they did not
allow sufficient time to ‘ ‘ mop up. ” But they smashed through
the Hindenburg Line and will ever share with their British,
French and Australian comrades the crowning victory in
the Great War.


CAPTURE OF LE CATELET AND MONTBREHAIN.
The 3rd Australian Division in advancing to take over from
the 27th Division met with severe fighting from the start ;
the right of the division was able to advance in conformity
with the sth Division, but practically no progress could be
made on the left. The tanks supporting the 3rd Division
were largelv destroyed by hostile shell-fire. Next morning
the 3rd and sth Divisions attacked in a north-easterly direction
along the Hindenburg line and along Railway Spur. Heavy
hand-to-hand fighting took place throughout the day. Pro-
gress was made on Bony Spur, along Nauroy Trench, east of
the Village of Nauroy, and a portion of Bony Village was
captured.
On Ist October the sth Division attacked with tanka ;
Millridge Estree and Folenprise Farm were captured after
stiff resistance. The 3rd Division completed the capture of
Bony, bombed along the Hindenburg line northwards, and
secured the northern entrance of the canal tunnel and the
high ground east of Le Catelet. This completed the capture
of the whole of the Hindenburg defences, except the Beaure-
voir line.
On 3rd October the 2nd Division attacked, with instructions
to capture the Beaurevoir line on the Corps front, the XIII.
and IX. Corps attacking on either side. Good progress was
made in spite of a heavy counter-attack by the enemy at
11 o’clock ; 725 prisoners were captured. On the 4th of
October the XIII. Corps took over the Australian front
as far south as the Canal, and the following day the Aus-
tralian Corps took over from the IX. Corps as far south as
Montbrehain. At 6.5 a.m. on the sth the 2nd Division at-
tacked Montbrehain ; the enemy fought stubbornly, but the
whole objective was conquered and consolidated. The
prisoners captured numbered 625.
At 2 a.m. on the 6th of October the 2nd Division was
relieved by the 30th American Division, and at 9 a.m. the
Australian Corps’ Commander handed over the front to General
Read of the 11. American Corps. The same day the German


3RD BATTLE OF THE SOMME.—RUINS OF PERONNE.
( Australian Official Photograph, by special permission.)


3RD BATTLE OF THE SOMME.-HINDENBURG LÌNE. CANAL AND TUNNEL NEAR BELLICOURT.
( Australian Official Photograph, by special permission.)


Government made its final offer of peace, which led to the
granting of the Armistice on 11th November. On 10th
October the “ 1914 men” were sent to Great Britain in order
to return to Australia for a holiday of ten weeks, they were to
have been back in England by Ist of April, 1919, if the war
had continued.
The Australian Corps reached the Somme towards the end
of March, 1918, and had therefore been engaged in active
offensive operations for over six months—four months in a
series of minor operations which secured Amiens, and two
months in the great Allied offensive which ended in decisive
victory.
During this period the Australians captured 610 officers and
22,244 other ranks, and 116 towns and villages in an advance
of 37 miles. The total Australian casualties in the Third battle
of the Somme, and the second capture of the Hindenburg
Line were 8782 killed and 23,938 wounded.*
The 30th American Division relieved the 6th Brigade on the
sth of October, and this ended the fighting of the Australians
in the Great War. They had finally smashed through the
extraordinarily strong triple defences of the Hindenburg
Line, which the Germans firmly believed, and not without
reason, were impregnable. The 2nd, 3rd, and sth Divisions
withdrew to their well-deserved rest between Amiens and
Abbeville. The Ist and 4th Divisions were moving up to the
front line again after the battle of Landrecies early in November
when the armistice was announced.
General Sir Henry Rawlinson, commanding the 4th Army,
wrote a week after the capture of Montbrehain—“ Since the
Australian Corps joined the 4th Army on the Bth of April,
1918, they have passed through a period of hard and uniformly
successful fighting of which all ranks have every right to feel
proud.
“ Now that it has been possible to give the Australian Corps
a well-earned period of rest, I wish to express to them my
gratitude for all that they have done. I have watched with
K
* Five obelisks of gray basalt, each 45 feet in height, have been erected, viz.,
at Beltenglise, Polygon Wood, St. Quentin, and Mericourt. as
memorials to the heroic Australians who laid down their lives on those great
battlefields,


the greatest interest and admiration the various stages through
which they have passed from the hard times of Flers and
Pozieres to their culminating victories of Mont St. Quentin
and the great Hindenburg system at Bony, Bellicourt Tunnel
and Montbrehain.
“ During the summer of 1918 the safety of Amiens has been
principally due to their determination, tenacity and valour.
“ The story of what they have accomplished as a fighting
Army Corps, of the diligence, gallantry and skill which they
have exhibited, and of the scientific methods which they have
so thoroughly learned and so successfully applied, has gained
for all Australians a place of honour amongst nations and
amongst the English-speaking races in particular
“ No one realises more than I do the very prominent part
they have played, for I have watched from day to day every
detail of their fighting, and learned to value beyond all
measure the prowess and determination of all ranks.
“ In once more congratulating the corps on a series of
successes unsurpassed in the Great War, I feel that no mere
words of mine can adequately express the renown that they
have won for themselves, and the position they have estab-
lished for the Australian nation not only in France but
throughout the world.
“ I wish every Officer, N.C.O. and man all possible good
fortune in the future, and a speedy and safe return to their
beloved Australia.”


CHAPTER 8.
Conquest of Sinai. Ist, 2nd and 3rd Battles op Gaza.
Capture of Palestine. Advance on Damascus.
The Expedition to Baku. The Mesopotamian
Front. The Russian Front.
CONQUEST OF SINAI.
The declaration of war by Turkey was the greatest triumph
of Gorman diplomacy throughout the war.
The value of Turkey to the Central Powers lay firstly in her
geographical position ; secondly in the fact that the Sultan,
as the Caliph, or successor of Mahomet, was the head of the
whole Mohammedan hierarchy, and thirdly in the considerable
armies of excellent fighting material which she was able to
train and equip with the assistance of Germany.
By the blocking of the Dardanelles Russia was crippled,
and by a combination of military forces and religious pro-
paganda, turmoil and unrest were created in southern Asia
and northern Africa, which forced the Allies to diffuse their
strength in expeditionary forces and garrisons. If Turkey
had remained strictly neutral, none of these might have been
necessary, except for the capture of German colonies.
Although the “ great decision” could be attained only on
the western front, it was nevertheless of immense importance
to destroy the far-reaching and malign influence of Turkey.
In this difficult undertaking the' Australians and New
Zealanders played an important and unique part throughout
the whole war, both in the great infantry attack on Gallipoli
and subsequently in the destruction of three Turkish armies
by the mounted troops in Syria.


General Chauvel had fought through the Gallipoli campaign
with his dismounted light horse, rising finally to the command
of the Ist Australian Division.
It was, however, in the subsequent campaigns in Egypt
and Syria that he displayed his special gifts as the greatest
leader of mounted troops in the whole war. There was little
scope for cavalry in the serried lines of trenches and barbed
wire which surrounded the combatants in Europe , but in
Egypt and Syria mounted troops were essential. It was in
those countries that the light horse—an arm of the service
which is peculiarly and characteristically Australian-
played such a glorious part and contributed so largely to the
crushing defeat of Turkish power.
General Chauvel, who had led the Australian and New
Zealand Mounted Division in the conquest of Sinai Peninsula,
commanded the Desert Mounted Corps after the second battle
of Gaza to the end of the campaign. These four divisions in-
cluded British, Australian, New Zealand and Indian troops,
aggregating 30,000 horse.
From the attack on Romani to the capture of Damascus, a
period of over two years, the Australian and New Zealand
light horse showed on many occasions extraordinary powers
of endurance, fighting in the sweltering heat almost con-
tinuously for eight or nine days, with a good humour which
no adverse conditions could ruffle, while their astonishing
sense of locality rendered unnecessary the provision of guides.
The Australian horses also seemed specially adapted for work
in those arid countries, proving themselves the best and
hardiest animals in the campaign.
CONQUEST OF SINAI.
Almost immediately on the declaration of war by Great
Britain against Turkey, the peninsula of Sinai, which was
Egyptian territory, was overrun by Turkish and Bedouin
troops. In the absence of water and railway communication
it was thought better to defend Egypt proper from the Suez
Canal rather than to attempt to recapture this useless territory,


more especially as at that time every soldier available was
required in France.
After the defeat in February, 1915, of the first attempt of
the Turks to capture the Suez Canal, a period of comparative
calm ensued on that frontier, owing to the Turkish forces
being held in Gallipoli.
Soon after the Gallipoli campaign Djemal Pasha had col-
lected a force of 250,000 men for the conquest of Egypt, but
the success of the Russians in capturing the important centre
of Erzerum, south of the Black Sea, in February 1916, with
Turkish losses of 100,000 men and many guns, necessitated
reinforcements being sent to that front, which reduced their
Egyptian expeditionary force to 60,000 men.
On the 22nd of January, 1916, General Sir Archibald
Murray took over the defence of Eastern Egypt from General
Sir John Maxwell, and in the following March—after the
defeat of the Senussi—the defence of all Egypt.
The Egyptian forces having been reinforced by the Austra-
lian and New Zealand light horse, General Murray determined
to attempt the reconquest of Sinai Peninsula. Long and
careful preparations were necessary owing to the roadless
nature of the country and the difficulty in obtaining water.
On 11th to 15th April, 1916, the 9th regiment of Australian
light horse made an attack on Jifjafa, east of the Pool Er
Rigm on the central route, where a Turkish party had been
boring for water for 5 months. The position was captured
and 34 prisoners taken.
On 31st May the New Zealand mounted rifles and a regiment
of Australian light horse successfully attacked an enemy post
at Bir Salmana, 20 miles E.N.E. of Katia. Other raids were
also successfully carried out. Sir Archibald Murray stated
that the Anzac Mounted Division had proved itself a unit
upon which absolute dependence could be placed, possessing
energy, resource and endurance.
At an earlier period when it was proposed to transfer
certain light horse regiments to France, General Murray had
protested, stating that the Australians were the keystone
of Egypt’s safety.


During June the Australian light horse and the Bikanir
camel corps under Lieut.-Col. Todd, D. 5.0., seized the Pool
Er Rigm and emptied out 5 million gallons of water. This,
with the destruction of the wells at Jif jafa, rendered the last
60 miles of the table-land route to the Canal waterless, thus
preventing our forces being outflanked.
The first objective in the forward movement was the oasis
of Katia on the road to El Arish and Palestine, which runs
near the Mediterranean Coast. The British forces under
General Murray included the English yeomanry, English and
Scotch territorial regiments, the Imperial Camel Corps and the
Desert Mounted Column (which included the Anzac Mounted
Division) and Indian troops.
During the summer of 1916 the Sherif of Mecca declared his
independence of Turkey.
In July, 1916, at the hottest period of the year, a Turkish
force 18,000 strong under Colonel Kress von Kressenstein,
advanced from El Arish towards Katia. At Dueidar an out
post, held by Scottish troops, was rushed at dawn by greatly
superior forces, but in spite of heavy casualties they were
gallantly repelled, until the arrival of Anzac mounted troops,
who drove off the Turks. On the 3rd of August the Ist Light
Horse Brigade (Brigadier-General Cox) came into contact
with the main Turkish force, and fought spirited rearguard
actions, forcing the enemy to deploy and causing many
casualties. The Australian force, outnumbered ten to one,
retired slowly on Mount Meredith, Wellington Ridge, and
Mount Royston near Romani. At daylight on the 4th, the
2nd Light Horse Brigade (Brigadier-General Ryrie) came up
and the two brigades held up the advance, although suffering
heavy casualties from German artillery, machine guns, and
bombing planes. The enemy was held on the left flank by
Scottish infantry and by Queenslanders on the right. The
horses of the Ist light Horse Brigade were knocked up after
48 hours’ continuous fighting. The Turks still came on,
shouting the rather novel battle-cry of ‘‘ Allah finish Aus-
tralia,” till their vanguard was in sight of Romani, the main
objective. Here a tremendous effort was made to break the


light horse line, but a magnificent charge of the New Zealand
mounted rifles with the bayonet, cut right through the
attacking column and won the day. It was in this vicinity
that in olden times the Persians under Cambyses gained a
great victory over the Egyptians. The enemy was driven
back to Katia with a loss of 1200 killed, 4500 wounded and
4000 prisoners, including a number of German officers and men.
The brunt of the fight was borne by the Anzacs, who suffered
87 per cent, of the total casualties on the British side.
The Turks were rallied at Katia, but after a few days hard
fighting retired towards El Arish. General Chauvel s mounted
troops made an effort to envelop the Turks, who were 6000
strong and plentifully supplied with field and machine guns.
On the night of the 11th von Kressenstein withdrew from
Bir-el-Abd (15 miles from Katia) and retreated toward El
Arish. The enemy’s total casualties were estimated at
9000.
On 16th September General Chauvel started from Bii-el-
Abd, with the Anzac Mounted Division, the Imperial Camel
Corps,* some Royal Horse Artillery batteries and a mountain
* The Australian Imperial Force Orders of the 6th of January, 1916, provided for the
organization of a Camel Corps, to be raised from Australian troops, each infantry
brigade to furnish two sections complete, selections to be made from Wiench
divisions or from reinforcements. Two company commanders to be supplied from each
of the First and Second Australian Divisions. „ . , TW whif>h did auch
This was the inauguration of the famous Suez Canal to
invaluable work in the long campaign through the desert from the huez an " A ",
Jerusalem Covering a period of nearly two and a half years. Each company consisted
of TofflSra 125 rank and file, and 153 camels. A second battalion was added of
Fn»lish and’ Scotch territorials, a third of Australians, New Zealanders, and, at the
end of 1916, a fourth battalion of Australians. They were commanded by Bnga ler-
General C L Smith. V.C., M.C. The Corps was disbanded in May, 1918.
When the First, Second and Third Light Horse Brigades, New Zesiland
Mounted Rifle Brigade returned from Gallipoli they were formed in March,,l9l6, into
the Anzac Mounted Division. The Third Light Horae, which was detached at Serapium
joined the Division at Romani on 4th August, 1916 , . d
The Fifth Yeomanry Brigade came to Egypt towards the end of 1916, an
co-operated with the Anzac Division at Rafa. Regiments)
The Fourth Light Horse Brigade (consisting of the 11th, 12th and. X3tn jxegimeurs;
arrived in Egypt* about August, 1915. It was broken up and used as reinforcements
for the three Light Horae Brigades fighting at Gallipoli. This Brigade (with the
reformed 4th Regiment, less the 13th Regiment) was reformed in February, 1917, at
Fe These two Brigades (sth Yeomanry and Fourth Light Horae), and the Third Light
Horse Brigade were organised as the Imperial Mounted Division in V’. *
“ d ?e£2SSI “r about three months, when the name wee ch.nged to the
A^lh r e3eTw<^DMttons D and*the Imperial Camel Corps became the Desert Mounted
£ e^;d“™ a o?G°.r» SPSS'S *April,- 1917, the Imperial Camel
CO lTmSm?. $S MhVSnry Brigade arrived on the Irontand
the 7th Bth and 22nd Mounted Yeomanry Brigades arrived in Egypt, ihe v eomanry
Mounted D i vis to 11 wa s formed from the 6th, Bth and 22nd Brigades, leaving the 7th
Brigade detached.


battery, to reconnoitre Bir el Mazar. The Turkish outposts
were driven in and serious losses inflicted. A few days later
the Turks retired to Masaid, 5 miles west of El Arish.
By the middle of December General Murray’s plans for the
advance on El Arish were complete. On the 20th of December
the British and Anzacs moved forward, both Masaid and El
Arish were abandoned by the enemy, one portion retiring to
Rafa on the Egyptian border, while another portion retired
south to Magdhaba.
The Anzac Mounted Division, with the Imperial Camel Corps
under General Chauvel, started at 1 a.m. on the 23rd from El
Arish, reaching Magdhaba, a distance of 23 miles, at 4,50 a.m.
At 9 a.m. the attack on Magdhaba commenced on front,
right and rear, the frontal attack being made by the Imperial
Camel Corps, the attack on the right and rear by the New
Zealand mounted rifles and Australian light horse. The
position was strongly defended. At 2 p.m. the Australians
captured one of the enemy outworks. Finally, the Australian
light horse with bayonets fixed charged right into the enemy’s
lines and captured the position. The Turks lost some hundreds
killed, 1282 prisoners and 4 guns.
This brilliant exploit was followed up on 9th January, 1917,
by the capture of Rafa and Magruntein. The Anzac Mounted
Division and the Imperial Camel Corps stormed the enemy
position covering Rafa, captured the town by a magnificent
charge right up to the trenches under deadly machine-gun
fire, and defeated a column marching to its relief. The
New Zealand mounted rifles by a brilliant charge captured the
These three Divisions were then organised as the Desert Mounted Corps in August,
1917, under General Sir Harry Chauvel. The Imperial Camel Corps returned to the
front from the Canal and became General Headquarters’ troops.
In March, 1918, ten yeomanry regiments—two from each yeomanry brigade—pro-
ceeded dismounted to France, and were replaced by Indian cavalry regiments from
France, forming early in 1918 the First Cavalry Division which was, at a later date,
changed to the Fourth Cavalry Division.
In May, 1918, the Second Indian Cavalry Division was formed, and added to the
Corps. In July, 1918, its name was changed to the Fifth Cavalry Division.
The Divisional Troops— i.e.. Engineers, Army Service Corps, and Araiy Medical
Corps—for the Anzac Mounted Division, and the Australian Mounted Division, were
supplied by the Anzac Mounted Division.
The Imperial Camel Corps was disbanded in July, 1918 (owing to the nature of the
country being unsuitable for camels), and the five Australian companies were reformed
into the 14th and 15th Regiments, and with a French Cavalry regiment became the sth
Light Horse Brigade. The brigade joined the Australian Mounted Division, displacing
the Fifth Cavalry Brigade,


redoubt protecting Magruntein. The enemy lost 600 in
casualties and 1600 prisoners. The tireless energy of the
Australians and New Zealanders is even more remarkable
when it is remembered that this was the hottest summer
known in Egypt for many years. The British lines were now
up to the borders of Palestine, and all Turks had been cleared
out of northern Sinai. Had the Egyptian expeditionary
force been able to continue its victorious advance now that
it had crossed the sandy desert it might have been possible to
capture Gaza without serious resistance, but the country
could not supply food and water to either man or beast, and
transport difficulties had to be overcome by the construction
of the railway line.
On 7th December, 1916, Lieut.-General Sir Philip Chetwode
assumed command of the mounted troops of the Desert
Mounted Column, which included the Anzac Mounted Division
under Major-General Sir Harry Chauvel. The mounted troops
were shortly afterwards reinforced by a large body of yeo-
manry.
Ist BATTLE OF GAZA.
The first attack on Gaza under General Dobell commenced
on 26th March, 1917. At 3.30 a.m. the Anzacs from Beit
Durdis attacked northerly and easterly, the 2nd light Horse
on the right towards the sea, the New Zealand mounted rifles
in the centre, and the yeomanry on the left. Some Austral-
ians and New Zealanders pushed into Gaza itself, where
stubborn bayonet fighting took place. The Anzacs were
subjected to machine-gun fire from the flat roofs of the
buildings, and suffered heavy losses ; as no reinforcements
arrived the troops retired during the night, some 200 of them
being taken prisoners, of whom 150 were wounded. The
fighting continued during the whole of the 27th. The
following morning the infantry had been forced back and the
cavalry retired. The British casualties were 4000, and it was
estimated that the losses of the enemy were at least double.


2nd BATTLE OF GAZA.
On 17th April the attack was renewed against the Turks,
who had five infantry divisions and one cavalry division on
the front. The plan of attack was to capture the ridges south
of Gaza the first day, and, after an artillery bombardment
from these ridges, the final assault on the town was to be
delivered. General Dobell decided that the attack was to be
made by infantry, the mounted troops to protect their right
flank. .
On the 17th the ridges south of Gaza were occupied by
7 a.m., and the guns were brought up. On the 19th the bom-
bardment began at 5.30 a.m., and at 7.30 the infantry ad-
vanced. Heavy fighting was continued all day ; the men of
the Imperial Camel Corps gained their full objective, but all
efforts to capture Gaza failed. The ground gained was con-
solidated. The casualties (especially amongst Scottish and
Welsh infantry) were very heavy, amounting to 7000. For
over six months no further attempts were made to capture
Gaza.
On 21st April General Dobell was relieved of his command.
Lieut.-General Sir Philip Chetwode was appointed to com
mand the eastern force and Major-General Chauvel succeeded
General Chetwode as Commander of the Desert Mounted
Column, Major General Chayter (N.Z.) commanding the
Anzac Division.
The Desert Column and the Camel Brigade received orders
to destroy the Turkish railway line south of Beersheba.
General Chauvel, with the cavalry and light horse, made a
strong demonstration against Beersheba, destroying the rail-
way bridge north of the town. Under cover of this movement
a special party of light horse and engineers systematically
destroyed the railway line, bridges and culverts, the Camel
Corps destroying the southern end of this line.
3rd BATTLE OF GAZA.
General Sir Edmund Allenby, who had done such good
work in France, reached Egypt on the 28th of June, 1917, and
took over command of the Egyptian Expeditionary Force.


Affairs at this juncture were not looking well. The enemy
had strongly fortified a line from Gaza to Beersheba, a front
of 20 miles, and the position appeared almost impregnable.
Gaza had been converted into a fortress. This was defended
by a Turkish army of 200,000, with German gunners. It was
not long, however, before General Allenby’s genius and en-
thusiasm improved the morale of his troops. Strenuous
preparations for a fresh attack were put in hand. Owing to
the enormously strengthened position a frontal attack seemed
out of the question, and yet a developing movement on the
east flank presented great difficulties owing to the waterless
country. The plan decided upon was to strike the main blow
at the eastern end of the Turkish line and thus obtain an open
flank against which to operate. The available troops were
formed into striking forces, the XX. Corps (53rd, 60th, 74th
and 10th Divisions) under General Chetwode to attack at the
eastern, or Beersheba, end of the front, while Major-General
Bui fin’s force, the XXI. Corps (52nd, 54th and 75th Divisions),
was to advance on Gaza. General Chauvel, commanding the
Desert Mounted Corps, and the 53rd (Welsh) Division was
with General Chetwode, while the 54th (Lowland) Division
was under General Bui fin.
The enormous difficulties of transport can hardly be realised.
Practically the whole of the transport, including 30,000 pack
camels, was allotted to one portion of the Beersheba force to
provide for the supply of water, food and ammunition, which
had to be brought 20 miles from the railhead.
The attack on Beersheba began on 31st October by two
infantry divisions, the Imperial Camel Corps and one regiment
of cavalry.
The Australian light horse, New Zealand mounted rifles
and the yeomanry, under General Chauvel, left their bases at
Sha’uth and Shellal on the night of 27th October and rode
south and east to the Khulasa and Asluj oases with the object
of making a wide detour and a surprise attack to the north and
east of Beersheba. After a short rest the second stage of the
movement commenced on the evening of 30th October. By
5 a.m t the troops had reached some high hills east of the Wadi


Khasim Zanna and to the east of Beersheba. The yeomanry
remained there as a reserve, while the Australians and New
Zealanders went into action. A force of light horse secured
positions on the Hebron Road to the right, while the Ist
Australian light Horse Brigade and New Zealanders (dis-
mounted) attacked Tel-el-Saba south-east of Beersheba. In
the afternoon the hill, of 1000 ft., strongly fortified and held
in considerable strength, was captured, after a long and bitter
fight, and the village of Saba stormed. By this time the
afternoon was wearing on and the crucially important attack
on Beersheba itself had not been attempted ; delay might
mean the bringing up of large enemy reinforcements, thus
neutralizing the element of surprise which had been so ably
utilized. It is at such crises that the tactical ability and
instant decision of great generals are manifested. In war,
said Napoleon, there is never more than one favourable
moment. The great art is to seize it and use it well.
At 4p.m., under severe machine-gun and rifle fire, the 4th
Regiment (Victoria) and the 12th Regiment (N.S.W.) of the 4th
Australian light Horse Brigade (Brigadier-General Grant), in
cavalry formation, charged at the gallop straight for the town ;
they cleared like steeple-chasers two lines of trenches 8 feet
deep and 4 feet wide, using their rifles and bayonets as
lances against the Turks, and with a wild yell thundered
into Beersheba ; this was more than Turkish flesh and blood
could stand. 500 of the enemy were killed and 1148 captured.
This was the most brilliant cavalry charge in the campaign.
At last, after being held up for seven months, our troops had
obtained an open flank, which was to be rapidly exploited.
Almost as important, an excellent water supply had been
secured in that thirsty desert. The famous wells, some of
which were said to have been dug by Abraham, had been
captured. The streets of Beersheba, they found, were planted
with eucalyptus and pepper trees.
On Ist November, the Scotch captured Umbrella Hill,
2500 yards from Gaza, and the following day the British
infantry captured Sheikh Hasan in the same locality. These
positions menaced Gaza and much improved the position of


the British left flank. On the right flank, after a stubborn
defence, the work of crumpling up the Turkish line was ad-
vanced by the capture of Sharia on 6th-7th November by
Irish and Welsh infantry, the cavalry and camel corps. The
same night, Gaza, the old capital of the Philistines, was
evacuated. The key of Palestine and Syria had been snatched
from the hand of the paynim, whose sinister rule had been
wielded for hundreds of years over these once prosperous
lands.
CAPTURE OF PALESTINE.
Immediately on the occupation of Gaza the Indian cavalry
pushed on to Beit Hanun, while the Australian light horse by
12th November had captured Beit Duras, west of Jerusalem,
and 12 miles from the coast. On the 13th El Tine, containing
large stores of ammunition, was seized, and the following day
the Jerusalem railway junction on the Gaza-Shechem railway
was occupied. This cut in two the Turkish forces, isolating
the Jerusalem section from the coastal area.
In 15 days the British force had advanced from 40 to 60
miles, driving back the Turkish army of nine infantry divisions
and one cavalry division from strongly held positions, and
capturing over 9000 prisoners and 80 guns, together with
vast stores of ammunition.
The way was now clear for the attack on Jerusalem. The
mounted troops under General Chauvel moved north on the
14th of November towards Ramleh and Ludd to protect the
left flank. Ekron was seized, and the New Zealanders
captured Ayun Kara six miles south of Jaffa (Joppa), while the
Ist light Horse Brigade seized Ramleh and Ludd, on the road
from Joppa to Jerusalem. Joppa, the seaport of Jerusalem,
was seized by the Anzacs, who continued their march north-
ward to the Auja river.
On the 17th the yeomanry advanced north east and captured
Beth Horan.
Between 31st October and 18th November the Desert
Mounted Corps captured 250 officers and 5470 other ranks.


The main attack on Jerusalem was on the road from Joppa.
On the 19th, infantry divisions, with the Australians pro-
tecting the right flank, advanced towards Jerusalem. On
reaching a point 6 miles from Jerusalem a pause was made to
prevent, if possible, any damage being done to the Sacred
City. The infantry turned north towards Bireh and met a
large body of the enemy at Beth Horan and Nebi Samwil,
Avhose attack was beaten off. The Australian light horse at
El Burj counter-attacked the enemy on 30th November,
killing a large number and capturing 200 prisoners.
On 6th December the Welsh troops entered Hebron without
opposition. The attack on Jerusalem, now partly surrounded,
was fixed for Bth December, but the Turkish troops withdrew,
and on 9th December, 1917, the first British troops entered
the famous city—after almost 400 years of Turkish rule. It
was said that Colonel Todd, D. 5.0., and his West Australians
were the first Allied troops to enter Jerusalem.
The Turks, having received reinforcements, made a deter-
mined attempt to recapture the city on 27th-28th December,
but without success. Following up the Turkish retreat the
British lines were advanced to the north and Jerusalem was
secured from attack.
On 19th February, 1918, the 53rd and 60th Divisions began
an advance on Jericho, 15 miles E.N.E. of Jerusalem. The
two infantry divisions advanced direct towards Jericho and
after severe fighting reached a point 4 miles from the town.
Meanwhile the Anzacs, with the territorial batteries, advanced
from Bethlehem over very rough country and against heavy
machine-gun fire, and captured two hills south of Nebi Musa
on the 20th. The New Zealand Brigade advanced direct on
Nebi Musa but were held up at a crossing over the Wadi
Mukelik. The Australians crossing by another ford entered
the Jordan Valley and endeavoured to cut off the Turkish
retreat, causing the enemy to abandon Nebi Musa and Jericho
and retire to the Jordan. On the 21st a squadron of the First
Brigade entered Jericho, the once proud city being now a
squalid village.


Early in March a successful attack was made on a 26-mile
front north from Jerusalem and towards Shechem (Nablus),
with the intention of pushing the line about 7 miles further
north to prevent the Turkish troops on the coastal side from
opposing the contemplated operations towards the Hedjaz
railway, which it was desired to cut at Amman in order to
assist our Arab Allies.
In March, 1918, General von Falkenhayn, who had failed to
save or retake Baghdad or Jerusalem, was recalled, and General
Liman von Sanders, who had been with the Turks on Gallipoli,
took over command.
On the 21st of March, 1918 (the day the Germans opened
their great offensive in France), the advance was commenced
towards Amman on the Hedjaz railway. The force consisted
of the 60th Infantry Division, the A. and N.Z. Mounted
Division, the Imperial Camel Brigade, with batteries and
armoured cars. The Jordan was crossed near the Dead Sea
(1200 feet below sea level) by the 23rd. On the 25th the 60th
Division captured Es Salt, a town of 15,000 people, in the
hills. By the 28th a brigade of the 60th Division reached the
plain on which Amman is situated. The A. and N.Z. Mounted
Division and the Imperial Camel Corps had advanced by
another route directly towards Amman, capturing Naaur on
the 25th of March, On the 26th the Australians sent demoli-
tion parties to destroy the railway. On the 27th the New
Zealanders destroyed part of the line south of Amman, but
could not destroy the viaduct and tunnel. The Imperial
Camel Brigade attacked towards Amman on the 27th, with the
light horse on the left, but met with strong opposition less than
a mile from the town. When a brigade of the 60th Division
arrived on the 28th a general attack was made —the Aus-
tralians being on the left, the Infantry Brigade in the centre
(astride the Es Salt—Amman road), the Camel Brigade on the
right. The New Zealanders attacked a hill south of Amman.
Fierce fighting continued until the 30th, when orders were
given for a withdrawal during the night. In the retirement
the British troops evacuated Es Salt, their rearguard being
attacked by the Turks on Ist April. The following day all


troops had crossed the Jordan, bringing with them 700
prisoners.
The Turkish troops, increased by reinforcements to 5000,
made violent attacks on the Jordan crossing defended by the
Imperial Camel Brigade and an Australian light Horse
Brigade, these assaults were repulsed with heavy losses.
Another raid was made on Es Salt on the 11th of April,
but it was not successful in recapturing the town. During
this month General Allenby’s forces were very much weakened
by the withdrawal of the 52nd and 74th Divisions, 9 yeomanry
regiments, 5 siege batteries, 10 British battalions, and 5
machine-gun companies, which were hurried to France.
Further withdrawals took place in May and June. The
yeomanry divisions were replaced by Indian cavalry.
On the 30th of April another advance against Es Salt was
made by the reduced forces. The 60th Division advanced
towards Spunet Nimrin, with the Australians and other
mounted troops on the left flank. The mounted troops
by 6 p.m. had again captured Es Salt, but the same even-
ing a Turkish cavalry division and some infantry crossed
the Jordan unperceived and attacked them frontally, while
another body suddenly fell on the right flank of the 4th
Australian Brigade stationed there, forcing them back with
the loss of nine 13-pounder guns and an armoured car. In his
report on the operations General Chauvel mentions that he had
foreseen that the front of the 4th Light Horse Brigade was
too extended to be held against any determined attack.
Three days later the British forces were withdrawn a second
time across the Jordan, bringing with them 942 prisoners.
Owing to the withdrawal of troops to France and the
summer heat, which was particularly felt in the Jordan
Valley, no further important offensives were attempted for
4 \ months.
The enemy were aware that the British forces had been
weakened by withdrawals for France, and hoped to strike a
decisive blow by an attack on each side of the Jordan on 14th
July. For this purpose General von Sanders brought up
15,000 German troops, who succeeded in recapturing Abu


PALESTINE CAMPAIGN.—IMPERIAL CAMEL CORPS. “PREPARE TO MOUNT.”
( Australian Official Photograph , by special permission.)


PALESTINE CAMPAIGN.-A EROPLANE PHOTO. OF JERUSALEM, SHOWING THE OLD CITY WALLS, THE MOSQUE OF OMAR, GARDEN OF GETHSEMANE,
BROOK KEDRON, AND MOUNT OF OLIVES. (Australian Official Photograph, by special permission.)


Tellul, west of the Jordan. A prompt counter-attack, however,
by the Ist Australian light Horse Brigade drove them back
with heavy losses.
At the beginning of September General Allenby had 12,000
cavalry, 57,000 infantry, and 540 guns, while the Turkish
forces were estimated at 4000 cavalry, 50,000 infantry, of
which 15,000 were Germans and Austrians, and 430 guns.
The majority of the British infantry now consisted of
Indian troops with Armenian troops of the Legion d’Orient,
Algerians, a battalion of coloured troops from South Africa,
two British West Indian (coloured) regiments and the 38th and
39th Jewish battalions of the Royal Fusiliers.
By erecting tents and dummies on the Jordan sector,
General Allenby very skilfully hoodwinked the Germans and
Turks into believing that the next attack would be on the
east of the sector, whereas the troops were moved at night and
concentrated under cover near the coast.
The great and final offensive was now to begin. As a
preliminary, 1000 Hedjaz troops on 15th September, by
arrangement with the British, destroyed the Hedjaz railway
in many places between Amman and Damascus, thus cutting
off the natural line of retreat of the Turks. For this work
some Australian aeroplanes rendered great assistance. Sir
Philip Chetwode and Sir Edward Bui fin commanded the two
infantry corps, Sir Harry Chauvel the Desert Mounted Corps
and Sir Edward Chayter—a New Zealander—the Australian
and New Zealand Mounted Division.
General Allenby commenced his main offensive at 4.30 a.m.
on 19th September, 1918, by an infantry attack on the de-
fences of the coastal plain, with the object of breaking through
the line so that the mounted troops by a rapid advance might
cut off the enemy’s retreat northwards, as the Arabs had done
from the east. By 8 a.m. the infantry had broken the line
between Ephraim and Rafat. Advancing five miles they
swung to the east towards Tul Keram. The infantry was not
engaged in any further serious fighting, but followed the
mounted troops and garrisoned the lines of communication.
The mounted troops, yeomanry, Indian cavalry and the sth
L


Australian Light Horse, galloped through the captured lines
and rapidly advanced through the plain of Sharon. By mid-
day, assisted by shells from the warships, they had covered 19
miles, driving the enemy before them. The Indian cavalry
and yeomanry entered Nazareth—the German headquarters-
on the 20th, and the following day seized the railway con-
necting with the Hedjaz line, cutting all the lines of com-
munication of the 7th and Bth Turkish armies.
Further east, British and Indian troops advanced and
captured the crossings on the Jordan, while British and Aus-
tralian airmen (who had gained a complete ascendency over
the German machines) bombed roads clogged with retreating
men, and blocked the narrow defiles.
The Desert Mounted Column under General Chauvel began
its great drive by pushing to the north along the coastal plain
and then turning east to cut off the retreat not only of the
Turkish Bth Army, but of the 7th Army also, which was
astride the Jerusalem-Shechem road. The Australians
captured 12,000 prisoners on the 20th.
The sth Australian Light Horse and a composite regiment
of the Chasseurs d’Afrique and Spahis went first followed by
the 4th and sth Cavalry Divisions and behind them the Aus-
tralian Mounted Division under Major-General Hodgson.
By noon the mounted troops had advanced 18 miles, reaching
Jelameh and Hudeira. An Australian regiment captured a
hill 4 miles east of Tul Keram, securing a quantity of transport
and many guns. On the 21st the sth Light Horse Brigade
(Brigadie -General Macarthur Onslow), with the French
cavalry, entered Nablus (Shechem) from the west. The
mounted troops advanced into the plain of Esdraelon (Arma-
geddon). Two regiments (Victorians and West Australians)
then turned south-east and captured Jenin, the headquarters
of the enemy’s air force , securing 7000 prisoners, 900 horses,
2 aerodromes and an immense quantity of war material.
Within 36 hours of the opening of the offensive both the 7th
and Bth Turkish armies had been defeated and all their main
outlets of escape closed. Retreating before the XX. and XXI.
Corps, they began falling into the net which was stretched
from Megiddo to the Jordan,


ADVANCE ON DAMASCUS.
The sth Cavalry Division and the Australian Mounted
Division were now directed to advance along the west side of
the Sea of Galilee, across the Jordan at Jisr Benat Yakub, and
advance direct on Damascus by the ancient caravan route
from Egypt. On 24th September the 4th Australian light
Horse Brigade captured Semakl, south of the Sea of Galilee,
after a fierce encounter against Germans and Turks. Tiberias,
on the west coast of the lake, was captured on the 26th. It
was here that the Australian Mounted Division concentrated
for the advance on Damascus.
In the meantime the Australian and New Zealand Mounted
Division under General Chayter, together with the 20th Indian
Brigade, two West Indian battalions and divisional troops
(artillery) advanced along the Jordan Valley, keeping to the
west of the Jericho-Beisan Road. On 22nd September, the
38th (Jewish) Battalion, Royal Fusiliers, captured the bridge-
head at Umin es Shert, and the New Zealand Mounted Rifles
captured the Jordan crossing, on the Shechem road. On the
23rd and 24th great numbers of prisoners were taken. On the
23rd September the sth Cavalry Division captured Acre and
Haifa. The total number of prisoners captured between 19th
and 22nd September was 12,165, with, it was estimated, 8000
still to be counted. By the evening of the 24th (six days) the
two Turkish armies in Palestine had practically ceased to
exist, while the total British casualties did not exceed 4000.
The only Turkish troops to be disposed of now were the 4th
Army to the east of the Jordan, with its base at Amman on the
Hedjaz railway, and the Australian and New Zealand Division
advanced against it. The New Zealand Brigade recaptured
Es Salt, and after two days’ hard fighting Amman was reached
and captured on the 25th of September.
The Turks fled northward, pursued by the Australians and
New Zealanders. Over 5000 prisoners and 28 guns were
captured ; the remainder were disposed of by the Arabs under
Emir Faisal.


The Australians and New Zealanders returned to Amman
and advanced against the 2nd Turkish Army Corps, which held
the Hedjaz railway line ten miles south of Amman towards
Medina This force was encountered bn the 29th and the
whole corps, amounting to 5000 men, surrendered. This
completed the destruction of the 4th Turkish Army.
On the 27th of September the Australian Mounted Division,
which had concentrated at Tiberias on the western shores of
the Sea of Galilee, together with the sth Cavalry Division,
commenced its advance on Damascus by the ancient caravan
route from Egypt, while the 4th Cavalry Division started on
the 26th for Damascus by a route following the railway line
easterly from the Sea of Galilee to the Hedjaz railway whence
they turned north to Damascus, keeping to the west side of the
Hedjaz railway.
There were therefore three parallel columns advancing on
Damascus, from west to east, the Australian Mounted Division
and the sth Cavalry Division, then the 4th Cavalry Division
on the west of the Hedjaz railway line, and the Arab column,
under Emir Faisal, east of the Hedjaz railway. The Aus-
tralian and New Zealand Division did not take part in the
advance on Damascus.
The Australian Mounted Division and the sth Cavalry
Division in their advance on Damascus crossed the Jordan 10
miles north of the Sea of Galilee (or Tiberias), the Australians
leading. They found that Jisr Benat Yakub was defended
by a force a thousand strong, with field and machine guns.
The Bth Australian light Horse Brigade swam the river a mile
further south and attacked and captured the force. A
second encounter took place at El Kuneitra. The Hoops had
now reached an elevated region of 3000 feet, and the cold a
night was very severe. On 29th September the Turkish
rearguards were met at Saza, 20 miles from Damascus ; these
were driven in, and by 10 o’clock on 30th September the
Australians had reached Katana, having diverged to the left
of the direct route, with a view of closing the exits of Damascus
on the north-west. The 6th Cavalry Division continued
straight on. At Abana Gorge, through which runs the


Damascus-Beirut road, the Australians met a strong force
guarding the exit, which they dispersed after a two hours
engagement, taking 4000 prisoners, and by the evening of the
30th had reached the outskirts of Damascus, occupying the
northern and western suburbs.
At 5 a.m. on Ist October, the 3rd Australian light Horse
Brigade, Brigadier-General Wilson, the 10th light Horse
Regiment (West Australians) forming the advance guard,
commanded by Major Olden, entered Damascus, being the
first of the Allied troops to do so, and blocked the Aleppo road.
Shortly afterwards the sth Cavalry Division joined hands with
the Australians, followed by the 4th Cavalry Division ; the
Arabs entered behind the 14th Cavalry Brigade the three
columns converging on the celebrated city almost simul-
taneously. Damascus, the most ancient inhabited city in the
world, was thus wrested from the four-century rule of the
Turks, and its loss shattered the remaining prestige of its
former rulers. In and around Damascus 22,000 prisoners and
much war material were taken.
On 2nd October the 3rd Australian Brigade pursued a force
of the enemy which had escaped towards Aleppo, overtaking
it 17 miles north-west of Damascus ; 1500 prisoners and 3
guns were captured.
Of the Turkish armies, numbering 104,000 on 18th
September, no less than 87,000 had been killed, wounded or
made prisoners and the remnant was a fugitive rabble.
The sth Cavalry Division commenced its advance on Aleppo
on sth October. Beyrout was occupied on Bth October by the
Meerut Division. This afforded the first good sea-base along
the coast from Port Said. The important town of Homs was
reached on 16th October ; it commanded the great thorough-
fare to Damascus, Palestine and Egypt. Five days later
Hama (Hamath) was entered without opposition. It had been
previously bombed by Australian airmen. On 23rd October
the city of Aleppo, containing 150,000 inhabitants, was reached
by armoured cars. The Turks at first refused to surrender,
but on the 25th the arrival of the sth Cavalry Brigade caused
them to change their decision. Muslimie, at the junction of


the Baghdad railway, was also captured on the 29th by
Sherifian Forces in co-operation with the sth Cavalry Division.
The Australian Mounted Division remained at Damascus
from Ist to 28th October. They were advancing to capture
Alexandretta, the port of Aleppo, and had proceeded half way
to Homs when the armistice was announced, on 30th October.
Continuing their journey to Homs, the Australian Division
turned west and reached the sea coast on 7th November. It
rested at the town of Tripoli until 4th January, when it re-
turned to Egypt. ,
The 4th Cavalry Division advanced with the sth Cavalry
Division as far as Baalbek, which it reached on Ist November.
On account of an epidemic of malaria it did not go on to
Aleppo but turned west and reached Bierut on the coast on
27th November.
The terms of the armistice included the surrender, to the
nearest allied commander, of all Turkish garrisons in the
Hedjaz, Asir, the Yemen, Syria and Mesopotamia. Alexand-
retta was occupied by British and French troops on 10th
November.
The Mesopotamian campaign was concluded on 30th
October by a battle in which General Marshall captured 7000
Turkish troops. Mosul was surrendered on 14th November
Shortly after the armistice a squadron of Allied warships
passed through the Dardanelles, and troops, including the 7th
Australian Light Horse, manned the forts which three years
before (owing to conditions over which they had no control)
they were unable to capture by a frontal attack. Not only
Gallipoli had now been conquered by the British and Anzacs,
but the whole of the Turkish Empire had been forced to sue
for peace on the terms of the victors.
A number of the Australians, while at Maidos, visited
Constantinople before they returned to Egypt.
In a despatch to the War Office, dated 28th of June, 1919,
Field Marshal Lord Allenby mentioned his indebtedness to,
amongst others, Lieutenant-General Sir Harry Chauvel,
commanding the Desert Mountain Corps. Lord Allenby added :
“ I take this opportunity of expressing my high appreciation


of the services of these officers, and of the Australian and New
Zealand troops which formed a large proportion of my force.”
THE EXPEDITION TO BAKU.
During 1918 the Turks, compelled on the Palestinian and
Mesopotamian fronts to stand on the defensive, conducted an
offensive in Trans-Caucasia, which resulted in their becoming
virtual masters of the greater part of that region.
They also re-invaded north-west Persia, captured Tabriz, and
made an advance towards Teheran. The Trans-Caucasian
campaign, which exactly suited the Pan-Turanian policy of
Enver and Talaat Pashas, was rendered possible by the col-
lapse of Russia. The resistance offered to the Turkish ad-
vance by the Georgians and Armenians was not effective, while
the Tartars treated the Turks as allies. The campaign was
brought to a conclusion by the capture of Baku by the Turks in
September, 1918. .. .
The British force in Mesopotamia had done what it could to
cheek the progress of the Turks. Forces sent from Baghdad
kept in play the enemy troops in Persia, and a detachment
which crossed the Caspian from Enzeli to Baku prolonged the
defence of that place for six weeks.
The Turks did not hold Trans-Caucasia for long, as the
defeat of Bulgaria had exposed their flank in Europe and
General Allenby had destroyed their armies in Syria. The
Bulgarians surrendered two days before the fall of Damascus.
The Ottoman Government was obliged to sue for terms, and
one of the terms was the evacuation of Trans-Caucasia. The
railway from Baku to Batum was therefore occupied by the
British.
Baku was not only extremely important as a great oil
centre, but now that the successes of the British in Mesopo-
tamia and Syria had destroyed the German hope of developing
her Asiatic policy through the Baghdad railway, the 8.8.8.
(Berlin-Byzantium-Baghdad) scheme was shelved and the
8.8.8.8. (Berlin-Batum-Baku-Bokhara) scheme was in-
augurated, a new route to India, which would bring German
influence to the confines of Afghanistan and India,


The details of the campaign are as follows :
Major-General L. C. Dunsterville, C. 8., commanded the
expedition to Baku.
In January, 1918, largely to help the famine-stricken people,
Sir Wm. Marshall had sent a British mission along the road as
far as Kermanshar, towards the Caspian, from Baghdad. It
was under Lieut.-Col. (temporary Major-General) L. C. Dun-
sterville, C. 8., of the Indian army, who was said to be the
original of Kipling’s “ Stalky.”
When it was decided that the British lines should be ex-
tended to the Caspian it was necessary to strengthen the force
under General Dunsterville. In particular the services of
officers and sergeants were required—men who could take
charge of isolated posts, help to raise and train native levies
and at need turn to administrative duties. Part of Dunster-
ville’s officers and non-commissioned officers came from France,
where there was a call for 100 officers and 250 sergeants to
volunteer for service in Persia. There were Englishmen and
Scotch, Irish, Canadians, and South Africans, while Australia
furnished the largest national unit (18 officers and 20 sergeants).
At the end of May, as the Russians were withdrawing and
embarking on the Caspian, there was no force to prevent the
Turks marching from Tabriz to Teheran against the defenceless
Persians.
Sir William Marshall sent forward Dunsterville’s force in
Ford motor-vans as far as Kazvin, south of the Caspian, to
take over that place from the Russian general. The road,
unmetalled, traverses rocky passes, swift running streams and
broad alluvial valleys ; the bridges had been broken down
or blown up ; one of the passes was over 7000 feet high.
The country was famine stricken. On Ist June General
Dunsterville’s mission reached Kazvin. On 26th July the
Bolshevist council at Baku was deposed by the Centro-Caspian
dictatorship, which requested British aid and sent transports
to Enzeli, a port on the Caspian, to bring back British troops.
A few British officers, with one platoon as escort, were sent to
make a report. They landed at Baku on 4th August. The
arrival of the British party at Baku had an electrical effect on


the citizens, who cheered and cheered again as the soldiers
marched through the streets ; new hope revived, and the
Turkish attack the following day was repulsed.
Further British reinforcements were sent during August.
On their arrival they took over portions of the defended
perimeter of the town, but the inhabitants of Baku seemed to
think that it was no longer necessary for them to fight now that
the British had arrived, and they gave our troops little or no
assistance. On 26th August the Turks, well supported by
artillery, attacked a salient with considerable determination.
This point was most gallantly held by a British company,
unsupported by local Baku troops, against odds of 5 to 1.
The British company suffered heavy casualties before being
obliged to withdraw. On 31st August the Turks made two
further attacks, which were beaten off, but with heavy loss to
the British and Russian troops, who were, however, sub-
sequently compelled to give ground owing to the exposure of
their flank by the withdrawal of some Armenian battalions.
On Ist September, further ground was lost; our troops, without
any efficient support from our local allies, were forced back,
fighting against heavy odds.
After receiving large reinforcements the Turks attacked
again on 14th September. On this occasion they succeeded
in scaling the heights, driving out with little difficulty the
Armenian troops opposed to them, necessitating a readjust-
ment of the British line to protect a flank held by three very
weak British companies and the “Dunsterf orce’ ’ armoured cars,
who held out all day on the last ridge on the outskirts of the
town under heavy shell fire and against repeated attacks by
the main body of the Turks. After fighting all day the Turks
were beaten off.
It was now decided to evacuate the British detachment.
All sick and wounded were carried on board the three transports.
Troops and guns were embarked, and they arrived safely at
Enzeli. For six weeks the “ Dunsters” had kept the enemy
out of Baku and denied them its valuable oilfields.
The Turkish success was shortlived, as almost immediately
after the armistice was signed this territory was evacuated
by the Turks.


THE MESOPOTAMIAN FRONT.
A mixed force of 45 Australian airmen, air-mechanics and
mule-drivers was lent to the Indian Government for operations
in the Persian Gulf. It left Australia on the 20th of April,
1915 and reached Busra, via Bombay, on the 28th of May
This’port, and Kurna—at the junction of the Tigris and
Euphrates—had been seized by an Indian Division under Sir
Arthur Barrett at the beginning of 1915, shortly after the
declaration of war with Turkey. A small force also had been
sent to Ahwez to protect the Anglo-Persian oil-pipe Ime.
In April General Sir John Nixon arrived with reinforcements,
and General Gorringe moved up the Euphrates. The Aus-
tralian contingent reached Kurna on the 28th of May. It was
attached to the Indian Flying Corps, and was allotted two
machines of the Maurice-Farman type. It was here that the
Australians had their first air-fight.
General Townsend advanced up the Tigris and entered Amara
on 3rd June. The flying corps then returned to its aerodrome
at Busra, and two months later ascended the Euphrates to
Nazariah, where there was a big aerial combat in which e
Australians again took part.
The air-force joined the expedition under General Townsend
advancing on Tel-el-Amara, which was captured on the 28th
of August after heavy fighting. With the slender forces at the
disnosal of the British, it was decided to attempt the capture of
Baghdad as a set-off to the Dardanelles failure. The force
reached Ctesiphon (the ancient capital of Parthia and Persia),
20 miles south of Baghdad, where the main position was
carried, but, large enemy reinforcements arriving the batt e
continued for four days, in which the air-force did valuab e
work Although the British were unbeaten, it was decided
to withdraw to Kut-el-Amara, which was reached on 2nd
December, with 1600 Turkish prisoners. After being besieged
for 145 days the heroic garrison, without food and decimated
by sickness, surrendered. The prisoners included a proportion
of the Australian air-mechanics and transport.


At the end of 1916, the remainder of the Australians were
withdrawn and sent to Egypt, where they joined the Aus-
tralian Flying Corps.
Towards the latter end of 1916 the First Australian Wireless
Signal Squadron, consisting of 120 officers and other ranks,
joined the British troops in Mesopotamia and rendered most
valuable service right up to the surrender of Mosul (Nmeveh)
on the 14th of November, 1918.
£.
I
THE RUSSIAN FRONT.
In July, 1918, a small party of specially-selected Australian
officers and men joined the North Russian Expeditionary
Force for the defence of Archangel and the Murman Coast.


CHAPTER 9
Australia’s Share in the Great War. Britain’s Wbecome
to her Kinsmen. The Armistice. The Peace
Terms. The League of Nations. The Future
Status of Australia.
AUSTRALIA’S SHARE IN THE GREAT WAR.
In apportioning Australia’s share in the Great War, the
people of the Commonwealth will ask no more than an un-
biassed record of how the young Nation, dwelling 12,000 miles
from the theatre of war, loyally fulfilled her part in fighting
for the great ideals of freedom and justice upon which the
British Empire is founded.
A short history describing the Australian campaign in the
Great War, necessarily precludes the possibility of doing full
Justice to the magnificent valour of the troops from all parts
of the British Isles, the splendid heroism of the forces of the
Indian Empire and of our sister nations and the Crown
Colonies. For this reason there may be a danger (owing to the
loss of perspective) of readers assuming that Australia took a
more decisive part in the great struggle than was actually
the case. It should always be remembered that the Empire
put into the field forces aggregating over seven millions, to
which Australia’s contribution was 3300,00.
It may seem invidious to compare the efforts made by the
sister nations of the Empire, when every portion gladly
rendered such glorious service and was actuated by such a high
conception of the great responsibilities jointly cast upon
it. It is, however, essential to supply figures to prevent
misconceptions arising and to prove the glorious part taken
by the Empire in the greatest tragedy recorded in history.


An idea of Australia’s relative contribution may be ob-
tained from the statistics given in Appendix E, showing the
proportion of men sent to the front compared with the total
populations of the various parts of the Empire. Judged by
this standard the order of merit is as follows : —British Isles
10| per cent., New Zealand 9 per cent., Australia 6f per cent.,
Canada 5 1-I2th per cent., Newfoundland, 4| per cent., South
Africa 3| per cent., and India | per cent.
It will thus be seen that amongst the nations of the Empire
Australia’s contribution is exceeded only by that of Great
Britain and New Zealand.
The relative sacrifices made by the troops sent from different
portions of the Empire are revealed by comparing the per-
centages of casualties to forces sent to the front. In this
comparison the order is : —Australia 68 per cent., New Zealand
58 per cent., Canada 51 per cent., Great Britain 521 per cent.
The estimated number of soldiers sent overseas by Great
Britain and Ireland was five millions, but it must be re-
membered that large numbers of these troops were in a low
physical category, and were recruited to work in the back
areas. This accounts for the lower percentage of casualties.
Deducting this class of men Great Britain’s percentage of
casualties of front line troops would probably be increased
to the average of Australia, New Zealand and Canada, but it
would reduce her total contribution of front-line troops to
4,452,000, and the percentage of troops to population to
nearly 9| per cent.
Great Britain also received a large number of recruits from
her dependencies and from foreign parts. Against this, it
must be remembered, she had over 430,000 men in the Navy,
and immense numbers in the factories, coal mines and other
protected industries.
Excluding the British Isles and the Indian Empire, Australia
had continuously in the front line a larger number of combat-
ant forces than any other nation of the British Empire, namely
five Infantry Divisions, fifteen Regiments of light Horse, and
an Air Service. In addition to these there was also a small but
effective fleet. In this respect Australia was maintaining


the position she held in the South African War, to which she
sent more troops than any other self-governing dominion.
The financial sacrifices made by Australia and New Zealand
were exceptionally heavy owing to their geographical position ;
the cost of transporting troops was very high, and owing to the
dearth of shipping the very profitable manufacture of muni-
tions and other military stores was denied them. Australia
equipped and paid her own forces from the day they enlisted
until they returned, including the cost of sea transport, and
the heavy cost of all ammunition used. She spent a larger
sum on the war, both actually and relatively, than any other
portion of the Empire, with the exception of the United
Kingdom.
The Australian troops were raised on a purely voluntary
basis, each man was prepared to make his sacrifice to maintain
the ideals of a free people, and the valiant manner in which
they acquitted themselves sent a thrill of pride throughout
Australia and the British Empire.
With the exception of those of the infantry and light horse,
it was not possible in this work to record individually the
exploits of the various arms composing the Australian Imperial
Force.
The bravery, the high standard of training attained by the
gunners, and their accurate shooting, time and again saved
a difficult situation from disaster. The celerity with which
deadly barrages were put down, to prevent or smash the
enemy’s counter-attacks, protected the infantry from heavy
casualties. No arm of the service showed greater endurance.
Not infrequently the artillery was found to be so indispensable
that it was left in the line when the worn-out infantry was
withdrawn to rest. The last fighting done by the Australians
in France was by the artillery. After the Australian troops
had captured a sector of the Hindenburg line in October, 1918,
and the infantry had been withdrawn to rest, the 10th and 11th
Brigades of the Australian Field Artillery (belonging to the
4th Division) remained in the line and helped to continue
the great push. So highly were the services of the artillery
appreciated and so invaluable had it become to smash the


enemy’s defences, to engage in counter-battery work and to
lay down protective or creeping barrages, that each successive
campaign on the western front witnessed greater and greater
aggregations of artillery. It was stated that in the third battle
of the Somme the proportion of gunners to riflemen was as
75 to 100.*
The Australian flying corps did excellent work, and de-
stroyed many German machines by their ability, fearless
dash, and powers of instant decision, which brought them
into the front rank amongst the famous flying corps of the
Allies on all fronts —Mesopotamia, Egypt, Gallipoli, France,
Belgium, Sinai, Palestine and Syria. On the western front
several records were established by the Australians, and in
Palestine twelve Distinguished Flying Crosses were granted to
Australians in a period of six weeks.
Amongst the causes that contributed to the successful
result of the war was the magnificent organisation and ad-
ministration of the Medical Service. In previous wars of long
duration the mortality from disease was usually greater than
the death rate from casualties. One of the greatest triumphs
of the Great War was the astounding advance in the scientific
prevention of infections and contagious diseases by cleanliness,
vaccinations, and inoculations, reducing to a minimum the
ravages of enteric, cholera, smallpox, dysentery, malaria, and
tetanus. The splendid organisation of the field ambulances,
* BRITISH ROYAL ARTILLERY.
Output of Guns, 4/8/14 to 11/11/18.
Year. New. Repaired. Converted. Totat-
e-1914 .. 91 186 .. •• 276
1915 .. 3,226 395 36 189 3,846
1916 .. 4,551 758 59 396 5,764
1917 .. 6,483 2,957 .. <>9B 10,938
1918 .. 10,680 4,873 .. 213 15,766
Totals .. 25,031 9,168 95 1,396 35,690
PERSONNEL
R0 Artmery i3Cm TotaL
Artillery. Artillery.
4th Aueust, 1914 59,086 83,834 92,92'
11th Nov., 1918 338,226 210,554 548,780
On the 28th of September, 1918, the British Artillery in France expended
943,837 rounds of ammunition, and during the war 170,305,595 rounds.


dressing stations, and hospitals, together with the ample
provision of hospital trains and ships, enormously mitigated
the sufferings of the wounded and saved tens of thousands of
lives. The heroic devotion of the stretcher-bearers, medical
officers, nurses, and attendants won the undying gratitude of
the whole force.
The tasks that confronted the Royal Engineers in the Great
War were more difficult and required greater skill, originality,
and endurance than in any previous war, owing, on the one
hand, to the devastating effect of massed artillery fire, mines
and aerial bombs, and, on the other, to the almost impassable
morasses on the western front, caused by the heavy rains and
a clayey subsoil. Scores of miles of light railways and cor-
duroyed road sprang into existence as though by magic ;
under a deluge of shell-fire muddy ditches were drained and
transformed into rivetted trenches ; bridges, culverts, railways
and roads (always a special mark for the enemy’s artillery),
were constructed, to enable field artillery and vast quantities
of ammunition and food supplies to reach the armies in the
front. In this great duty the sappers never failed, cheer-
fully toiling day and night to keep open the lines of com-
munication upon which the success of every undertaking
depended. In this work the splendid services of the Pioneers
were included. These latter were skilled artisans and
their services were of immense value. In describing cam-
paigns attention is naturally focussed on the import-
ant decisions in the battle area, but without the great
silent forces which are ceaselessly toiling in the rear these
victories would be impossible. The wonderful organisation
and administrative ability which controlled the lines of com-
munication from the great base at a seaport up to the battalion
transport, were so brilliantly successful that every combatant,
no matter whether retiring or advancing or whether engaged
in movements from one sector to another, got his three meals
a day, while the insatiable appetite of the batteries was fed
with incredible quantities of ammunition. The of the
railway operating corps, the army service corps, the mechanical
transport and the ordnance department throughout the war
was in every part exceptionally good.


PALESTINE CAMPAIGN.—DUST IN THE JORDAN VALLEY, JERICHO ON LEFT. WILDERNESS OF JUDEA ON RIGHT.
( Australian Official Photograph, by special permission ,)


SYRIA CAMPAIGN.-DAMSCUS. OFFICIAL ENTRY OF AUSTRALIAN LIGHT HORSE.
(Australian Official Photograph, by special permission.)


Another body of Australians whose services were invaluable
were the members of the Australian tunnelling corps. 2000
mining engineers and miners were raised for this duty. Their
work was of a nature which necessitated the greatest secrecy,
and therefore they were seldom seen or heard of, but many
great victories, notably that at Messines, were to a consider-
able extent due to the strenuous and dangerous work which
they accomplished. The tunnellers engaged in these hazard-
ous enterprises were always liable to be blown up by an
enemy countermine, and at Hill 60 a fight lasting nearly ten
months was waged between the British and German tun-
nellers, finally resulting in that hill being obliterated by the
British tunnellers before the attack on Messines.
At Vimy Ridge a number of mines was exploded on 9th
April, 1917. Good work was also done at Ploegsteert,
Givenchy and Loos.
BRITAIN’S WELCOME TO HER KINSMEN.
The cordiality of the welcome extended by the people of the
British Isles to their stalwart kinsmen from Overseas was
dictated by feelings of pride and affection, and not merely by
motives of gratitude or obligation, seeing that the safety of
every portion of the Empire, equally with that of Great Britain,
depended on the issue of the War,
To very many of the Australians it was the first visit to the
land of their fathers, and the generous hospitality and affection-
ate welcome they received made them realise, as they had never
done before, that the home of their fathers was their home
also, and that they inherited by lineal descent the noble
traditions of the British race. The flower of the manhood of
the whole Empire mingled for the first time in the old home-
land, creating a feeling of common interest, a mutual respect,
and a bond of brotherhood that was cemented in the joint
sacrifice of noble lives on the far-flung battle fields, where
they lie side by side in their last long sleep, having willingly
laid down their young lives in the cause of freedom and
justice. “ They were lovely and pleasant in their lives and
in their death they were not divided.”
M


The “ Men of the Blood” from far distant climes were in a
position different from that of their brothers of the old land.
They were deprived for long years of the gentle restraints and
loving discipline of home life. They were separated from
their mothers, wives, sisters and children. When dangerously
wounded they lacked the intimate sympathy and cheering
presence of their dear ones.
The British people, with the instinct of kinship and the
generous impulses of a warm and sympathetic nature, in-
tuitively recognised this and surrounded the oversea forces
with a loving mantle of care and attention that sheltered them
from feelings of isolation and homesickness, which were other-
wise inevitable.
During the last two and a-half years of the war there were
from forty to sixty thousand Australians continually training
in Great Britain, besides large numbers in hospital and on
furlough.
The casualty trains were regularly met by voluntary organ-
isations to distribute flowers, fruit, and refreshments, and to
convey greetings of sympathy and appreciation. Regular
entertainments were given in all the hospitals by artists of
repute, and privately-owned motor cars were always available
to take convalescents for a run in the country or to places of
interest. One organisation arranged for every wounded
Australian officer to spend his convalescent leave, of three to
seven weeks, as a guest at one of the fine country homes of
England, Scotland, Ireland, and Wales. Buffets were
established at the railway stations to supply refreshments to
the soldiers. The theatres allotted a certain number of tickets
for wounded Australians. Many organisations, such as the
Y.M.C.A., the Salvation Army, and the Church Army built
special huts for the entertainment and refreshment of the
oversea forces. Troop trains were continually conveying
Australian soldiers through Exeter on their way to and from
Devonport. The Lord Mayor organised a committee which
without any charge supplied refreshments during the whole
war to Australians passing through. As an expression of
gratitude, General Sir James McCay visited Exeter and at an


important function, arranged for the occasion, presented that
historic city with an Australian flag, which now hangs in the
ancient cathedral.
The Australian Natives’ Association in London did noble
work in providing refreshments and entertainments for the
soldiers. Several Australians living in Great Britain turned
their houses into convalescent homes, and others threw their
dwellings open to all Australians in the neighbourhood.
The troops deeply appreciated these disinterested acts of
fellowship and goodwill which were showered upon them, and
they showed their appreciation by their orderly conduct and
excellent discipline. During the whole period of the war there
was not a single riot amongst the large numbers of Australian
soldiers in Great Britain, and no destruction of property of
any kind was committed by them, whilst the perfect dis-
cipline of the Australian troops in the battle line has frequently
been emphasised by both British and Australian generals.
THE ARMISTICE.
The rout of the enemy on the western front before the
sledge-hammer blows of Great Britain, France, and America,
caused extraordinary unrest and revolutionary outbreaks
amongst the peoples of the Central Powers.
Ferdinand of Bulgaria abdicated on 7th October, 1918,
Turkey capitulated on 30th October, King Karl of Austria
abdicated on Ist November, the Kaiser, and the King of
Bavaria, on 9th November, and the King of Wtirtemburg and
the Duke of Brunswick on the following day.
A people’s Government was initiated in Berlin on the 9th,
and. Herr Ebert, a Socialist member of the Reichstag, was
appointed Imperial Chancellor.
The Armistice was signed at 5 a.m. on the 11th of November,
1918, after an all-night sitting of representatives of the Allies
and Germany. The preliminary Peace Terms were on the
basis of the “ Fourteen Points” contained in a speech made by
Dr. Woodrow Wilson, President of the United States of
America, on Bth January, 1918, with reservations regarding
clauses I. and 111.


The conditions of the Armistice may be summarised as
follows Evacuation within 14 days of Belgium, France,
Alsace-Lorraine, Luxemburg and other invaded territories.
Repatriation of inhabitants of these countries. Surrender of
5000 guns (2500 heavy, 2500 field), 25,000 machine guns,
3000 trench mortars, and 1700 aeroplanes. German armies
to retire across the Rhine within 31 days. The German
territory west of the Rhine to be administered by local
authorities under the control of the Allied and United States
armies of occupation. A neutral zone to be fixed of miles
on the right bank of the Rhine, and bridgeheads of a radius
of 18 miles on the right bank at Mayence, Coblenz and Cologne.
No damage or destruction in territory evacuated. Immediate
reparation, without reciprocity, of all Allied prisoners of war.
Surrender of 5000 locomotives, 150,000 railway wagons, and
5000 motor lorries.
Upkeep of troops in occupation of Rhineland to be paid for
by Germany. Treaties of Bucharest and Brest-litovsk to be
annulled. Restitution of Russian and Roumanian gold
taken by Germany. All submarines to be handed over within
14 days. Surrender of ten battleships, six battle-cruisers,
eight light cruisers, and fifty destroyers. Black Sea ports to
be evacuated and Allies to have free access to the Black Sea
and the Baltic. Blockade to be maintained.
THE PEACE TREATY.
No oecumenical council clothed with such powers, weighted
with such responsibilities, and faced with such difficulties,
as was the Peace Conference, had ever previously sat. The
representatives of thirty-two nations (including the Domin-
ions) gathered round the Council Table at Versailles to draw
up the terms of Peace, to create new nations, to exact re-
paration, and to do away with standing armies for aggressive
purposes. Despite the fact that they represented nations,
many of which were torn and bleeding, faced with bank-
ruptcy, food shortage and turmoil, with devastated lands
and jangling nerves, the conditions of Peace were an honest
effort to deal out even-handed justice to all on the principles


of self-determination and a popular suffrage, with a League
of Nations to prevent the world being again turned into a
shambles by ambitious ruffians.
The unemotional idealism of President Wilson created an
atmosphere which doubtless assisted in the attainment of the
results achieved.
The Peace Treaty—a document of monumental importance,
and extending over ninety-eight pages —was signed at
Versailles on the 28th of June, 1919.
The Treaty was signed by the Plenipotentiaries of the fol-
lowing powers : —The United States of America, the British
Empire, France, Italy, and Japan (described in the Treaty as
the Principal Allied and Associated Powers), Belgium, Bolivia,
Brazil, China, Cuba, Ecuador, Greece, Guatemala, Hayti, The
Hedjaz, Honduras, Liberia, Nicaragua, Panama, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Roumania, The Serb-Croat-Slovene State,
Siam, Czecho-Slovakia and Uruguay —these Powers con-
stituting, with the Principal Powers mentioned above, the
Allied and Associated Powers of the one part, and Germany of
the other part, acting in the name of the German Empire and
of each and every component State.
The covenant of the League of Nations is embodied in the
Treaty.
The terms of the Peace Treaty are shortly as follows :
Territorial.
Alsace-Lorraine is restored to France.
Luxemburg ceases to be part of the German Zollverein and
Germany renounces all conventions and treaties with the
Grand Duchy. Germany cedes to France full ownership in
the Mines of the Saar basin, which territory will be governed
by a commission appointed by the League of Nations. A
plebiscite is to be taken after 15 years to decide between the
League of Nations regime or union with France or Germany.
Poland is re-created an Empire, including Posen, and West
Prussia on the left bank of the Vistula. The people dwelling
on the southern frontier of East Prussia and in Upper Silesia
will decide by plebiscites the State or States to which they


wish to belong. The “ Free City of Danzig” is to be con-
stituted under the guarantee of the League of Nations. The
frontiers between Germany and Denmark will be determined
in accordance with the wishes of the population.
Germany is to recognise the independence of all territories
which formed part of the former Russian Empire. The
independence of German Austria is recognised by Germany.
Germany is to renounce her possessions and rights abroad,
yield her colonies to the Allies, together with her rights in
Africa under the various international conventions.
International recognition is given to the British Protectorate
in Egypt.
Germany cedes to Japan all her rights in Shantung.
Army and Navy.
All compulsory military service is to be abolished in Ger-
many, the total number of effectives being fixed first at
200,000, and by 31st March, 1920, at 100,000. The armed
forces of Germany must not include any military or naval air
forces.
Within two months the German naval forces in commission
must not exceed six battleships, six light cruisers, twelve
destroyers, and twelve torpedo boats, and the personnel (also
volunteers) must not exceed 15,000. Germany is forbidden
to construct or acquire any warships.
Fortifications and harbours on the islands of Heligoland and
Dune are to be destroyed. Germany must not maintain or
construct any fortifications less than 30 miles east of the Rhine,
and must maintain no armed force within this area.
Trial of the Ex- Kaiser.
The ex-Kaiser will be publicly arraigned for a supreme
offence against international morality and the sanctity of
treaties.
Reparation.
Germany accepts responsibility for the loss occasioned to
the Allies by reason of the war imposed on them by the ag-
gression of the enemy States. Germany must restore all


property taken from invaded States. The Allies require
Germany to pay compensation for all damages to civilians
through German aggression by land or sea. An inter-Allied
commission will fix the amount of damages and report the
same to Germany before Ist May, 1921, announcing at the
same time the total claims which Germany must meet, and
the scheme of payment, spread over a period of thirty years
thereafter.
Germany must pay before Ist May, 1921, £1,000,000,000
sterling worth of goods, or ships, the first charge thereon to
be the cost of the armies of occupation and supplies forwarded
to Germany to enable her to meet her obligations.
Germany must issue immediately and surrender to the
inter-Allied commission on account £1,000,000,000 sterling
Treasury bearer bonds as a guarantee of the instalment pay-
able before Ist May, 1921. There must also be a further issue
of bonds for £2,000,000,000 before 1926, and for £2,000,000,000
more at a date to be fixed. The ruling rate of interest is
5 per cent. An Allied commission will fix the remainder of
the indemnity to be paid by Germany and the form which it
shall take.
The Allies maintain the right to obtain payment of repara-
tion, etc., in priority settlement of all other German debts,
but will approve of exceptions.
Shipping and Trade.
Germany will build 1,000,000 tons of shipping, spread over
five years, for the Allies. Germany is to hand over all ships
over 1600 tons, one-half of her ships between 1000 tons and
1600 tons and one-fourth of her trawlers and fishing boats.
Germany will be allowed to use her merchant shipping for
two years. Germany undertakes not to discriminate directly
or indirectly against the trade of Allied or Associated countries,
such provision to be enforced for five years unless extended
by the League of Nations.
German nationality shall not continue to attach to persons
who have been nationalised in an allied or associated State.


An international conference is to be held annually to propose
labour reforms for adoption by the States. It will meet at
Washington this year (1919).
Powers to which German Territory is ceded (France, Poland,
and the States holding mandates over the former German
Colonies excepted) will assume a certain portion of the German
pre-war debt-
Miscellaneous Provisions.
Germany must bear the cost to the military occupation of
the Rhineland, which is an essential guarantee.
Germany will be compelled to alienate the greater part of her
foreign securities and will no longer be allowed to continue
intimately involved in the economical life of the Allies or of
Russia.
Owing to Germany’s illegal acts, many of the Allies are in a
state of economic inferiority. Therefore certain non-re-
ciprocal conditions in the matter of commercial exchanges
have been imposed for a minimum of five years. Reciprocity,
however, will be applied whenever possible.
The amount of reparation to be received by Australia under
the Peace terms is £100,000,000 (the claim submitted was
£354,000,000). How much Australia will actually receive
is not known. The first instalment will probably be from
£5,000,000 to £8,000,000.
Australia’s actual war expenditure was £364,000,000, and
the estimated capitalised cost of pensions is £100,000,000.
LEAGUE OF NATIONS
Membership.
Members of the League of Nations will be the signatories of
the Covenant and other States invited to accede, who must
lodge a declaration of accession without reservation within
two months. Any State, Dominion, or Colony, may be


admitted, provided that its admission is agreed to by two-
thirds of the members of the Assembly. If it has fulfilled all
its international obligations a State may withdraw upon
giving two years’ notice.
Council.
The Council will consist of representatives of the Five Great
Allied Powers (Great Britain, France, America, Italy and
Japan), together with representatives of four other members
selected by the Assembly from time to time. It may co-opt
additional States, and will meet at least once a year. The
members not represented will be invited to send representatives
when questions affecting their interests are discussed. Voting
will be by States. Each State will have one vote, and not
more than one representative. Decisions taken by the As-
sembly and the Council must be unanimous, except in regard
to procedure, and in certain cases specified in the Covenant
and in the Treaty. In these eases the decisions will be by
majority.
Armaments.
The Council will, for consideration and adoption, formulate
plans for the reduction of armaments. These plans to be
revised every ten years. Once it is admitted no member
must, without the concurrence of the Council, exceed the
armament fixed. All members will exchange full information
as to armaments and programmes, and a permanent commis-
sion will advise the Council on military and naval questions.
Prevention of War.
Upon any war or threat of war the Council will meet to
consider what common action shall be taken. Members are
pledged to submit matters in dispute to arbitration or enquiry,
and not to resort to war until three months afterwards. Mem-
bers agree to carry out the arbitral award, and not to go to
war with any party to the dispute which complies with it.
If a member fails to carry out an award the Council will pro-
pose the necessary measures. The Council will formulate


plans for the establishment of a permanent Court of Inter-
national Justice to determine international disputes or to
give advisory opinions. Members who do not submit their
cases to arbitration must accept the jurisdiction of the Council
or the Assembly. If the Council, less the parties to the dis-
pute, is unanimously agreed upon the rights of it, the members
agree that they will not go to war with any party to the dis-
pute which complies with the Council's recommendations
In this case a recommendation by the Assembly concurred
in by all its members represented on the Council, and a simp e
majority of the rest, less the parties to the dispute, will have
the force of an unanimous recommendation by the Council.
In either case, if the necessary agreement cannot be secured
the members reserve the right to take such action as may be
necessary for the maintenance of right and justice. Members
resorting to war in disregard of the Covenant will immediately
be debarred from all intercourse with other members, ihe
Council will in such cases consider what military or naval
action can be taken by the League collectively for the pro-
tection of the Covenants, and will afford facilities to members
co-operating in this enterprise.
Validity of Treaties.
All treaties or international engagements concluded after
the institution of the League will be registered with the
secretariat and published. The Assembly may from time to
time advise members to reconsider treaties which have become
inapplicable or involve danger to the maintenance of peace.
The Covenant abrogates all obligations between members
inconsistent with the terms, but nothmg m it shall affect the
validity of arbitration or regional understandings like e
Monroe doctrine, for securing the maintenance of peace.
Mandatory System.
The tutelage of nations not yet able to stand by themselves
will be entrusted to those advanced nations which are the best
fitted to undertake it. The Covenant recognises three differ-
ent stages of development, requiring different kinds of man


dates—(a) Communities like those belonging to the Turkish
Empire, which can be provisionally recognised as independent,
subject to advice and assistance from the mandatory, in the
selection of whom they should be allowed a voice, ( b) com-
munities like those of Central Africa, which are to be adminis-
tered by a mandatory under conditions generally approved
by the members of the League, where equal opportunities for
trade will be allowed to all members. Certain abuses such as
the trade in slaves, arms, and liquor will be prohibited, and the
construction of military and naval bases and the introduction
of compulsory military training will be disallowed, (c) Other
communities such as South-west Africa and the South Pacific
Islands, which can best be administered under the laws of
the mandatory as integral portions of the territory. In every
case the mandatory will render an annual report, and the
degree of its authority will be defined.
Leagues of Nations have existed throughout all history,
either for self-aggrandisement of for the protection of their
rights and liberties.
Of the latter type, the most notable are the sister nations
of the British Empire and the Pan-American Union. The
last mentioned is an embodiment of the Monroe doctrine. It
is an agreement formally signed by the twenty-one independ-
ent republics of North and South America and the West
Indies, every nation standing on an equal footing, irrespective
of size or population. It was created thirty years ago, and
in spite of racial divergencies and commercial rivalries, wars
have been averted between the republics during the whole
period, although previously wars were frequent. These two
leagues embrace half the population of the world, and there
have been no standing armies among their peoples.
Between Great Britain and the United States a conciliation
treaty was signed before the Great War, by which all disputes
were to be submitted to arbitration.
These are practical examples by the two greatest nations of


the world. It shows that both are prepared to refer
territorial disputes to the considered judgment of both parties.
A League of Nations embracing the whole world was im-
possible while arrogant autocracies existed, as despotisms
must rest on bayonets, forcing democracies to institute stand-
ing armies in defence of their rights and liberties.
For the first time in the history of civilization aristocracies,
military autocracies and class-rule have been swept from the
wide earth. Mankind has acquired its rightful position by
the tardy recognition that there are no rights except the com-
mon rights of mankind, and no privileges that are not equally
shared by all.
Liberty cannot flourish in the atmosphere of standing
armies, and while they exist there can be no lasting peace.
The creation of a standing army by one nation compels peace-
loving nations to arm in self-defence.
We have at present a world of nations, and within each
nation the people have made laws to protect the rights and
liberties of all. In the absence of such laws anarchy would
prevail. The laws have not been found galling or oppressive,
on the contrary the tendency of all democracies is to amplify
the activities and duties of government.
As government is necessary for the well-being of a com-
munity of people, it is equally necessary for a community of
nations. A community of nations without international
government is a community of national anarchists ; no laws
exist to safeguard the liberties of the weaker nations, or to
repress the violence of the strong—no act of brutality or
oppression is illegal. The three great pillars of human
liberty are adult suffrage, self-determination and a League of
Nations.
The Kaiser, with his advisers, committed one of the most
abominable crimes in history, yet he did nothing illegal. He
acted even within his constitutional rights in declaring war,
and converting the countries of peaceful and industrious people
into a shambles of blood and devastation. The infamy was
that these constitutional “ rights” should have been conferred
upon the German Emperor by a dominant class.


To-day, and until the coming into effect of the League of
Nations, there is no properly constituted authority to make a
recurrence of such acts illegal. It is difficult to believe that,
the civilised world, now governed by free democracies, will
tolerate the continuance of such a menace to their liberties.
The great world-question which is clamouring for an answer
is, whether these oceans of blood that have drenched three
continents are to be merely libations poured out to the god
of war, whether this great massacre of innocents is to be
merely a recurring convulsion in the long martyrdom of man ,
whether the hellish poisons of national greed, hate and
brutality are to fever the blood and paralyse the heart of
humanity ; or is a world-authority to be created that will
decide once and for all that the hecatombs of slain shall con-
stitute the costly tomb of war, that not only the people of a
nation shall obey the people’s laws, but that the nations them-
selves must obey the will of the whole people, so far as external
affairs are concerned. No nation will or should obey any less
authority.
This, it may be said, is a policy of perfection, that the
weaknesses of human nature are ignored, and that the am-
bitions and selfish aspirations of the nation are not taken into
account.
When this war began, two-thirds of Europe was under
autocratic rule. Could anyone have believed in 1914 that in
five years there would not be an autocracy in the civilised
world ? With that great victory is it difficult to believe that
the world, for the first time governed by free democracies,
may for ever abolish war from the category of human crimes ?
It has been said that a man who commits one murder is a
criminal ; if he commits a thousand he is a hero. Let world
opinion aver that unprovoked aggression by one nation upon
another will be considered as despicable as unprovoked ag-
gression by one man on another !
A League of Nations would not, except in regard to standing
armies which are for external use, in any way limit the absolute
sovereignity of States and the right of granting or refusing
admittance to all nationals.


The functions of such a tribunal would operate only when
disputes arose between sovereign States. These should be
settled by the arbitrament of reason and justice, not by parties
inflamed by passion and prejudice or by bullies who claim that
might is right.
Liberty implies mutual restraint. The actions and aspira-
tions of nations must be limited if such actions unfairly inter-
fere with the rights and liberties of other nations. The only
power that can limit them is a supreme council of the human
race.
If this great opportunity is not availed of, the millions of
slain, the vast army of maimed and mutilated humanity, the
desolation and destruction, will have been in vain. National
prejudices, trade rivalries, disputes and misunderstandings, if
not settled by the unprejudiced verdict of a world tribunal, will
inevitably breed wars in the future as in the past.
The League of Nations, which is not the arbiter of the
world’s destinies, but the protector of the people’s hard-won
liberties must, if it is to be effective, have the whole-hearted
support and protection of the democracies of the world.
“ The drying of a single tear has more
Of honest fame than shedding seas of gore.”
THE FUTURE STATUS OF AUSTRALIA.
It is characteristic of the British people to view with dis-
favor all revolutionary changes and to cling to old forms while
gradually adjusting methods to meet new conditions. Under
this elastic system the colonies have expanded into self-
governing sister nations—with their growth and development,
increasing powers and privileges have been conferred upon
them with the happiest results.
Legally, the whole of the British Dominions are subject to
the prerogatives of the Crown and the decisions of the Imperial
Parliament. It is true that under their constitutions the
Dominions exercise sovereign rights, except in regard to extra-
territorial matters, and have, in practice, been absolutely
unfettered in the exercise of their free will. At the same time


the British authorities which granted these constitutions have
the power to annul or amend them, although in practice no
alterations are made except at the instance of the Dominions.
Until the constitution of the League of Nations, such pro-
foundly important subjects as foreign policy, the negotiation of
treaties, and the declaration of war, were exclusively the
province of the Imperial authorities, but the views of the
Dominions were sought at Imperial Conferences and in other
ways, and those views received the fullest consideration.
In other words, the old form of legal subjection has been
maintained, while in practice the Dominions are accorded full
consultative rights as partners in the Empire.
The manhood of Australia has for years fought in foreign
countries. This has widened the mental horizon of the
Australian people and revealed to them in truer perspective
the great world-forces that confront them. It has confirmed
their appreciation of the great privileges which the Pan-
Britannic Union confers, without which their otherwise unique
defensive position would be shattered. The obligations of the
Great War have also created the desire that the privileges
which they have exercised and those duties which they have
voluntarily undertaken should be converted into rights and
obligations—that what was already theirs de facto should
become so de jure, and that their status as sister nations should
be clearly recognised. This desire has been already anticipated
by British statesmen. Lord Milner (Secretary of State for
the Colonies) has said ; “The United Kingdom and the Domin-
ions are partner Nations, not yet of equal power, but, for good
and all, of equal status.”
The admittance of the representatives of the Dominions
into the Peace Conference and as members of the League of
Nations was entirely in accord with the desires of the Aus-
tralian people, as it postulated their full and formal recognition
as partner nations within the Empire. Each Dominion had
the right to advocate and vote for its own policy, even if its
views were in conflict with the opinions of other representatives
of the Empire. Presumably the same status will be recognised
in the deliberations of the League of Nations, although the


Empire delegation may desire to give a composite or consensus
vote on matters vitally affecting the whole Empire, instead of
exercising their rights of direct relationship with foreign
countries, a course which might lead to embarrassing situa-
tions.
These great questions will doubtless be fully considered at
the next meeting of the Imperial Conference, and the impro-
visation that was necessary in a great crisis may be adjusted
if thought desirable, so that the great alliance of the British
sister nations, in a closer union of high purpose and cordial
co-operation, may emerge stronger and nobler from the fiery
ordeal of the Great War, determined to reach their lofty
destiny along paths of peace and prosperity.


Battle.
Year.
Total
Troops.
Combatants.
Total
Casualties.
Percent-
age of
Casualt’s
Blenheim
1704
116,000
Allies—French
31,000
26
Ramilies
1706
122,000
ii;eoo
20,000
9
Oudenarde
1708
170,000
ii
Malplaquet
1709
200,000
French—Allies
34,000
17
Fontenoy
1745
90,000
13'300
14
Prague
1757
124,000
Prussians—Austrians
22^000
17
Zomdorf
1758
84,760
Prussians—Russians
32,000
38
Kunnersdorf
1759
113,000
Allies —Prussians
31*000
27
Torgau ..
1760
106,000
Prussians—Austrians
24*000
22
Marengo ..
1800
58,000
French—Austrians
is’ooo
22
Austerlitz
1805
148,000
French—Allies
25,000
16
Jena
1806
98,000
French—Prussians
17j)00
17
Bylan
1807
133,500
French—Russians
42,000
33
Vimiero
1808
32,000
British—French
2*720
8
Aspem ..
1809
170,000
Austrians—French
45,000
26
Wagram ..
1809
370,000
French—Austrians
44/100
11
Talavera
1809
109,000
English & Spanish—
French
15,500
14
Albuera ..
1811
54,500
Allies—French
13^750
25
Salamanca
1812
91,000
ISiOOO
75,000
16
Borodino..
1812
263,000
French —Russians
28
Leipsic ..
1813
440,000
Allies—French
92*000
20
Quatre Bas
1815
52,500
Allies—French
8,700
16
Waterloo
1815
170,000
Allies—French
42*000
24
Inkerman
1854
83,700
Allies—Russians
13^787
Solferino
1859
295,000
Allies—Austrians
31*500
10
Chickamanga
1863
128,000
Confederate —Federals
SSjlOO
27
Gettysburg
1863
163,000
Federal—Confederates
37*000
24
VIonville
1870
168,000
Germans—French
32*800
19
Gravelotte
1870
320,000
3o;ooo
6,620
9
Noisseville
1870
152,000
Russians—Turks
4
Plevna
11.9.77
115,000
19,000
16
APPENDICES.
APPENDIX A.
SOME GREAT BATTLES OF THE PAST.
(The Victorious side is given first.)
APPENDIX B.
APPROXIMATE COST OF THE PRINCIPAL WARS OF
MODERN TIMES.
Napoleonic Wars £1,250,000,000
Crimean War 340,000,000
American Civil War . . 1,600,000,000
Franco-German War . . . . . . . . 700,000,000
South African War . . . . . . . . 250,000,000
Russo-Japanese War . . . . . . . . 500,000,000
The Great War 40,000,000,000
N


The daily expenditure during the whole of the Great War averaged
SHsSSSSSirixsa
from the destruction of towns, buildings, parties shrppi g,
wounded and more or less maimed.
Some idea of the
that the total publie debts of
all the Powers before the war was ten thousand millions.
APPENDIX C.
NATIONS ENGAGED IN THE GREAT WAR.
ALLIES.
Nation Date of Declaration of War.
NATION. £B, 1914
1- | erbia •• •• • .. August 1, 1914
2. Russia • • • ■ • • August 3> 19U
3- l™ nce ■■ . . August 4, 1914
4. Belgium • • • • ■ • • August 4, 1914
5. Great Britain • • • • • • August 7, 1914
6. Montenegro •• •• ‘ ; August 23, 1914
7. Japan ' ' May £3, 1914
8 - {, tal y , . . March 10, 1916
9. Portugal .. •• " August 27, 1916
10. Roumama . . • • ■ • • A 1017
11. United States •• •• • 8 1917
12 - g uba • • ‘ ‘ ‘ ' ‘ ‘ ! April 9’ 1917
13. Panama " July 16, 1917
14. Greece . • • • ■ • • * July 22, 1917
] 5 - ? iam . •• •• •• ;; .. August 7, 1917
16. Liberia • • • • ■ ■ August 14> 1917
17. China . . • • • • • • S ept. 23, 1917
18. Hayti • • • • ; • . . Oct. 27, 1917
!9. Brazil •• April 25, 1918
20. Guatemala . . “May 7, 1918
21. Nicaragua .. May 25, 1918
22. Costa Rica .. • • • • ■ • ■ ‘ y
ENEMY NATIONS.
■ „ July 28, 1914
1. Austria-Hungary August 1, 1914
2. Germany No v. 3> 1914
3. Turkey Oct. 4, 1915
4. Bulgaria


Nation.
Population.
Troops
Mobilized.
Troops
sent to the
Front.
Total
Killed.
Total
Wounded.
Total
Missing.
Total
Casualties
British Empire
French Republic*
Russia
Italy
United States
Japan
Belgium
Servia, Slovakia
and Montenegro
Roumania
Greece
Portugal
434,286,650
53,969,337
180,000,000
35.000.
92 000,000
75.000.
7.500.000
5.500.000
7.200.000
5.000.
6.000.
8,514,591
9.717.000
12,000,000
5.500.000
4,477,521
800,000
300.000
657,343
725.000
305.000
100.000
7,052,453
9,000,000
10,000,000
4.200.000
2.061.000
75.000
260,000
657,343
643.000
300.000
60.000
838,513
1,071,300
1,700,000
467,937
53,169
1,408
13,716
102,342
72,000
14,576
4,209
2,050,299
2,946,075
4,950,000
962,186
179,625
1,906
102,382
255,976
183,200
12,692
10,522
360,367
314.000
540.000
170.000
1,160
Nil
80,000
77,278
24,340
739
499
3,249,179
4,331,375
7,190,000
1,600,123
233,954
3,314
196,098
435,596
279,540
28,007
15,230
Total ..
43,096,455
34,308,796
4,339,170
11,654,863
1,568,383
17,562,416
Germany
Austria
Turkey
Bulgaria
70.000.
50.000.
20.000.
5,500,000
12,000,000
8,000,000
2,000,000
500,000
9.898.000
6.500.000
1.500.000
500,000
1,703,000
687,534
336,975
100,000
4.064.000
1.718.000
497,772
290,000
349,822
116,200
48,972
56,000
6,116,822
2,521,734
883,719
446,000
Total ..
22,500,000
18,398,000
2,827,509
6,569,772
570,994
9,968,275
GRAND TOTAL.
—
—
65,596,455 52,706,796
7,166,679
18,224,635
2,139,377
27,530,691
NATIONS WHICH BROKE OFF DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS
WITH GERMANY.
Bolivia (13/4/17), Honduras (17/5/17), San Salvador (11/6/17),
Santo Domingo (17/6/17), Peru (6/10/17), Uruguay (6/10/17),
Ecuador (9/12/17).
APPENDIX D.
TOTAL TROOPS MOBILIZED AND CASUALTIES.
ALLIED NATIONS.
CENTRAL POWERS.
* Including dependencies.


Country.
Total
Population
1916.
Total
Troops
Raised,
Total sent
Overseas or
to the Front
Total
Killed.
Total
Wounded.
Missing.
Total
Casualties.
Percentage to
Population of
Number sent
Overseas.
Percentage
Casualties to
Number sent
Overseas.
United Kingdom
Canada
Australia ..
New Zealand
South Africa
Newfoundland
India
Fed. Malay States
West Indies
Ceylon
46,089,249
8.140.000
4,875,325
1,099,449
6,000,000
250,000
315,200,000
1,036,999
1.772.000
4,262,097
5,704,416
628,964
416,809
105,629
228,907
11,922
1,401,350
1,000
15,289
305
5,000,000
411,834
330,000
99,822
228,907 1
11,922
953,374
1,000
15,289 3
305 3
660,317
55,777
59,038
16,456
7,241
1,177
37,971
103
428
5
1,616,742
149,726
166,817
41,404
11,444
2,314
60,989
290
560
13
349,684
4,648
193
27
33
18
5,724
40
2,626,743
210,151
226,048
57,887
18,718
3,509
104,684
433
988
18
10i
5i
61
9 ri
3|
41
4
52 i
51
68i
58
8i
30
11
43
6i
6
Total
8,514,591
7,052,453
838,613
2,050,299
360,367
3,249,179
British Navy
430,000
4,900
33,361
10*
5,183
15
Australian Navy
17,956
. .
British Merchant Service
'
—
APPENDIX E.
TOTAL FORCES OF THE BRITISH EMPIRE.
(1) Includes 92,837 coloured troops for labour battalions and transport.
SI! The U SrL 5, fo°r° as many officers and men joined the British Army.
(!) Killed and wounded In Capture of German New Guinea and destruction of Emden only.


Country.
War
Expenditure.
Cost per Head
of Population.
Capitalized Cost
of Pensions.
£
£
£
United Kingdom
*7,357,965,400
160
—
Canada
390,000,000
48
88,000,000
Australia
364,000,000
75
100,000,000
.New Zealand . .
75,750,000
69
12,000,000
Un. of S. Africa
32,950,000
5 10s.
2,250,000
JS ewfo undland
1,880,000
7 10s.
3,200,000
India
183,000,000
—
—
CrownColonies, &c
10,000,000
—
—
£8,415,545,400
Total
Percentage to
Enlistments.
Total Population.
Western Australia
32,231
9.9
New South Wales
164,030
8.8
Queensland
57,705
8.5
South Australia . .
34,959
8.0
Tasmania . .
15,485
7.9
Victoria
112,399
7.9
416,809
APPENDIX F.
WAR EXPENDITURE OF THE BRITISH EMPIRE.
*ln addition £1,332,000,000 was lent to Russia and the Allies. Of this a considerable
portion may not be recovered, at least for some time. The United Kingdom lost by
submarines 2479 merchant ships, representing 7,759,090 tons. Against this Great
Britain had at the conclusion of the war large assets in stocks of metals, transport
material, manufactured goods and foodstuffs, which have been disposed of.
APPENDIX G.
PERCENTAGE OF ENLISTMENTS TO POPULATION IN THE
AUSTRALIAN STATES.


Campaign or Battle.
Period.
Killed.
Wound-
ed.
Total
Dasualt’s
German New Guinea
Gallipoli
Northern France
1st Battle of the Somme ..
1st Capture Hindenburg Line ..
Northern France (3rd Division)
Battle of Mesaines
3rd Battle of Ypres
Messines Front .. ; ■
Battle of the Lys (1st Division)
Fighting at Dernancourt, Fillers
Bretonneux and Hamel
3rd Battle of the Somme and
2nd Capture Hindenburg Line
Sinai, Palestine and Syria
Mesopotamia, Russia, etc.
12/9/14 to 6/12/14
25/4/15 to 20/12/15
25/3/16 to 19/7/16
1/7/16 to 14/11/16
15/11/16 to 30/5/17
27/11/16 to 6/6/17
7/6/17 to 30/6/17
1/7/17 to 30/10/17
1/11/17 to 26/3/18
12/4/18 to 3/8/18
27/3/18 to 7/8/18
8/8/18 to 6/10/18
11/4/16 to 30/10/18
28/5/15 to 11/11/18
6
8,587
1,624
7,487
8,295
944
2,298
10,107
1,512
1,672
6,088
8,782
1,626
10
3
19,367
4,409
23,277
23,280
4,153
6,701
30,612
4,670
5,311
17,856
23,938
3,200
40
9
27,954
6,033
30,764
31,575
5,097
8,999
40.719
6,182
6,983
23,944
32.720
4,826
50
Totals
—
59,038
166,817
225,855
APPENDIX H.
AUSTRALIAN CASUALTIES IN THE VARIOUS CAMPAIGNS.
The relative intensity of the fighting in the various campaigns can be
ciated only if the information contained in the above table is considered in conjunction
with the forces engaged and the period occupied. It must be remembered that the
casualties in the Gallipoli campaign were borne prmcipally by the Ist Infa y
Division, the 4th Infantry Brigade and the Ist, 2nd 3rd and 4th Bngades 4
Horse, the total having an establishment of only about 30,400. The -nd li >
Division did not arrive until 20th August, 1915, the day before the Australmn attack
on Hill 60 in which the 18th (N.S.W.) Battalion of the 2nd Divmon took part.
The Second Division held the Australian positions in Gallipoli from 29th August uni
20th December, 1915, during the worst season of the year when dys ®^ er3 f a
diarrhoea were extremely prevalent. In the Ist Battle of the Somme
capture of the Hindenburg Line, only the Ist, 2nd, 4th and sth Divisions were engaged
-the latter division not until October. In the battle of Messines the3rd andl 4th
Divisions only were engaged. All five Australian Divisions took part in the 3rd Battle
of Ypres and the 3rd Battle of the Somme.


Rank.
American
British.
S. African
N. ZTand
Canadian
Aust’n.
Infantry
R.F.A.
Major-General ..
Brig.-General ..
Colonel
Lieut.-Colonel ..
Major ..
Captain
Lieut.-1st
Lieut.-2nd
4 12 7
3 9 6
2 6 3
2 0 6
1 14 8
17 9
13 2
0 19 8
4 2 3
2 14 8
2 14 8
13 0
0 16 0
0 12 6
0 8 6
0 7 6
4 2 3
2 14 8
2 14 8
13 0
0 16 0
0 13 6
0 9 6
0 8 6
a I
„ EJ *1 O
S
a «s g*-3
§ C o g
05 ®
1 §
3 7 6
2 15 10
1 15 0
1 10 0
16 0
110
0 15 0
0 15 0
Imperial
Rates
1 11 3
16 0
1 0 10
0 15 7
0 10 10
0 10 10
3 18 6
2 12 6
2 12 6
2 5 0
1 15 0
16 0
110
110
W.O. Class I. ..
R.S.M
R.Q.M.S.
O.R. Sgt.
Pay Sergeant ..
C.S.M.
Staff Sgt.
C.Q.M.S.
Sergeant
Lance-Sgt.
Corporal
2nd Corporal ..
Bombardier
Lance-Corporal
Driver (Horse)
Private 1st Class
Private, Trooper
Gunner, etc.
0 8 4
0 8 4
0 7 9
0 7 9
0 6 1
0 5‘ 7
o s' 1
0 4 7
0 5 3
0 5 3
0 4 3
0 4 3
0 2 7
0 2 3
0 2 0
0 i 9
0 16
0 16
0 6 1
0 6 1
0 4 5
0 4 5
0 4 4
0 4 5
0 3 5
0 2 9
0 2 6
0 19
0 16
0 16
0 6 0
0 6 0
(Medical)
0 5 0
0 5 0
0 5 0
0 5 0
0 4 6
0 3 6
0 3 3
0 3 3
0 3 3
0 3 0
0 3 0
0 10 6
0 10 6
0 10 6
0 7 0
0 8 0
0 9 6
0 9 6
0 9 6
0 7 0
0 6 6
0 6 0
0 6 0
0 5 0
0 5 0
0 5 0
0 5 0
0 9 7
0 9 7
0 8 4
0 7 1
0 7 1
0 7 6
0 7 6
0 7 1
0 6 3
0 5 5
0 5 0
0 4 9
0 4 9
0 4 9
0 5 7
0 4 7
0 14 0
0 14 0
0 14 0
0 11 6
0 10 6
0 12’ 0
0 12 0
0 11 6
0 10 6
0 10 0
0 10 0
0 9 0
0 9 0
0 6 0
0 6 0
0 6 0
APPENDIX I.
COMPARATIVE TABLE OF RATES OF PAY (DAILY) IN THE
ARMIES SET OUT HEREUNDER.
The rates of pay shewn in this return are the minimum rates for the respective ranks
and, except in the cas e of the Imperial Army, include Field Allowance where applicable.
In respect to the Imperial Army rates for two branches only of the service have been
shewn and it is impossible to strike a fiat rate as the emoluments are dependent on
many varied circumstances, such as the Arm of the service, technical qualifications,
etc. \
It has also been found impossible to define with any degree of accuracy the value of
allowance which Imperial officers receive.
The rates for both American and Canadian Armies are calculated on the basis of
one dollar equals 4s. 2d.
Owing to the length of the war, Australian troops received 4J per cent, on their
deferred pay from Ist January, 1918.


Length of
Service.
Britain.
New Zealand.
Offic’rs
O.E..
Canada.
Total
Married.
Total
Single.
Australia
4| years’ service
4 4
3*
3
24
2 „ ■
U
l
4
Days’
Pay.
372
310
310
248
248
186
186
124
124
28 Days’ leave with full
pay and in addition a cash O
gratuity for over 0 m’nths’
service ranging from £15 “
to £5, according to rank, t - *
and unemployment insur- $
ance policy 29s. weekly up
to 26 Weeks.
Days’
Pay
183
183
183
183
153
153
122
122
92
Days’ Pay
and Leave
154
140
126
112
98
84
70
56
42
Days’ Pay
and Leave
119
105
98
84
77
63
56
49
35
Days’ Pay
and Leave
69
60
53
45
38
30
23
15
8
APPENDIX J.
WAR SERVICE GRATUITIES OF GREAT BRITAIN AND
HER DOMINIONS.
ALL RANKS.
NOTES.
(1) The Australian rate of pay is higher.
(2) In addition to Gratuity Leave on full pay, Australia and New Zealand, since the
war, have granted to all ranks an additional gratuity of Is. 6d. per day
from the date of embarkation to the date Peace was signed.


Daily Rate of Pay.
Totally
Incapacitated.
Widow of
Deceased Member.
Rate
of Pension.
Pension Payable.
6/-
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
and under
3
0
0 per fortnight
2
0
0 per fortnight
7 /-
55
3
2
o
2
3
o
9/-
55
3
6
0
2
9
o
10/-
55
3
8
0
2
12
3
10/6
55
3
9
o
2
13
9
11/6
55
3
11
o
2
16
0
12/-
55
3
12
0
2
17
3
13/-
55
3
14
0
2
19
6
17/6
55
4
0
o
3
10
o
22/6
55
4
5
o
3
17
6
30/-
55
4
15
o
4
9
0
37/6
55
5
5
0
5
0
9
45/-
,,
5
15
o
5
12
3
50/-
and upwards
6
0
0
6
0
0
APPENDIX K.
WAR PENSIONS ACT, 1914-16.
PERSONS ENTITLED TO PENSIONS.
1. All members of A.I.F. Army and Navy on active service outside
Australia, including Army Medical Corps Nursing Service, appointed
by Director-General of Medical Services.
2. Imperial Reservists on active service who at the commencement
of the war were bona fide residents of Australia.
RATES PAYABLE.
If totally incapacitated through service in connection with the war,
the rate depends on the daily rate of pay. The following scale shows, in
the first column, the amounts payable. For widows of deceased mem-
bers whose deaths result from service in connection with the war, the
scale shown in the 2nd column is payable :
The wife of an incapacitated member is entitled to a pension of half
the rate granted to him even if the marriage took place after his dis-
charge. If the wife is a permanent invalid, or if the incapacitated is
unmarried or a widower necessitating the constant service of an at-
tendant, the rate of pension may be increased by £1 a fortnight.


Description of Disability.
Rate of Pension Payable.
Loss of leg or foot
Maximum rate for 6 months,
thereafter | of maximum rate.
Loss of hand or arm
do. do. do.
Loss of one eye
Half the maximum rate.
Loss of both legs
The maximum rate.
Loss of both feet
99 99
Loss of both arms
99 99
Loss of both hands
»» »
Loss of arm and leg
» ”
Loss of hand and foot
„ ’>
Loss of both eyes
Loss of one eye together
with loss of leg, foot, hand
or arm
99 99
Loss of all fingers and thumbs
„ ”
Very severe facial disfigurement
Advanced cases of incurable
99 99
disease
” »
Amputation of leg at hip or right
arm at shoulder joint
80% (100% for first six months)
Severe facial disfigurement
80 per cent.
Total loss of speech
80 „
Total deafness
70 „
Loss of thumb of right hand
40 „
Loss of four fingers of right hand
60
Loss of thumb of left hand
30 „
Loss of four fingers of left hand
Loss of thumb, index and middle
30
fingers of right hand
Loss of middle, ring and little
60
fingers of left hand
33j 99
Loss of ring and little fingers
20 „
Loss of middle and ring fingers
20 „
Loss of index and middle fingers
30
Loss of thumb and index finger
40 „
PARTIAL INCAPACITY.
Partially incapacitated members are entitled to lower rates
as follows:
A lee, foot, hand, arm or eye is deemed to be lost if it is rendered
nermanentlv or wholly useless. The rates are payable whatever the
earnings of the member. The wife of a partially incapacitated member
receives a pension of half the rate granted to her husband, even if the
marriage took place after his discharge.
CHILDREN.
“ Children” are sons, daughters, step-sons, step-daughters or adopted
children under the age of sixteen, whether bom before or after the mem-
ber’s discharge from the Forces.


An ex-nuptial child is not a “ child” under the War Pensions Act.
If, however, satisfactory evidence of the relationship of an ex-nuptial
child to a member is supplied it will be eligible for pension provided it
was born not later than 9 months after the event resulting in his death
or incapacity.
Children of deceased members receive pensions as under :
For the first child .. . . .. 20/- a fortnight.
For the second child .. . . . . 15/- ~
For each subsequent child .. . . 10/- ~
ORPHANS.
Where both the member of the Forces and his wife are dead, every
one of their children is entitled to a pension as follows :
Up to 10 years of age .. . . . . 20/- a fortnight.
From 10 to 14 years of age .. .. 25/- ~
From 14 to 16 years of age .. .. 30/- ~
Children of totally incapacitated members are entitled to the same
rate of pensions as children of deceased members.
If any member is only partially incapacitated his children are en-
titled to pensions according to the extent of his incapacity.
OTHER DEPENDANTS.
The following members of the family of a member of the Forces are
entitled to pensions at such rates as are assessed if they are wholly or
partly dependent on him within twelve months prior to his enlistment
or appointment, viz., father, mother, grandfather, grandmother, step-
father, step-mother, fostermother, son, daughter, grandson, grand-
daughter, step-son, step-daughter, brother, sister, half-brother, half-
sister, adopted child, mother-in-law, ex-nuptial grandchild.
A widowed mother of an unmarried son, whose death results from his
employment in connection with the war, is eligible for the full amount
of pension according to the scale of widows of deceased members.
The parents of any member of the Forces who, at any time after the
occurrence of the event resulting in his death, are without adequate
means of support, may be granted pensions.
A woman dependent on a member of the Forces, and recognised as
his wife (though not legally married to him) may be granted the same
amount of pension as if she were married to him.
If any person is entitled to a State or Imperial war pension in respect
of the death or incapacity of any member of the Forces which resulted
from his employment in the war, the amount of such State or
Imperial pension must be deducted from the amount of any Common-
wealth war pension which is payable.


fiegtL
No.
Rank.
Name.
Unit.
Other
Decorations, j
State.
8399
Corporal
Axforp, Thomas Leslie
16th Btn.
M.M.
W.A.
2742
Private
“Beatham, Robert Matthew
8th „
—
Vic.
2nd-Lieut
“Birks, Frederick
6 th
M.M.
Vic.
Blackburn, Arthur Seaforth
10th ,,
M.M.
S.A.
Borella, Albert
26th
QTand
1 6fl9a
Sgt.
Brown, Walter Ernest
20th „
D.C.M.
N.S.W.
N.S.W.
1R76
L.-Cpl.
“Buckley, Alexander Henry
54th „
—
8774
Private
“Bugden, Patrick
31st „
—
Q IclrliCl
884
Corporal
L.-Cpl.
“Burton, Alex. Stewart
7th
—
1804
Carroll, John
33rd „
—
N.S.W.
7 2$
Cartwright, George
33rd „
2ndM.G.Btn.
—
1852
“Castlbton, Claude Charles
—
N.S.W.
Captain
“Cherry, Percy Herbert
26th Btn.
M.C.
Tas.
N.S.W.
N.S.W.
QTand
S.A.
Vic.
8055
Private
“Cooke, Thomas
8th „
—
1584a
Private
Currey, William Matthew
53rd „
—
1086
Private
Dalzibl, Henry
15th ,,
1827
L.-Cpl.
Davey, Phillip
10 th ,,
M.M.
2130
C.8.M.
Dunstan, William
7th ,,
—
Dwyer, John James
5th M.G.Btn.
—
Tas.
“Gaby, Alfred Edward
28th Btn.
M.M.
W.A.
23
L.-Cpl.
Gordon, Bernard Sidney
41st
QTand
Grieve, Robert Cuthbert
37th ,,
—
N.S.W.
N.S.W.
N.S.W.
Vic.
S.A.
Vic.
N.S.W.
N.S.W.
2631
Corporal
Hall, Arthur Charles
54th ,,
—
2nd-Lieut
Hamilton, John
1st „
M.M.
2446
Corporal
Howell, George Julian
1st ,,
Lieut.
Ingram, George Morby
24th „
M.M.
506
588
Corporal
Capt.
Private
Inwood, Reginald Roy
JACKA, Albert
Jackson, William
10 th „
14th
17th „
M.C. & Bar
“Jeffries, Clarence Smith
34th
—
2889
Corporal
Jensen, Jorgan Christian
50th
—
S.A.
Vic.
N.S.W.
N.S.W.
QTand
Vic.
Vic.
N.S.W.
Vic.
W.A.
Joynt, William Donovan
8th „
4195
2058a
Corporal
Lieut.
Kenny, Thomas Jas. Bede
Keyzor, Leonard
Leak, John
2nd ,,
1st „
9th
—
2358
6939
Sgt.
Private
Lieut.
Lowerson, Albert David
“Mactier, Robert
Maxwell, Joseph
21st „
23rd „
18th
M.C., D.C.M.
T.-Capt.
Lt.-Col.
Moon, Rupert Vance
Murray, Henry William
58th „
13th „
D.S.O. & Bar
D.C.M.,C de G.
McCarthy, Lawrence Dominic
16th
W .A.
McDougall, Stanley Robert
48th „
M.M.
Tas.
Tas.
466
“McGee, Lewis
40 th „
—
McNamara, Frank Hubert
Fly. Corps.
Newland, James Ernest
12th Btn.
W.A.
I Vic.
3970
114
Corporal
O’Meara, Martin
Peeler, Walter
16th ,,
3rd Pnr. Btn.
j —
“Pope, Charles
11th Btn.
\
1717
Lieut.
Ruthven, William
Ryan, John
22nd „
55th „
1 —
\ ic.
N.S.W.
1 W.A.
Sadlier, Clifford Wm. King
51st „
—
6594
Sgt.
Sexton, Gerald (stated to be
13th „
D.C.M.
N.S.W.
Buckley, Maurice Vincent)
“Shout, Alfred John
1st „
M.C.
N.S.W.
506
Sgt.
Station, Percy Clyde
40 th „
M.M
Tas.
N.S.W.
Storkey, Percy Valentine
19th
! —
Symons, William John
7th „
10th L.H.Rgt.
—
Throssell, Hugo Vivian Hopi
W.A.
Towner, Edgar Thomas
2nd M.G. Btn.
M.C.
QTand
“Tube, Frederick Harold
7th Btn.
—
Vic.
Ware, Blair Anderson
32nd „
D.S.O.
iN .S.W .
1168
W BATHERSjLawrence Carthag
43rd ,,
—
S.A.
2902
Whittle, John Woods
12th „
D.C.M.
Tas.
W.A.
3244f
Private
Woods, James Park
48th „
APPENDIX L.
AUSTRALIAN IMPERIAL FORCE.
LIST OF VICTORIA CROSS WINNERS.
tc -n t) s o Denotes Distinguished Service Order. M.M. denotes Jliiitary Medal.
N ’ M.C „ Military Cross. M.S.M. „ Military Service Medal,
D.'c.M. ~ Distinguished Conduct Medal.


Q’land.
N.S.W.
Vic.
S.A.
W.A.
Tas.
Totals.
v.c
6
19
16
5
10
7
63
G.C.M.G
—
—
1
—
—
—
1
K.C.B
—
2
3
—
1
—
6
K.C.M.G.
1
1
8
—
1
—
11
C.B
7
14
18
—
8
5
52
C.M.G
20
52
52
7
13
4
148
D.S.O
95
203
200
47
41
26
612
Mil. Cross
298
812
738
204
205
96
2,353
D.C.M
218
574
560
165
180
57
1,754
M.S.M
106
370
441
128
96
32
1,173
M.M
1,342
3,006
3,035
897
885
447
9,612
Bar to D.S.O. ..
8
10
14
2
3
3
40
Bar to M.C.
17
54
57
19
18
3
168
Bar to D.C.M. ..
2
8
7
2
7
1
27
Bar to M.M.
56
89
106
40
31
19
341
Royal R-Cross ..
21
56
57
16
8
1
159
Royal Hum. Soc.
—
1
—
—
—
—
1
Congratulatory ..
28
69
144
27
24
10
302
Complimentary ..
25
63
62
16
17
6
189
Hon. Mention ..
67
147
125
39
58
27
463
Ment. in Desp.
659
1,769
1,789
483
498
195
5,393
French ..
38
87
85
19
34
15
278
Serbian ..
12
27
23
7
7
2
78
Belgian ..
47
144
146
30
35
22
424
U.S.A
1
2
3
—
1
2
9
Russian ..
3
8
5
2
3
—
21
Roumanian
1
—
—
—
—
—
1
Egyptian
2
3
3
—
—
—
8
Italian
2
13
11
4
5
2
37
Montenegriui
—
1
5
2
2
—
10
Bar to M.M.
15
35
63
18
13
5
149
2nd Bar to M.M.
4
4
4
3
3
18
3rd Bar to M.M...
—
1
—
—
—
—
1
Dist. Flying Cross
3
16
28
4
3
4
58
2nd Bar to D.S.O
—
—
1
—
—
—
1
Ord. Brit. Empire
20
70
102
25
21
8
246
2nd Bar to M.C.
1
1
—
—
1
1
4
R.V. Order
1
—
—
1
—
—
2
Albert Medal
2
1
—
—
—
—
3
Bar to D.F.C. ..
.
1
2
—
2
—
5
2nd Bar to D.F.C.
—
—
1
—
1
—
2
Order Hosp. St.
John of J. ..
1
_
1
Air Force Cross ..
1
4
5
2
12
Two Victoria Crosses (won by Corporal Sullivan and Sergeant
Pearce), and a number of other decorations were received by Australian
soldiers who volunteered for service in Russia, but these are not in-
cluded as these soldiers were not members of the Australian Imperial
Force at the time.
The ranks shown are in accordance with latest records, which in
most cases are different from those held when honour was gained.
COMPLETE LIST OF DECORATIONS WON BY AUSTRALIANS.


APPENDIX M.
GRATUITIES, ANNUITIES OR PENSIONS PAYABLE IN RESPECT
OF DECORATIONS AWARDED TO SOLDIERS OF THE A.I.F.
Victoria Cross. —A pension of £lO a year is granted to every warrant
officer, non-commissioned officer, or man who receives the Victoria
Cross. An additional pension of £5 is granted for each bar in con-
sequence of further acts of bravery.
Military Cross. —A warrant officer who has been awarded the Military
Cross shall be paid a gratuity of £2O on promotion to a commission,
or on discharge without pension, and an additional gratuity of £2O shall
be paid for each bar added. Upon discharge from the A.I.F. with an
Australian War Pension an additional pension of 6d. a day will be
granted to a warrant officer who is in possession of the Military Cross.
Distinguished Conduct Medal —A warrant officer, non-commissioned
officer or man who has been awarded the Distinguished Conduct Medal,
shall be paid a gratuity of £2O on promotion to a commission, or on
discharge without pension, and an additional gratuity of £2O shall be
paid for each bar added. On discharge from the A.I.F. with an Aus-
tralian War Pension an additional Pension of 6d. a day will be granted.
Meritorious Service Medal. —No gratuity is payable in respect to
this decoration, but upon discharge from the A.I.F. with an Australian
War Pension an additional pension of 6d. a day may be granted if the
award was for gallantry.
Military Medal.— No gratuity, pension or grant is payable.
APPENDIX N.
SCHOLARSHIPS.
A scheme was inaugurated during the war by means of which a
limited number of officers and other ranks of the Australian Imperial
Force, who through wounds or illness were rendered permanently
unfit for General Service, were granted by the Australian Govern-
ment Scholarships of a value ranging from £l5O to £250, enabling them
to attend for a year at a British University or technical school.
EDUCATION AND INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT.
At the time of the signing of the Armistice the Australian aut h°rities
were faced with the problem of returning to Australia oyer 200,000
individuals —soldiers, munition and other workers, and their wives and
children.
It was decided to repatriate the troops in the order of priority of en-
listment. It was evident that upwards of twelve months must elapse
before those who enlisted in 1917 and 1918 could be returned, and in
order to profitably employ them in the meantime a plan was developed
for educational courses, vocational and scholastic ; and for their em
ployment in the great engineering, shipbuilding, metal and textile
industries of Great Britain and on model and stud farms, so that skilled
labour would be available for creating new industries and developing
others.






THE GALLIPOLI CAMPAIGN




THE CAPTURE OF
GERMAN NEW GUINEA




FIRST & THIRD
BATTLES OF THE SOMME




BATTLE OF MESSINES I
THIRD BATTLE OF YPRES




SINAI PALESTINE & SYRIA
CAMPAIGN










