

AUSTRALIAN WOMAN'S
CHARTER
- 1943 -
Which comprises the Resolutions
adopted by the
AUSTRALIAN WOMEN'S CONFERENCE
for Victory in War and Victory
in Peace
November 19-22, 1943
Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.


AUSTRALIAN WOMEN'S CONFERENCE
COMMITTEE
Honorary Officers.
EXECUTIVE.
Chairman: Mrs. JESSIE STREET, B.A.
Hon. Secretary: Miss MONA RAVENSCROFT, M.A,
Hon. Treasurer: Mrs. MABEL WARHURST.
Hon. Organiser: Mrs. HATTIE CAMERON.
Miss DORIS BEEBY.
Mrs. NOELLE BRENNAN.
Miss NERIDA COHEN, LL.B.
Mrs. ALICE DICKSON.
Mrs. EILEEN FURLEY.
Miss EVE HIGSON, J.P.
Miss RUBY RICH.
Miss EVE WILEY.
Mrs. G. USHIRWOOD W^^.
.r ■ v. .- r '
ft Si' v s';


AUSTRALIAN WOMAN'S
CHARTER
- 1943 -
Which comprises the Resolutions
adopted by the
AUSTRALIAN WOMEN'S CONFERENCE
for Victory in War and Victory
in Peace
/
November 19-22, 1943
Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.


INDEX
AUSTRALIAN WOMEN'S CONFERENCE: Page
History and Objective 1
Direction to Charter Committees 2
International Conference 3
AUSTRALIAN WOMAN'S CHARTER:
Woman in War and Peace 4
Woman in Public Life 4
Women at the Peace Conference 4
Equal Status, Opportunity, Responsibility and
Reward 5
Equal Rights Legislation 5
Employment and Social Security 6
Employment of Women, Wage Earners and
Professional Women 6
Women's Employment Board and Amendment
to Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitra-
tion Act 7
Trained Nurses 8
Trade Unions and Women's Employment 8
Servicewomen 9
Voluntary Workers 9
Woman as Mother and/or Home-maker 10
Health 10
Education 11
Housing 12
Community Centres 13
Child Care 13
Birthrate 14
Alcohol 15
Moral Standards 15
Rehabilitation 16
Country Women 16
Aborigines 17
Legal Reforms 18
Divorce 18
Widows' Pensions 19
Census 19
Resolution on Racial Persecution 20
Organisations Represented at Conference 21
Speakers and Chairman at Conference 22


1, i 5 1 G
AUSTRALIAN WOMEN'S CONFERENCE.
HISTORY AND OBJECTIVE.
The suggestion of calling a Commonwealth-wide Con-
ference of Women was first adopted at a Conference of
women's organisations called by the United Associations
of Women in August, 1942, to consider "Problems Con-
cerning Women Under War Conditions." This resolution
was again adopted on August 27th, 1942, at a public meet-
ing held to celebrate the anniversary of the gaining of the
franchise by the women of New South Wales.
In March, 1943, the societies represented at these
meetings were invited to set up a Preparations Commit-
tee to call a National, and, if possible, an International,
Conference. The Prime Minister, Mr. Curtin, was ap-
proached with the suggestion that visitors be invited from
Great Britain, U.S.A., the Soviet Union, China, and India,
to attend a Women's Conference. The Prime Minister re-
plied that owing to the restrictions on travel arising out
of wartime conditions, it would not be possible to invite
international visitors. The Preparations Committee then
proceeded with its plans to call a National Conference.
A comprehensive list of women's organisations, and
organisations with women members throughout Australia
was compiled and circularised with an invitation to submit
resolutions and send representatives to the Conference.
It was also suggested that the organisations in other
States should set up Preparations Committees to assist in
the preparation of the Agenda and Resolutions to be sub-
mitted to the National Conference. A further suggestion
was made that the Resolutions submitted to Conference
should be drafted so that when put together they would
form a Woman's Charter. Experts in the various subjects
to be discussed were selected to address the Conference.
A draft of the resolutions received was circularised to
all organisations, with a programme of the Conference and
amendments invited.
Ninety organisations were represented at the Con-
ference, including women's organisations which work for
the improvement of the status and opportunity of women,
philanthropic and patriotic bodies, church societies, trade
unions and political parties. The resolutions adopted
comprise the Woman's Charter, and cover every aspect
of women's interests.
The members of the Conference believe that the
framing and launching of the Woman's Charter at the


present time will focus the attention of the public on the
reforms for which women are striving, and will encourage
and stimulate women to renew their age-long struggle for
these reforms. At the outbreak of war women diverted
all their time, thought and energies to war work. While
continuing with this, women must prepare for the post-
war period. The reforms incorporated in the Woman's
Charter will benefit not only women, but every man and
child. The clauses of the Charter seek to give a practical
form to some aspects of the ideals of liberty, justice and
democracy.
The Australian Women's Conference wished to pro-
vide that the Charter should be a living document, cap-
able of presenting continually the contemporary aspira-
tions of all who work for the improvement of the status
and opportunity of women, and that the Charter should
be capable of incorporating new needs as they arise out
of changing conditions. With this object in view, provi-
sion is made for the annual consideration of amendments
and additions which will strengthen and broaden the
Charter.
All women's organisations and organisations with
women members are invited to sign the Australian
Woman's Charter, 1943, in full or in part. If they so
desire, they may send amendments for consideration in
respect of future editions of the Charter. Donations are
solicited by the Woman's Charter Committee to carry on
the work of publicising the Charter.
CONFERENCE DIRECTION TO CHARTER COMMITTEES.
This Australian Women's Conference
(a) declares that the Resolutions adopted by Conference
in November, 1943, be known as the WOMAN'S
CHARTER OF AUSTRALIA, 1943.
(b) invites all women's organisations, all organisations
which have women as members, and individual
women to become signatories to the Woman's Charter
as a whole or in part (stating clauses);
(c) provides that this Charter may be amended at a future
Australian Women's Conference or by a majority of
signatory organisations adopting amendments which
have been previously circulated;


(d) instructs the Conference Committee to present the Aus-
tralian Woman's Charter as adopted by the Confer-
ence to the Prime Minister as soon after the opening
of Parliament as possible, to discuss with the appro-
priate Ministers the various clauses of the Charter; and
to send a copy of the Charter to all Federal Members
of Parliament;
(e) constitutes the delegates and members appointed from
each State to attend the Australian Women's Confer-
ence as Australian Women's Conference Provisional
Committees in their respective States, with power to
add to their numbers;
(f) instructs the Provisional Committees to bring the
the Woman's Charter before all women's organisations
and organisations with women members in their States
for the purpose of obtaining signatories to the Charter,
and to send copies of the Charter to all State Members
of Parliament;
(g) authorises the Conference Committee and the State
Provisional Committees to iAke whatever action they
consider advisable to achieve the aims of the Charter.
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE.
Believing that this Australian Women's Conference
has helped to formulate valuable ideas for winning the
peace within our our own borders,
We resolve to forward our resolutions to leading
women's organisations in Australia and other countries
with the suggestion that an International Conference be
called.


AUSTRALIAN WOMAN'S
CHARTER
- 1943 -
(1) WOMAN IN WAR AND PEACE.
This Australian Women's Conference, representing
every State and 90 organisations in the Commonwealth,
called after four years of war, affirms its unshakeable be-
lief that the hopes of all women for a world in which
justice and liberty and equality will exist depends entirely
upon winning the war and eradicating Fascism in any
form in every country.
Therefore, this Conference calls upon every woman
to ' take her full share in the war effort by either
enlisting in the defence forces, undertaking work on the
land or in industry, or enrolling as a voluntary worker,
and by subscribing to war loans.
This Conference further affirms its belief that if we
are to win the peace it is necessary to plan for peace
while carrying on the war, and while noting with satis-
faction the action of the Government in creating a Ministry
of Reconstruction, exhorts the Government to make fuller
use of the vision, enthusiasm, practical wisdom and capa-
bilities of women in the planning of reconstruction.
(2) WOMAN IN PUBLIC LIFE.
The Australian Women's Conference affirms its belief
that women have a special contribution to make in public
life, as citizens of a democratic community, and in order
that their capabilities may be developed and utilised for
the national good.
We recommend that
(a) every encouragement should be given to women to
stand as candidates for all elected legislative bodies;
(b) women be appointed in adequate numbers to national
and international conferences, diplomatic posts, to
administrative positions of authority and responsibility,
and on boards, commissions, etc.
(3) WOMEN AT THE PEACE CONFERENCE.
Whereas in every country women have taken
a full share in their country's struggle to win the war, and


in all the war centres shared the dangers and privations
of war and have shown courage, resource and endurance.
This Australian Women's Conference affirms its belief
that women have earned the right and proven themselves
capable to take an active and comprehensive part in every
aspect of the making of peace and the subsequent plan-
ning and control which will be necessary to win lasting
peace;
We declare that qualified Australian women with full
status as delegates should be included in sufficient num-
bers to participate effectively in the delegation attending
the peace settlement as representatives of the Australian
people.
(4) EQUAL STATUS, OPPORTUNITY, RESPONSIBILITY
AND REWARD.
Whereas the indispensable contribution that women
make to all phases of human life is at present inadequately
recognised; and
Whereas they are not accorded the same status,
opportunities, responsibilities and rewards as are accorded
to men in the community; and
Whereas they are submitted to many discriminations
and limitations imposed on account of their sex; and
Whereas it has been found to be essential to develop
the capabilities of women and to utilise the resources of
woman power in order to achieve victory in war; and
Whereas it will be equally necessary to continue the
development and utilise the potential capacity of women
in the post-war period in order to achieve victory in peace.
Therefore, this Australian Women's Conference
affirms the need for the immediate application of the prin-
ciple of equality as between men and women in all laws
and regulations.
(5) EQUAL RIGHTS LEGISLATION.
Whereas past history and contemporary conditions
demonstrate that many laws, regulations and statements
purporting to confer rights, status and opportunity on all
people are, in fact, only applied to male persons;
We request the Commonwealth Government to intro-
duce a Blanket Bill, designed to abolish sex discrimination
and to establish and maintain equality for all citizens with-


out distinctions based on sex, and to provide that any sex
discriminations embodied in any laws or regulations be
invalid;
We further request the Commonwealth Government
that when the Referendum is held for the amendment to
the Constitution an amendment shall be submitted to
provide that women shall be entitled to equal rights, status
and opportunity with men, and to provide that any sex
discrimination embodied in any laws or regulations be
invalid.
(6) EMPLOYMENT AND SOCIAL SECURITY.
We believe that a progressive and democratic society
should guarantee economic security by providing employ-
ment, education, health services, and adequate mainten-
ance during illness and old age for all its members.
We therefore request the Commonwealth Govern-
ment to survey the needs, resources and labour power of
the community, to develop and implement a plan to
provide employment, educational and health services for
all, and to care for all persons in old age, ill-health and
unemployment.
We further believe that it is vital to the interests of
the community as a whole that we should achieve demo-
bilisation without unemployment.
We therefore request the Commonwealth Govern-
ment
(a) to plan training and employment with the object of
absorbing the men and women in the Services and in
the war industries into useful occupations;
(b) to pay a wage to persons, irrespective of sex, awaiting
employment, on a scale which will enable them and
their dependents to maintain a reasonable standard of
living;
(c) to pay particular attention to the 200,000 women newly
employed in industry in response to the war emer-
gency situation who may need or wish to continue in
paid employment.
(7) EMPLOYMENT OF WOMEN, WAGE EARNERS AND
PROFESSIONAL WOMEN.
We believe that the standard of living of the whole
community is threatened, and animosity between men
and women wage-earners is engendered by cheap female
labour within the community.


We believe that experience has shown that whenever
women have been given the opportunity to do work
previously performed by men in the professions, in the
Public Service, in industry, etc., they have proved
themselves capable of measuring up to the established
standards.
We recommend that
(a) there should be no sex discrimination limiting the
opportunities for women, and that they should be
given equal pay, equal status, equal opportunity and
equal responsibility with men in all appointments and
spheres of employment;
(b) all restrictions be abolished on the right of women
to work (a) at night, (b) in any specific occupation, (c)
at any particular period, and (d) when they marry;
(c) in all laws and awards, adult female labour should
be classified with adult labour instead of being clas-
sified with the labour of young persons;
(d) all sex discrimination in the Public Service be
eliminated and the principle established throughout the
Public Service of equal pay and equal opportunity for
men and women;
(e) the Government eliminate in its plans for training for
post-war employment the sex discrimination introduced
by fixing lower rates of sustenance allowance for
women than men, and give to men and women the
same rates of sustenance allowance;
(f) canteen services be provided in all industrial estab-
lishments where the number of employees is in excess
of 250;
(g) provision be made for domestic workers in private
homes to obtain an award governing their wages and
conditions.
(8) WOMEN'S EMPLOYMENT BOARD AND AMEND-
MENT TO COMMONWEALTH CONCILIATION AND
ARBITRATION ACT.
We record our appreciation of the action of the
Commonwealth Government in appointing the Women's
Employment Board to assess the value and standard of
women's work as compared with the work of men, thus
for the first time affording women the opportunity to justify
their claim for equal pay.


We urge the Commonwealth Government to pass the
necessary legislation or regulation to direct the Women's
Employment Board to proceed immediately with the com-
plete elimination of sex differentiation in all wage rates
for women coming within its jurisdiction.
We believe that the evidence given before the Board
has shown that women have earned the right to equal
pay and equal opportunity; and
We request the Commonwealth Government to imple-
ment the policy of equal pay by amending the Common-
wealth Conciliation and Arbitration Act, 1904-32, to
provide that the basic wage for females shall be the same
as the basic wage for males.
(9) TRAINED NURSES.
In view of the long and arduous period of training
which must be undertaken by nurses, and in view of their
indispensable services to the community,
We recommend
(a) that the status of nurses be raised by granting them
higher rates of pay, a shorter working day with con-
secutive hours on duty, and better living conditions;
(b) that the status of qualified trained nurses be protected
by enacting legislation to prohibit the use of the title
of "nurse" by other than registered nurses;
(c) that the nurse's veil be registered as the official
uniform of a registered nurse and that none other than
registered nurses be permitted to wear the nurse's veil;
(d) that the nursing staff in public hospitals be represented
on the Board of their hospital by a representative or
representatives nominated and elected by the nurses;
(e) that nurses when off duty be permitted the same inde-
pendence and freedom of movement as are accorded
to other workers.
(10) TRADE UNIONS AND WOMEN'S EMPLOYMENT.
We record our recognition of the vital part played
by the Trade Unions in moulding and controlling the con-
ditions of employment in the community.
We congratulate those Trade Unions which have
granted women members equal rights with men members
in the organisation and administration of the Union.


We record our appreciation of the pressure brought
to bear by the Trade Unions for the maintenance of the
Women's Employment Board and of the consistent
advocacy by the Unions of higher wages and better
working conditions for women.
We request the Trade Unions to press for the imme-
diate implementation of the policy of equal pay for men
and women in all occupations.
We recommend that all women's organisations
working for the improvement of the status of women
workers co-operate with the Trade Unions in all campaigns
for the betterment of the conditions and wages of women
workers.
(11) SERVICEWOMEN.
As special provision is made for the wives, children
and other dependents of Servicemen,
We recommend that
(a) Servicewomen, including the Nursing Service, be
granted the same status, pay, dependents' allowances
and other benefits and opportunities afforded to Ser-
vicemen of equivalent rank;
(b) servicewomen under 21 years of age be granted the
same pay and status as servicemen under 21 years
of age.
(12) VOLUNTARY WORKERS.
As the spirit of fellowship and co-operation which is
so essential to progress is fostered by the common interest
and common effort of persons working together,
We recommend that
(a) provision be made to give ample scope to the initiative
and energies of voluntary workers to take a full part
in the great work of reconstruction that must follow
the war;
(b) opportunities be made available for women who wish
to continue giving voluntary services to assist in wel-
fare work in association with other voluntary workers,
but not in competition with paid employment, in order
that they should not undermine the conditions of paid
workers.


(13) WOMAN AS MOTHER AND/OR HOME-MAKER.
We believe the indispensable service rendered to the
community by mothers, accompanied as it is by inevitable
and specific handicaps, and responsibilities, demands
special consideration and provision;
We further believe that economic independence
strengthens character and develops a greater sense of
responsibility, whereas dependent economic status denies
liberty and opportunity and justice to the individual.
In order to alleviate these disabilities, we recommend
(a) the mother and/or home-maker be remunerated for her
work in the home by a personal endowment of a mini-
mum of 30/- a week, operated on the same principle
as child endowment;
(b) the existing system of Child Endowment apply to all
dependent children in a family and be increased to an
adequate sum.
(14) HEALTH.
As it is to the advantage of the community as a whole
that the health of every man, woman and child should
be developed and maintained at the maximum standard,
and as many factors are responsible for undermining the
health of the community,
We recommend to the Commonwealth Government
(a) a comprehensive health programme be adopted that
will take into consideration the part that economic
security, satisfactory qpcupation, proper housing,
nutrition and education standards play in the main-
tenance of the health of the community;
(b) a nationally-planned comprehensive system of free
health services, including medical, dental and hospital
treatment and provision of free medical examinations,
be developed;
(c) an adequate system of free pre-natal and baby clinics
and maternity hospitals and nursing services be
developed;
(d) such preventive health measures as child welfare,
general hygiene, industrial hygiene and immunisation
services be extended;


(e) regular medical and psychological supervision and
advice be provided for all children during their pre-
school and school life, so that variations can be
observed and dealt with as early as possible;
(f) hospital construction and equipment be extended,
especially for maternity cases, for sufferers from tuber-
culosis and mental diseases, and for the chronically
ill and infirm;
(g) an adequate number of institutions and special schools,
including handicraft centres and farm colonies, be
provided for mentally retarded and mentally defective
adults and children;
(h) special sanatoria be provided for the treatment of
incipient nervous cases of women;
(i) at least one-third of the members of the Board of any
hospital or health institution or committee be women.
(j) an intensive government campaign be developed and
maintained for the education of the public in all mat-
ters pertaining to health;
(k) the public be educated in the early signs of disease,
especially tuberculosis, cancer and venereal disease,
and that additional diagnostic clinics, X-ray units and
pathological laboratories be established wherever
required;
(1) the exchange of medical certificates by persons about
to marry be made compulsory, provided that there
shall be no interference with the existing rights of any
persons to marry;
(m) medical students and nurses be given the most up-to-
date gynaecological training;
(15) EDUCATION.
As it is of paramount importance for the future
development of Australia that the potential capacities of
every man, woman and child should be developed to the
maximum,
We recommend that
(a) nation-wide plans on an adequate scale be developed
by the Federal Government to provide free schools,
technical and cultural colleges and Universities, sports
and recreational facilities for all children, youths and
adults;


(b) academic and technical training be designed to fit the
students to meet the expanding needs of modern com-
munity life;
(c) schools of all grades include in their curricula the
teaching of the principles of the Atlantic Charter, the
causes of war and the foundations of peace;
(d) nature study, elementary biology, anatomy, hygiene,
nutrition and physical development be introduced into
the curricula of all schools;
(e) a widespread public campaign of health, recreation
and culture be organised by the educational authori-
ties by means of films, radio, press, posters, leaflets
and lectures;
(f) Governments provide on a much more generous scale
than at present teachers, buildings and equipment in
schools;
(g) the Commonwealth Government set up and endow
generously a committee on the lines of the British
Council for the Encouragement of National Art to carry
out a nation-wide cultural education campaign and to
provide libraries, national theatres, film libraries and
facilities for artistic and cultural appreciation and
achievement;
(h) the Commonwealth Government set up a body for re-
search into educational problems and for publicising
new ideas and developments in educational principles
and practices;
(i) more holiday homes and holiday camps be established
by the Government for the purpose of providing
country vacations for city children.
(j) full provision be made for regional sharing of control
and responsibility in the above matters in order to
develop the maximum local interest and pride in cul-
tural achievement;
(16) HOUSING.
We believe that the moral and physical well-being
of the community is adversely affected by bad housing
conditions.
We recommend that
(a) adequate national housing and slum-clearance plans,
as part of national town-planning schemes be formu-
lated by the Commonwealth authorities, and that the
building of homes be commenced immediately;


(b) Federal and State authorities co-operate with local
regional boards in the execution of the national plan;
(c) the Government fix a reasonable minimum standard
of home for town and country in regard to size, area
and equipment and that no building below this stan-
dard be permitted;
(d) the services of women be fully employed in official
capacities in planning, developing and administering
housing schemes;
(e) the Commonwealth Government make funds available
from the Commonwealth Bank for (a) building homes
at low rental for those who do not desire to purchase
them; (b) providing loans at a service rate of interest
for the purchase of homes; (c) assisting genuine co-
operative building societies;
(f) fares be zoned in order to encourage home-building
in the outer suburbs of cities;
(g) industry be decentralised and linked up with local
housing and town-planning schemes;
(h) homes for aged married people be built so that they
may live together instead of being sent to separate
institutions.
(17) COMMUNITY CENTRES.
As education is a continuous, living process essential
to the adult as well as the child; and
As art, culture, leisure and recreation will train the
citizen in constructive self-expression and social responsi-
bility;
We recommend that the Federal and State Govern-
ments establish as part of their post-war reconstruction
programme, Community Centres wherever needed,
equipped with public libraries, auditoria, playgrounds,
nursery schools, community kitchens, meeting rooms and
other facilities, and provide that the Education Depart-
ments, the local Councils and elected citizen bodies in
each State co-operate on a regional basis in the adminis-
tration of such Centres in order to develop local interest
to the maximum.
(18) CHILD CARE.
As experience has shown that the mental and physi-
cal well-being of children is developed, and delinquency


prevented by the existence of day nursery and nursery
schools and supervised playground facilities,
We recommend the Commonwealth Government to
(a) establish a National Children's Bureau with Headquart-
ers at Canberra, under the aegis of either the Depart-
ment of Reconstruction, of Health, or of Social Ser-
vices to
(i) formulate a National Programme for promoting the
welfare of children;
(ii) assemble information from scientific sources;
(iii) interpret this information for the public;
(iv) disseminate this information throughout the Com-
monwealth;
(v) educate systematically public opinion in the best
standards of child care;
(b) subsidise a national scheme for the establishment of
a network of child centres wherever needed and pro-
vide that Education Departments, local Councils and
elected citizens' bodies in each State co-operate in the
development and administration of these Centres in
order to develop local interest and effort to the
maximum.
(19) BIRTHRATE.
This Conference is of the opinion that an increase in
the birthrate is of vital importance to Australia, and that
the low birthrate is largely attributable to lack of economic
security, of adequate housing, and of facilities for the care
of babies and children to relieve the mother of the con-
tinuous care and strain of a young family;
We recommend
(a) the removal of obstacles to early marriage;
(b) the guaranteeing of economic security (as outlined in
Resolutions on "Employment and Economic Security"
and "Woman as Mother and/or Home-maker");
(c) the provision of suitable family homes;
(d) adequate child endowment;
(e) provision of day nurseries, nursery schools and super-
vised playgrounds fn all residential areas;
(f) safeguarding maternal health;
(g) the development of a baby nurses' scheme through
baby clinics which would make casual nursing service
available to parents of families.


(20) ALCOHOL.
We believe that the abuse of alcohol is an important
contributing cause of poverty, disease, immorality and
crime;
We recommend that
(a) every community shall have the democratic right re-
stored to them to vote whether alcoholic liquor shall,
or shall not, be sold in their district;
(b) direct or indirect advertising of alcoholic bever-
ages be prohibited;
(c) an educational publicity campaign be directed against
the evils of indulgence in alcohol, through the schools,
Press, radio and other agencies.
(21) MORAL STANDARDS.
Whereas the experiences of many countries over the
last 100 years has demonstrated that the regulation of
prostitution encourages vice, stimulates the white slave
traffic, creates a false sense of security from venereal in-
fection, and imposes cruel injustice and humiliation upon
the women concerned while allowing men to go free; and
Whereas the economic inequality of women tends to
lower their dignity and status;
Therefore we declare our unswerving opposition to
the licensing of vice by the registration of prostitution,
registration of brothels, or any other form of regulation,
including the compulsory examination and detention of
women on suspicion, and
We recommend
(a) an equal moral standard for men and women;
(b) a widespread publicity campaign on (i) the need for
early treatment of sufferers from venereal disease;
(ii) the causes of venereal disease such as promiscuous
sex relations, ignorance about sex matters, bad hous-
ing, economic insecurity, the existence of undesirable
places of amusement, abuse of the use and sale of
alcohol, etc.;
(c) that sufferers from venereal disease be under the
supervision of officers of the Health Department,
assisted by social workers and almoners, instead of
the Police Department;
(d) the provision of adequate facilities for the free and
secret treatment of venereal disease;


(e) the adoption of scientific methods for the rehabilitation
of girls and women who have contracted promiscuous
habits;
(f) the education of children in the laws of reproduction
through the scientific approach of botany and biology,
leading up to education of adolescents in the emo-
tional and ethical aspects of sex relations and the
significance and responsibilities of family life;
(g) that men partners in immorality and patrons of pros-
titutions be regarded as equally guilty of an offence
under the law;
(h) that ample facilities for healthy recreation be provided;
(i) that the sale of liquor be strictly controlled;
(j) the prohibition of the publication or distribution of
literature calculated to stimulate crime, sexual laxity
and other anti-social behaviour.
(22) REHABILITATION.
In view of the number of young men and women
and boys and girls whose mental and moral life has been
affected by war conditions,
We recommend that the Federal Government be
asked to establish institutions and colonies where men
and women, and boys and girls who have developed
immoral habits and anti-social behaviour and are classed
as delinquents, may be re-educated by modern methods,
including occupational therapy, to re-establish them eco-
nomically and socially in society.
(23) COUNTRY WOMEN.
As much of the development of Australia has de-
pended, and much of the future development of Australia
will inevitably depend upon the men and women in rural
areas, it is vitally important that the amenities of life should
be made available in country districts,
We recommend that
(a) special rail transport facilities be made available for
families;
(b) telephone services at special rates be provided;
(c) water conservation, and schemes for the generation of
electricity be developed so that, as far as possible,
water and electricity may be supplied to all homes in
the country at a reasonable cost;


(d) classes for mothers, giving instruction on baby and
child care and nutrition, be organised on the same lines
as the correspondence school classes;
(e) bush nursing systems be extended to cover all dis-
tricts, travelling medical clinics to provide adequate
maternal, infant and general health services to isolated
country areas be organised, and the country schools
be made available for these services.
(24) ABORIGINES.
This Conference deplores the continued neglect of
the native race and demands immediate measures by
the Federal Governments to arrest the process of extinc-
tion and to provide the Aborigines with all the means for
a secure and prosperous life. These immediate measures
to include the following;—
(a) Federal control over all questions concerning the wel-
fare of the Aborigines;
(b) Tribal Aborigines to be given reserves; such native
reserves to be inviolable, the land and natural resour-
ces to be the property of the Aborigines;
(c) adequate medical services to be provided for the
aborigines throughout Australia;
(d) no contact with the natives in the reserves to be per-
mitted except by members of the Medical Services and
other specially qualified persons responsible to the
Government;
(e) the potential equality of the Aboriginal Race be recog-
nised; education be directed to preparation for full
citizenship rights and responsibilities, including tech-
nical and other training and the opportunity to use this
training;
(f) the term Australian Aboriginal be interpreted in the
law to mean full blood Australian Aboriginal;
(g) suitable advisers be appointed to assist in the
gradual economic development of the Aborigines.
Native enterprises to be developed on a co-operative
basis;
(h) the abolition of the system of employment by license;
the aboriginal worker to be entitled to receive the full
amount of his or her wages as a legal right;
(i) that women be urged to use their influence to elimi-
nate colour prejudice from the social life of the nation.


(25) LEGAL REFORMS.
We believe that nationality, domicile, legitimation,
parental right and guardianship of children and property
of children should be the concern of the Commonwealth,
and that legislation thereon should contain no discrimina-
tion between men and women;
We recommend that
(a) the Commonwealth Government submit an amend-
ment, vesting in the Commonwealth such of these
powers as it does not already possess, when the ref-
erendum is taken;
(b) the Commonwealth pass legislation to ensure to a
married woman the same rights in regard to nation-
ality as a man or a single woman;
(c) the Commonwealth pass legislation to ensure to a
married woman the same rights in regard to domicile
as a man or single woman.
We further recommend that the competent authority
pass legislation
(a) to provide that a child shall be automatically legiti-
mated by the marriage of its parents;
(b) to provide that the mother and father should have the
same right in regard to the guardianship of children
and the property of children;
(c) to provide that all investments or savings made by or
placed in the name of a married woman should be
regarded as her undisputed property;
(d) to declare joint ownership of property used by married
persons as their home or business jointly conducted
or property acquired after marriage by either party,
other than by inheritance.
(26) DIVORCE.
Whereas at the present time marriage and divorce
laws are controlled by the State Parliament, and
Whereas the various provisions of these laws differ
in their grounds for divorce;
We recommend
(a) that the marriage and divorce laws of the individual
States be amended to provide that the grounds for
divorce in the laws of each State shall be common to


all States, and that when this has been achieved, the
Commonwealth Parliament shall take over the control
of marriage and divorce;
(b) that Courts of Conciliation to arbitrate in matrimonial
disputes be set up throughout the Commonwealth and
that petitions for divorce or separation be heard only-
after the parties have submitted their case to this Court;
(c) that women should be included on the Bench of the
Conciliation Courts.
(27) WIDOWS' PENSIONS.
Whereas at the present time the male basic wage is
computed to maintain a family at the minimum standard;
and
Whereas a widow's pension is reduced if she earns
more than 12/6 per week,
We recommend that widows with dependents shall
be eligible to supplement their pensions to a sum equiva-
lent to the male basic wage.
(28) CENSUS.
We request that when the census is taken, fuller par-
ticulars of the status, responsibilities, etc., of women be
required, so that data will be available in respect of women
wage-earners, breadwinners, grade of occupation, rate of
wages, age, conjugal conditions, number of persons
wholly or partly supported and relationship to bread-
winner.
FINIS.


In view of the urgent need for immediate action
to be taken to rescue the Jewish race from the syste-
matic massacre being perpetrated by the Nazis in
Europe, the following special resolution was passed at
the Australian Women's Conference:
RACIAL PERSECUTION.
Realising that the Jewish people ivere the first
victims of Hitler's barbarism; that already over
4,000,000 Jewish men, women and children have
been massacred; and that the Jewish people alone
have been selected by the Nazis for complete
annihilation.
We Australian women, in conference assembled,
urge that in accordance with uprooted European
Jewry's desperate need, relief and rehabilitation be
provided, and equal status restored to them by the
United Nations at the earliest moment possible;
Further, we urge, in the name of justice and
mercy, that those who can escape shall be provided
with opportunity for migration and settlement in
Palestine and elsewhere, and that the Australian
Government be asked to approach the authorities
concerned to further these purposes.


ORGANISATIONS REPRESENTED AT THE AUSTRALIAN WOMEN'S CONFERENCE.
SYDNEY—NOVEMBER. 1943.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
Austral India League.
Australian Institute of Sociology.
Australian Railways' Union —Women's
Auxiliary.
Australian Labor Party (Official).
Australian Labor Party (State).
Australian Labor Party (Concord West
Branch).
Australian Federation of Women Voters
(N.S.W. Committee).
Australian Association of Scientific Work-
ers (N.S.W. Division).
Australian Women's Party.
Amalgamated Hospital Employees' Asso-
ciation.
Amalgamated Engineering Union.
Board of Social Studies.
Balmain Council —Alderman Gallimore.
Bankstown Women's Committee.
Communist Party.
Care of the Child in Wartime Committee.
Commonwealth Temporary Clerks' Asso-
ciation.
Council for Women in War Work.
Christian Social Order Movement.
Domestic Employees' Union.
Eureka Youth League.
Federated Clerks' Union.
Fellowship of Australian Writers.
Friendship with Russia League.
Federation of Infants' School Clubs.
Friday Club.
Girls' Friendly Society.
Glebe Council—Alderman Pitt.
Greenwich Women's Committee.
Guildford Comforts Fund.
Granville Mothers' Club.
Hairdressers' Union.
Hotel Club and Restaurant Employees'
Union.
Humane Movement.
Ironworkers' Union.
Municipal and Shire Council Employees'
Union.
National Council of Jewish Women.
New Education Fellowship.
Our New Order.
Presbyterian Women's Federation.
Printing Industries' Union.
Roseville Group, United Associations of
Women.
Recreation and Leadership Movement.
Seamen's Union, Women's Auxiliary.
Sheet Metal Workers' Union.
Sydney Women's Co-operative Guild.
Teachers' Federation.
Textile Workers' Union.
Travellers' Aid Society.
United Associations of Women.
Women's Christian Temperance Union.
Watson Labor Women's Auxiliary.
Widows of the A.I.F. Association.
Women for Canberra.
Y.M.C.A.
COUNTRY.
Newcastle Housewives' Association.
Newcastle Social Hygiene Committee.
Women's Auxiliary, Coal and Shale Em-
ployees' Federation, Newcastle.
Crippled Children Society, Newcastle.
Newcastle Trades Hall Council.
Katoomba P. & C. and Mothers' Clubs'.
Katoomba Crippled Children's Society.
Katoomba R.5.5.1.L.A., Women's Auxiliary.
Katoomba Congregational Church,
Women's Guild.
Lithgow Child Care Committee.
Democratic Housewives' Association,
Wollongong.
Goulburn A.R.U. Women's Auxiliary.
West Maitland Branch, United Associa-
tions of Women.
QUEENSLAND.
National Council of Women.
Y.W.C.A.
Women's Auxiliary, Townsville Trades
and Labor Council.
Women's Auxiliary, Maryborough Trades
and Labor Council.
Federated Clerks' Union.
Storemen and Packers' Union.
Town and Country Women's Association.
VICTORIA.
Women's Christian Temperance Union.
Council for Women in War Work.
Communist Party.
Munition Workers' Union.
TASMANIA.
Housewives' Association.
R.S.S.I.L.A. Guild of Remembrance.
National Council of Women.
Council for the Mother and Child.
Women's International League.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Adelaide Jewish Women's Guild.
Jewish Red Cross Society.
Women's Christian Temperance Union.
League for the Protection of Aboriginal
Women.
Communist Party.
WEST AUSTRALIA.
Hotel, Club and Caterers' Union.
Council of Churches.
Housewives' Association.


AUSTRALIAN WOMEN'S CONFERENCE.
Papers Read By:
Miss MOLLIE BAYNE, M.A., Dip.Ed., Hon. Secretary, Council for Women in
War Work, Victoria.
Mrs. NOELLE BRENNAN, Women's Australian National Services and Girl
Guides' Association, N.S.W.
Miss ADA BROMHAM, Secretary, Women's Christian Temperance Union,
South Australia.
Dr. HILDA BULL, Assistant Medical Officer, Melbourne.
Mrs. G. L. BYTH, President, National Council of Women, Queensland.
Madame FABIAN CHOW, Representative of the People's Foreign Relations
Society of China.
Miss NERIDA COHEN, 8.A., LL.B., Chairman, Council for Women in War
Work, N.S.W.
Mr. J. G. CRAWFORD, Officer of Ministry of Reconstruction, Canberra.
Mrs. PHYLLIS DUGUID, South Australia.
The Honourable CLIVE EVATT, K.C., M.L.A., Minister for Education, N.S.W.
Mrs. H. V. EVATT, New South Wales.
Miss CHRISTINE HEINIG, Ph.B., M.A., Associaion for the Development of the
Pre-School Child, Victoria.
Dr. MARGOT HENTZE, Research Worker under a grant administered by the
Ministry of Reconstruction.
Mrs. H. C. HERBERT, President, League for Protection of Aboriginal Women,
South Australia.
Miss M. JAMES, Organiser, Munition Workers' Union, Victoria.
Miss B. LAHIFF, Federated Ironworkers' Union, N.S.W.
Sister PATRICIA LLOYD, Member of the Nursing Profession.
Miss I. McCORKINDALE, Organiser, Women's Christian Temperance Union,
South Australia.
Miss JEAN McKENZIE, Official Secretary to High Commissioner for New Zealand,
Canberra.
Miss R. PAYNE SCOTT, B.Sc., Association of Scientific Workers, N.S.W.
KATHERINE SUSANNAH PRICHARD, Author, West Australia.
Miss MONA RAVENSCROFT, M.A., Hon. Secretary, Care of the Child in War-
time Committee, N.S.W.
Dr. FANNY READING, President, National Council of Jewish Women, N.S.W.
Mrs. M. M. RYAN, Member of Commonwealth Housing Commission.
Miss C. SHELLEY, Secretary, Hotel, Club and Caterers' Union, West Australia.
Mrs. E. A. WATERWORTH, Tasmanian State Council for the Mother and Child.
Miss LUCY WOODCOCK, 8.A., B.Ec., Vice-President, N.S.W. Teachers'
Federation.
Y.W.C.A. (Paper read for Miss Jean Scott).
Chairmen:
Mrs. W. E. DICKSON.
Mrs. M. McINTYRE.
Mrs. L. MIDDLETON.
Mrs. A. MONSBOURGH.
Miss RUBY RICH.
Mrs. USHERWOOD WILSON.
Mrs. JESSIE STREET, B.A.


\ 3 1508 01227342 6 |


X X
A. K. MURRAY
& CO.
PRINTERS
OS SUTHERLAND ST.
PADDINQTON
X X
rag -■ • %
