

Klf
33S *-tO c \ M-
s '■ : .' v ' : ■ NJ q?>&
■■
3] [ ;•$
|| ' ||
'ii 1*
■
i
Ij I •
II
AND
THE WAR ||l
1 mSSfv ■
, '-. r v ■
■ ■
v
, i ' /VS|
AUSTRALIAN
MANUFACTURERS


Issued by
The Victorian Chamber of
Manufactures
312 FLINDERS ST., MELBOURNE.


The War Effort of
Australian Manufacturers
MANY manufacturers were very concerned some time
ago at the unceasing stream of propaganda focused
on the production of munitions of war. It was felt that,
while this was justified from one point of view, an
unbalanced picture of Australia’s war effort was being
presented, because the propaganda tended to impress
people only in terms of guns and shells. There was no
suggestion at all of the machine tool industry behind the
output of munitions, of the equally vital clothing and
provisioning of armies, nor of the almost overnight growth
of industries entirely new to Australia. In short, the
public were uninformed of the foresight and enterprise
of private industry, its remarkable adaptation to war
production, and the whole-hearted co-operation of its
leaders, despite harassing and costly Government restric-
tions and regulations.
The Council of the Chamber felt that something should be
done to enlighten the general public on these matters,
and a short campaign was undertaken with the object of
bringing under notice the tremendous effort being made
by Australian manufacturers —an effort which, in pro-
portion to our population, is probably a greater achieve-
ment than that accomplished in any other democratic
country.


The campaign was strictly educational and presented the
bare facts to the people. The Department of Munitions
cordially co-operated, and Editorial assistance was
obtained to the extent of some 700 inches in Victorian
newspapers.
The Council of the Chamber believes the campaign served
a useful purpose. Many members followed the lead
given, Chairmen made reference to the matter in their
addresses to shareholders, and in many new directions it
became realised that the contribution of Australian
manufacturers to the war effort was of great National
significance.
With the rapid deterioration of the war situation the
Council has temporarily suspended the campaign but,
being of the opinion that the collated material is worthy of
preservation in permanent form, it has been decided to
issue this Brochure.
The following pages show:
(a) Suggested advertisements (in rough form) from
which the advertisements used were selected;
(b) the advertisements which actually appeared in
the press;
(c) an indication of the editorial support given to
the Chamber; and
(d) a brief summary of the war record of Australian
manufacturers.
The whole is submitted in the hope that it will prove of
more than passing interest.


PRESS ANNOUNCEMENTS
THE VICTORIAN
CHAMBER OF
MANUFACTURES
The above are rough visuals from which the
Chamber’s announcements were selected.


THE VICTORIAN
CHAMBER OF
MANUFACTURES


im' hw a®/ i
and to toe |
NATION'S AID CAME
AUSTRALIAN
MANUFACTURERS
Without Australia’s magnificent industrial enterprise of
the past decode we could not to-day defend our shores, let
alone eontfnuoosly send enormous war supplies to the
Jar flung battlefields of the world.
Industry'* machines, equipment, research facilities—the
skill and experience of its men from top to bottom—are
the sinews of Australia’# magnificent war effort
iM»t fay Tm VICTORIAN CHAMlttt Of MAMUPACTUUS. MSUCVSNI


AUSTRALIAN MANUFACTURERS’
VITAL PART IN THE WAR EFFORT
he a cold, sober {act that Australia's war effort would
nmnunt to rcry Rttlc without our industrial enterprise*
... That’* because war means immedmte, enormously
increased production to clothe, teed and cqmQ tin:
Forces. The only source ol such production 5* Industry.
And ks record to date in this nar Is magnificent.
Thousands of factories have swun* completely to wnr
production. Industry’s machines, equipment, research
facllities—the skill and experience ot it* men from top
to bottom arc the sinews of Australia’s splendid war
INDUSTRY
THE SMEWS Of AUSTRALIA'S WAR EFFORT I
t««4 hy THf VICTORiON CHAMWR Of W-AHUf ACTtMtS,
■■■■■■■■ n"


BS Is f° r 1
on are 1
stral' a ]
lyoawdnitnly fco*c cpwadifc# of
red. Aa»tr*«»n Industry J»«l
itted maOCSeowtit and own. «fco
kU *J»prf»«e of nwefelne too!*
•us*y r»«t<4« war production,
ntfti war produt^iwt.^ AuMra-
Ulne too)*. Atwiralao-madc
Mntu, <riixJt r», driltinji »r«-
spin* machine*. etc;, etc, »n
sirClrHH
e of
ILIAN
wiANur auTURERS
I /VW Is one of the
great strengths
Of Australia's
Eff ° rt ’''
Even p are 1
Waf . in Australia
Made m ftu —i
t.su.a hi tMB VICTORIAN ON AMUR OF MARBf AOTOBtI, M£lS60«»«


Jof CtO tV "
I . rVICE s
FicHt^ 6 . ii^rg^l
. MADE BY AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY
pofcUahed by the M«m«ee el Strop** «'>! «' «“«*«>*
«WJ H quantify bv A-leetorim vl a - I
♦quipmem b» *c P»£huott Semw* Tbtlivsrtea t« slate total ro<»et>
than 2S million fawn. ami iwlwfe 2/WJSRD ariwm,.
2JXWIH 'l.irt.i ?«WW> iroumute, VBhlfife **.r« el «o*U ami
*wW»*», 1/W*s pi.tio-.-v.*.
Tbk en',.r»xi>is output has w«o t'tew ’W tiwmrie* vvbitt. oeewallj
fwryxtuoe Awiti-nlia'* pvaco-ome requirement*, Now. t>»pa»*ty
ami r«te <>( production tremen<lm.s!,i cwemk-J, tW«' futnorit-.i a.,
suppfyin* both «hf iu.lrn.ry »nJ C>v3' demand* <4 thy ammlrf.
The ebo-re figured, ami prwhoaim. rmmrtl* oi *» tstatfit* »*r
tuppl**, ptmy ttut without Aewretian irtdwttrlal ciiUrprire ov«a
(be fj« fieoade, <Ure w»uM be liirio .u»
The Enterprise of
AUSTRALIAN
.MANUFACTURERS
Is one ot the great strengths
of Australia’s War Effort . . .
OHM k| tnt »MJT(MUM «> «lt»8«KI


EVEN 3.000 T0N
PRESSES Kk*mA if
Australian WanufruWers
I n * ll ,1
of
AUSTRALIAN
MANUFACTURERS
a *m •> Mh 6n«4 S4**«/Ar »f
tunhuftm Mfw £k*>f


The Cnierpmi of
AUSTRALIAN
MANUFACTURERS


AUSTRALIAN
MANUFACTURERS


I Vt PiU. I
More than 1,000
BREN CARRIERS
an already made-
e Enterprise irt
AUSTRALIAN
MANUFACTURERS


Australian Mamibttortrs
niw make • •
3EARGLIGHT8
PERISCOPES
iHUm > IMWHM W>W
ii
0m
U1UI< * 111111111 1 * * I
Tf/TEikrfna at
AUSTRALIAN
MANUFACTURERS


.. and to the
NATION'S AID CAME
AUSTRALIAN
MANUFACTURERS
Without Australia’s magnificent industrial enterprise of
the past decade we could not to*day defend our shores, let
alone continuously send enormous war supplies to the
far flung battlefields of the world.
Industry’s machines, equipment, research facilities—the
skill and experience of its men from top to bottom—are
the sinews of Australia’s magnificent war effort
Immkl by THI VICTORIAN CHAMBER OF MANUFACTURES. MELBOURNE
This announcement appeared in Melbourne
“HERALD” “ARGUS” and “AGE.”


AUSTRALIAN MANUFACTURERS’
VITAL PART IN THE WAR EFFORT
Ft's a cold, sober fact that Australia’s war effort would
amount to very little without our industrial enterprises
.., That’s because war means immediate, enormously
increased production to clothe, feed and equip the
Forces. The only source of such production is Industry.
And its record to date in this war is magnificent.
Thousands of factories have swung completely to war
production. Industry's machines, equipment, research
facilities—the skill and experience of its men from top
to bottom are the sinews of Australia’s splendid war
INDUSTRY
THE SINEWS OF AUSTRALIA’S WAR EFFORT !
luusd by THE VICTORIAN CHAMBER OF MANUFACTURES, MELBOURNE
This announcement appeared in Melbourne
“HERALD ” “ARGUS” and “AGE.”


E’.
"'ll
nediately huge quantities of
!. Australian Industry had
j management and men, tin-
shortage of machine tools
y restrict war production,
ility they show in switching
to war production, Austra*
ive now successfully built
e tools. Australian-made
ie», grinders, drilling ma*
ig machines, etc., etc., in
rs are working in factories
mwealth. Recently at one
tions Minister announced
achines in that factory had
of
LIAN
MANUI-AU rURERS
I Is one of the
& reai
°t Australia's
War Effort '
Issued b* THE VICTORIAS CHAMBER OF MAH 9 f ACT BBE S, MEtBOURHE
This announcement appeared in Melbourne
“HERALD ” ‘‘ARGUS,” “TRUTH,” “SUN”
and “SMITH’S WEEKLY.”


|f|l 25 W‘ctot««‘ 0 TO
ml >« ws Vse«vi<=' 5 I*
FiGHt' NG —rgy
... MADE BY AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY
Figures published recently by the Minister ot Supply tell an amassing
story of quantity production by Australian factories of clothing and
equipment for the Fighting Services. Deliveries to date total more
than 25 million items, and include 2.697.580 service garments.
2,285.51S shirts; 700,000 greatcoats, 5,039.926 pairs of socks and
stockings. 1,886.565 pullovers.
This enormous output has come from the factories which normally
produce Australia’s peace-time requirements. Now, with capacity
and rate of production tremendously extended, these factories are
supplying both the military and civil demands of the country.
The above figures, and production records of all essential war
supplies, prove that without Australian industrial enterprise over
the past decade, there would be little war effort.
The Enterprise of
AUSTRALIAN
MANUFACTURERS
Is one of the great strengths
of Australia's War Effort . . .
UftlMd by THE VICTORIAN CHAMBER OF MAHUFAC T 8 R E 8, MEiBOORNi
This announcement appeared in Melbourne
“ HERALD” “ARGUS,” “SUN” and
“SMITH’S WEEKLY.”


poooooo
I MILITARY
8 BLANKETS
fe : NOMON ORDER'
Fighting forces of the Empire need
"'iiif blankets. \nd. according to information
eminent. Australian Manufacturers have
undertaken to provide 3,000.000 blankets,
nearly trebling normal production. 'The
pre-war establishment of Australia’s in-
* A *Wfa e! tlustries has alone made our war effort
possible. The further expansion to-da>
prm ides a sound foundation for Aus-
aa's p.»l-v. r . .. .
Enterprise of
AUSTRALIAN
MANUFACTURERS
one of the great strengths
of Australia's War Effort
Issued by THE VICTORIA* CHAMBER Of MAHCfACTCHfS, MELBOORMC
This announcement appeared in Melbourne
“ HERALD ” and Melbourne “TRUTH.”


ffWobt
AUSTRALIAN
MANUFACTURERS
one of the great strengths
of Australia*s War Effort
usmd by THE ViOTORtAH CHAMBER Of MANVfACTBREB, MELROSRHf
* CMIS.3I
This announcement appeared in Melbourne
“HERALD” and Melbourne “ARGUS.”


EDITORIAL
CO-OPERATION
r I ''HE following pages serve to
indicate the editorial support
given to the Chamber by the press.
Over 30 leading Victorian news-
papers and journals co-operated.
Altogether over 700 inches of edi-
torial was devoted to the Chamber’s
educational campaign. In addition,
Chairmen’s addresses to share-
holders, referring to the issue, were
published.


—AGE, H/H/194U
ADVANCE IN
ENGINEERING
Notable Wartime
Achievements
. in the sci t,v •. Aus-
tralian d< P>- i. « ne E l-n.
Cwoup Hi < -i, Co I'l no i J ll «.
last year d u ii* pro
auction ot machine tools, which might
be regarded as probably Australia’s
n«f «i ' v "<1 i »"
~ble dswvt re of being convt tod Into
, major element .1 u-i . u 'litis
prophecy has already been fulfilled.
1 tor it Is author!!.-lively stated chat.
ill < f < v i >
•limited number of highly specialised
machines which it is neither prac-
ticable nor economical to impose upon
(-.« ~U. heavy burden of produc-
tion plant manufacture, Australian
Industry is now self-contained.
'The maimer in which yie precision
tooling branch of Australia's engi-
neering industry has been developed
during the past iwo years of war is
trulv one ot the most notable features
of this nation's industrial develop-
; meat. Although befoie the war began
< Australia possessed a great engmeer-
Vmg Industry, only a very small
of It was capable of manufacturing
'machines and tools of die extremely
Sim tolerances required for the mann-
er 'he highly lire.;l.-lc-ned weapons and
imstnmlehu of war. Yet. in the face
lot ail the difficulties inherent ut the
‘ war situation, there has been brought
I Into being within two years a machine
j tool and precision tool manufacturing
(industry which sheady tanks a* ore
jot the most Impoiw-nt avuuns at
j Australia's engineering sfruettire.
In titt insn-iUcM.-re of In.slru.m-nts
lof war, mass production of aims,
i munitions, transport vehicles and
[other equipment demands hlgh-qual-
! itv and precision standards in order
u> ensure complete Interchangeability.
Engineers have Ut d.'-ign and manu-
facture gr-at imehmes and delicate
I tostrumen’. » < >■’ *> -n J. uia
parts an closely filling as to demand
clearances or tolerances of a ten-
•honswdfh part of an ifich. and even
finer In some cases, Although fill-
Uancti of the industry was 00l highly
developed in Australia two years ago.
Uie engineering Indus!!/ had been so
well established bv eniagprtsln? manu-
facturers, in spite of cop < limed oppo-
sition and scei>!.|ejsin..;??.«?. the foun-
dation of a great tool-inKking Indus-
trv was in being, anq the subsequent
rapid and trcmei d«Hf»xp»rn.jon made
possible.
the engineering industry had
been so well established by enter-
prising manufacturers, in spite of
continued opposition and scepticism,
that the foundation of a great tool-
making industry was in being, and
the subsequent rapid and tremend-
ous expansion made possible.
1 Production of Mortars
A typical example of the lu-in-vt-
nionts in this department of Austra-
lian industry whs titwvd wemly In
a report tram ihe Department of
Munitions. It was stated that toward
i he am.
>t f - - i
tar was introduced to assist advanc-
ing- infantry in In-viking up enemy
machine-gun outpost,-. To-dov IP-
successor, isl 3-im-tt iresnii moriar,
H 8 P , i nu-cu;; : i v ■ ’ v I u
■ ip(i , ; ,:i > u I >
i The mortars have a range of almost
a mile, .and Are so quickly that eight
homos ran be In the air be tore the
I first reaches the target. Wh- :i sup-
plies ot these we ipen.s weie ho longer
obtainable from Britain in June last
year their production was undertaken
: in Australia.
i To-day about thirty firms in Aus-
’ trslia are engaged in the manufac-
ture of the 500 components of these;
: weapons, ’em mass-production lines.
! Originally i! took about five hours to
a ii. > - i * > n tar but
I n'iw the work la done in less than two
i hours.
Another Inter lug t ingle U the
D'OimUcUltf of compass beanio.s !. I
! t ! Us, tWViCi It 1 '> < ’
■any compass beating (or needle•
which d>»- .u ' 'i up So i .ono.ooo
j varying oaclUahotu when tested Is not
regarded a- ‘■a’isfactoi' Thur vin-u
part is the point, which must he many
limes harder than five tougluwt steel,
and which generally has been made
■, of imitation sapphires from Switacr-
I * M<
j wh*n supplies of these, imitation
(sapphires to Austiaha were cut oil
•after the ombre-- of war -rt-m»sf,-
?,et to work st W> rut re University
to produce a substitute. By a series
lof experiment# <n a ‘.rial and error
basts they succeeded m producing a
metal substitute po.-aes«ing the neces-
"sary hardness and durability. So
. compass hearings continue m mass
production cue of the n - • >htcve-
it i i i ’> ‘
optical instruments industry, an in-
dustry forced upon Australia by the
war, and now established on a basis
which should enable it to remain
permanently.
Many .. >. i • of a similar
nsiffle I -> V he quoted to show how
this new and vital department of Aus-
tralian industry has developed during
flit past two years. It may be men-
tioned that of 80 machines supplied
recently for the equipment of a new
fuse annexe near Melbourne no more
than four were made o be «> rile
The great achievements of Aus-
tralian manufacturers in this field
of industry is recognised by the
Government and by the people. It
has been aptly stated that Australia
could never have secured the ma-
chines necessary for the production
of the machines of war if she had
not had her own established indus-
tries with which to set about the
task of equipping her own factories
for a great programme of arma-
ments and munitions production.
•—AGE, 18/11/41.
INDUSTRY AND
THE WAR
Australia's Great
Achievement
The colossal demands of the
i., <>r ,-u; respect of arms.
■ munitions and supplies for the
fighting forces have proved far
too great for the productive capa-
i city of Britain’s industry, and a«-
- dileti and rapid de-
velopment, of secondary industry
I In Auaf raflm:
It was fortunate for Australia and
for the Empire as a whole that Aus-
tralian industry already had been
developed to a high state of efficiency
when the war broke out, and was
ready for the further great expan-
sion that was demanded of it in the
time of crisis.
; During the great wjfr of 1914-18
Britain's own industries provided the;
arms, munitions ant! equipment of
the whole of the British forces and
most of the Dominion troops. Aus-1
tralla fed and clothed her own forces,
and was able u» provide them with •
titles and small arms ammunition to
a limited extent, Australia also built
a number of ships during the last
war, and had previously built seve-
ral vessels of war for her own navy.
I The manufacture of the larger types
of guns and ammunition, machine
guns, armored vehicles, aeroplanes or I
any of {he more refined in-'rument.s
of warfare, however, was hot then
even contemplated In the range ot •
Australia's Industrial output. The,
Commonwealth was relied upon
mainly to supply men and food sup-
plies for the Empire. No more was 1
asked or expected of this young na- 1
non. j
Manufacturers' Response
1 The position now is vastly differ- 1
es t 'A of i hi. . ■ - i, ,n Sep-
lembcr. 1939. the Commonwealth
pw«csscd a great and highly efficient
Industry for tin- production of, iron 1
and steel, a large number of engin-
eering workshops distributed over the
various States, motor body and as-
sembling works, the beginnings ot
aircraft factories, Government arms
and munition works and many other
industrial enterprises capable of pio- :
duclng war requirements, apart from
; the wide range of mills and factories
, producing goods of all kinds for the
civil population. Still, It was gone-
rally recognised that Australian in-
dus try, great as its advancement had
been, was not vet able to produce
■he more intricate weapons and ms-
\ shines of war, nor tire; high precision
, tools required for their manufacture.
At the call to arms, however, the
manufacturers of Australia re-
sponded to the demand for their
services in a united war effort.
They were an
organised body, and under the direc-
tion of one of Australia's foremost
Industrial engineers set to work on
an ordered plan to develop their In-
dustries further find to produce at
far as possible every_requirement of
the armed forces. I .
* To produce
new types of arms and munitions
they had to make new and highly
specialised tools and machines. To
many it seemed like an effort to
the impossible, but the effort
went on, and the seemingly impos-
sible has been achieved.
Industries Extended
Government and private manu-
facturers co-operated in the gigan-
tic effort. Existing munition fac-
tories were enlarged.
were * nlarged. and new f»< t« rie« bmi'
in cities and country centres in vari-
ous States Annexes for the msnu-
■ fac'ure of munitions were added to
many engineering workshops. New
aircraft factories were built and
others Increased In size. Ship-build-
ing yards were reopened and new t
yards built in various state* to carry


out a programme of construction ol
naval and mercantile vessels. Manu-
facturers in many branches of in-
dustry extended their works and
added new departments to produce
articles that hitherto had not been
made in Australia.
Briefly, it may he said that the
war has raised the standard and
volume of secondary production in
Australia to a stage which in the
ordinary course of development
have been
present generation, possibly not
even in the present century. There
the present cfir.ury. There is a two- .
fo’d reason for ri .s. First, the need
for production of arms and muni-
tions necessitated the- development of
now industries for the manufacture |
of machine tools and prevision instru- .
mente. which otherwise would not
have been attempted in Australia for
many years u> come. Second, ship-
ping and other problems arising from
the war curtailed importation of
many kinds of goods, including high-
grade tools and machines. Insulated
cables and rnanv other Items, with
the -e,still IhM Australian manufac-
turers nad to make these things
themselves, and they are making
them now in (jmimity ami at high
speed.
Before the war the capacity of
Australian industry to produce the
machines- ami tools necessary to make
the machine* of war was limited to
10 or 12 precision tool firms. To-
day more '.ban 130 Australian firms
are producing these high-grade tools
and machines. Recently i: was an-
nounced on behalf r.f the Federal
Government that orders placed for
these articles in all States amounted
to more than £B.OOO 000. and deitv-
erief of more than 5000 tools of many
types. valued at more theft
~£3.009,000. had been completed.
The articles now being manufac-
tured by these Australian firms
range from small jobbing or pro-
duction lathes to great gun-boring
and turning lathes, grinding and
milling machines.
crimes, huge power and forging
presses, and all forms of Intricate
machinery for engineering workshops.
The new industries are not merely
a mushroom growth or temporary
expedient, to pass with the exigen-
cies of war. They are well estab-
lished and, it is hoped, destined to
play an important part in solving
the great post-war problems of
Australia.
try whose entire population of
7.000,000 is only I wo-thirds that, ot
CiUfA lllte ly.i&don and Chicago,
Great field gtiK. AA gusts,
bombs, shells, cartridge*, optic*,
respirators, Bren stuns, ants-
lank guns, maclllcegun carriers,
depth charges, parachutes, acre
p.n -Vsr.c.v fold.ng boats,
and almost everything else that a
modern at my needs are now wing
mass produced in a country that a
lew years ago was reckoned os »
ir-ttd C.f j riru.uy industries and a
i i i h future Ift
Him; Bushy.
Before any of these things
could be built Australia had to
have the tools with which to build
them. But even before the war
I Almost every country in me smuts
■ hud demands on tire machine-ton
industry in USA; Germany dropped
•out of the market, when she went to
war; Britain needed all her machine
for the desperate Industrial
I step-up that followed Munich. B
there was an acute shortage of
machine tools.
It was very largely because of
private enterprise that Australia
was able to overcome difficulties
that many people thought were
insuperable.
The story of Australia’s ma-
chine-tool industry is one of the
real romances of our war effort,
and it is a story of energy, de-
termination, and initiative by
men who in pre-war days had
been the butts of jeering critics.
Those men knew the industrial
possibilities of Australia. They
spent their own money to send
expert technicians abroad, fought
against prejudice to obtain rights
to produce under licence machine
tools in Australia.
Before us war began hair were,
already signs of Australia's progress
toward a great industrial future, bun
«- v,-.. a progress dangerously <je-
, pendent on Lho supply of necewiarv
| isuu’hn > cools from matl There
were fewer than a doaon firms in
Australia making machine and pru-
After 2 years of wot
more mu: 130 Ausirallan firms -
some of them elating Australia’s
greatest factories*-were turning oat
iianw QOftfttlties of rim most in-
niteo n.e.chfiie tools. At any tlvon
:B»e their total orders, exceeded
. .V S rimt.iHiC. Deliveries have been
;made ol more than 5.000 tools valued
>O.OOO. Without the private
(asm rifting barrels up to 24ft. wag*
laud all ti ev lathes bear the simple
i brass plate. ‘'Made in Australia. •
I Thousands of lathes a&d presses
all types are tunc being produced
in scores of factories, and thousands
more hr® already is vijpemttem in
every State.
Wn-'n the .Australian delegation
presented its report on Australia'*
munilicm programme to the Bast-
ern Group Supply Council at Mew
Delhi they sate that production dh
I Australlan-mado machine tools.'
! which earitssf had been regarded m
lour greatest single source of
tit-a, war up l!n measurable dis-
ci being converted into a
Smajor element of strength. Tims
; forecast has B.y hove been ful-
tilted With I!.■ :■•■■■ r. -I a limi-
ted number of highly specialised
tools nil'll I be practical or
... -.iiei;;!.- propo.,iuoni in this coun-
try, AuUralbi as ss machine-fool pro-
on (mmtey is now self-cob-
Mined, But, for the necessity of Ua«
utmost production for our men wap
effort it would how be possible for
Australia embark on ft large-scale
policy of export tug AuMraJian-tmfttter
maobinr- -tools to other parts of
Km pile. The tan that Australia can-
not fully meet the demand froia
oversea fur tools made in this coun-
try i . tribute from those who wrra
our competitors in peacetime.
Scores r.f huge factotics are con-
■ •entreilng almost entirely on tool
production for the munitions Indus-
i try. because new orders far mat
tools for now weapon*, pour ip m-
cej.»u:uly. In Hies.’ lactones ma-
' hlnes never stop spuming. Tw'enly-
lour hour shifts are maintained week
after week.
COPIED FROM CATALOGUE
The man-.iniv of these tradesmen
;ii t - Mj u ~ and dlffl'dlf prob-
lems deserve* our admiration. A
> I li mm machine ti
needed for a p -tioular armament
job- If clue route ho obtained from
oversea (Which was most, doubtful,
it would be at least a year before It
could he delivered, The was
given to u big private firm Vs en
Sinew, working from nothing feat *
1 ” < it) a t uli n <opted the
machine, had U u hut production
In a few month., and presented a
lull fhst was Sews than hklf the
estimated landed curt of the im-
ported
—ARGUS, 27/11/1941.
ENTERPRISE
AND
INGENUITY
Mochine Tools
For Munitions
' Sy moms H, JOHNSTON
; Behind Ute AU-Au*tr»lS«n Exhib'!-
jtion of .Munitions. whirl* is Bring
iheld at Mdtmnrne Town Hall. Ups
!»« almost Incredible story of an In- |
d sir i —» production i
rmintr's 1! d h ah occurred In a conn- '
Without the private
factories which had been estab-
lished in the days of peace those
tools could never have been made,
and without tools Australia’s
mighty munitions industry would
have rattled along in low gear for
a while, and then petered out
from sheer inanition.
SPEED IN PRODUCTION.
Scores of factories are now
producing mechanical presses
ranging from 100 tons capacity
up to 3,000 tons. One company
was asked to tackle a job com-
pletely new to it.
d« tim 11 . 1* " 1. 1 pt .*!
'i»w Ot J Oi.-O-ton for«i»B pr«i. Bluc-
I prints were made. Urn press was built
and it was ui actual production
within the re coi : tim. of 11 weeks 1
Many of our blggr-l ordnance (a. -
: furies are now equipped with hnga
’giia capable of turning, boring,
As one oversea engineer who
visited Australia remarked- 'The
pm Hi uter genius of (lie Australian
A’Appear* M be that »f sur-
mv-unung obstacles by just looking
nr them , and then walking round
thonr 5”
In other factories J hare veep the
[work of these men who ropy intri-
cate oversea mu. hmi-. wh® make
existing machines do lobs Uiey were
i.e-.-r ii.-rignec! to do. v.ho make the
machines whit-h make (hr munitions
cf rar item ply bup Pen .minsUon,
lots <>! -v- i <nd i-n» mute bad
lan gunge.-"
Remember tint 70.009 dHTer»n :
i tools - M’ir had < be made
A-'l.-re (he first Ai.lriralliin-made
Bren sun route he tedurt sh.
U war orocimcd u month- ahead c.f
otei'cliiit' A highly ItOtlcste rar;,
ndge gauging machine arrived for
a Government terrory. from Ger-
many, a vvr< l> bteorr war began. An
Australian ilvm established since war
began copied the ms.'hfcie so aucenvu
fiiliv tha’ -r d.-rs a or;ter job than
to .-tev it :i< •>.!
Ik-) f tin’ pi thut in the davs
of pe > rite <(,.u e'd rommernal
•Tolrranro” u possible flmlfc of
error) us Aurl.raljs.a tuol .tk*a was
generally J*32na or pvtUapsi
»f ’(I (I JIIW (2ftet v
are now priteuvipg gun tereroie With
8«0 separate soeaguriug points, each
nf which must ronlorra tu a toler-
am-e of sometlfla* like i-iO.eacth of
an inchl


_ „ UW •
question ol manpower. To those whop'
asked, “Are we doing enough?'’ then
answer was, “No! We will not bei 1
doing enough ur.Ul the war i« won.
: but we sire doing a tremendous!':
He referred members interested i
to what one section of Australian ■
j manpower was doing in this war
I to a well-written article on the
J All-Australian Exhibition of
Munitions by George H. Johnston
in The Argus of yesterday, which,
he said, was worth studying.
After months of metallurgical
research, the first ductile steel
anchor chain ever made in Aus-
tralia has been fitted to the Wil-
liamstown vehicular ferry.
; Ab ■». re-«lt .>1 flic success
1 achieved with this, new maiernl
sue test? conducted by the do*
: pence authorities, ttie new due*
rule steel i> bcins used b the
Royal Australian Navy and mer-
; .»canUlo marine lor anchor chains
fend saotrtte parts, .
In less ftlah a year Australia,
created m entirely new industry
that demanded the maximum of pre-
cision wortoanship—the industry
producing leases, prisms, and optics.
Australia now wakes her own tele-
scope and gim sights, in which the
tolerances are so She as to seem
fantastic—to some cases m fine as
l«l,006,800th part of an .Inch, or less
than 1-I,oooth part of 'he thick-
ness of a cigarette paper?
- None of-these Jobs could have been
done without tools. None of these
Jobs could have been done without
the co-operation of private in-
dustry,
-Sir Alexander Eoger was sent out
from England to -study Australian
munitions production, to advise and
to instruct He admitted that he had
done much more than that. He had
learnt many things from us. He
took With Mw all details of Aus-
tralian tee! production and Impro-
visation, he took with him details of
new Australian processes tor th#
production of various
arta samples of the alloys. "Our
people at home must know at once
how you have tackled your prob-
ferns,” he said. “We want you to giver,
Britain the fullest particulars ecf;
that our munitions Industry can
benefit by your enterprise and to- :
genalty. Australia's industrial wav s
effort is a sheer romance of pm- ;
liiitoS
—ARGUS, 28/11/1941,
HELP TO
WAR EFFORT \
PRAISED
"No Political |
Interference"!
Tribute to the willingness of
Australians to assist in the war
effort was paid by Sir Carl Jess,
chairman of the Manpower Com-
mittee, at a Royal Empire Society
luncheon at Hotel Australia yes-
terday.
He said; “There has been won- j
derful co-operation and acceptance |
of the fact that one must give up j
something to this war. In no In- |
stance has political SnSuenoe been |
used to force us to alter our de* |
cision." , |
Sir Cart Jess said that since the >
outbreak of war commonwealth -
manpower authorities had dealt withy
no fewer than 826,000 case* concern- j ■
: lug enlistments in the services and 1 ;
i exemptions sought by employers and I
(employees. There had been- critl-P
i-eism that some people were shelter-f ;
ling behind the list of reserved oocu-n
Ipatterns, but if there were no list;;
; they would find something else to I
shelter behind. i|
Sir Carl Jess said that the author!-ft
Wes had a great psychological-, prob-j-1
iem to overcome to dealing with the!
<—AGE, 8/12/1941.
WAR INDUSTRIES
Decentralisation
Policy
i SYDNEY, Sunday.—The Minister
;of Customs (Senator Keaaei, In a
broadcast to-night oa the Common -
I wealth's Industrial expansion since
: the war, pointed out that it would be
the future policy of the Federal Labor
Government to encourage the decett-
i irahsatlon of new industrial eater-
Overnight, almost, Australian fac-
tories had stepped out of their
swaddling clothes to become vital
adult factors in the defence of the
, Commonwealth, i _ ""
Inc said, ana m the
assistance attorned Great Britain and
her Allies, That healthy condition,
. arid the immediate response of Aus-
■ irallai. mqusvnem '
II of the Australian Labor party to a
1 fiscal policy of essential protection. :
i Standing valiantly behind, our Aus- 1
Ij tralian soldiers in the line, was an;
ij army to overalls, which provided one |
! of the epic stories of the war. The |
I employment in factories in Australia |
I had increased from 387.000 in 1833-34, j
1 to an- all-time record of 892,000 in(j
ij September last. The dependants of i
i; these workers, and the workers in- |i
’ directly employed through them in
i primary industries and other spheres,.!
: probably meant that-no ■fewer than.
3,500.000 Australians were imme-
diately concerned with Australian
manufacturing enterprises.
No longer was that defeatist catch-
cry of “Australia can’t do it” heard
Today, rightly, the popular convic-
tion was, “Australia can make it.’
For the ctirrent financial year it was
estimated that for the first time to j
the history of the Commonwealth,
excise revenue would actually exceed!
Customs revenue. This was' accounted
for by the fact that many luxury lines j
to which high rates of revenue;
duties applied were now being pro-;
duced locally. A very pleasing aspect
of the recent Industrial expansion was ;
the more equitable distribution of |
industries among the States. Haring,
regard to population, the 26,941 fac-
tories. covering every phase Of manu- ;
facture. were divided fairly evenly j
over the Commonwealth.
—HERALD, 24/6/42.
j new m enu: i\
\ STEEL I
I EOKI CABLES :
> •• —*i
For many years the chains
used to guide the Willlamstowa
cross tht ivcr hare beep
made of wrought iron, which has;
a greater resistance to sudden;
shams than the stod chains pi*e-
iviously available, i
; Since the war. however, wrought 1
ifiroh for chains Jim. become wn-
j obtainable. The suppliers of the
tdmtes. the Palklficr Machinery
‘ICo,, of Brisbane, got together
with the research engineers of
hf Broke . Mill P;v ( i Ltd and
finally evolved a steel substitute
lor the wivjusih iron previously
yused.
This chain consists o! two 82b
,■ .1 ' .S' V : . i,- )
■ welded "by electric means. Each of
the 6444 links has a breaking
strata of more than 37 tons -and
tis expected ip last as tong as, if
not longer, than, the wrought'
h >n i* rolefi'.i
—ACS, 30/6/42.
MATERIALS OF WAR
The astounding achievement per-
formed by the engineering in-
dustry in producing materials of
war for our armed forces was de-
scribed by the Minister of Muni-
tions (Mr. Makin) yesterday at
the opening of an exhibition.
Mr. Mnkin >atd he used the word
; “astounding” advisedly for, when
! several years ago a schedule of pro-
iductlon of armaments and munitions
I was prepared In consultation with
| the fighting services, it appeared to
! belong more to the realm of fantasy
I than to that of .reality. The men
'who conceived this production pro-
i gramme and their colleagues to office
\ and factory who had brought it to
i fruition bad to full measure the
characteristic Australian qualities of
courage. Initiative and enterprise.
The development programme tor
munitions factories which (to years
: ago Involved the relatively modest
j figure of £20,000.000, had now suc-
I cesstvely expanded to more than
| £§6,000,000,
—HERALD, 22/1/42. \
PLENTY OF
I I FIMF NT
;l( ‘EMENT ts likely to be used es-i
l|V tmsively m air-raid prccau-!
| Herns and, being an important-:
defence material, a great portion
|of the company's output has a,
I national significance. This- was
I remarked bv the acting chairman t
I tMr W B. McOasm* at Australian:
I Cement Ltd, annual meeting to-!
I day. * i
! : The major rcconst ruction and
expansion of the works at Geelong
in 1939 had therefore been timely.
:and it was hoped to meet-every
demand. Vital needs were coal
supplies sub rail transport
Arrangements have been marie]
, tn safeguard supplies of the special I
type of paper for cement bags ’
Large users could help by taking
; bulk deliveries.
Mr. McCann paid a tribute to
those responsible for building
up Australia’s secondary indus-
tries, often in the face of dis-
couragement. He spoke of the
inter-dependence of industries,
of the crippling effects if there
were any weak links.


i| M. ; pK m
I % I «*■ i
* 1 f< 1l 1| '*$k > J||r. Ik X -I : l6
w is W % IK M jff | v i«B FiS*
" I '.^
■ • r ' -’f%r ' * '■ ■■W**?*' '■"' •'
DEC. 10, 1941
THE LEADER
THE MACHINES THAT MAKE THE
MACHINES OF WAR
EDITORIAL CO-OPERA


; T H £ UAOB JAN. 14. 1942
pre-war industrial enterprise backbone
aPp- These are examples of
pw^ W I MHBfll several pages which
■MpilC-im 1181 ft appeared in The Mel-
H ' ,,r g***m eellent illustrated pub-


! THE LEADER JAN. 14. 1942
I Hi LEADt « MC ,0 ' IM ' ' PRE-WAR INDUSTRIAL ENTERPRISE BACKBONE
THE MACHINES THAT MAKE THE 1 VITAL WAR EFFORT


t (x\ V .
t vftCS x^f|S;i?^ :f ;X. . Mitv .
l\ W>
\ ,< w* ,*ifc3“' Vt*®* v**** •« « T °\vi* \ t #. v9 ' v <• Vt>‘* ,,,i , *A *.


WAR RECORD OF
AUSTRALIAN MANUFACTURERS
WHEN the public thinks of Australia’s war effort it thinks
usually in terms of guns and shells. It is suggested that no
opportunity is lost, therefore, in educating the people to the wide
range of vital war requirements which have had to be made in
Australia. Also, without the enterprise and initiative of Australian
Manufacturers in the past there would have been no foundation on
which to build our present huge industrial effort on which the
Nation’s life depends.
1. Clothing and Woven Materials.
2. Engineering and Equipment.
3. New Industries and Products.
4. Provisions and
Medical Stores.
CLOTHING AND WOVEN
MATERIALS
Stepping up the spinning, weaving, knitting, woollen and associated
industries and the boot manufacturing industry to the tremendous
needs of Australia’s war effort called for the mastering of many
intricate problems and the maxi-
mum of co-operation by all con-
cerned. An indication of Australia’s
production is gathered from the
following facts:
Blankets : Pre-war output approx.
30.000 a week. Now well over
75.000 a week.
Boots: Pre-war requirements
were normally 25,000 pairs a week.
Now stepped up to well over
75,000 pairs a week.


Socks: 175,000 pairs a week for military use alone.
Woven Materials: Formerly imported from Italy and Germany,
Barathea is now made in Australia and used extensively for clothing.
The complete range of clothing required for a war effort is consider-
able. At the end of 1941 10,000 military garments were required
every week, including singlets, underpants, putties, uniforms, etc.
ENGINEERING and EQUIPMENT
The most outstanding aspect of engineering and equipment is the
development of the machine tool industry in Australia. In little
more than two years orders have been placed amounting to approxi-
mately £4,000,000, and many thousands of machine tools, presses
and other units have been delivered. Machine tools used for the
production of guns, shells, etc., include engine lathes, gun lathes,
capstan and turret lathes and shell lathes.
Plant is also made for making shell and aerial bombs of greater
size, shell making equipment, milling, shaping, grinding and sawing
machines.
By the end of 1941 manufacture of mechanical presses had included
2,450 cartridge-making presses, many 3,000 and 2,000 ton presses
and more than 200 power and hydraulic presses ranging from 100
to 1,000 ton capacity.
Australian manufacturers in co-operation with the Government are
also producing huge quantities of small arms, small arms munitions,
explosives, guns, gun ammunition, artillery stores, bren gun carriers,
armoured fighting vehicles, engineer stores, search light equipment,
optical munitions, signalling equipment, radio gear, mechanical
transport, miscellaneous aircraft components and many other
miscellaneous items.


* • r
NEW INDUSTRIES AND PRODUCTS
Little known by the general public arc the new industries and
products and raw materials which have been developed in Australia
to meet the needs of the war. Practically no major obstacle has
proved unsurmountable. War equipment now being produced
includes Beaufort Bombers, predictors, air bombs, searchlights,
material for parachutes, aeroplane engines, range-finders, paravanes,
torpedoes, mines, gas masks, tin hats, surgical instruments and
special collapsible boats for the army. New ranges of steel alloys
produced in Australia are now used for gun barrels, bullet proof
plate, armoured fighting vehicles, cast-steel armoured hulls for
tanks, tool steel, ship building, motor industry, etc. Gun cotton
now unobtainable from overseas is made in Australia from wood
pulp. Optical glass, which was only manufactured in Great Britain
during the last war and had previously been almost a monopoly
in Germany since its invention, was mastered in the space of eighteen
months in Australia, and production now includes such intricate
instruments as dial sights, telescope sights, directors, range finders
and other high precision instruments.
Other interesting aspect of new developments include Metallic
Magnesium, Cables, Crystals for radio equipment, special aircraft
instruments and surgical and dental instruments, all formerly
imported into Australia, and now made here. Thousands of
instruments necessary to equip field hospitals come under this
category.
Summarised, it may be said that almost every essential item for war
use, previously imported, is now in production in Australia.


Kip
PROVISIONS and MEDICAL STORES
The immense stepping up of provisions and medical stores manu-
facture is often overlooked. Reserves of essential commodities,
allowing for evacuated people, are now established throughout the
length and breadth of the Commonwealth. In addition, there has
been in the past the feeding not only of our own A.I.F. and home
forces but that of British forces in other parts of the Empire and
Allied forces in Australia.
The canning industry has been developed, and fifteen types of
vegetables and eleven types of meat are now available in tins as
well as all types of food and foodstuffs. The soldiers’ diet today is
not only varied but dietetically as valuable as that cooked at home,
the tinned foods containing all the necessary vitamins, minerals, etc.
The expansion of this industry made necessary extensive planting
and growing of seeds and vegetables, also fruit for jam.
Eleven different kinds of meat are now canned, including corned
beef, corned mutton, meat and vegetable ration, pork and beans,
sausages, bacon, irish stew, stewed steak, brisket of beef and lamb
pie. The range of vegetables is particularly interesting, covering
cabbage, cauliflower, green peas, french beans, carrots, parsnips,
beetroot, silver beet, white turnips, spinnach, potatoes, brussel
sprouts, tomatoes, etc.
Biscuit Manufacturers have been called upon to co-operate and
provide enormous quantities of army biscuits. Literally thousands
of tons of biscuits have left the factories for army use.
The production of condensed milk has been stepped up to a point
far beyond what was considered possible even twelve months ago.
Considerable demands have been made on medical supplies and
Australia’s production today of drugs and medicines is a revelation
of what a country of 7,000,000 people can do.


31508022918025


