

AUSTRALIAN
BALL ROOM
GUIDE.
MRS. O. READ.


NATIONAL LIBRARY
OF AUSTRALIA
CANBERRA
This Book
was presented to
the Library
by MRS A. I. Mable-Brown
of (jtC’u //c/r/7


Third Edition.
MRS. CHAS. READ’S
AUSTRALIAN
BALL ROOM GUIDE.
SYDNEY:
Gibbs, Shallard, anii Co., Printers, 108 Pitt Street.
1876.




INDEX.
PAGE.
Preface 7
Etiquette 10
The Positions 15
The Quadrille 15
The Most Popular Quadrille 16
Paine’s First Set; or, The Real English Quadrille .. 18
The Parisian Quadrille 20
The Queen’s First Set 20
Paine’s Third Set 21
The Lancers 22
The Double Lancers 25
Minuet 28
The Caledonians 30
Spanish Dance 32
The Prince Imperial 33
The New Lancers 35
The Windsor Castle Quadrilles 37
The Gorlitza 38
La Varsoviana 38
Circassian Circle 39
The German Schottische .. ~ 39
The Country Dance .. 40
La Temp Ste 41
Sir Roger de Coverley .. .. 42


PAGE.
The Polka 42
Galopade ; or, Le Galop 44
Polka Mazurka 44
The Slow Waltz ; or, Valse i. Trois Temps .. .. 45
The Schottische 45
The Highland Schottische 47
The Quick Waltz ; or, Valse & Deux Temps 47
The Polonaise 48
Coquette
Calisthenic Exercises 49
Exercise for the Head .. 50
Extension Motions 51
First Practice
Balance Step .. .. 52
Gaining Ground 53
Pole Exercises 53
Index.


MRS. CHARLES READ'S
Classes are held at her residence, three times a week,
throughout the season—on Mondays and Tuesdays
for those requiring instruction in dancing, deport-
ment, &>c., and on Thursdays from eight to half-
past ten o'clock, for the practice of alt the new and
fashionable dances. A few private lessons from
Mrs. Charles Read will suffice to qualify any person
not previously acquainted with dancing to take pat t
in a ball with confidence and success.
Assembly Rooms,
75 William Street,
Woolloomooloo,


Teaches Dancing, Deportment, and Calisthenics,
at the principal schools in Sydney, Burwood, Par-
ramatta, Double Bay, IVaverley, &*c., &c.
Mrs. Charles Read also gives lessons to ladies
and gentlemen at her own residence, either privately
or in class.
Assembly Rooms,
75 William Street.
Mrs. Charles Read


PREFACE.
Dance, dance, let no cynic rebel ! . -r
See, the stars are for ever all dancing and twinkling
Tis the music of spheres that they dance to so well.
And that music is ceaseless, though soft be the tinkling.
Dance, dance, as long as you may ;
Nature gets up a great “ ballet ’’ about us ;
Her stage-room is vast, so come, trip it away,
For life’s opera cannot be perfect without us.
ELIZA COOK.
This little book will be found to contain all that
is essential to be known on dancing and deport-
ment by ladies and gentlemen, on their introduc-
tion to the ball-room. There is also added a
brief description of calisthenic exercises, the im-
portance of which —in imparting a free movement
to the limbs, preventing all awkward attitudes,
forming a graceful carriage, and expanding the
chest —it were difficult to over-estimate. Young
people of delicate frames are not unfrequently
found to acquire, by these exercises, renewed
health and vigour.
First impressions being generally the most last-
ing, it becomes a matter of paramount importance
that our deportment should be such as is calcu-
lated to influence others, on a first introduction,


in our behalf. So essential indeed is it to favour-
able impressions, that that subtle quality of the
mind—the taste—should not be offended through
the eye : that a young lady, for instance, with
round or high shoulders, head leaning forward in
advance of her feet, on entering a drawing-room,
would, in all probability, by the awkwardness of
her carriage, produce so unfavourable an impres-
sion, as no amount of good qualities on her part,
mental or otherwise, would suffice wholly to
remove.
The ever varying customs of the fashionable
world have altered many dances, and introduced
others among the latter may be named the Prince
Imperial Quadrilles, that have been received with
a degree of furore by the fashionable world such
as the novel and graceful character of the dance
was well calculated to achieve. Of this, and all
other dances now in vogue, a full and detailed
account will be found in this little book. Books
alone, however, it need hardly be said, fail to
convey a thorough knowledge of any art. “Good
rules may do much, but good models far more ;
for in the latter we have instruction in action.”
Lverything seen makes a deeper impression than
anything that is heard or read. A few good


lessons, combined with due attention to the rules
laid down, would do much for those who, without
much quickness of preception, are actuated by a
strong desire to learn. In this, as well as in
all other arts, half the success lies in the ardent
wish to succeed.
From the bad taste of some persons, and vulgar
styles occasionally practiced, this most graceful
art has, in certain quarters, been most severely
condemned, it is therefore thought advisable to
add a few commendatory quotations
Dancing.—The gymnasium of running, walking on stilts,
climbing, &c., steels and makes hardy single powers and
muscles but dancing, like a corporeal poesy, embellishes,
exercises, and equalizes all the muscles at once.
Richter.
Dancing. —This exercise is among the most healthful.
The body, as well as the mind, feels its gladdening influence.
No amusement seems more to have a foundation in our
nature. The true idea of dancing entitles it to favour. Us
end is to realize perfect grace in motion ; and who does not
know that a sense of the graceful is one of the higher faclil
W. Ellery Channing.
ties of our nature ?-
Good breeding is as necessary a quality in conversation,
to accomplish all the rest, as grace in motion and dancing.
Sir W. Temple.
Dancing.— There are parents who will not allow their
children to be taught dancing, regarding dancing as sinful.
The result is that the children are awkward, and unlike
other children ; and when they are suffered to spend an
evening among a number of companions who have all
learned dancing, they suffer a keen mortification which
A. K. H. Boyd,
author
older people ought U> understand. —.
of Recreations of a Country Parson.


Now, if the promoters of higher education for women
will compe. girls to any training analagous to our public
school games; if for instance, they will insist on that
natural and wholesome of all exercises—dancing • if, in
short, they will teach girls not merely to understand the
Greek tongue, but to copy some of the Greek physical
training of that music and gymnastic” which helped to
make the cleverest race of the old world the ablest race
likewise ; then they earn the gratitude of the patriot and
the physiologist by doing their best to stay the downward
tendencies of the physique, and therefore ultimately of the
morale, in the' coming generation of English women.—
C. Kingsley.
Dancing.— Bad company, untimely hours, evil dances,
make the exercise evil ; good company, wholesome hours,
and home influences, make it a very great benefit
H. W. Beecher.
Rev.
Dancing should be cultivated as an elegant
amusement in the intercourse of society. The
principal thing to be sought after in learning to
dance, is grace and a perfect ease of movement.
1 he disposition to measured motion is implanted
strongly in human nature. “ Among all nations,”
we are told, ‘‘in the first stages of civilization, it
was used as an expression of excited feelings.”
Refinement now teaches us to subdue this outward
expression, and accordingly all hopping, jumping,
or anything like movement of the body should be
carefully avoided. On the other hand, a grave
face, moving with slow majestic steps, is entirely
out of place in any assembly where people meet for
recreation and amusement.


But as of old, all now be gold ;
Move, move then to the sounds ;
And do not only walk your solemn round,
But give those light and airy bounds.
Ben Johnson.
In order to make the ball-room a pleasant
resort, all persons should endeavour, as much as
possible, to be agreeable to the company assem-
bled ; not singling out one or two partners for the
favourite dances. Even those who stand in the
delicate position of engagement should be careful
not to show too plainly their preference.
The association of young ladies and gentlemen
in the dancing and ball-room should improve
their manners as well as their carriage; and it
would do so if they would endeavour to study how
to make themselves agreeable, remembering “ In
matters apparently trivial, attention to politeness
tends to form ourselves to become habitually so.
On first entering the ball-room, a gentleman
should immediately address himself to the mistress
of the house, or hostess, and afterwards he is
at liberty to join his friends. When putting his
name on a lady’s programme, he should select
but two dances, or at the most three, remembering
she might wish to dance more frequently with


others present, and his selfishness may lessen the
pleasure of the ball to her.
A well bred gentleman will take compassion
on any neglected young lady, whom he may sup-
pose desirous of dancing, and will solicit her hand
for a quadrille. However plain or unattractive
she may be, his politeness and courtesy will be
duly appieciated by those who possess good feel-
ings. After each dance it is customary for the
partners to promenade together for a few minutes,
but when the gentleman takes the lady back to
her friends, he should not seat himself at her side,
or he will prevent others from inviting her for the
next dance.
The top of the ball-room is generally the farthest
from the door. This should be steadily borne in
mind, as the couple at the top take the lead, and
the couple at the right hand lead at the side.
Politeness should teach that those couples, who
by age or otherwise are entitled to priority, should
always have the top of the quadrille assigned to
them. A gentleman at a ball requesting the
Master of the Ceremonies to introduce him to a
partner, should be careful to stand up only in
those dances with which he is familiar, as the
lady is bound, by the rules of etiquette, to accept


him as partner, provided she is not already en-
gaged. It therefore places her in a trying position
to be compelled to lead through, or instruct a
gentleman with whom she may not be acquainted.
Too much cannot be said against the want ot
taste and propriety shown by some gentlemen in
holding their partners—to this, and not to any
well founded objections to the dances themselves,
must be ascribed the disfavour with which the
Waltz, Polka, &c., are viewed by people not
otherwise opposed to dancing, but disposed to look
upon it in its true light—that of a healthful and
innocent recreation.
In all circular dances, the most agreeable and
the most easy way for a gentleman to hold his
partner, is to take her right hand in his left, raise
it to a level with her waist, rounding the elbow,
keeping it out a little; the right hand should be
placed on his partners waist, so as to support and
lead her round; all pulling, or anything like
dragging should be carefully avoided. The gen-
tleman leads, his partner must take care to follow,
and keep exactly together. Her left hand should
be upon his shoulder, and not on his arm.
The ball-room dress for gentlemen should bq,
black ; ties may be either white or black. Married


ladies, and ladies not very young, of course
consult their own opinion as to evening costume,
due regard being paid to contrast of colours ; but
young ladies should wear white, of any thin
material. The custom in Italy is very good, of
young ladies always appearing in the ball-room
>n white, either of net or gauze, the only orna-
ment being a sash—jewels are quite out of
character on young persons. Half mourning is
allowable, but not deep mourning. Such sombre
habiliments are out ot place.
The hints on deportment cannot be considered
complete without some words on the curtsy A
writer recently says, “This graceful salutation,
now almost in abeyance, is certainly very difficult
to accomplish, and even in the Court of Louis the
fourteenth, ladies won reputation and celebrity
for no other reason than the elegance with which
they performed the curtsy. But in this practical
age, all these refinements are forgotten. The
ancient Greeks and Romans did not despise them ;
and to the Hebrews lessons in deportment were
essential, as they celebrated the crossing of the
Red Sea by a national dance.”
The time occupied in making the curtsy is while
six is counted slowly, three counts while bending


low, and three counts while rising. Standing
erect with the heels together, toes turned out,
place the left foot a little behind the right, bend
both knees slowly when rising, bring the feet in
the first position again. The head should be
slightly bent forward. These few directions, if
carefully followed, will enable a lady to accom-
plish a graceful curtsy, a most desirable acquisition.
THE POSITIONS.
There are five positions in which the feet are to
be exercised, as a preliminary to learning the dan-
ces ; one or other of these positions occur in
every step, and a correct knowledge of them tends
to make further details much easier to he under-
stood.
1. Place the heels close together, the toes turned
out to form a right angle.
2. Move the right foot as far as possible with-
out bending the knee ; point the toe to the ground.
3. Draw the right foot back, and place the heel
in the middle of the left foot.
4. Point the toe forward in a similar manner
to the second, but forward, instead of to the side.
5. Bring the heel of the right foot to the toe of
he left.
The Quadrille
Is the most universal and the most social of all
dances, allowing passing conversation, and being


graceful and elegant in its movements. Previous
to the commencement of the figure, the music
plays eight bars ; the gentleman should bow, and
the lady curtsy to their partners.
QUADRILLE.
Before giving an explanation of the figures! a
few words as to the manner of dancing it may be
found useful. It should always be kept in mind
that in this, as well as in all other dances, ladies
and gentlemen should endeavour to move through
the figures as much as possible on the toes, the
heels only resting on the ground when the dancer
returns to his place in the figure; or, when he has
to remain stationary.
It is also very important that the toes be turned
out at all times. When still, the feet should be
placed in the third position ; that is, the heel of
the right, placed to the middle of the left foot.
Formerly, the steps were most intricate, and
required long practice before attempting the figures,
each part having its own particular steps. Modern
fashions, however, have done away with this
difficulty, once so formidable. This style of dan-
cing is illustrated well by Richard Swiveller, at the
breaking-up party.
The Most Popular Quadrille.
X. Le Pantalon. —The lady and gentleman stand-
ing at the top of the figure change places with
the opposite couple at the bottom of the figure ;
gentleman passing outside, taking eight walking
steps, re-cross, and return to places.


Eight walking steps. —Lady’s chain, that is, each
lady crosses over to opposite gentleman, giving their
right hand to each other when they meet, passing
on to the opposite gentleman going round them,
giving their left hand, and returning in a similar
manner to their own partners ; both couples cross
over to opposite place, and return apart to places,
in the same way as the figure commenced—called
half right and left.
2. L'Ete. —Top and opposite couple advance
four steps, retire four steps, repeat the advancing
and retiring, cross over to opposite places, straight
over, not as right and left, advance and retire
once, recross to places, and turn partners.
3. LaPoule. —Top lady and opposite gentleman
cross over to opposite places, re-cross, giving left
hand to each other when meeting, right hand to
partners, fall in a line, and set half promenade to
opposite sides ; the same lady and gentleman
advance and retire, advance again—bow and curt-
sy, retire —join hands with partners —all four
advance and retire—return to place; second lady
and gentleman dance the same, then the side
couples follow in succession.
4. La Pastorale. —First couple advance and
retire twice, the second time the lady remains
with the opposite couple, the gentleman then
advances and retires with the two ladies —leaving
them both with the first gentleman —brings them
forward and back twice —joins hands all four—
twice to opposite sides, and return to places.


5. Final. —The whole of the couples forming
the quadrille, side couples included, join handsand
advance four steps—retire four steps —repeating
this. This is called the circle. Top and bottom
couples galop forward four steps—galop back—
galop across to opposite side—forward and back
four steps, return to places. Le Grand Ronde or
circle is repeated after each figure.
Paine's First Set; or, the Real
English Quadrille
I. Le Pantalon. —The top and bottom couples
cross over—eight walking steps; re-cross the
same. This crossing and re-crossing is called
right and left, and occupies eight bars. The
gentleman in crossing and re-crossing always
keeps to the right of his vis a vis lady, keeping
her inside the figure, in other words, he moves first
towards his own left hand, and then towards his
right, thus describing an arc, or part of a circle—
balancez, turn partners (eight bars) ladies’ chain
—half promenade (eight bars) couples crossing
over to each others places, hands joined (four bars,
or eight walking steps)—return apart to places—
(four bars). Side couples do the same.
2. L'Eld. —First or top lady and opposite
gentleman advance four steps, retire four steps,
(eight bars), cross over, turning round at mid-
way, so as to be vis a vis to each other; in crossing
eight steps in all, (four bars), —advance and retire
four steps (four bars), return towards partners, with


balancez, turn partners (eight bars in all).
Second lady and first gentleman repeat this, then
side couples follow, the couples on the right oi
the top couple having the precedence. The lady
on the right side advances to meet the opposite
gentleman.
3. La Poule. —First lady and opposite gentle-
man cross over, re-cross, giving left hands, and
fall in a line (eight bars) —set four in a line, half
promenade to opposite places (eight bars) first
lady and vis a vis advance and retire twice (eight
bars) —both couples advance and retire, hands
joined, return half right and left to places (eight
bars) —second lady and opposite gentleman re-
peat this, then the sides follow in succession.
4. Trenise. —The first couple advance and retire,
then advance again, the lady remaining with the
opposite gentleman (eight bars), and at the same
time the gentleman retires alone, the two ladies
then cross over and he advances between them,
turning round at midway to be vis a vis to his
partner, he and his vis a vis lady then return to
their places (eight bars) —balancez to partners.
The second couple or couples then do the same,
after that the sides, or third and fourth couples
follow' in succession.
5. or Final —Le Grand Ronde , or Great
Round. —The whole party forming one circle
move four steps towards the centre, retire four
steps, advance centrewards four steps, again retire
four steps. After that, L’Etfi, or the same as
Quadrille, is introduced, and Le Grand Ronde is
repeated after each figure.


The Parisian Quadrille.
This is half a Quadrille. —Two couples vis a vis
are arranged either across or along the room,
the figures are exactly the same as Paine’s First
Set, but only half the music is required, having
no side couples to repeat the figures ; it is no im-
provement upon the original quadrille, but it suits
very well those who like rushing about and quick-
ness more than graceful dancing ; indeed, unless
some check be given in certain places, the quad-
rille hitherto considered to be so graceful in its
character will soon lose its good name.
The Queen's First Set,
USUALLY KNOWN AS “PAINE’s SECOND SET."
X. Le Pantalon.
2. L'Etl
3" La Poule.
These three are danced in the same order as the
first set. or,
4. La Trenise. —First couple advance and retire
twice, the lady remaining on the opposite side;
the two ladies go round the first gentleman, who
advances up the centre—set, and turn hands.
5- La Pastorale. —First couple advance and re-
tire twice; first lady now on the other side, and
second couple advance, leaving the two ladies
with the opposite gentleman, who advances twice j
hands four half-round, and half right and left.


Finale Figure — VEte. —Ladies’ hands across
and back ; balancez all eight; chasse across or
grand round at the end.
Paine's Third Set.
1. Right and left—balancez, turn partners—
ladies’ chain —half promenade, half right and left,
2. First lady and gentleman opposite advance
and retire—chasse right and left—traversez—
chasse right and left—re-cross—turn partners.
3. First lady and gentleman opposite traversez,
back—left hands —balancez, four in a line —half
promenade—two advance and retire twice—four
advance and retire —half right and left.
4. Ladies’ chain double—all set turn partners—
first lady and gentleman opposite advance and
retire —chasse right and left —traversez —chasse
right and left—re-cross, turn partners, half
promenade—half right and left.
5. All join hands and set in a circle—four
advance and set —change ladies, retire —again
advance—resume partners —retire to places—set
and turn partners —right and left—four opposite
promenade all round.
6. Right and left—first gentleman advance twice
and retire —lady opposite do the same—set, and
turn partners —ladies’ hands across and back—all
set and cross, gentlemen outside —all turn partners
to places. Finish with grand promenade.


The Lancers.
The Lancers have again become a very popular
dance, in consequence of their revival at Her
Majesty’s state balls ; they are very elegant figures
when well performed ; only eight make a set.
It has been observed by Sir E. Dick Lander, in
his account of the Queen’s visit to Scotland,
entitled, “ The Royal Progress, ” that every per-
son was much pleased with the manner Her Maj-
esty performed all the dances in which she took
part, carefully adhering to all the established rules
of the dance, leaving no part out, and giving to
each its proper time. He mentions that ladies
should endeavour to follow this excellent example,
which adds so much to the harmony of the dance.
If he speaks so of the Home dancing, what could
be said of the Australian manner of going through
this favourite and really pretty dance. Some per-
sons try whenever they can, to leave out parts, and
make up for the omission by turning their partners
round and round to fill up the lost time ; but it
will be found no alteration is necessary to these
figures, and if all do not dance them exactly alike,
confusion must ensue every time they are danced.
A gentleman should be careful not to take his
partner to a place already engaged by another
couple ; but give way with a polite bow on being
informed to that effect. When once the Quadrille
or Lancers are formed, the couples should on no
account change their places to other sets where
perhaps some most particular friends are standing.


The breach of this most particular law of eti-
quette, has often occasioned very unpleasant
feelings to the other couples left in the set, as
each may consider they are the cause of the occur-
rence.
FIGURES OF THE LANCERS.
1. After four couples are arranged vis a vis, the
leading lady and opposite gentleman advance and
retire, then re-advance, joining hands; pass round
each other and return to places during eight bars.
Top couple join hands and cross over, be-
tween the opposite couple, while the latter pass
outside to opposite places. The leading couple
then separate, and the opposite couple pass be-
tween them, their hands joined, to their places
occupying eight bars. All four couples then
set to corners and turn to places during eight
bars more. The second couple then take the lead,
and the figure is repeated. Then the third and
fourth couples follow in succession, so that the
figure is repeated four times. Each figure is thus
repeated. .
2. The leading couple advance and retire, the
gentleman holding the lady’s left hand, they re-
advance and the gentleman leaves the lady in the
centre of the quadrille and retires alone (eight
bars)—then four steps to the right, four back
again and turn to places (eight bars) —the side
couples then join top and bottom couples, forming
four in a line ; when so placed, all advance and
retire together, and each gentleman turns his own


partner to place (eight bars). The figure is re-
peated four times.
3. Four ladies into the centre of the figure (two
bars) pause (two bars) —all making low curtsys
(four bars) —making eight bars for the first part of
the figuie ; then the four ladies join right hands
and go across half round, turn, join left hands and
back to places (eight bars). It is repeated four times.
4. Leading gentleman takes his partner by the
left hand, they advance to the couple on the right,
and bow and curtsy, and then pass to the fourth
couple, and again curtsy (eight bars)—all four
chasse croisez (or change sides), and leading
couples return to places (eight bars) —-top and
bottom couples right and left (eight bars)—repeat
the figure four times.
Final. Figure commences with the music—
each gentleman faces his partner and takes her
right hand, and after three chords of music, pre-
sents his left hand to the lady on the right, then
his right hand to the next lady, and so on alter-
nately till he regains his place—all do the same
at the same time—this forms a chain called the
grand chain, and occupies sixteen bars—the leading
couple promenade inside the figure and return to
their own places, finishing with their faces turned
outside the quadrille—the side couples fall in
behind them, and the bottom couples remain as
they were, the whole forming two lines, the gen-
tlemen on one side and the ladies on the other
(eight bars) —they all chasse-croisez, the ladies to
the left the gentlemen to the right, the gentlemen
passing behind their own partners—ladies then to


the right and gentlemen to the left, occupying
eight bars—the leading lady leads off to the
right, the leading gentleman off to the left, and they
meet at the bottom of the quadrille, and pass up
to their own places. All the ladies at the same
time follow the top lady, and all the gentlemen
follow the top gentleman (eight bars) the four
ladies join hands, and the four gentlemen do like-
wise, facing partners —all advance and retiie, each
turns partner to places (eight bars) grand chain
—the other couples then repeat this, and the grand
chain is repeated each figure—after the last the
grand promenade. In Paris the last figure has
been slightly altered, inasmuch as when they
present right hands they make a formal bow and
curtsy ; likewise when they regain their places.
Lancers for Sixteen Persons.
COMPOSED BY LOUIS D'EGVILLE.
1. The first ladies and opposite gentlemen (num-
bers I, 8,3, 6, see Diagram No. i) advance, retire,
turn in centre, and finish in their places, r igures
i and 2 pass between the opposite couple, figures
7 and 8 ; figures 3 and 4 between 5 and 6 ; in
returning, figures 5 and 6 between 3 and 4, and 7
and 8 between 1 and 2. The eight ladies set to
the gentlemen on the right; the eight gentlemen
to the ladies on their left ; they then turn and
take their original places.
2. The top and bottom couples (numbers 1,2,
5, 6 -see diagram No. 1) advance and retire;
advance a second time, and leave the ladies oppo


site j then set to them and turn, finishing in their
original places. All sixteen then join hands and
advance to the centre, back to places, and turn
partners.
3- The top and bottom ladies (numbers I, 5
see diagram No. x) advance to the centre and
stop ; the opposite gentlemen (numbers 8,4) do
the same ; courtesy and bow, then return to places,
ihe eight ladies hands across and back again,
whilst their partners go half round and back again
moving in the contrary direction to the ladies.
4. Couples (numbers 1,2, 3,4, 5,6, 7, B— see
(Uagrarn No. l) move to the right, numbers 1,2,
finishing opposite 9, xo—3,4, opposite 11, 12—
5,6, opposite 13, 14 —7,8, opposite 15, 16 ; then
all eight move round to the left, 1,2, finishing
opposite 13, 14—3, 4, opposite 15, 16—5, 6,
opposite 9, 10—7, 8, opposite 11, 12 ; chasse-
croissez, then give the right hand to partner, and
half turn to original places. Chaine Anglaise
(right and left). This figure is danced twice.
5• Th e Grand Chaine. This must be danced
by forming an inner and outer circle (sec diagram
A 3)> which is not more difficult to accomplish
than the ordinary chaine, numbers 1,2, 3,4, then
turn towards each other, and finish with their
backs to the bottom of the dance ; numbers I, 2,
taking the lead, each of the remaining couples
advance behind the numbers 1,2, or leading
couple, the ladies in a line at one side, their part-
ners in a line on the other (see diagram No, 2).
Cross and re-cross with partners ;' the first and"
fifth lady (numbers 1 and 9) turn off to the right,


followed by the three ladies behind them ; the
first and fifth gentlemen (numbers 2 and 10) turn
off to the left, followed by the three gentlemen ;
each couple meet again in the centre. Ladies
advance and retire in a line on one side ; the gen-
tlemen in a line on the other ; then all turn part-
ners into places. Inner and outer chaine.


The Music to be played four times through in each
figure.
Minuet.
I have lately introduced at my academy, and at
the principal schools, with success, particularly to
advanced pupils, the Minuet du Court, commonly


called the Minuet de la Cour, composed by the
elegant Noverre. It was styled the Minuet of
the Heart, from the peculiar expression of senti-
ment so discernible both in the music and figure :
the “ Court Minuet,” from being long a favourite
at the English and Parisian courts.
The stately minuet is begun,—
Oh, dance of dignity and grace !
Thou hast but ill resigned thy place
To fashion’s lighter dances.
Thy steps, that sentiment impart,
Thy movements, minuet of the heart,
Thy elegant, thy courtly train,
That brings us back old times again ;
Spreading its folds in graceful flow,
Following the steps like handmaids fair,
And giving that commanding air
Our days do not bestow.
Description of the step and figure of the Minuet ;
Commence by sliding to the right, the lady puts
back her right foot making a slow curtsy when
resting, the left toe pointed to the ground, the
gentleman at the same time making a bow and
putting his right foot forward three graceful walk-
ing steps, and then turn face to and curtsy to
partner, slide once, bend low, and when rising
keep the toes pointing to the ground—slide again
and turn to places as at the commencement —the
gentleman takes the lady’s hand, and leading her
six steps forward, bows low —balancez, and waltz
back to places—halfbalancez —three steps forward
and turn--half balancez, turning from your part-
ner—three steps forward—turn —the gentleman
passes his lady before him into his place with the
glassade forward and one glassade backward while


passing', repeat to return to places—waltz three
slow steps round each other, holding the right hand
turn and waltz, holding left hand, the lady pass
under her partner’s arm to her place—finish same
commencement of the figure, and end at the
thud curtsy and bow. It must be observed, that
throughout the whole dance, the lady keeps her
left foot forward while her partner his right.
The Caledonians.
1. The first couple and the couple opposite
hands across and back again— set and turn partners
—ladies’ chain—half promenade—half right and
left.
2. First gentleman advance twice, and the four
ladies set to gentlemen on their right—turn with
both hands, each taking next lady’s place—pro-
menade quite round.
3- First lady and opposite gentleman advance
and retire—join hands and turn to places— top
couple lead between the opposite couple— return
leading outside—set at the corners, and turn with
both hands to places—all set in a circle.
4. First lady and opposite gentleman advance
and stop, then their partners advance—turn to
places—the four ladies move to the right, each
taking next lady’s place, and stop—the four
gentlemen move to the left, each taking next
gentleman’s place, and stop—ladies repeat the
same to right—then gentlemen to left—all join


hands and promenade round to places, and turn
partners. . ,
5. First gentleman leads his partner round
inside the figure —the four ladies advance, join
right hands, and retire—the gentlemen do the
same — a ll set and turn partners —grand chain or
eight half round and set—all promenade to places
and turn partners—all change sides, join right
hands at corners, and set back again to places
finish with grand promenade.
SECOND SET.
1. Ladies’ chain—first couple and couple oppo-
site advance and retire —half right and left then
the side couples do the same —all promenade to
places, and turn partners.
2. First gentleman advances twice —first lady
and lady opposite advance and retire change
places—first couple and couple opposite advance
—resume partners and turn to places.
3. First lady and gentleman advance and set —
turn with both hands to places —first couple
opposite advance and retire, then turn partners, at
the same time the side couples change sides and
back again—all set at corners, joining right hands,
and all turn to places —all set in a circle and turn
partners.
4'. First lady and opposite gentleman advance
and retire —back to back, set and turn partners
half promenade—half right and left —first couple
and couple opposite advance and retire set to
couple at their right—all change places with
partners and set—all turn partners to places.


5- All change sides, join right hands at the
corners, and back again—first lady advances twice,
all the gentlemen advance and retire —all set to
partners—all chain figure a quarter round, and
set, then the gentlemen turn the ladies quite
with right hand—chain figure again into
opposite places—lead partners with right hand
quite round—all promenade to places and turn
partners —finish with change sides.
Spanish Dance.
Formerly the principal waltz of the evening,
before the introduction of the Valse a Deux Temps’
and other round dances, as then it was seldom
that more than one circular waltz was performed.
It is occasionally introduced at a private party,
and sometimes at a public ball, but very rarely.
The couples stand as for a country dance (some-
times the couples are arranged in a circle) except
that the first gentleman must be on the lady’s left
side, and the first lady on the gentleman’s side ;
and to prevent the other couples waiting, every
fourth lady and gentlemen exchange places ;by
this means delay is prevented, and the whole can
start at once in the next movement. The first
gentleman and second lady advance and retire
with a waltz step and change places—first lady
and second gentleman do likewise at the same
time—first gentleman and partner advance and
retire with waltz step, and exchange places—
second gentleman and partner do likewise at the


same time—first gentleman and second lady repeat
this figure—and first lady and second gentleman
do likewise at the same time—first gentleman and
partner repeat the same —first lady and second
gentleman do the same at the same time—all join
hands and advance to the centre and retire pass
ladies to the left—all join hands again, and advance
to the centre as before, and pass ladies to the left
this is repeated twice more—each gentleman
takes his own partner, and the two couples waltz
round each other once or twice, leaving the
second lady and gentleman at the top of the
dance as in the Country Dance —the first lady and
g entleman repeat the same figure with every suc-
ceeding couple to the end of the dance.
The Prince Imperial.
A new French quadrille, lately composed by
Cordon, of Paris, and received readily in all the
higher circles of society, on account of being
danced by the elegant and spirituelle Eugenie,
Empress of the French, whose superiority in
matters of taste has given her precedence in
fashionable life to Tout le Mond. It requires to
be danced slower than quadrilles formerly, that
sufficient time may be given to perform the grace-
ful evolutions of the figure.
THE QUADRILLE.
I. The top and opposite couples turn to the
couples on the right hand, at the same time bow
and take the lady over to their vis a vis place


ladies all round and back, or ladies’ chain of fou
—four steps to the light, facing partners—all eight
back turn partners —sides do the same.
2. First lady and opposite gentleman advance
and retire—advance again—turn—remain opposite
the second lady—the second lady then passing
through to the opposite side, and turn the gentle-
man with the left hand, remaining in his lady’s
place—advance and retire all four—half ladies’
chain—all eight chasse-croisez—turn at corners
with right hand partners, with left hand to places.
3- Each gentleman places his partner in the
centre, bows and retires, occupying four bars
each —ladies turn round to the right into their
places, or join hands, and raising them, turn
once round the figure backwards—gentlemen then
join, balancez in a circle and turn partners.
4. Double pastorelle, or top and opposite
couple advance and retire second time —the first
lady and second gentleman remain at the side—
three advance twice, the gentleman and lady alone
advance twice second time, bowing and turning to
the three on their right—a round of four—half
right and left to places.
5. Le tourbillion. Each lady turn all the
gentlemen going round the figure, and giving her
right hand to each —first lady and opposite gentle-
man advance twice second time—turn four steps
to the right, facing partners, back, and turn —at
the final, place the ladies in the centre and bow,
lead them to places and bow again. All these


figures must be four times repeated, and all the
turns must be made with the hands only, with
pas marche step.
The New Lancers.
1. First lady and opposite gentleman chassez to
the right and left and turn quite round, with right
hand to places—first lady and gentleman and
opposite couple change places and back again
—first lady and gentleman turn passing in the
centre and return to places passing outside —the
four gentlemen join left hands in the centre at
the same time, their right hands to their partners
all forming a cross ancl balancez—the gentle-
men change places with their partners —the
four ladies coming to the centre, joining both
right and left hands with each other, form-
ing a cage—the four ladies with hands joined
dance round to the left, while the gentlemen
singly dance quite round the reverse way outside,
then turn their partners to their places —the othe
six do the same. •
2. First gentleman and lady advance and retire
twice, the second time he leaves the lady on the
opposite side of the gentleman—chassez to the
right and left and turn his partner —balancez to
the sides, then advance and retire in two lines,
and turn partners to places —the other six do the
same.
3- First lady chassez forward alone, then the
opposite gentleman, both chassez to the right and


chassez together round to the left into their own
places- -then the four ladies join their right hands
in the centre, at the same time giving their left
hands to their partners’ left hands, all dancing
quite round, in the form of a cross—each gentle-
man turns his partner round to the left into their
own places —the other six do the same.
4. One gentleman and his partner, with the
lady on his left, three advance and retire twice,
balancez, and pass between the two ladies, three
half round to the left, and back again—the other
three gentlemen do the same figure—after which
the ladies do the same figure with the gentlemen.
5. Right and left all round, making ballotez
every time the right and left hand is given—first
gentlemen gives his right hand to his partner's
left, and turn half round in their own places,
their back to the third couple—the second gen-
tleman and lady follow the first couple—the
third gentleman and lady follow the second
couple— the fourth gentleman and lady follow
the third couple, only one couple advancing at a
time, when all form in two lines—the ladies
on the right hand of the gentlemen—all facing
the top of the room, then chassez all across twice
and pas de basque twice —the gentlemen turn off
round to the left and the ladies to the right—gen-
tlemen follow first gentleman, and the ladies first
lady—when all are returned to their own former
position they turn off, then form two lines, each
gentleman facing his partner, and chassez forward
and back —each gentleman turns his partner into


their own places —conclude with the grand square,
viz.: first and third couple chassez forward while
the side couple chassez open —first and third
couples chassez open while the side couples chassez
forward—first and third couple chassez back while
the side couples chassez close —first and third
couples chassez into places while the side couples
chassez backward into places. The figure com-
mences next with the second couple, then with the
third, wuth the fourth, when the said couples
commence the figure, they chassez fonvard, in the
square, while the third couple chassez open.
The Windsor Castle Quadrilles.
1. Le Pantelon, or the opposite couple advance
and retire—again advance, the gentlemen ex-
changing partners —balancez —turn partners the
four advance and retire as before, resuming partners
half promenade —half right and left.
2. L’Ete, or the four gentlemen advance and
retire—ladies do the same —the first lady and
gentleman vis-a-vis advance twice, and pass round
each other to places —right and left.
3. La Poule, or ladies’ chain—half promenade
—half right and left ladies’ hands across half
round—back again, joining left hands, each
gentleman joins right hands with partners set,
and turn to places.
4. La Trenise, or the gentleman and his partner
advance twice, leaving the lady at the left of the


gentleman opposite—chassez to the right and left
—turn to their places—half promenade—half riyht
and left. b
i 5- Le Grand Rond L’Ete, or all change sides—
the first lady advances and retires—opposite gentle-
man does the same—the two advance and pass
round each other—turn partners right and left.
The Gorlitza.
This round dance was introduced by Veran ; it
is of Polish origin, and requires much practice,
which, it is feared, will debar its becoming very
popular ; this is to be regretted, for it is well
worth the trouble of learning. No description in
writing will convey a proper idea of its execution,
l herefore a teacher must be applied to for the step,
but for the figure it is sufficient to say that those
of the Polka are the same.
La Varsoviana.
It is a very pretty dance, being a compound o
the Polka and Mazurka, with the rest of two-
thirds of a bar alternately with each foot, which
gives it a characteristic style.
The gentleman takes his lady as usual, they
make one bar of the Polka step, and in the next
bar only one step of the Polka, resting the other
two measures of the bar with the feet gracefully
extended ; then repeat the same with the other
foot, which will bring you quite round at the end
of the fourth bar. This may be repeated for six


teen bars. The Mazurka step straight forward
two bars, then Polka one bar, turning round and
resting as before at the next bar, then repeat with
the other foot, which will bring you quite round
at the eighth bar. This may be repeated for six-
teen bar's. Then Polka or redowa steps four bars
and pause ; repeat this for sixteen bars, then re-
peat the whole.
Circassian Circle.
In this dance the whole of the company may
join, and therefore it is well adapted for a finale.
The couples are arranged in a circle round the
room, the ladies being placed on the right hand of
the gentlemen ; the first and second couples com-
mence the figure, facing each other. The figures
generally danced are taken from the quadrilles,
&c. Ladies’ chain, set, and turn partners —hands
across and back —hands round and back —right
and left. At the conclusion, the first couple with
the fourth, and the second with the third, recom-
mence the figure, and so on until they go com-
pletely round the circle, meeting at the place from
whence they first started. The dance is then
concluded.
The German Schottische.
This new schottische is but little different to the
ordinary one, but more lively. It is in much
favour in many parts of England, and at the


Annual Ball at Eaton Hall and other country seats,
all present joined this dance with an apparent zest,
even the highest scion of nobility.
The steps. —Four galop steps to the left in an
oblique direction, four ditto to the right in a simi-
lar manner, four galop steps in the way the galop
is usually danced.
The Country Dance.
Many people regret the exclusion from the
party or ball of the Country Dance. Can any-
thing that has superseded it compare in the least
to its pleasure giving movements ?
" What a dance was the first, with what pleasure we went
Down the middle and up, till our breathing was spent.’
All ages could join in this dance ; the happy
child and laughing grandmamma join hands and
march down full of the jollity of the hour. A
favourite author has written feelingly on its
decay :
“The life of the country dance was a long one,
its decay was very gradual, and it would revive
from time to time, even after everyone fondly
imagined that it had received the coup de grace.
Who has not seen it rouse itself and break out at
the conclusion of an evening to the dismay of the
new generation. Then how would the members
of the old society rally round their ancient friend
and support its steps. The young ladies and
gentlemen of the present day will tell you they do


not like to stand in rows separated from each
other, that to be half an hour without speaking
to your partner, or taking an important share in
the dance, is a bore, and that it is small compen-
sation to have to go down the middle and up
again as hard as you can when at length your
time for action does come.”
The old dance wears a different aspect to the
older race. I could also quote much from a work
I have mentioned before, an account of Her
Majesty’s tour in Scotland, even when these dances
were in vogue ; it was remarked at the time, her
kind manner in joining in them, and not sitting
down when her part was over, not until everyone
had danced up to the top, and had derived an
equal share of the amusement. A very good
example for many ladies and gentlemen.
La Tempete is the only one left resembling the
old country dance that is now sometimes intro-
duced. I have therefore inserted it.
La Tempete.
The Parisians have lately introduced the Tem-
plate figure. All eight advance, retire, cross over
and repeat to places ; the four in the middle hands
across, while those outside turn, then hands four
round and back to places, galop across the figure
and back—all eight advance, retire, and top lines
pass through to next line, and repeat the whole to
the bottom of the room.


Sir Roger de Coverley.
The company stand in two lines, the ladies, as
is usual in country dances, being opposite their
partners ; the lady at the top and the gentleman
at the bottom advance to the centre and turn with
right hands, and back to places ; the lady at the
bottom and the gentleman at the top repeat the
same ; the same parties advance and turn with
both hands; then advance, bow, curtsey, and
retire ; all ladies turn off to the left and the gen-
tlemen to the right, down to the bottom of the
room, the first couple stopping at the bottom,
hold up their hands, while all others pass under-
neath ; the couple at the top now lead off the same
figure, which is repeated until the whole set have
performed it.
The Polka.
The Polka step is very simple. It consists
merely of three steps and one rest. The gentle-
man begins with a slight spring on his right foot,
at the same time sliding the left foot forward
this is the first movement (the toe of the left foot
being pointed outward, and the heel pointed
towards the right foot) ; the right foot is then
brought to where the left foot is with a spring, at
the same time raising the left foot—this is the
second movement; then fall on the left foot,
raising the left foot, also the right foot behind
this is the third movement ; after a rest of one
quaver, spring with the left foot and slide the right


foot forward, thus reversing the movement, and
do as before, with the opposite feet. As the lady
begins with the right foot, springing on the left
foot, the above directions, reversed, apply to her.
The Polka requires considerable practice on the
gentleman’s part to dance it well, for the gentle-
man has to guide his partner through the mazes
into which it usually lorms itself, and this he must
do in such a manner as not only to preserve the
step and time but also to avoid collision with
other couples, by gracefully and easily wheeling
round them, or passing between them, as the cir-
cumstances demand. The lady being passive in
this movement has much less to learn. The lady
in leaning on the shoulder of the gentleman,
should touch as lightly as possible, for the dance
is never well or agreeably executed until all sensa-
tion of weight or labour is thoroughly removed,
and in the accomplishment of the end more
depends on the lady than on the gentleman.
Every accomplishment has it vulgarities and so
has the Polka; but a person of refined taste can
at once perceive the difference between the elegant
and the inelegent, the delicate and the indelicate.
All romping, dragging, hugging, and leaning or
stooping over the shoulders of partners, is
decidedly objectionable ; much of what is averse
to a delicate taste arises perhaps from bad dancing,
but there are good dancers who yield themselves
up to excitement of the moment, forget the pro-
prieties of social etiquette, and descend into the
vulgarities of low society.


Galopade; or, Le Galop,
Is a dance now very much in vogue from its being
so very similar to the Valse a Deux Temps in
appearance, but the music is entirely different,
being in twojfour time. Like the round dances,
an unlimited number may join, and the step is
somewhat similar to the chassez. The gentleman
commences with his left foot, and the lady with
her right, and it is generally commenced with
eight sliding steps, the gentleman keeping his left
foot forward and the lady her right, then half turn,
and vice versa , the gentleman with right foot
forward and the lady with the left, and so on at
pleasure ; the step may be waltzing. This dance
is generally used as a finale. The first part of a
public ball usually concludes with a Galop, as
does the second part with Sir Roger de Coverley.
Polka Mazurka.
This is a round dance, and a combination of
the Polka and Mazurka, as regards the steps. The
music is in three-eight time. The dance was
introduced about the same time as the Schottische.
It is rather simple, easily acquired, and more in
favour than many other round dances.
Steps. —Gentleman rests on the right foot with
the left slightly raised behind, slide left foot to the
left (count one) bringing the right foot up close to
the left (count two), slide the left foot back (count
three), making one bar; slide left foot to left


(count one), bring the right foot up (count two),
raise the right foot, put it before the left (count
three). In the first bar dance straight forward
without turning, in the second bar turn half round
so as to complete the circle in four bars.
The Slow Waltz; or, Valse a Trois
Temps.
In describing the lady's step it will be under-
stood that the gentleman’s step is exactly the same,
but he commences with the second part.
1, Lady slides forward the right foot, bringing
the left close before, then right forward in the
form of a half circle (three bars).
2. Slide the left foot to complete the half circle
bringing the right foot behind, turn on both feet
and finishing with the right foot forward. All
turns to the right for the lady, to the left for the
gentleman.
The Schottische.
The step is very easy, but requires more care
and attention, being more difficult for the gentle-
man to guide his partner. The Schottische is
now seldom danced at public balls, but should be
learnt, as it is often inserted in the programme of
a private party, and not out of favour at many en-
tertainments. I would strongly advise the
Schottische to be learnt, as it is, when perfectly
known, an excellent introduction to the Valse d


Deux Temps, the quick step being almost exactly
the same, only slower; the rest, given to the
learner by the slow part, enables him to acquire
the quick or waltz step, much more readily than by
keeping to that step alone.
The Step of the Schottische. —The gentleman holds
his partner in a similar manner as in the polka ;
he commences with the left fool, merely sliding it
forward, then he brings up the right to the place
of left foot, again sliding the left foot forward,
rise on the toes to accentuate the time avoiding
hops or any jumping movements ; he repeats this
movement to the right, beginning with the right
foot, sliding it forward, bringing up the left foot
to the place of the right, and sliding forward
again ; immediately after this the movement
changes into the waltz step, as described under
that dance —the time is two in each bar, the first
occupying two bars, the four waltz steps two
bars.
The Schottische, like other circular dances,
may be varied by means of the reverse turn, or even
by going in a direct line round the room ; you
may also double each part by giving four bars to
the first part, and the same number to the second or
circular movement ; the gentleman is directed to
regulate all these matters according to circum-
stances, changing occasionally for variety, and
sometimes to avoid collision in a crowded room.
The tune is slower than the polka, though it is
danced faster now than when first introduced.


The Highland Schottische.
This dance has become a great favourite since the
visit of H. R. H. The Duke of Edinburgh, who
was pleased to have introduced Highland dances,
to the stirring music of the bagpipes, which the
Duke’s piper played.
The step for the gentleman. —Touch the floor
lightly with the heel and toe of the left foot twice,
four slides or galop steps to the left, repeat with
the right foot, galop four steps to places, balance
on the toe of each foot eight times, eight galop
steps, or waltz a deux temps. The music of any
of the Scotch reels is very suitable for this dance.
The Quick Waltz; or, Valse a
Deux Temps.
This Waltz, since it came out at the court ot
Venice, has become so decided a favourite, to the
exclusion of many others, that it is generally re-
peated oftencr than any other during a ball. Some
may think the step easy when they see it performed
by others, but no dance requires more practice and
care in becoming perfect in the step ; one thing
should always be remembered, never to jump, but
only to slide, and with a peculiar ascent in the
first part of the step, also very close short steps
should be taken the feet sliding smoothly over the
floor, and scarcely ever raised ; although it is very
quick it must be danced quietly and elegantly,
neither romping nor vulgar motions should ever


appear. The ' Deux Temps should never be
danced long without stopping, for it soon becomes
laborious, and when that is apparent grace is
wanting.
The Polonaise,
As danced at the marriage of His Royal Highness
the Duke of Edinburgh.
If the grand old warriors and their dames came
to life again, they might roam the world over and
find no dance of modern times in which their pic-
torial grace and erect carriage would be neither
old-fashioned nor ridiculous, except the Minuet
and Polonaise. The latter is rather a lyric march
than a dance.
The company join in couples, promenade round
the room to the music of any well-marked band
march ; after going once round the room (on
coming to the top of the room again) the first lady
passes on to the gentleman who precedes her, each
lady doing the same without stopping or making
any break in the time ; the last bar of the move-
ment is emphasized by the stamp of the heel of
the gentlemen, and parting bow. In Poland every
gentleman twirls his moustache simultaneously
with the stamp of the heel. After each lady has
gone round the room with each of the gentlemen
in turn, and at last returned to her own par ner, the
dancers form rows of four, advancing up the
room, dividing off in couples of two ; when meet-
ing again at the top of the room where they origi-
nally commenced, the inner row of couples


advance and join hands ; the outside couples pas-
sing under their hands, these in their turn hold
up the hands while the the others pass under—the
march round, as at first, is then repeated.
Coquette.
NOUVELLE DANSE DE SALON.
Theorie.
Le Pas comporte deux mesures. La position est
la meme que pour la valse ordinaire. Le cavalier
commence du pied gauche. La dame du pied
droit. Glasse et chasse, i ere mesure, chasse—ere
coupe dessous et jete dessous. 2me mesure, la
mesure de la_ musique est a two-four m£me;
mouvement que la Polka.
CALISTHENIC EXERCISES
Calisthenics is a Greek word, meaning exercises
to invigorate the limbs. This name is given to a
gentler sort of gymnastics, suited to girls ; they
tend to produce vigorous muscles, graceful
motion, and practised daily they cannot fail to
produce the effect required—perfect symmetry of
form. The dress must be loose and not constrain-
ing any part of body or arms. Before com-
mencing, care must be taken that the body is
perfectly upright, the shoulders square, the head
erect, tha heels close together with the toes turned
out.
i. Raise the arms high over the head, the tops
of the fingers touching, throw them quickly be


hind, remembering to keep the hands turned so
as to strike the backs together—continue this, and
indeed all the exercises, until feeling fatigued.
2. Raise the arms straight in a line, throw the
right hand out while doing so, draw up the left
in the same manner, bend the right arm so as to
touch the shoulder, keeping the elbow up, and so
on continue to use each arm.
3. The same exercise, but with both arms at
once.
4. Place the tips of the fingers on the chest,
keeping the elbows raised, then throw them
quickly behind, keep the hands up while doing so.
5. Keep the arms in a line with the shoulders
and move them quickly round.
6. Raise the right hand slowly over the head
and gradually place it behind the back, then the
left in the same manner.
EXERCISE FOR THE HEAD.
Excellent practice to correct the head leaning
forward, which is a great habit of young ladies in
this colony.
It consists of five positions —
1. The head and neck are brought forward and
down towards the chest.
2. The head and neck are brought down towards
the right shoulder.
3. The head and neck are brought down towards
the left shoulder.
4. The, head and neck are thrown back and
down towards the back.


5. The head is drawn up in its natural position,
but placed very upright, the chin slightly drawn
in.
These positions must be taken as low as possi-
ble, without bending the body.
Every exercise should be practised about six or
eight times slowly over, and to gain real benefit
from them, daily practice is strongly recom-
mended for about twenty minutes.
EXTENSION MOTIONS.
In order to open the chest and give freedom to
the muscles, the following extension motions
should be practiced.
FIRST PRACTICE.
1. On the word one, bring the hands and
arms to the front, till the fingers meet at the
points, nails downwards, then raise them in a
circular direction over the head, the ends of the
fingers still touching and pointing downwards, so
as to touch the head, thumbs pointing to back,
elbows pressed back, shoulders kept down.
2. On the word two, throw the hands up, ex-
tending the arms smartly upwards, palms of the
hands inwards, then force them obliquely back,
and gradually let them fall to the first position,
endeavouring as much as possible to elevate the
neck and chest.
3. On the word one, raise the arms outwards
from the sides without bending the elbows, press-
ing the shoulders back until the hands meet above


the head ; palms to the front, fingers pointed up-
wards, thumbs locked, left thumb in front. On
the word two, bend over until the hands touch
the feet, keeping the arms and knees straight, the
head being brought down in the same direction ;
after a slight pause raise the body gradually and
bring the arms to the sides, and resume the first
position. N. B. —The foregoing motions are to
be done slowly so that the muscles will be exerted
throughout.
4. Raise the hands in front of the body, at the
full extent of the arms, and in a line with the
mouth, palms meeting but without noise, thumbs
close to the forefingers.
5. Separate the hands quickly, throwing them
well back, slanting downwards, at the same time
raise the body on the fore part of the feet. Bring
the arms forward to the position above described,
and so on.
6. Raise the hands in front of the body, as in
the second practise, but with hands clenched.
Separate the hands quickly, throwing the arms
back in a line with the shoulders, back of the
hands downwards. Throw the arms round as
quickly as possible from front to back.
BALANCE STEP.
The object of the above, balance step, is to teach
the free movement of the legs, preserving at the
same time perfect squareness of the shoulders, and
the utmost steadiness of body; and no labour
must be spared to obtain this first most essential


object, which forms, indeed, the very foundation
of good walking.
Balance step, without gaining ground, com-
mencing with the left foot, must be first learnt.
The left foot must be raised from the ground by
a slight bend of the knee, and carried gently to
the front; the knee being gradually straightened
as the foot is brought forward ; the toe turned out,
the sole of the foot kept about three inches from
the ground, and parallel to it; the. left heel in a
line with the right toe —the left foot must be
brought gently back (without a jerk) until the toe
is in a line with the right heel, the left knee a
little bent. The left foot in this position will not
be so flat, as when in front ; the toe will be a little
depressed.
GAINING GROUND.
The left foot must be carried to the front, as
described in the first balance step, after passing,
so as to well balance the body, slide a step forward,
and then carry the right to the front. Great care
must be taken that the knees are kept, perfectly
straight as long as both feet are touching the
ground ; that the toes remain turned out; that the
body is perfectly straight, but reclining forward;
the head erect, and neither turned to the right nor
the left.
POLE EXERCISES.
The pole for this purpose should be light and
smooth, but not of a nature to bend. It is first
to be taken hold of near the extremities by each


hand with the knuckles outward, then raise to a
perpendicular position, the right hand being upper-
most ; then the left hand takes its place—this
should be performed for some time. The pole
should then be raised above the head, passed be-
hind, and finally returned into the first position by
reverse process of the arms. Hold the pole as
before, except that the knuckles are turned be-
hind, raise it parallel with the shoulders, each
hand being turned alternately inward, so that the
end of the pole passes between the fore-arm and
the shoulder, lift it above the head, bring it down
behind, and finally return it to the first position.


Gibbs, Sh allard, and Co.,
Lithographic and Letterpress Printers,
Pitt Street, Sydney.




