

AUSTRALIAN
HORSES
FROM PADDOCK
TO PARK.






ta£. UL.
iffiz we>~ryiJL£As
/f'g.


Australian Horses
FROM PADDOCK
TO PARK.
BY D. McGILLIVRAY
(“The Celebrated Australian Horse-Taming. Riding and Driving Expert’’)
A Treatise on the Scientific Handling, Breaking, Educating,
and the General Management of Horses; with up-
wards of 105 Splendid Illustrations, obtained by
instantaneous photography whilst the
Author was at work upon the wild
and raw material.
Price - - 11/- (post free).
SYDNEY ;
William Brooks and Co., Ltd.,
PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS, 17 CASTLEBKAOH-STREET.
1902.








Preface.
Sp WROTE this work, and had it almost ready for the
I printers, about twelve years ago, but, after giving the
matter careful consideration, I decided not to publish it
while I was actively engaged in teaching classes. However, I
have much pleasure in doing so now, and offer it to my
numerous pupils and to the general public at a moderate cost.
It is with the greatest confidence in good results that' I ask
all horse-masters, and all lovers of kindness to animals, to adopt
the methods that it teaches, as I have on innumerable occasions
proved that they are the most scientific, the most gentle and
humane, and at the same time the quickest, the most effective,
.and the most labour-saving that have ever been exhibited or
offered to the British horse-loving people.
In describing these methods to l the best of my ability, I
have adopted the popular language used by horsey men, avoid-
ing all technical names and phrases, and writing almost the
exact words employed by me when instructing classes, and I
have endeavoured to make the illustrations (which were
obtained by the aid of photography when I have' been actually
at work upon the wild and raw material) so' clear that the ordi-
nary reader may easily understand. I now, as I always did
when teaching classes, invite criticism, and I shall be thankful
if any of my old members, or others that may be competent to
judge, will kindly point out any errors and omissions that I
may have made in describing my various theories, so that,
should I ever bring out a second edition, I may guard against
them.
If my publication is in the smallest degree so much appre-
ciated as my classes have been in all parts of Australia, I
shall be very grateful; and should it be the means of saving a
few more of my “gentle, brown-eyed, glossy-coated friends ’
from the horrors and barbarisms of the old style of breaking, I
shall feel that my work has been indeed a. success, and that the
trouble and expense that I may have gone to has not been in
vain.
The Authob.
“Bomera” Station,
Tambar Springs,


CONTENTS.
Page
A Horse Fighting from Fear 16
A Horse’s Spirit Broken by Rough
Handling 23
A Horse Understands Caressing ... 31
A Good Head Indispensable 32
Adjusting the Halter and Tying Up... 55
Adjusting McGillivray’s Patent Roller 60
Avoid Lacerating the Mouth 67
A Horse Brave and Plucky 69
A Horse that will Kicx 82
American Trotters 95
A Hunter : What Size Required ... 102
A Lady’s Hack: ‘What Size 103
A Kicker 108
Ability to Handle the Reins 129
Advice, and Things that should be
Remembered 156
Ailments of the Horse 206
Branding, “Old System” u
Breaking. “Old System” 17
Bit and Bridoon on an Educated
Hunter 63
Breaking to Single Harness 107
Bolting in Harness 110
Bolting in Saddle ; ... 117
Blemishes and Defects of Horse’s
Legs 212
Bone Spavin 215
Blood Spavin 215
Breeding 216
Breeding Hunters from Draughts ... 218
Camped at the “Warrigal Springs” ... 16
“Carbine,” Best Head for Intelligence 3o
Catching a Colt with Tackling ... 71
Catching a Man-eater with Walking-
stick 83
Coolness Desirable while Riding at
Fences 102
Castrating and Branding; My Own
Method 139
Colic or Gripe and its Cure 208
“Curb” 214
Crossbred Horses—“ Mules” 218
Driving 1, 2 or more Horses 104
“Darling Pea” 211
English Horses. How Used 24
Educating to Guide, “Mouthing” ... 59
“Educating” not Mouthing 67
Fast Trotting Horses “Made,” not
Bred 91
Full-grown Horses Easiest to Handle 203
Forced-up Horses Soft 204
Gripes from Eating “Wheat” 210
Hurricane Scenes 16
Hyland’s System 28
How to Build McGiilivray’s Yard ... 37
Hunting 100
How a Lady’s Hack Should Canter ... 103
Harness. How to Break to 105
How to Use the Stirrup 124
How to Hold the Reins 127
How to Ride a “Buckjumper” ... 132
How, a Lady Should Mount 135
How a Lady Should Ride 136
Horses Afraid of Moving Objects ... 138
How to Tell a Horse’s Age to 21 Years 194
Horses Worked too Young 203
Horses Should not be Worked Much
until 5 Years Old 204
Introduction 9
Inbred Horses Lacking Brain Power 217
Indian Army Remounts 22l
Interfering with a Hunter's Head ... 66
Page
Jibbing Horses, How to Cure 118
Jumping “Brush” Should be Avoided 101
Lesson in Leading, “Station Style”... 21
Leightwark’s and Galvayne’s systems 30
Lake Albert “Man-eater” 70
Lifting a Horse at a Fence Impossible 101
Light Hands on the Eeins 101
Men Using Spurs on a Colt 86
Mounting 121
Never 111-use a Horse 85
Never Persuade a Horse to Buck ... 86
Navel Rupture and its Cure 209
Old System. Station Style 11
Only Breed from Pure Stock 220
Preface 5
Press Notices 157
Press Notice re Catching a Colt in
Ten Seconds 51
Pleasure in Riding a Buckjumper or
Hunter 133
Purchase, and when a Horse is
Matured 202
Picking Mares for Certain Horses ... 220
Rarey’s System 25
Rubber Bits 61
Riding Trotters 95
Runaway Horses 112
Riding 120
Rearing 123
Riding Long Journeys 205
Ringbone 213
Roadsters: How Bred in Australia ... 219
Sample’s System 26
StroKim? Inspires Confidence 31
Size a Trotter Should be 99
Starting Trotting or Cantering ... 99
Securing Buggy and Horses 113
Striking or Biting L 3
Shying and its Cure 137
Shoeing a Refractory Horse 149
Soft and Inferior Pastures 206
Strangles 207
Staggers 210
Splints 212
Sex: How Regulate 222
The Secret of My Success 31
Time it Takes to Catch a Colt 32
To Handle a Wild, Unbroken Colt ... 37
The Much-spoken-of Walking Stick... 44
To Catch a Horse in Ten Seconds ... 44
The Advantage of McGillivray’s Sur-
cingle 65
Tricky or Timid Horses 70
The Horse a Pet 69
To Teach a Horse Paces 87
Trotting and Cantering 91
Teaching a Horse to Jump 100
To Prevent a Horse from Bucking ... 134
Teaching a Horse to Stand “Fire” ... 139
To Breed Upstanding Horses 219
To Pick or Select a Horse 223
To Teach a Horse Tricks 227
To Test Whether a Horse Has Pace 230
Using Colts Mustering 24
Use and Advantage of Rubber Bits... 66
Useful Hints to Know 232
Victoria Harness lus
Wildest Animal I Can Remember ... 52
Walking, How to Teach 88
What Constitutes Good Horsemanship 131
When Colts Should be Branded ... 144
Where the Best Horses are Found ... 204
Wind Galls 214


INDEX TO PRESS NOTICES.
Page
‘'Argus,” Warren, N.S.W 188
“Advertiser,” Wagga, N.S.W. ... ... 189
“Advocate,” Berrigan, N.S.W 191
“Courier.” Brisbane, Q 166
“Courier,” Brisbane, Q 175
“Chronicle,” Cobargo, N.S.W 176
“Courier,” Charleville, Q. 188
“Downs Gazette,” Toowoomba, Q. ... 177
“Examiner,” Warwick, Q. 187
“Flashes,” Brisbane, Q 165
“Free Press,” Bathurst ... 171
“Free Press,” Cowra, N.S.W 175
“Free Press,” Corowa, N.S.W 193
“Guardian,” Glen Innes 180
‘‘Guardian,” Allora, Q. .... 187
“Guardian,” Swan Hill, Vic 192
“Gladstone Express,” S.A 181
“Herald,” Goulbum, N.S.W 172
“Herald,” Dalby. Q. ...
“Independent,” Ooonamble, N.5.W.... 190
“Jamestown Agricultural Review,”
S.A 157
“Lockyer Star,” Laidley, Q 159
“Logan Advocate,” Q 168
‘‘Leader.” Orange. N.S.W 170
Page
“Lockyer Star.” Laidley. Q 186
‘‘Mercury,” Maitland, N.S.W 162
“News,” Nowra, N.S.W 172
“Northern Argus.” S.A 184
“Port Augusta Despatch,” S.A. ... 168
“Port Augusta Despatch,” S.A. ... 182
“R. R. Express,” Casino, N.S.W. ... 174
“Riverina Grazier,” Hay 193
“Record,” Traralgon, \ic ibo
“Standard,” Omeo, Vic 164
“Star,” Lismore. N.S.W 178
“Times,” Ballina, N.S.W. ■■■ ... 161
“Times,” Ipswich, Q ••• 179
“The Liberal,” Cootamundra, N.S.W. 179
“Times,” Bombala, N.S.W 183
“Times,” Forbes. N.S.W 184
“Telegraph,” Brisbane, Q 185
“Times.” Donald. Vic 191
“Western Star,” Roma, Q 187
Mudgee, N.S.W 175
Bega, N.S.W. 161
Milton, N.S.W 174
Moree, N.S.W 189
Richmond River, N.S.W. 177
Walgett, N.S.W 190
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.
Page
P. 1. Throwing a Colt for Branding, Ordinary “Station Style” 14
„ 2. Holding Colt in Position, “Station Style” 15
~ 3. Catching a Colt with Pole and Headrope, “Station Style” ... .• •• 17
~ 4. Two or Three Men Hanging on to a Colt to Choke it. “Station
Style” 18
~ 5. Breaker Cautiously Approaching a Colt with the Halter, “Station
Style” , 19
~ 6. Hauling a Colt About, “Station Style’ 19
~ 7. Hauling at a Colt’s Mouth, “Station Style” 22
„ 8. “Carbine” the Best Shaped Head for Intelligence 1 ever Saw ... 32
.. 9. Quite a Different Temperament to “Carbine” 33
~ 10. More Sense and Understanding, but would Require Watching ... 33
„ 11. The Head of a Nervous, Timid Thoroughbred 35
~ 12. A First-class Intelligent Head 36
„ 13. McGillivray’s Catching Yard 37
„ 14. A Yard Suitable for all Ordinary Purposes 40
~ 15. Putting Right Hand on a Colt’s Hip, Own Method 41
„ 16. Keeping Hand on its Hip and Stroking with Left Hand ... ... 41
~ 17. Gently Placing Arm Over the Colt’s Back While Holding the Mane 45
Holding Mane and Moving Round 45
~ 18. Hanging on the Colt’s Sid© 47
~ 19. Vaulting on the Colt’s Back 47
~ 20. Using a Walking-stick as a Long Arm 49
~ 21. How to Catch a Wild Colt in 10 Seconds 49
~22. McGillivray’s Patent Halter 5*
~23. Adjusting Halter. Another Position; Walking Round 54
~ 24. Holding the Body Rope on Off Hip ... . ... • ••• ••• 55
25. A Colt Tied up Securely. Another Position •. Trying to Break the
Line 57
„ 26. McGillivray’s Patent Roller £9
~ 27. Adjusting the Roller 05
„ 28. Rubber Bit 5}
„ 29. Mouthing Rein 5J
„ 29a. Educating to Guide
„ 30. Driving Colt with Long Rems Jg
„ 31. Buckjump Saddle £3
~32. Buckjump Surcingle ••• ••• .... ••••••. g?
33 Colt Broken to Saddle Ready to Ride : Surcingle Adjusted ... 65
” 34. Hunter, with Bit and Bridoon Go


P. 35, McGillivray’g Earey Strap Pa^?
„ 36. Holding Earey Strap and Pushing Quiet Horae Over 72
” m let Horae and Man-eater Close Together: Touching with Strap 73
„ 38, Man-eater Stepping on Earey Strap p 7,
39, Eing and Buckle 7?
~40. The Thong £?
„ 41. Man-eater’s Near Leg tip £3
„ 42. Cup-loop ... 1%
~ 43. Earey strap Buckled, Cup-loop on Off Fetlock 77
„ 44. Man-eater on its Knees 77
„ 45. Standing on the Colt’s Back ... 79
„ 46. Standing on the Colt's Shoulder and Hip . 79
”Is tr V.M an ‘ eater Tame<i: Hying Quietly, with no Tackling on it 81
„ 49, A Kicker Hobbled Fore-and-aft ... ... "... g|
~ 50. Using a Walking-stick in Catching a Man-eater "* 84
„ 51. McGilhvray’s Trotting Gear . go
„ 51a. Showing Trotting Gear on a Horae 90
~ 52. Trotting Gear on Horse in Action ," 90
” 53, .f’.At Bnokland’s Br. Gelding "Fritz” Going at a 2.14 Gait... 92
® positions). Champion Trotter of Australia, 2.13 Q 3
„„ .X a ? cle J e A ? lr . e of "Frit..” “Sunshine.” “Velox,” and Others 96
” m Velox A American Trotter; 2 miles sm. 5s 97
„ 53b. Team, of Four with “Victoria” Harness 105
„ 54. Bolting Rein, Showing One Side HI
55. A Russian Bolting Rein H 2
„ 56. McGillivray’s Safety Buggy Strap 114
„ 57. McGillivray’s Safety Buggy Strap on the Wheels ... 115
.. 58. Bolting Rem in Riding ' iio
59. The Correct Way to Mount 121
~ 60. Mounting, Small Line and Ring
” Correct Way to Hold Four Reins, Either Riding or Driving 126
„ 62. Obverse View ’ " 12 6
„ 63. McGillivray’s Patent “Crush Pen” ... 140
64. Crush Pen Open with Foal in Yard 141
„ 65. Foal in Pen, and Near Foreleg Buckled Up ... 142
„ 66. The Cup-loop and Thong on the Foal 143
~ 67. The Shoeing and Loin Rope 144
„ 68. Foal on its Knees in Crush Pen 145
~ 69. Foal with Loin Rope on, and down, as if Camping 145
70. Foal on its Back or Side and Crush Pen Open 147
.. 71. An Ecraseur 149
72. Raising the Foreleg for Shoeing 151
~ 73. The Foreleg through the Crupper and Easy to Shoe ... .!. 151
„ 74. Lifting the Hind Leg with the Loin Rope ... 153
„ 75. Horse Securely Fixed .and Easy to Shoe 153
.. 76. Colt’s Mouth at Two Years, Lower Jaw ' 195
„ 77. Colt’s Mouth at Two-and-a-half Years 195
~ 78. Colt’s Mouth at Three Years 195
~ 79. Colt’s Mouth at Pour Years 196
~ 80. Colt’s Mouth at Five Years igg
~ 81. Front View of Colt’s Mouth at Five Years ... ... 197
~ 82. Colt’s Mouth at Six Years ’ 193
83. Colt’s Mouth at Seven Years ... ' 199
~ 84. Horse’s Mouth at Eight Years !!! 199
~ 85. Horse’s Mouth at Nine Years 200
~ 86. Horse’s Mouth (Top Jaw) at Ten Years 200
~ 87. Horse’s Mouth Top Jaw) at Eighteen Years 201
~ 88. Horse’s Mouth (Top Jaw) at Fifteen Years Off 201
89. Showing Where and How to Bleed a Horse for “Staggers” 211
„ 90. A Bad Splint ... ’** 213
~ 91. A Ringbone 213
~92. Position of Wind Galls . 214
„ 93. A Curb 214
~ 94. Bone Spavin **’ 215
~ 95. Blood Spavin 215
„ 96. “The Swell”: A First-class Indian Remount Horse ... 221
~ 97. Testing a Horse with Pmmb-line 224
~ 98. How a Horse Should be Measured " 227
„ 99. Determining What Height a Colt will Grow to 230
100. Do. do. Second Measurement 231


“ When we understand how little we know,
Then we begin to learn some useful knowledge/'
V
O-Ph-l
*WAS born on a sheep station in Victoria, but at an
early age removed to my father’s property in South
Australia, where I was educated, with my brothers,
by private tuition, our master being Professor J. W.
Ashley, 8.A., Glasgow University.
For as far back as I can remember I was for ever being
crammed (during school holidays, and even after I left) with
lessons and instructions in the proper management of stock,
principally cattle and sheep, with a view to qualify me to man-
age the estate. However, notwithstanding the fact that my
father always discouraged it, I had a tendency and a desire to
make a study of the horse, in preference to other stock, and
was never satisfied unless handling and making a pet of one;
and at the age of eighteen years the opportunity to extend my
studies in that direction was afforded me, having accepted a
position as stock overseer, which I took advantage of, and from
that out I had my desires gratified, being in a position to ex-
periment on wild and unbroken horses, and gaining a vast
amount of knowledge. I soon became an expert at riding and
driving, and after some years was induced to handle and pre-
pare large mobs of colts for shipment for the Indian remount
trade. My ability to handle a large number in an unusually
short period (I once handled 202 wild colts in twenty-one days)
was freely commented upon, and repeated applications were
made to me for instructions in my method, but I declined for
many years to teach.
When Professor H. Sample, the American horse-tamer,
visited Australia, and waiS showing in Melbourne, I journeyed
to that city, and was so surprised at the manner in which bo
handled a horse, and also the small amount of knowledge to be


gained from him for two guineas, that I immediately decided
to take advantage of my practical experience, and teach my
own methods, and for the following fifteen years practically
adopted horse-taming as my profession, teaching classes in
all parts of Australia, to upwards of 24,000 pupils, each of
whom paid one guinea, and the numerous flattering press
notices I receiv Q d. several of which will be found reprinted in
this volume, should be a. sufficient guarantee that my methods,
and also my ability to instruct same, were appreciated.
All sorts and conditions of men took advantage of my in-
structions, from the best of horsemen in this sunny land of ours
to the jolly tar who sails the briny ocean, and amongst other
distinguished patrons of my classes were the first Governor-
General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Lady Hopetoun.
The Brisbane Courier , in describing one of my exhibitions,
eulogises me as follows : —Professor McGillivray, the cele-
brated horse-tamer, still continues to instruct large classes at
Messrs, Carter and Fenwick’s Bazaar, in the art of managing
and controlling horses. Yesterday the Professor gave a display
of his powers over unbroken colts before tils Excellency the
Governor and Lady Norman, the Earl and Countess ,of Hope-
toun, and a. large attendance of Defence Force officers, and the
elite of the city.”
As many of my readers have not had the privilege or oppor-
tunity of attending my classes., and must therefore be un-
acquainted with the modus operandt , so that they may perfectly
understand this, I will describe as clearly as possible what may
be called the ancient systems —that have been practised in Aus-
tralia and elsewhere—and the modem (my methods), so that all
may be compared, and I must ask them to follow me throughout
this book, reserving their decision as to which is the most
humane and efficient treatment until the conclusion.
We will begin with a colt of, say, nine to twelve months
old, and follow it through its various stages, trials, and adven-
tures until we. leave it, thoroughly quiet, in the carriage of
some city gentleman, or perhaps on board some large steamer


bound for Calcutta, to take its place for which it was purchased,,
viz., an Indian remount.
THE OLD SYSTEM.
In the months of July or August we will journey to a large
horse station some 500 miles in the interior, where there are
from 1500 to 2000 brood mares, perhaps more. The large yards
not far from the homestead are full of horses of all sizes, shapes
and colours, and upon the rails are the head boss (probably the
owner or manager), the overseer, and his gang of, say, a dozen
men. who had just run in the above mob, which contains 200
colts and fillies, which have to be operated upon according to
sex. In addition to the large yard in which the above are
located, there are several smaller yards, each diverting from a
central yard, usually called “the pound," which should be cir-
cular in shape, and with gates into five or six different, yards.
There is also a long, narrow yard connecting the receiving-yard
with the pound, usually called the “lane." At each of the
aforesaid gates a man is posted, and a number of horses are
then put into the lane, and drafted off one by one into the
pound. The overseer, or man in charge, then calls out the class
of the animal or the purpose for which he is intended, such as
Brand, Breaker, Bush Market, etc., and the man at the gate
leading to the particular yard set apart for this class opens the
gate, and the horse is run out. The next animal is drafted from
the lane, and so on, until the whole mob is through.
BRANDING-OLD SYSTEM.
When the drafting is completed, the mode of procedure is
as follows: —One of the animals is run into the operating
pen, and the “head-rope" is put around its neck, either by
throwing it like a lasso, or by the aid of a long pole (generally
the latter). Several of the assistants pull on the rope (if a filly)
until it chokes down, when a couple of them kneel upon it,
and keep it securely on the ground, while the brand,
which is red-hot, is put on. The rope is then taken off, and the
animal is set at liberty. If the animal is a colt, just as it is
choken to such a state as to be on the verge of falling, a green-
11
BRANDING —OLD SYSTEM.


hide strap or collar is placed round its neck at the shoulders, an-
other double hide rope is then fastened to the collar at the colt’s
breast, and the two ends taken back between its legs, one
around each hind fetlock, and back through the collar, on, the
outside of the shoulder. Two men then stand, one on either
side of the colt, and each pulls his rope at the same time. (See
p. 1).
By this means the hind legs are pulled forward, and the ani-
mal falls to the ground, and its head is held in such
a position that in its struggles it cannot get the
collar over it. The hind legs are then pulled so tightly
that the hoofs are up to its shoulder, and, by a series of half-
hitches in the rope, the fore legs are securely lashed to the hind.
Now, no' matter in what position the animal is placed, it must
be in a most unnatural one, as the hind legs are drawn up so
tightly that the head always has a, tendency to come down be-
tween the knees, on account of the great strain that they
put upon the collar round the animal’s neck. Therefore, an
assistant is always required at the head. The colt is now placed
upon its back, a man standing on either side, holding the spare
rope-ends, and keeping the animal in that position until the
operation of castration is completed. (See p. 2).
It thus takes five men to complete the process, three of
whom hold the colt, the attendant with the brand, and the
operator. There are several methods adopted in completing the
operation itself, some going to the trouble of washing the parts,
and using oil, some using resin when searing, and some tying the
cords with silk thread; while others use the knife only, and
castrate as we do calves, and I am much more inclined to the
latter method, but will explain that adopted by me
later on. Two or three of the better-conducted stations use a
crush-pen to catch the colts, instead of the head-rope, and fillies
are branded while standing. Colts, however, are thrown as
mentioned above, the rope, etc., being put on while in the pen,
which saves the choking process, and is a great improvement.
My readers should, however, note that the colts have to' be tied
in the same uncomfortable and barbarous manner I have
12
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.




P. 1 .—Throwing a colt for branding, ordinary “station style."


P. 2.—Holding colt in position, “station style.”


described above, and the same number of men (five) are
required to perform the operation with anything like ease and
expediency.
The colts are now turned out with the other horses, and are
rarely yarded again until they are four or five years old, and are
required for the market or riding purposes. Then after a con-
siderable number of flying musters, several days and nights
camped at the Warrigal Springs, sundry knocking up of the best
saddle horses on the station, and not a. few ugly busters while
going at full gallop, the stockmen will again succeed in yarding
a goodly number of colts and fillies of the proper age. The> best
looking and best furnished horses are drafted off forthwith, and
the breaking-in process is commenced.
If the reader has had any experience on stations, of course
he knows what the above is like, but the uninitiated must trust a
good deal to his own imagination to furnish him with a de-
scription of the wild and hurricane scene, a tempestuous whirl-
pool of heads, waving manes, and tails, continual clouds of dust,
together with a series of wild screeching and winnying as
the mob stampede around the yard, endeavouring to rejoin their
old comrades. A person who has always lived in the city
could never dream or imagine the wildness of the scene, nor even
guess that the staid old cab horse, with the same brand he had
seen that morning, was once as wild as these. No animal, whether
domestic or otherwise, could possibly be wilder, and no wonder,
for we know that they have only once been inside a yard before,
and th _ treatment then meted out to them could hardly be calcu-
lated to improve or sooth their timidity.
I have seen horses bred in the interior so wild that unless
the operator is exceptionally careful, he risks being savaged,
and often the animal seriously injures itself in its mad endea-
vours to escape. This I contend is only don© in self defence ;
there is nothing at all savage in the nature of the hors© once he
is aware that the rider or operator is not going to hurt him..
When a wild young horse attempts to savage his attendant, it is
because his heart is breaking with fear, and, as a last resource, he
defends himself thus. Even a vicious kicker only acts in self.


defence, being afraid of the object kicked a,t, and in all my ex-
perience I have never come across a case that could not be traced
to “fear,” and I invariably found the cure in making the subject
used to the object either “savaged” or kicked at. The sole reason
that we find so many buckjumpers and savage horses on up-
country stations is that they have not been made to understand
that they are not going to be hurt when man approaches and
essays to ride them. Many of my readers may doubt this theory,
and think they know better, but anyone who has witnessed
P. 3.—Catching a colt with pole and headrope, “station style.”
any of my classes, knows that I can prove my theory, and I in-
tend to do so for the benefit of the most incredulous later on.
BREAKING—OLD SYSTEM.
The usual way on a station is to put a colt by itself in the
small yard, and, while flying around like a whirlwind, in great
danger every moment of breaking its neck, or bashing its brains
out against the; rails, a long rope (which I have previously des-
cribed as being termed a head rope), is thrown over its head
with the aid of a long pole (see p. 3), and the running noose


is pulled tightly round its throat. There is considerable
danger to the animal in this operation as it is so wild and timid
that it will go round the yard in a series of mad bounds as soon
as the rope tightens, frequently falling down against the
fences, causing ugly scars and disfigurements, and every moment
increasing the risk of killing itself outright. Two, and some-
times three, men then hang on to the rope until the horse is in a
half-choked condition, staggering with exhaustion, its eyes
almost starting out of its head, and most likely bleeding at the
P. 4. — Two or three men hanging on to a colt to choke it, “station style.”
nose and mouth, the result of coming into contact with the
fences (see p, 4); it is then the operator cautiously approaches
(see p. 5), and after a little trouble and a few weakly “bucks”
on the part of the horse, succeeds in putting a “cavassan” on
its head, which is buckled securely by a strap around the
neck. A rope of about 30 feet long is then attached
to the ring in the nose band of thei “cavassan,” and the head rope
is quietly slackened and eventual!y removed. The colt is allowed
to run around the yard again, and is put through a process called
18
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK,


P. 5.—The breaker cautiously approaching a colt with the halter,
“station style.”
P. 6.—Hauling a colt about, “station style.”




“hauling about,” that is, the breaker holds on to the rope
attached to the “cavassan,” already described, and continuously
pulls the colt about (see p. 6). This barbarous treatment often
results in injuries to the colt., as it. is only natural that the ani-
mal will try to regain its freedom, and while galloping around
the sudden jerk of the rope in the hands of a strong man (who
does not stop to think whether he is acting judiciously or not in
exercising his strength), results in the animal having its neck
“kincked,” while not infrequently it will rear and strike at
the rope with its forelegs, thereby running a risk of being pulled
over on its back, often with fatal results. The operator must
be considered tolerably lucky if he has got on this far without
mishap, as if the subject is a strong wild horse, the first operation
of overcoming him by choking invariably ends in a kincked neck,
which may get right in a day or two, but often never. While
witnessing such an operation, I have seen a. colt give one terrific
bound, and fall to the ground with its neck doubled under its
body, never to rise again. After the breaker has successfully
made the horse understand that it can be held, he proceeds to
put on the “roller,” which is a, broad leather girth, buckled on
round the body just behind the wither, with crupper and reins
attached. In the centre of the roller is a. large ring, to which
one end of the reins are fastened, while the other ends are con-
nected with a large iron bit, joined in the centre, with three or
four iron drops loosely hanging; this is placed in the mouth, and
attached by D straps to the “cavassan”; thus, by the aid of the
reins already mentioned, the colt's head is tightly reined up to
the roller, and he is then left to his own cogitations for four or
five hours..
Before the tackling is removed the colt is generally given
a lesson in leading, the breaker holding the lead-rope, while the
assistant walks, behind with a whip to keep the animal moving
forward. After about half-an-hour or thereabouts is spent in this
manner, the day’s schooling is complete, and the colt is turned
out in a convenient paddock for the night. For the next two
days the colt is subjected to the same operations, with the ex-
ception of choking, as it has learnt to stand and allow itself to


be approached. On the third day it is tied by a short rope,
placed around its neck, to a post, and made to pull back until it
learns to stand quietly, even wliile being hit across the face with
an empty bag. The colt is then saddled and mounted, and.
after several futile bucks in a vain attempt to unseat his rider
(who generally can stay on anything with four legs, and is de-
lighted at its efforts), is trotted around the yard a few times, and
as it is about a hundred to one chance that he will not steer well,
P. 7.— Hauling at a colt’s month, “station style.”
the rider hauls away at its mouth, either side alternately, until it
becomes tractable, and will answer tolerably to the reins (see
p. 7).
The following day it is ridden in the same manner, and
perhaps with the assistant on a quiet horse as mentor, ridden
a short distance outside, and brought back to the yard reeking
with sweat, dismounted, and then remounted a number of times,
to teach it to stand. After being used for a couple of weeks
in this manner, it is considered thoroughly quiet, and handed
over to the station. The poor animal still carries the scars re-
ceived during its first wild encounters with the head-rope, and
22
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


shows decided signs of a sore and lacerated month, caused by
using the brutal and unmerciful bit for the purpose of mouth-
ing. It is now almost sure to be turned, out for a spell, and will
not be seen again for some considerable time, and, when it comes
into the vard again, trembles lest it should be put through the
same hated schooling and receive the same amount of punish-
ment meted out to it when yarded previously. It is not the
breaher who has any tendency to ill-treat hia charge, but the
methods and mode of educating the horse to submit to man,
that causes him to remember with sorrow that all his teachings
have been by force, and, during the whole period of its existence,
he will never forget that horrid, choking sensation felt at his first
introduction to man. He will never again be the same noble
and plucky animal, with light, bounding, free gallop and elastic
step, as when first yarded, nor shall we see him playfully put
back his ears and pretend to bite his comrade, and end up by
kicking his heels in the air and racing forward with lightning
speed, as if bursting with delight, as we did the first morning
that we started hia mob. All that is gone and past; and he has
learned, to his cost, that he must submit to all sorts of im-
positions, but he will never forget that he has been bullied into
submission, and that, though he fought bravely in his wild de-
spair, he had to cave in at last and fall to the ground exhausted.
This, I say, he will never forget, and the first time that he is in
difficulties, and you require him most, he will give in. He has
been shown that it is useless to persevere, and, perhaps, when
racing for a large stake, one stroke of the whip will cause him
to curl up without a struggle. He is beaten, and knows it.
How, in the name of common sense, can we expect him to put
forth extra exertions when he has been taught not to do so ?
He has been forced to submit to all sorts of liberties and impo-
sitions. This is the first lesson taught him, and you would
have great trouble to teach him to do the opposite.
Horses have a great faculty of remembrance, and the
first lesson taught him, good or bad, has a decided influence
over him, and, once you have fairly knocked him up,
he will never be the same horse again. This I have seen
23
BREAKING—OLD SYSTEM.


plainly illustrated on many occasions. AVlicn following my
profession I had on one occasion to go far up into the interior,
where droughts are prevalent, at which time the saddle horses
get very poor, and on the station where I was located for the
time being, there was hardly an old horse on the place that had
not been at some time or other “knocked up,” although to look at
them (the season I speak of had been a good one), you would not
have thought so, as they were in excellent condition. At the
time I was engaged in breaking in a large mob of three and
four-year-old colts, and, the station being short of hands, I
used to assist to muster, and, on this wild and unfenced coun-
try, hardly a day passed that some of our “ gang ” did not
return with a knocked-up horse ; in fact, lucky if he did not
have to walk several miles and carry his saddle. I was by
far the heaviest man of the party, weighing 13st. 71b., yet in-
variably rode a, colt that had only been handled a day or two
before, and doing my full share of the work, galloping stride for
stride with the best horses out., but had, without exception, on
each occasion the freshest and best horse at the finish.
Mr. Edward Berry, the manager of the station mentioned,
who usually formed one of the party, will, I am sure, bear me
out in this. I can well remember his astonishment at the time,
and he could not understand why my colt would come home as
fresh as a “daisy,” while nearly all the other horses were com-
pletely done up. The reason is obvious : the old horses had been
licked ’ before, and as soon as it became a bit hard, gave in
without a struggle ; while my colts, caught and handled under
my own method, never knew what it was to be “cowed,” and,
though very tired, would rather die than give in; their natural
gameness and pluck was left in them, and their wildness and
timidity overcome by kindness, and not by force.
ENGLISH HORSES.
The herses in England at the present time, nor, for that
matter, for centuries past, could not be called wild in any sense
of the word. They are chiefly of high-class—that is, “well-
bred”—and from infancy are in the stable, around the stack or


barn, or in very small pastures, handled and caressed, and for
three or four weeks before being ridden are led and hawked
about, with a “ dummy ’ man on their backs, to get them as
tractable as an ordinary Australian horseman would do them
in two hours.
MR. RAREY'S SYSTEM.
This was the state of things over 40 years, ago, when “Mr.
Karev” came over from America, and electrified the British
public with his methods, and what was called "his extraordi-
nary power ” over the animal. There is no gainsaying the fact
that he was a capable and clever horseman, and many of
his methods are well worth noting, and are to. the present day
of service ; but there are many useful things known now that he
either did not know or at least exercise. His knowledge of
catching a horse was very meagre, and, although he could
do a deal with him after he was caught, he could not give us a
good and effectual method of catching him. His book on the
subject reminds me of that well-known recipe of the cookery
book, which says; “ Take a hare,” and do so and so ; but the
leading factor is not provided. However, we owe many thanks
to “ Mr. Rarey,” who was the first to teach English horsemen
something new, and great was their astonishment when he com-
pletely subdued the notorious “Crusier.”
This horse was so vicious that he would eat anything in
the shape of a man who dared to approach him ; but we are
told how Mr. Rarey got under a cart loaded with hay, and, while
the horse was feeding, placed a strap on his near foreleg through
the spokes of the wheel, after which he threw him, and mani-
pulated every part, of his body, and in a very short time led
him behind a cab, and, unless I am greatly mistaken, was show-
ing him as a trick horse a week after.
Mr. Rarey’s method of catching a colt was not 0.K., and
took a considerable time, with unnecessary punishment to the
horse, and would not be very effective in handling a. “ brumby ”
from “Blanch Water.” The colt was placed in a small enclo-
sure, and the operator was to flick him lightly with a sharp
whip on the hind legs, until it came up to him and followed


him around, so that after a little trouble he could put a halter
on its head.
He mouthed the horse in a similar manner to that
described before, as practised in the interior, but frequently
mounted without a saddle. To make a horse stand,
he tied the near foreleg up, and it is marvellous
how wild horses can be subdued thus. In casting a
horse he placed a running noose on the off fore fetlock,
with the near foreleg tied in the ordinary way by a broad leather
strap passed round the fetlock, and buckled tightly around the
arm, and then, by pulling the off rein and the rope or strap from
the off fetlock (by placing the arm over the horse’s back), the
animal was brought down on its knees, and, of course, would
very soon be down altogether, to be patted and caressed at lei-
sure, thus teaching it that no hurt was intended, which is the
main thing. My method is somewhat similar, but is applied in
a different and far more effective manner in subduing what are
called vicious and savage horses, as will be seen further on.
Almost immediately after showing in England, Mr. Rarey
came to Australia,, and gave instructions in his art, but I do
not think many of his pupils practised his methods afterwards,
for the simple reason that the catching was difficult and not
applicable to all horses. For instance, suppose he were to
handle one of these timid animals, previously described as “sav-
age,” how would he catch him ? It is not always convenient to
have a load of hay to get under to catch a colt, and in the pre-
sent age we cannot afford to waste any time; everything must
be done quickly and well.
MR. H. SAMPLE’S SYSTEM.
Following the example of Mr. Rarey, the next to give les-
sons in this country was Professor Sample, who did well, and
made a few thousand pounds by his exertions. There is no
doubt that he was also a good horseman, and taught some very
useful things, but I am sure every pupil will agree with me that
he had the same failing as Mr. Rarey as regards “ catching ” a
horse. When showing in Melbourne, he led a horse into the
26
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


yard, and said, “Now, ladies and gentlemen, this colt has never
had. a hand on him before ” ; but every horseman knows that
the most difficult part of the breaking operation had been ac-
complished when the halter was placed on the animal, and he
had been taught to lead. However, he always put his subject
through a course of lessons that could not fail to make him use-
ful, and at the same: time most instructive to the onlookers.
In first catching the colt, he put the animal into: a small enclo-
sure about 30ft. in diameter, and rubbed him down with a long
pole, and in a short time the horse would stand quietly in a
corner, and allow the halter, which is placed on the end of this
pole, worked up to his ears quietly, to be put on. Attached to
the halter is a long rope., and by its aid the colt is lunged around
the yard until fairly tractable, and understands that, it can be
held. The operator gradually approaches, and is enabled to lay
hold of the tail, which is, of course, fairly long, and tie a com-
mon knot near the end, and then connect the lead of the halter
with the hair above the knot, tightly, thus bringing the colt’s
head round towards it. By this means the strength of the ani-
mal is divided against itself, and in this plight it is let go:, to
whirl round in a. circle, running a risk of falling and injuring
itself. Naturally, this makes the animal giddy in a very short
time, and it will allow itself to be handled. The harness is
put on quickly, while in this semi-silly state, and it will be
taught to lead, and lunged by attaching a rope to the bit on
either side, and running the colt round to the right or left, as
the case may be, to give it a mouth, and sundry other liberties
are taken with it calculated to make it quiet, such a.s tying a
kerosene tin to its tail, and such like. After such operations
are repeated for two or three consecutive days, the horse is
driven in harness. Mr. Sample taught more about harness
horses than he did about saddle horses, for the reason, I sup-
pose, that his corpulence prevented him from riding, although
he would show and prepare a horse for one of his pupils to ride.
He did not profess to stop a horse from bucking unless it had
gone through a gentle course of work, and some diversion was
created at his shows when he had a lively animal. In all his


methods, however, Mr. Sample clearly defined the qualities
most indispensable in a thorough horseman—gentleness and
patience. This should always be borne in mind, whatever
method the operator adopts; when handling a colt he must
never lose his temper. Mr. Sample would never lose his temper
with a horse ; but, to my mind, used the whip too freely, while
at the same time he would feed his subject on dainty morsels,
such as a handful of oats, when he had done as wished, exhibit-
ing an amount of patience worthy of an angel until he had suc-
ceeded in getting the subject to do as he wished. It has been
unanimously allowed in England, America, on the Continent,
and throughout the Australian colonies, that Professor Sample
was the best all-round horseman in the world.
HYLAND’S SYSTEM.
Following in the wake of Professor Sample in giving exhi-
bitions was Mr. D’Arcy Hyland, a typical Australian horseman,
born and brought up, like myself, in Victoria., and who was one
of the most active men I have ever come in contact with, while
being a fearless and accomplished rider. He gave public exhi-
bitions of riding buckjumpers, and also riding a, bullock. He
used to exhibit an extraordinary amount of patience in catch-
ing colts, etc.
He usually put the colt into the enclosure, and used a long
pole or bamboo with a small flag on the end, with which he
rubbed the horse down and made him used to by flicking it
about him and over him, and in a. very short time
he could be approached, and a light rope-halter placed on his
head with the aid of the pole or bamboo, and taught that it
could be held. A small rope was then put under the animal's
tail, passed round either shoulder, and tied around its
body like a girth, similar to the manner in which
I tie up a horse. It was then taught to lead by
pulling on another piece of rope attached to this at the
breast, and brought through the rings of the bit. The mouth-
ing was similar to the style adopted by Sample, but as Mr.
Hyland claimed that he could make a horse lit to ride in two
28
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


hours, I suppose he can reasonably claim to have improved con-
siderably on Mr. Sample’s system.
When a colt had been put through the operations men-
tioned, and while the roller was still on, a line with running
noose was put on the near hind fetlock, thence through the ring
on the off side of the roller, round the chest, back to the corres-
ponding ring on the near side of the roller, and by this means
the hind leg was drawn up until the toe would just touch the
ground; the colt being thus rendered powerless, would
submit to being mounted from either side and all sorts
of liberties taken with it. This operation has a strange
influence over a colt; the ropes are on him and his hind
leg up before he can realise it, and he will scarcely
ever struggle; and, there being no danger of injury, he
can be mounted without a saddle. After going through all
sorts of evolutions on its back, the ropes and tackling may be
taken off, and the operator can mount anyhow, and even put a
bridle on and ride it round the yard. I have been told, how-
ever, that when the colts had been turned out for a few days
they were worse than ever; but I am very sceptical on this
point, and am inclined to think that parties with that opinion
do not know how to approach them. It must be borne in
mind that a horse taught under Hyland’s method must be ap-
proached as Hyland teaches, and it is not to be expected that a
colt, only handled for, say, a few hours, and then turned out for
a few weeks, would allow a man to run at him, as if running at
a wood-heap. A timid horse must at all times be approached
gently, giving it time to remember its previous lessons. To
my own knowledge, Professor Hyland has been decried by per-
sons who have never seen him, but who have tried and failed
to catch a colt that had only been used for the purpose of in-
struction. It is ridiculous for men to say “ they could do
better themselves without submitting their prowess to l public
judgment. My own candid opinion of Professor Hyland is that
he could ride any horse, or, for that matter, any animal, and
even if perchance should be thrown, would land on his feet.
His exhibitions were more' of the public show variety than
29
hyland’s system.


classes of instruction, and his powers of transmitting his know-
ledge were very meagre, but suited the crowd who wanted ex-
citement ; and surely they were satisfied after seeing him astride
a bullock maddened while in the arena by such as casks, tins,
etc., being thrown at him, to be rushed, trampled, and gored.
While the bullock was going through a succession of mad
tricks, Hyland would sit on his back quite: composed, and when
ho thought the crowd had enough for their money, and the ani-
mal’s attention being engaged elsewhere, he would slip off like
lightning, and would next be seen on the rails.
I could never see the utility of such performances as these,
as we Australians will never be so short of horses as to be com-
pelled to substitute bullocks, and I have always endeavoured to
give exhibitions that were more useful and instructive as well
as amusing.
Subsequent to the establishment of classes by myself in
various parts of the colonies, several of my pupils have adopted
the profession with success, besides whom Mr. Leightwark, of
New Zealand, and Galvayne, of England, held classes of instruc-
tion in the management of vicious horses; but neither of the
latter were in a position to impart their improved methods to
Australians, as both lacked the knowledge essential to a suc-
cessful horse-training, “ How to first catch a colt.”
LEIGHTWARK’S SYSTEM—GALYAYNE S SYSTEM.
Mr. Leightwark caught a colt in the primitive manner
previously described by me, with the aid of a long pole,
and by tying a rope round the horse’s neck and passing
a line through it, thence round the fetlock, raising the
hind leg, the horse allowing him to perform in a man-
ner similar to Hyland. Galvayne always shut his colt in
a dark stable, and also caught him in the manner
described. This may be all very well with horses about
town, but not suitable on a station, or where there
are wild bush horses, where it is necessary that a
man should be able to take his halter, walk straight
up to his colt, and put it on him, without violence
30
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


oi' exeition as the saying goes, without either the colt
or operator “turning a hair.' 1 This I have been teaching for
years, and can justly claim that no man in any part of the world
can catch and quieten a horse as quickly as I can, unless he has
been a member of my class and adopts my methods'. Many
writers who have witnessed my exhibitions state that “the veriest
tyro can accomplish wonders ’ if my instructions', which are
clearly set out in this volume, are carefully carried out.
THE SECRET OF MY SUCCESS.
However, the methods that I adopt and the tackling that
I use are not so much responsible for my great success as the
simple fact that I understand the horse’s nature thoroughly,
and, before describing how to catch and handle a colt, I would
impress upon my readers the fact that no horse is wild or vicious
in his natural state. The so-called wild horse that is ten years
old and never saw a man, is not wild at all, only nervous and
timid. He simply knows nothing except eating and drinking
and moving about with mates who caress him. Whatever
knowledge he acquires later on, and be it good or bad, has to be
taught him by man; he lias brains and faculty enough to en-
able him to learn and remember, in fact do anything short, of
talking; but, like the boy learning “Foreign .Languages, swear-
ing comes first, so with the horse—bad tricks and bad habits,
which are easily learnt and retained, and must be carefrmy
avoided by his mentor.
As I have mentioned above, a horse knows what it is to
be caressed by his friend, mate, or dam, and the only mode of
caressing with all wild and inferior animals is “softly licking."
This can be very closely imitated by gently and softly stroking
with the hand, and no horse (or, for that matter, any other ani-
mal) ever fails to understand this form of caressing. Simple
as it may appear, this is really and truly the great secret of my
success with what are called wild and untamable horses.
Immediately I put my hand upon a colt, I stroke him,
which simple act inspires confidence, and he is no
longer afraid of me, allowing me to stroke all
31
TliK SECRET OF MY SUCCESS.


over him, get on his back in a very few minutes, and
even in many cases going so far as to play, pretending
to bite, pawing the ground, and capering around as if he had
been a circus horse all his life.
Of course, the time it takes to accomplish all this depends
upon the brain power and intelligence possessed by the colts,
which are like human beings in thisi respect ; all are not en-
P. 8.—“Carbine” —the best shaped head for intelligence I ever saw.
dowed with the same amount of brains, and it is quite as im-
possible for a horse to become clever and famous with a limited
brain as it is for a man. To possess the necessary intelligence
for the animal to be “first-class,” a good head is indispensable
that is, wide between the ears and eyes, perfectly straight down
the face, and shapely in every way. In proof of my argument,
let the reader refer to any of the ding-dong gallopers or big-gun
horses that he knows, and as an illustration of my theory I
reproduce a picture of the famous Carbine (p. 8). It would


P. 9. —Quite a different temperament to “Carbine.”
P. 10.—More sense and understanding, but would require watching.




be impossible to imagine a more intelligent, and at the same
time a more consistent ding-donger or braver horse under heavy
weight, and over any distance, than this, and he has the most
beautifully-shaped head for brains and intelligence that I ever
saw. .To a colt having the same shaped head as Carbine, a man
could walk straight up, and, after stroking for half a minute,
co”Id do anything with him.
P. 11. —The head of a nervous, timid thoroughbred.
The head illustrated in p. 9 is of quite a different tem-
perament to Carbine, being one of the least intelligent types
to be found and the most difficult to handle, on account
of being unable to understand quickly that the operator is not
going to hurt him, and would in all probability kick and strike
in self-defence, if approached in the ordinary bush style, trying
to jump out, and probably succeeding, if the yard was not a good
one, showing that he does not lack courage.
35
THE SECRET OF MY SUCCESS.


That shown in p. 10 presents more sense and power
of understanding, hut would require watching, the faculty
of remembrance not being strong; p. 11 shows the head
of a nervous, timid thoroughbred, more apt to learn and remem-
ber bad tricks than good manners, and cannot be expected
to exhibit much courage. The head as shown in p. 12
P. 12.—A first-class, intelligent head.
illustrates that of a first-class all-round horse, gifted with brains
enough to learn and remember anything good or bad in a mar-
vellously short time, and, if properly handled, should be quiet
and gentle, but still brave and courageous. A close study of
these heads, and remarks pertaining thereto; with the aid of
36
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


careful observations of the actions of the horses he already
knows and has handled, should enable the operator, with very
little practice, to toll at a glance what to expect of any colt
yarded, and he should proceed with the following instructions
accordingly, being particularly careful not to lose his temper
under any circumstances, and not try to teach a horse anything
while the animal is hot, or has a drop of sweat on him :
TO HANDLE A WILD, UNBROKEN COLT.
If a colt is worth handling, it is always worth a little extra
outlay in the matter of environs, and, to meet the requirements
of my readers, I will furnish particulars of the yard usually
erected for myself.
P. 13.—McGillivray’s catching yard.
The yard (as per p. 13) should not be more than 30 feet nor
less than 18 feet in diameter, hut I recommend one 21 feet,
to which scale the illustration is shown. To build this yard
you require ten (10) round, straight post® of good durable tim-
ber eleven (il) feet long, and not less than five (5) inches in dia-
meter at the smaller end ; together with forty (40) round rails


six and a half (6|) feet long, and, say, three (3) inches at
smaller end. All these should be barked, and all knotsi carefully
taken off. Then select your site for erection, and proceed as
follows:—Drive a stout peg as your starting point and centre
of yard tightly into the ground to, say, within three inches, and
then drive a nail into the top of this peg ; put the ring of your
tape on it; run your tape out to 10ft. Gin. (half your diameter),
at which point drive another small peg, on which place a second
tape ; hold both tapes in one hand, being careful that you have
the first one at 10ft. Gin.; walk to the left, running your hand
along tape No. 2, until you come to sft. 7in., and put in a similar
small peg, to which remove tape No. 2, running along another
sft. Tin., being careful all the while that tape No. 1 is held
securely at 10ft. Gin., and inserting pegs exactly where that tape
meets at sft. Tin. with No. 2. Repeat this performance right
around, and when the tenth (10th) peg is driven out you will find
your circle complete, with pegs equal distances apart. Let each
peg be the centre of your posbhole, the posts being at least 3ft.
in the ground and rammed tightly. Now select the panel you
are to use as a gate ; stand inside the circle, and bolt a rail on
to the two posts, making the first panel to the left of the gate,
keeping the small end of the rail always to the left,
and bolted to the inside of the posts. The bolts holding
the first rail should be 2ft. 4in. from the ground (this will
prevent a horse injuring itself by kicking), and every other
20 inches apart, which will give you, when the four
rails are bolted on, a height of Tft. 4in. Taking the
panel just complete as No. 1, you do exactly the same
with each alternate panel, such as 3,5, T, and 9, which will fin-
ish half of the yard. The remaining panels will be completed by
fitting the rails on top of those previously put on—viz., Nos., 2,
4,6, B—leaving No. 10 as the gate, where the rails should be
loose, so as to be easily removed. Battens nailed about a foot
from the gate posts will keep the rails in a fixed and secure posi-
tion. (See p. 13.) To finish the yard you require three
good loads of ground tan, sawdust or clean sand, to put on as
a floor, and you will have a first-class catching yard, where no




P. 14. — A yard suitable for all ordinary purposes.


P. 15.—Putting right hand on colt’s hip, my own method.
P. 16.—Keeping hand on its hip and stroking with left hand.




horse can either hurt itself or get out.. The yard should always
be built in such a position with the ordinary horse yard that
the animal to be operated upon may easily be drafted, and the
yard, as shown p. 14, will be found convenient and suitable
for all purposes.
After drafting the particular colt you intend handling into
this yard, allow him to stand long enough to collect its disturbed
senses, and realize that it has been separated from its mates,
and when sufficiently cooled down and recovered from the ex-
citement, let the operator go in with the animal and walk round
the circle to the left, and, after completing a couple of circles,
walk slowly. The colt, in his anxiety to go quickly, will come up
behind ; then keep well in towards the centre of the yard, giving
the horse, if it wishes, an opportunity of passing on your right
hand only, or between the breaker and the fence. Continue
walking round, making the circle smaller and smaller, endea-
vouring to keep ahead of the colt, while, by making short
turns to the left, you keep the animal moving, until,
after two or three minutes, you have made the circle in
which you have been travelling so small that you are in the
centre of the yard, merely turning round, while the colt has
also been making the circle smaller, passing quite close to
you, so close that, by gently putting out your right arm,
you can stroke it down (see p. 15). After the second
or third time the horse will not take any notice of this
stroking, and the operator can put his right hand on the
animal’s hip and walk round with it, keeping at a right angle
with its hindquarter, as in p. 16, and stroking it with
his left hand. It will be observed that while in this position,
on account of the yard being round, and necessitating the horse
keeping its left or near legs forward, it cannot possibly kick the
operator, nor will it ever attempt to do so, as you have already
taught it that you are not going to hurt it. By this time the
colt will stand still and allow itself to be stroked and
patted anyhow; but if it does not, keep on stroking it until you
have worked up to its side; then catch hold of its mane about


the middle of the neck with the left hand, placing the right
gentlv over its back, stroking it the whole time, as in p. 17.
You have it now in such a position that it cannot get away
from a man of ordinary strength, as you can lay your whole
weight on the right arm, and, should he bound forward, which
is not at all likely, will carry you with him ; pull yourself up to
its side, letting it see what you are going to> do; and in about two
minutes you can vault on its back (see ps. 18 and 19), and it
will carry you as quietly as if a broken-in hunter. The oper-
ation will not take more than ten minutes at the most, when
vou have the horse so quiet that you can take all sorts of liber-
ties, usually taken only with pet animals.
THE MUCH-SPOKEN-OF WALKING-STICK.
If desirable, the operator can take an ordinary walking-stick
in the right hand, and use it as % long arm to stroke the horse
with, moving it. to the left hand when placing the right on the
colt’s near hip (p. 20). This is a very good plan, as a man
is not so apt to scare a timid animal with the stick as with
the hand. The stick may be used along the colt’s back, and
on to the top of the head, thence back to the middle of the neck,
when it should be allowed to slip back through the hand, and
falls to the ground behind you, while you grasp its mane and
proceed as above.
TO CATCH A HORSE IN 10 SECONDS.
Another method I use with very wild and leas intelligent
animals is, when the animal is careering round the yard to the
left, to spring off the rails into the yard, and when the colt has
made one turn, go up to it quickly, catch it by the mane about
the top of the crest, placing the right arm over the back (see
p. 21), stroking gently on the off shoulder; then proceed
as before. This never takes more than a few seconds, and in 99
cases in 100 the horse will stand still almost immediately the
hand touches it.
The following, relating to this point, are clippings from
several New South Wales journals:
44
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


P. 17. —Gently placing arm over the colt’s back while holding the mane.
Holding mane and moving round.




P. 18. —Hanging on the colt’s side.
P. 19.—Vaulting on to the colt’s back.




P. 20.—Using a walking-stick as a long arm.
P. 21.—How to catch a wild colt in ten seconds.




“ Professor McGillivray gave one of hia exhibitions of horse-
taming in Traynor's yard on Wednesday, before a large audi-
ence of those interested in horsemanship. The horses (three in
number) which were experimented on were perfectly wild and
unbroken, from the Weebollabolla run. In his experiment with
the first animal, the Professor took three minutes in the opera-
tion, in order to explain his modus operandi, and to demon-
strate to the satisfaction of the audience that his system could
be worked by any man who could follow out his plan. The
second horse was caught and handled in from twelve to fifteen
seconds, and the third in ten seconds. It was somewhat difficult
for the Professor to make some of his visitors believe that the
horses had not been previously handled, but ultimately all were
satisfied with the bona fides of the operation.” —Extract from
Moree (N.S.W.) paper.
The Wentworth Advocate (N.S.W.), of November 3rd, 1889,
in describing my exhibition there, said :
“The next was an upstanding chestnut colt of five years.
Mr. McMahon guaranteed that this horse never had a hand on
him, and within five minutes the Professor was stroking him on
the ribs and rump, placing his arm around the horse's shoulder,
and patting him on the off side. The horse in the meantime was
perfectly naked, no- rope or tackling being on it. A moment
afterwards he was on its back, then lay down on it, ana crawled
over it, finally standing up on its back. This operation was
repeated on a bay filly that was brought in. Neither of these
animals were tackled in any way, and everything seemed to be
so simply and quietly done that many of the spectators did not
believe that the horses acted upon were not thoroughly broken
before being put into the yard.”
The Mildura Cultivator of November 17th, 1889, states :
“A mare belonging to Mr. Pegler, which had the reputa-
tion of being ‘an outlaw,’ was first handled. Turned into the
yard with the Professor, she walked around quietly, and in
less than five minutes, without the assistance: of rope, strap, or
bridle, he was standing upright on her bare back. A four-year-
old was then driven into the yard, his' owner and breeder being


present, and testified that the animal had never been handled.
The Professor walked up to the colt, and in two minutes it was
carrying him quietly round, without bridle or saddle.”
I have thus exhibited before some of the most experienced
horsemen in Australia, and they were astounded to find that
colts operated upon had not been previously handled. The wild-
est animal I can remember seeing was a grey mare from Blanch
P. 22. —McGillivray’a patent halter.
Water, that I handled at Baltana Station (S.A.); but she only
took three and minutes to overcome, and I could crawl up
one side and down the other, stand erect on her back, slip off
her hips, or anything else I liked, to the astonishment of the
owner, Mr. Phillipson, who was present.
After the operator has ridden round, vaulting on and off
a few times, and stroked his colt down all over, he can go away
52
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.




P. 23.—Adjusting halter.
Another position, walking round.


from it and approach it again at any time; and, even if
turned out for a year, it would never completely forget the
lesson taught in a few minutes.
ADJUSTING THE HALTER AND TYING UP.
When the above operation is satisfactory, take a light lea-
ther halter (as shown p. 22) and place first on the' colt’s wither,
stroking him while holding it in position ; carry gently up along
the neck with the left hand (see p. 23), and drop quietly over its
P. 24.—Holding body-rope on off hip.
ears ; buckle the nos&band and throat-strap, and the first piece
of tackling is on. Next take an ordinary bran bag, folded twice
lengthwise; place round the neck, and pass a piece of
|-in. rope through the nose-band under the chin; tie
to the hag by two half-hitches, and use for a lead; then
take a piece of f-in. rope, 22 feet long; tie with a bowline
knot round the neck at the shoulders; hold this in the right
hand, and the lead in the left (see p. 24), and, while




P. 25.—A colt tied up securely.
Another position, trying to break the line.




the colt is walking round, by placing the former on the
off hip, it will be easy to bring it round under the tail
like a crupper; now loosen the bowline round the neck,
and you will have a long as well as a short end, the
former coming from the tail. Take one turn with the latter
over the rope along the back, and tie to the short end with a
reef knot; then, taking one turn round the rope again, with the
spare end just behind the shoulder, bring round underneath
like a girth, and tie to the rope on near side again; pass the
lead through a ring on a post, tie the end of it to the rope across
the breast, and you have the colt properly and securely tied up,
P. 26.—McGillivray’s patent
roller.
as in p. 25. Frighten the horse to
make it pull back a few times, and
leave, occasionally returning and re-
peating same ; and, after four or five
times, on seeing you approach the
colt will draw up to the post, instead
of pulling back. After untying he
will follow you about with the lead.
Thus, without any trouble or pain to
either yourself or the animal, you
have taught it to lead, carry the
crupper, and tie up, in a very short
space of time.
EDUCATING TO GUIDE, OR
MOUTHING.
The operation of mouthing is then
proceeded with by using a roller (as
shown in p. 26), which has no buckles
whatever, and which, on investiga-
tion, will be found to consist of a
leather band 21m. to Sin. wide, padded on the back like a single
buggy saddle, and long enough to nearly go round the horse’s


body, with a brass ring at each end like a surcingle ; on the near
side end is riveted a leather thong of 7ft. in length and about 2
inches in width. The padded part is placed on the horse’s back
like a saddle, the girth end being brought underneath, and the
thong is then passed three or four times backward and forward
between the two rings. Hold the end of this thong in your
right hand, and the lead in your left, and, while standing
some distance away, let the colt move round, and you pull
P. 27.—Adjusting the roller
the thong (see p. 27). It is very easy to pull it up tight,
and it will grip itself and not come loose; you need not
tie, but throw the end over the colt’s back, or place
through one of the spare rings on the pad to keep it
from trailing about the horse’s feet. By the means of this
thong you can pull the roller tighter than ever a saddle would
be, while you are standing clear from the colt, and every inch
60
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


you pull the thong will held itself, while the operator does not
risk being kicked or run over, like he docs when using the old-
fashioned roller.
RUBBER BITS.
A chain bit. covered with india-rubber (as in p.
28), is attached to the halter by a D strap through the
ring on the off cheek, put in the colt's mouth, and buckled
P. 28.—Rubber bit.
P. 29. —Mouthing rein.
to the ring on the near side. To do this, hold the ring of
the bit in the left hand, with the rubber part nearly touching
the lips; hold the near side D strap in the right hand, putting
the forefinger in the colt’s mouth; this will cause the colt to
open its mouth, when the bit can be easily inserted and buckled
up as on the off side. The rein (as shown in p. 29), which has
a spring hook on each end and a buckle in the centre, to shorten
or lengthen as required, is hooked on to the D on the


off side of the roller, and the other end hooked to the off
side ring of the bit; tighten sufficiently to bring the
colt’s head round to a slight angle; fasten and let the
animal go, and make it walk round to the right (see p. 29a),
meeting it now and again, causing it to reduce the size
of the circle, and in two or three minutes, especially if the
rein has been tightened a little the second time, the colt
will almost waltz round. Now take the rein, and repeat the
P. 29A. Educating to guide.
operation on the near side, and then attach two lines, each
22 feet long, on to the bit-rings, with a bowline knot; pass
back through D’s marked A and B on the roller, walk behind,
and drive the colt (see p. 30). After turning the colt from side
to side a few times, and pulling it up repeatedly, you will find
that it is nicely mouthed, and that it will guide anywhere.
The whole work will not take more than ten minutes at the
outside, and if the several operations have been properly carried
62
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


P. 30.—Driving colt with long reins.
P. 31.—Buck-jump saddle.
(B. Sneed, maker, Mount Gambier, S.A.)
P. 32. —Buck-jump surcingle.




out with reasonable care and gentleness, the horse will not have
‘'turned a hair’’ (withe at causing any sweating), and he will be
quite cool and calm. The roller and lines may now be dispensed
with, and the colt saddled with a plain rough-riding saddle with
a strand leather girth (see p. 31) and a surcingle (p, 32),
no crupper or breastplate being required. Place the surcingle
(which, it will be noted, has a thong, as on the roller) over the
saddle, just far enough back to miss the flap in passing round
P. 33. —Colt, broken and saddled ready to ride, surcingle adjusted.
the colt's body, pull as described in use of roller, and place the
loose end through the crupper D (see p. 33). The advan-
tage in using this surcingle is apparent. Should the saddle
shift, the rider need not dismount to tighten and buckle
as in ordinary surcingles, but by simply pulling the thong
he can tighten to his own liking while sitting on the saddle.
The surcingle is very strong, and no horse living can


possibly get the saddle off if it is put on as directed. Use
ordinary bridle reins and the bit you used in mouthing.
After a colt has been ridden it may be used in any way.
I have often run in horses while riding a colt that had
been caught during the morning, and claim to get any colt
ready to work in an hour. Even for ordinary riding I use rub-
ber bits, and recommend them as a great improvement, as they
prevent lacerating the mouth, as we often see, caused by
light steel bits on a hard puller, and also prevent any jarring
on the gums, which so often causes a horse to throw its head up.
When a horse is racing at a fence, the rider thinks he is not
coming up to it in the proper stride, and sails him along at it,
then finds that he is going too' fast, and if he shortens his stride
he will come to the proper “take-off” ; but the distance is short,
and it takes a big pull to alter his stride. The hard pull with
the light bit jars his gums; up goes his head at a very critical
moment, his eye is taken off the obstacle, and he takes off too
far or too near, the result being a cropper. This I have seen
plainly illustrated on many occasions, and felt sure that, had
the rubber bit been used, it would not have occurred; and I
have known the rider to reply, when asked the cause of the
fall, “Oh! I interfered with him as he was coming at the
fence, and he ran into it.” Thus knowing that his pull on the
bit caused the mistake, yet, perhaps, not aware that, had he
been riding with a rubber bit, his interference would not have
had" the effect it did, and his worthy and sensitive hunter would
have sailed over in safety.
Another excellent quality in the rubber bit is that it will
not lacerate the colt's lips in the mouthing operation, which can-
not be avoided if the old style of large iron bit is used, and the
horse reined up for a couple of days, causing both sides of the
mouth to become sore, by which means it is an utter impossi-
bility to give it a good mouth, and the wisest course to adopt
would be to turn the colt out for a few days until the lips
heal.


AVOID LACERATING THE MOUTH.
It has always been an erroneous idea that people have
for years laboured under, that in making a horse's mouth
tender constitutes mouthing; in fact, men considered experi-
enced horse-breakers have said that a horse was never properly
mouthed until its lips became sore. Quite the reverse is the
case, however, and the more painful the mouth becomes, the
more a horse will pull. He will always meet whatever is hurt
ing him, and not shrink away. In a charge of cavalry, when
a bayonet pierces its breast, he will not turn back, but will press
forward right on to it.
“EDUCATING,” NOT MOUTHING.
Mouthing is all education, and a horse may be
taught to steer and guide in a race or in a hunt, or in
fact anywhere, by a band round the nose, to which reins are
attached, just as well, and perhaps better, than if the bit were
used. Educate your horse as directed above; give him a thorough
lesson, and you will have a horse that the most delicate lady
can guide under any circumstances with one hand; by a little
careful and gentle training a horse can be taught to guide by the
voice and knees. Some time ago I owned a hunter that I could
ride over any given number of fences without either saddle or
bridle, and on two or three occasions I owned horses that I
could mount in the paddock, and yard the mob on, also with-
out bridle or saddle. These, and hundreds of other instances
I could mention, tend to show that there is no such thing as
“ mouthing,” the better and proper term being “ educating.”
I am confident that once the rubber bit is used in educating
horses, it will always be preferred. Surely it is more humane to
see a nice soft rubber bit in preference to the hard steel ones,
and as for the so-called patent bits we see, the use of them is
simply barbarous, and the sooner the Society for the Prevention
of Cruelty to Animals moves to abolish the use of them the
better. If you cannot be advised to discard the iron bit, then


confine yourself to a plain snaffle. But, with the exception of
the hit and bridoon, in the hands of an expert horseman,
us id only on an educated and practised hunter (see p.
34), I recommend a fair trial of the rubber snaffle, and you
P. 34.—Hunter, with bit and bridoon.
will find that you have a strong, firm hold of your horse’s
head, while you are conscious of a feeling that you could not
possibly injure or jar the mouth.


“THE HORSE A PET.”
When the operator has carefully followed the directions
given in the last few pages, and has his colt educated or
mouthed, he will have a perfectly quiet animal, to catch any-
where, to ride in safety, and to lead as easily as a perfectly-
broken domesticated horse. All this has been done without
using force, only kindness and genuine caressing, but, at the
same time, with an amount of firmness that compels the beast
to obey your wishes. The colt will show his appreciation of his
master’s fondling by rubbing his head against his arms, shoul-
der or breast, by licking his hands or face, and, many times in
playful animals, pretending to bite. My contention is that it
should be so. The horse has been the dearest and choicest pet
of the most distinguished persons on earth, and should also be
ours. Monarchs for ages past nave petted him, while amongst the
most savage races he is the dearest and most cared for pet, and
not used so cruelly and unmercifully as I regret to say he is by
some who call themselves Christians and consider themselves
horsemen in Australia.
“A HORSE BRAVE AND PLUCKY.”
When a colt has gone through his first hour’s lesson
under the above method, he should be perfectly quiet, tract-
able, and fond of his master, and should, after a little
work, be as good, if not the best, horse in the land, as he
not only possesses the necessary qualifications, but retains
the stamina, pluck and power of endurance Nature endowed
him with. He has not been subjected to treatment that
could in the least tend to break his spirit or cow him
down, and carries with him no horrible recollection of hard-
ships gone through such as are experienced by colts caught
under the old style. This horse has only a faint remembrance
of the day when his master first caressed him ; he has never
been surprised at anything done to him, nor yet needed to con-
tort or exhaust himself in futile efforts to show his objection
to the treatment meted out to him, because you have taught him


what to expact before he was subjected to- it, and he knew you
did not intend hurting him even before you put your hand on
him and vaulted on to his back. He was not afraid since the
moment he began to follow you around the yard, and if the
subject is of the proper sort, should you ever be in a difficulty
where genuine pluck and real grit is required to relieve you,
call on your equine friend, and he will not be found wanting.
“TRICKY OR TIMID.”
Sometimes horses that are bred on farms, about bams, etc.,
and also often wild colts that have hardly ever seen a man
until y ar ded, 'will “fight” and “savage” in their own defence;
the former because he knows too much, and is tricky, on account
of being teased from time to time by those working about the
stables and stacks; while the latter objects because he is afraid
of man, and real fear makes him fight. As soon as a man
approaches him he will charge open-mouthed, and most likely
turn quickly and kick with both heels, the only course left
open for the operator being to climb on to the fence. The
oftener an animal with a temper like this is approached the
worse it will become, and I have seen colts so bad that imme-
diately an attempt was made even to get on the fence from the
outside, he would rush at the operator; and I saw one so
wicked that when the owner walked round the outside of the
pen the colt went careering round on the inside, trying to get
at him. more like a wild beast than what should be a domesti-
cated horse. This occurred at Miningie Station, near Miningie,
on Lake Albert (S.A.), when I was exhibiting there in Septem-
ber, 1887. The colt was a six-year-old chestnut by the imported
sire “Highlander,” the property of Mr. F. E. Hyde, who kindly
gave me the appended testimonial after handling him :
“Meringie Station,
Lake Albert,
Sept. 15th, 1887.
I have much pleasure in testifying that Professor McGil-
livray completely subdued a six-year-old colt that had been


given up by the colt-breakers as unbreakable. In fact, the
horse, by all hands on the station, was considered a real outlaw,
and was named ‘ The Man-Eater.’
(Signed) F. E. Hyde,
Manager.”
“CATCHING WITH TACKLING.”
The best plan to adopt with a colt of this description would
be to use the tackling I have for such cases, and operate as
P. 35.—McGillivray’s Rarey-strap.
follows : —Take a quiet horse—one that runs in double harness
will be found the handiest, but any quiet horse will do, no
special training being necessary—place on its head a bridle
with only a near side rein on, and take a strap (the Rarey-
strap, p. 35) 4 feet long, with a strong buckle in one end, very
much resembling a buggy-pole strap, with the exception that
in the place of the inside leather keeper on the latter, it has an


iron D, hold in the right hand (p. 36), with the buckle
to the left or front side. The end of the strap is pulled a little
through the D, and the buckle held in position bv the fore and
second fingers, while the small end of the strap is held tightly
by the two other fingers pressed against the palm of the hand.
Hold the quiet horse (p. 36), and push him over against
the colt, having both in the corner of the yard, secreting your-
P. 36.—Holding Rarey-strap and pushing quiet horse over.
self behind the quiet horse, so as not to be visible to the “man-
eater,” when both the horses are standing with their forelegs
almost together, the colt being slightly further back (see p.
37). Touch his near foreleg very lightly with the strap,
which causes him to raise his foot, which, once off the ground,
enables you to quickly place the loop round his fetlock, and give
a sharp pull, at the same time releasing the buckle held with
the fingers. The strap will run through the D, which passes


P. 37. —Quiet horse and man-eater close together, touching with strap.
P. 38. —Man-eater stepping on Rarey-strap.




over a, small leather key placed at a proper distance from the
buckle, to l allow room for the fetlock. The colt may be allowed
to run round the yard, and if it steps on the strap with its
hind foot (see p. 38) so much the better, as it will serve to take
some of the nervousness out of it. Push the quiet, horse up
again, and take hold of the loose end of the strap, and buckle
the ring (p. 39), being careful to have the two buckles facing
each other ; buckle down in the last hole, near the fetlock. Take
the thong (p. 40) or leather strap, which is 17 feet long,
with an iron ring in the end; make up in a roll about three
P. 39. —Ring and buckle.
P. 40. —The thong.
parts of it; put round the quiet horse’s neck from underneath,
holding the roll in the right hand, and when you have a good
opportunity, throw the roll over the colt’s wither, being careful
that the colt is in such a position that the weight of the ring
will not carry the end of the thong through the fence.. Secure
the end on the off aide, which contains the ring, with your walk-
ing stick, to avoid being kicked, and place through the ring
already buckled on to the Earey-strap, and put the long end of
the thong through its own ring. Let the quiet horse go, moving
the colt round the yard, while pulling the thong, thus drawing


tl:u-' leg up to its chest (p, hi). A f;-.v ta:n» uni! tin uirj
will soon cool the horse down, and you can give the end of the
thong to vour assistant while you again push the quiet horse into
position, and put the long end of the Rarey-strap round tne
P. 41. —Man-eater’s near leg up.
arm on the inside, and buckle in the ordinary way (see
p. 43); take the “cup” loop (p. 42) by the ring, and place
round the off fetlock from behind, and bring the ring up
through the loop from underneath, so that the strap will fit
“cup” fashion on the fetlock (p. 43). Then take the thong
out of the ring it is in, and place
it through the ring on the off
fetlock ; proceed as before, and
the colt will come down on its
knees (p. 44), and is perfectly
helpless. Its tail can now be
trimmed to the right length, and
by the time this is done, the
horse will have lain down.
Walk about it, stand on its
back (p. 45), stroke and caress
it; pull it over on its side by
P. 42.—Cup-loop.
76
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


P. 43.—Rarey-strap buckled, cup-loop on off fetlock.
P. 44.—Man-eater on its knees.




P. 45.—Standing on the colt’s back.
P. 46.—Standing on the colt’s shoulder and hip.




holding the forelock in one hand, and with the other holding
ine mane in the centre of the neck; stand on its shoulders and
hips (p. 46), etc. While in this position manipulate the hind
legs, flank, tail, etc.; flap a bag or rug over it; crack a whip,
and such like, calculated to make it quiet, being careful the
whole time not to hurt it in any way. More can be done to-
wards quietening what is called a wild horse under this system
P. 47. —The man-eater tamed. Lying quietly with no tackling on it.
in 15 or 20 minutes than could be imagined by one unac-
quainted with it. Unless the subject shows symptoms denot-
ing that he is a vicious kicker, everything can be taken off
while it is lying on the ground (see p. 47), and a light halter
may be put on its head, and a bit also put into its mouth.
When the colt has been put up, as if camping in its natural
position, and down again on its side, the operator should say
“Get up!” “Lie down!” etc., as he moves it, and in a very
short time it will obey the voice without even going near it,


and when let up without a rope, will allow you to lift any of
its legs, mount from either side, and even stand erect on its
ba ck.
The following is an extract from the Port Augusta
(S.A.) Despatch, in commenting on my exhibition there in
May, 1899.
“ The next one tackled (and in this instance tackling was
used, but of a most simple and inexpensive kind) was a sturdy
chestnut horse, rising seven years old, the property of Mr.
John Brennan. This one, we understand, was selected speci-
ally, and submitted as one likely to give Mr. McG-illivray ‘all
his work ’to manage and master him. In about a quarter
of an hour, however, he had it as quiet and tractable as a
sheep, allowing the Professor to mount it either side, stand
upright on its back, lift its legs, even laying down on being
told, and, in fact, showed itself willing to do almost anything
but talk.”
A HORSE THAT WILL KICK.
If a colt should develop a tendency to kick while being
caught, take a pair of hobbles (p. 48),
and while the colt is lying on the ground
put them on his hind fetlocks, and tie a
piece of rope of fair strength on the
centre of the chain. Do not take the
straps off the fore fetlocks. When ready
to let the colt up, just merely loosen
them and leave in their place, and, when
the horse is up, buckle them together like
a hobble. Then take the rope that is
fastened on the hind hobble, and fasten
also to the fore hobble; thus the
colt is hobbled fore and aft (see
p. 49). The operator can now get
P. 48.—Hobbles.
82
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


about it—anyhow he can raise the hind legs without fear
of being kicked, can pass round behind it, much to the
horse’s consternation and astonishment, and the animal can
thus be very soon taught not to kick, and that you are not at
all afraid of it. By this method the most vicious kicker can
be cured in a few minutes, and they seldom require a second
lesson, as when thus operated on they have little chance of
kicking, and when they try to cow-kick it is stopped by the
hobbles severely straining on the other fetlocks.
P. 49.—A kicker “hobbled” fore-and-aft.
CATCHING A MAN-EATER WITH WALKING-STICK.
Another method that I adopt with the so-called savage
horses is to get on the rails of the yard and wait until the
horse is on the opposite side of the arena to you, and going
to the left, or with the near side to you. The moment his
rump passes the post directly opposite to you, get quietly
but quickly into the yard, holding your walking-stick in your
left hand. Walk to the middle of the yard, towards the ani-
mal's tail. He will in all probability make a dash forward,
83
CATCHING A MAN-EATER WITH WALKING-STICK.


showing an inclination to come at you. Move calmly to the
left (as in my instructions in catching a colt), facing the horse
and making the circle smaller at every step. Should the horse
come at you do not shrink away or hit him. Never leave your
course. Walk sharply to the left, or towards his tail, keeping
the walking-stick between you and his head. In less time
than it takes to write this down the horse will realise that you
P. 50. — Using a walking-stick in catching a man-eater.
are not going to hurt him. He will make the circle smaller, as
you do the same. Slow down, until the horse’s nose is
touching your left and extended hand, which is constantly
holding the stick between you. Should he smell your hand
it is all the better. When opportunity offers, softly and
gently stroke his neck with the end of the stick, still keeping
the arm and stick between your body and his head (p. 50).
A couple of soft strokes on his neck and all is over; he is sure
84
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


you are not going to hurt him. Treat him like any other colt;
he is as quiet as the others. I caught and handled a
notorious man-eating mare, the property of the Hon. Rupert
Carrington, from “ Momalong,” Berrigan (N.S.W.), under this
method, of which the Berrigan Advocate gave the following
notice :
“ Mad Kate : Having been duly cautioned by the public,
advised to make his will by the owner, and informed by the
guardian of the law that the State accepted no responsibility
in the matter, Prof. McGillivray last Saturday proceeded to
perform his promise that he would subdue the untractable
Momalong mare ‘Mad Kate.’ As mentioned in our last issue,
Kitty is a thoroughbred vixen of fourteen years, finely built,
and as neat-looking a. hackney as could be desired. At pre-
sent she has a foal at foot, and her usual ‘sweet’ temper was
in no wise improved by this fact, which was evident by the
way she rushed open-mouthed at ‘Mac.’ as he went into
the yard. That rush was not completed in the manner she
anticipated, as the professor didn’t jump the fence, but. waited
for the mare to change' her mind. What followed proved dis-
appointing to those who had come to see a battle royal, for in
about a minute the professor had caught the mare, who
quickly submitted to be ridden without an attempt at bucking.
A further exhibition of lassooing was given, and the class have
been instructed daily. On Monday two of the pupils—Messrs.
Gorman and Charles —caught and rode two two-year-olds in
about five minutes, the horses being perfectly tractable after-
wards.”
“NEVER ILL-USE A HORSE.”
The first method mentioned, however, has several quali-
fications that I am quite' sure will recommend it to all
thorough horsemen. Every horse, whether wild or docile, is
the same; there is no danger to the operator, and it is
utterly impossible to hurt the subject operated upon, as all
85
“ NEVER ILL-USE A HORSE.”


the tackling is on the colt., and he is completely helpless before
he knows anything about it. and he cannot exhaust himself in
struggling. This should be the main object sought after
in the management of a colt, no matter what system is fol-
lowed. Always endeavour to prevent the colt struggling;
never let it work itself into a state of excitement and a lather
of sweat, and under no circumstances allow it to exhaust its
strength, and thereby understand that, he is licked. Hundreds
of good well-bred colts are spoiled each season by their spirits
being broken from the onset. I have known men to put on
long-necked spurs when going to ride, and as soon as they are
in the saddle jam them into the horse’s flank, with the result,
of course, that he bucks. This is what the rider delights in, and
he will ply whip and spurs freely. The colt cannot under-
stand this treatment, and when fairly exhausted by its futile
exertions to unseat its rider, he will most likely “ sulk,” and,
though its sides are bleeding, will not move. I consider this
the heighth of madness and cruelty, and the perpetrators
should be dealt with severely. What is more likely to. break
a horse’s spirit than this harsh treatment? Such men as
these know nothing about a, horse, and should never be allowed
to ride or drive one. Walking is too good for them.
I never persuade a horse to buck if he does not want to,
but, if inclined that way, I let him see that I am not afraid to
let his head go, and he can buck to his heart’s content. I
yell at him, and hit him with my hat or a light strap, but
I never use spurs. When he makes up his mind to go, I caress
him for itnor do I whip him for going because I came off
best in the encounter, being perfectly satisfied with our “ pri-
vate interview” when he is; and although I can ride any horse,
am never mad with anxiety to. make every colt I ride buck.
I always find a buck-jumper hard enough to sit on, and the
encounter quite exciting enough without encouraging it. If a
horse is properly handled he will seldom buck, and if he does
it is only in play or in fear, not because he is “savage.”
The cause of the latter is that he is afraid, seeing a
man suddenly in a certain position on his back. Some will
86
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


ask : “If such is the case, why do some horses carry their
riders several miles, or perhaps a good day s journey and then
buck ?” The reason is easily explained : all horses have not
the same faculty of remembrance, and some will carry a man
several miles, and suddenly forget he is on their back, perhaps
only for an instant, but just as suddenly as he looks over his
shoulder, and sees his rider where he did not expect him —
get a start or a shock, as it were —puts down his head, and
“goes to market” as savagely as possible. It is sudden fear
from seeing a man in that position that causes him to buck,
and the same thing occurs when a man gets on to a colt’s back
quickly at first. Hence the advisability of letting the horse
know exactly what the operator intends doing before he
subjects the animal to it, and the best cure for a forgetful colt
that will buck when away from home is to talk to him or
continually touch him, so as to keep your presence constantly
in his memory, and the failing will soon wear off.
TO TEACH A HORSE PACES.
A gentleman’s hack or hunter should be thoroughly proficient
in all its paces, and every horse, especially if his owner claims
that his nag has any pretentions to being “high-class,” should
be put through a thorough course of schooling in all
paces. Nothing looks so shockingly bad as a good-looking,
well-bred hack jig-jogging along like an old pack-horse, or
even worse, and this alone would prevent the sale of a first-
class animal. When a colt is first ridden it should be made
walk, even if not fast at first; he will be sure to improve, and
on every attempt at jogging rein him up, and make him carry
his head stylishly, remembering that fast walking is a pace
that is acquired, and not a natural gift, as some suppose. Any
horse can be made to walk fairly fast if you keep him at it, but
how fast depends upon the conformation of the animal; the bet-
ter the shape and the more ground he covers from the hind
87
TO TEACH A HORSE PACES.


to the for© hoofs when standing still, the faster he will walk.
If when a horse is standing still, with his forelegs nearly back
to the hind legs, with the neck and chest over, as it were,
he will never be a fast horse, a fast walker, nor yet a comfort-
able hack; he has not a good reach, a qualification particu-
larly essential in both. The continual care on the part of
P. 51.—Trotting gear.
the rider to keep him at it, and encouraging him to go faster by
gently touching him on the side every step or so with the
heels, one at a time, being at the same time careful not to
let him break into a “jog,” will improve his pace- in this re-
spect. Keep on at it in exercise, general work, in going a
journey, and, in fact, whenever riding at a walking pace, and
88
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.




P. 51A.— Showing trotting gear on a horse.
P. 52.—Trotting gear on horse in action.


by the time your colt is thoroughly domesticated you will be
pleased to find you have as good a. walking hack as most of
your neighbours.
Trotting and cantering are more natural paces to a horse
than walking, and are therefore easier taught, or rather easier
improved upon. Of the two, the former is by far the most
difficult, and to make a good trotter, the rider must be careful
never to start from a trot into a canter or gallop. If you
should want your trotting horse to canter, first pull him into
a walk, and from that start into a cantering gait. If a trot-
ting horse is taught under these directions from the first, he
will not want to break. I have a gear, however, for teaching
a horse to know no other pace than trotting, which is very use-
ful. It is shown in p. 51, and consists of a piece of
five-eighth rope, fastened by a padded leather strap to each
hind leg, just above the hock or round the ham-string, and a
small block or pulley, through which this rope, is fastened to
the collar, or, if in saddle, to a strap round the neck like a col-
lar. When this is pulled tight it is impossible for the horse
to canter, the rope and block will not allow both hind legs
to go together; but in trotting or walking, one leg, as it comes
forward in stepping, allows the rope to pass through the block,
so that the other leg can go back (see p. 52). When a
horse has been driven a few times with this gear on, he will
not break under any circumstances, and it will be found most
useful in teaching buggy horses, and either riding or driving
fast trotting horses. It is advisable to always rein a trotter
tightly, as they pull on the bit hard, and in this case the rub-
ber bit previously mentioned by me will prove advantageous,
being softer on the lips and gums than an iron or steel bit, and
this will encourage a horse to pull (see p. 53, “Fritz,” champion
of Australia, at a 2mins. Msecs, gait).
Fast trotting horses are not bred, they are educated; and
if a horse is properly built for that pace, it is possible that he
may develop into a record breaker, notwithstanding the fact
that he is not bred from trotting stock, and the gain derived
91
TO TEACH A HORSE PACES.


P. 53. —Mr. J. A. Buckland’s br gelding “Fritz,” going at a 2.14 gait.


“Fritz,” Champion Trotter
of Australia—213.




from breeding from American horses imported to Australia is
“build.”
AMERICAN TROTTERS.
The American trotter is a distinct breed of horse,
built purely for trotting (see p. “Yancleve”), and I main-
tain that if we could get an Australian thoroughbred
built on the same lines, it would be a trotter; and so,
providing she is the proper shape and build, there is
no reason why your old cart mare should not be a “ hum-
mer,” had you taken the trouble to teach her, and perhaps
it is not too late yet. Hummers are not made in a week,
and to take a raw colt that has never been tried, and has no
pretensions to trot, and teach him, it may take years to make
a real flyer of him, and when you think you have made the fast-
est time with him that he can achieve, you make a great mis-
take. You can never get him thoroughly perfect, and if you
only persevere, you can again and again improve on his record,
until he gets too old; and if a horse is sound and always been
well cared for, I do not consider 20 years too old for a trotter.
The real typical American trotter is much like the English
blood horse, but somewhat lower in build, while more solid and
chunky, with rounded quarters and very strong, small, well-set-
on head, fair neck, sloping shoulders but low wither, and, in nine
cases out of ten, one and arhalf to two inches higher behind
than in front—-that is to say, the top of the rump is often two
inches higher from the ground than the highest part of the
wither (see p. 53a. This animal can trot a mile in 2mins.
14secs.).
RIDING TROTTERS.
If you wish to make an ordinary hack of your trotter, do
not. keep him constantly at that pace, nor, in preparing him for
a match, extend him fully for long distances. Just keep him
at half or three-quarter pace, and spin him full speed for a few
hundred yards. When using him for ordinary hackney or sta-


Vancleve (Imp.) Sire of “Fritz,” “Sunshine,” “Velox,” and others, which makes
him the Champion Trotting Sire of Australia.


P. 53A. —“Velox,” a typical American trotter. Two miles, 5.5




tion work, it is as well to canter him occasionally, as there
is such a thing as making him sick of the one pace; but care
should be exercised, to start him from a walk into a canter,
and not commit the grievous error of forcing him from a trot
into a canter, and thus teach him to do it when you do not
want him, and maybe do so when you have him fully extended
for a good stake. As I have previously remarked, there is no
reason why any fairly well-made horse should not develop into
a trotter, whether half-bred, three-quarter-bred, or otherwise;
but still, at the same time, were I selecting a likely trotter, I
should be careful to have him up to 13 or 14 stone, and as
nearly thoroughbred as possible, holding with the old ‘saw,
“an ounce of blood is worth a hundredweight of flesh," and, as
fast trotting requires stamina and great power of endurance,
I like my trotter as near blood as size will allow. (See picture
of Fritz. This horse is well made, and up to 14 stone, and has
trotted a mile in 2mins. 13 2-ssecs.).
STARTING TROTTING OR CANTERING.
When starting your horse into a trot, slacken the rein
slightly, and lean forward; but when starting to canter, take a
pull on the rein and lean the body back, and tne horse will
canter immediately. Cantering is the most natural pace of a
horse, and therefore all that needs to be taught a. colt in regard
to it is not to go too fast. For short journeys cantering is
a comfortable pace for both rider and horse; but, in cases of
long journeys, a. horse will tire sooner than if kept trotting,
for more reasons than one. For instance, in trotting, either
fast or slow, the weight of the rider is off the back, the stride
necessitating his rising, thus suspending the weight in the air,
between the time the seat leaves the saddle and returns to it;
while, again, the animal puts an equal amount of weight on all
its legs, whereas in cantering, if the right foot is forward, a
good deal more than half the weight of the horse is on the
right or off hind leg, or vice versa, and for this reason most
horses, after cantering a few hundred yards, will want to change
99
STARTING TROTTING OR CANTERING.


and put the other leg forward. Therefore, it is not advisable
to canter your horse more than a mile at one time without
pulling him up, as changing his legs is uncomfortable for the
rider and not good for the horse, besides being a breach of
manners that a thoroughly good and well-educated hack
should not be guilty of.
HUNTING.
To teach a horse to jump and make a good and safe hun-
ter is the most difficult, and at the same time the most delicate
piece of work that a man can undertake in the whole manage-
ment of the animal. Anyone can make a horse jump, but to
make him a reliable and straight goer is another matter. A
man may take a colt that he has every reason to believe will
make a good hunter, but if he does not go; the proper way about
it, and not know his horse’s temper thoroughly, and work him
accordingly, he may spoil him irrevocably in the first act. I
notice it is a failing with a lot of people when commencing to
educate a hunter, to jump him over a flight of hurdles, which is
wrong, as a horse who has never been over them does not like
them, and it looks; so easy to him to get round; he sees a clear
run on either side, and cannot make out what has suddenly
come over his rider to be mad enough to run him at such an
obstacle, and has every reason to believe his master is blind;
and in nine cases out of ten he will miss, and think he is doing
perfectly right, and may be brought around a second or third
time with a like result; and this he will never forget, even if he
is with difficulty got over. He will remember that it is easier
to get round, and does not understand what is wanted; conse-
quently taking the easiest road. It would be more natural to
try him at a long straight fence, but I am afraid the reason this
is not done is that the rider’s heart is not in the right place;
and, if he only knew it, there is far less danger in trying at the
big fences than at the hurdles. The best plan to teach a horse
to jump is to prepare a panel in a good strong fence, not too high
at first, say three feet, being sure that the rail is strong
enough to prevent the horse breaking it or knocking it down


should he strike it. Show him the fence and turn away for
three or four lengths, then rush him over it, pull up gently, and
stroke and caress him; but do not attempt to jump him again
that day. The next time you try him you can repeat the opera-
tion twice, and each succeeding day take him a little further
back, and as you get him to clear it nicely raise the rail a little
at a time, until it is as high as the rest of the fence. Never
jump your horse more than twice or three times at one exhibi-
tion, nor more than once a day. Always stroke and caress him
for doing right, being careful not to let him excite himself or
rush his fences. Almost any horse will jump when going so
fast that he cannot stop, but it takes an accomplished hunter
to canter up to a big fence and jump. When you have the
rail as high as the fence, jump the next to it, or two or three
panels away from it; but be careful, when starting to jump
fences he ha® not yet. been over, that the “take-off” is good.
Do not jump him at a rotten rail, and under no circumstances
whatever practise him over brush. Jumping brush fences
teaches a horse to jump long, and spoil his stride for rails, as it
causes him to take off too fax, and also get him so used to strik-
ing when going over, that he is apt to make the same mistake
over stiff rails, and come to grief. Never pull on the reins as
the horse is rising at his fence, and think you can lift him over.
This is all “bunkum.” Yon will often hear horsemen who
should know better remark, “They fairly lifted him over, or
so-and-so “lifted his horse at such and such a fence.” My ad-
vice to riders who come under this category is to get into a large
clothes, basket, and, while in a standing position, catch bold of
both handles, and see how much they can lift it. The result, I
am confident, will disabuse their minds of the “lifting over
business.” If a, man has light hands on a horse, or, in other
words, can use the reins as they should be used, he can regulate
the stride of his hunter, and take off at the proper place, and if
this is done it will indeed be a very poor jumper that will rap
or strike heavily, and such a brute is out of place on the hunt-
ing field. When a horse is brought up to the proper “take-off,’
the best course is to let his head go, and give him a chance to
101
HUNTING.


see the fence, and also where he is going to land ; but when the
rider does not succeed in bringing him to the right “take off,”
and a buster is imminent, he may, by a piece of real good man-
agement, pull the ' '-ad round into such a position that it
will enable the animal to see better where it is going,
and balance it nicely on to its legs; but this is
easier said than done, and any interference with a
horse's head more often results in a “spill” than other-
wise, so, after all, the best course is to let the horse have
its head after regulating his stride to the proper “take-off.”
Another great thing is to keep calm and cool under all circum-
stances. More than three parts of the “croppers” we see every
day on the hunting field are the result of inexperience, the rider
“losing his head,” and, in his excitement, interfering with his
horse by hitting him with a whip or spur when about to rise, at
his fence, causing him to hurry and rise too close to his fence or
to his neighbour on either side, does not give him a. chance to see-
the fence, and a dozen other little mistakes that can be made
in the excitement of the chase. This is one good reason you
should, when teaching your hunter, be careful not to excite
him; a few runs after hounds will be sufficient excitement
for him, without having such lessons early in life, and if both
horse and rider lose their heads they are bound to come to a
bad end.
A hunter should be an upstanding, powerful horse, as well-
bred as can be obtained with size, never less than 15.2 high,
measuring 22 inches round the arm, and not less than 9 inches
round the smallest part below the knee ; a nice clean head and
neck, open in the jowl, wide enough to admit a man’s closed fist,
and clear and open in the throat or gullet, broad in the chest,
with deep, nicely sloping shoulders, and, above all things, high
in the wither; a short back, that the saddle will almost cover;
rounded ribs, that should come so close to the hip-bone that at
most you can only insert your three fingers between; thei hind-
quarter to match the hind legs, well up underneath, with flat
bone and plenty of muscle. Get a horse like this, and he will
102
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


not be hard to teach, providing you keep him cool; and, in
selecting a lady’s hack, you want one of this description.
A LADY’S HACK.
A lady’s hack should be the very best horse that money
can buy, and be an upstanding, beautiful-looking animal, sound
in every limb, well-educated, and an accomplished hunter. It
is a great mistake to think that any sort of a nice little horse
will do for a lady’s hack ; such is not the case. He should not
be less than 15| hands high, and even if higher will look all the
better with a skirt. He should be perfect in make and paces —
that is, walking and cantering —but should never trot. Under
no circumstances should a lady’s hack canter on the left or near
leg, but always on the right or off leg, even when going round
to the left, and in my opinion no animal is an accomplished
lady’s hack unless he does so.
To teach a horse to canter on the right leg, when
reining up to start into a canter, pull the near rein most, bring-
ing the head slightly round, which will cause the horse to put
the off leg forward; so, with very little patience and practice,
he will always do it, and, if nicely managed, will never wish to
start wrongly, even if you tried to make him do so. A horse
that persists in cantering on the left leg is very awkward for
a lady to ride, besides being a disgrace to the man that educated
him, and whose proper sphere is a, country famed for cows, and
naught else. While a lady’s hack should be able to trot (ac-
complished horses should be able to go all paces), he should
never attempt it when, carrying a lady, but, as stated before,
when his fair rider leans back and pulls gently on the rein, will
gracefully put the right foot forward, and break into a gentle,
easy canter in one stride. He should also be a sure and easy
jumper, and, as previously remarked, be the best-looking, best-
educated, and most accomplished horse “that money can buy.”


DRIVING.
In driving one, two, or more horses, the reins should be
held, as in riding, in the left hand only (see p, 126), and the
wheeler’s reins in the case of three, four, or more raking the
place of the curb reins in riding. The reins should never, under
any circumstances, be completely removed from the left hand ;
though the right (while holding the whip) may be used in
guiding or turning when necessary. Nothing looks so bad as to
see one driving with a rein in each hand, as it is not only a grave
breach of driving etiquette, but it is actually dangerous to life
and limb. The driver may be trotting his team slowly, holding
his reins as above described, when some horseman or vehicle
suddenly overtakes him. The horses take fright and rush
forward, and the driver cannot take a shorter hold; then up
goes his hands to his head in trying to take a pull on the run-
aways. This does not have the desired effect, and he leans back
in his seat for all he is worth, cutting a sorry figure, to the great
amusement (most likely) of all who see him. On more than one
occasion I have seen drivers of this class, when going along
quietly, run suddenly over a rut that they did not
notice in time; the horses have made a slight rush
forward, and the drivers’ hands have gone up to their
faces when they leaned, in fact almost fell, back, in a manner
that is easier imagined than described. This kind of
driving is very unpleasant for the occupants, and I for one
would rather not be of the party. There is only one correct
method of doing any one thing, and a moment’s careful consider-
ation of the method and style of holding the reins which I have
described and illustrated will convince the most sceptical that
it is the correct one. By taking hold of the whole of the reins
in a bunch (when they fall over the thumb) in this method with
the right hand, the left may be run forward along the reins
without removing the fingers from between, when a short and
secure hold may be obtained in an instant, avoiding all risk of
pulling one more than another, or of dropping any of them. This
is the key to good and careful driving, and should be practised
by everyone. When driving “leaders,” either in large towns,
104
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


where there is much traffic, or on bush roads where there is much
timber, I would strongly discourage the use of swinglebars.
These are often the cause of lamentable accidents through some
mishap, such as one of the horses getting its leg over and kick-
ing; the end of the bar getting fast in a part of a passing dray
or waggon, and on bush roads getting fast in trees, bushes, or
such like. What is known in Australia as “Victoria” harness
is much safer, more durable, neater, and more fashionable (see
p. 53b). There is no swinglebar used with the leading harness;
in this case the traces being fixed to a special buckle made for
the purpose (on the wheeler’s harness) by a, spring hook, making
P. 53B. —Team of four with “Victoria” harness.
it almost impossible for the team to get, as the phrase goes,
“mixed up.” This kind of harness will be found very convenient
when driving green or newly broken horses. I would strongly
advocate wearing a breeching on the wheelers in all driving, as
it is more reliable than any brake that ever was made, although
it is desirable to have a brake also.
HARNESS.
In large coaching establishments, as well as on most sta-
tions in the colonies, the usual course adopted in breaking a
colt to harness is to simply put him with a staunch old stager


that will pull, and start to work immediately. Generally at
the former a large coach or brake is used for the purpose, and
the colt is one of the “wheelers” in a team of four; but on the
station there is seldom more than the brake horse with him,
Up to the time he is harnessed and hitched to the brake he
knows absolutely nothing about harness or what is wanted of
him, but the old horse will start off, pulling the colt with him,
who will after a time go along gently, because he knows it is
compulsory; but in the majority of cases he pulls very little,
if at all, and, when once stopped, will not exert himself until
pulled away as before. Even after working for perhaps several
weeks, it will not start without a good mate, although it may
immediately go into the collar when once in motion, and work
nicely.
When two such horses are paired, they can make things
very unpleasant, and should the driver have the misfortune to
get into a difficult place or heavy bog, they will not pull the
proverbial “sprat off a gridiron.” While everything is going
smoothly, and on a hard road, they may pull very well; but
ask them to shift a heavy load, and the game is up. They may
take a load through a nasty creek or bog, if kept going; but let
them once stop in the centre, and they will not start again till
all is black and blue. They always remember that in their first
lesson they had the load started for them, and expect it again.
This manner of breaking is the cause of so many notorious jib-
bing horses ; but they are not to blame, for from the first it was
their mate who started the load for them, and they have not
been taught otherwise, so cannot be expected to “guess” what
is required of them when their driver and themselves are in
dire difficulties. I could go to any coaching establishment in
the colonies where colts are broken in the manner described,
and with safety wager any amount of money that two-thirds of
their four-horse teams will not start an empty coach with the
wheels locked; but still we may possibly come across some nice
staunch horses, but it is more luck than good management that
they are so, and one horse will soon spoil a team if he will not
pull.
106
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


BREAKING TO SINGLE HARNESS.
I find the best method is to break a colt first into single
harness. Any horse will go if he has a good mate to do l the
severe starting, etc.; whether required for either light or heavy
work, my advice is to break singly, and he will understand he
has to rely on his own strength. Put harness on him with
traces that will enable him to pull a sledge, being particular to
put it all on, and drive him round before adjusting the winkers,
by this means enabling him to learn that the harness will not
hurt him. Then have your assistant holding on to the ends of
the traces, and each time you turn the horse allow the traces
to come round in such a. way that they will rub the hind legs,
and thus help in taking the timidity out of him; and teach
him not to kick should anything go wrong. Weight should be
put on the shoulder gradually, by your assistant holding on to
the traces, and the horse should be started and stopped at
frequent intervals, and he should always start in
a walk. When you have got him to start nicely, with
the man’s weight behind him, hook him to a log or
sledge, which should be so light that, even if the horse should
by any chance get the traces round his legs and start kicking,
it would drag without injuring him. After a time you can, by
a little coaxing, get him to trot, and, with about an hour’s
schooling, you will be able to stand on the sledge, and he will
trot away with you. Each time you go' near him stroke and
caress him. Should you be in a hurry to drive him, and find
he will trot nicely with you, get a couple of empty tins, and tie
on to the sledge, driving him round a few times with these
rattling. By this means he will get used to a noise behind
him (not being used to a noise behind is the cause of the ma-
jority of horses kicking in harness), and if he takes no notice
of the tins, you can drive him in any description of harness
with safety; but the better plan would be to take off the har-
ness and feed him, and give him another lesson next day before
putting him in a buggy. By giving him short lessons he will
understand what is required of him, and not “sicken” of it,
and you should always bear in mind that he should never be
107
BREAKING TO SINGLE HARNESS.


hot. Immediately he begins to sweat, take the harness off
him. When breaking a valuable horse into harness, I believe in
using an open bridle, teaching him never to be afraid of any-
thing behind; but, after he is thoroughly trained, use winkers,
as high-spirited horses are apt to get excited and want to race
with a team coming behind them ; while, again, others are lazy,
and on seeing the whip will jump, and give the occupants of
the vehicle an unpleasant jerk. It is well, however, t ( o have
your carriage pair, or single buggy horse trained to go without
winkers, so that, in the event of their being accidentally
rubbed off, the horse will not take fright.
In breaking for heavy harness, the same care need not
be exercised, as after dragging a log about for a. while, the ani-
mal may be put in the body of a waggon team, but in all cases
he should be taught to pull singly, and if reliable in that, it will
certainly pull in double harness.
A KICKER.
When the subject is a very vicious kicker, it is a good
course to adopt Mr. Sample’s method with him before putting
him into harness—viz., tie his head and tail together with the
aid of the lead, and knotting the tail as directed in page 27,
rubbing him down with a long pole until he stands perfectly
quiet and will allow his legs to be manipulated anyhow. Drive
him round with side lines, allowing the far side line to run
over his hind leg every time you turn him, and after very little
of this treatment he will understand that he is not going to be
hurt, and will not kick, no matter what you do to him; then
proceed with his lesson, teaching him to pull as before. To take
a, vicious, kicking colt that has only just been mouthed, and
drive him straight away with your quiet horse in a valuable
carriage, without breaking anything, very much as described
as done on stations or in coaching establishments, with the ex-
ception that they use a brake, it is advisable to use my trot-
ting gear (p. 52). If the buggy pole is not very strong,
and you fancy your subject will not go, you can lash a piece
of quartering along it. First put your quiet horse in his place.
108
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


and hook him on, buckling the pole-strap carefully ; then put
the colt up, buckling the pole-strap very short in his case, and
having the traces a hole longer than his mate’s. Harnessed
thus, a colt cannot possibly kick, and, your other horse being
fairly staunch, can pull him away easily. It will be seen at a
glance that the pole-strap and the gear, both being fastened
to the collar, as the quiet horse pulls, should the colt refuse,
his hind legs will be drawn up under him, and, unless he throws
himself down, he must certainly go. In most cases, when
driven under this system, the colt will go straight away, as he
seems to be conscious of the feeling that he cannot do anything
if he tries, and should he elect to try, the result is amusing.
His hind legs lose all their power, the strain all being on the
ham-strings in kicking, and they fall helplessly to the ground.
No wonder the subject is disgusted with such a result. He
probably had intentions of making matchwood of the obnoxi-
ous vehicle, but, on finding it turns out a bad job, will tr,ot
away quietly. Still, at the same time, although this method
is wonderfully handy and inexpensive to a man with a large
number to break, and the cost of purchasing a brake-van is a
considerable item, and while any horse may be driven in an.
ordinary buggy, with any harness, it is very much against my
theory and comes under the category of the “pulling away’’
business, and might teach the subject to look for his mate to
start the load. It is invaluable, however, to those who will
drive their colts without preparation; besides being inexpen-
sive, it will teach him to trot, and trot he must, and he must
behave like a. thorough gentleman. Two or three times, at the
outside, will suffice to drive him with the “gear.” His first
lesson he will never forget, and this experiment must be tried
to be understood and properly appreciated, ana, if tried on a
really vicious horse, that has been used to “kick up a shine,”
it will be quickly noticed how docile and gentle he has to be-
have. He is prevented from kicking, rearing, jibbing or can-
tering, but must walk or trot like an accomplished horse. This
tackling is also invaluable when putting a kicking mare to a
valuable stud horse. It can be put on, and the mare let loose
in the paddock with the stallion, without fear of his being
injured.
109
A KICKER.


BOLTING.
Bolting is another vice that a horse will take a long time
to forget once the failing has been indulged in, and I am not sure
if he is ever the same after once taking fright. Invariably bolt-
ing is first caused by the horse taking fright at something or
other going wrong with the harness, leaving him stand on the
street, and something coming along and frightening him, this,
being the commonest cause of bolting. He will probably walk
off at first, and then go into a trot, gradually getting faster and
faster, until after a bit he is going at hurricane speed, running
against some obstacle and turning the trap over, getting mad-
der and madder at every moment, and, before finally secured, is
completely exhausted, and perhaps cut to pieces. The animal
will never wholly forget such an adventure as this, and, al-
though it may be very useful, and driven about quietly enough,
cannot be depended on, and may at any time take fright at
something it has not the slightest occasion to fear, and when
the driver cannot possibly account for a reason, bolt and smash
everything. When a horse takes a fit such as this, all the ordi-
nary bits and reins, that were ever invented would not stop him,
and the best method I have found for stopping him is to have
your ordinary single harness reins made about seven feet longer,
and a strong D fastened on to the crupper where it touches the
highest part of the horse’s rump; buckle the reins on to this D,
instead of on to the bit, and run it down the animal’s side and
through another D fastened on the harness belly-band, a little
below the level of the shafts. Now run the reins through the
bit ring from the inside, and a loose ring may be added here to
keep the reins in their place; thence through the harness tur-
rets back to the driver (see p. 54); use for ordinary driv-
ing. In this way the most delicate hands can hold the greatest
puller that ever bolted, as the animal’s strength is used against
itself, and he is in a word pulled up altogether, and is perfectly
helpless, being quite unable to bolt, buck, or kick.
Another good method is a Russian invention that I picked
up. It is very simple, but effective, and will stop a bolting
horse when going at full speed as quickly as if he were shot
110
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


dead. Take a thin cord—schnapper-line is the best—and tie
or to a small iron ring three-quarters of an inch in diameter;
secure the ring to the top of the horse’s winkers, between, the
ears ; pass the line round the animal's throat, through the ring
on top of the winkers, and through the harness, etc.,
with the reins (see p. 55); then tie loosely on to
the splash-board until required. When the horse bolts
P. 54.—Bolting rein: showing one side.
pull the line, and the result will astound you. The
horse will lose all power, and fall down in a moment
if great care is not taken, and in the hands of a person apt to
get excited, the cure may be worse than the disease. The pres-
sure on the top of the head acts on the spinal cord, and for the
time being has the same effect as “pithing,” so the pull on the
cord must not be too heavy, the best way being to pull gently
with the little finger, while you keep a steady strain continu-
111
BOLTING.


allv on the reins, and you will find the horse staggering and
getting slower in pace, until in a short distance you have him
again completely under command. It is no encumbrance to
carry a line on a horse you think will holt, and it is inexpensive
and easily adjusted. If anything will cure this fault it is the
judicious use of either of these methods, and, of course, I re-
commend my own —the long rein;—for, even if it will not cure,
P. 53.—A Russian bolting rein.
he is at least safe, and no one need be afraid of any horse with
this fixture on. As in riding, I believe in using rubber bits
and notice that they are being used extensively now in driving.
RUNAWAY HORSES.
When a horse, or pair of horses, left in the street with a
buggy or carriage, bolt, they are most likely to come to grief un-
less they are very soon stopped. They generally set off at a
112
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


fast trot, but before going many yards break into full gallop,
and it is no foolish or simple feat for a pedestrian to stop them.
Of course, it is useless for anyone who is near where they started,
and therefore behind them, to attempt to overtake them ; but
in coming towards them the case is different, and he only
requires to be active, and have a fair amount of pluck, to. be
able to stop them, preventing, perhaps, scores of pounds in dam-
age. When the pedestrian sees them he should take up his
■position in the road in such a way that the bolters will have
to pass him with their near side to him, and when they are
within a chain or so of him, should start to run the same
way they are going, and thus get some pace on by the time they
come alongside. When they come up with him he should
quickly note where the reins are, and if still in the body of the
trap, he can catch hold of the after part, jump in from behind,
getting the reins, and pull them up; but if the reins are trail-
ing between the horses, which is generally the case, he should
first catch hold of the near side trace. He can tnen pull himself
up alongside, until he can catch the collar, or the mane, with his
left hand : then place the right on the withers, and vault on to
the animal’s back, and it is then an easy matter to gather up
the reins, pulling the bolters up in safety. This feat may look
difficult to some; but it is not so hard to accomplish as it seems
to be on paper, and a man only requires to be active enough to
catch the trace, and the rest is easy. Another method is to run
alongside the horse, secure the reins, and pull them up by a
series of jerks; but this is much more dangerous than the other,
as the pace the animals are going at would be sure to take a
person off his feet, and he may be dragged along, or perhaps
run over. To vault on is much the best and surest, way, and
one need have no hesitation in getting on the horse, for, even
if he is not broken to saddle, he will not buck in a case like this,
even if he could see what was going on; but the winkers pre-
vent even that.
SECURING HORSES AND BUGGY.
To prevent a horse bolting when left by itself on the street
or elsewhere I have several methods.. If you tie a horse up in
113
SECURING HORSES AND BUGGY.


the ordinary way with one of the reins, it is not strong enough.
If he pulls away it is sure to break; but if you pull one of the
reins out of the hames, pass it round a, post, and put it through
his collar at the breast, back between his legs, and tie securely
to the tail, he cannot possibly get away or break the rein, and a
small line a quarter of an inch is quite strong enough to hold the
strongest horse. Another way is. to take a cord as above, and
tie with a running noose round the horse’s neck ; then put a
half-hitch on the lower jaw beneath the tongue, and tie to the
post, and I will guarantee that the horse is there when
P. 56. —McGillivray’s safety buggy strap.
you come for him, even if you are away for a consider-
able time. There is not the slightest inconvenience to the
horse as long as he stands quiet, but if he tried to pull
the pain will be severe. However, it is strange to say
that a horse tied like this will not attempt to pull away. An-
other good method of securing a vehicle and pair (or one horse
either), is to have a long leather strap (see p. 56), and tie the two
wheels (on one side) together, and tie the reins to a ring in the
strap, put there for this special purpose; they cannot get away
114
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


P. 57. —McGillivray’s safety buggy strap on the wheels.




with this on, as both wheels of the' trap are completely blocked,
and the reins being tied carefully (p. 57). will allow the wheels
to go round only sufficient to bring a small pressure on the
horse’s mouth, and give him to understand that he is
thoroughly and securely fixed.
BOLTING IN SADDLE.
It is harness horses that are generally addicted to
the vice of bolting, although occasionally a saddle horse
develops it; but it soon disappears in the latter with a
little gentle work. I have always found that when a horse
bolts in saddle, the best plan is to let him bolt, making up your
mind that he will tire first. Sit still on him, and do not try to
stop him, and you will find he will not go far, unless he has
taken fright at something hanging to the rider or the saddle,
and in that case remove the cause, or else make him used to it
as soon as possible ; but if he bolts as a substitute for bucking,
let him bolt (as in bucking, let him buck), and he will very
soon throw up the little game, probably never to resume it.
If he is treated with contempt, and you let him see you are
not afraid, it is only one horse in a hundred that will bolt a
second time. Probably some of my readers might think that
very few riders can make up their minds that they are not in
danger when a horse bolts with them ; but any ordinary horse-
man should know that natural instinct teaches the horse to take
care of itself, and see where he is going, and it is only when
interfered with by the constant pulling at his mouth which
arouses that spirit of contrariness common to him that he will
not be stopped. It is against all reason to expect a bolting-
horse to do anything but come to grief, if the rider persists
in nulling him about, and if this is done when he is coming toi a
fence, dray, or ditch, up goes his head, and he does not see
where he is going, and he runs smash into it. Then, again, if
the rider pulls on one rein, it is just the same ; instead of com-
ing round the way he is wanted, he will strain like mad against
the bit. his head being pulled back almost to the' rider’s foot,
but the course of the body and legs will not be altered one iota.
117
BOLTING IN SADDLE.


He will bound along sideways in his mad career, and, should
he collide with a dray or run into a six-wire fence while going
in that manner, the fall both to himself and his rider may
prove disastrous. But if you sit quite still, and let the reins
hang loosely, he may race to within a few yards of this danger-
ous obstacle, but not once in a thousand times will he go into
it; so I say sit still on him by all means. Give him his
head, and by so doing you will be avoiding the great danger of
P. 58. —Bolting rein in riding.
diverting his attention, and the instinct with which all horses
are endowed teaches them to save themselves more effectually
than all the lessons you could ever give. However, if you use
the long rein as in harness (p. 58), no horse can bolt with you.
JIBBING HORSES.
The cause of a, jibbing horse is the manner in which it has
been broken in, and, once the habit is indulged in, it is con-
sidered by most horsemen incurable. Such is not the case,
however, and under the proper treatment the most notorious


jibber can be transformed into a really staunch horse in a very
short time. The usual and ordinary method is to flog the ani-
mal, but if he were flogged for a week at a stretch he could not
be made to pull; while, again, some put a rope round the fore
fetlock, and pull on it, thus bringing the leg forward, and most
horses, when once they move their load forward, will go all
right, rushing on at a fast pace. I have actually seen a. man
build a fire under a jibbing horse, and try all sorts of things,
but all in vain. Of all the faults that a horse can develop, jib-
bing is the most exasperating, and would try the temper of an
angel, and I am very sorry to sav that some men treat such
animals cruelly. To l cure a horse of this habit, take a. piece of
f-rope, and, while tlm horse is hitched to the dray 01
buggy, tie with a slip-knot round the throat, bringing down
along the chin through the nose-band, and place a half-hitch
round the lower jaw under the tongue (as directed on page 114
for tying up). Your assistant should be in the buggy or cart,
holding the reins. Stroke the horse down the face and head;
then stand some distance in front of him, and pull hard on the
rope, at the same time calling the horse by name, such as
“Come on, Jack.” If he does not come on the first pull, he
most certainly will when you repeat the operation, and, when
he does come, stand in your place and stroke and caress him
for a few seconds; then move away again to the end of Uie
rope, and immediately you say “Come on, Jack,” he will come
to you. Repeat this a, few times, and the horse will come as
soon as you call him; even if you go behind the vehicle he will
turn round to you, and after you have continued this operation
for 20 minutes or half an hour, you can tie him to a post or tree,
and he will pull every time you call. There is no one thing
that has been so profitable to me as this method of curing a jib,
and 1 have never known it to fail, although I have repeatedly
taken horses that have been given up as incurable, and
delivered them up to their owners in a very short time com-
pletely cured, and thoroughly staunch horses.
Another method that I have is to tie the horse’s tail to the
swinglebar, leaving the traces slack; most horses will pull
when tied thus, and after going some distance the rope with
119
JIBBING HORSES.


which the tail is attached to the bar can be slackened gently, and
the horse allowed to go into the collar, and he will pull all right,
and forget all about jibbing. This method of fixing is invalu-
able to a man who wants to drive colts, and is not too sure if
they will start, and the advantage over the former method is
that it can be used in a, team ; but at the same time, while the
former will cure a horse altogether of this habit, tying the tail
will only start him for the time being. It will never hurt him,
however, and a horse can shift as heavy a load by his tail as he
could if pulling by the shoulders. If horses were intended by
Nature to draw loads, it must be by the tail, which is much
stronger than any other part. If you take a draught horse, and
fix him to a, loaded dray by his tail, he will walk away with it
quite contentedly, and as easily as if he were pulling by the
shoulders.
RIDING.
It is a wonderful thing that among the hundreds of thou-
sands of people throughout the civilised world who ride, there
are very few we meet who ride correctly or even tolerably
well, this remark applying particularly to Australians. In
a country like ours, where we should have the best horsemen
in the world, and where, you may say, many are born in the
saddle, it is wonderful that so many inferior riders are
to be found. Some who have been riding all their
lives may be seen with their knees nearly up to their chins,
or stooped until nearly face downwards on the pommel
of the saddle, or perhaps leaning right up the horse’s neck ;
and then again you will see men riding to hounds, and going up
to a fence, holding a rein in each hand, and, to crown all, with
the hands up near the chest ; while not infrequently among
those who do keep their hands in position, we see them when
they wish to turn their horse to the right or left, merely move
the hand in which both reins are held towards the side they
wish to go. These are most unpardonable errors in riding, and
show want of thought and skill on the part of a horseman. I
fully expect that my remarks will be severely criticised by my


Australian friends ; but, as I said, early in, this volume, I am
writing from experience', and I mean to tell the truth, though it
may be unpalatable to some. The matter of holding the reins
correctly is, I consider, one of the chief feature® in riding.
MOUNTING.
In dealing with this subject, I will commence by giving
instructions, on mounting a horse.
P. 59. —The correct way to mount.
The best method (and only correct one) of mounting is
to take the reins up tightly, the near rein the tighter of
the two, so as to bring the horse’s head slightly round, and
keep in that position by taking a large lock of the mane
nearer the wither than the centre of the crest in
the left hand, with the reins; hold the stirrup
121
MOUNTING,


with the right, while you place the left foot in,
removing it then to firmly grasp the pommel of the
saddle : bend the left leg, until the outside of the knee will
touch the flap, then rise the weight of the body, not by a sudden
jerk, but gently, by the aid of the left leg and the right hand,
fulling on the saddle (see p. 59), keeping a good hold of
the latter until the seat is safely reached, and the right foot is
in the stirrup. This will be found a much safer method than
the old style of catching the cantle of the saddle, as in the
former you have your hold until the seat is gained, and, should
the horse move during the time that intervenes from the foot
leaving the ground and being placed in the stirrup, by leaning
slightly from the horse the rider is quite safe, as he can hold
on while in that position, as well as if properly seated, the hold
enabling him to balance himself, and even should the horse
buck, by giving slightly with the left leg, which carries all the
bodily weight, and letting the leg, as it were, bend at each
bound of the horse, it prevents the jar that the body would
receive, and the motion of the horse has no power over it.
Therefore, if the bound or buck that the horse gives does not
catch the weight, it cannot throw it; but in holding the cant’e
of the saddle while mounting, the rider has to remove iixs
right hand before he can possibly put his right leg over the
saddle, and just as he is about to throw his leg over, his body
has nothing to support it. Should the horse move at all, the
rider must come to grief, a buster is inevitable, and a great
many accidents happen for this very reason, and even if the
horse does not move at all, when the hand is removed and the
weight is suspended without support, it is impossible to sit down
on the saddle easily and gracefully, and if the horse is timid
and the rider gets flurried, the chances are that immediately
the hand is removed from the cantle, he goes down “ flop ”
on the saddle, causing the horse to bound forward with con-
siderable risk to the rider’s safety, as he has no time to take a
proper hold of the reins, nor yet get his right foot in the stirrup.
I am very much surprised that the South Australian
mounted police are still made to mount in this manner.


although I could name a good number who have received severe
falls through this very error, and on speaking to ! one or two oi
the inspectors, and pointing out the danger, the reply has in-
variably been “that horses bought for this department are sup-
posed to be quiet.” This is a very lame excuse, and should one
of these Government, animals get a little over-fed, and fancies
he is once more a, colt, and put himself through sundry contor-
tions, it could not be expected that one of the police could or
would ride him. I know there are some first-class horsemen
amongst them, but they are not allowed any discretion, and
their chances of showing their ability are meagre. It is the
usual red-tape formula, and subordinates must obey the man-
date of the heads of the department, even though they be
wrong, and they are compelled to mount in this erroneous
method. When a good firm hold is taken of the pommel, the
rider can mount, whether the horse stands or not, and should
he jump forward, the arm will carry the weight of the body into
the saddle, gaining the seat without, any risk whatever.
REARING.
The quickest and easiest, method to mount, a horse that
will rear and plunge is to take the near rein up short in the left
hand, and get. a firm hold of the animals near ear, catching the
pommel as before, and retaining the hold on the ear until you
are fairly seated. Most horses will stand perfectly quiet when
held in this way, and should the rider have any difficulty in
mounting, it is because he has not brought the animal’s head,
round far enough to the near side. This can be done by placing
the elbow in between the horse’s cheek and the rein, as it is
held by the ear in the left hand, and pulling the elbow into
the side, and it will then be found easy to mount.
STRIKING OR BITING.
I have another method which I use when a horse will
“strike” or hit with the fore feet. Take two pieces of light
rope, and splice on to a small iron ring, thus you will have a
line, with a ring in the centre. Put one of the ropes round the
123
REARING. — STRIKING OR BITING.


horse’s near fore-fetlock, and through the ring; take it up and
through the ring of the bit, and then hold in the left hand with
the reins. The other part or end of the rope is taken up along
the leg to the saddle, where it is made fast (see p. 60). The horse
is thus fastened head to fore leg, and cannot move, and when
the rider is mounted, that portion of the rope coming from the
bit is let loose, while the rope from the leg to the saddle is
P. 60.—Mounting small line and ring.
taken, and given a slight pull, releasing the ring from the
fetlock. By this means the rope is removed without dismount-
ing, and without assistance.
HOW TO USE THE STIRRUP.
In riding, a gentleman should have his feet well into the
stirrup ; if riding at a slow pace, such as walking or cantering,
a man may ride with only the ball of the toe resting in He
stirrup ; but going at a fairly fast pace, over fences or stock-
riding. such a thing could not be thought of for a moment. The




P 61. —Correct way to hold four reins, either driving or riding.
P. 62. —Obverse view.


stirrups should be long enough to enable the rider to sit nicely
and easily balance his weight to save being jerked, ©to. When
sitting comfortably on horseback, a man should measure within
(from the sole of his foot to his crown) four inches or so of his
height when standing, the leg should touch the saddle all the
way down, and when it leaves the flap it should almost touch
the horse’s girth. From the knee, the leg and foot should
hang straight down, with the toes straight forward; the posi-
tion of the body should be perfectly upright and not too stiff;
a man should ride as if he were part of the horse, moving in
the right position with each motion of the animal.
HOW TO HOLD THE REINS.
If riding with single reins, they should be held with the
near-side rein coming up through the left hand from the little
finger, and the off-rein should pass in between the fore and
second fingers, joining the other rein, and both falling over
the thumb. With double reins use the large or snaffle rein as
above, and pass the near-side curb rein between the little finger
and the third, and the off-rein between the third and second
.fingers, up through the hand with the other reins, and fall-
ing over the thumb (see ps. 61 and 62). The hands
should be held square with the horse’s ears, down close
to the saddle, and, when riding slowly, with rather a
loose rein, the little finger should just touch the pommel. The
elbows should be close in to the sides, carried firmly but not
stiffly ; the left hand should never leave this position under any
circumstances, nor the elbows leave the side, but care must be
taken not to run away with the idea they should be jammed in
close to the ribs. Such is not the case, although the sleeve
should touch the side of the jacket, but in a graceful position.
When there is a necessity to grasp the reins with rignt liand
also, the two off-side reins are taken in the hand, mucn in the
;same position as they are in the left, the hold being taken
between the left hand and the horse’s head. The reins are
never allowed to leave the left hand, but may slip ever so little,


to give the right hand room, and are then held firmly and
securely with both hands down almost touching the saddle.
This is the correct way to hold the reins when racing at a fence,
the rider having complete command over the horse, and he can
use all his power, while at the same time, if he has occasion
to take the right hand away suddenly to use the whip or such
like, he can do so in an instant, and the left hand still has its
hold of all the reins as securely as ever. When holding the
reins in the left hand thus, the horse can be turned to either
side without using the right, as if turning to the left, just turn
the hand down, as if bringing the little finger in towards the
seat, which will slacken the off-side and tighten the near-side
rein, and in turning to the rignt, turn the hand up, as if bring-
ing the forefinger towards the breast, which will have the
desired effect. Some people, when wishing to turn a horse,
merely move the hand to the right or left as the case may be,
but instead of tightening the near-side rein when the hand is.
brought that way, it will tighten the off-side, and vice versa.
As I have previously stated, this is an error a great many fall
into, and with anyone of either sex having any pretensions
whatever as riders, this is unpardonable, as it. only requires a
moment’s study to see the absurdity of it. What on earch is
the use of educating a horse to turn to the left by pulling the
near rein, or to the off by pulling the right, if you afterwards
expect him to do the reverse ? At the same time, there are
hundreds of horses that will turn when guided in this manner,
even at the first trial; but lam convinced they do so because
they know what is required of them, and not because they are
influenced by the rider’s ability to make them understand.
But, as I have said before, riding altogether in a great measure
constitutes being able to properly handle the reins, or, in other
words, handling the reins is the main thing to learn in good
riding. The hands of a. good horseman should be as firm as a
rook, but still light, delicate, and sensitive as a, fairy’s, and a
hand like this on a well-educated horse communicates the
rider’s intentions, and his wishes, almost his very thoughts, to
the animal pretty nearly as soon as he himself is aware tnat


they exist, and creates that silent but mutual understanding
between the noble beast and his master, that I cannot,
and, indeed, no writer, ever need attempt to describe. You
are racing at a fence straight towards a certain panel, but
when you come to within thirty paces, you see a better
rail a few yards further down, and make up your mind to
take it, and almost before you are aware that the thought
is born, it is telegraphed through the reins to your hunter,
who bounds towards it as light as air, seeming to say
“All right, master, I know what you want. Well do it;
come on.” The horse pricksi his ears., looks a.t the fence, but
the silent communication still goes on between you, through
the reins, which regulates his stride to the very inch, enabling
him to bound from the proper take-off. But put an inferior
rider on the same horse, one who holds a rein in each hand up
near his breast, and see how he will jump; if he does jump at
all, he will most likely make an awful blunder, but the chances
are that he will not jump, but will behave like an inveterate
baulker. The rider does not know how to handle the reins, and
the horse is aware of it. Perhaps the rider is. afraid, and that
knowledge is communicated to the horse immediately.
ABILITY TO HANDLE THE REINS.
So that, whether a man will make a. first-class rider or not
all depends on how he can handle the reins, and if he cannot
do that properly he will never become proficient. A good deal
of the art of handling the reins correctly is a natural gift.
Lightness of the hand cannot be learnt or acquired, but may be
greatly improved by practice, and the first and best lesson to
have is how it should be done.
Therefore, in learning to handle a horse’s head properly the
pupil must first ascertain if he has the ability to become a first-
class horseman, whether he possesses the gift of lightness of
hands, so necessary to a real good rider. This he can very soon
find out, by observing when riding as naturally as he possibly
can. how he pulls a horse up when going at full gallop, how he
holds his hand when taking a fence or ditch, or the horse shies
129
ABILITY TO HANDLE THE REINS.


and jumps forward. If he has this desirable gift in each case
and under all circumstances, the hands will never be more than
an inch or two from the jDommel, and there is no desire to put
them up ; the animal will be managed with comparative
ease, not by jerking and sawing at his. mouth, but by that
gentle and firm pressure on the rein which always conveys that
peculiar mutual understanding that exists between an educated
horse and his accomplished rider. If the rider has not the
natural gift, when he attempts to pull the horse up, his hands,
while holding the rein, will be up at his breast m spite of him-
self, with most likely a rein in each hand, and the hands wide
apart. This will be most noticeable in jumping when the
horse is off the ground, and also as he lands; one arm, or per-
haps both, will be thrown up. If this can be avoided there is
no reason why the pupil should not become a real good horse-
man with practice. It should always be borne in mind that
the hands should never be more than two inches from the
saddle at most, and if both hands are used at the reins, they
should touch each other, and never be apart. A man who pos-
sesses this accomplishment as a. natural gift, invariably possesses
also the gift of being able to tell when his horse is fully ex-
tended while racing, and can tell exactly how much more he
can get out of him before the final struggle commences, and to
the very stride where he can catch and beat his most formid-
able opponent. If he is riding at fences he can bring his
horse to the proper take-off, and on his rising the hands
have no inclination to move or leave their position at the
pommel. The rider sits comfortably and easy, without an
effort, and is as graceful as though ho were part of the
horse. The animal’s mouth is not interfered with in
the slightest degree, but still that gentle but firm strain is
ever on the reins, unless perhaps when removed for an instant,
when the horse plants his feet to rise at the fence;
which is done to give him a better chance to judge his jump,
and without the slightest effort the strain is again put on before
he leaves the ground. It seems to guide the horse while in mid-
air, and, as it were, balance him nicely on to his legs on the
130
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


other side, both sailing away without either receiving as much
as a jolt or jerk. To be able to ride and handle the reins like,
this, is, what I consider, good horsemanship, not merely clinging
on while the horse jumps, with the hands thrown about as if
swimming instead of riding, which is the sort of thing that in-
terferes with the horse’s sensitive mouth, causing him to baulk,
strike, or fall, and the rider who does this will seldom sit still
when the horse jumps, although he tries his utmost to do so.
and it is more than likely that when the horse is landing he will
put both hands down on its neck to enable him to regain his
seat, while the reins will be hanging quite loose. He is endeav-
ouring to accomplish something hard, and seems to think he is
bound to cling on for bare life, otherwise he may fall off. It
is this clinging that transforms him from the graceful
rider that he should be to something like a foreign
body, and has the same effect as though a bag of sand
were tied to the saddle, and when the horse would land the
sand would be sure to jolt and bump. He is not a
part of the horse, although able to sit on with a little
trouble, and he and the hunter never enjoy that mutual
understanding so difficult to describe. That this under-
standing exists between good horsemen and their steeds I
have not the slightest doubt; a seeming communication be-
tween them through the reins is a guarantee that there is some-
thing natural in the gift, and the fact that everyone cannot be
taught it is sufficient proof. If you are not a firstrclass horse-
man do not cherish the idea that you will be, unless possessing
the natural gifts necessary; but should you have the ability,
you can. be taught to apply it. A good horseman can hardly ex-
plain to another how he sits. He does not know himself; he
does not cling to his horse, that is a certainty. He merely goes
with it, as though he were part of it; he sits gracefully and
easy without an effort; the legs and feet are kept still in their
proper position; the body is erect and square, with the hip-
joints completely loose, and with every motion, whether up or
down, of the horse, works as if on hinges. He never tries to do
it ;it seems to come natural to him. The body is merely bal-
131
ABILITY TO HANDLE THE REINS.


anced on the hips, as though it were no trouble. Therefore,
the only instructions that I can give is to keep in their proper
position, and allow the hip joint to be perfectly loose, keeping
the body upright and square, the hands well down, close to the
pommel, with the arms close to the sides.
HOW TO RIDE A BUCKJUMPER.
When riding a jumping horse that raises his hind-
quarters high in the air and lands with his head well
down, to the uninitiated the horseman appears to be
leaning back; and the same thing applies when riding a
buck-jumper, when his head is down between his forelegs,
and an ordinary remark from an on-looker is, “ Lean
back, old fellow, and hang to him,” to the rider when
in this position. At the same time, in neither of these cases
does the rider lean back in the least; the one on the buck-
jumper is just merely standing upright; the hips are carried
forward and slightly down by the horse, but the body re-
tains its equilibrium, and as soon as the horse’s head comes up
again, it brings the hips and legs back, while the body is still
straight over them. Being able to do this enables a man to sit
a buck-jumper, and not. as many suppose, by main strength.
The correct way to sit a buck-jumper is to mount as previously
described, by holding the ear, and when the seat is gained and
the right foot in the stirrup, take the slack of the rein up with
the right hand, let the ear go, still holding the near rein, letting
it slip through the fingers until the hand is at the proper place
at the pommel, where the reins are held, as directed, with both
hands. When the horse puts his head down allow the reins
to slip through the fingers, until it is down as far as he
can put it, and, if necessary, hold on to the reins to
steady yourself; put both heels close into the horse's
girth on each side, causing the toes and the leg below
the knee to be turned out, bringing the calf in contact
with the saddle-flaps and enabling the rider to keep a good
hold. Hold sufficiently tight with the legs to keep them
in this position j allow the hip-joints to move loosely, being care


ful not to hold on to the reins too tightly, and pull the body off
its equilibrium, as, once the body is off the balance, the suc-
ceeding buck -will probably find the rider on the ground, and in
49 cases out of 50 where men are thrown, it is because they
held on to the reins too tightly. Men run away with the idea
that they can stop a horses from bucking by holding on to his
head, which is right this far, that if he can be prevented from
putting his head down he cannot buck ; but no horseman alive
can prevent a horse that means to buck from putting it down—
that is, with an ordinary pair of reins. He will most certainly
put down his head, whether his rider likes it or not, and if the
reins are not allowed to slip through the fingers, he can make
up his mind that he will be pulled off. Once the animal puts
his head down as far as he wishes, the rider can then hold as
much as he likes, and when the body is in its proper position
while the horse is bucking the reins will come up outside the
knees, and holding on will pull the rider all the tighter into
the saddle, and enable him to balance nicely.
I allow the reins to slip through as above, holding just
enough to prevent the horse getting his feet in them, letting
him have his say out, and making him understand, by hitting
with the heels now and then, that I am quite at home, and I
always find that a horse will soon desist, and rarely buck a
second time after this treatment.
PLEASURE IN RIDING A BUCK-JUMPER OR A
HUNTER.
There is something nice in being able to sit a buck-jumper,,
and when on one that goes through a series of contortions
whirling round, twisting and turning like something mad, with
nerhaps both ends together, while his rider can sit easily and
gracefully in spite of all his efforts, the exhilaration of the lat-
ter can be better imagined than described. It is not nearly
so hard to accomplish this as many suppose, and a, man wlm
can ride fairly well over fences only requires to have confidence
in himself, keep cool, and act up to the instructions in the last
few pages, and he can sit on the most notorious buck-jumper.
133
PLEASURE IN RIDING A BUCK-JUMPER OR A HUNTER.


and once a man finds out that he can ride cue, it seems to fasci-
nate him, and he must have another and yet another try ; it
awakens a peculiar desire to excel that wo do not feel in any
other class of riding, excepting, perhaps, in hunting. We often
hear people who have never joined in the chase speak dispara-
gingly of those following a pack over stiff fences, as they term
it, after the scent of a red herring, oil of aniseed, etc., but we
can forgive them in their ignorance. They have not the slight-
est idea of the sensation we feel as our gallant hunter carries us,
at the “head of the ruck," close to the hounds, and no descrip-
tion can convey the actual feelings experienced. The best of
writers, the strongest of words, and the choicest of language
cannot describe that sensation clearly enough to give oven a re-
mote idea what to expect 111 the first ride to hounds. There is
something so bracing, jovial and exhilarating in hunting that
fascinates you, once you join the merry throng, that no man
can word-paint. My advice is to try it just once, if you can
ride at all; ride a well-educated hunter, and if you do not wish
for the day and hour to come when you can be mounted and
after them again, well, I cannot know anything about riding
or hunting either.
But, to hark back to riding a buck-jumper. As I previ-
ously said, there is something so fascinating about it that, once
a. man finds out he can ride, he wishes to be always at it, and
for this reason we see so many people knock a colt or horse
about so as to make him buck. Dozens of young men make
their horses buck purely for the fun of sitting on them ; but for
my own part, I invariably find it difficult enough to sit on when
they buck of their own accord, without encouraging it, but still,
when the fun is on, as I said before, I enjoy it more than any-
thing else I can mention except hunting.
TO PREVENT A HORSE FROM BUCKING.
To prevent a horse bucking, take my buck-jump surcingle,
and, instead of putting it round the body, as in p. 33, put
it round the animal’s stomach behind the short riba; put the
lace or thong through the rings three or four times, slack, and
134
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


hold the end in the right hand, while with the left you hold
the bridle reins; stand away from the horse, and pull the
surcingle tight.
While the surcingle is being adjusted, the horse is sure to
buck round the operator in a circle, at first bounding high, but
as the lace or thong is held and gradually tightened the hounds
will become less and less until at last, when the surcingle has
been pulled tight enough to keep the saddle in its place, the
horse cannot buck at all.
The rider can then get on with safety, and although it can,
of course, bound and plunge, the animal cannot really buck.
The surcingle placed thus cannot hurt or inconvenience the
horse in any way, and will not prevent him racing or jumping
as easily as he would without it, but he cannot get his head
down between his forelegs to buck, and the invention is invalu-
able to men who have not learned to ride a buck-jumper, and
doubt their ability to do so. As the loose end of the thong is
passed through the crupper D, and is always near the rider's
hand, it can easily, if not tight enough, be pulled up at plea-
sure, after mounting, without trouble or inconvenience. If
you do not like the surcingle, use my long rein, as in p. 58.
There is not one horse in a thousand that will try to buck with
it.
HOW A LADY SHOULD MOUNT.
A lady's hack should be, as I have previously said, thor-
oughly quiet, domesticated, and accomplished, and her saddle a
good one, of modern design, with three crutches, of course, and
the bridle of the best leather, double reins, and a light bit and
bridoon. When about to mount, the lady should stand with her
right side to the saddle, her right hand on the centre crutch
(the gentleman assistant prior to this having placed the end of
the reins over the third crutch, and stands, holding the reins
with the left hand on the mane, near the withers). She should
then hold her skirt with the left hand, and place her left foot,
being careful that the boot is clear of the skirt, in the gentle-
man’s right hand, who should bo in a kneeling position, with
his fore-arm resting on his right knee. The lady should then
135
HOW A LADY SHOULD MOUNT.


spring off the right foot, at the same time straightening, and
standing, as it were, on the left, while she should balance and
raise herself with her right arm, which guides her easily and
gracefully to the seat of the saddle, where she should sit side-
ways, until her attendant straightens her skirt to full length;
and then, as she places her right knee over the centre crutch,
he should place her left foot in the stirrup with a fold of the
skirt. The reins should be held as already directed, and always
used thus, but when there is no necessity to use the curb, the
light, or curb reins, should be allowed to slip through the
fingers to the end, and hang on the third finger, and, should the
curb be required, the slack can be brought up in an instant by
catching the reins with the right hand inside the left, where
the loop is round the finger. The stirrup should be sufficiently
long to allow the thigh a little above the knee just to touch the
crutch when the toe is well into the slipper. The body should
sit perfectly upright and square, notwithstanding that both
feet are on one side, and this can be done without any trouble
or inconvenience. The weight should be perfectly even on the
horse, and a lady is not riding as she should unless it is so. The
hands should be kept down almost on the knee, the arms close
in to the sides, and the shoulders square with the horse’s head.
To hold tightly to the saddle, press the left knee down and for-
ward, the right heel pressed back towards the left knee, and if
this is done, and the body kept upright, with the hip-joints
loose, it. will give any animal considerable trouble to unseat
her, and indeed I have seen many ladies who would put a gen-
tleman rider to shame on a rough horse. A lady should sit in
such a way that the weight will be even and straight on her
horse; in fact, with the exception of the right leg from the
knee down, there should not be an ounce of weight more on one
side, than on the other, and the idea, that a. lady, although pro-
bably a first-class rider, will give a. horse a sore back is errone-
ous, and if a saddle is well made there is no> more likelihood of
tins than if ridden by a gentleman, and indeed I consider it is
much better to lend a. favourite horse to a lady than to a gentle-
man, even if the latter is a first-class horseman, as he will be


sure to educate him into some curious ways of behaving foreign
to what he has been used to, and which are certain fads of the
rider, such as allowing him to walk about while being saddled
or mounted, fidget while the rider is l on its back, leaning and
pulling heavily on the bit, and perhaps pulling him up with a
sudden jerk, causing it to throw up its head, and a dozen other
eccentricities that the owner had taken great care not to teach
him. Ladies may be guilty of allowing a horse to jig-jog—
that, is, half trot and half walk —but they invariably have such
light hands on the reins that the horse will never suffer from
that fault, and a lady’s hack is always, taught to stand while
being mounted, and altogether they may teach him some bad
habits (though not very flattering to them), but their teaching
is not so lasting as that of a gentleman, and after a ride or
two he may be cured completely.
SHYING.
Shying is a most unfortunate failing, inasmuch as it cannot
be completely cured. It is caused through the horse not being
able to see distinctly the object it is afraid of, and he imagines
the smallest stump or brush to bo some terrible object, likely
to bite or injure him. If the horse, going at a fast pace, sud-
denly sees somei object, it will bound across the road with great
risk to the rider, while, if going slowly, it will most likely notice
the object some distance off, prick its ears, and ease off in pace,
and perhaps snort and run back, with dilated eyes, trembling
all over, showing unmistakeable signs of fear. It is most likely
some stump or brush that he has seen scores of times, which
shows that the failing cannot be completely cured. lam sorry
to have to say that a very large number of riders go the wrong
way to work to cure it. I allude to those who whip and beat
their horses for shying. This has just the opposite effect to that
desired. When the horse shies, and he receives a sharp cut with
the whip for so- doing, he will, of course, bound away, and the
next time he sees a similar object, will bound and very likely
gallop away some distance before lie can be pulled up, simply
because he expects to be hit with the whip. This is not desir-
137
SHYINO.


able, A horse should never be hit for shying, but soothe and
coax him up to the object he is afraid of; let him stand over it
until he sees and is sure what it is, patting and caressing him to
assure him he will not be hurt. Persevere with this treatment,
and do not miss any opportunity to practise it each time the
horse sees anything to fear, and in a, very short time it will have
the effect that, when the rider thinks the horse is going to
shy, by stroking him on the neck, he will change his mind, and
g>on as smoothly as possible; he will remember your kind
treatment on previous occasions when he was afraid, and
immediately he feels your stroking it inspires confidence, and,
were he able to speak, would say : “Oh, it's nothing to be
afraid of after all ; my master can see better than I can, and
I know it is all right by his caresses on my neck.”
I do not say that this treatment will completely cure a
shying horse, but it will improve him so much that he may be
ridden for months without shying, and perhaps forget it
altogether.
HORSES AFRAID OF MOVING OBJECTS.
Some horses are very much afraid of objects ap]rroaching
them, such as a perambulator, bicycle, road-roller, or steam-
engine, and can only be persuaded to pass such after consider-
able trouble. To make a horse used to a moving object, he
should be ridden after it; he will approach it in this manner,
because he has time to see it, but he will not see it distinctly if
ridden to meet it, and is consequently afraid. In making a
hoise (or a pan) used to a train or engine, drive or ride up to
it from the rear; do not rush him to it quickly, but coax and
stroke him kindly, and encourage him, and you will find that
two or three lessons given judiciously in this manner will make
the almost chary horse stand quietly while a train passes close
to them, or comes up and stands quite near.
It will be noted that this method is much after the style
in which I catch a horse, allowing him to approach, not ap-
proaching him, which shows the peculiarity of the horse. He
may be coaxed to do anything, but he cannot be driven to it.
one has ever seen a jibbing horse go by flogging.


TO TEACH A HORSE TO “ STAND FIRE. '
To teach a horse to “ stand fire ” is also a delicate process,
and the operator must use great care in the first lessons,
or he will have considerable trouble, and even after a horse
has been taught, and hundreds of shots have been fired
from off his back, it is an easy matter to spoil him, and
once an old horse has become scared of a gun or revolver,
it would be much easier to teach a young colt to stand
than give the old horse confidence again. Horses are
frightened when shots are fired over the head or near
the ears, and the latter injures the drum of the ears and
does considerable harm. This should be carefully avoided.
Always turn the side on when firing. The best plan to adopt is
to load the firearm lightly with blank cartridge, and send the
horse along at a gallop, firing in the air as often as necessary,
gradually reducing the pace until the horse is walking and takes
no notice; then get him to stand still, and fire off him. This
will be found easy, but great care must be exercised to avoid two
things—firing over the head, as mentioned above, and firing in
such a position that the wind will carry the smoke into the
horse’s face and nostrils, which is apt to frighten the animal as
much as anything.
CASTRATING-BRANDING.
To do this work under the system that I adopt only one
assistant is required to attend to the branding-irons, etc., and
you proceed as follows, using my double gate " crush-pen (see
p. 63), which consists of two strong gates swung on to the
opposite sides of the gate post leading from the operating yard
into the receiving yard, set apart for the reception of colts after
they arc branded. The gates should be nine feet long, and the
post on which they are swung should be eleven or twelve inches
in diameter, so that the hinge ends of the gates, when closed,
-will be about 14 inches apart. The opposite post should be cut,
so that the head end of both gates will almost touch each other
w’hen closed. A strong prop should be fastened to the head of
the inside gate, as shown in the plate, and the centre-bar end
139
CASTRATING—BRANDING.


P. 63. McGillivray’s patent “crush-pen.”


P. 64. —“Crush-pen" open, with foal in yard.


P. 63.- McGillivray’s patent “crush-pen.”


P. 64. —“Crush-pen” open, with foal in yard.


should be loose at the left hand side, as is also shown, so that
should it come over the colt's shoulder, where it is desired to
brand him, the end of the bar may be lowered or raised at will.
Aftei the whole of the colts and fillies to be operated upon
are drafted off by themselves, run one into the operating yard,
having the inside gate of the crush opened back to the fence
(see p. 64). Run the animal round to the left, and carry the
end of the gate forward, closing the colt m between the two
gates. The prop will be found of service here in holding the
P. 65. — Foal in pen and near fore-leg buckled up.
gate wherever you leave it, and preventing any chance of the
horse rushing it back upon you. Push the gate up as tightly as
possible by putting an iron peg in the rail behind the colt to
assist the prop and make doubly secure. If the animal is a
filly put the brand on it, and your assistant (who should have
the fire immediately outside the crush so as to be handy) can
open the outside gate of the crush, and the animal is set at
liberty. By this means one man can brand qumkcr than two
men can draft the horses for him.


When a colt comes into the crush put the brand on as
above, and then buckle the near fore leg up with mv “ Rarey-
strap " (as in p. 43 —sec p. 65). Put the cup strap on the off
fetlock (as in p, 43). and run the thong through it (as in p. 66).
Now take the loin rope (p. 67), and put it on the near hind fet-
lock, by running the long end through the ring on the end of
the padded part. Place the rope over the colt's back, in be-
tween the hind legs, from the front, round the outside of the
off hind leg, and back over the animal, to the near side again,
and through the second ring. Now pull the thong with the left
hand, bringing the colt dewn on his knees (see p. 68). Secure
P. 66. —The cup-loop and thong on the foal.
the thong a half-hitch at its own ring; open the gate suffi-
ciently to give you room in, with the colt; pull the rope tightly,
bringing the hind legs up to the body, and the horse will go
down as if camping (see p. 69). Raise the prop, and swing the
gate back to the fence ; draw the rope up tightly, and take one
turn round the off hind fetlock, pulling the animal over on its
back (see p. 70). You may now turn him over to any place, or
put him into any position you like ; he will never struggle, and
the operation can be performed at leisure and with ease.


When performing the operation I never use searing irons,
but an “Ecraseur,” a chain instrument made for the purpose
(p. 71), by which the main or blood cord of the “test” is severed,
and the mouth or lips of the blood veins are chewed, and closed
up so that they will not bleed. There is not the slightest diffi-
culty in castrating a colt if you have this instrument, and the
operation requires but little skill. Simply cut the skin cover-
ing the “test” with a sharp knife, remove from the inner cover-
ing by severing the sinews that connect the two at the large end
P. 67. —The shoeing and loin rope.
of the “test.” Prepare the two “testicles” in this manner, and
place the loose chain of the “Ecraseur” round the cords ; screw
up tightly, cutting both off together ; remove the loin rope as
quickly as possible, letting the colt lie on its side, thus prevent-
ing any slight drop of blood that may escape running inside the
animal’s body.
As I have mentioned at the commencement of this volume,
the work of castration and branding is done on the majority of
stations in the Australian States during the Spring, and one
144
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


P. 68. —Foal on its knees in “crush-pen.”
P. 69.—Foal with loin rope on, and down as if camping.




P. 70. —Foal on its back or side, and “ crush-pen ” open.




moment's careful thought will convince the most sceptical
horse-breeder that this is wrong, and that no worse time
could be selected. Nature has provided that all horses come
in season at this time of the year, every animal is full-
blooded, and therefore the operation it has to go through
will take more effect upon it. The work should be done
at any time between the Ist of February and Ist July,
and if the colt is rather low in condition, it is all the
better, as the operation will not take so much effect on
it as it would if the horse were “ mud ”
fat. The proper age to operate depends
upon the quality of the animal—l mean
by this their fineness. If the owner is
breeding from rough stock ho should
arrange to castrate and brand during
the first Autumn, that is, when the colts
are six or seven months old ; whereas, if
he is breeding from light stock, which he
may think are too fine, it is as well to let
the colts run until they are 18 months
old, which will give them a chance to
furnish better. I may mention that the
same thing applies to cattle also.
TO SHOE A REFRACTORY
HORSE.
I have several good methods of
making a horse stand still while being
P.71. —Ecraseur.
shod. Some horses have a habit of fidgeting, kicking
and jumping about while being shod, which is very trouble-
some, although the animal is not vicious or wild. With such a
horse as this take a short piece of line rope; tie one end round
the animal’s neck with a running “'bowline knot” ; put a half-
hitch on the bottom jaw under the tongue, as directed for jib-
bing ; give the horse a turn round, letting him feel that the rope
is on him, and let your assistant hold him by this rope, having
149
TO SHOE A REFRACTORY HORSE.




P. 72. —Raising the fore leg for shoeing.
P. 73. —The fore leg through the crupper and easy to shoe.




P. 74. —Lifting the hind leg with the loin rope.
P. 75. —Horse securely fixed and easy to shoe.




his hand close to the animal’s mouth. Proceed then with the
shoeing, and not one horse in a thousand will move
with this on.
Put my roller on the horse (p. 26), pulling the thong up
tightly. Take the loin rope (p. 67), and place the padded
part round the near fore fetlock ; put the rope then through
one of the rings on the top of the roller, and back through the
second ring on the rope where it is round the fetlock. (Previous
to this have the crupper buckled through the D marked A on the
roller, holding the end of the loin rope in one hand, and the lead
in the other.) Move the horse forward, and pull the rope, which
will have the effect of raising the leg (see p. 72). When the horse
stands still, take the foot out of the rope, and place it in the
crupper (seep. 73), and the animal can be easily shod. Before
letting this leg down place the rope round the near hind fetlock,
through the D on the off side of the roller-pad. round the horse’s
chest, back through the ring on the near side of the pad, thence
through the second ring on the rope at the fetlock. Now let the
fore leg down, and you can stand away and raise the hind leg
(p. 74). Now tie the rope above the near side (D), and you
can do anything with the horse, and there will be no trouble in
siioeing him (p. 75). Proceed in the same manner with the off
legs.
The Tenterfeld Star of June, 1892. gave the following
notice of how one of my pupils at that place got over the diffi-
culty of shoeing a very bad horse :
“The efficacy of Professor McGillivray’s method of hand-
ling horses was well exemplified the other day by Mr. Saun-
ders, who was one of the Professor’s pupils during his stay in
Tenter-field. Mr. Saunders had a. fine young two-year-old
stallion brought him to shoe, and the spirited beast for some
time defied all efforts to handle him in the ordinary way, and
became positively dangerous by his violence. Mr. Saunders
having wasted an hour on the defiant crocodile determined to
‘Mr. McGillivray’ him, and with remarkable success, for in
about five minutes the recalcitrant animal was completely sub-
dued, and the shoeing was accomplished with perfect ease. Mr.
Saunders says that the system is a perfect boon to shoe-smiths."
155
TO SHOE A REFRACTORY HORSE.


ADVICE, AND THINGS THAT SHOULD BE
REMEMBERED.
A horse will never forget a kindness, nor wholly
forget or forgive an injury; he is of a curious con-
struction, in his wild state knowing nothing but fear,
but is endowed with sufficient capacity of brain to be
able to understand and be taught to do almost any-
thing but talk. He seems to have been created specially for
the use of man, not knowing anything useful in his raw state,
but ready to be moulded to the liking, and for any particular
purpose he may be required. He is not created with any par-
ticular vices, or with any bad or wicked traits in his character,
that must be overcome before he is of any use to man. As I said
before, when he is first yarded he knows nothing but fear j not
like a dog, naturally sagacious, but he has sufficient brain to
understand man s teaching, and remember sufficient to enable
him to accomplish as much as any dog, and it only requires
the proper patience and methods of teaching to be able to edu-
cate him to accomplish great things, especially when the raw
material is of the right grade.
I have endeavoured to make it clear to the reader what
these methods axe, and how to apply them, and if my instruc-
tions are earned out with even moderate care, providing always
that extreme patience and kindness are used, the operator can
achieve wonders, and he need not have a moment’s hesitation
in deciding that he can quieten the wildest horse that lives.
Many have said that my success was due to some personal
power, purely my own, but such is not the case. lam not half
so clever and active as hundreds of my neighbours. It is only
my methods that are clever, and the fact that I know the
horse s nature, conformation and ability to learn, and remem-
ber as I have described, and act accordingly. Under these


circumstances, I can safely claim that I can catch and subdue
what is known to the ordinary layman as a wild horse quicker
than any other man in the known world, but still thousands
of my pupils can also do the same if they follow out my instruc-
tions. Apply my methods carefully ; never lose your temper,
nor allow your subject to do so; act gently, kindly but firmly,
and the result is never for a moment in doubt.
PRESS NOTICES.
So that my readers may form some idea, and more easily
gauge how successful I have been in practising these methods,
I reprint in this volume a few of the many hundreds of flatter-
ing notices from the Australian Press in some of the districts
where X have taught classics throughout the Commonwealth.
The Jamestown Agricultural Review (S.A.), of December
20th, 1888, says:
“ Professor McGillivray gave an exhibition of his powers
last Wednesday, when there was no lack of unbroken colts in
the yard, and a fair number attended to witness his skill. No
tune was lost in selecting a colt to operate, and many were the
conjectures as to how the taming would be done, several think-
ing it would be by some power of mesmerism, and that the
Professor would subdue his horse by will power. Whatever
his powers may be in this direction, he does not use them before
the public, but proceeded in a w r ay that is practicable to any
one with sufficient nerve and experience, the only other requi-
site being tackling, which is of an ordinary or simple nature,
and easily procurable. The work of taming is done by the aid
of straps and handling, the object being to make the colt feel
that he is thoroughly subdued, and that no injury is intenaod
him. Within 20 minutes the whole work is completed, and
the colt released from his bondage, when he may be ridden
round the yard without a strap or rope of any kind on him, and
he is as tractable almost as a trained circus horse, even allow-
ing the Professor to stand upright on his back while perfectly
157
PRESS NOTICES.


free. Mr. Coles, a pupil of the Professor, operated on a horse-
brought in, showing how readily the art may be acquired, as
Mr. Coles had not had any previous experience. The portion
of the Professor’s skill exhibited to the public is but a
small part compared to that taught his pupils, and the
lessons given were such as cannot fail to benefit them
m the treatment of horses; tricks which many horses
have, and which are thought generally to be incurable,
such as kicking, jibbing, bridle-breaking, etc., have their
remedies, and these are simple, as taught by the Professor,”
Port Augusta (S.A.) Despatch , June, 1888 ;
“Mr. McGillivray ia a fine sample of an Australian, being
six feet two inches in height, active, muscular, and proportion-
ately well built. He seems to impress the animal while in his
hands with perfect confidence; it displays no fear, nor should
it, for it is treated with kindness and gentleness from start to
finish, while at the same time with a, firmness that compels it
to succumb to the wishes or commands of its (for the time
being) master. The Professor has formed a class, the fee for
pupils being one guinea, and the money is well spent by those
who have anything to do with horses, and would be well in-
vested by anyone who ever expects to become the fortunate (or
unfortunate) owner of a nag. At the conclusion of the public
exhibition the pupils were given a valuable practical lesson on
the various ways of treating wild, bucking, jibbing, and gener-
ally unmanageable horses, taught how to mount a restless,
biting, or kicking horse, how to ride a bucking horse, and cure
it of its bad habits, how to catch, tame, and ride a wild colt,
showing how to prevent a horse from ever attempting to break
its bridle, and to stand perfectly quiet when left alone; how to
stop a horse or pair from bolting, and to cure them of the habit
for the future; how to shoe a refractory horse; to make a
horse know no other pace than trotting; how to make a jib-
bing horse go, and various other wrinkles useful to know.
“Last evening the Professor gave the second of his public
expositions, and dealt with three young colts and fillies. The
158
AUSTHAJ,! AN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


first two were yarded, thoroughly quietened, and ‘polished off’
in about ten minutes apiece. The third animal being a par-
ticularly lively ‘ critter ’ of a filly (4 years old and blind
of the near eye) the professor informed the auditors that
he would deal with it in a different manner to the
others, that being blind of an eye —and especially the
near eye—it made matters rather risky in a small yard;
his intention was to use the tackling. This was done,
and in a very few minutes the animal was thrown simply,
and without injury to itself, and was speedily brought
under thorough control, allowing, without fear, its legs
to be handled, and the Professor to sit or stand
upon it while upon the ground. It was afterwards
girthed, bridled, and driven about the yard. Eventually he
showed to the pupils (who, by the way, were the only ones
allowed to remain to see) a simple method of overcoming
viciousness in the animals.
“The performances were given in a small inclosure, about
eight yards in diameter, the gear made use of in the experi-
ments being simple in the extreme, and must be seen to be
appreciated. The Professor is certainly a master of his pro-
fession, and is far and away the best man we have ever seen in
his particular line of business, viz., as horse tamer and trainer.
All who have to do with the ‘noble steed’ cannot do better than
to obtain a lesson..’’
Loclyer Star (Laidley, Queensland), August, 1893;
“On Tuesday afternoon Professor McGillivray gave his
first exhibition of wild horse taming, the attendance number-
ing upwards of sixty, and including several ladies. Before com-
mencing operations the Professor impressed upon those present
that he was no travelling showman, but guaranteed to teach
and do all that he professed to be able to do. The first animal
brought into the yard was a low-set filly belonging to Mr. John
Gunn. Although it did not prove to be either wild or vicious,
yet it was lively enough to keep the Professor on his guard,
as the animal showed inclinations on several occasions of
‘shaking hands’ with him. Inside of five minutes, however, the
159
PKF.SS NOTICES.


Professor was on its back, riding it around the yard without
saddle or bridle. The next subject was a nicely-grown chestnut
filly, three years old, by the great trotting sire, ‘Yankee Lad,’
and owned by Mr. Walton Kent, of Rosewood Station. This
animal proved to be a little harder to w r ork with than its pre-
decessor, and the eagerness of the majority of those present
to witness something lively was to a certain extent gratified,
as the animal made several attempts at indulging in a little
buck-jumping ; but the Professor was quite equal to the occa-
sion, and after taking matters quietly and leisurely, so that
those present could understand his system thoroughly, he
mounted the filly in the same fashion as in the first instance.
We can confidently recommend the Professor's methods of
taming and otherwise controlling a horse, and they are prac-
ticable to both young and old.
“The second exhibition of horse taming, etc., was given
by Professor McGillivray on Thursday. Three unbroken horses
were supplied by Mr. John Campbell, of Gatton, the first a
chestnut, by no means a quiet brute, was mounted without
saddle or bridle by the Professor in eight seconds from his step-
ping into the yard. The next subject proved to be one of the
worst that could be possible to obtain, being a vicious kicker,
fearfully mad-headed, and as wild as could be wished for. The
first attempt of the Professor to approach was resented by
several vicious kicks, and an attempt to clear the fence of the
yard. This brute was handled in a different fashion. In a
neat, expedient, and safe manner it was thrown, after being
effectively prevented from kicking, and was subjected to fami-
liarities that would have been ridiculed had they been pre-
dicted but a few minutes previous. While the brute was thus .
handled, lessons were given in branding, castrating, and various
other things. After further handling the Professor mounted
the hitherto outlaw, standing erect on its back without saddle
or bridle after 20 minutes of its having been placed in the yard.
The third subject, a heavy draught, was handled by one of the
pupils (Mr. Summers), under the Professor’s directions, and
the pupil was on its back without saddle or bridle in eight
160
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


minutes. The proceedings closed with instructions for curing
kicking, jibbing, bolting, restlessness, and many other faults
usually found in the average horse.”
Times, Ballina, R.R. :
“On Wednesday and Saturday Professor McGillivray gave
an exhibition of his skill in the paddock adjoining Wickham s
Hotel, and also a series of lessons to pupils, both of which we
attended. It would take a very big article to describe all
the novel and interesting procedure by means of which he
makes himself master of any unbroken animal, and places it in
thorough subjection—not the least interesting being the novel
but simple gear which he employs and explains to effect his
purpose. Those who are inclined to ridicule such exhibitions
should reserve their judgment until they have seen Mr.
McGillivray handle an unbroken colt, and they will doubtless
come to the conclusion, as his pupils and ourselves have done,
that he makes a genuine claim, and teaches much that is well
worth learning by every farmer, every groom, every shoeing
smith, and, in fact, by every one who is called upon at any
time to drive or handle a horse. This is not high falutin, but
the candid, honest expression of opinion formed of Mr.
McGillivray’s ability as a horse tamer —horse breaker or horse
tamer —call it whatever name you like.”
Sega (N.S.W.) :
“ Professor McGillivray was to have given an exhibition
on the show-ground on Saturday afternoon. There was a
good number of spectators on the ground, but a greater num-
ber trying to sec the fun ‘on the never’ from the hill. The
Professor wisely concluded that he would not show as it would
not be fair to those who paid if those outside could see just
as well for nothing. In Candelo and Bombala, we believe,
although the exhibitions were in ap open yard, all who went
to see them paid. A horse that is a noted buckjumper, in
fact he frightened Sydney folks, was saddled up, and Profes-
sor McGillivray rode him. The horse, a knowing old brute,
at once ‘went to market,’ roaring like a bull all the while. The


Professor sat on him as comfortably as any one else would on
a chair; everyone praising his fine horsemanship. To-night
he gives an exhibition in the yard at the back of the' School
of Arts, when he will ride any buckjumper, and tame any un-
broken colts brought, in. Some say this is all bunkum, and
that he 1 cannot master a colt so easily. Any such sceptics
can be accommodated by a Bombala gentleman who was here
yesterday, who said he will bet £SO or a hundred that any
horse that anyone liked to bring in, the wildest procurable,
the Professor would quieten in less than half-an-hour. He
had seen him at work and said he can do as he likes with any
horse. Any horse brought for exhibition, the wilder the
better for him, he will quieten gratis. 7 '
Mercury , Maitland (N.S.W.) :
“On Saturday afternoon Professor McGillivray, the cele-
biated wild horse trainer and buckjumper rider, who has,
since the show, been holding classes in West Maitland, gave a
final performance in the yards of Messrs. Markwell and Onus,
High-street. The Professor, during his stay in Maitland,
has not received the patronage that he expected and deserved.
He first gave an illustration of his method of catching a wild
horse. The first one he tackled was too quiet to give any op-
portunity of showing his powers; but that being discarded,
a wild filly was introduced in the small yard, and taxed his
powers for ten minutes or a quarter of an hour before he was
able to catch her. She had never had a hand on her before,
it was said, and had not, been branded, but by perseverance
the Professor at last got his hand upon her, and she was soon
comparatively quiet, and he put a bridle upon her and tied
her up, and rode her round the ring. He afterwards mounted
a, great bucker of Mr. W. C. Markwell’s and rode it about the
yard. And afterwards obtaining a few more pupils, gave
illustrations of how to cure a horse from kicking, to prevent
his kicking while in harness, and by means of diSerent tack-
ling in the shape of ropes, straps, buckles and rings, showed
how a horse could be caught single-handed and thrown for
branding, etc., prevented from kicking or bolting, mouthed,


and in various other ways enable a man to properly manage
a vicious animal. He teaches the horses to acknowledge that
he has perfectly mastered them, and at the same time does it
with the greatest kindness. His illustrations on Saturday
afternoon were very successful, and acknowledged by those
present, most of whom were interested in the management of
horses, to be very careful. A. spectator writes as follows of
the performances of the Professor:
“ ‘ On Saturday afternoon last Professor McGillivray gave
his last exhibition of his abilities as a horse tamer in Mait-
land. With the exception of his pupils the Professor had a
meagre attendance —far below that which his merit deserved.
We have seen many so-called ‘horse-tamers,’ but none of whom
could compare with Mr. McGillivray. His treatment, is very
simple but thorough; and by aid of kindness, nerve, and a
few mechanical devices in the manner of ropes and straps, he
can subjugate, the most formidable of outlaws in a very short
time. The first subject he experimented on was a little bay
filly, which had never been handled. Within 10 minutes the
Professor was riding her round the ring without saddle or
bridle. He next operated on a splendid black horse, who
maintained his reputation as an outlaw by the lively manner
in which he bucked round the yard. But the Professor soon
subdued him, and established a reputation as an excellent
horseman. The remainder of the exhibition, which was solely
for pupils, was devoted to lessons in throwing horses without
assistance, catching with tackle, and bitting young horses,
and showing how, with the aid of a cord and a ring, the most
vicious of horses would be rendered incapable of performing
with or without, a rider. His tackle, too, for horses with a
propensity for bolting is very simple and, effective ; and his
method of curing a kicking horse should be, asi is claimed for
it, infallible. That part of his outfit which claimed the
most admiration was that which he uses for breaking into
harness, and which, when applied, prevents a horse from kick-
ing, rearing or bolting, and only permits the horse to travel at
a trot,.’ ”
163
PRESS NOTICES.


Standard, Omeo, Gippsland (Vic.):
“Professor McGillivray, the native Australian exponent
of horse taming, who has recently come amongst' us, held an
exhibition on Saturday last at Middleton’s Yards, and de-
monstrated his quelling and compelling powers; over the
equines brought to him with marked success. His first sub-
ject was an unbroken, and, in fact, unhandled colt, which the
Professor kept at a gentle walk round the small yard until
able to place his hand quietly on its rump. Still humouring
and soothing the shy beast, he finally gripped it by the mane
and, almost immediately, appeared to have secured full con-
trol of its actions, as the colt now permitted him to; lift its hind
leg, pass under it, and, finally, place on its back a boy who rode
it several times round the yard. An aged horse belonging
to Mr. P. Garmody was next brought in—this acknowledged
outlaw was most fractious, and for some little time, kept, the
Professor at bay. Following him up, however, gently strok-
ing the brute, first with his walking stick, and afterwards with
his hand on the rump, the mane grip was at last obtained,
and from that moment, as in the last instance, victory was
assured, and the tamer did as he pleased with a horse
now as docile as he was previously intractable. With the
buckjumper saddled by Mr. Eawson, Professor McGillivray
made his third experiment. While his horsemanship was
much admired, this third exhibit was less impressive than
those preceding, where the powerful magnetic, odic, or
whatever other influence possessed by the operator and
its almost immediate effect upon his subject, called forth
universal admiration and approval. A considerable con-
course witnessed the Professor’s performance, at the close
of which a class of some dozen pupils was enrolled.
At a second exhibition held yesterday in the same
locality, the Professor outdid has previous performances,
and fairly electrified the onlookers. A colt belonging:
o &
to Mr. G. Worcester, unhandled, save for branding, utterly
vicious and apparently untameable, after kicking off the
top of a six-foot fence, and defying all attempts at con


ciliation for nearly an hour, was rendered docile to the
extent that, after playing with it as a child might with
a kitten, his subduer stood upright upon the animal's
back.”
Record, Traralgon (Vic,), December, 1889:
“Professor McGillivray gave an example of his skill as a
horse tamer at Messrs. Roberts Bros.’ stables, on Wednesday
evening last, but owing to the very heavy downpour of rain
there was but a small attendance of the general public. The
first animal operated on was an unbroken roan filly, rising
three years. In less than fifteen minutes the Professor was
on the animal's back without halter or saddle l , and had gained
its confidence by simply passing his stick and then his hand
along the animal’s back to its head. The second animal intro-
duced into the enclosure was a bay filly about three years old,
but this proved to be' much more troublesome than the last.
It had an uncontrollable habit of turning its hind-quarters
upon the Professor and launching out with its heels. It was
found necessary to put the halter on before control was assured,
which was obtained in about 35 minutes. The grey was again
brought in, and the Professor put on the head stall by drawing
it over the animal’s head; he afterwards put on the harness
and drove the animal round the ring. The performance was con-
sidered highly creditable, and proved that the Professor had
considerable ability. The light was very bad, and this fact
no doubt, interfered with his success.”
Flashes, Brisbane (Q.), June, 1893 :
“ The spacious saleyards in connection with Messrs. Car-
ter and Fenwick’s stables, have of late been the scene of some
feats in the ring which quite eclipse the conventional per-
formance of the circus, and have, besides, the merit of being
of some practical utility, and of advantage both to man and
beast. Donald McGillivray is a professor of the art of horse-
taming, and, verily, he is not a professor only, for all who l have
seen him, the veteran horse-breaker or the most fearless stock-
rider admit, after an hour of his pleasant and easy style of
explanation and practical demonstration, that they have


learned more than they ever knew before, viz., their own ignor-
ance of the true principles at the root of successful training.
Kindness, untiring patience, firmness, and common sense, are the
secrets of his marvellous success. The most rowdy of un-
tamed brumbies is backed and ridden round the small enclosure
without bridle or saddle within three or four minutes l from the
time of his first appearance in the arena, a revolving hurricane
of head, heels and flying mane. In five minutes the greatest
rogue out is lying on his side without either strap or thong to
control his movements, while his new master is discovered sit-
ting casually between the legs of his recumbent subject, cares-
sing with fearless ease a fore and hind foot in his lap the
while. The public have been admitted daily, and number-
less pupils have taken advantage of Mr. McGillivray’s private
classes to learn as much as they could of the science of which
he is undoubtedly a past-master. On the occasion of my
visit, I saw several well-known ladies, whose presence is often
chronicled in the hunting field, a sprinkling of Downs squat-
ters, an officer, and more than one member of the Mounted
Infantry, sundry prominent civil servants and commercial men
and last, but by no means the least interested, a popular pro-
fessional horse-breaker, thus showing the general interest taken
in the subject by all sorts and conditions of men. Our friends
at Ipswich and Toowoomba are now to have a chance of seeing
for themselves the perfection to which the art has been brought,
an opportunity which no true lover of horseflesh should miss,
and the Professor hopes to return to Brisbane with a mob of
the rowdiest colts he can find on the Downs as subjects to
introduce to his country friends in exhibition week.”
Courier, Brisbane, June, 1893;—,
“Professor McG-illivray, whose name is not unknown in
Queensland, and who has gained a good reputation in other
parts of Australia, as a horse tamer, gave an exhibition of the
art of dealing with unbroken animals at Messrs, Carter and
Fenwick’s Saleyaxds, Adelaide-street, yesterday afternoon, in
the presence of a number of well-known horsemen. A mar-
quee had been erected for the purpose, inside of which there
166
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


was a small circular yard, that is, there were no corners into
which the horses could run, and make the task of the tamer
more difficult to accomplish. Another advantage of a fence
erected on this principle was that it presented no obstacle
which a wild horse could jump at. The first animal to be sub*
mitted to the Professor’s treatment, was a chestnut colt, which
it was said, had never been handled, except when caught to
be branded. Whether this was absolutely correct or not it
was impossible to say, but there was no disputing the fact that
the horse yarded was as wild as a, hare. The Professor, who
is a man of the true bushman type —resolute, active, and, as
a matter of fact, as a, Scotchman —at once proceeded to deal
with his subject. Taking a. short stick in his hand, something
like a walking cane, he approached the colt, curiously enough
advancing towards the rump. Within the space of three
minutes the Professor had his hand on the horse, and inch by
inch he worked his hand along hisi back, until, to the astonish-
ment of those present, the animal allowed his foretop to be
pulled. The Professor then stroked the horse all over, and
within the space of ten minutes he was astride him. He even
went so far as to. stand up on the animal’s back, there being
neither saddle nor bridle on him. This crowning feat was
greeted with applause by the spectators. The Professor then
gave those' present a. wrinkle in the matter of putting a halter
on a timid horse. Instead of endeavouring to put the har-
ness over the horse’s nose, as most persons do, the Professor
gently placed thei halter, which was made after his own ap-
proved pattern, on the colt’s neck, buckled the throat strap,
and slipped the other part over his head. The thing was
done so simply and effectively that the animal never moved,
and those present could not refrain from laughing and applaud-
ing heartily. The Professor then proceeded to tie the horse
up, but instead of fastening a rope round his neck, he substi-
tuted a piece of canvas, and once more the spectators saw the
superiority of the new over the old method of fastening up a
young horse. To the canvas be attached a rope, which was
placed round the colt’s neck, round his body, and under his
167
PRESS NOTICES.


tail, brought back to the head, and tied to a post' in the yard.
By this method, which was simplicity itself, it. was, impossible
for the horse to hurt itself—let it plunge or fall ever so hard.
So tame was the horse by this time that several men jumped on
him bare-back and rode him round the ring. The next sub-
ject for treatment was a brown filly. The animal was so
frightened when she found herself within the enclosure, that
she shook like a leaf. Adopting the same tactics as before, the
Professor proceeded to tame her, and in eight minutes he was
riding her round the yard as quiet as a lamb. The Professor
explained that the. secret, of his success as ai horse, tamer lav,
not in the possession of animal magnetism, but in the adoption
of common sense principles, which were as simple as A.8.C.,
and could be used as successfully by any of his pupils as by
himself. Most, if not all, of those persons who attended the
exhibition went there with sceptical minds as to the Profes-
sor’s ability to uphold his reputation; but it is not too much
to say that, they left the performance convinced that the Pro-
fessor is a past-master in the art of horse taming, and that his
system is a revolution in the old, cruel and expensive way of
handling wild horses. The Professor also pointed out that all
that was required to deal with an unbroken colt was for the
stockman to keep both himself and his horse in good temper.
The process of breaking-in was so simple, so, humane, and yet so
thorough, that the prejudices of almost every man present
were broken down, and they became pupils of Professor
McGillivray. The newly-formed class was then let into the
secrets of this remarkable power of being able to tame a wild
horse by a kindly process, within the space of a few minutes
without turning a hair upon the animal.”
Logan Advocate, Beaudesert (Q), April, 1893:
The advent of Professor McGillivray was anxiously
looked forward to by a, great, number of horsey men in Beau-
desert, and, although his first performance was not so well at-
tended as it might have been (probably owing to the fact that
the intelligence of the Professor’s arrival had not been freely
circulated throughout this district), the attendance on Satur


day was a large and representative gathering, nearly all the
residents being present. Before giving any particulars of the
horse taming portion of the programme, a glance at the Pro-
fessor himself will not be amiss. One look is sufficient to satisfy
the critical onlooker that the man before him thoroughly un-
derstands his business. He stands over six feet in his stock-
ings, and in make, at any rate, he seems a thorough athlete,
and his subsequent movements in the yard prove that, to use
a well-known phrase, he is as ‘active as a cat,' added to which
he is in tip-top condition, and all those who delight in seeing
a good athlete in thorough training, cannot help admiring the
Professor. A conversation with the Professor on matters
appertaining to that noblest of all dumb animals, the horse,
lets the interviewer know that the man before him has studied
his subject very carefully, and has brought great intelligence
to bear on the matter.
“Among the audience on Saturday were men who had
come to the grounds for the express purpose of ridiculing the
performance, but they were one and all forced to admit that
what they saw was quite a revelation to them, and the apparent
ease and grace which characterised every feat quite electrified
all present. Before going into any details of the performance
I should strongly advise all the residents of the district to come
and see the Professor. lam quite willing to admit that there
are in this district some splendid horsemen —as good as they
make ’em—but still nobody is too old to learn, and, as good as
they are, our breakers have a lot to 1 learn in the art of hand-
ling young horses —an opinion which has been held by the
writer long before Professor McGillivray visited us and to
conclude this part of my notice I should advise all those who
can afford it to become pupils, as a look at the tackling used,
as well as many valuable hints as simple as they are new and
effective how to prevent the many vices found among horses,
is well worth the money, the substitute for the ‘ cruel twitch
being alone worth the outlay to those who were shown the
wrinkle.
“On Saturday quite a number of unbroken colts and fillies
were yarded for the Professor. The general public were then


shown the Professor’s mode of catching an unbroken colt. The
animal was brought into the yard without any tackling what-
ever, and in an incredibly short space of time the Professor
was on his back, and generally wound up his exhibition by
standing up on the horse’s back, and crawling all over him,
etc. A broken-in gelding, which had a great reputation as a
striker, was subdued in some few seconds. A neat-looking
half-bred from Tabragalbra which earned the sobriquet of
the ‘Tabragalbra Bally,’ gave the public plenty of fun, and
also caused the Professor some trouble, and the horse’s antics
in the yard showed him to be a pig-headed brute, built just
about as bad as could be got; he made two bold attempts to
clear the top rail of the yard. The Professor, however, kept
at him, and in about ten minutes he was complete master of
the animal, which then looked as if he had been used for or-
dinary domestic purposes for years. For this wonderfully
clever feat, the Professor received a round of well-deserved
applause. The rest of the afternoon was devoted to the pupils,
when the latter were shown many useful contrivances which
were quite a novelty to some of the oldest hands among
horses, and it only shows how very backward wei have been in
the past in taking advantages which, although easily acquired
(when illustrated), have never suggested themselves to practical
men. All the tackling used is simple and good, and there is
no doubt by adopting and carrying out Professor McGillivray’s
suggestions, the veriest tyro can accomplish wonders in the
way of handling, mouthing, etc. But as was remarked on the
ground on Saturday more than once, ‘the tackling is good, but,
b 7 P n g°> 80 is the man.’ I can only conclude by saying that
we do not see a Professor McGillivray every day. The Pro-
fessor is an excellent all-round horseman, and intends to' ex-
hibit his skill in this direction before leaving us, which will not
be until after the races.”
Leader, Orange (N.S.W.), March, 1891 ;
Professor McGillivray, who has been advertised for some
time past came to Orange on Friday, and commenced opera


tions in Messrs. Coalson and Moulder’s yard on Saturday after-
noon. A good many persons remarked on the presumption of
anyone coming here to teach the cornstalks to ride ; hut, as it
is not easy for the best horsemen to ride before the horse is
caught, the Professor’s visit has been of some use to the best
of horsemen, as he has shown them how simply the wildest
animal may be bridled or ridden without' any trappings what-
ever Among those present were many men of
large experience among horses, and the general opinion was
that the manner in which the horses were handled was little
short of marvellous. We don’t pretend to know much about
horses, but it would be difficult to imagine anything more
simple than the way in which Professor McGillivray gets them
under control, and to those who- have or may have anything
to do' with horses, we think a guinea invested would be well
spent.”
Free Press, Bathurst (N.S.W.), April, 1891 :
“Yesterday afternoon Professor McGillivray gave another
exhibition in the yard at Cashman’s Hotel, of his prowess, as
a. horse tamer, and the method adopted by him of breaking
in animals Professor McGillivray successfully
handled four animals, including one colt of Mr. Inglis’ that
was said to possess all the cunning and vice necessary
to resist submission to any horseman. Once in the ring,
the Professor soon had the animal under subjection, and
was seated on its bare back almost before the crowd was
able to look around In the evening the exhibi-
tion was continued, in the presence of a good number, many of
whom turned up purposely to witness the capers of an animal
belonging to Mr. Godfrey, of Eglington, that some time ago
was turned out an ‘ outlaw,’ all attempts to break him in
having proved useless. ‘He’ll go for you open-mouthed,’ was
one of the remarks made as the horse was led with no little
difficulty into the training ring. But, once inside the charmed
circle, he soon forgot his fractiousness, and allowed the Profes-
sor to handle him just as he pleased. Mr. Godfrey was more
than surprised when his horse was handed back to> him, with
the assurance that he could be ridden home with all safety.


. . . . Professor McGillivray is undoubtedly a master
of the art, and during Ins stay in Bathurst all who desire to
place themselves under his tutorship should not miss the
opportunity.”
IVeil's, No'wra. N.S.W., April, 1890:
During the past week experts in horse-flesh have had
opportunities of learning much from the lessons of Professor
McGillivray, the famous horse-tamer, who has held classes on
the running track at Nowra. At his opening lesson on Tues-
day the public mustered in force, many well-known ladies being
among them, besides Dr. Brereton, Messrs. Monaghan, Morton,
Blacket, Maguire, and others., who expressed themselves amazed
at the feats performed, and the ease with which they were done.
But the fact that the simplicity of the whole performance was
more apparent than real was exemplified when a young fellow,
who prides himself on his knowledge of buckjumper riding, ex-
pressed his opinion that the horse, which was being treated was
really quiet instead of fast becoming so. He was invited to put
his boast, that he could easily ride the brute, to the test, but
retired discomforted in a, few seconds a, sadder and wiser man.
The Professor s lessons should be attended by horse-shoers, as
well as saddlers, horse-breakers, etc., as many of his ‘systems’
are well worth the money. ‘Jim’ Maguire, the noted horse-
breaker, who was present, states that, although he has seen
Professors Sample and Hyland, he does not think either of
them will compare with Professor McGillivray. In a few
minutes a perfect outlaw, the property of Mr. H. D. Morton,
was broken in and mouthed without any ill-treatment, and the
Professor was sitting on the horse as he lay on the ground
without harness, straps, or buckles of any sort. In this pro-
gressive age it is necessary for our young men to be less bucolic,
and to advance with the times. We therefore strongly advise
those who have not yet joined Professor McGillivray’s class
to do so.”
Herald , Goulburn, N.S.W., August, 1890 :
“On Saturday afternoon Professor McGillivray gave his
first practical demonstration of his taming in the large yard of
Mclntyre’s Family Hotel.


“ Punctually to advertised time the Professor made his
appearance, and at once, in an appropriate speech of a few
words, told those assembled that he was in no sense a showman,
and that his mission was principally to impart to others the
manner in which he subdued the wildest and most uncontrol-
lable horses. At the termination of his opening address, a bay
filly of Mr. Kathwait’s was brought into the ring, which had
never been handled or branded. For a time the beast showed a
most determined spirit of opposition to any one approaching
her on the near side. The little delay also stirred up the im-
patience of the onlookers, some of whom broke out into
cries of ‘Get on her.’ ‘I will,’ said the Professor, and, suiting
action to the words, immediately vaulted to the back of the
animal, which carried him round the ring a few times. Pulling
up. the equestrian dismounted, and again vaulted on the back
of the semi-subdued steed, this time excelling his past perform-
ance by standing upright upon the mare's back. The feat
elicited loud applause. Up to the present the time registered
eleven minutes since the filly had been taken in hand and com-
pletely mastered. The next part of the programme was the in-
troduction of a notorious Queensland buckjumper the pro-
perty of Mr. Wm. Henderson, which had never been success-
fully ridden by the best riders, 16 different horsemen having
failed in the attempt. After No. 2 animal was led into the
ring, and the saddle and bridle placed on its back,
an over facetious individual clamoured for the removal
of the surcingle, while others gave expression to their
thoughts that the Professor could not ride the animal
up the street. Tim second wish was responded to,
and the Professor rode up the street and back into the yard,
the animal appearing to be perfectly quiet The
bridle and saddle were then removed, and once more the Pro-
fessor took the liberty of standing upright on the steed’s back.
This exhibition of daring had such an effect that some of the
bystanders expressed themselves incredulous as to the bona
fide nature of the skill displayed, and went so far as to remark
that it could not be done if the Professor changed his clothes.


.... It is only scant justice to say lliat l>y wliat wo
saw on Saturday, Professor McGillivray exercises a marvellous
control over the horse, and if his wonderful knowledge can be
imparted to others, the small sum charged for admission to the
class must be a good investment.”
B. B. Express, Casino,, May, 1892 :
“Professor McGillivray, the well-known horse-tamer, is
giving a series of exhibitions of his skill at Casino, and has
secured a number of pupils for a class. He is possessed of great
nerve, has a quick eye, and on Tuesday very quickly had
mastery of two unbroken horses which he first handled, and at
last stood upon their backs.. This success is attributable, in
a great degree, to the kindness used. Yesterday afternoon the
Professor gave further evidence of his ability, having secured a
violent kicking coach horse from Mr. Potter. After a space of
about half an hour he succeeded in perfectly quieting the ani-
mal, so that he placed a clothes-prop on both sides, and between
the legs, and no sign of kicking. Mr. Potter assures us that, it
was impossible to drive this horse alongside the pole. The Pro-
fessor’s exhibitions are well worth seeing.”
Milton, N.S.W. :
“Most people think that to break a, young horse in
properly the animal must be pretty well broken down, in order
to curb its fiery spirit—provided, of course, that poor living
has not already reduced it to a state of submission, and ani-
mals treated in this manner are never safe. Most people know
that horses can be quietened by kind and proper treatment,
and in a more satisfactory manner, but few have learnt this art.
The visit of Professor McGillivray to this district, then, must
be hailed with pleasure, not only for the instruction and enter-
tainment he provides, but chiefly for the good that he will do.
On Wednesday last, on the show-ground, the Professor quiet-
ened an unbroken colt in such a, way in a few minutes that,
without a thing on the animal, he could hold its mane, jump
on to its back, and stand upright. Others found that they
could do the same.


“ Bucking and kicking horses were quietened in a very
short time without spurs, whip, or by artificial means. The
Professor had a good number of spectators, and he also enrolled
a large number of pupils, who will be taught the art of treat-
ing horses properly, and with good results.”
Courier, Brisbane, Juno, 1893 :
“Professor McGillivray, the celebrated horse-tamer, still
continues to instruct large classes at Messrs. Carter and Fen-
wick’s Bazaar in the art of managing and controlling horses.
Yesterday the Professor gave a display of his powers over un-
broken colts before His Excellency the Governor and Lady
Norman, the Earl and Countess of Hopetoun, and a large
attendance of defence-force officers, and the elite of the city.
Experimenting on several unbroken colts, the Professor illus-
trated his various methods of catching such animals, and of
afterwards making them understand what was required of
them. As an illustration of his own skill and power over re-
fractory animals he rode a buckjumper, and finally, taking off
the saddle, rode the same horse barebacked. Each method
was lucidly explained, and many valuable hints were explained
to those present who were in the habit of using horses. In
a wonderful manner the Professor seemed to assure the ani-
mals that no harm was meant them, and make them under-
stand what was required of them. The vice-regal party ex-
pressed themselves as highly pleased with the exhibition.”
Mudgee, N.S.W., August, 1891 :
“As we must plead guilty to a certain amount of doubt
as to whether the cure of Mr. Strike's horse on Saturday would
be lasting, we are glad to hear that Mr. Strike is thoroughly
satisfied on that point, as he rode it home on Monday with as
much ease as if it had been broken in for three or four years.”
Free Press, Lachlan River, Cowra, N.S.W., January
1891 :
“Professor McGillivray. whose fame as a horse-tamer has
been fully established in the Australian colonies, gave one of


his marvellous exhibitions on Wednesday afternoon, at the
rear of the Fitzroy Hotel, in a. yard and; enclosure erected by
himself. The number present was very limited, but this; did not
prevent the Professor from demonstrating in a practical and
convincing manner the wonderful influence he has over the
horse tribe. The animal operated upon was a, vicious, nasty-
tempered brute, but he succeeded, much to 1 the astonishment
of all present, in bringing it under complete subjection in a
verv short space of time. . . . The entire proceeding was
conducted in sight of the spectators, to whom it was very evi-
dent that druggery or trickery formed no part of the Profes-
sor’s system.”
Chronicle , Cobargo, N.S.W., June, 1890:
“Professor McGillivray, the eminent' horse-trainer, gave an
exhibition of his skill at Graham’s yard on Saturday afternoon.
The l attendance was. very large, and included ai great manv of our
residents well versed in the habits and use of the horse. Upon
some of their faces we fancied we could predict, at the outset, a
look of mistrust and doubt as to the ability of the Professor to
carry into effect the marvellous feats with which he has been
credited by the Press wherever he has performed, but before the
Professor had proceeded far with his handling of a young un-
broken colt, showing fashionable breeding, and supplied by Mr.
Stennett, of Bega, these same individuals were forced to admit
that the Professor was a veritable wonder in his management of
horses. The colt mentioned was driven into the yard, and in
about ten minutes Mr. McGillivray was in turn riding and
standing on the horse, and this without any tackling whatever.
An incorrigible outlaw was next brought in, which the Professor
decided to throw. He did not get a long pole and lasso the horse,
then call to his aid three or four stalwart men, but he procured
an old, quiet horse, placed him alongside the outlaw, and in a
few moments had, in the simplest and most effectual manner,
the horse on the ground. The tackling used could be placed in
an ordinary coat pocket. When the horse was on the ground,
the Professor handled him kindly, presently took off every ves-
tige of tackling, lifted his head, and then sat and stood on his


back, and altogether the horse and master seemed to have
entered into a compact to quietly ‘'have” the public; but the
former’s character was too well known to those present, Mr.
Stennett having that morning brought him especially to test the
skill of the Professor. Two minutes after the horse had risen
from the ground the Professor was standing upright on his back,
and actually sitting on his rump, with legs dangling over -his
tail.”
Downs Gazette, Toowoomba (Q.)-,-September, 1893 ;
“ On Saturday last Professor McGillivray gave an exhibi-
tion of his powers as a horse-tamer, in the Darling Downs horse
bazaar, and displayed great ability in the exercise of his art.
He is undoubtedly well worth going to see, even if it is only
to witness what can be done in the course of a few minutes with
a raw colt. The Professor commenced the performance by
catching a young colt about two and a-half years old, without
either halter or rope, and was on his back within ten minutes
after the colt entered the yard. He then threw and tied him,
as if for branding operations. After removing the ropes, the
horse submitted himself to be handled as though he had been
tamed for the performance of “ Black Bess.” Mr. McGillivray
afterwards gave some illustrations of how a horse should be
handled in breaking him in for harness or saddle, and gave some
useful lessons on how to make a jibbing horse pull and how to
prevent a horse from kicking, using some very ingenious but
simple tackling for the purpose of explaining each part as it
was required. The Professor deserves good patronage by horse-
fanciers, as his exhibitions are both interesting and instructive.”
Richmond River, N.S.W.:
“At the sale of horses held by Mr. A. W. Smith, auctioneer,
last Saturday, he had a number of unbroken horses, and as an
inducement to buyers, he undertook to catch any animals that
the buyers wished, after the sale, and place halters on them.
This seemed to be appreciated by purchasers, and Mr. Smith
had seven or eight of these to deal with after the sale. Mr.
Smith had joined one of Professor McGillivray’s classes last
week, and very quickly profited by the information he gained,


for he caught the animals in an average of less than five min-
utes each, mounted them barebacked, and even stood up on
them. This proves that what Professor McGillivray states is
literally tine—that, he will teach anyone to be able to subdue
horses just as well as he can himself. Mr. Smith, as well as
other pupils here, considers his guinea was well invested. We
would advise those desirous of learning his methods to do. so at
once.”
Star, Lismorc, N.S.W.:
“On Saturday afternoon Professor McGillivray gave an
exhibition of his skill in dealing with unhandled and vicious
horses. A yard has been constructed at the rear of the Free-
masons’ Hotel, and screened off with canvas, and to this the pub-
lic are admitted. Several young horses were brought into the
yard, one at a time, and these the Professor literally “handles”
very quickly, and is soon astride of them and dealing with them
in a way proving that the animals have lost all sense of fear.
This he generally manages to effect without turning a hair. We
have to make this qualification, because occasionally a roguish,
vicious animal is encountered, and one of these turned up on
Saturday afternoon, which needed special treatment. He was
always ready to fight with forefeet or hind, or his teeth, as occa-
sion served, and before he was mastered got home once with his
forefeet on the Professor, getting him down in the saw-dust. He
was a very determined colt, and resisted to the last; but he had
eventually to give in, and was ridden round the ring without
saddle or bridle. To know the mode of treating animals, people
should see for themselves, because Mr. McGillivray has many
modes of dealing with his subjects. The performances are only
introductory to the more useful object which he contemplates—.
namely, to form classes to impart information to pupils on the
best methods of handling, riding and driving, and to prevent, all
vicious developments. When we know how many good animals
have had their values impaired by one solitary vice., no one own-
ing or having to do with horses should grudge the payment of a
guinea to be instructed how to cure a horse of vicious propensi-
ties. If anyone has a thoroughly spoilt or wicked horse, the


Professor will be glad to get him to exemplify the value of his
treatment. A class was. formed on Saturday, and another exhi-
bition will be given this afternoon, with one in the evening, to
which the public are admitted for a small fee.
Queensland Times , Ipswich, August, 1893 :
“The famous Australian wild horse tamer, Professor McGil-
livray, held two classes last week at Dugandan, for exhibition
and instruction of pupils, when the usual performance was gone
through, the Professor once more showing his marvellous com-
mand over the equine race. On Saturday night he gave his
final performance in Ipswich, when most of his pupils were pre-
sent, besides a goodly number of spectators. He first caught a
colt, which had been brought in from Glenharding, in a very
short space of time, and, after mounting and riding it, bare-
backed, adjusted the halter, tied it up, and proceeded to quieten
it. This animal was then turned out, and a big, unbroken colt
from Nanango driven in. One of the pupils, Mr. T. O’Brien, at
the request of the Professor, proceeded to tame this animal, and
was most successful in his attempt, as hei mounted the animal
bareback in less than three minutes after it had been brought
into the enclosure. Hisi own quiet horse being then led forward,
the Professor put his pupil through the application of the gear,
etc., which was performed in a satisfactory manner.
The Liberal, Cootamundra, N.S.W., October, 1890 :
“ On Saturday, Professor McGillivray, the noted South
Australian horse-tamer, gave an exhibition of his remarkable
powers over the unbroken horse. The scene was the Albion
yard next to the Assembly Hall, and within this the horse-
tamer had constructed a circular pen measuring 21 feet in
diameter, and about 5 feet high. From a secluded corner close
by the horses were drafted, as desired. There were six or eight
unbroken animals, mostly young, and some of them were lively
enough for anything. When it is stated that within ten min-
utes Mr. McGillivray was handling them as he pleased, jump-
ing on and off them, and standing erect upon them, it will be
seen that his manipulation of the untamed horse was something
remarkable. He not only rode in the ring, but outside as well.


There were three or four of Mr. J. J. Miller’s horses, and horses
belonging to Mr. M. Maher, junr., and Mr. A. Bragg, were all
tamed inside of an hour. So marvellous did this taming process
appear, that one of the onlookers, within our hearing—and a
practical man, too' —declared that the tamer used chemicals.
This, after two or three visits, we unhesitatingly declare to be
an erroneous impression. It caused Mr. McGillivray no end of
amusement. ‘ There,’ said he, with a broad grin, ‘is where I
put the chloroform,’ as he stealthily approached the near hip
of him, which is the least ticklish part of a horse, and, having
once laid his hand upon a horse the trouble seems half over, for
then he persuasively ‘runs the rule over the animal.’ Invari-
ably, according to our observation, be rubs the top of the head,
and here, if at any time, there is an imparting of the subtle mag T
netic influence, for after this friendly performance the horse and
the tamer seem to understand one another. Only once did we see
the slightest sign of a kick. Two of the horses plunged as though
they would break through anything, but they were subdued.
The most interesting performances were probably those of the
after-tea meeting, when some half-do'zen pupils were shown the
why and wherefore of the tamer’s treatment of untamed horses.
He is emphatic about the necessity of treating horses kindly.
‘Let them know no fear,’ is one of his cardinal points. This
suggested to Mr. Bragg that he would like the Professor toi try a
perfect brute to kick. He was trotted in, and by candle-light
experimented upon. A tin-can was tied to bis tail, a pole waa
strung to his tail and his mane, a walking stick was rubbed all
about him, yet no sign of a kick did he attempt to make. ‘ Per-
fect brute to kick,’ jokingly remarked Mr. McGillivray. We
witnessed some parts of the lesson, and received no word of cau-
tion ; therefore, no fault would be found if we divulged all we
knew.”
Guardian, Glen Innes, N.S.W., March, 1892 :
“ We all of us have heard, and some of us have witnessed,
the wonderful feats in horae-taming that have been performed
by such men as Cook and Rarey, and their method has
appeared incomprehensible. Professor McGillivray, who is now:


in Glen Innes, appears to act on a, similar principle, and it
is worth any one’s while to see him experimenting on horses
brought to him on account of vice or wildness. The animals
one by one are introduced into a saw-dust covered ring, of very
circumscribed dimensions, and there, in some mysterious man-
ner, the Professor brings his occult influence to bear on them.
He meets the horse, and no matter how vicious or wild the crear
ture may be, he no sooner lays his hands on its head than, in the
generality of cases, the beast seems to become mesmerised—■
allows Mr. McGillivray to mount on his back, dance about on it
circus-fashion,, and in a very few minutes seems as docile as one
could wish. The victory is not always as easily won as this,
and we saw one horse operated upon that had to be thrown
before the tamer could bring his influence to bear on it, and the
creature made frantic struggles for a long time to resist, but
eventually Professor McGillivray succeeded ao well in curbing its
spirits that, after dancing about on the animal, in between the
animal’s fore and hind legs—the creature then being on its side
—he collected its four hoofs on his lap, the horse seeming not
at all to object to the queer proceedings, although a very short
time before the animal was so wild as hardly to allow anyone
to approach it. Whatever the Professor’s secret may be, its
results indeed are astonishing.
Express, Gladstone, S.A., 20th November, 1888:
“The visit of the Professor to this town has caused quite a
sensation amongst horsemen and others, and made things some-
what lively for a day or two. According to his advertisement, he
was prepared to handle any horse that might be brought, and
it is pleasing to be able to record the fact that he fulfilled his
engagements most thoroughly. As is usual, there were a tew
who didn’t hesitate to say, “there’s nothing in it,’’ but when a
man can take a notoriously vicious horse, and one that has been
given up as “too bad for anything,” and can, after a very little
handling, stand erect on its back, without a, rope on, there must
be something in it. The Professor is a thorough horseman, and
doesn’t exhibit the slightest fear under any circumstances con-
nected with his business. He is wonderfully active, and always


manages “not to be there” when a horse kicks at him, which
they often do at the introduction. He was doubtful about being
able to get any “bad” horses here, but the first one he tackled
dispelled the: doubt, and he afterwards said that it was one of
the worst he had ever handled. It was a Blanchwater, and as
wild and full of vice as it was possible to be. Its peculiar
qualifications were those of biting, kicking, and squealing. In
a very short time the Professor, without using a whip, subdued
the horse to such an extent that he stood erect on its back, with-
out even a rope on. The second horse was handled by Mr.
Atkins, of Booyoolie Station (a pupil of the Professor), and he
was as successful almost as the Professor himself
It might also be mentioned that the horses handled on Satur-
day last were ridden around the town two- or three days after by
the owners, and appeared to be perfectly quiet."
Despatch, Port Augusta, S.A., 28th May, 1889 :
“Professor McGillivray, on Wednesday afternoon and last
evening, gave two exhibitions of his skill and ability in the
management of untamed and, untrained horses at the yards of
the Royal Hotel, Port Augusta. The Professor had previously,
by advertisement, invited and requested a supply of unbroken
colts—the wilder the better—for treatment, and on Wednesday
morning some reputed ‘snorters’ were run in. After the public
had been admitted to the enclosure, the Professor began operas
tions on a fine, upstanding colt, rising five years, which had just-
been brought in from the Marachowrie Station run. It had not
previously been handled, except in infancy for branding pur-
poses. The animal was speedily brought to its bearings, and in
less than 15 minutes, with the aid of nothing but a small walk-
ing-stick, the Professor was able to mount it barebacked, and
stand erect upon him. The next on© tackled (and in this in-
stance ‘tackling’ was used, but of a most simple and inexpensive
kind) was a sturdy chestnut horse—never previously handled —
rising 7 years old, the property of Mr. John Brennan. This
one, we understand, waa selected specially, and submitted as one
likely to give Mr. McGillivray ‘all his work to do’ to manage and
master him. In about a quarter of an hour he had it as quiet


and tractable as a sheep, allowing the Professor to mount it from
either side, stand upright, on its back, lift its legs, even lying
down on being told, and, in fact, showed itself willing to do
almost anything but talk. The Professor further declared his
ability to make the animal follow him, without strap or rope,
through the streets of the town, and to mount and lie down on a
table, if necessary The performances weie given
in a small enclosure —about eight yards in diameter; the
gear made use of in the experiments being simple in the
extreme, and must be seen to be appreciated. The Professor is
certainly a master of his profession, and is far and away the
best man we have ever seen in his particular line of business,
viz., as horse-tamer and trainer. All who have to do with the
‘noble steed’ cannot do 1 better than obtain a. lesson.
Times. Bombala, N.S.W., March, 1890 :
“ On Saturday afternoon a fair-sized crowd assembled on
the Show Ground to witness an exhibition of horse-taming by
Professor McGillivray. Several unbroken youngsters were
brought, one at a time, into the yard, and in a few minutes the
Professor was riding them barebacked, and standing upright on
them, not one of the horses attempting to buck with him. There
was not the slightest doubt of the genuineness of the perform-
ance, as the horses were supplied by such well-known horsemen
as Mr. W. E. Smith and Mr. R. Dudley One of
the fillies yarded on this occasion was so wild and timid that she
ran at the high four-rail fence enclosing the yard, split a post
from top to bottom, and brought down the whole panel. She was
brought back, and in a few minutes the Professor was sitting
on her back as quietly as though she’d never been used to any-
thing else. One of his pupils (Mr. Dudley), who had been let
into the secret previously, then took another youngster, and did
exactly what the Professor had previously done with the other,
except that he did not venture to stand up. After this the Pro-
fessor explained to his pupils how he managed to prevent the
horse from bucking, and showed how it was done. He then pro-
ceeded to show and explain the use of improved tackling for
various purposes, which information should be of great use to
horse-breeders and others.”


Times, Forbes, January, 1891 (N.S.W.):
“ On Saturday evening last, and in the early days of the
present week, Professor McGillivray gave some interesting and
wonderful performances in the art of horse-taming and break-
ing-in generally. His. subjects on Saturday were two unbroken
two-year-old colts and one filly (the property of Mr. John Flint),
the latter especially being very lively. The first colt run into
the yard was supposed to be the worst of the three, but Professor
McGillivray had not been with him more than a couple of min-
utes before he had caught him, and was riding him barebacked.
He next caught the filly, and in a few minutes, was standing up
on her back. He put the halter on her, and, after tying her up
to a fence, taught her to lead. Lastly, he operated on the other
colt, and before the end of the performance he was quiet enough
to allow anyone to get on his back. At the close of the public
performance., Professor McGillivray instructed a. class as to his
method of handling and quietening young horses, and with the
colt, last caught, went through the whole performance of catch-
ing him, tying him up, teaching him to lead, mounting him, etc.,
also teaching him to lift his legs in order that he might be shod.
At the close of the lesson the horse was driven home with the
rest, and not touched till Monday. On that day he was caught
in the comer of a large 1 yard, saddled, etc., and, on being ridden,
was not in the least irksome, but was used to drive some other
horses to town. The colt was not handled for more than an hour
altogether, and the way he went to his work on Monday proves
beyond a doubt that Professor McGillivray’s method of breaking-
in cannot be beaten Many ‘horsey men’ are fre-
quently under the impression that no. onei can teach them any-
thing with regard to horses and the right way of dealing with
them, but a lesson from the Professor disabuses one' of that idea,
and out of the many wrinkles that he gives, one or two of them
alone are worth the money.”
Northern Argus, Adelaide, S.A. :
“Professor McGillivray gave another exhibition of horse-
taming in Mr. Spratt’s yard, Clare, on Monday evening last. He
broke two harness! horses into saddle in his usual masterly style,


after which great preparations were made for some huckjump-
ing. The Professor gave it out that no one had been able to
successfully ride the horse he was about to< introduce, and the
spectators anticipated some fun. The horse, a nice, lively, com-
pact hay belonging to Mr. J. Hill, J.P., was brought in with a
snort. After being saddled, the horse was left to his own cogi-
tations, and did some high-class bucking, to the intense delight
of the onlookers. However, when the Professor got on its back,
it positively refused ‘to gO' to market,’ and there was ne’er a. buck
to be got out of it. The animal was tried without a saddle, with-
the same unsatisfactory result. Some one in the crowd threw
out a challenge to Mr. McGillivray that he dared not ride the
horse in Main Street on the following morning. The wager was
promptly taken up, and won, easily by the Professor, as the horse
was not going to play up to oblige a crowd of people who assem-
bled to witness, the l display of horsemanship.”
Telegraph, Brisbane (Q.) :
! 'Mr. D. McGillivray, the celebrated horse-taming expert,
gave an exhibition of his powers and control of wild horses at
Messrs. Carter and Fenwick’s Bazaar on Thursday afternoon,
before His Excellency the Governor, Lady Norman, and the
Misses Norman, the Earl and Countess of Hopetoun, and a large
number of our Brisbane ladies, who 1 all enjpyed the spectacle
of the complete subjugation of several unbroken colts and fillies
which had never before been, handled by man except in brand-
ing. It was made fully apparent, that if the Professor’s humane
treatment were only universally adopted an immense saving of
time and horseflesh would be effected, while the work of the
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty would be greatly reduced.
The whole of Mr. McGillivray’s work with a horse, from begin-
ning to end, seems to be done without producing the least
physical pain to the animal, and the system is simply a triumph
of reason over brute force. After the preliminary work of catch-
ing and riding, the Professor went through a series of different
methods of controlling the horse for different purposes, and gave
a lucid explanation of each. The hints imparted were such as
must prove invaluable to those interested in horses. Their


Excellencies expressed themselves highly delighted with the
exhibition, and seemed much impressed with the various
methods of the Professor.”
Herald, Dalby (Q.), October, 1893 :
“Professor McGillivray made his dehut in Dalby on Wed-
nesday last at the Royal Hotel, where he gave an exhibition of
his marvellous skill to an admiring audience, exemplifying the
power of the human mind over brute creation. He experiment-
alised first on a big black draught horse, a vicious brute, by
walking up to him and stroking his mane, and, wonderful to
relate, within five minutes he had vaulted on his back and rode
him round the yard. The next subject was a bay horse, a regu-
lar wild Myall, who vainly endeavoured to jump over the rails.
The animal was approached in the same manner, and subdued
by the same mystic power the Professor evidently possesses, for,
within a ‘cooee,’ he had the horse lying down, and the Professor
himself was lying between the horse’s legs, without the aid of
strap or buckle. But Mr. McGiLUvray’s performances must be
seen to be appreciated.”
Lockyer Star, Laidley, August, 1893 :
“ Professor McGillivray gave a third exhibition of horse-
taming on Saturday. There was a large number of ladies and
gentlemen present. The subjects handled were provided by
Messrs. Cooper, Peacock, and Summers. Mr. Peacock’s horses
comprised an uncontrollable sire, and which it was expected
would cause the Professor some trouble. However, such was
not the case, he being on the brute’s back in a few seconds, and
stood erect immediately afterwards. Two of the pupils, Messrs.
Jos. Lester and C. Crack, each succeeded in subduing an animal
under the Professor’s directions. Mr. Lester handled a draught,
the property of Mr. Summers, and was on his back without
saddle or bridle in exactly three minutes from entering the yard.
Mr. Crack did likewise to one of Mr. Peacock’s in four and arhalf
minutes, and both pupils were applauded. After the proceed-
ings, further pupils enrolled themselves, and remained to receive
instruction in the one-hundred-and-one things pertaining to>
horses that the Professor imparts.”
186
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


Examiner, Warwick (Q.), March, 1894 : —•
“Professor McGillivray has been giving public exhibitions
of his horse-taming and managing qualities every afternoon
during the week in our office back yard. Although several wild,
unhandled horses were handled, each and all submitted to his
tender mercies, and when the exhibitions were over, all present
were ready to admit that the animals were thoroughly subdued.
Mr. Dampler, of the Dampier Dramatic Company, who claims
to have seen exhibitions of horsedaming in different parts of the
world, complimented the Professor on his tact and ability, and
said he had never seen anything like it.”
Western Star, Roma (Q), November, 1893 :
“Professor McGillivray, on Saturday last, gave two addi-
tional expositions of his methods of quietening and training the
most lawless and refractory subjects. The Professor has secured
quite a large number of pupils in the district, and all appear to
be astounded and amazed at his success in dealing with the
youngsters submitted to him for treatment. The muttered
sounds of ‘ chemicals’ that are sometimes heard at his public
exhibitions are no longer heard when he unfolds his methods to
his pupils, with lucid explanations that will enable them to put
them into practice themselves. Valuable wrinkles are also im-
parted on a variety of horsey matters, and the pupils appear
to look upon their guinea as money well invested.
Guardian, Allora (Q), March, 1894:
“Professor McGillivray gave an exhibition of his horse-
taming on Thursday afternoon, in Holme’s yard, at the Royal
Hotel. The exhibition was announced for Wednesday, but the
state of the weather prevented anything from being done on
that day. On Thursday some young unbroken colts that had
been running on Mr. Cook’s selection at Pilton were operated
upon; it consequently need scarcely be said that they were well
up to the average of the unbroken raw material. The horsey
men present were fairly astonished at what followed, and some
of them, who had been used to handling and dealing with horses
187
PRESS NOTICES.


all their lives, in the presence of such a past-master of the art
of ‘horse-breaking made easy’ as the Professor proved himself
to be, were fain to acknowledge that they knew very little of
the science of the business.
“Three successive youngsters were admitted into the yard,
and in each case, in a minute or so, the Professor had them under
complete control, sprang on to their backs, first on one side and
then on the other, and finally stood up on their backs. They
allowed themselves to be handled all over without a strap or
tackling on them, and in a few minutes were literally as quiet as
sheep.”
Courier , Charleville, Q., December, 1893:
“Professor McGillivray gave an exhibition of horse-taming
at the yards of the Charleville Hotel on Thursday evening last
to a large attendance. There is no doubt, from what we have
seen of the Professor, we can say without fear of contradiction
that he is the cleverest man that has ever put a leg across a
horse.”
Argus, Warren, N.S.W., March, 1894:
“On Monday and Tuesday evenings, in the Show Grounds,
Professor McGillivray gave two exhibitions of hia skill as a wild-
horse tamer. There was a good attendance on each occasion.
Mr. McGillivray is a thorough master of his business. After
being a few minutes in his hands, the most vicious and intract-
able horse becomes completely subdued. Several horses were
brought to the Professor on Monday evening to be tamed, and,
with one exception, he was on their backs in a few seconds from
the time they were put in the yard. The exception was a par-
ticularly vicious brute, that struck out both fore and aft
whenever the Professor approached him. His intractableness,
however, afforded Mr. McGillivray an opportunity of display-
ing his skill in manipulating the complete set of breaking-in
gear which he possesses. With the help of a quiet horse and a
number of straps, he had the horse at full length on the ground
in no time, and when he had finished with him, the owner of
the horse not only rode him, but stood up on him, d la circus.
A special feature about Mr. McGillivray is the quiet way in


which he manages his horses, never injuring or even marking
them in the least. A very interesting part of the performance
was the Professor’s method of curing a jibbing horse. A ‘rank
jib’ from Gunningbar was dealt with, and cured in a very few
seconds, by a very simple method. This ‘wrinkle’ alone was
worth more than the gate-money to anyone who owns a horse
that won’t go.”
Moree, N.S.W., September, 1894:
“Professor McGillivray gave one of his exhibitions of horse-
taming in Traynor’s yard on Wednesday evening, before a, large
audience of those interested in horsemanship. The horses (three
in number) which were experimented on were perfectly wild
and unbroken, from the Weebollabolla run. In his experiment
with the first animal, the Professor took three minutes in the
operation, in order to explain the modus operandi, and to de-
monstrate to the satisfaction of his audience that his system
could be worked by any man who could follow out his plan. The
second horse was caught and handled in from 12 to 15 seconds,
and the third in 10 seconds. It was somewhat difficult for the
Professor to make some of his visitors believe that the horses
had not been previously handled, but ultimately all were satis-
fied with the bona fides of the operation. About a dozen gen-
tlemen enrolled themselves as pupils of the Professor. When in
Moree some two and a half years ago, Mr. McGillivray had 52
pupils, nearly the whole of whom were present on Wednesday
evening.”
Advertiser, Wagga., N.S.W., February, 1895 :
“Professor McGillivray gave an exhibition of his taming
abilities at the Australian Hotel yards on Saturday afternoon,
to a good audience. Some horses were sent in by Mr. W. F.
Stone, of Uranquinty, and were certainly not the pick of the
bunch as regards amiability of temperament. The first was a
dark brown horse, five and arhalf years, by Pioneer, which had
never been handled previously. After being dealt with and
haltered, the animal showed signs of reform, and has benefited
by the treatment since. The second was a bay thoroughbred
filly by Landsborough, four years old, and never touched. This
189
PRESS NOTICES.


the Professor quickly brought under his rule, as also a brown
mare from Pioneer, and one by Bosworth. The horses handled
on Wednesday last have been ridden about the town since, and
become quite tractable. A class has been formed, and instruc-
tion is now imparted to the pupils. To-morrow afternoon an-
other public exhibition will be held at the Australian Hotel
yards. Prom the manner in which Mr. McGillivray has demon-
strated his ability to deal with the most vicious animals, the
public is fast gaining confidence in his methods, and will no
doubt respond to the present opportunity of participating in
the valuable tuition.
Independent, Coonamble, N.S.W., October, 1894 :
“On Monday afternoon last Professor McGillivray began in
Coonamble a series of exhibition classes for the purpose of
teaching the best methods of handling, riding, and managing
vicious or unbroken horses. A lot of valuable information was
given anent equestrian matters, and a number of “hard cases”
in the horse line were put through their facings, becoming quite
gentle and tractable under the Professor's treatment. There is
no magic in the system; it is simply one of applied
sense, and anyone after a lesson or two can work with satis-
faction, and without danger to life or limb by kicking, rearing,
or bolting horses. We are glad to notice that a goodiy number
of gentlemen have joined the classeis, and trust that the better
knowledge of horse management disseminated will prevent
many a mishap, and bring to a finis the long chapter of acci-
dents which have lately taken place in our district from this
source.”
Walgett, N.S.W., February, 1895 :
“We have this week witnessed Professor McGillivray in his
art of horse-taming, and feel justified in extolling him so
thoroughly gifted in the management of horses that the uniniti-
ated may be somewhat pardoned for attributing his handling of
unbroken colts less to any more than ordinary skilled treatment
in the nature of them, than to the liberal use of some powerful
and subtle alternative. But there is no such trickery in his
system. The only legerdemain he has is what originates from


a long life-study of the animals’ habits and anatomy. This he
very lucidly explains to his class members, and we are quite sure
that there is not one out of the 18 members he has already in
class that will not readily concur with us in pronouncing
him exceptionally well skilled in the care, nature, management,
and humane treatment of the horse. We would recommend
every man who feels that he does not know more about a horse
than he ought to, to attend his classes.”
Advocate , Berrigan, N.S.W., April, 1895:
“Having been duly cautioned by the public, advised to
make his will by the owner, and informed by the guardian of
the law that the State accepted no responsibility in the matter,
Professor McGillivray last Saturday proceeded to perform his
promise that he would subdue the intractable Momalong mare
‘ Mad Kate.’ As mentioned in our last issue, Kitty is a tho-
rough vixen of fourteen years, finely-built, and as neat-looking
a hackney as could be desired. At present she has a foal at
foot, and her usual ‘sweet’ temper was in no wise improved by
this fact, which was evident by the way she rushed, open-
mouthed, at Mac., as he went into the yard. That rush was
not completed in the manner she anticipated, as the Professor
didn’t jump the fence, but waited for the mare to change her
mind. What followed proved very disappointing to those who
had come to see a battle royal, for in about a minute the Pro-
fessor had caught the mare, who quietly submitted to be har-
nessed and ridden without scarcely an attempt at bucking. A
further exhibition of lassoing was given, and the class have
been instructed daily. On Monday two ! of the pupils, Messrs.
Gorman and Charles, caught and rode two two-year-olds in
about five minutes, the horses being perfectly tractable
afterwards.”
Times, Donald, Vic., August, 1895;—•
“Donald has been visited by many professors of horse-tam-
ing, but we doubt very much if ever one of them showed such
command over unbroken horses as Professor McGillivray, who
gave an exhibition at Cave’s yard on Tuesday afternoon. The
Professor treated two subjects out of four brought from the
191
PRESS NOTICES.


Common at Corack. The animals were the property of Mr. Bol-
der, and it was vouched for that they had never been used in
any kind of work; in fact, they were raw animals. The first
was a bay colt, three years 1 old, which was run into a yard about
21 feet square. At the outset the youngster did not take
kindly to the surroundings, but in less than three minutes the
Professor had him on ‘friendly terms.’ The performance was
really marvellous, for the colt stood as if mesmerised. Within
the lapse of five minutes the Professor was riding the beast
round the ring without the aid of a vestige of harness, and
vaulting off and on as though the horse had been in his posses
sion for years. He had complete control of his charge. After
the Professor had satisfied himself, an onlooker got astride of
the animal, which was as subdued as could possibly be wished.
The second part of the treatment consisted of binding the horse
with rope, which is fastened to a post, whereby the animal is
rendered powerless, for its weight is divided against itself by the
process. Professor McGillivray departs from the usual method,
of horae-tamers—viz., fastening the animal’s tail to its head,
thereby forming a kink in the neck, in which position the poor
brute is allowed to remain some minutes, and all the while
being forced round the ring, until giddiness is occasioned. In
this instance kindness appears to- be the chief factor employed.
The only instrument used is an ordinary walking-stick about
three feet long, which the Professor utilises merely to coax his
subject. The stick is first gently placed on the rump of the ani-
mal. Afterwards by degrees the operator gets his hand on the
colt, and then everything appears easy. Only those who wit-
ness the performance can form an idea, as to the Professor's
mastery of the animals.”
Guardian, Swan Hill, Vic., July, 1895 :
“Professor McGillivray, according to announcement, gave
an exhibition of horse-taming on Wednesday afternoon in Mr.
Burton s yards. A large number of spectators assembled. The
Professor, after a few remarks, which created much curiosity in
the minds of his hearers, soon went to work. Be had a small
circular yard prepared for the occasion, into which was driven


a three-year-old, unbroken. The Professor stepped into the
yard, touched the beast quietly with a stick, then walked for-
ward, placed his hand on its hack, and after a few minutes was
on the animal’s back, much to the l astonishment of everyone
concerned. Then a second beast was brought in, one well-
known to the district' as an outlaw. The crowd anticipated some
fun, but, to the surprise of all, this animal, too, was on perfect
teims of friendship with its master in a few moments, Then a
third horse—a big, rollicking animal, never before handled, and
at the same time aged—was introduced. This was evidently
to be the greatest trial. The Professor took off his coat on this
occasion for an exceptional encounter. The animal stood,
snorting and trembling, in the ring, but soon the Professor was
alongside of it, holding its mane and rubbing its back. He then
tied it up to the fence with his own patent, and the horse stood
as if it' had been broken for years. How is all this done ? There
is only one explanation. Professor McGillivray, through long
experience and careful study, is a master of the horse, and the
horse knows it. His exceptional power consists in that he
knows the nature of the beast, and that he is a different beast
to what the majority of men think him to be. Kindness marks
his treatment throughout, a whip never being known. Every-
one expressed pleasure at the exhibition, and the Professor then
booked a number of pupils, the after-performance, to which the
public are not admitted.”
Riverina Grazier, Hay, N.S.W., May, 1895:
■‘Professor McGillivray, the well-known horse-tamer, gave
an exhibition of his skill at Hay on Saturday in the presence of
a number of good judges. Two unbroken colts from Eli Elwah
were successfully handled, and the Professor’s skill was warmly
applauded.”
Free Press, Corowa, April, 1895 :
“On Wednesday and Thursday afternoon Professor McGil-
livray, the celebrated wild horse-tamer and buck-jump rider,
gave exhibitions of his skill on the Corowa' Show Grounds. As
193
PRESS NOTICES.


the Professor will be in the district for some little time, and this
is his first visit it will be just as well to explain what he is doing.
Professor McGillivray disclaims being anything in the shape of
a public showman. He is simply an expert with horses, and
gives exhibitions of his skill for the purpo’Se of obtaining pupils.
On the days mentioned some unbroken horses were yarded, and,
having singled one out, the Professor, without any severity or
ill-treatment whatever, proceeded to catch it, which he quickly
did, and mounted it without saddle or bridle. Having proved
his knowledge of horse-training, the Professor then sought for
pupils. . . He is SO’ perfectly good at his business that it has
at times been thought he has used trickery to accomplish the
complete mastery he has over a horse. This, of course, is ab-
surd, and a good story is told of the Professor when once accused
of using such means. A man who thought himself very smart
offered to pay the Professor for the recipe. The Professor mys-
teriously invited the smart man in, and offered it to’ him for 2s.
6d. The money was quickly produced, and the Professor wrote
the following, which is given gratis : —Oil ,of common sense,
two drachms; oil of kindness, two drachms.; clear, cool courage,
two drachms ; clear grit, two drachms; mix, and apply in a
small yard. The smart man left, swearing as only a. horsey man
can swear.”
HOW TO TELL A HORSE S AGE UP TO 21 YEARS.
It is needless to describe here the appearance of a. colt's
mouth before he is two years old, as anyone can tell by the ap-
pearance of the animal up to that age that it is only what, we
call a yearling, but nevertheless, now that so many people race
horses at this early age, it is well to know all about it, therefore
I will explain as from that age.
From the time a foal gathers the greater part of its own.
food until it is two years old, it only has foal’s teeth, called in
Australia “sucking teeth,” having no large or “horse teeth” at
all, the under or lower jaw appearing as in p. 76. Horses
throughout Australia take their age from the Ist August, and a
colt raced at Christmas or January as a two-year-old is actually


two* years and four or five months, and up to the 1 following
month of August is considered two l years old, although perhaps
within two or three weekai of three years, and SO’ on. As shown
in p. 76, a colt at two years has no large nippers, only foal
or sucking teeth, but during the months of March or April
following—according, however, to whether the colt is
P. 76. —Colt’s mouth at two years, lower jaw.
P. 77. —Colt’s mouth at two-and-a-half years.
well fed or otherwise —he will lose the two centre nippers in
the upper and lower jaw, the foal’s teeth will slowly and
gradually loosen, and, as they fall out, new and much larger
teeth will appear in their place, and at about , the middle of
June these teeth will be much broader, but only about half
the length of the foal’s first teeth, and the mouth will
appear as in p l . 77. During the month of August
and when the colt is three years old, these teeth


P. 78. —Colt’s mouth at three years.
will have grown as long as the others, and the colt’s
mouth will appear as in p. 78, having two large and four
P. 79. —Colt’s mouth at four vears.
small teeth in front, top and bottom. Some time between Feb-
ruary and May he will again lose four teeth, one on each side of
P. 80.—Colt’s mouth at five years.


the teeth he has already on the top and bottom, and, as before,
broader and larger teeth will appear in their place, and by the
month of August these will have grown up level with the
others, and the mouth will be as in p. 79, the colt being now
four years old. The colt has now eight full-grown teeth, four
on top and four on the lower jaw, having one small or foal’s
tooth still left on each side, top and bottom. It will also be
noted that there is a groove on the outside surface of all the large
P. 81. —Front view of colt’s mouth at five years.
or horse teeth, running their full length, from the gums to the
outer edge. There may be a little difference in the time the
horse will lose the remaining foal teeth, and they may fall out
earlier in the year than the others did, or they may not, but in
any case, by the end of August or the beginning of September,
the last, or outside nippers, will have grown up level with the
others on the outside surface, but not so on the inside, and the
last tooth will be as in p. 80, like a shell, the inside not so long


as the outside, and it will also be noticed that these teeth are per-
fectly smooth on the outside surface, having no groove like the
other eight (see p. 81), and by this time, if the subject is a
colt, it will have the bridle teeth, or tusks (as shown
in p. 86), and the colt is five years old. As the time
goes on towards the sixth year, the outside or shell
teeth will gradually grow up, and during the month
of August and the following months of the season they
will be as near as possible like the others, with the exception,
P. 82. —Colt’s mouth at six years.
however, that in these the black mark or cup in the centre
of the tooth is much larger, groove running down the
inside surface, and it will be noted that the cup in the
centre teeth will have almost filled up (see p. 82), and
the marks will be less plain than the others. When the horse
has reached his seventh year the holes or marks in the centre
teeth will have disappeared, and that in, the second outside or
the centre of the three teeth on that side of the jaw will have
almost filled up, and, like the centre teeth before the horse wae
six, the marks will be less plain than the outside, or last teeth
(see p. 83).
198
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


When the horse has reached his eighth year the marks in
the second outside teeth will have disappeared, as in the case of
the centre teeth at seven years, and that in the last tooth will
be filled up (see p. 84).
P. 83. —Colt’s month at seven years.
P. 84. —Horse’s mouth at eight years.
When the horse has reached nine years all the marks are
gone, and the whole of the teeth, top and bottom, are alike, look-
ing from the front, excepting, of course, as I said before, the four
outside teeth have no groove on the outer surface running from
the gums to the edge of the tooth, while all the others have (see
ps. 81 and 85).


At the age of ten years' a groove will start just at the gums
on the outside teeth, and a large pin-head could be placed in it
(see p. 86), and it is much easier to tell a horse’s age after
this, until he has reached 21 years, than it is before reaching
7 years, as this groove comes down the eleventh part of the
P. 85.—Horse’s mouth at nine years.
P. 86. —Horse’s mouth (top jaw) at ten years.
tooth each year, until the time when all the teeth, so far as the
groove is concerned, are completely alike. I have practised
this method of telling the age of a horse for many years, and
have never known it to fail in any one instance. I could give
other means and signs of telling the age up to 20 years, but none
200
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK-


are so reliable, as the different ways of feeding and fodder
that some horses get would alter the teeth so much that
they would not resemble others at all. But in my method no
feeding can possibly alter the teeth, and that part of every
horse’s mouth is the same.
P. 87. —Horse’s mouth (top jaw) at 18 years.
P. 88. —Horses mouth (top jaw) at 15 off.
When a horse has reached 18 years his mouth will appear
as in p. 87, and when he is 15 the groove will be just a
little more than half-way down, that is when he is 15 off (see
p. 88).


PURCHASE, AND WHEN A HORSE IS MATURED.
With a little practice, and by looking and observing
every horse he sees and has a chance of inspecting, and
then ascertaining his age through the Stud Book, etc., a pupil
will very soon become proficient., and can at one glance a,t the
horse’s near side upper tooth, tell the age to within six months,
very often, to the owner’s astonishment, as it is: generally com
■sidered by most people that no one can tell a horse s age after
he is seven years, hence the common saying, “Oh, he is as old
as any other man’s horse—seven years,” and not knowing the
age of a horse over seven years very often causes a man to lose
a really good sale, and many others miss a. chance of securing a
first-class animal for the only reason that, because he is over
that age, they are not sure but that he may be 20. At large
sales they will look at a horse’s mouth, and if they cannot see
at least one foal’s tooth, or some other mark they are familiar
with, denoting that he is under seven years, they will say, “Oh,
he is an old brute,” and will not bid for him, thereby losing, per-
haps, the best animal in the yard. In fact, I know this sort of
thing to be carried on to such an alarming extent in some parts
of the country that no one will try a. horse that has “no. marks,”
as they say, and is therefor© over seven, and, upon my word,
make people believe that a horse is very little good above that
age, whereas in truth he is not thoroughly perfect and sub-
stantial until he has reached it.
I think it is a great mistake to work horses very hard be-
fore they are. properly grown and furnished, and half the horses
we see every day were broken down and worked to death before
they were more than half-matured. It is a well-known fact
that this is the case with all our best racehorses, who are worked
and trained before their legs are properly set and matured, and
if they stand the tremendous tension they have to undergo to
prepare them for a large stake, they will only stand it two or
three times at most, and the next we hear of them is “gone
202
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


wrong,” strained a back tendon, or some such thing, whereas, if
we take a good-legged one, and break him at five years, and put
him into the stable at six, and prepare him by giving plenty of
feeding and work for twelve months 1 , see what a horse we will
have—one that may be trained to run and wm the very largest
stakes for five or six or mere years, and then be' fit to run. for
a man’s life, having the requisite pluck and stamina, and his
legs still, with all his training and hard work, as clean and wiry
as a piece of steel. Some object to this, as he could not win a
“Derby”; but that is of no consequence, he would win ten
times as much; but if an owner prefers rather to win that classic
event, and have his horse “go bung,” by all means let him, but,
for myself, if I owned a Carbine, or an Abercorn to-morrow,
unbroken, I would not touch him until he were five years
old, and could truthfully say that I had one of the best
horses in the world. Other people, again, think that horses
are harder to break when they have age upon them, but
this is an erroneous idea. I would much rather
catch and educate three seven or eight-year-old horses
than two colts that are only two years old. The older
and better furnished horses understand and remember
what is taught them, but the two-year-old would be like a very
young, but big, overgrown, fat school-boy, and could neither
understand what the operator would teach, nor yet remember
what they learned two hours after the lesson was over. Although
the old horses might play up a bit when caught, under the “old
style,” still, as soon asi they are subdued, they can be set. to work
right away, and can do as much on their first day as if they had
been handled for a. year or more. There is no shilly-shallying
about them. There they are, and if you know how to subdue
them, they can do. a good, honest day’s work at the first asking.
This I have frequently had plainly illustrated, ana at no place
better than at Beltana Station, S.A., where I handled about 20
horses during 1889, only one or two of which were under ten
years old, yet I could take any one of these, and, in less than an
hour, have it ready to do any work, and, in fact, several of them
were taken over by the owners immediately after one lesson.


and were ridden by the men at mustering and other work. These
horses were bred at Blanchwater, in the interior, and there
are no wilder horses under the sun, while at large ; still, under
my treatment, the very wildest of them can be subdued in ten
minutes to such an extent that a man can take such liberties
with them as can only be usually taken with thoroughly" quiet
horses. Horses should never (even if broken earlier) be worked
much before they are five years old, at least, and really they
are not fit to be depended upon to do hard work before then.
The Indian Government show their acceptation of this theory,
by the fact that they will not purchase any horses under that
age for cavalry remounts, knowing well that horses ypunger
than this cannot possess any real grit and power of endurance,
and, of course, it stands to reason that they cannot —they have
not properly matured before that age, their bones, and espec-
ially their legs, are not sufficiently set, nor yet are the muscles
developed, and the more they are forced up and well fed in their
first couple of years to make them big and fat, the less fit they
are to work when broken in. Thus, when people have just a
few cplts, they sometimes feed them at the home stable, and
the colt grows up splendidly, and at three years old is as big as
if he were five. The owner sells him to a man whot wants a good
hack, and he is broken in with great care, but when he becomes
quiet enough for the new owner to ride or drive, he finds, to
his great astonishment, that he is as soft as a. cabbage. In nine
cases out of ten, where colts are fed, and forced up, and seem
to be full-grown at three years, this will be the case—he will be
soft, and will not stand anything like the work a stranger
would expect from him, judging from his appearances. The
only way to account for this is that the horse has had as much
as ever he could eat, without sufficient exercise to properly de-
velop him.
WHERE THE BEST HORSES ARE FOUND.
There is no better horse than one that has been grown on
open dry pastures, where it has plenty natural grasses, and


where it can get and is almost compelled to take much
exercise. Horses bred in the north are much better
and hardier than those bred in the south, for the simple reason
that the climate, the country, and grasses are better;
they have to travel considerable distances, however, to
obtain these grasses and water, and thus get the necessary ex-
ercise to grpw and properly develop them. That class of country,
which is chiefly rough and stony tableland, seems to endow the
horses bred there with the power of endurance that is required
for dry and arid districts, while those bred and grown on the
south-west coast, in the south-east of South Australia and the
western districts of Victoria, although they may be well-grown,
they are generally softer, not of such sound constitution, and
will not stand nearly as much work, nor retain their condition
so long as the interior horses; for instance, dozens of horses may
be got 500 miles north of Adelaide that will carry a heavy man
a hundred miles a day, and be as fresh as a daisy the next.
Horses may be got in the south to do this, but not on the
northern roads, and very few can do it anywhere, and hardly
any, if they are only grassrfed, like the northern horses. Any
southern horse requires to be atable-fed to do long journeys. In
the interior horses that have never seen a stable will carry a man
100 miles in twelve hours, and on one occasion, when on the
River Darling, N.S.W., I received a, message to be at a certain
place on a particular date, the distance being three hundred
and five (305) miles. I could not leave the station I was on be-
fore noon on Wednesday, and was compelled to be at Mildura,
on the River Murray, at 6 p.m. on Saturday. I did not think
I could possibly do it, and acquainted a friend of mine, a Mr.
Coles, with my difficulty, who replied that he only knew of one
horse in the district that he could really depend upon to dp it
with, but he believed I could purchase him; and, from his
account of him, I decided to inspect the horse, and was so
pleased with his appearance that I gave £25 for him. I started
on my journey on Wednesday at 1 o’clock, and accomplished
the task very easily before 6 p.m. on Saturday, without having
ridden a mile without sunlight. One hundred miles a day was


simply a nice journey for this horse, and I was a good deal more
fatigued at the end of the day than he was. I kept this horse
for some time, and about a year afterwards I rode him from
Koringa to Adelaide, a distance of 102 miles, in one day, and
two days afterwards sold him for sixty guineas. I could name
several instances of where even longer journeys than these have
been made by horses bred in the interior, but 1 do l not happen
to know of any such long distances having been done by south-
ern-bred horses, although some may without coming under my
notice, and in chronicling the foregoing I merely state part of
my own experiences.
SOFT AND INFERIOR PASTURES.
The reason that horses bred on the south-west coast of the
States are not hardy is that the pastures are so wet and marshy,
the grasses are of a soft, and unsubstantial description, and the
climate is so cold and ungenial that it is unnatural to suppose
that anything reared on it. could ever be anything else but soft,
and unfitted to stand a hot and severe atmosphere, caused either
by climate or work. Neither the horses or cattle, or even sheep,
grown on these pastures ever grow as large as the stock further
north, nor yet fatten so quickly, and when they are in condition,
and started on a journey of 200 or 300 miles to market, lose flesh
considerably before reaching the end. This is very different to
the case with northern or Queensland stock, when they are
started for the Adelaide or Melbourne markets, and if there is
any feed at all on the route, they will improve, benefiting by the
change.
AILMENTS OF THE HORSE.
I do not intend to go much into the veterinary parts of
the management of the horse, but it may not be amiss to ex-
plain and describe his commonest ailments and how to .treat,
them. In doing this I will merely describe blemishes and de-
fects that may be found out and are visible to the ordinary
206
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


horseman, and complaints or ailments the animal may have
that are within the bushman’s power to relieve and cure, by
giving the most simple remedies, and which are easily obtain-
able in the country. There is not much use in having a book
full of recipes of different medicines, made up of half-ardozen
chemicals, as a cure for a particular disease, if the owner and the
animal itself are 500 miles from town. Therefore, it is desir-
able that I should only give the simplest and yet most effective
recipes.
STRANGLES.
Amongst the commonest ailments of the horse is the
strangles, which is a considerable swelling ,of the glands of the
jaw and throat, which eventually ends in a festering of the
parts. This disease generally comes on during the winter
months, and will go through a whole stud of young horses
once it commences.
Young horses are most subject to'it, but I have known old
horses to have it, and even die with it. It is a, kind of influenza,
or severe cold in the throat, with a continuous running at. the
nose, and the disease is altogether disgusting. I know of
nothing that will cure it. It must take its course, and the only
thing to be done is to apply such remedies as will hasten and
heln towards a termination. Dozens of unbroken colts will have
it in their paddock, and they will fall away in condition to
mere skeletons. It will throw the horse back for months, and
frequently, when badly affected, they will not recover until the
following season.
When horses that are handled become affected, the best
coursei is to apply a poultice of hot bran to the throat, and also
place a nose-bag half filled with a similar poultice on the nose,
and close up round the head from time to time with the hands,
causing the horse to inhale the steam. Continue this treat-
ment, heating the poultices when too cold, and the strangles
will soon be got over. The festering will soon be brought to a
head, and the swelling will break either inside the throat, and
the matter will run through the nose, or else it will break out-
side, under the jaw. If the swelling does not break, blister
with croton oil. As soon as the swelling has broken, a large
207
AILMENTS OF THE HORSE.


amount of foul matter will be got rid of, and the horse will soon
show signs of recovery, and improve in condition considerably
in a few days, but should not, however, be worked for a week or
two.
COLIC OR GRIPES.
In the summer and beginning of winter, when feed is scarce
and very dry, it is a, common thing for working hprses to get
“colic,” or what is usually called “griped.” The symptoms are
easily recognised, as the horse will switch its tail, strike its
hind legs against its stomach, and stamp with all its legs, lying
down and suddenly rising again, most likely to lie down imme-
diately, and roll over and over. If this is allowed to continue
for any length of time the horse will most likely die, or cut itself
to pieces on the' hard ground, breaking the skin at the hip joints
and head. Colic is caused by too much dry feed; dry chaff will
often cause it, and it is a stoppage of the bowels, or else the uri-
nary structures. In my opinion there is no ailment more trouble-
some to Australian horsemen than colic : a horse may be taken
with it when a man isi in the middle of a particular journey, or
the nag that is kept solely for pleasure may be attacked at any
moment. The best remedy is to give oil of turpentine, or what
is usually called turps, 4 tablespoonfuls (2 ounces), laudanum 2
tablespoonfuls (1 ounce). Mix with half-a-pint of hot water.
Give when warm, to prevent the turps from injuring the throat.
If the horse is not all right in 45 minutes repeat a half dose, and
have no fear of the result. This remedy has been used by my-
self and a great number of horsemen for many years, and I have
never found it to fail yet. The preparation is simple, and
both the turpentine and laudanum are nearly always obtainable
at any station, farm, or hut.
Another splendid remedy is to get a good bunch of par-
snips, wash all the sand or earth off, and cut up small; put in a
pot with plenty water, and boil to a pulp —in fact, boil until no
more will boil away; then strain through a cloth, and give the
horse a pint while it is still luke-warm. This will cure a horse
of colic in less than an hour, and will not in any way injure the
animal. Some people give a pint of yeast as a remedv for colic,
208
AUSTRALIAN, HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


while others give one ounce of ginger mixed with half-a-pint of
gin. All these are effectual, but none so much as the first two,
and these are also the easiest to obtain. After the horse has
recovered, and will eat, give it a bran mash, if obtainable ; but
if not, let it have a day's rest.
NAVEL RUPTURE AND ITS CURE.
Some horses have a defect that often causes colic—that
is, an enlargement or rupture of the navel. Either a horse
or mare may have this. It is caused by the mare being
short of feed and in poor condition while carrying the
foal. Perhaps, when the foal is first born, it only just
shows, and as the animal grows up it may disappear alto-
gether ; but it is more likely to grow larger, and, in most cases,
is a. terrible eyesore, even though it does not cause colic. This
lump is an acute rupture, and is caused by the entrails com-
ing out through the inner lining of the belly, and is only
stopped by the outside skin, and when the horse is worked the
entrails seem to l come down more in this opening than at any
other time, and as the food does not get a. proper chance to pass
through them, it causes colic. The parsnip concoction is the
best to relieve this kind of colic, but, of course, there is no cure
for it except by cutting the lump off the animal, thereby pre-
venting the entrails coming down. Toi do this, obtain two
smooth splints of hardwood, and tie the two ends of the splints
together like “clams” ; cast the horse as directed for castrat-
ing, put the colt on its back, and the entrails will go back, leav-
ing the skin an empty bag. Put the wooden clams on the
empty skin, hold the loose ends of the clams tightly with one
hand, and pull the skin up through them, tightly pressing
them down on to the body; tie the loose ends together, and,
with a packing-needle and thread, sew the clams on toi the. skin,
where it passes through, passing the needle under and over the
wood as often as possible and practicable; put a little tar over
the part, and turn the animal loose. When you again see the
colt the lump will be gone, and only a slight scar left, over


which the hair will soon grow. If the lump is a very large one.
and the horse an old animal, it would be well, to ensure a good
cures to cut the inner skin, to make it grow together quicker.
When the colt or horse is on: its back, cut the skin with a sharp
knife, and it will be found that thei edge of the inner skin,
where the entrails have been passing through, has formed
into a kind of gristle, and will not be very likely to grow to-
gether easily; pass the sharp knife round the edge, cutting
the harder part away, taking care that it is taken out alto-
gether ; then sew up as directed above. The skin will thus
be pulled so tightly over the hole that the entrails cannot leave
their proper place, and the hole will gradually grow up. The
horse will never have colic through this cause again.
GRIPES FROM EATING WHEAT.
Gripes through eating wheat is about the most dangerous
of all colic, and if not attended to immediately generally ends
fatally. It often happens, when the horse and owner are not
near to where he can procure a remedy soon enough, and if he
does not know what to do he is sure to lose the animal. The
best possible cure for this is to bleed the horse, and make it
swallow its own blood. To do this use a sharp penknife, and
run it into the roof of the mouth, at the second bar from the
teeth. It only requires to be well cut through the skin, and
the horse will bleed profusely, and as it will work the mouth
and tongue, and swallow a great quantity of blood, it will get
ease in a remarkably short time. I have known horses that
were very bad to be treated in this manner and be used plough-
ing an hour and a. half after. If nothing else can be obtained,
a pint of raw linseed oil is very good for any kind of colic, or,
for that matter, any oil. But I have known paint oil to be
given, and the animal poisoned thereby.
STAGGERS.
What is generally known throughout Australia as “stag-
gers” is caused by overcrowding of the blood to the brain. It
210
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


usually occurs when the horse has been greatly heated, and the
animal will stagger about like a drunken man, and it is not
unusual for them to fall down and severely injure themselves.
The only cure for this is very simple, and almost instanta-
neously effective, viz., bleeding. Place a saddle-strap tightly
round the horse’s neck, and bleed from the jugular vein
P. 89. —Showing where and how to bleed a horse for “staggers.”
between the strap and the head (see p. 89). If the horse is
very bad, a gallon of blood may be taken away; then take the
strap off the neck, run a pin through the lips of the incision
made by the lance, or whatever instrument is used, and tie a
few hairs from the mane or tail around it, and the dorse can
be ridden away to his work.
DARLING PEA.
This poisonous plant derives its name from the fact that
it grows on the Darling River, N.S.W. The horses eat it


during the dry weather, and are greatly affected by it. A plant
of the very same species, even if not actually the same, grows
on the coast of the south-east of South Australia, and is very
plentiful near Kingston and Robe. The horses in these dis-
tricts are also often affected with it, the disease being
called by the name of “Darling Pea,” presumably because it
is caused by that pea, and no other reason can be assigned.
The poison acts on horses in two different ways, some be-
ing affected in the head, the poison acting on the brain, while
others are affected in the loin, the poison in this case acting on
the spinal card. In every case it acts on the spinal cord to a
certain extent, although it may not appear to affect the animal
in the loin. When the animal is first affected it has a sleepy,
drooping appearance, going about for several days by itself
with a hanging head. If the animal survives the first few days,
the stupor will pass off, and to all appearance the animal will be
all right, but when heated it will go half mad, and do the most
extraordinary and eccentric things. I have 1 known horsesi so
affected to try and climb a tree, and at other times go down
on their knees at a hollow log, and endeavour to get inside of
it. Horses suffering from the “pea” are difficult for the inex-
perienced to break, as they will rear and fall over as soon as
they are pulled with the halter or bridle, and the best way to
manage them is to teach them to lead, with the whip, touching
the head as little as possible. The only cure that I know of
for this malady is a complete change of pasture, and give seve-
ral doses of the following compound from time to time: One
tablespoonful of sal volatile in a pint of water, and keep the
horse on green feed, or give bran mash to keep the bowels
right.
Blemishes and Defects of the Legs,
splints.
A splint is a small bony enlargement on the shin, or can-
non bone, under the knee, generally on the inside, and is caused
by a hit from some hard object—very often by a kick from
another horse. A splint will very often cause lameness when
212
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


it first comes on, but that, soon wears off, and although it may be
.an eyesore on the horse, it will never affect him in his work. It
is hard to get rid of, and can only be successfully contended
with by taking the matter in hand early, and a continuous ap-
plication of arnica. Some people use blisters, but with no real
good results, as a splint is an enlargement, or rather a growing
on the bone, and blistering can have but little effect, but a free
use of arnica will gradually but surely wear it off. Splints
will sometimes appear on young horses, and if they are turned
out for some time their legs will become quite clean again
P. 90. —A bad splint.
P. 91. —A ringbone.
without any application at all. Horses with bad legs are more
subject to splints than those with good strong bone and muscle.
The worst kind of splint is one that is so close as to be almost
touching the knee (see p. 90), and it is sure to cause lameness
at first.
RINGBONE.
This is another bony enlargement, and is on the bone just
over the hoof, or pastern bone (see p. 91). . A copious bathing
with arnica is the best remedy for this also, but if it is a bad
case, nothing will cure it, and unless it is a mare that is
affected, and can be used for stud purposes, the best and
shortest method to save all further trouble, both to the horse
.and the owner, is to shoot the animal.
213
AILMENTS OF THE HORSE.


WIND-GALLS.
Wind-galls are small, conical enlargements immediately
over the fetlock joints, and consist of a watery fluid under the
skin (see p. 92), which may be completely got rid of by a course
of blistering. St. Steven’s Ointment is the best to use. Wind-
galls never cause lameness, and may be on all four feet, and
the horse still perfectly sound. They are caused, however, by
much travelling on hard or else very soft ground. If the
horse is turned out for some time wind-galls may disappear.
P. 93.—A curb.
P. 92. —Position of wind-galls.
CURB.
A curb is an enlargement on the hock, consisting of sub-
stance resembling muscle, and is hard to the feel (see p. 93).
A curb causes considerable pain and lameness to the animal,
and is very hard to get rid of. The horse will be very lame at
starting, but after going some distance will improve, and not
show any signs of lameness, and to the inexperienced will seem
all right, but the next morning they will be quite disappointed
to find it worse than ever. Some horses are more subject to
this defect than others, having badly-formed hocks, commonly
called “ curby hocks,” that is, an unnecessary enlargement of
214
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


the back and lower part of the hock. Fast work on soft ground
will cause a, horse with legs formed thus to develop a curb, and
once it is properly developed can never be cured, in fact it is
useless to persevere ; but when it is just coming it may some-
times be cured by blistering with St. Steven’s Ointment or Ken-
dell’s Spavin Cure.
BONE SPAVIN.
A bone spavin is an enlargement on the side of the hock
joint, and is a peculiar contraction of the muscles (see p. 94),
which, with care, may be removed by blistering. It causes
lameness very often before it can be seen, and it is therefore
P. 94.—Bone spavin.
P. 95.—Blood spavin.
sometimes difficult to tell what is causing lameness in the ani-
mal’s leg, and all sorts of things are tried, the owner, perhaps,
fancying it is in the hip, hoof, or fetlock. The best way to find
■out is to* press the hock all over with the thumb, and note if
the animal flinches and pulls the leg away, by which means the
spot may be located, and should be treated with Kendell’s
Spavin Cure immediately.
BLOOD SPAVIN.
As shown in p. 95, this is an enlargement on the front and
inside part of the hock, and causes considerable lameness and
pain, on account of the animal’s inability to properly straighten
the leg. A course of blistering, however, and a long rest will
cure it completely.


A good blister, that may be easily obtained on any station,
and almost everywhere, and one that is invaluable in the treat-
ment of horses where good, severe blisters are required, is made
up as follows;—Half a pint of turps, half a pint of kerosene.
Mix well, and apply with a brush to the affected part. The
next best blister to use is pure croton oil, which is very severe,
and must be used sparingly, the hair over the affected part
being barely saturated with the oil.
BREEDING.
How horses should be bred and how they are' bred in, Aus-
tralia are two' very different things. With the exception of a
few stud farms, where only a few horses are bred, owners do
not exercise half enough care in reference to this matter, such as
in the selection of the sire used; and even when he is a good
and choice animal, the most suitable mares are not chosen for
him. On large stations', where there are twenty or thirty stal-
lions running out on one vast run, with leave to choose their
own “harem,” there is no such thing as picking the mares that
are suitable for such-and-such & horse.
But let us consider for a moment; Is this sort of a horse
station, where all the horses are higgelty-piggelty, and
no one knows what is the sire of this or that, beyond
the fact that he is of a certain brand, and that he must be
by such a horse, or one of 30 others, out of a nice mare by
something else—is this the most desirable sort of station to
have, or would it not be better to have enclosed paddocks,
and breed Just as many as could be conveniently looked
after, and breed them well! Would not a man get more
for a couple of hundred well and properly bred horses
than he would for double the number of these wholesale
bred animals? Yerily, I think he would. Where there
are so many horses at large, there must, necessarily be some
hundreds very inbred, besides other defects in breeding that
depreciate their value. An inbred horse is not the most de-
sirable animal to have, although it may do its share of the
216
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


■work. I have known inbred horses to be really first-class, ani-
mals to work, and several also to turn out racehorses.
I know one instance where a stallion was kept from a dam
by her own son. There were some scores of mares on the station
by the same sire (“The Son”). I will mention the station and
the name of both horses, to give any of my readers who may
know the breed an opportunity to judge for themselves whether
inbred horses are good or not.
The station was “Killanoola,” in the south-east of South
Australia, the stallion being “Subbada,” by “Sarrawack”
(imp.), out of “Victoria.” “Subbada” was standing at this
station for several seasons, and a great number of “Sarrawack”
fillies were put to him, and the progeny turned out. to be splen-
did horses. Old “Victoria” bred another stallion to “Sub-
bada,” which was called “Rajah,” and he was used on the sta-
tion to. the same mares, and also on his l more than half-sisters,
with surprising success. No better horses for general work
could be found anywhere than the “Killanoola” breed, and
several good racehorses have come from them, but they are the
most notorious buckjumpers. This is the worst feature in
inbred horses; they are sure to buck and kick, no matter how
carefully they are broken and handled. They cannot be
depended upon any more than a mule. An inbred horse can
hardly ever be called quiet, as he may start to buck or kick at
any moment. A colt, may carry his rider nicely for several
miles, and seem to. forget he is there, and then suddenly look
up and see him, take fright, and buck a hurricane. Such a horse
is deficient in memory and brain power, which is the real result
of inbreeding. A nicely and clean-bred animal will hardly
ever buck or kick more than once, and not then if properly
handled. The better bred he is the quieter he will become,
and the more brain power he will have. Like all inbred ani-
mals, horses are certainly deficient in brain power, but they are
more deficient in the faculty of remembrance than any other,
or it may be that we notice this more. Teach him to stand
while you get on, crawl about his legsi, jump over him, flick him
with a bag or cloth, then go away from him for a. few minutes,
217
BREEDING.


and when you again try to approach him he will not let you—
he will actually forget in two' minutes that he ever saw a man.
in his life. If we give a well-bred animal ten minutes school-
ing he will never forget it. He is easily made to
understand, and will remember the minutest detail; he can
be taught good or bad at leisure, and he will remember one as
much as the other. But not so with inbred horses. They can-
not remember, and therefore they can scarcely ever be com-
pletely cured of that wildness and timidity with which they are
possessed when first yarded, and we may say the same of cross-
bred or what is commonly called “carties,” viz., half blood and
half draught. This breed of horse is nothing more nor less than
a mule in a mild form. There is no doubt that a donkey is a
specie of horse, and when a mare is put to a donkey, the pro-
geny is a mule, and the same may be said of the draught horse,
who is of a different specie to the blood, and when a draught
mare is put to a blood horse, the result is seldom satisfactory.
Their progeny is neither one thing or the other, although it
may be very useful and all that, still there is something lack-
ing ; this kind of animal is not alwavs the quietest and kindest
in the world, and often gives considerable trouble in breaking.
If a mare bred thus is again put to a blood horse, the
result may be better, probably taking more after the sire, and
be cleaner bred, and may be improved again by purer blood
until the animal produced is almost a pure blood, with just
enough draught to give it plenty of strength, and enable it to
carry weight. Wh know horses bred on these lines make splen-
did hunters, and have great power of endurance, and are nearly
always good jumpers. A. great many people, however, make a
mistake in thinking that they can breed horses of this descrip-
tion, that is, try to breed roadster stock from a roadster stal-
lion or mare. Horses bred as described above between
blood and draught horses are in these States generally called
roadsters. They can be produced in many parts powerful,
active, compact and beautiful animals, and I have known
dozens of breeders, who really should have known better, pur-
218
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


chase these horses at high prices on purpose to breed such.
There is not one horse in a thousand bred thus that will
get anything like himself, no matter what mare he gets
to him, nor yet a mare that will breed a horse like her-
self. Not being pure bred, the animal’s progeny will
run generally towards the ancestors of the sire, and if both sire
and dam are roadster breed the result cannot be depended upon,
and, although they may both be handsome animals, and really
good, the chances are that their progeny will be nothing better
than a mongrel. Here neither of the parents are pure, and
nature is at a loss what to do, and the result is often a poor,
miserable, puny weed; at other times it is a crock of a thing,
with ill-made legs, big head, which neither of the parents have,
and as much unlike either of them as it is possible to be. This
is the case not with horses alone, but with all animals that are
not pure-bred—they constantly either degenerate or improve,
according to the superior quality and blood or otherwise of the
sire. Thus, if a roadster breed mare of superior beauty and
quality is put to a real fine, upstanding, thoroughbred horse,
the result will be a better beast than the dam, and not quite as
good as the sire ; but if she is put to a horse that is not thorough-
bred, or a half-draught, the result will be a brute not worth own-
ing. Horses bred like the latter are sure to have coarse, ugly
heads, goose rump, roach back, ewe neck, and are altogether
undesirable animals. Such breeding is a thousand times worse
than in-breeding, as in the former the horses got are ugly,
clumsy, and ungainly, and therefore unsaleable, whereas, in the
latter, they do not lose much in appearance, although they do
in brain. If we must have anything fairly good of a mixture,
one part at least must be pure—it would never do to have all
alloy. Therefore, to breed a fairly good horse, have one parent
at least pure and as superior as possible, and, of the two, it is
preferable to have the sire the superior. If you must have
draught blood in the stock, have it in the mare, and not in the
sire. Upstanding horses cannot be produced from thorough-
bred mares by a badly-bred sire, let him be ever so handsome,


as the mares will not be large and roomy enough. Although
I would feel very much inclined to have the blood on the mt
temal side, where draught is at all necessary, I know it cannot
be carried out with good and sure results. We must have blood
on top, as the progeny will always favour the sire. Therefore,
to breed upstanding horses, have the mares bigger than the
horse, selecting active mares, as handsome as possible, with,
above all things, pretty heads—choose mares that are perfect
where the sires are deficient. If the horse is slack at the loins,
select a mare with a strong, short back; or if the mare is Sxiort
in the neck, put her to a horse that is uncommonly well made in
that part ; and if a mare is bad under the knee, curby hocked,
or has a big head, or some such fault, never put her to a sire
that is deficient or faulty in the same parts. To breed horses
properly, and get good, honest, saleable animals, these matters
must be properly attended to.
To breed draught horses have pure draught stock, and the
same with blood, and to breed half-breds always have the sire
a real thoroughbred. Do not try to breed roadsters from road-
sters. You will not succeed, as they are not a distinct breed.
They are not pure, and consequently will not breed the like.
My choice for a roadster would be an upstanding thoroughbred,
but to breed the class of animal usually called a roadster in this
country put a pretty draught, mare to a handsome, upstanding
thoroughbred, then put the progeny again to a thorough-
bred, and we will have a nice, active spring-cart
horse or buggy horse, if not too big. Again, put the progeny
to a blood horse, and we have a roadster—a good all-round horss,
and a fairly good hunter; but I would never think of keeping
such for a stallion. It will thus be noted a roadster is not
easily bred, if we start with pure blood on both sides, and if a
man has a pure blood horse and a pure draught mare, it will
take him just sixteen years to breed a roadster, fit to break in—
that is, have him three years old, always providing that the
progeny is a female, and he must change his sire three times.
This, however, is the only way to breed them.


INDIAN ARMY REMOUNTS.
This is the most difficult class of horse to produce
that we can possibly go in for, on account of the Indian
Government requiring horses of a “ special class ’ and of
fairly uniform size. The remount horse must be whole-
coloured (bay, brown or black); a grey or light chestnut will
not be accepted. It must be from 14Jr to hands in height,
fairly well bred, well built, pretty head and neck, good, stout,
clean bone, measuring not less than eight inches round the smal-
lest part under the knee, well set up on its fetlocks, with good.
P. 90. —“The Swell,” a first-class Indian remount horse.
sound black hoofs, and without a blemish of any kind upon him
anywhere; in fact, the sort of horse that the owner has no need
to take to India to dispose of. He can sell him anywhere.
“The Swell” (p. 96), a well-known show horse, and a winner of
many prizes in this class, is of the exact type required. It is
extremely difficult to produce a number of horses, and have them
all, or even a fair majority of them, anything like this one. I
may mention that he is by “Confidence” (imp.) from a thorough-
bred mare. “Confidence” is, I understand, what is known in.


England as the Cleveland bay, and he is by far the best of his
sort that has ever been imported to Australia. If a man had a
few sires like this one, and mares to suit them so well as “The
,Swell’s” dam, of course a fortune would be assured; but if it
were tried, I am afraid it would oe found that the desired result
would only happen in individual cases, and that twenty horses
as good-looking as “Confidence” might be imported without a
single one of them getting stock anything like this.
To produce the class of horse required, great care and judg-
ment must be exercised in selecting the whole of the stud, and
a good deal will always depend upon the class of country chosen
to rear them on. For choice, I should much prefer limestone
country in an arid climate; and the far north of South Austra-
lia is the most suitable that I know of in any of the States,
where I am certain the industry could be carried on with
profitable results.
SEX.
In regard to sex, a breeder who only breeds a few horses,
and breeds them well, can, by exercising a little care, have his
choice of sex, from whatever mare he likes by observ.ng the
following rules :
Should a filly foal be desired, immediately the mare comes
in season, put her toi the horse, and, after being served, take her
away again until the 9th (ninth) day. If she comes in season
again repeat as before. When the mare is stinted in this man-
ner the result will be a filly. If, however, a colt is wanted, have
the mare served on the last day she is in season. If she is
stinted thirteen days after she has a foal, the result will undoubt-
edly be a colt, if on the ninth day a filly. This rule is well worth
practising, and is applicable to all living animals, and may be
used with satisfactory and profitable results in the case of “high-
class” stock of all kinds, such as horses, cattle, sheep, and camels
of a particular and valuable breed. All female animals con-
ceiving on the last day they are in season will undoubtedly bear
a male, and those conceiving on the first or second day they
are in season will bear a female. This is natural to all animal


creation, and we never knew Nature to make much of a mistake
yet, unless when she produced a mule, and, as Josh Billings said
“she was so ashamed of herself in that case, that when she
found it out she came to a dead stop.” Hence the reason
mules will not breed.
TO PICK OE SELECT.
To pick or select a good horse a purchaser should proceed
in the following manner :
First see that he is of suitable height, with a clear-cut
head, tapering down to the mouth, which should be small and
neat, with thin lips and wide nostrils. The eyes should be
large, lustrous, and rather prominent, with that part usually
white in the eye of a peculiar mixture of white and brown, show-
ing plainly. These eyes have a kindly and pleasant appearance,
and always denote good temper and understanding on the part
of the animal. When the ©ye is dark-looking, with the lids
closing, and showing the bare pupils only, it is a sure sign that
the horse is more or less savage. The head, between the eyes,
should be wide and perfectly flat. When this part of the head
or face is prominent, and bulges out, or with a natural enlarge-
ment on the face just under the eyes, the horse will be a rough
customer to handle, and prove very stubborn ; so avoid this, and
be sure to see that there is a good distance between the ears—not
less than four (4) inches, while six (6) inches would not be too
much; and if this part of the head is fairly prominent it is all
the better. The ears should be a fair size, with little hair on the
inside, nicely shaped, and sharp-pointed. Avoid horses with
small ears, with curly hair on the inside, as they are never good-
tempered, subject to shy, and very much afraid of sounds. The
jaws at the jowl, or gullet, should be wide, and perfectly open,
free of all flesh or fat, and a man should be able to place his
closed fist in between them. The throat should be quite clear
of fat, and a regular cavity should appear, the wind-pipe showing
clearly, as if only hanging to the neck by the skin. A horse that
has a full throat, with the part between the wind-pipe and the
223
TO PICK OR SELECT.


neck, where it meets the head, filled with flesh and fat, the jowl
also thin and narrow, cannot have good wind, and no matter
how perfect in other respects, cannot travel long distances at a
fast pace. The neck should be long and lean, but muscular,
tapering nicely from the shoulders to the head. A horse can-
not have too long a neck. The shoulders should he deep, and
nicely sloping, with high withers. To test whether the shoulder
is sufficiently sloping, take a plumb-line, and hold it with the
finger and thumb, touching the very point of the shoulder,
while the horse is standing in his natural position. The weight
P. 97. —Testing a horse with plumb-line.
on the line should just touch the outer front edge of the hoof.
When this is the case the horse stands properly on the forelegs,
and if the animal stands thus the shoulders must be properly
sloping (see p. 97). The withers should be high and thin, slop-
ing gently to the back, which should be short and strong, par-
ticularly over the loins. Great care should be taken to select a
horse that is strong and nicely made in the coupling, for if the-
animal is strong in this particular part, he is almost sure to be-
224
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


well proportioned in every respect. The ribs should come well
out from the backbone, like a half-hoop, giving the horse a round
back. See that the animal you select is broad across the hips,
long between the top of the rump and the tail, sloping quarters,
and broad in the breach. The points of the hips, which should
not bei too prominent, should be within three inches at least of
the small ribs; and on some really good and well-made animals
the ribs can be seen on each side when you are standing behind
them. The tail should be carried straight down and out, with
not too much hair, which should be fine and straight. The
gaskins and thighs should be strong and muscular, and, if any-
thing, be slightly bowed, or, rather, the plentiful supply of
muscle on the outside of the thigh and on the inside, behind
the purse, will give the leg a bowed appearance, but of course
the bone is straight. The hocks should be hard and clean, and
the buyer should have the horse moved forward, standing be-
hind, to enable him to see that he is not “cow-hocked.” The
horse should put his leg down perfectly straight when walking,
but in a “cow-hocked” horse the hoeks will turn in towards each
other. Stand at right-angle with the horse’s hind legs, and see
that he is not “curby hocked.” Look carefully to the side of the
hock, and see that he is not developing a spavin. The leg, from
the point of the hip to the hock, should be long, and come down
with a curving sweep. The shin should be short and flat, with
the sinews showing clearly, especially if a blood horse. The fet-
lock should also be of the flat kind. Horses with round fetlocks
do not stand so much work. The hair on the fetlocks, if any,
should be fine, the pasterns clean. See that there is no sign of
ringbone developing over the hoofs. The hoofs should be
small and black, clear of sand cracks, and should be concave,
and not too flat; but this may be altered by careful shoeing,
and the form of the hoof depends on the nature of the country
the animal is bred on. Horses bred on stony, tableland country
always have good hoofs. See that the horse has a good stomach,
and is not what is called a “flanker,” and after a few days in the
stable will look like a half-starved greyhound. The stomach
should be large enough to make the barrel look nice and even,
225
TO PICK OR SELECT.


and when the horse is saddled the girth and saddle should keep
in their proper place without either breastplate or crupper.
Stand at a right-angle with the shoulder, and see that his fore-
legs are properly under him, as I have directed in re the
plumb-line. Stand in front of the horse, and see that
he has a nice chest. See that the muscle of the arm is
large and developed. See that the knees are clean, and
that he is not “ calf-kneed.” (Calf-kneed means a tendency
to stand in at the knees.) A properly and well-made horse
should stand perfectly straight on his legs when the observer
stands right in front of him, and the hind and forelegs should
be level with each other, all the way up and down. The
cannon bone should be strong and short. See that just
under the knee is a proportionate size with the other por-
tion of the shin. See that the shin is clear of splints, and that
the fetlocks are clean and free of wind-galls. The back part of
the leg should be clean, clear, and hard, showing the sinews
clearly, especially near the fetlocks. The front pasterns should
be fairly short and strong, and the horse should not stand back
on them, but be fairly upright. Some very fast horses are very
much back on the fore fetlock joints, but it is a grave fault,
nevertheless, and a. horse that stands thus is sure to be apt
to stumble. See that there is no sign of a ringbone, and the
hoofs, like those of the hind feet, are void of sand cracks and are
black and also smooth. See the horse trotting, and note how he
throws his legs. When trotting fast, a horse should bend the
forelegs from the knee straight out and even, allowing them to
fall easily to the ground. The hind legs should come up well
apart, as if one were coming on each side of the forelegs. He
should throw his legs straight and even when cantering also,
and not lift them too high.
When you find the animal’s height is satisfactory, and to
your liking, proceed to determine if the horse is built in pro-
portion. Take a tape measure and find the exact distance from
where the neck joins the withers, along the back, over the rump,
and down to the centre of the round bone A to B (p. 98).


This should be the horse’s height, Cto D. Now measure from
the point of the shoulder to the centre of the point of the hip,
Eto F. He should be the same distance from the point of the
hip to the lowest portion of the hock joint, Fto G. Measure
from the crown of the head, between the ears, to where the
withers sink into the back, Hto J. It should be exactly half
the distance from that point to the centre of the coupling, J to
K. and from the point of the shoulder to the stifle, when tire
P. 98.—How a horse should be measured.
animal is standing in a natural position, should be the same as
the former, Eto L and Hto J. If these measurements will not
correspond, the horse is not well made, and should be rejected.
If, however, the measurements are satisfactory, go on with your
examination.
TO TEACH HORSES TRICKS,
It is an easy matter to teach a horse tricks. Any horse can
be taught—even an old crock 12 or 15 years old. It only re-
quires patience on the part of the operator, to teach him any


thing out of the common that he chooses, such as lying down-
on being told, carrying a handkerchief in the mouth, bow,
shake hands, get up on a form, <fec.
To- teach a horse to lie down when told, tie the near fore-
leg up and then raise the off leg, as directed in catching with
tackling; have the horse in a soft place where he cannot hurt
himself; get him down on hisi side and pat and caress him ; let
him up and put him down half-a-dozen times or so; always re-
peating the words “lie down,” as he goes down, and “get up” as
you want him up, and in a little time he will lie down when you
lift the near foreleg, and tell him to “lie down,” and after a
little, he will go- down when you tell him, even when you are-
away from him. By putting a leather band round his neck and a
leather strap from the one shoulder round the hind legs above
the hocks, and back to thei collar on the other shoulder, and
buckling tightly when the horse is down, you can teach him to
“sit up” when you tell him. Tell him to “get up,” and. as he
cannot get the hind legs from under him, he will be in a sit-
ting position, when you should pat and encourage him, and in
a short time you can take the straps off and he will “sit up, ’
“lie down,” etc., when told.
To teach him to get up on a form or box, get a strong, low
platform, and get.his forelegs, on it onei at a time; encourage-
him by speaking and caressing him ; endeavour to lead him up,
and the chances are he will get up, if not, lift one hind leg and
put it up, and then he will raise the other. Have the bench or
platform large enough for him to stand comfortably on at
first, and when he will go up on being told the size may be
gradually reduced until he can scarcely get all his feet on and
then half a cask is a good thing to show on.
To teach him to answer a question by shaking his head,
as a negative or nodding in the affirmative, take a long, sharp
whip, stand in front of the horse and flick him lightly on the
neck with it, saying, “Do- you like this whip?” at the same time
raise your left hand—the flicking will cause the horse to shake
his head immediately you raise the whip, or your hand, and


'he will soon do it, when he hears the words, “ Do you,” so
that you can stand away from him and say, “ Do you like
this whip?” “Do you like work?” “Do you like boys?” “Do
you like blacks ? ” etc., and he will shake his head each time,
much to the amusement of the onlookers. To teach him
to nod, take a nin, and as you ask the question prick him
lightly on the breast; this will cause him to bow his head
to dislodge the fly he thinks is annoying him. As you
touch him with the pin pat the ground with your foot, and
he will get so used to the sign that as soon as you move the
foot he will nod; so as you ask the above questions, and he
continues shaking his head, you can suddenly say, “ Do you like
oats ?” moving your foot, and he will answer in the affirmative
by a graceful nod. Any words may be used, as “like lollies,” or
“like hay,” etc.
To teach him to carry or take a handkerchief off any part
of his body, hold a handkerchief in the hand with a pin in it—
•the best plan will be to place the hand over the horse’s back,
■and as you say, “take it off,” prick him with the pin. Almost
any horse will take it in his mouth immediately, and if let go
will very likely carry it round. After a few lessons, place the
handkerchief on any part of the body, and when you say, take
it off,” he will do so. To teach him to waltz, put a roller on
him, and rein his head up, as in my method of mouthing; flick
him with a whip to make him go round; rein him up short or
long and send him round fast or slow to suit the time of the
music, telling him when you start him to “waltz.” Start and
•stop him often, patting and caressing him each time'; be kind to
him, when he does well, and firm, but not cruel at any time.
In this manner numerous curious tricks can be taught, and al-
though I do not profess to* be a teacher of trick or circus horses,
some of those I teach will be found very nice and amusing, and
•a few of them very often enhance the value of a horse that
•would not otherwise bring much.
229
TO TEACH HORSES TRICKS.


It is very useful to teach a horse to lie down, as you can, if
y.u have an hour to spare, rest your horse more by making him
lie down if you have a long journey to go.
TO TEST WHETHER A HORSE HAS PACE.
The following is a sure and useful method. Educate the
horse to gallop, that is, school him until he knows what it is to
try. There is no better schooling in the world for a horse that
you think may turn out a “Cup winner,” than to put him in
P. 99. —Determining what height a colt will grow to.
safe hands mustering sheep or cattle. At this game he will soon
learn to be handy and tractable, and when you have him handy
and will race when asked, measure out a course one (1) furlong
(220 yards) on level ground, where the going is good; care
should be taken that the distance is exact. The winning post
should be so fixed with a post opposite, that you can make
sure of the time. Put any weight on your horse, say from 9to
12 stone; have him started as in a race; you may run another


horse with him to encourage him. Let the starter drop the flag
at the exact instant that the horse’s nose reaches the starting
post, and you are standing at the winning post. Take the time
from the fall of the flag ; be sure you have a, careful and faith-
ful trial, and if your horse covers: the distance in 12| seconds,
or under, train him ; he has the pace, condition will do: the
rest. If it takes him 13 to 13J seconds to cover the distance,
my advice is “don’t.”
This is a. perfectly sure and inexpensive method of finding
out whether your horse will ever be able to win a race or not.
P. 100.—Second measurement.
The animal requires no preparation —one night out of the pad-
dock is sufficient.
How to decide what height a colt will grow to by measur-
ing when the animal is 18 months to 2 years old:—■
When the animal is standing upright, measure from the
centre of the fore fetlocks to the centre of the elbow joint, or
to the middle of the crease that runs from the point of the
elbow joint round the arm. This length will be the exact
231
TO TEST WHETHER A HORSE HAS PACE.


measurement of the horse’s shoulder from the crease mentioned
to the withers, when he is full grown, so that if you place the
two-year-old measurement from the crease or elbow up (see ps.
99 and 100), you can tell to' an eighth of an inch what neight the
horse will be 5 years hence.
As the horse’s leg never grows in length after he is 18
months or 2 years old, this method can be profitably adopted
in selecting and matching pairs.
USEFUL HINTS TO KNOW.
Never feed a horse immediately after coming off a long
journey • let him be washed down and stand for an hour and
then feed him.
When going on a long journey never hurry the horse either
the first or last mile.
Never give a horse a big feed just before starting on a
journey, better reserve until his work is done., then it will do.
him more good.
Never give a horse more than a couple of mouthfuls of
water if the animal is hot, or you may founder him.
Never let a horse know he is beaten, even if he is, and you
will always have a good one.
Never handle a horse for work too young. Anything under
4 years is not old enough, and has not enough sense, and his
joints are not set.
Never own a horse if you have to use a crupper to keep
the saddle from going over his head; if his withers are not high
enough to keep the saddle in its proper place, without a crup-
per, he requires curing, and the cure is to sell him.
When a horse pulls back and tries to get away from you,
never hang on to the lead like grim death and fancy you can
hold him by main strength; hold him enough to keep his head
towards you and follow him back ; he cannot get away from you,
and it will soon completely cure him.


When mounting never catch the cantle of the saddle, but
the pommel with the right hand.
When schooling a horse to jump, never jump him more
than twice at one lesson, and never try at a fence he is able to
run round.
When riding at fences never change your mind once you
have picked your “panel.”
Never interfere with the horse’s, mouth and fancy you can
lift him over a fence, because you cannot.
Never use the whip when within a few strides of a fence,
because you may over hurry the horse and thus bring both of
you to grief.
Never reject a horse because someone said he was a “jib.
There is no such thing as a horse that cannot be cured of what-
ever vice he has.
Never hit a horse over the head with anything.
Never thrash a horse because he will not go; that will
never cure him, but make him worse.
When a colt is wild and appears to be “savage,” overcome
his timidity by gentleness and kindness, and do. not bully him.
When catching a colt or timid horse, approach him
gently. Never run at him with your arms extended as though
you were running blindfolded into a woodheap.
Never reject a horse (especially if you require him for hard
work) because he is 10 or 15 years old, for if the animal is still
sound, he is preferable to a three-year-old, and will do four
times the work. A horse is not too old at 15 by any means,
and is still good for 8 years.
Never think that a two-year-old colt is easier handled and
managed than a horse that is 10 years old, because he is not;
he has not the sense and power of understanding that the old
animal has, who will never forget what you once teach him.
Never catch a wild colt under the “old style” of the long
pole and headrope, because the very idea of the method is cruel


and barbarous, and unworthy of our 1 present age, and of any-
one who pretends to love the noble steed.
Never lose your temper with a horse, no matter what he
does. If you find your temper giving way, sit on the fence
until you are cool again.
Never whip your horse because be stumbles or trips, that
will make him worse, and it is not his fault, but a failing.
Never chastise a horse for shying; it is a. failing that he
cannot help; and whipping will only cause him to bolt and
make him more dangerous than he already is.
Never reject a horse because he appears to be wild; there is
no l such thing as a wild and vicious horse. Timid is the right
word for it, and as soon as you have overcome his timidity by
real kindness as directed in this book, he will be thoroughly
quiet.
Never subject your colt to any treatment before first endea-
vouring to teach him what you are going to do.
No horse will buck if you let him know you are going to
mount him, and then get on his back while he is moving round.
Never let your horse “jig-jog” and fancy he cannot walk.
If he doesi not walk teach him to do so, because it is a disgrace
for you to ride a horse that has not learned good paces, and it
si ows your want of ability and skill as a horseman to have such
a brute any length of time, and not teach him to avoid such a
breach of good manners.
Never lacerate your horse’s mouth when you are educating
him to steer by the' reins, because you will spoil him. Mouth-
ing does not constitute making the colt’s mouth tender as many
people suppose, and every hors© steers by being educated to
do so, and can be taught to' guide by the use of a halter without
a bit as well as with one. “Educating to guide” is the proper
term, and not “ mouthing.”
When you get a colt that does buck, and makes himself
so notorious by his viciousness that you are unable to
manage him, do not call him an outlaw and say he


is unmanageable. Rather put the want of concord be-
tween you down to your own stupidity and want of proper
knowledge of the management of the animal. Always
remember that man was created and endowed with the power
to learn to master all living animals, therefore, if your
horse is vicious, it is because you do not know how to
properly manage him ; give him to someone that does know,
and you will find that there is no viciousness in his composition;
he is only “timid,” and as. he has a greater amount of stamina
and grit than most, horses, he fights in self defence. Overcome
his timidity by kindness, but, at the same time, with a persis-
tency that compels the animal to understand that you really
mean to be “boss of the ranch.” He will, under such treatment
as this, become one of your most docile and best hacks.
Never think your horse cannot jump, because any horse-
can be taught to jump.
Never think your horse is too old to learn, because he is
never too old to learn anything, nor a man either.
When you are approaching a horse, if he does not see you,
let him know you are coming by saying “I am coming, Bob, Tom
or Bess,” or whatever name it is called.
Never say “whoa” to a horse unless he is moving and you
want him to stop.
When you are harnessing or saddling a horse, and he is
standing still, never say “whey” or “whoa,” as it means “stand,’”
and if you use the. word when he is not moving, he will not
know what you mean when he moves and you do want him to
stand.
Never burn lampus out of your horse’s mouth, as the prac-
tice is both cruel and barbarous. Lampus was put there by Na-
ture and she was never known to make much of a mistake. If
you feed him as he should be fed, he will never have lampus, as
they are caused by want of food, and stable-fed horses are not
subject to them.
235
USEFUL HINTS TO KNOW.


Never fancy you can improve on Nature’s handiwork, and
“dock” your foals’ tails, thinking they are better with only a
stump instead of a tail. If they were better thus, they would
be bom so. Nature does not provide any unnecessary append-
ages, and the practice of docking is cruel in the extreme, giving
excruciating pain in the operation; besides, it must have a
weakening effect on the animal’s back, as not only are all the
sinews cut off at the ends, but the spinal cord, which has direct
communication with, the brain may in some cases be severed.
Never think that Nature provided horses to be afterwards
"gelded.” The operation of gelding certainly does not improve
the animal either in appearance or in power, and for real “grit”
and genuine pluck in a horse, commend me to a, stallion that
has never been at the stud. Note that all fast times have in-
variably been done by stallions, and the majority of first-class
race-horses that win much money and many stakes are stallions.
Do you remember how often the Melbourne Cup has been won
by either a “gelding” or a “mare” ? The Arabs do not geld their
horses, and they have the hardiest horses in the world.
Never use mares as first-class carriage horses. They may
look nice and behave well for months, even for years, and then,
when suffering from an ailment natural to their sex, may sud-
denly start to “kick” or “jib” just when you require them most,
. and not only make an exhibition of you and themselves, but also
break your valuable trap and harness.
Never think that mares can be thoroughly depended upon,
for they cannot, although they can be made very useful both in
saddle and harness.
Never think that a horse is an intelligent animal before
you teach him ; he is not. If he were the intelligent beast that
many suppose him to be, he would (being eight times as strong
as a man) never suffer himself to be used cruelly, as he often is.
Never make the mistake l of taking a, horse’s natural instinct
•for intelligence.
236
AUSTRALIAN HORSES FROM PADDOCK TO PARK.


Never think, when a colt is first yarded, that he knows any-
thing but fear.
Never forget that a horse has five senses the same as human
beings—viz. : smelling, tasting, seeing, hearing and feeling.
When educating the horse, do not forget to educate each
and every one of his senses separately.
THE END.
237
USEFUL HINTS TO KNOW.


WILLIAM BROOKS & CO., Lto»
Phintcr ••
PUBLUHtR* AND STATION (Ml
SYDNEY AND BRISBANE*
