

AUSTRALIA
MUST BE
HEARD
Revised Edition.
BY W. H. GOCHER,
Author of
“The Ten Shilling Note.”
An appeal to
HIS HOLINESS
POPE BENEDICT XV.,
to bring about an armistice
and arrange an Internation-
al Conference to consider
proposals from Australia on
behalf of the Democracies
of Nations








/ Dedicated to my friend
or. W. maionep, u?.p.,
(Member for Melbourne, House of Representatives
in the Commonwealth of Australia).
Democrat, Humanitarian,
People’s Friend.


An appeal to
HIS HOLINESS
POPE BENEDICT XV.,
to bring about an armistice
and arrange an Internation-
al Conference to consider
proposals from Australia on
behalf of the Democracies
of Nations
27 Albert Street, Newtown,
Beloved and Most Holy Father,- Syd “?’’ A " straliil '
on the All humillty may 1 re( mest you to deign to listen to me
a I mome ?-‘ 80 aflectin " world to-dav, voicing
do, the dem ocratic sentiment of Australia who are an
pealing for an International Conference, which cannot be
brought about only by an Armistice, to be arranged by your
Sou’thZ h Cr t,on ,0 “
His Grace the Most Rev, Dr. Mannix, Archbishop of Mel
bourne, recently stated that it is not England’s war nor Ger
many’s war, nor Australia’s war-hut it is a war'
Such contentmns necessitate considerable explanation Tt
da v Uir Tk 1 * hat “ The Citizen -” 'he London labour
daiU which was then in existence, declared at the commence-
ment of hostilities that it was a diplomatist’s war which evi
dently was the case since the English Government did ill in
its power to stop the war, eve., after it had started ; il.en
the Kaiser admitted that he been deceived by the Diplomats
tTe o then 0 Ap many IMy WOuld remain to
the then Triple Alliance, and many other reasonings
Four years prior to the war the diplomats nearly brought


those great nations into hostilities.
The financiers became exasperated at Germany’s attitude
respecting her currency, which virtually gave silver legal ten-
der to the Fatherland, thereby ignoring Rothschild and his
financiers’ advice pertaining to the limitation of the coinage
of that metal; hence this last decade of years Germany has
become exceedingly prosperous, and the financiers then saw
how their world’s monetary power would wane.
The infamy of the gold standard has, indeed, become
manifest. The money-changers have violated the laws of
God and economics by deraonitizing silver. In other words they
have forced the water up hill, but Germany has broken the rese-
voir, and the liquid, finding its level, is bringing devastation
and ruin to the world. Therefore, Archbishop Mannix’s conten-
tion is correct, that it is a capitalistic war. His Holiness
Leo XIII,, who is well known as the working man’s Pope,
speaking on this subject, stated that “After our many
scourges, the reign of money has arrived, which is threat-
ening to subdue Christianity;” and his secretary, the famous
Cardinal Rampolli, who graced the courts of Europe by his
attractiveness, and would have been your predecessor only
pasiApc ‘sjibjju oucpumu tit >joo; oq jsojopu <>qj joj
all nations to form economic leagues (to study this question).
After mature reflection I think it would come with better
grace from your Holiness to intercede with the nations than for
the nations to appeal to you to bring about such International
Conference. I recently stated: —
“To whom shall the Democracies appeal to bring about an
armistice?
To the monarchies who are fighting for their very exist-
ence? No, To the financiers who are becoming richer as
The war continues? No. To the diplomats who are but
the mouthpieces of the financiers? No. Then to whom shall
we appeal? To the trades unionists of Australia, asking them
to invoke the aid of their brother unionists of the United
States, through the medium of the Hon. William Jennings
Bryan and Mr. Henry Ford, to immediately demand that the
voice of the Democrats of the belligerent nations shall send
in a request to His Holiness the Pope, to bring about an
armistice to consider proposals for a definite peace on Demo-
cratic terms herein suggested for the first time.
Even Lloyd George must have felt the psychological in-
fluence of the Democratic Movement when he said recently,
“Be audacious in your demands for reform,” and as no man
at present stands out so prominently on the canvas for Peace
as William Jennings Bryan, to what better authority can we
appeal to state the case, and considering that the proposals
in the foregoing programme practically emanate from that


gentleman, notwithstanding the cheap sneers of the Press on
the occasion of Mr. Henry Ford’s mission from the United
States as an emissary of Peace?”
AUSTRALIAN PROPOSALS.
(1) fhe map oi Europe be not altered, with the exception
of the restoration of Alsace Lorraine to the French, in lieu of
the return to Germany of her colonies—an exception in this
case being Samoa, which be retained by England and America
conjointly as a Naval Base.
(2) The restoration of Poland, with a system of Republi-
can Government.
(3) Mesopotamia to become a dominion of the British
Empire; and small nations which have been ruthlessly dealt
with, especially Belgium, must be indemnified, or for the
great nations to help them financially.
THE REFORM PLATFORM.
The following platform shall constitute the demands of
Australia before the settlement of hostilities:—
(1) Restoration of the moneys of the world previous to
1873, and reform of the banking systems of the nations.
(2) Tolerance of religious liberty in all lands.
(3) Universal adult suffrage.
(4) Oneness of common interests among the nations.
(5) Racial demarcation,
(6) Limitation of monarchy,
(7) The abolition of the House of Lords.
(8) International Annual Democratic Convention.
(3) Self-government for all Dominions.
Although the above may seem ambitious, when a brief
explanation is given on each proposal it will be recognised
that the simplicity of these set forth entitle Australia to prom-
ulgate such a platform.
On the first proposal the currency question is dealt with
fully elsewhere, but the reform of the banking systems re-
quires some explanation.
Lombard Street, Loudon, is the centre of the financial
•operations of the world, and has five branch centres in Europe
and America. These branches are the Stock Exchanges, or
Bourses, of \ ienna, Berlin, Paris, Petrograd (late St, Peters-
burg) and Wall Street (New York).
The mode of operating is simple, but the sinister influence
is gigantic. Take, for instance, the movement of gold, and
its effects. If gold is demanded to be moved from Vienna
to New York, the bankers of Austria comply with the “re-
quest” from Lombard Street, whilst the agents of Lombard
Street in Wall Street “get busy.” There is “a wave of
depression” in America at the time, because of the scarcity
of money, and they buy up all the scrip in railway bonds.


thej can lay their hands on. As soon as prosperity is
restored in America, at the cost of depression in Austria, they
unload, and thus fortunes are made in one centre at the* same
time as a “wave of depression” takes place in another through
the cessation of reproductive works, and all the other condi-
tions contingent on shortage of money.
And so the evil thing goes on at the bidding of Lom-
bard Street. “Waves of depression” precede restored pros-
perity until a fresh order is issued for the removal of gold
to some other centre of operations—and the agents of Lom-
bard Street always know when to buy and when to sell.
We advise the nations at the Convention to adopt the
system of the Commonwealth Bank of Australia, which is
not only a State bank of deposit, but is one with the Govern-
ment guarantee of issue.
As an illustration of the methods of the present Lombard
Street controlled banking system, let us take a case in point.
A high financial journalistic authority in Sydney received an
inquiry from a leading London financial editor asking him
sub rosa the following question: How is it that Australian
banks pay such big dividends to their shareholders?” The
reply was this: A squatter received an overdraft of £2O 000
from his bank; foreclosure took effect. To-day the property
is worth £240,000, and the squatter is only manager of the
run! Had this transaction been with the Commonwealth
Bank such would not have happened, as only the money ad-
vanced and other just debts would have been acquired by the
bank.
flow this state of. affairs comes about arises from the
fact that Australia was in a state of money prosperity at
the time, and the local bank managers looked about for
sound ’ investments. The squatter is advised that his cre-
dit is good, and that he should improve his run. The over-
diaffi is granted in all good faith by the local bank manager
who does not know what is coming afterwards. Suddenly
Lombard Street issues instructions to the directors of the
banks to tighten their purse strings, as so much gold is re-
quired for investment elsewhere. The bank managers are
advised to put the screw on, and foreclosure follows.
Religious Toleration.—lt is imperative for all nations to
enact laws pertaining to this plank, because we can ho longer
stand the unbridled barbarism of the Moslem hordes. The
enormous toll of Christian and Jewish sacrifices, for which
these people are responsible, is sufficient argument for a
united mandate from the Democracies of the nations ‘ No
longer can we submit to the Press fanning the flame of bigotry
lor political reasons, at the instigation of the lords who own


Ireland, and “whose hands are dripping with the fats of the
Reformation” (Lloyd George’s speech.) The persecution
•even of the infidel or agnostic must cease, for the octracis-
ing of any man who holds different opinions on religious ques-
tions is opposed to the teachings of Christ. And who are we
that we should arrogate to ourselves the functions of God,
.and become judges of our fellow-man, for is not faith a gift
from the Most High?
Adult Universal Suffrage.—The great success which
woman suffrage has attained in these Southern lands is be-
yond all expectations; and as it is an accepted fact that the
poor have large families whilst the rich have small, the num-
erical strength of the Democratic vote is an important factor.
Further, as a proof of the value of the woman vote, we
can proudly refer to the great improvement in the personnel
of our own Parliaments since the granting of woman suffrage.
It has been said that —
“She who rocks the cradle rules the world,”
and she certainly should have a voice in such ruling.
“Oneness of Common Interests.”—This is a quotation from
William Jennings Bryan, and is applicable to this clause. The
viciousness of the post-war schemes are so cruel, and so
opposed/ to all considerations of Christianity, that enmity
must give way to amity, and racial hatred must cease.
A freetrade amongst the nations will be necessary to
consolidate this oneness, and will make it possible for stan-
dard systems, such as eight hours a day for labor and equal
remuneration (according to the purchasing power of the
moneys of each country, as compared to Australia), Early Clos-
ing Acts, etc.
Too long have the poor of England been dragged in the
mire of servitude; indeed, the emancipation of labor through-
out Europe must become manifest, hence the “oneness of com-
mon interests/’ Besides, the freedom of the seas must be
guaranteed!
Abolition of the Lords. —The House of Lords has always
refused to recognise the demands of Democracy, as reference
to the long list of measures slaughtered by them will show,
as, for instance, that most important national ease, Home
Rule for Ireland, which they refused to sanction when W. E.
Gladstone had the voice of England behind him, and at that
time Gladstone threatened to abolish them. Therefore, let
the Lords make their obeisance before the Senators of Eng-
land’s choice!
Limitation of Monarchy.—The power of Imperial veto,
which is now held by monarchs, must go. The power of the


p h, * t ll1 ® r ® spect 18 not as great as that of the
President of the Imited States of America, who holds that
power but seldom uses it. Further, the enormous sums of
momj spent in the upkeep of Imperial establishments lias no
justification in Democratic communities.
Racial Demarcation.—This very important matter should
be considered as much in the interest of the coloured races
as tor the consummation of a white Australia or white Ame-
rica. it is not a question of inferiority on the coloured side
or superiority on ours, because the natural dislike of the
white tor tlie black is equally as strong as the hatred of the
black tor us.
It will be for the Annual Democratic Convention in years
to come to inspire the Asiatic to cry aloud, “Asia for the
Asians Ethiopia for the Ethiopians,” as we decided that Aus-
lalia be for the Australians. The Almighty has made the
black and the brown, as well as the white, therefore they
must be considered. *
Annual Democratic Convention.—We have alluded else-
where to a new school of diplomats, which is synonymous with
the Annual International Democratic Convention, the object
mlnch is not only to keep the world’s Peace, but to see that
the nations progress, politically and economically.
The result of these deliberations must be published in
-all languages, and the Governments of all countries must per-
mit the distribution of these reports in the unaltered full
text so that the privately-owned Press cannot mislead the
people by distorting the truth.
Self-Government of Dominions.—The principles of self-
government should be extended to the dominions of
the British Empire. Take the case of Ireland, which
has been divided against itself for a century, not be-
cause the people of Ulster are as bigoted as we are led to
believe, because they return a Catholic member to the House
of C ommons, but because the alleged statesmen and the plu-
tocratic press determine that they shall be divided, for what
sinister purpose is best known to themselves. The seething
unrest which has prevailed in India during recent years is
proverbial, and as India has been described as “the Diadem
of the British Crown,” this ought not to be. It is trace-
able to the closing of the mints in that country. These 'un-
fortunate, subdued people are reduced to living on the bar-
est necessities, because they have no say in their own Govern-
“®nt; fR $ \ he H U l k of the 300 I™ 111011 people who con-
stitute the Diadem have no say in anything concerning
their own welfare. No wonder India is described as “The
Gem” of the Empire.


the basis for an international conference.
The following proposals from N.S.W. Political La kour
League have been endorsed by the Interstate C onference, held
in Perth, June 17th, 1918.
We submit that in, framing the terms of a lasting peace
the following principles should be observed:—
1. The right of small nations (including Ireland) to poli-
tical independence. . . , , _
2. That tlie European countries occupied by invading
armies during the present war be immediately evacuated
3. That disputed provinces or territories shall choose tneir
own form of government, or shall he attached to such ad-
iacent countries as the majority of their inhabitants may by
plebiscite decide, on the democratic principle that all just
government must rest on the consent of the governed. Ihe
free exercise of such choice under conditions of political
equality to be secured by the appointment of an Internationa
commission of control. , . , .
Note. —This course (with such safeguards for the rights-
of minorities in communities of mixed races as the Conference
might devise) would secure a final settlement of the rival
claims for Alsace-Lorraine, Poland, Transylvania, and ot icr
ftotigs similarly circumstanced*
territories s * disbandmcnt of the combatant armies
and the merchant navies employed in the war, they shall e
utilised by 4m organised system of volunteer service for' res-
toring the devastated territories at the expense of the invad-
ing Powers, which shall also compensate the widows anc
dependents of all non-combatants, including seamen, who have
lost their lives as a result of hostilities.
5. That, where an amicable arrangement cannot be reached
by the Peace Conference in regard to captured colonies and
dependencies, such territories shall be placed provisionally
under international*control. _
6. That the freedom of the seas be secured on the lines
laid down by President Wilson of America in his speech at
Washington, in May, 1916, when he advocated:— A univer-
sal association of the nations to maintain the inviolate se-
curity of the highway of the seas for the common and unhin-
dered use of all the nations of the world.
7. The abolition of trading in armaments and the prohi-
bition of the private manufacture theieof. .
8. The abolition of conscription in all countries simul-
-9 The control of foreign relations under a democratic
system, based upon publicity, in lieu of the present methods
of secret diplomacy.


10. That the existin'; machinery for international Arbitra-
tion be expanded to embrace a concert of Europe, ultimately
merging into a world-wide Parliament, as advocated by Pre-
sident Wilson, in a recent message to the American Congress,
Therefore, if your Holiness is successful in arranging an
Armistice, 1 trust you will call upon the Hon. William Jen-
nings Bryan, of the United States, to be the speaker of the
International Conference.
May the day of grace be near to hand, and the world
lulled to peace; then shall the gentle winds sigh their sad
requiems through the pines of Oregon, the cedars of Lebanon,
and the myalls of our Western Plains for the brave dead,
friend and foe; and may I ask your Holiness when the war is
over to bless our dear boys “the bravest things God ever
made,” and pray that they may safely and speedily return
to their native shores, where the wattle blooms “and w'afts
its sweetness on the desert air, on this, our Southern Land;
and may I ask you to bless our Democratic leaders who have
done so much in bringing about Legislative enactments, to
alcviate the conditions of the poor.
The poor, who are the favourites of the One whom you
represent on earth, Christ, the Son of the Living God.
Filially and devotedly yo irs,
W. H. GOCHER,
President of the Australian Currency League.
A PLEA FOR PEACE, 1915.
An Open Letter to Hon. William Jennings Bi 'o, of the
United States Congress, Urging Him to Call a inference
of All the Christian Powers for the Purpc: o iroposmg
Peace.
To the Hon. William Jennings Bryan,
“The Commoner,” Lincoln, Nebraska, U.G.A
My Dear Sir,—The pendulum of war r denotes
the excessive duration of hostilities, and unless .s war is
stopped now it may go on for many years.
It is to be hoped that His Holiness Pope adict X\.
will, in conjunction with your worthy Presiden r. Wood-
row Wilson, bring about the first armistice, so t) he repre-
sentatives of the belligerent Governments may c r respect-
ing peace. „ .
It is sadly to be feared that such conference U become
abortive, since the papers are already ridiculin : aace pro-
posals of an honourable nature. Nevertheless, <ch efforts
will lead to the path of tranquility.
It is to be hoped that you will arrange ma ;rs for the
second conference by calling together the rats of the


said nations, and explain to them the cause of the war.
LET DEMOS SPEAK
in solemn conclave, and the world will hear.
In all probability you will arrange the third conference
to take place shortly afterwards. Then the peace propaganda
will have done its work, because the peoples, in spite of
the press, will have appealed to their individual Govern-
ments to stoj) this infamy.
So that no nation will become humiliated, it seems so rea-
sonable to invite them to stop hostilities and turn their bat-
talions upon those who were the cause of this great war. It
is impossible to allow such terrible wickedness to go un-
punished, and the greatest punishment than can be inflicted
upon them is to see that their monetary power wanes, and
this can be done only by returning to the peoples of nations
the capital of which their fathers were robbed.
Let the greatest monometalic faddist understand that in
1878 the world’s international money was £1,600,000,000, and
the population was 1,400,000,000. To-day, notwithstanding
the great output of gold, there is only £1,000,000,000; and the
increase of the population of the world from that period is
to-day 1,750,000,000. This war has already cost more than
three times the amount of money that is in the world. There-
fore it is proved that the curse of credit has become more
and more pronounced.
A few years ago Germany violated some sort of a secret
silver treaty which she had entered into with Rothschild,
and that was only to
COIN SO MUCH SILVER
and not to issue notes of a small denomination. The states-
men of Germany considered such a treaty immoral, and had,
therefore, a perfect right to ignore the same. Indeed, Lloyd
George threatened to do likewise, as “Britain was having too
much Rothschild.” Germany then began in earnest to coin
millions upon millions of silver; and notes of small denomina-
tion wete issued accordingly. This so enraged the money-
changers that they sought to bring her into war.
You will remember, Sir, that three years ago we drew
your attention to the fact that the money-changers had tried
to bring about a financial crisis in Germany, This, again,
was a failure, because of the great expansion of Germany’s
internal money. In the same address we stated, “The recent
wars were caused by the diplomats, who were the advance
agents of the money-changers.”
Before the declaration of the Boer War, Hyndman, the
editor of “Justice,” had his scouts out watching the doings
of Joe Chamberlain. They observed him one day jumping


into a handsom cab. He was driven to Rothschild’s Palace
in Piccadilly, and after an hour’s conversation with the Prince
of Money-changers, he drove to the nearest telegraph office,
AND DECLARED WAR
upon the South African farmers.
You will remember that England met with many re-
verses, which caused great jubilation in Germany; and that
violent Anglophobia articles appeared in the press of that
country. Joe Chamberlain silenced the press of Germany by
saying: “Germany seems to have forgotten the conditions
upon which we entered this war.” The conditions alluded
to were arranged before a shot was fired into the convent in
Samoa by the English and American men-o’-war —the Ger-
man man-o’-war, of course, would not fire, as Samoa had to
be ceded to Germany, also the south-west coast of Africa.
America’s portion of the grab of territory was Cuba and the
Philippines; and England’s share was the Orange Free State
and the Transvaal,
Before this war is stopped, the world must know the
truth. Your courage and ability will accomplish this task.
Who brought about the crime of ages in 1873?—Rothschild.
Who caused the Brussels International Monetary Con-
ference, in 1893, to become abortive, so that the banks closed
their doors in Europe, America, and Australia? —Rothschild.
Who caused the Indian famine, by advising Gladstone to
close the Indian mints, causing millions of Indians to die of
starvation ? —Rothschild,
Who brought about the American-Spanish w r ar? —Roths-
child in conjunction with Wall Street.
Who thrice defeated you for the Presidency of the United
States? —.Rothschild, in conjunction with Wall Street.
Who was the cause of the Boer War? —-Rothschild.
Who was the cause of the present war? —Rothschild and
his group of financiers —which every member in the British
Cabinet knows by this time.
BonarJjaw recently stated that “No one man, nor group
of men, vffil be the cause of another war after this war.” (He
should have said, “Nor group of financiers.”) Lord Rosebery
said, after this war started, that “If any great organiser was
the cause of this war
THE CURSES OF POSTERITY
would follow him to the end.” Shortly after our High
Commissioner, Sir George Reid, received his appointment in
London he stated that “ It was a terrible thing to allow one
individual the power to cause the whole of Europe to be at
war.”
The diplomatists receive their instructions from the Go


vernments or from some other source. On this occasion the
English Government had nothing to do with the doings of
the diplomats so far as hoodwinking the Kaiser to declare war
is concerned. No one could have been more in earnest than
Sir Edward Grey, who represented the English Government.
He did his utmost to stay the hand of Germany even after
the war started. Then who did dictate to the diplomatists?
Rothschild, and his group of financiers.
The lying diplomats told the Kaiser that if he declared
war, England would not fight, because she was on the verge
of civil war; that her dominions were ready to look after
themselves; that India was seething with discord; that Italy
would remain faithful to the Triple Alliance; and that Bei-
gium would look upon the German army in a surly mood tra-
versing her territory, but would not fight.
Hence it was that the Kaiser saw Europe trembling, as
his mighty host advanced. But, alas! from the very start,
he found that his plans had to be altered. He then told his
diplomatists who were doing duty abroad, that “they must
consider their avocation closed, and find another way of
making a living.” Shortly afterwards, he burst out in an
awful rage, and called them “a lot of wasters and lubbers,
and that the English diplomats had knocked spots off them.”
The diplomats seem to have carte blanche with the press;
whether the proprietaries are subsidised by
THE SECRET SERVICE FUNDS
is best known to themselves.
Never since the Caxtonian period has the press been so
vicious as of recent years; it stands with unblushing audacity
in ever widening the gulf between Labor and Capital, en-
deavouring to mar the progress of Democracy. It is the
mouthpiece of our banks, which are controlled by the money-
changers in Lombard and Wall Streets.
The press stands to-day like a monument upon the pedes-
tal of sophistry dedicated to the Living Lie. It is, moreover,
the great medium for war; but give the womeif’of all the
nations a vote, and there will be but little war.
Imperialism entwines the laurels around the poets’ brows,
so long as in their songs they sing the glories of war.
Australia still intends to lead the world on in progres-
sive legislation, and to fight for the maintenance of our liber-
ties, which we have fought so hard for. We will never
endure an Imperialism which is synonymous with Militarism.
Our lads are licked into shape in a few weeks, and become
the best soldiers in the world. Oh, what an object lesson
to those countries which are cursed with standing armies.
Australia’s vitality is traceable to the Eight Hours a Day


for Labour and fair remuneration for all.
Above all, the modern democrats must pay attention to
the doing of the Stock Jobbers, Financiers and Bankers. Too
long have the Rothschilds been the
SCOURGE OF CHRISTENDOM.
No wonder Leo XIII. exclaimed: ‘ ‘ AFTER OUR MANY
SCOURGES THE REIGN OF MONEY HAS ARRIVED
WHICH IS THREATENING TO SUBDUE CHRISTIANITY. ’ *
The Omnipresent Christ saw this our day. He, who was
sold by Judas, bribed with thirty pieces of silver, saw how
the money-changers would rob the peoples of half of the
fruits of their labour by causing silver to be no longer money,
and then cause Christian nations to be at war, which would
hopelessly involve them financially. He became infuriated,
and flogged them from the Temple of the Living God, and by
so doing set us an example to follow Him. Not that Lom-
bard and Wall streets are the temples of the Living God—they
are the temples of Demas—the Devil. Humanity is the
Temple of the Living God, and we must flog the money-mon-
gers out from amongst us. This will mean the triumph of
Christianity and the downfall of the anarchy of finance.
Secret societies of discontent will disappear, and poverty will
vanish before an era of prosperity. Art, science, and lit-
erature will receive an impetus hitherto unknown, whilst com-
merce and industry will make progressive strides such as were
never known along the course of ages.
Although the hour is dark, tell the poor belligerents to
be of good heart, because the darkest hour precedes the early
dawn —the dawn of a New Democracy.
In conclusion, we trust that the bust of Dr. Woodrow
Wilson will stand out in bas-relief in the niche of Fame, even
above those of his famous predecessors, in the Presidency, so
that, generations, yet unborn, will be eternally reminded of
him, and say that 'he was a humanitarian and statesman, who
dipped further and deeper into the future and looked beyond
the United States into the wider sphere of world-politics,
and did so much to
TERMINATE THIS GREAT WAR.
The advocacy of the continuance of this awful infamy is
the blackest sin, crying to the eternal heavens for vengeance.
Remember, Sir, that this is a man’s war, and'man must
stop it. Blessings from the Most High will be showered upon
your efforts to bring about universal peace, permanent pros-
perity, and permanent political, social, and industrial pro-
gress" which will beget the oneness of common interest among
the civilised nations.


therefore,, we trust and pray that the day may be near
at hand when the joy-bells of the world will ring in the
Yours etc CC ° n LaFth and Goodwill towards all Mankind.—
President of the Aus. Currency League H ' GOCHER ’
Sydney, Sept. 22, 15.
Presidential Address
used in the following address 1 further-
e“hanr
a&xusttfc 4 - '*™as ss
In furtherance of the contentions on this subieet thp.
«r^ 10nS , eS f tablished *® collect evidence tor the rLt!
Instead* of tldf* 1 t( !, tally l ".'" ,re th,J main influence.
ir I 1 ° f the evidence of master butchers and
a Why do< -f ™‘ «>e Commisdon call the
real authors oh this monopoly before its tribunal?
p • h ct Commissioners obtain from the Government
nntmg Office a pamphlet which contains the names of the
and cattle ’ ”™* d an d controlled bv The Aus.
Lfi fw? kS and fl,iailclal concerns, and compare* the names
d , y ot tke S( l uatters (?) who send stock to the Homebush
* es. Then compel these gentlemen to give evidence before
the Commission on these points: Firstly, are they the owT
ers of the property? Secondly, are they instructed or in
fluenced by the mortgagee, bank, or concern as to the num-
niarket? lead ° f Cattle ° F she6p they shall send to the
Then it will be the duty of the Commission to ascertain
port S ° U AiTTtfter mfjUenC?S Tf purchasin £ ()f stock for ex-
• Allc b after comparing the two sources, which is really
hhe w,u know "- h0 is *■»
I say Lombard-street!
In the concluding portion of this address reference is
made to a New School of Diplomats.
This democratic proposal is dealt with fully elsewhere.


American Presidency
AUSTRALIAN CURRENCY LEAGUE SENDS GREETINGS
TO DR. WOODROW WILSON.
MONEY-CHANGERS KING OF ALL TRUSTS.
The President of the Australian Currency League has
forwarded the following address of greeting to Dr. Woodrow
Wilson, the selected Democratic candidate for the Presidency
of the United States: —
“City Hotel, King Street, Sydney,
Australia, 8/16/12.
“To the Hon. Wm, Jennings Bryan.
“My Dear Sir, —The members of the Currency League of
Australia have requested me to ask you to convey greetings
to the democrats of the United States, and to extend in a
special manner our hearty good wishes to Dr. Woodrow Wil-
son for his success in the Presidential campaign. With
extraordinary interest Australia will watch your doings dur-
ing the elections, because our political aspirations are so
much akin, having one common enemy—Wall and Lombard
Streets. It is with painful reflections we view the past his-
tory of Wall-street in your regard. . How that the Equitable
Life and other financial institutions poured millions of pounds
into Wall-street to bring about your defeat for the Presi-
dency will long be remembered.
“Well did Abraham Lincoln view with alarm the ad-
vent of the Stock Exchange. No one knows better than
yourself how combines, trusts, etc., flourish through the in-
fluence of Wall-street; but how remarkable the affinity is to
that of Lombard-street, which controls the London Stock
Exchange, and such exchange controls the banks of Austalia,
which are a disgrace to civilisation, and would not be tol-
erated in any other part of the world. It is lamentable to
see our squatters falling easy victims to their avariciousness.
They (the banks) now own about 50 per cent, of the stations
in Australia. They send our best mutton and beef to foreign
markets, leaving us the rejects, for which we have to pay ex-
traordinarily high prices. In this land of plenty avc are in
want. A Royal Commission is being concluded in this State of
New South Wales. We understand the verdict is—‘No trusts
prevail.’ Well, avc will have to go to the neologians for
another term. HoAvever, the inquiry an* i 11 have beneficial re-
sults, since avc take it that they Avill continue to supply existing
contracts, and be of better behaviour in the future, for Avhich
we ought to be truly thankful.


“But this kind of business has been going on for
The late Premier of New Zealand (the Hon. R. J. Seddon,
I .C.) threatened to build State steamboats, and thereby regu-
late the output to foreign markets, if they did not stop their
chicanery. Such threat was efficacious, at least for a while.
‘ ‘ It has been stated that Armour lost millions in trying to
form a Pork Trust, This was before the advent of cornering-
gold, but when the money-changers did corner that metal, they
were able to corner all commodities. Hence the expansion of
currency will bring about prosperity and honest competition,
which will be detrimental to trusts. To-day the money-
changers are cornering the gold of the civilised world to send
to Asia. It is to be hoped that much more of it will not go via
the bottom of the sea. Their sinister object is to contract the
currency still further. They have advised the banks of Aus-
tralia to keep a tight hold on the gold, and ship the same to
where they please. They have taken from Australia more than
half of our gold reserves. We are proud to inform you, how-
ever, that we have a Federal Labor Government that is smiting
these banks hip and thigh. Already they have taken away
their privilege of issue, and introduced a Commonwealth State
Bank. They have, moreover, brought about a reform in the
currency by introducing a ten-shilling note; the benefits that
will accrue from same will be enormous.
“But while we applaud the democrats of Australia, wo
have to deplore the attitude of the English people for not
taking an interest in this momentous question of currency.
Their apathy is appalling; such lymphaticness is but erecting
a monument which will be duly dedicated to decadence.
Since Germany (and all praise to the great Fatherland) has
increased its silver reserves to a hundred millions of pounds,
and has issued a vote to be redeemed by a hundred marks and
notes of smaller denomination, such note has become im-
mensely popular, having two Dreadnoughts in full steam artis-
tically depicted thereon. (This was written in 1912—W.H.G.).
England, on the other hand is taxed, according to Lord Rob-
erts, to her uttermost farthing. Prince Katsura, of Japan, is.
following Germany’s example, and by so doing intends to
spend millions of pounds in railways to open up Korea, and
£40,000,000 upon her navy.
“Such examples recently made Lloyd George state that
‘ other nations refused to be dictated to by the big financial in-
stitutions, and if they did not take care Britain would also fall
in line; we were having too much Rothschild.'
“What Rothschild is to Lombard-street, so is Pierpont
Morgan to Wall-street; and how they work together is worthy
of reflection. Pour years ago Australia staggered on the verge


of a financial crisis, caused by the financial swindles worked
in Wall-street at the end of 190/. You will remember, Sir that
England sent £26,000,000 over to America, hence England’s
shortness of money so affected Australian prices that our wool
and all produce went down to zero.
It is well not to forget Pierpont Morgan’s attitude on that
occasion. He was cheered by the Stock Exchangers for going
to their rescue by lending them money at fabulous interest.
He well knew at the time that .Rothschild would send the
£26,000,000 alluded to, hence the rise in scrip. How much he
made out of the transaction is best known to himself. No won-
der he is worth £100,000,000.
In conclusion, sir, may we direct your attention to the
recent strain of relations between England and Germany? The
diplomats endeavoured to bring about discord between those
great Powers. Haying failed they did their utmost to bring
about a financial crisis in Germany, such attempt being also a
miserable failure. On account of the great expanse of her in-
ternal currency, Berlin was able to lend privately at three
per cent., while in London such loans were four per cent. The
recent wars go to prove that the diplomats are nothing but
advance agents for the money-changers.
We trust the day is near when America will join hands
with Australia in the formation of a new school of diplomats,
inviting the co-operation of the trades unionists of the world •
having among its objects the exposition of the wickedness of
the Stock Exchanges— to study the banking and monetary sys-
tems of nations, and last, but not least, never to tolerate war
without the sanction of both schools of diplomats.
“We feel sure that the democrats of the land of great
achievements will listen not to the voice of the cuckoo, but
vote solidly for their selected choice, in the person of Dr.
Woodrow Wilson.—Yours very truly,
W. H. GOCHER,
“President of the Australian Currency League.”
“P.S.—You will have earned a well-deserved holiday af-
ter this campaign, therefore we trust that you will take your
contemplated trip to Australia.—W.H.G.”
Democratising the University
One of the most commendable acts of the Holman Labor
Government, before the lamentable Labor split, was a bill for
the above purpose. On that account, I had the pleasure of
being invited to deliver a lecture at the Sydney University on


“Currency and Banking,” which subject would never have
been permitted under tire old regime.
This Branch is under the control of Mr. Meredith Atkin-
son, M.A., who calls it his “Tutorial Class;” the object of
which is to stimulate democratic thought throughout Aus-
tralia.
I don’t wish to recapitulate' that lecture, as so many
points of the question are dealt with elsewhere. But there is
one thing I would like to refer to, and that is the prophecy
of Ernest Seyd, and the discussion which took place at Wash-
ington at the time, and which brought about the discovery
of what is known as
THE CRIME OF AGES.
The Americans accuse Rothschild of employing two Scotland
Yard detectives and teaching them brokerage—after which
they established themselves in business near the White House,
and were exceedingly affable to the politicians of the day!
They also say that he, Rothschild engaged one, Ernest Seyd,
a distinguished bullionist and banker, to sanction the bill
which had been so cleverly devised, with the object of closing
the mints against silver —thus robbing the world of £800,000.000
Mr, Alexander Del Mar thus describes the process
“In 1873, when people had forgotten all about coins, and
had relaxed their customary watchfulness concerning mint
laws, one little man who had determined in his own little mind,
from what motives I know not, that the long time monetary
laws of the union should be changed, proceeded to change them
by blotting out a word from the law.
“By surreptitiously omitting the word ‘dollar’ in the list
of coins the mint was authorised to coin upon the application
of the holders of bullion, it foully degraded and demoralised
the coin—the silver coin previously open to unlimited and
gratuitous coinage. In the following year this garbled mint
law was incorporated in the revised statistics of the United
States. It was still further garbled by surreptitiously degrad-
ing the legal tender function of the outstanding silver dollars
to five dollars in any one payhient. Its demonetisation was
thus completed. These acts were not those of the American
nation; they were not those of American statesmen. The people
had no knowledge of them; their rulers had no voice in them.
They were done by intrigue which I more than
fear had its origin on this side of the ocean (Europe). No
suspicion of what had been done, no discovery of the momen-
tous change that thus had been secretly and treacherously
effected, took place until 18713, when I made the discovery of
it myself. Having discovered the wrong. I took immediate
steps to set it right, and these steps resulted in an elaborate


presentation of the subject to the public, the formation of the
Monetary Commission, and eventually of the passing of the
‘Bland Act.’ ”
We reprint Seyd s prophecy, also the debate which took
place in the House of Representatives, United States,
THE PROPHECY.
“It is a great mistake to suppose that the adoption of
the gold valuation by other States besides England will be
beneficial. It will only lead to the destruction of the mone-
tary equilibrium hitherto existing, and cause a fall in the value
of silver, from which England’s trade and the Indian silver val-
uation will suffer more than all other interests, grievous as
the general decline of prosperity all over the world will be. The
strong doctrinism existing in England as regards the gold
valuation is so blind that when the time of depression sets in
there will be this special feature; the economical authorities
of the country will refuse to listen to the cause here fore-
shadowed; every possible attempt will be made to prove that
the decline of commerce is due to all sorts of causes and irre-
concilable matters. The workman and his strikes will be the
first convenient target; then speculation and over-trading will
have their turn. Later on, when foreign nations, unable to
pay in silver, have recourse to protection, when a number of
secondary causes develop themselves, then many would-be
wise men will have the opportunity of pointing to specific
reason which, in their eyes, account for the falling off in every
branch of trade. Many other allegations will be made totally
irrelevant to the real issue, but satisfactory to the moralising
tendency of financial writers. The' great danger of the time
will then be that, among all this confusion and strife, Eng-
land’s supremacy in commerce and manufactures may go back-
wards to an extent which redressed when the real
cause becomes recognised and the natural remedy is applied.”
THE DEBATE.
A discussion took place in the House of Representatives,
United States, Friday, August 18, 1893, between Mr. McCleary,
a bimetallist, and Mr. Sibley, a silverite, as follows:
Mr. McCleary (of Minnesota): Will the gentleman permit
a question?
Mr. Sibley; Yes, sir,
Mr. McCleary: I beg the gentleman’s pardon for inter-
rupting at this point; but 1 could not sooner get the oppor-
tunity. The gentleman has been speaking of the prophecy. A
short time ago he sent a prophecy to the desk to be read. Will
he please name the gentleman whose prophecy he had read by
the clerk?


Mr. Sibley: That was the prophet of the devil; this is the
prophet of Almighty God (Laughter and applause.) That pro-
phet belonged to your side.
Mr. McCleary: I did not ask the gentleman to characterise
the prohphet; I asked him to name him.
Mr. Sibley: Ernest Seyd.
Mr. McCleary; Is that the same gentleman you accuse of
having come over here in 1873 as an emissary to “down”
silver? Mr. Sibley: I did not utter such accusation. I will
append to my remarks what distinguished gentlemen have said
—how, sent here as a friend of silver, that man betrayed it—
how he came into this House, went with your committees,
and showed his dexter hand all through. That will be incor-
porated in my remarks. 1 will try to make it plain to that
gentleman.
Mr. McCleary; My question is, Is this the same gentleman
whom you accuse of that villainy?
Mr. Sibley: No doubt about it, sir.
Mr. McCleary: Then I ask that the clerk read that pro-
phecy again.
Mr, Sibley; Everybody lias heard it read. If it is the same
quotation—
Mr. McCleary: The same.
Then why have it read twice?
Mr. McCleary; If you object to it then 1 ask gentlemen to
read it in the quiet of their closets; and ask themselves whether
the man who used that language could have done the thing
they say he did.
Mr. Sibley; Yes, sir; I have seen men sell out during the
last two months. (Laughter.)# From the time he uttered that
prophecy two years have elapsed. I have known men to change
their minds in twenty minutes. Wise men, it is said, change
their minds often; fools never,
Mr. McCleary: What the gentleman says cannot be true
of a man who died in the cause of silver, as Ernest Seyd did.
Mr. Pence; When the gentleman speaks of having “dyed”
does he mean he changed bis colors? (Laughter.)
Mr. McCleary: The gentleman from Pennsylvania had
sufficient regard for Mr. Seyd to quote him as an authority in
behalf of silver. Simple justice demands that his memory
should be treated with fairness. Both before and after 1873
Ernest Seyd was recognised as one of the champions of silver
in Eurpoe. A man whose opinion was eagerly sought by the


Silver Cimmission in 1876, and of whom Mr. Horton, the bi-
metallist, said, speaking of Mr, Seyd’s death, at the Inter-
national Monetary Conference: ‘lt was the profound interest
which he took in the Conference which brought him here and
hastened his death.’-’ This unfounded charge against the mem-
ory of a man now unable to defend himself —and I believe the
gentleman from Pennsylvania would not willingly do anyone
an injustice—has nothing to do with the merits of this discus-
sion, even if it were true; and I am glad that the gentleman
from Pennsylvania has selected so good a quotation to show
the real position of Mr. Seyd.
Mr. Sibley: Thank you.
Mr. Sibley took his arguments from the “Congressional
Globe.”
According to the “Congressional Globe,” page 2034, April 9,
1872, the following appears:—
“The Bill was prepared two years ago, and has been sub-
mitted to careful and deliberate examination. It has the
approval of nearly all the mint experts of the country, and the
sanction of the Secretary of the Treasury. Ernest Seyd, of
London, a distinguished writer and hullionist, is now here, and
has given great attention to the subject of mints-and coinage,
and, after examining the first draft of the Bill, made various
sensible suggestions, which the Committee accepted and em-
bodied in the Bill. While the Committee take no credit to
themselves for the original preparation of this Bill, they have
no hesitation in unanimously recommending its passage as
necessary and expedient.”
The following was the first plank of the Democratic Con-
vention held in Chicago;
That there must be no compromise of this question. All
legislation demonetising silver and restricting the coinage
thereof must be immediately and completely repealed by an
Act restoring the coinage of the country to the conditions
established by the founders of the nation, and which con-
tinued for over eighty years without complaint from any part
of our people. Every hour’s delay in undoing the corrupt
work of Ernest Seyd and our foreign enemies is an insult to
the dignity of the American people, a crushing burden on their
prosperity, and an attempt to place us again under the yoke
from which George Washington and his compatriots rescued
us.
Notwithstanding this, the writer is of opinion that Ernest
Seyd was impersonated, because he who would endeavour to
bring about such a crime, would not hesitate about the employ-
ment of impersonators!


AUSTRALIA MUST BE HEARD
The reception accorded to Part I. of “Australia Must Be
Heard,” at a time of political excitement, has suggested to me
the necessity of further elaborating the proposals to be con-
sidered at the coming Conference to be held in Western
Australia on the 17th of June hist.
The debate will unquestionably centre on the Peace pro-
posals which are now being put forth by the Australian Labor
Party for submission to the Democracies of the World.
During my recent to the Southern Capital, for the
purpose of interviewing the Mint Authorities, politicians, and
Trades Hall Leaders, enabled me to arrive at a concrete idea
of the attitude and thought of those sections of the community;
and, to put it mildly, I was paralyzed with amazement at
their ignorance on matters pertaining to currency
STUPIDITY OR RASCALITY ON MINTING VALUES.
In the course of an after-dinner chat at the Federal Par-
liament House, with Dr. W. Maloney, M.P., the simple matter of
metal values cropped up. Dr. Maloney mentioned, that he
had information from the Deputy-Master of the Mint that the
cost of minting one ounce of silver was (5/6) five shillings and
sixpence face value.
This was indeed an eye-opener, as I pointed out, .by ex-
plaining the bimetallic ratio between gold and silver.
Whereupon a communication was immediately sent to the
Mint for verification of the statement. On the following day
a courteous reply was received at Parliament House, stating
that silver mintage cost 5/6 per ounce-face value.
I immediately called upon the Mint authorities and minu-
tely went into details on the subject of ratio, and other currency
matters.
A STARTLING STATEMENT.
The relative value between gold and silver, so I was in-
formed at the Mint was 14.1 of silver to one of gold; which 1
stated was a hideous mistake, showing that our gold standard
value was, 16 ounces of silver to one ounce of gold.
The Mint Officer. —“ How do you make that out?”
My reply was that 16 times the value of one ounce of
silver is equal to one ounce of gold—and the standard value
of gold per ounce is 4 sovereigns.
I was then subjected to a perfect tornado of decimals,
and, after a lengthy discussion, I told the Mint officer I was just
about as clear as when he started.
I asked him to kindly consider me a business man, and
tell me what amount of silver he would give me in change for
4 sovereigns.
He replied promptly—“ Eighty shillings.”


“Therefore,” I replied, “according to your face value
in minting, i.e., 5/6 per ounce for silver, you would lose 8/-
on the transaction—or 2/- in the sovereign.* He seemed sur-
prised. ,
The Mint official merely remarked: “We are a branch of
the Royal Mint, and we are working in complete accordance
with the British Act, which has been in vogue since 1817.”
THE “AGE” ASTONISHED.
I then went to the Financial Editor of the “Age” (Mel-
bourne), and told him what had transpired. He said the
Mint authorities were entirely wrong; there must be some
great mistake; and promised to investigate the matter him-
self.
That night Dr. Maloney brought the matter up in the
Federal House of Representatives, and
STRANGE TO SAY,
not a member of that Assembly seemed to understand the
currency question, for they laughed derisively at the Doctor.
The following day we again dined together, when he
told me of his humiliation by the laughter of his fellow-
parliamentarians, and said he preferred to have no more to say
on the question.
When I told him that the Editor of “The Age” thoroughly
agreed with me, he replied, “I don’t care about you nor jour
editors; if you like to speak about Worcester sauce or pickles,
I’ll gladly entertain a discussion. Anyhow,” he said, con-
tinuing, “come up to the Medical Hall, and we’ll weigh the
amount in silver and see if it’s accurate.”
We found then that 5/6 in silver weighed exactly one
ounce (troy). This so convinced the Doctor that he was
perfectly satisfied; and, further, conveys the fact that deep
study on currency is not necessary, because of its simplicity.
For twenty years I have been writing and agitating in
every possible manner for the restoration of the BiMetallie
System to the displacement of the present monstrous capitalis-
tic gold standard; which has proved itself to be the cause of
all the International troubles in the world to-day.
that although Germany was on a gold
standard, Zimmerman, the great financial adviser of the Ger-
man Government, ignored the words bi-metallism and mono-
metallism, and simply gave legal tender to silver up to five
pounds; and issued * 100-mark notes, and notes of smaller
denomination; thereby expanding her currency by a hundred
million pounds.
Instead of taxing her people for military purposes, she
acquired great prosperity through the said expansion of her
* Silver legal te-dor


currency. Thus, it will be readily seen that the source of
her power came through the hoarding of silver, with winch
she paid her labor good wages and developed home industries.
Exporting her goods manufactured on a silver basis to countries
which paid her back in gold values!
Thus it is demonstrated that Germany purchasing Broken
Hill silver at 1/10 per ounce, was enabled to secure increased
value to the extent of 150 per cent, (that being approximately
the difference between bullion silver and face value), and,
with this enormous wealth, Avas empowered to purchase almost
anything she wanted in her organization for the development
ofwworld-po r er ambition—even to the extent of buying up
scrap-heap engines in Australia and converting them into
engines of destruction against her sons.
With the foregoing statement, contrast the gold standard
system which has been our capitalistic horror for the past 45
years! And always remember that silver coinage is the
money of the masses.
It will be as well if I quote the famous utterance of that
illustrious American, Wm. Jennings Bryan, who was considered
in his Presidential campaigns a greater Democrat than Thomas
Jefferson, and Thomas Jefferson was once described as “the
greatest Democrat since the time of Christ.”
These are the famous words of Bryan: “No longer shall
you place upon the brow of Labor a Crown of Thorns; no longer
shall you Crucify humanity to the Cross of Gold.” And,
again, “The gold standard is so cruel and so wicked that it
far surpasses the infamy of all the standing armies of the
world. ’ ’
And although our papers at the present time make no
reference to William Jennings Bryan, it is well known to
those who folloAv the magazines that he is actively devoting his
great energy and ability to Peace Propaganda.
It must be conceded by the members of the Labor Con-
ference that the importance of the monetary system makes it
imperative that it should have a conspicuous place in the
forefront of the proposals to be considered by tile-democracies
of the Nations, on the 17th of June.
A great deal oj confusion has been created about the
understanding of the subject of Bi-metallism, owing to the
false impression that it required the study of a special litera-
ture, and a detailed knowledge of finance. This is wrong
as the simplicity of the foregoing illustrations slioavs.
Therefore, I maintain that if we stand by the full text of
our mvn Constitution, and make as much money as avc require
within our OAvn territory, we will be rich indeed, without
borrowing.
Take this simple truth to your heart—To-day you cash


an Australian £l-uote and receive silver. Then why not let
that Australian pound-note represent silver? This is not a
new proposition, for silver was money from time immemorial
until 1873, when the capitalistic gold bugs demonitized silver
in the United States, under what has since been known as the
“Crime of Ages,” fully referred to in Part I.
This will not do aw T ay with the sovereign, as we will still
require gold, because with silver it makes twice the amount
of money, hence the w r ord bi-metal.
The absurdity of that almost national fallacy that “the
English sovereign is worth its weight in gold,” is easily ex-
ploded when w r e remember that is the value of an
ounce of gold, according to the Mint authorities, and an ounce
is used in making four sovereigns.
My final advice to Australians is, never mind about read-
ing books on this side or that side on Bi-metallism or Mono-
metallism, but use your common sense. Do what Germany
did and is doing, whilst Japan and other nations are doing
the same.
The death-rattle of the gold standard is now heard through-
out the world, and we must not permit Australia to be dictated
to by any other nation.
Again, I remind you of Lloyd George’s words a few years
back, before this brutal war. He knew what Germany was
doing, when he stated: “Germany and other nations have
“refused to be dictated to by these financial institutions, and
“if they are not careful, Britain will do likewise, as we are
“having too much—Rothschild.”
THE UNSEEN POWER?
The concession to Australia by the Imperial authorities in
allowing us to frame a Constitution for our self-government,
has resulted in one of the finest efforts at constructive legis-
lation that ever emanated from the brain of man. But any
power behind the Throne that mars the progress of our pro-
sperity makes the Constitution null and void, and self-govern-
ment becomes at once a sham and a hollow mockery.
No country in the world has more liberal law r s pertaining
to Banking, Legal Tender, Issue, and Coinage than we have,
but immediately we proposed to mint our coinage, a storm of
protest arose from an Unseen Power, and England refused to
allow us to reopen our Mints—until pressure was brought to
bear by the Labor Government of that time. Andrew fisher
was Prime Minister.
We were then permitted to mint silver to the value of
£IOO,OOO per annum.
At that time Australia had in circulation about £2,000,000
in silver, which would take about 20 years to go out of
circulation before we could exhaust the old coin.


One year the Fisher Government asked for permission to
coin an extra £lOO,OOO in silver, on aeconnt of financial re-
quirements at the time. The English Government informed
the Commonwealth Government that gold preceded silver in
minting, but granted permission for an extra £50,000 —thus
meeting us half-way for that year only.
I was informed at that time by the Mint authorities that
the old coin could not be withdrawn at the rate prescribed, as
they were wanted for circulation. Hence the amount of worn-
out silver in our midst at the present time.
I have always found that audacity modestly applied be-
comes efficacious, as instance the following recent episode:—
On an occasion not long ago I was travelling on a North
Sydney tram, and tendered a sixpence to the conductor as
fare. He said the coin was “worn” and refused to it.
I refused to offer another. He gave me a card, and told me
to pay the manager in Blizabeth-street. At this office I was
informed that the conductors were instructed not to take
“worn” coin, as the banks refused to accept them from the
Department. I called on the manager of a city bank, and
told him that the Tramway people refused to accept the coin
from me. He said, “Well, if they won’t take it, why should I
accept it?” I said, “They say you won’t take it from them,
“so they won’t take it from me.” I then politely told him
that 1 would not tolerate the dislocation of trade, nor would
I permit the Australian poor to be robbed. He then referred
me to another bank official, and I subsequently saw the Traffic
Manager at the Tram Office again, to whom I said, “Please,
summon me, won’t you?” To which he replied, “We will
let events take their course.”
Two days later I received a communication from the
Railways Commissioners, demanding 2d. for fare, and a penny
for postage, with a warning “to be of better behaviour in
future. ’ ’
My reply to the Commissioners was as follows:
Gentlemen.—
lam in receipt of your letter. I refuse to tender any
other coin, and a Court of Justice must be approached.
Yours faithfully,
W/H. GOCHER,
President Australian Currency League.
This closed the incident, as far as the Railway people were
concerned; but a few days later a mandate from the Govern-
ment was published, announcing that any Coin of the Realm
with even the faintest semblance of a head showing must be
accepted as legal tender.


PROFITEERING.
I would like to submit the following facts on the above
question for the consideration of the Conference:—
Here is an extract from Part I. of “Australia Must Be
Heard ’ ’:
lii furtherance of the contentions on this subject, the
C ommissions established to collect evidence for the regulation
of prices of meat totally ignore the main influence.
Instead of taking the evidence of master butchers and
stock salesmen, etc., why does not the Commission call the real
authors of this monopoly before its tribunal?
Let the Commissioners obtain from the Government Print-
ing Office a pamphlet which contains the names of the stations,
sheep and cattle, owned and controlled by the Australian banks
and financial concerns, and compare the names daily of the
squatters (?) who send stock to the Homebush sales. Then
compel these gentlemen to give evidence before the Commission
on these points: Firstly, are they the owners of the property?
Secondly, are they instructed or influenced by the mortgagee
bank or concern as to the number of head of either cattle or
sheep they shall send to the market?
Then it will be the duty of the Commission to ascertain
the source which influences the purchasing of stock for export.
And, after comparing the two sources, which is really only one,
the public will know who is the master tyrant of the meat
market.
The Meat Commission was held at the Commonwealth
Bank, where I saw Mr. Brown (Secretary to the Commission).
I drew his attention to these statements; and the matter
of giving evidence. He said, “If you are game enough to
face five King’s Counsellors, go in.” I replied that “I trusted
to God they were game enough to face me.” I attended the
Commission for a while, and then saw Mr. Brown again. This
time he told me that Commissioner Mills was reading my
work concerning the matter, and added: “I think, Mr. Gocher,
advisable for you to bring a few of these squatters
before the Commission. We know who they are, but you brintr
them along.” &
To thi ; s astounding suggestion, I replied: “This matter is
in your jurisdiction, Mr. Brown. You have power to sum-
mon these people to attend, and compel them to give evi-
dence.” He promised to write and let me know if' my
evidence would be heard before the Commission.
I have not heard from him yet.
Now, as the Conference of the 17th of June will be the
most important of its kind yet held in Australia, and the eyes
of Australia will be focussed on the doings of the delegates,
we exhort them to deal with this grave question of Profiteering


which has developed to such cruel dimensions, whilst the toiling
masses are being robbed of their very few privileges.
A REMARKABLE UTTERANCE.
When I read the newspaper report of a speech delivered
by the Very Rev. Archbishop Dr. Mannix, in which he stated
that “this war is not England's war—nor is it Germany’s
war, nor Australia’s, but it is a capitalistic war,” I concluded
that he was a Bi-metallist, like his brilliant colleague, the Rev.
Dr. Walsh, who is the most convincing authority on the subject
in the Empire.
And, with this conviction, I took the liberty of interview-
ing Dr. Mannix in Melbourne. lie, however, displayed a
stubborn disinclination to be drawn into a discussion on the
subject, but when I remarked that the question of Bi-metallism
was not understood in Australia, he significantly said r
“Neither is the question understood in England.”
TRADES HALL VISIT.
That veil of suspicion which seems to envelope every
visitor to the Headquarters of the Labor Movement having
been carefully removed, I was received by the leaders with
politeness, especially when I told them 1 had travelled from
Sydney to talk to them as a man to men, on the all-important
matter of trying to stop this brutal war.
I was m ce than delighted when I heard that they had in
motion many similar proposals to those promulgated in the
first art of my work, “Australia Must Be Heard,” and had
been set down for consideration at the coming Conference in
Perth.
They thoroughly agreed with me that an Armistice is im-
perative before Peace, so that the voice of the Democracies
must be heard.
It is only fit and proper that such resolutions should come
from Australia, as the leader of all democratic thought and
action.
By a strange coincidence the proposals to be considered
by Labor number nine as they do in my published work.
It may be that the Conference will think it advisable to
knock out one of their proposals. For instance, Clause 3of
Labor’s Terms of Peace —and at the same time they may
eliminate Clause sin my proposals. However, I reprint the
two sets of suggestions, leaving the delegates to add or take
from these proposals:—
I.—TERMS OF PEACE.
1. The right of small nations to political independence.
2. That the European countries invaded during the present
war be immediately evacuated, and their future territorial


integrity guaranteed; provided that the ownership of dis-
puted territories shall be determined by a plebiscite of the
inhabitants, under the protection of an International Com-
mission. This course would dispose of Alsace-Lorraine,
Poland, and similar cases, on the democratic principle that
all just government must rest on the consent of the go-
verned.
3. That, prior to the process of disbandment of the com-
batant armies, the soldiers shall be voluntarily utilised,
under International control, for the restoration of the
devastated territories, at the expense of the invaders.
4. That, where an amicable arrangement cannot be reached
by the Peace Conference in regard to captured Colonies
and Dependencies, such territories shall be placed provi-
sionally under International control,
5. That the freedom of the seas be secured on the lines laid
down by President Wilson of America, in his speech at
Washington, in May, 1916, where he advocated: “A uni-
versal association of the nations, to maintain the inviolate-
security of the highway of the seas for the common and!
unhindered use of all nations of the world.”
6. The abolition of trading in armaments, and the prohibition
of the private manufacture thereof.
7. The abolition of conscription in all countries simul-
taneously.
8. The control of foreign relations under a democratic sys-
tem, based upon publicity, in lieu of the present methods
©f secret diplomacy.
9. That the existing machinery for International Arbitration
be expanded to embrace a Concert of Europe, ultimately
merging into a world-wide Parliament, as advocated by
President Wilson in a recent message to 'the American
Congress.
AUSTRALIAN PROPOSALS.
(1) The map of Europe be not altered, with the exception
of the restoration of Alsace-Lorraine to the French, in lieu of
the return to Germany of her colonies—an exception in this
case being Samoa, which be retained by England and America
conjointly as a Naval Base.
(2) The restoration of Poland, with a system of Republican
Government.
(3) Mesopotamia to become a dominion of the British
Empire; and small nations which have been ruthlessly dealt
with, especially Belgium, must be indemnified.
THE REFORM PLATFORM.
The following platform shall constitute the demands of
Australia before the settlement of hostilities: —


(1) Restoration of the moneys of the world previous to,
1873, and reform of the banking system of the nations.
(2) Tolerance of religious liberty in all lands.
(3) Universal adult suffrage.
(4) Oneness of common interests amongst the nations.
(5) Racial demarcation.
(6) Limitation of monarchy.
(7) The abolition of the House of Lords.
(8) International Annual Democratic Convention,
(9) Self-Government for all Dominions.
Although the above may seem ambitious, when a brief
explanation is given on each proposal it will be recognised that
the simplicity of these set forth entitle Australia to promulgate
such a platform.
From the attitude of the Leaders of the Australian Labor
Movement towards the American, Samuel Gompers, it appears
that he does not express the sentiments of United Labor in
the States of America. It may be necessary, therefore, to
get in touch with William Jennings Bryan, whose sympathy
with progress on all Democratic Reforms is of
unquestionable sincerity.
It may not be known that Mr. Bryan, as one of the most
pronounced Presbyterians in America, introduced for the first
time in the States, tolerance of Religious Liberty,
It is admitted on all hands that both sides in the war are
satisfied that a -continuance of the struggle is hopeless; it
would be well if the delegates left the first step towards’an
Armistice to W. Jennings Bryan, who could easily get in toitch
with the one important neutral Power, His Holiness the Pope
especially when it is remembered that His Holiness is eager
for a cessation/of the cruel hostilities; and who is eager to
accept suggestions from any quarter.
In conclusion, let us hope that the delegates will rise to
the magnitude of the work they have in hand, remembering
that not only is Australia waiting impatiently for their deci-
sions, but the eyes of the world are upon them.


W. H Gocher takes Henry
Labouchere, M.P., to task.
Let me elaborate ray proposals with the reproduction of a
controversy 1 had with that gilt-edged democrat, who was
once looked up to, the late Mr. Henry Labouchere, of London
“Truth.” The following was first published in 1904, and the
arguments then used are far more applicable to the existing
conditions of monetary matters than they were then.
Hence the first reform in our Peace proposals must be the
complete overthrow of the present currency system of the
nations.
And when we consider that the source of Mr. Labouchere s
inspiration was that eminently undisguised monopolistic insti-
tution, the Lombard-street “Gold Standard Defence Associa-
tion,” it will be easily- seen that the tyrants who control Stock
Exchanges and father international disturbances, were elated
with his attempt to mislead the democracy.
The gold standard is the charletan mistress of hunger,
and Mr. Labouchere was the highly paid advocate of that
world-controlling monster —The Gold Bug!
However, you must not lose sight of the fact that the rise
in prices of commodities to-day is the result of artificially in-
flated schemes of trust monopolists, pools and combines, which
fact does not conflict with the economic bases of my arguments.
Although Bimetallism increases prices economically, it
would not influence markets to the degree which obtains to-
day under the profiteering system. In other words, we would
have twice as much money with which to purchase the com-
modities we require at a lesser price. This, then, would des-
troy the pernicious and criminal system which permits the
trusts and combines to control the world’s food supplies, and
juggle with human happiness through Stock Exchanges. '
The time has arrived when the strife between capital and
labor must cease, as the benefits accruing through bimetallism
will be enjoyed by all. Those who are engaged in the busy hive
of industry will be benefited just as well as the drones who
bask in the suimv side thereof.


HENRY LABOUCHERE:.
1. Bimetallism is an attempt
to establish by legislative en-
actment a permanent ratio be-
tween gold and silver, although
their relative cost of produc-
tion most always* be fluctua-
ting. This ratio established,
everything would be indiffer-
ently paid in gold and silver,
both becoming legal tender.
Bimetallists propose that all
countries should agree to buy
for a fixed equivalent of gold
all silver offered, and all gold
offered for a fixed equivalent
of silver.
2. It is evident that so long
as countries chose to effect
those exchanges, the ratio
would be maintained, no mat-
ter what the fluctuations of the
relative value of the two met-
als might be. But the produc-
tion of one or other of the two
metals would soon cease, be-
cause in respect to one or the
other, the ratio would exceed
value. If it costs 5/- to bring
into existnce a new coat, arid
2/- to bring into existence a
new pair of boots, and a per-
son were to open a shop at
which a new coat were given
for two pair of boots, I should
go to this shop whenever 1
wanted a coat, with two pairs
of boots in my hands, and thus
provide myself with a coat for
4/- instead of 5/-; thus saving
one shilling. So it would be
with gold and silver.
3. Bimetallists do not agree
as to the exact ratio to be es-
tablished between the two met-
als, but all agree that gold is
W. H. QOCHER:
1. "Legislative enactment’ ’
should read legislative re-
enactment, because from all
time, until 1873 (England,
1816), gold and silver were
legal tender. In the years
1873-4 no less than half the
world s money was deliberately
robbed from the people. The
money was then £1,600,000,000,
but through the vile conspir-
acy of the "money-changers”
it was reduced to £800,000,000.
As far as the cost of production
fluctuating is concerned, the
laws of mineralogy have noth-
ing to do with the laws of cur-
rency. It costs more to ob-
tain the precious metals than
what they are worth. More for-
tunes are lost than won over
the gamble for the same. Bi-
metallists propose that all gold
and silver should be taken to
mint and coined free of charge
at the cost of the nation, i.e.,
take the bullion and receive the
specie.
2, International agreement
means that all nations will
agree upon a fixed ratio, pro-
bably at the rate of 16 to 1,
that is to say, that 16 ounces
of silver will be worth 1 ounce
of gold; then silver will be
worth its weight in silver as
gold is worth its weight in gold,
i.e., loz of silver would be worth
5/-, loz. of gold £4; 16 ounces
of silver at 5/- an ounce makes
80/ —£4, or 1 ounce of gold.
So how can the ratio exceed the
value? The metaphor is ab-
surd about a person opening a
shop "at which a new coat


HENRY LABOUCHERE:
to be exchanged for less silver
than its present market value.
It* wmuld, therefore, be gold
that wmuld cease to be pro-
duced. All people wmnting it
would take silver to one of the
exchange shops and demand
gold for it at the fixed ratio.
But what would happen? It
does not need to be a Solomon
to perceive. There would be a
run on the shops for gold, their
supply would soon be ex-
hausted, and so this precious
scheme would have to be given
up. Those only wmuld have
gained by it who, counting on
its breakdown, had exchanged
their silver for gold, and stored
up the latter. Such storing
could only be indulged in by
rich men, consequently the en-
tire gain would go into their
pockets.
4. Thug, even if all countries
were to come into the arrange-
ment, the scheme would not
work. But all countries would
not come into it, and those that
did not would be wise, for they
would get hold of all the gold
of those that jdid. If we were
so foolish as to become one of
the members of this interna-
tional partnership we should
lose more than any other coun-
try, for not only are we com-
paratively small silver pi*odu-
cers, but we have lent gold to
almost every other country;
and pleased indeed would they
be to pay us back in silver at a
ratio wdiich would not be the
equivalent for the gold they
have got from us.
W. H. GrOCHER:
would be given for two paira
of boots/ That is a question
of barter and not of currency.,
3. If silver is related to gold
and gold related to silver, why
should gold cease to be pro-
duced more than silver cease to
be produced ? If Mr. Labouchere
took a trip over to Paris would
he find the people taking sil-
ver to one of the exchange
shops and demanding gold for
it? Did he ever read of people
before 1873 amusing themselves,
by collecting a lot of gold to
hoard it up for curiosity?
People prefer putting their
gold and silver into the banks,
where it is safe, and earning
interest, in preference to run-
ning it about in a wheelbar-
row. I thoroughly agree with
my friend that “It does not
need to be a Solomon to per-
ceive “ the force of his argu-
ments, but, unfortunately, it
takes a Solomon to understand
the boomerang nature of his
argument, because the present
system of our currency gives
the facility for cornering the
gold, that is, by moving it from
one country to another, hav-
ing for its sinister motive the
depreciation or the/ apprecia-
tion of Consols.
4. Why would not the scheme-
work, since it has been in exis-
tence from all ages until 1873,
with the exception of India,
China, and Mexico, all of wdiich
were silver monometallic?
5, So if countries want capi-


HENRY LABOUGHERE;
5. But even these countries
would not be gainers in' the
long run. They want capital,
and to obtain it they must
maintain their credit intact. Is
it likely that they would find
persons to advance them
money if they were not to
maintain faith with their ex-
isting creditors? On what did
the late Presidential election
turn in America? Mr. Bryan
proposed the free coinage of
silver, and a ratio of 16 to 1 be-
tween silver and gold. The
immediate effect would have
been that everyone would have
been relieved of one-half of his
liabilities, and the liability of
the United States to the lend-
ing Powers of Europe would
have been reduced by that am-
ount. After such an experience
of this mode of meeting liabili-
ties, it is evident either that no
7
one would lend America any-
thing, or that if he did, it would
only be at an interest to cover
the risk of another reduction in
the amount of his loan. Ameri-
cans are not fools. They soon
perceived that Mr. Bryan’s
scheme would prove ruinous to
the progress of their country.
Not only were financiers
against it, but the workers.
The latter failed to realise what
benefit it would be to them to
be paid even double wages, if
everything they had to pur-
chase cost double. At most,
this would have placed them in
the position that they are now.
But they had a shrewd suspicion
that, whilst the buying power
W. H. GOCHER:
tal, they must keep the credit
intact. But we say if coun-
tries want capital let them
make their own money. The
curse of credit money is that it
is detrimental to the debtor
country. The difference be-
tween Mr. McKinley’s and Mr.
Bryan’s policy was simply this:
That Mr. McKinley proposed
International Bimetallism afld
Mr. Bryan National Bimetall-
ism. No doubt Mr. Labou-
chere is correct when he
states that the result would
have been that commodities
would have doubled. Hence
the democratic cry was “Give
us back the dollars of our
fathers.” We are constantly
informed that if we borrow
money when it is dear that it
would be immoral to appre-
ciate prices by depreciating
money. However, the same
individuals never inform us that
when they depreciated prices
in 873, and we had then to pay
twice the amount for the money
that we borrowed before that
period, that that was a just
transaction, Speaking plain-
ly, the “money-changers” vio-
lated the laws of God by clos-
ing the mints to silver, and in
spite of them, to-day, all na-
tions are expanding internal
money, with the exception of
England and Australia. But
England is the creditor coun-
try, and Australia is the debtor
country, and we can only go
by results. By paying England
two bales of wool instead of one
we have our squatting indus-
tries ruined, and only a feAv in-


HENRY LABOUCHERE:
of a dollar would be reduced
by one-half, the increase of
wages would not keep pace
with this halving of the dollar.
Mr. Bryan, therefore, was de-
feated by a large majority,
G. There are men amongst us
who honestly and conscienti-
ously believe that Bimetallism
would be an advantage to us.
This may appeal' surprising,
but everywhere and in every
age there have been persons
who lose their h?ads over some
theory, and then are unable to
perceive its practical folly.
In the middle ages, there were
many chemists who passed
their lives trying to transmute
silver into gold; and there is
much similarity between those
chemists and the Bimetallists
of our day. Increase the
world’s coin, they say, and you
will increase its wealth. This
is almost as absurd as it would
be to suppose that the climate
of this planet would be better-
ed were there more barometers.
The wealth of a country has
nothing to do with the volume
of its currency, because cur-
rency is nothing more than a
measure of value for every-
thing else. Nothing indeed is
more remarkable than the very
small amount of currency that
suffices for the world’s require-
ments. A 1 the buying and sel-
ling that takes place involves a
very small movement of what
we call money, whether the
transaction be between country
and country, or between the in-
habitants of any country. A
W. H. GOCHER:
dividuals are benefited thereby..
Take the West End and the-
East of London. There we
find a few millionaires are liv-
ing in luxury, while in the East
over a million people are liv-
ing on the verge of starvation.,
b. Did the last three or four
governors of the Bank of Eng-
land lose their' heads because
they were Bimetallists? Like-
wise, Goschen and Balfour, to
say nothing of the hundreds of
millions of people throughout
the world who applaud the ut-
terances of all professors of po-
litical economy that “much
money means much prosperity,
and who are, in almost every
case, Bimetallists. If my friend,
Labouchere, came to Australia
he would find that the volume
of currency would have much
to do with the wealth of this,
unfortunate country. linstead
of going hat in hand to Lom-
bard-street for more credit
money, and for so doing get-
ting insulted, and kicked to
boot, 1 feel sure we would have
a champion in the'cause of ex-
pansion of our internal money,
and he would battle for our
Constitution, which grants us.
coinage, legal tender and issue.
He would at once perceive the
necessity for establishing a Cre-
dit Foncier, so that the people
desirous of settling on the land
might be generously assisted,
and that a wholesome system of
irrigation would be at once
started, so that regular seasons
would, accordingly, abolish our


HENRY LABOUCHERE:
country imports and exports.
If the exports exceed the im-
ports, a very little of this is
paid in mono}'; the margin of
loss is liquidated in bonds and
other such securities, whilst the
transactions themselves are ar-
ranged for by bills of exchange
A domestic trader buys with
■cheques, and sells for cheques.
Beyond a comparatively small
amount of coin for his daily
turnover, and for the payment
of wages, he does not require
coin from year’s end to year’s
•end. Of course, if there is a
large amount of gold existent
in the country, which can be
brought into marketable form
for less than the actual cost of
mining, etc., the particular
country is the richer for it, but
the sum total of the world’s
wealth is only augmented, as it
would be by an impetus being
given to any oilier industry.
7. These theorising Bime-
tallists point out that, if we had
more coined money, an estate
that is now worth £1 ()(),()()()
would then be worth perhaps
£150,000. But what would the
owner gain by this, since every-
thing else would increase in
value by the same proportion-
,.ate amount? If they really be-
lieve this is to be an advantage,
they have only to decree that
pennies shall henceforth be
called pounds, and the estate
which now sells for £lOO,OOO
would sell for twenty-four mil-
lions and one hundred thou-
sand of these new pounds.
The Bimetallists would have us
•W. H. GOCHER:
appalling cycles of drought.
But the Democrats have now
come to this determination, that
they insist upon no more bor-
rowing, but to make our own
money, and sound money at
that. Of course, the Clearing
House will see to the superflu-
ous movement of money; but
if a domestic trader buys with
cheques, those cheques merely
represent coin, and the more
coin he has the greater arc his
cheques and the greater his in-
vestments. If the argument
concerning ”a large amount of
gold existent in the country”
is good for that country, so it
is applicable to silver, and the
countries would be the richer
for the production of both
metals, but if the money paid
for mining is to be considered,
both metals cost more for pro-
duction than they are absolute-
ly worth. However, the world’s
wealth is augmented even by
currency, and twice the impe-
tus would be given to the in-
dustrial world.
7. Again, I have to remind
Mr. Labouchere that gold and
silver were always money, and
weighed by the weight of troy.
Copper is a debased metal, and
therefore not precious. It is
the rarity or the scarcity of
gold and silver which seems to
have been providentially sent
for mankind. But man, in his
wickedness, has closed the
mints to silver, and has des-
troyed the hitherto equilibrium
of 15,i ratio of one t o the other.
If is just about as mad to talk


XIENRY LABOUCHERE:
believe that trade depression,
fall in value of land, absence
of employment among artisans,
agrarianism in Ireland, squal-
or, suffering, misery every-
where, will cease, if only we
will adopt their nostrum. If
so, the world can be converted
into a paradise by very simple
jugglery—and it is a wonder
this has not already been done.
8. When Bimetallists are
told that, apart from no one
gaining by the juggle, they
are proposing an impossibility
in endeavouring to bring about
a permanent ratio between two
things whose relative value is
fluctuating owing to causes
which must always exist, they
reply that this apparently im-
possible feat has been perform-
ed already. It has indeed been
tried, but the trial was so un-
successful that it had to be
given up. In 1874, the Latin
Union of States, which for
some years had bought at a
fixed rate all silver offered, and
converted it into coin, declined
to continue this system of un-
limited purchase, and they lim-
ited by agreement the annual
coinage in each of the five
countries constituting the
Union, In America much the
same thing has occurred.
There the silver ring was so
small, that it obliged the Fed-
eral Government to purchase
vast quantities of silver, whilst
all its obligations were made
pa3’able in gold or silver. But
the United States soon found
that it could only keep up its
W. H. GOCHBR:
about making pennies pounds
as it is to make paper-money
unconvertible, i.e., to, say, un-
limited issue of paper. The
world has been perverted into
a hell by vile jugglery, and it
is a wonder that the people
are not up in arms against the
wickedness of the pullers of
the financial strings of Lom-
bard-street.
8. “ The trial was so unsuc-
cessful,” considering that Bi-
metallism always did exist un-
til the demonetisation of silver,
which took place in 1873, al-
though England went on the
gold standard in 1816. But the
rest of the civilised world was
bimetallic, so England alone
did not cut such an important
feature in the world’s finance
“that it had to be given up.”
The reason wh} T it had to be giv-
en up was this: “That a cer-
tain English financier bribed
certain Senators of the U.S. to
' bring about the Act, which, at
the dead hour of night, was
passed without debate, nobody
knowing what it really meant.”
Using the language of one
writer, “It passed through the
House like the silent tread of
a cat.” This was the start of
the most awful crime that has
over been perpetrated upon
humanity. The Americans say
it was Rothschild who engaged
several financiers to attend to
"business. Among the finan-
ciers was one Ernest Seyd, a
distinguished banker, bullionist,
and bimetallist. It is often de


' HENRY LABOUCHERE:
credit by paying its obligations
in gold, and after a perfect
mountain of silver had been ac-
cumulated in the Treasury, the
law for the purchase of silver
was repealed. The purchase of
silver has, therefore, proved a
dead loss to the United States.
In Germany a gold currency
has been substituted for a sil-
ver currency. Li Austria this
change is being made. In Rus-
sia the Minister of Finance has
announced that it will shortly
be made, If, therefore, we are
to be influenced by experience,
we shall hold fast to our gold
currency, and substitute for it
neither a silver currency nor a
silver and gold currency.
Surely the man suffering most
acutely' from the bimetallic
craze must see that, if really
Bimetallism would be produc-
tive of such happy results, as
he anticipates from it, all these
countries must be peopled by
idiots, if having secured this in-
estimable boon, they have
thrown it aside as worthless.
The truth is that they found
thal its advantages, if any,
were outweighed by its disad-
vantages, and having discover-
ed this, they are falling back
on monometallism.
9. But whilst there are very
few who consider that we
should gain as a nation by Bi-
metallism, there are certain
sections of the community who
imagine that it might prove
profitable to the section to
which they belong.
In Lancashire Bimetallism is
W. H. GOCHERr
uied that Seyd did take part.
However, in the ‘ ‘ Congressional
Globe” we read that he sanc-
tioned the bill, with a slight
alteration. These gentlemen
afterwards went to Bismarck,
in 1874, and advised him to
adopt the same cause as the
U.S., as France was sure to
pour much silver into Germany.
France became alarmed, and
called the representatives of
the five countries, known as the
Latin Union, who decided to
remain bimetallic, but to close
their mints to silver—that is to
say, that silver should still re-
main full legal tender. The
mountain of silver that Labou-
chere speaks about was brought
about by the Bland Allison Act,
of 1878, which gave the Gov-
ernment power to purchase
£1,000,000 worth of silver
monthly, and issue notes there-
to. Since then that silver has
been used as subsidiary coins.
Therefore, the United States
had not found that purchase of
silver was a dead loss. . The
average man knows little about
Bimetallism, and is unable to
say that it would “be produc-
tive of such happy results.” •
9. Either the Lancashire Bi-
metallists are wrong or Mr. La-
bouchere is right; but how can
Mr. Labouchere’s argument
stand good, i.e., when ‘ ‘ the ans-
wer is, that the rate of wage in
the East is so much lower than
it is with us”? Still, Mr. La-
bouchere admits that other en-
vironments nullify matters*


HENRY 1 iABOUCHERE:
rife amongst those engaged in
the textile industries. Their
idea is that the fact of our hav-
ing a gold currency, and India
and the East having a silver
currency, tells against them in
the Eastern market. A produ-
cer in India, they say, pays
wages in silver, and sells his
goods in the home market for
silver, and in our market for
gold; therefore, whilst at home
he is unaffected by the fall in
value of silver, he is a gainer
by getting gold for his produce
when sold abroad. A Lanca-
shire manufacturer, on the other
hand, pays his wages on a gold
basis, and sells the goods that
he sends to the East on a silver
basis; he, therefore, is handi-
capped by having to pay out in
coin of a high standard, and be-
ing paid in coin of a low stan-
dard of value. How, he asks,
can he compete under such con-
ditions with the Eastern manu-
facturer? The answer is that
the rate of wage in the East is
so much lower than it is with
us, irrespective of all question
of currency* that if the differ-
ence renders it impossible to
compete, compete he could not.
But as a matter of fact he does,
because he has advantage over
the Eastern manufacturers in
.so many other ways that, tak-
ing one thing with another, he
is able to hold his own in the
East. In China our chief compe-
titors just now are the Germans
They are a people widely awake
to the main chance, and if they
had thought they could have
W. H. GOCHER:
The following figures will be
found in favor of our Lanca-
shire friends: —
In 1873 India was almost un-
known as a commercial country,
and her people were regarded
as indolent and shiftless. How-
ever, her soil was rich and her
natural advantages great, and
under the vitalising effect of an
increased silver currency that
has poured into her since 1873,
her people became more indus-
trious, and a complete change
took place. In 1873 she pro-
duced only 978,000 bales of cot-
ton, while in 1890 she had in-
creased her crop to 2,238,000.
In 1873 her exports of wheat
were only nominal, while in
1892 they were to England alone
59,000,000 bushels.
In the statistics compiled by
Archbishop Walsh, of Ireland,
it is shown that prior to 1873
the exports of yarn to India
were.practically nothing.
In her exports of this one
item of yarn to China and
Japan alone the following table
shows a marvellous increase :
In 1874 .... 1,000,000 lbs.
1875 .... 5,000,000 lbs.
1880 .... 25,000,000 lf)s.
1885 .... 75,000,000 lbs.
1889 .... 127,000,000 lbs.
1891 .... 165,000,000 lbs.
In 1891 she imported from
China 2,240,295 tens of rupees
of merchandise, while during
the same year she exported
merchandise to China of the
value of 14,295,934 tens of ru-
pees. Nor did her* vastly in-
creasing commerce stop with


lIENRY LABOUCHERE:
swept the Eastern market by
having a silver currency like
India, China, and Japan, is it
likely that they would them-
selves have substituted a gold
for a silver currency?
10. There has been a little
vagueness amongst the Lanca-
shire Bimetallists as to what
they want. Are we to adopt Bi-
metallism, and is India to re-
tain its silver currency; or are
both to adopt Bimetallism? Are
we to make the change that we
propose contingent upon China
and Japan adopting it? If we
are to become Bimetallists, and
the chief Eastern nations are
to retain their monometallic
silver currency, this would
mean that we are to maintain
the value of silver at about
double what it is at present
worth, by buying all that may
be offered to us at this higher
rate, for the sake of our textile
industry—a proposition that
throws into the shade the de-
mand that we should establish
an import duty on foreign corn
for the benefit of agriculture.
11. But even more desirous
than some Lancashire folk for
Bimetallism are some of our
landholders. Their rents have
fallen, and consequently their
incomes have fallen. In most
cases the fall in rents affects
them all the more, as they have
mortgages on their estates. It
has, therefore, occurcd to them
that it would be an excellent
stroke of business if they were
allowed to pay off their mort-
gages in a depricated currency.
Landowners have long been un-
W. H. GOCHER:
silver-using nations. In the
same year she imported from
France goods of the value of
815,825 tens of rupees, and ex-
ported to Prance 7,842,267 tens
of rupees. In the same year
she sold to Germany 4,387,482,
and purchased of Germany only
1,691,649. During the same
year she bought of the United
States of the value of 1,522,365
tens of rupees, and sold to the
United States 3,968,735.
During the year 1873 the
number of vessels engaged in
foreign trade with India was
less than 400. On the other
hand, the number of vessels en-
gaged in the foreign trade, en-
tered at the ports of Indian dur-
ing the year ending March 31 r
1891, was 5,490.
To save her own trade at
home Gladstone laid the para-
lysing hand of demonetisation
of India.
What was good for India
would be good for Australia.
It will be noticed that India
had a balance of trade in her
favour, not only with silver
countries, but also with all
gold standard countries, and
sold the United States more
than she bought of her. Free
coinage, will make high prices.
High prices will make prosper-
ity, and high prices will bring
more money to this country in
payment for our commodities.
10. All Bimetallists condemn
silver monometallism, also gold
monometallism, and only trust
that the day may not be far
off when international agree


] lEXRV LABOUCHERE:
der the delusion that agricul-
ture is depressed because their
incomes are reduced. In advo-
cating, therefore, this new
way to pay old debts, they
nrye that it. would benefit all
those engaged in agricultural
vsuits. Would it benefit the
farmer? He would have to pay
more pounds in rent, because
the purchasing power of the
pound would be reduced; but
against this he would receive
move depreciated pounds for
his produce. So far, he would
be neither a gainer nor a loser.
The only way in which he could
benefit by the change would be
for him to continue to pay the
present wage to his laborers,
and this he probably would do.
But if he did, the agricultural
laborer would be a loser, and a
heavy loser, as he would have to
pay " for everything, food,
clothes, lodging, etc., consider-
ably more than he does now,
and thus to all intents and pur-
poses his wage would be re-
duced. „
12. Bimetallism, therefore, as
a panacea for agricultural dis-
tress amounts to this; The
landlords would be able to pay
off their mortgages in a depre-
ciated currency, which clearly
would be to their advantage
and to the disadvantage of
these who have lent them
money; the farmer would gain
by paying his laborers their
present wage in this depreciated
currency; and the real suffer-
ers would be the laborers. Mr.
Chaplin, it is true, tells us that
~ Bimetallism would cause a rise
W. H. GOCHER:
ment will be arrived at.
The laws of currency have
nothing to do with fiscal issue.
11. Many landowners pur-
chased their properties before
1873 —that was before the cur-
rency was appreciated; it is
lierefore a just occurrence that
icy should be allowed to pay
ff their mortages in a deprec-
ited currency. Would it bene-
t the farmer? When money
i cheap commodities are dear;
ence it would suit the pro-
ucer. Labour would receive a
•reat blessing. Being a eom-
aodity, it would necessarily be
n great demand, and would
ise, therefore, in value.
12 It is better for the work-
>r to pay 3d. per loaf for bread
,vhen in constant work and re-
ceiving good wages, than pay-
no- 2d. per loaf when he is
aften out of employment and
not receiving good wages.
‘Much money means much
prosperity, ” was exemplified
when President McKinley
brought about an expansion of
internal money for the United
States. Commodities went up
95 per cent, and so great was
the demand for labour that the
farmers of the Northern States
engaged labour from Ireland
at "the rate of 10/- per day.
High prices are good for the
debtor country, but low prices
are bad for the creditor coun-
try. If it was right for the
creditor country to compel
us to pay more than we
agreed to,. so on the other
hand it is right to force
AUSTRALIA MUST BE HEARD.


HENRY LABOUCHERE:
of about 25 per cent, on whe
m our markets. If } le on
means that wheat like everv-
thing else would cost rnor
pounds, when pounds are won i
less, the rise would be nomina
not real, if he means that ther
would be a real rise in th
price oi corn, he is incorrec;.
But assuming that he is righ
from whom would this 25 pe
cent, come? From the bread
eaters, whilst it would go int
the pockets of Mr. Chaplin and
his brother landlords. Surely
proposal which, it is asserted bv
its advocates, would increase
the price of bread by 25 pe:;*
cent., carries with it its own
demnation with all who woulc
have to pay this extra price for
the staff of life.
Id. It is well, as I have said,
that Bimetallism should be un-
derstood, because we know the
influence of landlords in our
scheme of government. They
are flooding the country with
tracts in praise of it, and in
various other ways they are
spending money in an active
propagandism. What they are
doing here, the owners of sil-
ver mines have been doing in
America. Bimetallism is, in
fact, a combination between
American silver mine-owners
and British landowners. The
first want to sell their silver for
more than it is worth; the se-
cond want to pay off their
mortgages for less than what
they received. The whole thing
is pernicious nonsense. In times
past bad bings tampered with
the currency for their own ends.
iw. H. GOCHER:
l»ack again, and pay them with
depreciated money, which
he a lesson for the “money
changers” never to violate the
Jaws of God again.
Id. It is the bankers who have
the influence “in our scheme of
government,” not the landlords,
because on the 37th of March’
1896, the House of Com-
mons unanimously decided
that England would re-open
the Indian Mints, and do all in
icr power to bring about In-
ternational agreement,” but on
September 22, 1897, the bank-
!rs met at the Clearing House,
dosed the doors, and in secrecy
id they conspire to upset the
decision of Parliament. This
o enraged the Trades Unkin-
ds of England that they sent
nndreds of thousands of pam-
hlets all over the Empire, de-
laring “that no foreign Power
in believe the pledges of a
fitish Ministry.” If Mr. La-
luchere is right concerning
ie effect that Bimetallism
ould have upon the landlord,
/-, no advantage at all “since
erything else would increase
value by the same propor-
mate amount,’* where does
e combination come in? The
io!e thing, undoubtediv, is
rnioious nonsense. The tam-
tiiig with the currency has
eady taken place, and the
metallists are striving to rec-
-11 by bringing silver
*k again as money.
4 - if most Bimetallists would
; to re-establish the old ra-
AUSTRALIA MUST RE HEARD


HENRY LABOUCHERE:
Now our landlords would do
the same. Some capitalists have
joined them because they fancy
that it might bring grist to
to their mills.
14. There is a proverb that
when certain persons fall out
honest men get their rights;
and, fortunately, these Bime-
tallists never have been able to
agree what is to be the ratio
between gold and silver. In
1878 it was about 15£ of sil-
ver to lof gold. According
to market prices, it is now
about 30 of silver to 1 of gold.
Most Bimetallists would like
the old ratio to be established,
for their real aim is to depre-
ciate the currency. But none
of them venture boldly to ad-
mit this. They therefore pro-
pose that all countries should
go into a monetary conference
with open minds as to the ratio.
Jf they did they would come
out of it with these same open
minds, but no ratio would be
established. When questioned
about a ratio a Bimetallist re-
plies that it is merely a matter
of detail. Detail, indeed! To
Rim it is everything-. Admitting
that Bimetallism is desirable, or
even possible* the whole crux
of the (piestion turns upon the
ratio, and it shows what thor-
oughly unpractical people Bi-
metallists are, that they clam-
our for the adoption of their
absurd nostrum without ever
having agree what the ratio be-
tween the two metals is to be.
On this no agreement is pos-
sible, because the silver-produc-
ing countries would insist on
W. H. GOCHER:
tio of 15£ to 1, how does Mr.
Labouchere know this, since
“none of them venture boldly
to admit this”? No Bimetal-
list would be fool enough to say
that “the ratio was a matter of
detail.” Bimetallism means the
relation of silver to gold. The
ratio which now exists in our
legal tender silver to-day is
to I—that is to say, 16 half-
crowns are worth £2, because
the law says so, but no one can
force the payment of 24 half-
crowns, as it is outside the limit
of legal tender; hence gold must
be paid with the 16 half-crowns
to pay the debt of £2. As soon
as the mints are open to silver
there will be no such expression
as “commercial relation,” be-
cause, notwithstanding the out-
put of each metal, the relation
will, as it always did, remain
the same. According to Mul-
hall, in 1600, 27 tons of silver
were produced to one of gold;
in 1700, 34 tons of silver to one
of gold; in 1800, 32 tons'of sil-
ver to one of gold; in 1843, 31
tons of silver to one of gold;
in 1880, 18 tons of silver to one
of gold; 1890, 18 tons of silver
to one of gold; to-day, about 8
tons of silver to one of gold,
and yet, forsooth, we are told
that there is too much silver in
the world—in fact, mountains.
Rubbish!
As a matter of fact, no less
than 45 tons of silver to one
ton of gold in one period was
produced, and, notwithstanding
such an output, the ratio was
not disturbed. But to-day, al-
though only eight tons of sil


lIENRY LABOUCHERB:
one largely favouring silver,
whilst the non-silver producing
countries—if ever they were so
silly as to accept the principle
of Bimetallism—would insist
upon the ratio being based
upon the actual commercial re-
lation now existing between the
two metals: Even, however, if
this ratio were adopted, ratio
and value would not long re-
main the same, for if only a mar-
ket were temporarily assured to
silver, at the existing ratio, so
much of it would be produced
that the ratio would be each
succeeding year more and more
out of proportion to value as
estimated by that of gold.
15. My advice to all is to
have nothing to do with this
proposal to tamper with the
currency. But especially I
would respectfully tender this
advice to the working classes.
They would be the chief suff-
erers, for rise in wages would
never keep pace with rise in
the commodities that wage-ear-
ners have to purchase. Wages
have in 10 years risen consider-
ably, and 1 hope that they will
still further rise. Bimetallism
is an insidious attempt to
juggle the toilers and workers,
not only out of all prospective
rise, but out of the present rate
of wages. Our entire com-
mercial dealings; every mone-
tary transaction between man
and man; the security of the
advance in wages achieved by
our workers after many a
struggle, depend upon no tam-
pering being permitted with
our coinage, for it is the stan-
W. H. GOCHER:
ver is only produced to one ton
of gold, nevertheless, if the
mints were opened again to sil-
ver much more would be pro-
duced, as many mines are clos-
ed. They would not pay on ac-
count of the cheapness of that
metal. We have two mines in
this State that would pay if
silver reached 3/6 per oz.
15. My advice to all, and es-
pecially to the workers, is,
now that the currency has been
tampered with, to tight hard
for the restoration of God’s
money for the people, and cry
aloud, with our cousins across
the Pacific, “Give us back ‘the
dollars of our fathers.” I
would exhort, in a special man-
ner, the Labour Party to fight
in the interests of capital, so
that labour may participate. If
capital is in a healthy plight,
so, likewise, will be labour. If
through the expansion of money
our commodities rise, so much
greater will be the demand for
labour, as 1 have already ex-
plained what took place recent-
ly in the United States. Then
a new phase will come over this
unfortunate country. Above
all, remember that our currency
to-day should be the same as it
was yesterday, then the poor
man will he benefited, likewise
the rich man; you will then stop
the system which makes multi-
millionaires.
16. If Milton were alive to-
day, he would see that Satan
would have a magnificent es-
cort, from Lombard-street, tra-


HENRY LABOUCHERE:
dard by which we estimate the
value of all else. It should be
the same to-morrow as it is to-
day. This, as I think I have
shown, is of far more import-
ance to poor men than to rich
men, for in monetary fluctua-
tions rich men often gain, but
poor men never,
16. There are many ways of
tampering with the currency.
The coin may be debased, and
this has been done often by
bad kings—so bad, indfeed, that
Dante, in his famous poem, in
describing his visit to Hell,
says that he found these royal
thieves in a place of torture
specially reserved for them.
Large issues of inconvertible
paper currency may be made,
with the result that the pur-
chasing power of legal tender
money is reduced. Bimetallism
is as pernicious, but far more
absurd than either of these two
expedients. It could not last,
for it attempts to interfere with
every natural law of supply
and demand, and to substitute
for them a fixed ratio between
two things which have no con-
nection with each other. If two
potatoes and .three carrots
could be bought to-day for the
same sum, would it not be rid-
iculous for the Legislature to
decree that shops are to be
opened by the nation in which
three carrots will be given for
four potatoes! and would it not
be still more ridiculous if it
were to be declared by law that
this rate of exchange between
carrots apd potatoes is the rule
for ever and aye, irrespective
W. H. GrOCHER:
versing with him through the
“bottom of the bottomless pit.”
There would be no place of tor-
ture reserved for them, as there
is for bad kings. The magni-
tude of their crimes far excels
the crimes of the royal thieves
who merely debase the currency
of the realm. The Lombard-
street thieves have debased the
once precious metal, and there-
by debased the world’s cur-
rency; in other words, they
have robbed the people of half
their money by debasing silver.
A good old gag!—inconvertible
paper. If Mr. Labouchere is
in earnest about the ‘ ‘
ible paper,” what is his rea-
son? It must be to expand
the currency. But to what
amount? Carl Marx suggests
that a limitation must be agreed
to by nations. For argument
sake, say that there should be
as much inconvertible paper as
gold in the world, then there
would be twice the amount of
money, but if silver were re-
monetised there would lie twice
the amount of money likewise.
Surely the inconvertible paper
would not have the mobility of
silver. Silver is the money of
the masses, on account of its
mobility. Why should not the
Government issue notes which
admit of convertibility to sil-
ver as well as gold? If Mr.
Labouchere took a trip to the
South Sea Islands the natives
might understand him if he
preached the doctrine of bar-
ter that one shark’s tooth was
worth so many shells, or that
“three carrots should be giv-


HENRY LABOUCHERE:
of the amount of eacli that may
be raised? Yet this is precisely
what Bimetallists would have
us do in respect to gold and sil-
ver. And this folly they would
have us perpetrate in order that
landowners who have borrow-
ed money and spent it may com-
pound with their creditors,
and that working men may be
fooled out of a portion of the
wages that they now receive by
being paid in a coin which will
not buy as much as that of
to-day. If I know my coun-
trymen, they are not quite such
fools as these ingenious sche-
mers take’them to be.
17. Mr. Gladstone, who is ad-
mitted to be the soundest head
in matters connected with fi-
nance, has always protested
against Bimetallism as a folly
that would entail ruin on us.
Almost every banker in Lon-
don is against it, and bankers
have a practical"’'experience in
the working of currency; and
their opinion is worthy of con-
sideration, for these financial
middlemen would neither lose
nor gain in their business by
the suggested alteration in the
value of money. But, I repeat,
my strongest objection to it is,
that the wage-earner would
find his ability to provide de-
cently for himself and his fam-
ily greatly reduced. This is
why I want our artisans and
our laborers to take the trouble
to understand the question. If
they do, they never will allow
themselves to be gulled and
humbugged into approval of
W. H. GOOHER:
en for four potatoes.”
17. Mr. Gladstone’s sound-
ness on finance was illustrated
by closing the Indian mints. It
is impossible to conceive a more
infamous piece of work. To
make provision for old age the
Indians used to save their mo-
ney by having their rupees con-
verted into ornaments, anklets,
etc., for their wives and daugh-
ters to wear, and when they
required money they took their
silver ornaments to the mint,
which coined them into rupees
free of charge. Just as soon
as their mints were closed
their saving were so much de-
preciated that it caused such a
famine that it is computed no
less than thirty millions of
these unfortunate people died
through starvation and plague
it brought about positively,
through this great financier’s
action. But it is said that the
drought was the cause of the
famine. How was it, then,
that the papers of England did
not refute the accusation of
Senator Woolcot, who was sent
by McKinley to England? In
a recent conference Senator
Woolcot told England that the
cause of the famine was
brought about on account of the
mints being closed, and the
people who had no money could
not buy rice when it was a little
over a cent per pound. 1 think
the only paper that commented
upon this remark was the Lon-
don “Times,” which stated that
“Senator Woolcot had insulted
England,” If almost every ban-


HENRY LABOUCHERE:
what, in any case, must damage
them.
18. If Bimetallism is to do so
much for us, would not tri-
metallism do more? Why is
the penny left out of this
strange plan to make us all rich
and prosperous by altering the
coinage? Why not decree
that all debts are to be paid
either in copper or gold, and
that we will give anyone a gold-
en pound for one hundred cop-
per pennies? Anyone can see
the absurdity of this, for we
should, in a very short time,
have every pound that we own
taken from us, and in its place
find ourselves the happy pos-
sessors of all the copper that
has ever been, and that can be,
produced. But just as absurd
is it to try to level down the
pound by endeavouring to level
up the shilling. The Bimetal-
lists are in a cleft stick. At one
time they say that their pan-
acea would leave everything as
it is and that (he existing re-
lative value of gold and silver
would not be altered by it. If
so, why make the change? At
another time they say that cer-
tain classes would gain by it.
But, if so, it would be the rich-
er classes who would gain, and
whatever this gain might be it
it would all come out of the
pockets of the poorer classes.
W. H. GOCHER:
ker is opposed to Bimetallism,
they know what is good for
themselves. As a matter of
fact, bankers know more of fig-
ures than what they do about
currency. The heads of bank-
ing concerns know all about
currency, and every man Jack
of them are in the inner circles
of the Stock Exchange.
18. If monometallism is to do
so much for us, why not make
platinum the standard and de-
monetise gold? It is all nom
sense talking about introduc-
ing copper as a precious metal;
the rarity or scarcity of gold
and silver is the cause of their
great value, which seems provi-
dentially sent for our use. But
man, in his wickedness, has
taken from silver the function
of money, which, from all ages,
until 1873, was related to gold
at 15£ to 1. England will yet
be the place to cry the loudest
for its restoration.
The suggestions in the foregoing pages may be added fo
or taken from, as the nations may decide, as long as we get
the armistice. But this we must emphasise, and it is said
with all earnestness, that it is for the Trade Unionists of
Australia to move at once and not give ear to the capitalistic
press. For my part, I care not what the press says, no more


than 1 do for those who brought about this terrible state of
affairs. Let the financiers and profiteers, and those who
caused the war, become the guests of the Unseen banquet of
eternal damnation. Let them fill their chalices with human
gore, and drink to the health of Satan.
1 swear before the loving God that I will stand by the
Great Democrat of Ages, who on the mountain side 2000 years
ago declared that not only should the peace-makers be called
blessed, but children of His Eternal Father.


Yours truly,
W. H. GOCHER,
(Bimetallist).
I’ newsletter” Print, Sydney,
