

Australian Aboriginal
Curios
TOST and ROHU
26 Martin Place (near G.P.O.) SYDNEY


WE have absolutely the greatest and most complete collection
of genuine Australasian and Island Curios, in the
World, the extent and variety of this unique collection,
comprising, as it does, Native Weapons, Implements, Ornaments
{Personal, Ceremonial, and Magical), and the many other
curiosities peculiar to the Savage in his native element, gathered
from all parts of Australia and the innumerable Islands of the
South Pacific.
We are unable to enumerate in detail the large variety we have
on hand of the various weapons, Implements etc. collected during
the last 60 years, there are many kinds of Spears, Spear Heads,
Womerahs, Shields, Clubs, Nulla Nullas, Stone Tomahawks,
Stone Axe Heads, Glass and Stone Knives, Coolamons, Digging
Sticks, Fire Sticks, Girdles, Necklets, Forehead Bands, Bull-
roarers, Message Sticks, Spindles, {for making Native String,)
Nose Bones, Head Dresses, Hair, Dancing, Corrobboree, Cere-
monial and Magical Charms, Ornaments and Wands and many
other interesting Curios of various kinds, all of which materially
contribute to form this unique collection.
Visitors to Sydney are cordially invited to view our extensive
Showrooms and Museum and see the collection for themselves,
and we are confident the time thus spent will not be regretted, we
are always pleased to exhibit and explain our collection to visitors.
All purchases will be carefully packed {free) and forwarded to
any part of the world.
Correspondence is invited and will receive our personal and
prompt attention.
TOST & ROHU
Australian and Island Curio Dealers,
Opal Merchants, Manufacturing Furriers,
:: :: Tanners and Dyers :: ::
26 MARTIN PLACE, SYDNEY, N.S.W.


Boonmerang.
The boomerang is the most distinctive of the weapons of the
Australian native, and its use does not appear to have been
known to the Tasmanians.
There are various forms of the implement, some large ana
relatively heavy, used at close quarters for fighting, others for
throwing at game, and others, which are often called play boom
erangs, possess the characteristic feature of returning to the
thrower There is a remarkable resemblance in general form
between that of the boomerang and the long curved leaves of
many eucalypt trees. The missile is aways more or less leaf
shaped and varies much in size, but always consists of a flatten-
ed blade, usually quite flat on one side and slightly concave on
the other side and always more or less curved.
These unique and typically Australian Weapons are in use
throughout Australia, and are used by the natives in hunting
the various game desired as food, in tribal fights and on Cere-
monial and Festive occasions (including the well known
Corroboree.)
Spears.
Used in hunting, fishing, warfare and Ceremonies, these vary
in length from 4 to 10 feet and great ingenuity and workman-
ship is shown in barbing them, the natives using for the
purpose, sharpened Kangaroo bones, Flintheads, Glass Sting-
ray Stings, Telegraph wire, etc, fastened on with Kangaroo
Sinew and string made from human hair, fibre etc., and native
gums or cement.
Nulla Nulla.
Typical Aboriginal Fighting Club, made of heavy wood, used
in warfare, hunting game and Ceremonial Occasions. When
hunting game the native creeps as near as possible to the in-
tended object and then hurls the Nulla with all his might and
generally succeeds in bringing the object to earth.
Nose Pins.
Worn by both sexes of the natives and mostly made from
Kangaroo Bone ornamented at one end with rat tails or a bunch
of Cockatoo feathers, used on Ceremonial and festive occasions.
3


Womerahs or Spear Throwers.
The Spear Thrower of which there are a number of different
shapes and sizes, is in many parts of Australia perhaps the most
useful implement possessed by the native, it serves not only as a
spear thrower enabling a spear to be thrown with great force and
precision, but as a receptacle in which various objects such as red
ochre, kaolin, etc. can be carried about during the preparations
for a Ceremony, and more important still, the sharp flint which
is invariably attached to one end serves as the chief cutting
implement of the native by which he fashions all his wooden
implements and weapons of various kinds, it is also used in the
making of fire.
Fire Sticks.
Fire sticks, in a set of two, made of soft pith wood with a red cap
for keeping the ends dry, ornamented with red berries buried in
native gum or cement and bound with native fibre. A very
curious and interesting implement used by the natives for making
fire, the method employed being as follows ;
In one of the sticks a small cavity with a notch in it is made and
held under the feet, into this the end of the other stick is placed
and rapidly turned round by rubbing between the palms of the
hand, the friction thus producing a fine dust which first turns
black then falls into some frayed bark fibre which has been placed
below the groove to receive it, finally the dust takes fire and being
folded up in the fibre is blown into flame.
Weet Weet
Aboriginal toy or Sporting implement, when thrown along the
ground it described a number of irregular gyratory movements
or springs, much to the delight of the natives, who frequently
throw small clubs, boomerangs, etc. at it for practice.
Message Sticks.
A very interesting curio, made of short pieces of wood, notched
and carved, and used for the purpose of intertribal communica-
tions, such as invitations to certain Corrobborees and for personal
messages.


Death Pointers.
There are still parts of Australia where the wild untamed passions of
primitive man have free play. In the vast hinterland the black
man roams undisturbed. Occasionally there are conflicts with
other tribes. Then the black magic, the “pointing of the bone,”
is a prolific source of trouble. An Aboriginal points a bone
at another and “wills” that he should die. Invariably the
victim succumbs. It is the antithesis of faith-healing. It is
actually faith-killing.
Native Slippers.
(Wadgee-Wonjey or Nothing talk)
Very rare, made of human hair spun and emu feathers. Used by
the natives in stealth and wife-stealing from neighbouring tribes,
these special slippers are supposed not to leave any tracks, thereby
the wearer is unable to be followed and indentified.
Aboriginal Chief's Staff
Staff or Club with pronged end, used by one in authority, not in
general use and very rare, painted and striped with native red
ochre and clay. The pronged end is supposed to be used to
gouge out the eyes of evil-doers.
Stone Knives.
Made from various kinds of flaked and ground stone, such as
flint, quartzite, etc. used in the initiation into manhood ceremonies.
Coolamon.
An implement of a variety of shapes and sizes made of hollowed
out wood, bark, and the skins of animals and is a receptacle in
which the natives carry food and water, and is used as a scoop to
throw out the earth dug up by native women whilst hunting for
vegetable food or small animals, and at times for carrying
young babies.
5


Dilly Bags.
Well formed and skilfully made from string made of fibres
obtained from weeds, and used for personal treasures and
general carrying purposes.
Sacred Stick or Bull Roarer.
The term sacred is used because they are never, or only on very
rare occasions, allowed to be seen by women children, and
uninitiated men, any infringement of this rule being punishable
by blinding or death. Used in connection with the ceremonies
attendant upon the initiation of the young men, and the loud
roaring noise which is made by rapidly twirling them round at
the end of a string is supposed by the women to be the voice
of a spirit which has come to take the young men way. At special
times they are shown to the younger men after their initiation.
Wock-A-Burra.
Pineapple headed club used in Ceremonies, Warfare, and hunting
colored red and white with ochreous days.
Tomahawks With Stone Heads.
These interesting and primitive implements are now becoming
rare and valuable and are obtained from the tribes in remote parts
only. Iron and Steel tomahawks of European make are gradually
taking their place, being introduced by the way of trade by those
natives in touch with the whites.
Used in fashioning their weapons and implements and also to
enable the natives to climb large trees in quest of honey and game,
the manner of so doing being very interesting. A small notch
is made in the trunk of the tree in which the native inserts the
big toe, then, clinging to the tree and lifting himself up, a similar
notch is made higher up, and so on, thus gradually ascending
until the desired height is reached.
Mill Stones.
Mill Stones used by the natives, held and manipulated by the
hands, with which they grind and prepare their food such as
Nardoo seed, Berries, etc.


Lonka-Lonka.
A much valued shell ornament used for charming women,
made out of the shell of Melo ethiopiea or Meleagrina mar-
garitifera. This is often suspended from the waist girdle especially
at Corrobborees. If a man desires to charm a particular woman,
he takes it to a retired spot and charms it by singing over it,
(inviting the lightning to come and dwell in it.) After charming
has taken place he hangs it on a digging stick at the Corrobboree
Ground until night and then removes it and hangs it on his waist
belt. While he is dancing, the woman he wishes to attract, alone
sees the lightning flashing on it, and all at once her internal organs
shake with emotion. If possible she will creep that night to his
camp or seize the earliest chance of running away with him. The
Lonka-Lonka’s generally used in Central Australia are plain, but
on similar specimens from West Australia the Zig-Zag pattern or
carving is generally present. These charms appear to be generally
used throughout the Central Northern part of Australia.
Helimon or Shield.
Made of wood in various shapes and sizes, some plain and others
nicely carved. Used in warfare to ward off Spears, Boomerangs,
and Throwing Sticks, and on festive and Ceremonial Occasions.
Considering the very primitive implements used in the making of
these shields exceptionally good workmanship is shown. The
natives show a marvellous dexterity in the manner of using shields,
warding off, with apparent ease, spears, boomerangs etc., which if
missed would severely wound or disable them.
Bone Charm.
Native Aboriginal Bone embalmed with native Cement and gum
and containing the yellow crest or plume of the White Cockatoo.
This Bone Charm is the remains of a distinguished chief or hunts-
men and is held sacred by the near relations of the deceased.
Enclosed in a native covering made of the bark of the paper
bark tree.
Digging Sticks .
Wooden Implement used by the native women for digging the
various edible roots used as food also for killing small game and
for defensive purposes.


Tchintu or Magic Sun Charm.
Consisting of a small pear shaped lump of Porcupine Grass Resin,
into one end of which are affixed two incisor rat teeth, and at the
other end is attached a stout piece of hair string about two feet
in length, the string is covered with a red down and the whole
is carried out of sight wrapped up in thin pieces of bark.
The Tchintu is supposed to contain the heat of the sun, and
it is believed that if placed in the track of an enemy he will be
seized by a violent fever which rapidly burns him up.
Chilara.
A charmed head band for obtaining wives, made out of Opossum
fur or Emu feathers placed side by side so as to form a flat
band which stretches across the forehead from ear to ear. On
special occasions such as dancing festivals, this will be decorated
with designs drawn in red ochre or pipeclay. When a native desires
to charm a woman he secretly charms it by singing over it and
placing it on his head and wearing it about the camp so that the
woman can see it. By some mysterious means her attraction is
drawn to it, and she becomes violently attracted to the man. At
night if possible, she creeps into his carpp. Sometimes two
men who are friends will decide on making and wearing “ Chilara”
so as to charm two women. After wearing them they will depart
to their own camps and the women while pretending to go out
hunting will, in reality, follow the men.
We have in stock an extensive collection of photographs of Austral-
ian Aborigines and South Sea Islanders, that were taken 30 or
40 years ago, before civilization began to spoil the native races
of these parts. We sell these photographs at 12/- and 15/- per
dozen.
aite & Bull, Printers, 81 Campbell Street, Sydney ,
TOST & ROHU
Established 1860
Taxidermists, Naturalists, Articulators,
Opal and Curio Merchants
26 MARTIN PLACE, SYDNEY
