

ONE SHILLING.
toy


I—The Max that would not Pay the Price
IP— Christ on the Sea
111. —Look !
3
)0
18
IV.— The Blood-mark on the Door
V -A Business Man's Sermon
Vl —The Touch that Saved
Vll,— The Man up the Tree
VIII. —The Secret of Hope
IX—Two Old Testament Knights
X.—A Cripple as a Text
XL —The Man God Chooses -
Xll —The Delivered Lepers
XIII —The Shepherd Psalm
XlV.— The Unseen Helpers
XV —The Story of Ruth
XVI —David in the Cave Adullam
XVll.— Voices that Call
24
- 29
100
108


'Jcl ■(
Australasian Addresses
BY THE
Rev. JOHN M'NEILL
(OF LONDON)
BEING VERBATIM REPORTS OF ADDRESSES DELIVERED
IN MELBOURNE.
REPUBLISHED FROM THE “SOUTHERN CROSS,’
flfl fib mime ;
“SOUTHERN CROSS” NEWSPAPER COMPANY LIMITED.,
1894.


• (
k'”*
PREFACE.
24th September, 1894.
Very large editions of the Southern Cross containing reports of Mr M'Neill’s
sermons in Melbourne were printed, but the demand far exceeded the supply.
Many persons were unable to procure copies; and to meet a demand thus
proved to exist, they are published here in volume form. The reports are as
exact as the shorthand writer’s art and printer’s type will permit, but it is
impossible to express in cold print the life and power of these sermons. Every
reader, we think, will admit they are remarkable discourses. They vibrate
with spiritual power, they burn with a passion of hate for sin, and a Christlike
pity for men But no printed page can reproduce the personal elements
in Mr. M‘Neills sermons —the noble voice, with its expressive cadences ;
the living face and glance ; the over-running human vitality. The audiences
drawn to hear these addresses were enormous. Never before, indeed, in
Melbourne have such great multitudes hung upon a single human voice
declaring the great message of Christianity, and never, perhaps, has that
message been listened to with more of eagerness. The audience at
Mr M‘Neill’s services was almost as remarkable as the preacher—a great
floor of human faces all visibly shaped to one mood, each face the picture of
fixed, intent, unbreathing attention. In these reports the words “laughter,”
“ applause, etc., are allowed to stand, that a true picture of the effect produced
by the sermons may be given ; but it need scarcely be added that there is no
faintest note of levity in Mr. M'Neill’s preaching. He never goes in search of
humorous effects. His mood is one of overpowering and passionate earnestness
But he is rich in Scottish humour, and the instinct of the orator in him makes
him sensible that even a grave emotion is deepened, and not impaired, by a
passing gleam of humour. As a matter of fact, the sudden, lightning-like
flash of wit on the part of Mr. M‘Neill, while it sends a swift ripple of laughter
over the audience, really contributes to the whole moral effect for which the
preacher is striving. It sharpens the appeal of the moment; it pricks the
imagination ; it helps to break down some lingering hindrance in the j)ath of
truth. But the sermons speak for themselves, and will, no doubt, give a
spiritual impulse to thousands whom the preacher's voice will never reach.
W. H FITCHETT.


Kj> <22 I r~i <s I
Ijfj} )/ V" i & { ‘fj / i 0
i w'V -y I » I
AUSTRALASIAN ADDRESSES.
I. —THE MAN THAT WOULD NOT PAY THE PRICE.*
(Mark x.)
My theme comes in at the 17th verse : “ And when Jesus was go ne forth
into the way ” —what next? “There came one running and kneeled to
Him, and asked Him, Good Master, what shall I do that I may inherit
eternal life? And Jesus said unto him, Why callest thou Me good?
there is none good but one—that is, God. Thou knowest the command-
ments, Do not commit adultery, do not kill, do not steal, do not bear false
witness, defraud not, honour thy father and thy mother. And he
answered and said unto Him, Master, all these have I observed from my
youth. Then Jesus, beholding him, loved him and said ” —perhaps some
people think He should have said, “ Well, my friend, I will not make any
hard terms with you ; it does not matter after all. You are quite good
enough.’’ But did He say that ? No, but He did say this, “ Then Jesus
beholding him, loved him, and said unto him, One thing thou lackest :
go thy way, sell whatsoever thou hast and give to the poor, and thou
shalt have treasure in heaven, and come, take up the cross, and follow Me.
And he was sad at that saying and went away grieved, for he had great
possessions.’’ Jesus never went a yard after him nor allowed His
disciples to go after him, although no doubt Peter was just wondering
whether that was a fish worth catching. Oh ! thought Peter, that is
just the kind of man to bring into our church; why not just make it a
little easiei for the camel to get through the needle’s eye ? But no; our
Saviour allowed him to depart—he “ lacked one thing.”
CHRIST AS A DISTURBING FORCE.
Our blessed Lord and Master w’as a great sensation. Society could
not stand it. It can stand us preachers. More’s the pity, for it ought
not to be able to. The preacher of Christ’s gospel, I don’t care how
cultured his people ma,y be, but essentially he ought to be a man that
turns things upside down. A man came to me on one occasion, and
speaking with reference to the congregation at his church, said: “We
have leading persons here, we have some of the great lights of society,
leading merchants, and bank managers, and members of Parliament, and
others.” I said to him, “Have you? There are some of them a proper
lot of rascals.” Some think it a fine thing to have a congregation com-
posed of such people, but our Lord is no respecter of persons. As I
have said, when our blessed Master was here society was moved. Now
it is blind Baitimeus, now it is Zaccheus, and now it is a leper, now an
outcast woman, now it is this Jewish gentleman, a leader of the Church ;
and under the spell of Christ’s presence all sorts of people forgot them-
selves, and society was moved. Look how Christ handled that man. It
♦Melbourne Town Hall.


fairly took the disciples’ breath away. They were astonished beyond
bounds—His own disciples—at the amazing way He handled that man.
They would not have done it. My friends, the Lord give back to us the
days when Christ was here, the days when His own apostles who were
baptised into His own spirit turned the world upside down. Some were
glad, c The common people clapped their hands. The common people
heard Him gladly and never would have left Him if their elders had not
misled them. And I say shame on the day when I deny my origin. I
belong to the common people. I will say this for my own class, “ horny-
handed sons of toil,” I have not found that they are atheists or infidels,
or blasphemers, or even that harmless creature, an agnostic. They may
be a little tired of church and of me and my brother ministers, but as a
rule they speak respectfully of Jesus Christ, and have not quarrelled with
Him yet. Oh that we might have back now that kind of preaching that
moves all people. Some were glad, as I have said. Some were sad, and
no doubt some were mad. But none, or scarcely any, were indifferent.
That is the blight and curse of to-day, being lukewarm, and careless, and
indifferent as to whether what we preach is right or wrong; indifferent
to the extent that multitudes of decent people won’t even give us a look
in to listen. That had no place when Christ and the apostles were here.
It may be as dull as ditch water now, but from the beginning it was not
so ; there was power and penetration and widespread interest. There is
a sample case ; if we will just go and preach like that the fat will be in
the fire. The dulness will be over, and for one man that goes out, a
dozen will come in to see what sent him out. There was a man came to
me in London one day, and said that there was an opinion among the
people that I had made a mistake of some sort. “ But,” said he, “ you
have made no mistake, and if you will set yourself and your ministry on
fire, London will come to see it burn.” And so it did. Oh yes, that
is it.
HOW CHRIST DEALS WITH A HUMAN SOUL.
Now look at the story. That man Jesus was going along the road ;
mind you, He was not even in a church. He was as strong outside as
in it; and He saw a rich young ruler, a member of the Sanhedrim, a
man of culture and refinement, and he ran before Him on the public
street and kneeled down before Him and said, “ Good Master, what shall
I do that I may inherit eternal life?” Now I say that is well done.
Some of you, I know, are greatly concerned to follow the gentry in these
matters. That is what you go by. The “ better class of people,” they
are called. I wish I could make them so. Some people have not come
to this meeting because they have not heard that the Joneses, and
Browns, and Smiths have been, but as soon as they hear that the leaders
of society have been they say, “ Oh, let us go.” This man got so moved
out of himself under the spell of Christ’s presence that he knelt down
in the street and said, “ Good Master, what shall I do that I may inherit
eternal life?” Now I want to say here, that was a good question, the
question about eternal life.
ETERNAL LIEE.
You have got your intellectual faculties that they may dig round about
the root of that question. He virtually said, “I am conscious of it by
the lack of it. 1 have been deep into good society and refinement all
my days ; but Master, Master, Master! the kernel of the nut, what is it?


I hare been filling my mouth and cracking shells, but I have got no
kernel yet.’’ Eternal life, he confessed, he had not got, and he was only
conscious of it by the lack of it. So are you, my Christless brother or
sister, who make a profession or who do not. Eternal life 1 I was made
for it! I like that, spoilt and bad as I am, dwarfed and stunted ; I was
made to hold eternal life. I was built that way, and if God can, He
will put it right again. Eternal life ! The lile that the coffin and the
grave cannot touch! Eternal life! “Master, I could hold it; I am
conscious of it by the absence of it. How am Ito get it? Now follow
Him, dear friends; follow Him. There is what you call “being anxious
about your soul.” Eternal life ! Ho not live like a beast. A day
and a day’s meat; a day’s wage and a night’s pleasure, and a nights
sleep ; you are made for more than that. Yours is eternal life. Bise to
it! It has come to you in Jesus Christ.
TESTING THE CONSCIENCE.
How did Christ handle a man like that? “Good Master, ’ he said,
“ what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?” And Jesus seemed to
try and throw him off rather than bring him on. He caught him on a
word. “ Why callest thou Me good ? There is_ none good save one—
that is, God.” Some say, “ Ah, He says there is none good but one
God. He disclaims divinity.” I believe the real grip of His word Jay
here. I think that this young ruler was not superior to the draw-
backs of his class, and even whilst He kneeled down on the ground befoie
Christ and said “Good Master,” there was a kind of self-consciousness in
it that spoilt it; for the Master notices everything although He may say
nothing, and even while he bowed and said, “ Good Master, what shall I
do that I may inherit eternal life?” there was a little pride and self-
consciousness in his tone that said, “ Understand who it is that kneels
to Thee; Ido not go kneeling down to every teacher that comes round
about here.” At any rate, no matter about this man, I tell you there is
such a feeling. Some of you take your seats in church with that same
easy, self-conscious air. The moment you take your seat there is a look
in your face that says, “Now you may go on with the sermon. Even
the best people in the subux’b, people who occupy the chief seats in the
synagogue and pay the biggest pew rent, if they could just get rid of that
and come to Jesus it would be what Christ wants. Some of you are
lamenting the bad times in Melbourne. Well, I am sorry; but if bad
times make a rich man get all the starch taken out of him, and the rich
ruler turned into the blind Bartimeus and get saved, he will say, “ Sweet
were the uses of adversity.” Who is blind Bartimeus who occupied our
attention last night? He is your rich young ruler after he has tumbled
through the bankruptcy court and had all the pride and self-conceit taken
out of him and he is ripe for being saved, not as a rich young ruler, but
as a poor empty beggar on heaven’s bounty. I like the fact that these
two men are in the same chapter. Listen ! “ Good Master, he said,
“ what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?” and Jesus just said,
“Why callest thou Me good? Do not mistake Me for one of your
Babbis, call them great big high-falutin’ names. Just come to Me
simply and naturally, and no patronage.” No, friends, for the sake of
everything, no patronage. Do not try to look down on a man whose
head is in heaven. You are a fool if you try. Jesus just firmly shook
the nonsense out of Him as far as He could.


THE TEST OF THE LAW.
What next? Jesus said unto him, “Ye know the commandments,’’
and he ran over them shortly. The young ruler did not get the reply
he expected. He got a hopelessly disappointing answer. He said,
“Master, all these have I observed from my youth ; what lack I yet ? ”
Doubtless he thought to himself, I came to this new teacher and put a
leading question of the day, and now I doubt, from his answer, that he
is worthy of his place among our preachers and teachers. See what an
insufficient answer he has given to that leading question. I have gone
to Eabbi So-and-so and So-and-so and they gave me their answers, and
they laboured to answer me circumspectly, but this young teacher from
Galilee does not seem to comprehend the point or understand the scope
of my question. “Ye know the commandments.” “ Master,” he said,
“ all these have I kept from my youth.” I never can get over the feeling of
w r onder that Christ said nothing sarcastic at this point. Ido not think I
could have stopped myself. It is on my tongue just now. “All these have
I observed from my youth ; what lack I yet?” Jesus did not get sarcastic.
He loved him, I will speak to some of you young ladies at this point.
Have you ever been in a company of people who think they know a little
more than other people, and perhaps there is some young fellow
especially talking away, and you happen to know what he is talking
about. You put a kind of leading question to him, and of course he
talks away the same as ever, and you feel what a flimsy, empty, would-be
thing he is, and you know the scorn that rises in your soul for him.
Now Jesus is a Master in this business, and He knows what the law is
and what righteousness is. He is a Master, and we are all poor, peddling
creatures, and lam amazed how He answered the young man. He did
not wax sarcastic. He did His best for him, but lam afraid it failed.
This young ruler’s vaflity was the vanity that comes out; it is the most
harmless kifid. It is the vanity that clothes itself with humble self-dis-
praise that is the deadly kind. Now this young man’s vanity was very open,
and so not deadly. It is far better for some diseases to come out. If
they are driven in they kill. If they come out they let live. That is
how it is that some harlots and drunkards will go to Christ and He will
save them. Your lepro<*V is driven in ; it is death. “Master,” he said,
“all these have I kept from my youth: what lack I yet?” And
Jesus looked at him and His heart rose to him, for He loves a young
fellow who is frank and open. And He tested him. He did not read
him a homily about God’s law.
SIN AT THE ROOT.
Now don’t suppose because you never killed anyone, because you never
swore away any man’s character in a court of justice, because you never
went to the harlot’s house, that on that account you axe blameless. We
must preach to you that, although you do not commit the outward act,
yet your heart may be depraved, “ Whosoever looketh on a woman,”
We must preach that God’s law has a lightning glance. There are
men and women who wish and desire to be immoral, but for prudential
considerations it pays them better in Melbourne to be moral rather
than immoral. That is a rotten foundation on which to rest your
morality. “It pays you better,” and so you hold yourself within bounds,
and when some other man gets over the traces and bolts, God pity and
forgive you for lifting your self-righteous hands in horroi’. You never


could do that! You never could take your fling ! Maybe there’s no
fling in you. lam not running down morality; there is too little of it
in Melbourne ; but understand that along that track you are as far off
God’s favour as ever.
THE CORE OF THE GOSPEL.
Now, as to this young man, Christ tested him practically. Practically ?
How? He virtually looked at him and said, “You are one of those
honest, sincere persons whose creed has been expressed in a rather long
collection of words.” A “ tell him anything more to do and he will do
it” Pharisee. Tell him anything more to do, and he will do it, in the
hope that the sum total of his deeds will merit God’s favour, everlasting
life, salvation. Christ said to him, “Friend, you are a doer. I will
give you something to do.” He took him at his own valuation, and
there could not be a higher one than your own valuation of yourself. He
did not say, “ You are a hypocrite.” He was one of those honest Pharisees
who really mean to get to heaven this way, Paul was another. When
one of these decent people gets saved—when Paul gets a sight of himself
and a sight of Christ’s salvation—the rage of him at his former state is
positively magnificent. He poured contempt on it, and said, “It is dung,
dung, dung ! ” Jesus tested him practically. That is just how a candi-
date for a vacant situation should be tested. If an employer is wanting
a vacancy filled he advertises for candidates, and they come. Now, as a
rule, every candidate carries with him his certificates telling what he is
and what he can do, and, as a rule, these certificates are beautifully
expressed and very accurate and laudatory. Just imagine a case. There
are some young fellows come as candidates for your vacant situation,
and you first take one and read his certificates—you and he alone in the
countinghouse—and every certificate says that this is the very man for
your vacant situation, and in fact it is very fortunate that you should
happen to have a vacancy when such a gorgeous junior is going about
looking for one. (Laughter.) It is said that those who have sheaves and
bundles of certificates stand greatly in need of them. But that apart.
You do not say there is forgery here, there is deceit here, there is lying
here ! No, if you know what’s what, you read them, you never turn a
word on him, like a gentleman in Scotland I knew. He had a good
situation in a nobleman’s household, and he advertised for a candidate
for a vacant situation on this nobleman’s estate. In answer, someone
came, and with certificates so satisfactory that even a Scotch lawyer was
nearly taken in, and that is as near as you can go. (Laughter.) He
was just going to fling his lordship’s vacancy at that man’s head, when
he said, somehow, “ That certificate made me suspicious ; ” as a cooper
said to me once, “ It is a pretty sure sign of weakness when there are
too many hoops to the barrel.” You may be too many certificated. So,
instead of accepting this man on his certificates, he said, “ I tested him
practically.” I said, “By the way, there’s a certain bit of work waiting
to be done on the home farm. Would you just look round, please, and
bring in your idea of what you think should be done. Let’s hear what
you think of it.” And he said, “ I had no sooner got his report, when
he came back, than 1 discovered I had almost flung away the situation
on a bit of certificated incompetence.” That is just what Jesus did here,
and He tested him practically. He said—and I would give all lam
worth, and a thousand times more, if I could stand before a candidate


for the Kingdom and speak to him in tones of heavenly eloquence and
encouragement, as the Lord spoke to that man—“ Go thy way, sell
whatsoever thou hast, and give to the poor,” and you will not lose by it;
you will have treasure in heaven, where Abraham’s and David’s treasure
was. And then He kept the best till the last, for He said, “Fall in
behind Me with these twelve men from Galilee.’’ “ Take up the Cross
and follow Me.” “You will have a deal to give up, mind, but you will
always have Me.” That is what makes the balance lean to the other
side. “ Follow Me.” For the sake of Him the best and the bravest have
gone through death, and fire, and flame ; for although thou givest up
house and wealth, and wife and child, and life, thou boldest Me. “ Follow
Me.” There is the core of the Gospel, the pith and marrow of the whole
business. It is getting heaven.
a soul’s failure.
And it failed! “He went away sorrowful, for he had great possessions.”
Oh, how he dwindled, struck by the lightning. Christ did not condemn
but with every ring of his foot on the road as he went away, He said,
“ Not fit for the kingdom of heaven. He counted himself unworthy of
the thing he sought— ‘ eternal life.’ ” He makes you condemn yourself.
He makes you tear up your own certificates, and give them the lie. Do
you sympathise with the young man ? Yes. So do I. I cannot help
it. Why was Christ so severe ? Because He could not help it. Listen !
Jesus said to that man, “ Friend, go on ; do this and you will add the
top stone to all your other doings ; and He might have said, “ If you do
this you will be as good as Myself; I am doing no more, and you will
have rendered My coming here the largest blunder of all time. For if
righteousness comes by our own unaided natural goodness, Christ is
dead in vain. That is a hideous blunder and a crime, and God is not
clear of it. Christ had to handle him so to justify His own mission to
the world. “ There is none righteous, no, not one,” and He had come
to bring in a righteousness that was to be handed over as a free gift, and
to die an atoning death for our salvation, and He has made no mistake.
HOW A SINNER IS SAVED.
Stand up, my self-righteous friend, and remember you are virtually
saying that Jesus did not need to come and die when you trust so much
to yourself. Do not mix things up. Beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees ! You must be saved as a sinner or never saved at all. It is
worth repeating. Listen ! You must be saved as a sinner or never
saved at all. There is a woman on her deathbed, and she knows she
is dying, dying intelligently, dying in the possession of her faculties,
and she talks thus with herself on her deathbed, a place at which and
m which one’s real working creed ought to come: “ I have been,” she
said, “a good wife to my husband. I have been a good mother to my
children; a good friend and neighbour among men; any
harm to anybody; there is nobody can say a word against me, and it is
a comfort to me now to think of it.” In that awful hour not one syllable
as to the need of the cleansing blood or any righteousness better than
her own! Going to the judgment seat with a lying certificate in her
right hand; with not even the dimmest glimmer of Christ dying on the
Cross. And she had sung “ Bock of Ages, cleft for Me,” for forty years !
Take another case. That man is the same. Put the psalm-book in his


hand on a Sunday, and what does he say? He stands up and says:
“Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive
me.” “ Shapen in iniquity and sin ” from the very protoplasm. But
when he meets the Son of God on the road there is his real working
creed. The psalm-book, the prayer-book, and the hymn-book can keep
your tongue right, but no amount of it can keep your heart right; and
your heart may be saying “Myself! Myself! Myself! ” even when your
tongue says “ Rock of Ages, cleft for Me.” I say it with all solemnity,
from the damning, desolating, stupefying power of mere formality and
lip-service in religion, good Lord deliver us, and let all this people say
amen !
HOW CHRIST TOWERS !
In closing I come back to what Christ had to do in justice to His own
mission. Somehow, I never love Jesus more than when I see Him
beside that man. Before he met Jesus he did look of some worth, but
when you put him alongside Jesus what a pigmy he is ! If Jesus Christ
had only been as good as that man, wliat would He have done? He
would have clung to His possessions up there in Eternity where He is
Lord of all, and would sometimes have looked down sadly and pityingly
on you and me, but left us to sink down to hell while He clung to His
great possessions as the Lord of eternity. Oh ! how Christ towers, and
that man dwindles ! That is your Jesus! Love Him morh than ever,
and purge your soul of self-righteousness to the last particle.
An illustration. Her*e stands the Tay Bridge. You have heard of it.
The Tay Bridge in Scotland is two miles long across the Frith of Tay to
Dundee. There stands the first Tay Bridge. Would you be sorry, sup-
pose that first Tay Bridge were now’ to be opened for traffic—would you
be sorry, knowing what you know now, if Government should have sent
across that bridge, before it was open for passenger traffic, a freight
train so heavy that the bridge would have been broken down ? Let me
tell you there are bleeding hearts all over the north-east of Scotland
to-day, who would to God it had been done. It was awful, it was cruel,
to let off the Tay Bridge as it was. There was bad work in it; but it
was all certified to by leading engineers, and railway companies had
accepted it and it was open for traffic. But no amount of certificates and
scamp work and glossing things over availed when one night God’s
judgment winds were out. They won’t look at architects’ certificates;
judgment winds were out, and they took that bridge with a train
on it and hurled it into the gulf below. Oh, it was abominably cruel,
the kindness to a badly constructed bridge, no matter how costly and
how certificated, Jesus Christ will not be guilty of that cruelty, blessed
be His holy name ! He tested that man down to the ground. He
shattered him. He had to do it. There was no road to heaven that
way. The bridge is down! No road that way! “Not by works of
righteousness that we have done, but according to His mercy He saves.”
If that door slams in your face there is another door that opens. Do
not beat your head out against the street door. Come where Jesus is
standing within the door to receive and welcome you as a poor sinner.
A TRAGEDY IN THREE ACTS.
I have no divisions for this sermon, but if you like you can call it a
roadside tragedy, in three acts. In five minutes it was all over, and there


was no ripple left on tlie surface of the stream to show where the human
soul took a solemn plunge into the icy waters of rejection of the Son of
God. That drama goes forth to-night. God help you to play your part
better than this fool played it. I had been better pleased if he had got
mad, rather than sad. There is nothing more dangerous than mere
tender sentiment of religion—nothing ! Yet that is all some of you
have; a mere surface emotion of sentiment towards Jesus; but your
heart goes after its own covetousness all the while. I had been better
pleased if he had got mad, but he “ went away.” All Hell is in that
word. These shall “gu away.” That is Hell. He went away. Hang
on to Christ. Hang on to Him, and life, and peace, and rest will come,
but do not, under any pretence, go away. If the Lord seemed to handle
him roughly, He had to do it in justice to His own claims. But if He
did handle him roughly, death came one day. What is the last about
the rich young ruler? He is dead since. Death came one day, and
death handled him roughly, and death made no bones about who he was,
but rudely dispossessed him of his wealth like any poor beggar, “We
brought nothing into the world, and it is certain we can carry nothing
out.” He died. His breath left his body. He passed through the vale
into eternity, and there, in quite a blaze of light, in glory, there sits the
Man whom he rejected on the roadside in Galilee. Mind, there is no
getting rid of Jesus. Turn your back on Him to-night, and you meet
Him to-morrow as your Judge; therefore come to Him to-night. “ Him
that cometh unto Me I will in no wise cast out.” Come to-night, and
remember this, the last word. Since that man knelt at Christ’s feet,
the print of the nail has come into Christ’s feet. We meet Him to-night
after the Cross. That man met Him before the Cross. This is the true
God. This is eternal life. He that hath the Son of God, hath life.
He that hath not the Son of God, shall not have life, but the wrath of
God is resting upon Him. Come out from under the wrath. Come in
under the shelter of the Cross. Take Jesus Christ as your righteousness.
Take Jesus Christ as your Saviour, and in whom thou hast eternal life.
“Not of works, lest any man should boast.” The gift of God is eternal
life through Jesus Christ our Lord. I can hardly stop here. When I
get into the vein I could preach about it till my tongue will no longer
wag. Oh ! the amazing grace of God to guilty sinners in Jesus Christ!
Pardon ana peace in the twinkling of an eye by renouncing yourself and
taking Him. The Lord add His blessing. Oh ! Jesus, be revealed
to-night. May our self-righteousness sink dumb for ever. Now, friends,
to make sure we shall never stop, keep singing. Compel your proud
heart to sing His dying love,
“ E’er since by faith I saw the stream
Thy flowing wounds supply,
Redeeming love has been my theme,
And shall be till I die.'
lI.—CHRIST ON THE SEA.*
(Make iv. 36-41.)
Now i would like to begin at the end, so to speak. “And they feared
exceedingly, and said one to another,” —in a terrified whispering—
* Melbourne Town Hall.


“What manner of man is this that even the wind and the sea obey
Him?” What these disciples said at the end of this story I should like
we should say at the beginning, and say it all through ; only you know
there is such a difference the way we say a thing. They said, “ What
manner of man is this that even the wind and the sea obey Him ? ” and
they said it with a chill of fear that went to the marrow, with parted
teeth, and trembling lips, and shuddering frame; “What manner of
man is this ? ”
TRUTH IN DIFFERENT TONES.
Now notice. We can say the very same thing to the very last syllable,
but we can say it adoringly, rapturously, and confidently, as if we knew
the answer to our own question. We can say it with a shout instead of
a shivering whisper, “what manner of man is this that even the wind
and THE SEA obes Him ! ” As we would say, “Come, high or low, rain
or sunshine, storm or calm, what matters it: lam sailing the seas with
Him. How happy, then, am I! ” Now just begin and strike that key-
note. I wonder why they said it with a shiver, “ they feared exceedingly ”
nearly fainted, neaily went out of their mind. “ What manner of man
is this ? ” and they had been with Him for some time now and knew
Him better than anybody else did* I think it was something this :
They were just like you and me. Is not there a stage at which if our
religious knowledge does not breed contempt, it breeds a kind of stagna-
tion ? We stand still at ditchwater level. We virtually say, “What I
don’t know about religion is not knowledge. I have been for years in
contact with these things and know all about preaching and worship and
Christian work.” Just like what the disciples were, Ihey thought they
knew all about Jesus, and, of course, they were not tired of Him ; but
they had been close to Him, and were just coming to that stage at which
you begin to think you know it all, when, suddenly, that morning He
•towered away up above them into Godhead and infinity and immensity !
And, as the seas roared above them and the wind howled round
them, they looked as if they had never seen Him .before. “What
manner of man is this ?” Our Jesus ! And they looked at Him with
startled eyes and beating, throbbing hearts. My friends, I would not
be sorry if the same thing came to some of us. God be praised for the
surprising mercy, or God be praised for the judgment that brings to
you and me that shock that lifts us out of dulness and stagnation into
the knowledge of God and of His Son Jesus Christ. lor we are all apt
to get into the doldrums, and spin round about like a bit of wood in a
back eddy, while the main stream goes on to the ocean without us,
“ What manner of man is this?” 1 repeat it, God be praised for the
surprising mercy, or the staggering judgment that catches you a blow
between the eyes and makes you think it is time you repented of your
past Christianity and began over again at the beginning, They thought
they knew all about Him, but that morning He shot up above them into
Godhead. “What manner of man is this ? ”
THE UNKNOWN IN CHRIST.
Jesus takes a deal of knowing. It is not in a day, or a month, or a
year, or a lifetime, that yowwill get to the end of Him. “ Walk about
Zion and go round.” Go round, go round, man ! You have not been
half round the city yet. Look at Him from all sides, and look again.


He takes a deal of knowing 1 . He is no end of a Saviour. “ Age cannot
wither nor custom stale His infinite variety.” There is a perpetual
newness and open-eyed wonderment and surprise in Jesus Christ,
Perhaps some of us are just beginning to think, “Now I am already
perfect, and if you want to know about religion, come and ask me.’’ My
friend, there is nobody in such dense darkness as you. Have you ever
thought of those poor idolaters—say in India? Picture one of them:
think of his coming with his rice and his fowls, or his chickens, to lay
them down before that poor, dim, hideous, grinning idol by way of
worship; and he comes bowing and bending, and with fear in his step
as he comes with gifts to offer at the feet of that carved and grinning
image. Try and think how would you feel if that thing suddenly lifted
its cold, ivory hand and touched him, and opened its scared, empty eyes
and looked at him ! What a thrill would go through him. The day is
to dawn when that thrill will go through you and strike through your be-
sotted, idolatrous soul, and make you exclaim, “ God lives! God lives!
There was a time when He was only a name in a book to me, only a name
in a book, and I sang it a thousand times. But now it dawns upon me
—God lives ! He has touched me, He has looked at me; I have seen
Him.” Something like that went through these disciples. May God
give it to all of us ! It will bring a mighty revival of the best kind into
our hearts, a revelation of God as a living God. For to many of us He
is a mere dumb idol: your heart has never wakened up to believe that
God is, and is the rewarder of them that diligently seek Him.
THE LOWLY CHRIST.
How did all this happen—this story of Jesus stilling the tempest and
working this great deliverance, that was such an eye-opening thing and
soul-subduing thing ? It happened thus ; “It was at the close of a busy
day, and our blessed Master had been preaching and healing diseases
among that crowd that continually followed Him. Think of the exhaus-
tion of it; not only preaching to, but healing those people—keeping at it
for hours together. And at the close of the day all the accommodation He
could get was to step on board an old ill-smelling fisherman’s boat and
sink down in the stern and lay His blessed head down on the only soft
thing there was —not a pillow, fishermen don’t carry pillows, but only
what is known as a fisherman’s cushion—and then, worn out with sheer
exhaustion, fall fast asleep. I cannot get over that. When I see Jesus
stepping aboard that boat at the close of such a busy day; when I see
the manner of the Man, I feel inclined to say at the beginning, “ What
manner of man is this?” for lowliness, for self-forgetfulness, for condescen-
sion and sweethumility; for being stone-dead to the things you would burst
your little heart about. You would have thought of yourself, and who
and what you are. Just look at Him and remember who He was as
shown in the end of the narrative. The mighty God ! The Lord God
of Hosts, who rules the raging sea, and when the waves thereof arise He
stilleth them ! That is the manner of this man, the Lord God of Hosts !
And yet at the close of a busy day He laid His head on a fisherman’s
cushion. Listen ! Four and twenty hours of that Man’s spirit of lowli-
ness and self-forgetfulness would so sweeten the breath of Melbourne and
your home that you would not know it. £)h the fragrance that that
breath brings with it! How it sweetens the home ! The spirit of Jesus
is the spirit of lowliness and self-forgetfulness and utter absolute meek-


ness. Remember that awful text, “If any man have not the spirit of
Christ he is none of His ; ” and that Man’s spirit is absolute meekness
and self-forgetfulness. You may eat and drink the sacramental elements
till you drug your soul, but if you have not the spirit of Christ you are
none of His, and shall never see the blessed One. Now just think of
how we carry on. If we don’t get all that is due to us, and if we are not
bowed down to and commended, and get all things taken at our own
valuation, there will be squalls aboard the boat. (Laughter.) Yes, and
there are many homes and congregations in Melbourne, and it is terribly
dirty weather aboard the boat, and it is the lack of that spirit that causes
it. But if they sought the Lord all strife would still down, and you
might almost see that brooding Spirit descending like a dove on that
congregation.
THE UNRECOGNISED CHRIST.
This stilling of the tempest is a miracle that need never have been
wrought. Christ ought never to have needed to go aboard that boat.
There were people who had big houses on the lake front, and we can
imagine that when the evening came on they would say, “I wonder
where that preacher stays to-night,” but they did not ask Him in. He did
not look like a gentleman in His rough clothes. No ! God save us from
the tailor-made gentleman—coat and vest 735. 6d. He did not look like
a gentleman ; and the disciples who were helping Him in His evangelical
work and His medical mission were evidently working men, and those
big people with plenty of accommodation kept their houses to themselves.
But they will hear about it in that day—“l was a stranger.” “You
remember one afternoon up near the lake I was a stranger and ye took
Me not in; I was hungry and ye never asked Me where I was to get my
bread ; and I had to go into an ill-provided fisherman’s boat.” They
will hear about it. Ah, my friends, have an eye in your head for the
Lord’s poor; show kindness to them, for you may entertain angels
unawares. There was a chance that day for someone to have enter-
tained, not simply an angel, but the Lord of Angels ; and they missed in
badly, didn’t they? Be not ye therefore like unto them. The Lord
comes limping along past us, it may be on some beggar’s crutch, and you
do not know Him. “ Lord,” we shall say, “ when saw we Thee an
hungered and fed Thee ? ” And the King shall answer and say,
“ Inasmuch as ye did it unto one of the least of these My brethren, ye
did it unto Me.” Now I remember all that when I see Him having to
go aboard the boat, and nobody giving Him accommodation when that
storm was brewing. I remember, when I was over in Ireland, holding
evangelistic meetings and preaching to ten thousand people three times
a day in the open air, from eleven till five o’clock, after my Master’s
fashion. But what happened when evening came round ? Outside the
city there on the road came a fine carriage, drawn by a pair of splendid
horses, and the footman jumped out and bowed me in, and I sank down
into the dreamy luxuriousness of that splendid carriage and was driven
off to the gentleman’s mansion ; and when I arrived there the master
and the mistress and the maids and the daughters vied with each
other in showing me kindness, and I do not say I did not deserve it.
(Laughter.) But how different was the case with our Master !
THE IMITABLE THING IN CHRIST.
“And the same day when the even was come He saith unto them, Let


us pass over to the other side. And when they had sent away the mul-
titude they took Him even as He was ” —limp and tired, wearied in the
work, but not of it, utterly exhausted, for it is exhausting work—and He
just managed to stagger along to the boat, and I see it give under the
weight of Him till He sank down in the stern and waved His hand and
said, “ To the other side,” and quicker than I can say it He was asleep.
Oh, blessed Jesus ! Oh, to be like Him ! Well, I cannot be like Him
in this respect. I cannot still the tempest, or work miracles, but we can
go away home to-night and be so like Jesus that in four and twenty
hours your best friends will look narrowly at you and say, “ My ! he is
so changed; she is so altered. Before, so proud, so selfish, and stubborn,
and loud, and self-opinionated, and now so quiet, and gentle, and easy
to be entreated;” and that is of more value in Melbourne to-day than
stilling tempests. Covet earnestly the best gifts.
CIIftIST AND THE STORM.
When I see Jesus starting off in that boat I remember the man He
was. I say to myself, I would like to see that boat in a big wind and
sea. Why ? Because I have a notion like this : no matter how strong
the winds blow and how high the waves dash, that boat will never ship
a drop of water at either bow or stern. An oar’s length away there may
be a perfect hell of wind and broken water, but aboard the boat where
that Passenger is there will not be enough wind to stir Peter’s hair. A
flat calm, although there is a raging tempest an oar’s length away; and
wherever she comes the waves will sink and crouch like spaniels at their
master’s feet. Well, dear friends, you know that it fared with that boat
like any other boat, only a little worse ; and I am so glad of it. Didn’t
you and I, when we came to Jesus in the time of our conversion, after
the light dawned upon us in the sweet beginnings of our conscious
faith in Chiist, when we took Jesus into our heait, and we were one
and we knew it, did not we rather congratulate ourselves on that rosy
dawn of Christ in our souls and say, “ Begone, dull care, begone from
me; you and I can never agree”? All my battles are fought and won
now; all my troubles are over now. My bread is baked and buttered
on both sides, and there will be no more trouble or trial. “ I feel
like singing all the time, and I will drift across moonlit and sunlit seas,
and life will be like a splendid yachting voyage, until in some favoured
hour 1 will drift across and drop anchor in ‘ Pair Havens ’ at the last.”
And what has your Christian life been? Been? you say! lam not
without my own crosses and trials, but I feel that it would be only
acting the part of a modest man for me to sit dow r n at this point and let
some grey-haired veteran or some sweet, patient woman, whose wrinkled
face is written over with a history of trial, and trouble, and bereavement,
tll you what her Christian life has been. Such a one would stand up
and tell us that she never knew what trouble was till she came to Jesus ;
that she was tempted to think her conversion was a mistake; that she
had fewer troubles in the old, unbelieving days, or the moral, formal
days, when she was nothing but an empty Pharisee; how there seemed
thorns in her sides that never troubled her before. That is the very
sign the Christ is with you ! And it was because Jesus was in that boat
that they had trouble. What a triumph it would have been for the devil
it he could have sunk that boat. Depend upon it he was out that night.
(Laughter.) He didn’t care three brass farthings for the disciples and


their Master if he could have sunk that boat. Now of yourself you are
less than nothing and vanity, but if you are a believer you carry a
precious cargo. Christ is in you ; and the “ P rince of the power of the
air” will do his utmost to put between you and Jesus every barrier he
can make. Now do not play into his hands as the first disciples did.
If you are tossed about, and have lost a quantity of earthly goods in the
depression, lie low ; keep close to Christ ; hold hard. These be the very
signs that Christ is with you. Storm and trouble are the very signs of
Christ’s presence with you. Ever since Job’s day, patient, honest
believers in God have found that the believer seems to fare worse for this
world than the unbeliever. God’s people are killed all the day long.
Now understand it, and possess your soul in patience. I don’t care what
the weather is, listen, “ There shall not a hair of your head perish ; ”
and some of us have a few to look after. (Laughter.) I like that—
“ not a hair of your head ’’ —it is Christ’s challenge to the devil. “ Not
a hair of your head shall perish.” “ Happy art thou, 0 Israel! Who
is like unto thee, O people, saved of the Lord ? Thine enemies shall be
found liars unto thee, and thou shalt tread upon their high places.”
THE SECRET OF SAFETY.
Now I come back to the disciples. Christ’s presence was their safety,
but they didn’t see it. Christ’s presence is our safety. It makes all the
difference between the career of the Christian and the non-Christian.
The Christian for a little while seems to fare like anybody else, but the
difference is this: be a Christian or do not be a Christian as you like,
but you cannot escape trouble or trial. That is so, isn’t it? There is
no escaping sickness, accident, disease, trouble, losses, crosses, and at
last death shall break your boat up. The big difference is this : without
Christ not a soul shall reach the other side; with Christ the voyage may
be long and the winds may be contrary, and for many a day and year
neither sun nor moon nor star appears. But you are indestructible and
unsuitable ! Waves won’t drown you ; fire won’t burn you ; death won’t
kill you. “My sheep know My voice and I give to them eternal life, and
they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of My
hand.” That is the difference, and it is a mighty one in the end, isn’t
it? For a little while it looks as if there were none, but in the long run
you don’t get to the other side without Jesus, that’s all.
THE SLUMBERING CHRIST !
Now what next? I could preach till midnight. It is just full of
subject for discourse. You know I have nothing to say except what
God said first. It is all in there. Ido not get it in books. Surely any
man can see that. “He was in the hinder part of the ship asleep on a
pillow.” “ What manner of man is this?” Now there is a question
for you. What manner of man is this for taking a sound sleep when the
poor disciples were struggling and plugging at the oar, and, as we say in
Scotland, “ knocking the life out to keep it in”? How is it that the
storm and the rolling of the boat doesn’t wake Him ? Oh, He will only
be rocked to a deeper sleep. It is nice when you are used to it.
(Laughter.) How could He sleep, I wonder, when those poor disciples
were tugging themselves to pieces. He was as human as they were •
and when they awaked Him and complained of their miserable condition
He could easily have jumped up and rebuked them. He could have


said, “If your clothes are wet, am 1 dry? Am I lying in a gentleman’s
bed on shore ? Am I not with you in the same boat ? If it is a stormy
night for you, isn’t it a stormy night for Me? ” “In all our afflictions
He was afflicted.” ‘‘ Did I not cast in three men,” says Nebuchadnezzar,
“unto the midst of the fire? Lo ! I see four men, loose, walking in
the midst of the fire, and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God.”
He goes into the furnace with you.
How did He sleep ? I 'will tell you. First of all He had been busy
during the day, engaged in very wearying and exhausting work, and so
He slept. And He knew all about the storm that night. He knew it
was coming, and when He lay down He committed all to His heavenly
Father, and although He seemed to be lying on a plank bed, He had a
better bed than that. He crept into His heavenly Father’s bosom, where
no storm could beat. God’s left hand was under His head, and with His
right hand He embraced Him ; and the same embrace held the disciples,
but it was wasted on them. Isn’t it melancholy to think what a chance
they had of showing their faith, and they flung it away ! Now lam n»t
saying I would have been any better. Peter and I would have been
bursting ourselves on one oar. (Laughter.) I can see by the way you
laugh that it has happened to you, (Laughter.) You will have plenty
of opportunity to lean on Jesus. Bless God for the depression in
Melbourne! It gives you a grand chance to find out the value of Jesus
in the storm and the trial. Remember what He said before He fell
asleep—“ Let us pass over to the other side.” He said that before He
fell asleep, and it was bound to come true. The Word of God shall
stand. Let the Word of Christ dwell in you richly and you will keep on
an even keel in the biggest storm. But why is it we are knocked about ?
Because the Word of God does not dwell in us richly. Ye do err, not
knowing the Scriptures. There was another thing that should have
kept them right, and that was His own presence. A Christian is a going
concern—
“ We’re going home no more to roam,
No more to sin and sorrow,
No more to wear the brow of care—
Were going home to-morrow.”
And some of them may get home to-day. We are passing over to the
other side, in the care of Jesus, and He never lost one passenger yet and
He will not lose you. Sit still, and don’t make a fool of yourself; that
is about all you’ve got to do, and too much for you. (Laughter.) What
next? They had not only His word, as I said just now ; they had Him-
self. I wish I had been there—knowing what I know now. (Laughter.) I
wish I had been there. Why didn’t Peter, now—Peter and John—gather
the others, and stop all the rowing and baling of the boat, and gather
round the sleeping Saviour ? Oh, what a sight it must have been—the
sleeping face of Christ, the Son of God ! Why did they not borrow peace
from His tranquillity, and say, by the sleeping face of the Son of God,
“ Our hearts shall know no fear. Time enough to spring up in wild
alarm when He springs up.” There He lay, “ the peace of God that
passeth all understanding,” in visible form; and it was wasted on them!
What a sight it must have been ! Come and gather round Him to-night.
Come and look at Him. Calmness sits enthroned on that unruffled brow.
It is a wild night round you, and the devil and the world are doing their
best; but He is in perfect peace, as happy and safe as if He were up in


heaven. Trust in Jesus! I wish you could learn that. What a life
yours and mine might be, just to trust Him and let the winds blow.
“ Thou wilt keep Him in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on Thee,
because he trusteth in Thee.” It is an argument in a circle. Trust
Him to-night; gather round Him. What are you afraid of with Him?
SLEEPING WITH CHRIST.
There is a mother in Melbourne to-day; she had a hard morning’s
work and she was tired this afternoon—a working mother who really
brings up her children. She was very tired, and was about an hour on
the lee side of the afternoon. Just about four o’clock that tired woman
endeavours to get some rest, so she flings herself down on the top of the
bed and leaves the children playing about on the floor. And for a while
they play about contentedly on the floor while the mother is enjoying a
brief sleep ; but after about ten minutes or so one child suddenly stops
playing, and climbs up on the bed and creeps in behind the mother, and
then, after a little while, another child misses that one—(laughter) —and
goes the same road, and then maybe a third ; and in about half an hour
there is a great stillness in that room. The mother and all those little
chicks round about her fast asleep. Not a sound to be heard but the
ticking of the clock and the gentle heaving of their peaceful breasts.
The disciples might have done that. They might have said, when He
sleeps it is sleeping time. (Laughter.) At this point you cannot help
quoting Elizabeth Barrett Browning :
“ Of all the thoughts of God that are
Borne inward into souls afar,
Along the Psalmist’s music deep,
Now tell me if that any is,
For gift or grace, surpassing this—
‘ He giveth His beloved sleep ’ ? ”
It is His legacy. Some devil’s advocate has cheated you out of your
Master’s legacy: “ My peace I give unto you, My peace I leave with you.”
I will tell you what is wrong—Martha’s spirit has entered into you. This
is just our dear old friend Martha, flying in the face of the Lord.
“ Master, dost Thou not care that we perish ? Dost Thou not care that
I work alone. Send Mary that she help me.” There were these disciples
now, and the Mary spirit would have made that one of the most beautiful
voyages you ever read about. They should have implicitly trusted in
Christ’s superior strength. If Mary had been aboard that boat she would
have done it; she would have set an example to those bungling men.
She would have kept close to Christ just because she knew nothing of
rowing. The Martha spirit spoiled them ; the Mary spirit would have
saved them—the calm, patient waiting, waiting, waiting on Him, But I
must say it goes against one to speak against Martha . she was a good
soul. Who is it that sews on our buttons, when Mary is mooning away
at conventions? Martha. (Laughter.) But oh! for Mary’s spirit!
And even if they had just kept pulling away at the oars, and trusting to
Jesus to bring them to the other side, how much better that would have
been. Do not for ever be asking God to work miracles for you, to split
Jordan in front of you. Gather round about Christ; wait on Him;
have Him sleeping in you. I was brought up at the coast, and I have
often got a little nervous in my sleep, and awoke with the sea and wind
shrieking round about the house. But what steadied my nerve Avas


this: through the wall there lay the strongest man I ever knew—my
father. He was there—that was enough. Is Christ sleeping in you ?
Let Him sleep. It is grand to have Him there. He knows His own
time. Trust Him ; and that is the cure for the soul, and that will carry
you through !
WHAT CHRIST CAN DO.
That is all I want to say to-night. I sometimes deliberately play fast
and loose with our customary mechanics in evangelistic work. Anything
I could say to you in a second meeting I have already put into my
sermon. Trust that Jesus for the Voyage of Life, and get Him in the
boat, and He will take you to the other side sure and certain. Our
fathers trusted in Him, and He has taken them home, and He will do it
for us. If there are troubles, by all means go and pray to Him; but
these disciples did not pray, they accused Him. “ Dost thou not care
that we perish ? ” when it was caring that they should not perish that
brought Him there at all. Peace, perfect peace, for He is our King, and
I don’t care from what point the storm rises. Is it a storm of lost wealth?
Is it a storm of fear and anxiety because of your son or daughter, your
husband or wife ? Because temptation is laying hold of the trembling
curtains of your flesh, and the sparks are landing and beginning to
kindle? Is it a storm of your sin within you ? He is thy King. Look
to Jesus. Cling to Jesus. Trust in Jesus. One word of His mouth,
one drop of His atoning blood, one look at His blessed face in the beatific
vision of a simple faith as He is revealed in the eternal world, and peace
sets in ; peace deep, solid, fathomless, the peace of God that passeth all
understanding, that keeps the heart and mind, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Now just bow your heads and trust —all of you.
III—LOOK ! *
SALVATION BY LOOKING-
You will find our theme this afternoon in Isaiah xlv. 22, “ Look unto
Me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth ; for I am God, and there is
none else,”
Now my text is a splendid text for a big crowd, a text that was made
for a crowd. “ Look unto Me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth ;
for I am God, and beside Me there is none else” to look to.
I remember, when I was a lad, one evening I went to our little village
church, and perhaps I went all the more eagerly because, as they say in
Scotland, it was “a strange man” that was to preach, not our own
minister. You know all the notes that are in him by this time, and you
go with greater curiosity to a stranger. Well, I went that evening, and
the strange minister took this text for his sermon. I have forgotten all
the sermon except the divisions. I was only a lad of fourteen or fifteen
at the time, and the divisions were—first of all, the greatest possible
blessing, salvation ; secondly, the greatest possible blessing in the
simplest possible way, “ by a look ; ” thirdly, the greatest possible bless-
ing in the simplest possible way, for the greatest possible number, “all
the ends of the earth ; ” and lastly, this greatest possible blessing, in the
simplest possible way, for the greatest possible number, secured, secured
to us on the strongest possible guarantee, “ for lam God.” And if that
*Exhlbition Buildinjr, Sunday afternoon.


doesn’t clinch the business and give security to him who believes, what
will? Now a word in the ear ; Carry away the heads as I did,' If you
have to forget all else, go home and tell what the text was in perhaps the
biggest religious meeting you were ever in. Get the text and the heads,
and, if you have forgotten them, come back to me to-night and I will tell
you. (Laughter.)
THE GREATEST THING IN THE WORLD.
First of all, dear friends, in my text there is the greatest possible
blessing—being saved. Now listen. I have gone a good bit round the
world, and I have met all sorts and conditions of people ; but I am
bound to say this, that, while I have met a good many careless people,
and a good many indifferent people, and a good many hollow hypocrites,
and a good many downright wicked people, I find that deep down in
men’s hearts there is a sneaking kind of belief that salvation is just
about the biggest thing you can strike. It beats the Coolgardie mines,
and they are about the biggest thing in Australia, I suppose. (Laughter.)
It is a nugget, and no mistake, “ Look unto Me, and be ye saved ”! I
have never met a man yet who didn’t believe in getting saved. He may
not believe in getting saved now , but he believes in getting saved some
time, I met a leading gambler (a professional gambler) on a steamer
once, and I found that deep down in his heart—the last man you would
think, a man who would put a bet on what side of the bed he rose in
the morning, and who played cards, and smoked and drank all through
the voyage—and yet, deep down in his heart, even he would not say
there was no God, no hereafter, and that salvation was rubbish, or a
dream. It is the greatest of all possible blessings to get Eternal Life,
the life that the coffin and the grave cannot touch. There is no grave
ever dug that will hold eternal life, is there ? The coffin and the shroud
shall never see eternal life, and “ the gift of God is eternal life through
Jesus Christ our Lord,” while “ the wages of sin is death,” I will spend
no time trying to prove that salvation from sin, and guilt, and doom is
the greatest possible blessing. I might just as soon start off to prove
that the sun shines, that the heart beats, that the birds sing, as try to
prove that salvation is the greatest possible blessing that can come to
the soul of man. The grand proof of its value is the price He paid who
has brought it to our doors. The Cross of Christ proves to man for
evermore what God thinks is the value of saving a human soul from its
guilt and doom.
THE SIMPLEST WAY OF GETTING IT.
But I will pass on to say that this greatest possible blessing can be
had by every soul here in the simplest possible way : by a look I “Look
and live.’ 1 That is the theory of divine grace. By a look! Now
looking is simple. Any fool can look as well as Professor Rentoul.
(Laughter.) He is a philosopher and a learned man, and he is a
Presbyterian—(laughter)—and I don’t know what he isn't; but any fool
can look as well as a professor. And don’t you see God has brought this
wonderful salvation that He thinks is so valuable; He has brought it to
the simplest, smallest, lowest, and easiest point. Look, look, and be
saved.
I will tell you a story. My text has a wonderful personal history.
There was a man who found salvation along the lines of this old text,


and we all love that man, and his name will be held in honour till the
latest day of the Church of Christ upon the earth. One day, a cold,
biting, sleeting Sunday morning, in a village in the east of England, in
the county of Essex, there was a young lad, fifteen or sixteen years of
age, and already sin had fastened its clutch on him. He was convicted
of sin and very miserable, and he could not shake it off, and, thank God,
he didn’t try to ; and on this cold, bitter Sunday morning he didn’t even
go the length of his own church where his people went, but stopped
short and turned into a little Primitive Methodist chapel, and oh—but
it was wofully thin and empty ! A stranger occupied the pulpit, an
untutored, untrained, Primitive preacher—l am not sure that his
identity has been clearly established even yet —but he took this text,
and, guided by a wisdom beyond his own, he suddenly cried out:
“Young man under the gallery, you will never get peace until you look
away from yourself. Young man, look, look, look to Jesus!” And as
he cried that young man under the gallery just simply, with his mind
and his heart trusting, looked to Jesus, left everything in Jesus’ hands,
and his soul found rest and security. Who was that? As that young
lad stood listening to God’s word in my text, “ Look unto Me, and be ye
saved,” the great soul of Charles Haddon Spurgeon passed from death
unto life, from darkness to light everlasting. Oh, my text is well com-
mended. One man proved it. Now where Spurgeon found his Saviour
the Saviour speaks still to you and me, for “ the word of God abideth
for ever.”
TOO SIMPLE TO BE EXPLAINED.
Oh, how simple it is when you know how! Oh, how hard it is when
you don’t know how ! Like that young woman who came to Spurgeon
in after days and said, “I am surprised that you preach salvation from
sin and misery is so easy; for you know,” she said, “my heart was five
years getting religion ; ” and she was twice in a lunatic asylum on the
head of it! (Laughter.) Get off the track of God’s word and simple
faith, and you will miss the mark , hut the plainest and vilest who simply
listens and believes strikes God in that moment, strikes the hand of Jesus
Christ and is saved. Look ! What is “ looking ” ? Now that is where
you spoil it. Somebody says: “If salvation is so easy, I have only to
look and be saved; then the next thing is, what is it to look ? ” No,
no, my friend; the next thing is not to ask what is it to look. The next
thing is to look without asking what it is to look. Suppose you were
sitting down at your dinner. Maybe it’s over, or maybe it isn’t!
Suppose you were sitting down at your dinner. There it is, finest
Australian mutton—(laughter)—and you are just sitting down, you
know, and suddenly you get very solemn, and say, “ I am not going
to taste this dinner until I can understand what it is to eat.
What is eating?” Well, now, what is eating? (Laughter.) My friend,
if you act like that you will die of starvation, with your dinner in front
of you, before you settle that point (Laughter.) Y T ou may call all the
doctors in Melbourne, and they will only make it as clear as mud to you.
(Laughter.) Now, what is hearing? Can anybody define that? Why,
you will get landed in obscurity if you try. And if you refused to eat
food until you could give a satisfactory definition of what eating is, you
would die very soon. What is “ looking ” ? Suppose you said, I will
not open my eyes until I understand what “ looking ” is. Now, thank


God, He has brought salvation down to a point where it can be made no
simpler. It is like looking, eating, drinking, breathing, walking, or any-
thing of that simple, elementary, universal kind of thing that you do
without asking how you do it.
A RIDING LESSON.
I remember the first time I ever went on horseback, three months
ago, almost by the day of the month, so that I am not an old horseman.
It was in Johannesburg, away in the Transvaal, in South Africa, and I
was wanting some exercise, and everybody there rides. It is too hot to
walk, and I thought, “Now if I could just sit up there, the horse’s legs
would do as well as mine, and I would get a shaking up.” An old Dutch
farmer said to me : “ I’ll help you up,” and we started off at six o’clock
in the morning, so that the streets might be nice and empty, and I would
have a private performance. (Laughter.) All the time I was most
uncomfortable. There’s an awful lot of things to be attended to. You’ve
to hold the reins so, and not so, and a whole lot of things. Well, I got
upon the horse, but, of course, I only allowed it to walk, and when we
had walked out of the town, I was very, very shaky, and it was all I could
do to stick on ; so I said: “ Tell me about this business. How do you
ride? lam just sticking on here.” That was all I could do, although
the beast was only walking. And he told me this, “ I have been on
horseback all my days ever since I was a lad ; from a child I have been
on horseback.” But yet that man whom I thought should surely
have been able to help me, instead of being a good teacher, added : “ I
am the very worst you could have to teach you, for I have been at it so
long that I cannot tell you a thing about it.” (Laughter.) “You just
get on to the horse, look at me, and you stick on, and there you are.”
(Laughter.) Well, now, you smile, but I am sure my ministerial
brothers and experienced Christians here, when they have been sitting
downibeside some anxious inquiring soul in an after meeting, have often
felt like that Dutchman when he was trying to tell me how to ride.
When we have come to know what salvation is, and have enjoyed it, and
found it so simple, really, that is our puzzle. It is so simple to us now
that we really get baffled to make it any simpler. Look to Jesus !
Somebody says: “What is believing?” Believing is looking, and
looking is believing • and believing is trusting, and trusting is believing;
and there you are round again !
BREAKING THE DEVIL’S BACK WITH HIS OWN STICK.
But oh, brothers, what a great lesson lies here ! How came sin into
the world? It came into the world by a look. The woman saw that the
tree was good for food. Her eye inflamed her heart. Evil passion and
disorder sprang up through the look of the eye at the forbidden tree, and
the end was that that woman dashed her hands through God’s command-
ments, and here we are, the fallen sons and daughters of one who was
led away from God by a look. Now it is like God to break—if I may
use a homely phrase—to break the devil’s back with his own stick; and
as a look led us away, blessed be God ! a look brings us back. Look to
Jesus, and you have left the devil, and you have left your fallen state,
and you have left your condemnation, and you are back to God and saved
for ever, “ Look to Me ! ” “ You looked away from Me. Oh, sons of
men ! Look back to Me, hanging on the Cross, that you might see Me,


and know Me, and understand Me; and in that look your soul is back
from sin and condemnation to God, and finds justification forevermore.”
“ i’ll pay it ” !
I remember when I was in Edinburgh—l will not ask the Edinburgh
people who are here to bold up their hands, but I am sure there are a
lot of them. You find Scotch people everywhere, like the Jews, and for
the same purpose. (Laughter.) I see that remark opened the face of
one old Scotchman standing at the back there. (Laughter.)
I was preaching one Sunday morning in a hall in Edinburgh to a com-
pany of lads and girls, gathered from drunkards’ homes by Christian men
and women to give them a free breakfast—poor, hapless, hungry little
things ! And one Sunday morning it was my privilege to give them the
Bread of Life in a little sermon, after giving them the bread for the body,
and my text was this one. 1 was labouring away on this old business,
what it is to look to God, and floundering along, as I am doing now,
because you can’t make it any simpler. You might as well try to stop
the circulation of your blood till you find out how it is done. I was
talking away, and I said, “ Suppose there is your mother, and she is a
widow, and she is very poor, and you are all very poor, and the rent is
due, and your mother has no money to pay the rent; and, boys, you
know what will happen if your mother doesn’t pay the rent.” “ Aye,”
says a little fellow, “ we’ll be turned out.” (Laughter.) He knew all about
it. “ Now,” I said, “ I know a kind man who has plenty of money, and
a good heart to part with it, and I go and say to him, * There is a poor
widow woman in that back slum, and the rent day is coming on next
week and this wealthy gentleman goes and sees your mother, and says,
‘ Are you So-and-so ? ’ ‘ Yes.’ ‘Your rent day is coming on?’ ‘ Yes.’
‘ And you have no money ? ’ ‘No.’ * Well, now, don’t be troubled ; you
just look to me. I will not give you the money just now, but I will be
round here on the rent day in the morning to meet the collector. I will
he here bright and early. You just look to me. Now,” I said, “boys
and girls, when that gentleman takes his hat and stick to go away out,
does that mean your mother is to rise and go out after him, and keep
looking at him, and follow him all through the streets, and keep
looking, looking, looking?” And they smiled. “ What does that mean
—to look to him?” And a little fellow snapped his thumbs, and he rose,
and the dead silence made him a little nervous, and he said, “ That
means, ‘Dinna ye fear, mistress ; I’ll pay it.’ ” (Laughter.) I went to
preach to that boy, and that boy preached to me. Sinner, backslider,
man, woman, —sin is the blight, the burden, the millstone round your
neck; but look ! —“dinna ye fear!” It is not a thing that has to be
paid ; there is nothing to be paid for salvation. Your account is paid ;
it is settled, God is satisfied. Are you satisfied ? That is all: Look to
Jesus, and your sin is blotted out, and you are clear in God’s book !
A GOSPEL FOR THE CROWD.
Now I will leave out the other division, “all the ends of the earth,”
just simply passing it by, by saying that it is a grand text for a crowd.
This is a large crowd; but I bless God for the thought here, friends,
that though I had in this enclosure all the people of this dark, sin-
cursed world, black and white men, yellow men, heathens, cannibals,,
savages, harlots, murderers, idolaters, fornicators, the inhabitants of a)


gaols, prisons, reformatories, and all men of an evil sort, yet, praise God !
I have a text for each and for all. Vast as the assembly would be,
unsearchable are the riches of Jesus Christ. “ Look unto Me, and be ye
saved, all the ends of the earth; for I am God and there is none
else.” Might not an angel from heaven envy this poor fellow the
unspeakable honour of declaring such a salvation ? Is not it amazing?
Is not it glorious ? Is not it like God ? Only one sun in the sky, and
he gives light enough for all, and light enough for each. Only one
Jesus, and He is enough ; we want no other. There is life, peace, par-
don, hope, comfort enough streaming from that great sun, God’s grace
for all and for each. But do not rest there. The sun is only of use to
us so far as we individually avail ourselves of his light. I cannot see
the sun through your eye, nor get the benefit of his light and heat
through your body, nor you through mine. Look for thyself, and gee
thine own share of Christ’s light and live.
Last of all, it is on the strongest guarantee: “ For lam God.” I
suppose you want guarantees pretty badly in Australia just now.
(Laughter.) Pardon my referring to the depression. It seems the only
thing you have got here. (Laughter.) lam so glad one of the news-
papers—they say hard things of me sometimes, but I keep sweet and
come up smiling—said that this M‘Neill and Burke mission at last has
“ lifted people’s mind off the depression. It is something new to talk
about ” ! I tell you, my friends, if you lift your eyes from the depres-
sion on to the face of Jesus Christ your depression is over, (Loud
applause.) Your best days have dawned by looking to Him and trusting
in Him. I was saying my last words about the guarantee: “ Look to
Me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth ; for lam God.” That is the
guarantee. It is a simple thing, but it is not, as you say in Australia, a
“soft” thing. It is not a wee thing. Folks make a great mistake in
talking of “ simple faith ” as something that is slim and weak and fragile,
and like a cobweb. It is not so with God’s salvation. It is simple, but
it is bottomed on the Eternal God, and there is no rock like God to rest
on. It is all right looking to Jesus, because God, God , God is the top
and bottom and width of it! That will hold. That will stand. Will
God give out? No ! Then your salvation won’t give out, for God is our
salvation. I will trust and not be afraid.
SOLID GROUND.
There’s this floor, this platform ; do you see it? No, you don’t; but
it is here, and it helps you to see me. Suppose, when I came on to this
platform, I began to walk in a gingerly fashion, like a cat on the top of a
wall among broken glass, and suppose that I should have shown plainly
that I doubted its stability, what would happen ? I’ll tell you what
would happen. If I had dared to come on to this platform built by man’s
hand and had been so foolish as to show my distrust in its stability, I
would have created a panic. There are women in this front row, and
even while I burlesque the thing their faces are uneasy at the mei’e
suggestion that the platform might crash down upon them. What did
I come to this platform for? To doubt it? No; I came to use it for
proclaiming my Master’s Gospel. What I say in my last word is this:
Shall man for his personal safety trust a three-quarter-inch plank, and
shall he not trust God? That is the question, man : trust God! It, is
because God is beneath the feet of your sinking soul that you will sink


no farther. Get your feet on to that bed-rock, the word of God in the
person of the Son of God. Salvation is of God, therefore I icjoice,
glory, I preach. It will stand for ever.
Now God grant that all of us may just compel ourselves to do this
thing, “Look to Me and be saved.” That is God’s injunction, and it
doesn’t lie in your interests to disobey. lam only too glad to believe
that, as well as I know how, I am looking to Jesus Christ, and now
have peace and salvation. Himself hath said it, and His blood hath
secured it. Amen.
IV.—THE BLOOD-MARK OX THE DOOR."
This is no audience to trifle with. No audience is. But in a great mass
of people like this, which, when it disperses, no human power can bring
back together into this place the same, individually, as it was
feel it to be of vast importance that I should bring before you God s
salvation to sinful men.
We will take for our text Exodus xii. 22—the old story of the passover.
You remember it got its name from this : God said, When 1 see the
blood I will pass over your door,” and the first-born behind the blood-
mark would be spared. All through the Bible, indeed, a solemn index-,
finger points to that night of nights, when Israel s history as a nation
began, when God broke the rod of the oppressor, and brought out His
people free. Moses said to all the elders of Israel: “ Draw out and take
you a lamb, according to your families, and kill the passover. And } r e
shall tike a bunch of hyssop and dip it in the lamb’s blood that is in the
basin ; and strike the lintel and the two side posts of the door with the
blood that is in the basin; and none of you shall go out at the door of
his house until the morning. For the Lord will pass through to smite
the Egyptian, and when He seeth the blood upon the lintel and upon
he two side posts, the Lord will pass over the door, and will not suffer
he destroyer to come in unto your houses and smite you.”
DID IT HAPPEN?
When I have read so far let me answer an question by
reading two verses. Did it happen? Aye, it happened. “ The children
of Israel went away and did as the Lord commanded them, so did they.
And it came to pass that at midnight the Lord smote all the first-born
in the land of Egypt, from the first-born of Pharaoh that sat on his
throne unto the first-born of the captive that was in the dungeon, and all
the first-born of cattle. And Pharaoh rose up in the night, he and all
the Egyptians and all his servants, and there was a great cry in Egypt,
for there was not a house where there was not one dead.” And behind
the blood-mark not a hair of the head had perished ! God was as good
as His word of judgment, and as good as His word of promise and
mercy. I preach the same God to-night. There is no other. Now the
pivot round which turns all that wonderful old historical scene is man s
trust in the word of God. You are safe and saved, said God, if My word
can be trusted. On God’s word your and my salvation hangs. Is not
that sufficient ?
Let the Apostle Paul be our guide in using the Old Testament instead
of the New. You never find a New Testament writer trying to expound
* Exhibition Building, Sunday evening.


Jesus and His salvation through His atoning death for us without falling
back on the Old Testament for his material and illustrations ; and the
New Testament writers ought to know better than some moderns, both
English and Gern an. The Apostle Paul says, looking back to that
night in Egypt, and then looking on to Christ—the spotless, innocent
Jesus—dying on the cross for sins not His own—His very executionei
compelled to say, “ I find no fault in Him —Paul says the one is the
explanation of the other. “Christ, our Passover, is slain for us. What
the Old Testament passover lamb was to the threatened first-born that
night in Egypt, the Lord Jesus Christ is to threatened, doomed sinners
to-night. Christ is our Passover Lamb, slain for us, and we escape by
His death. Make application of that atoning death by a personal trust
therein !
SAVED FROM DOOM!
Salvation that night in Egypt, and salvation to-night in Melbourne,
can be expressed thus : That night it was salvation from temporal doom,
the threatened stroke on the first-born. God, you remember, had at last
picked up the gauntlet that Pharaoh had flung down, and was about to
shoot His tenth arrow, the arrow that destroyed the power of the oppressor
for ever. The salvation to-night is salvation from impending doom and
overhanging j udgment. Don’t mistake me. I had almost said to some
man, Don’t interrupt me. I know you are going to say, “ 1 hat s an
old-fashioned view of things.” Yea, I know it. Pm not here to preach
new-fashioned, o>- to please man’s ear. Woe is me i + ' I tamper with
eternal truth to tickle men’s ears and gratify their vanity and conceit I
Salvation from impending doom ! You may deny it, and forget it, and
scoff at it; but you do not alter it. That is what you forget.
When I go into the railway train to go a long journey, I take my
berth. Whether I sit, or stand, or talk to a fellow-passenger, or lie
down or fall fast asleep, does my conduct tell in the slightest on that
engine or those whirling wheels ? No. Whether I sleep or wake, no matter
what I am, no matter what I do, it makes no difference. I hrough all
the night—no stop, no stay—speeds that express and those flying wheels.
And—hear me!—whether you laugh or scoff, or whether you believe and
obey, it does not tell one bit on the stupendous fact that this wo’.ld moves
to its judgment before God, and from God. You cannot alter it. I wish
some of you could understand what an easy, unintellectual business it is
to laugh, or to be indifferent, but how utterly helpless you are to alter
matters, or make or shape the tendency of God’s world. It goes up to
the judgment-seat. Men have sinned; the law is proclaimed, and the
remedy ; and the doom must fall; only before the doom falls, God has
opened a way of escape, and every wise man is pressing into it, 1 hat
is all.
SAVED FROM THE FETTERS.
Further, that night in Egypt meant freedom for the slaves. _ Those
Israelites were bondsmen, a nation degraded, toiling in the brickfield,
under the brutal curse of the taskmaster, the brutal lash for ever on theii
backs, making the blood to start, and life to be a misery and death a
blessing that was longed for, and slow of coming. And salvation that
night, when God came to redeem them, meant freedom for the captive,
new days for the down-trod and the oppressed. Here, in Melbourne, the
Gospel I preach spells freedom for tho slave, freedom to the man, freedom


to the woman, toiling in a bondage compared with which the bondage in
Egypt was a light affliction that endured only for a moment, and told
only on the body and the earthly life. Oh, men and women ! oppressed
by the devil and the world and sin ; men and women driven hard, and
butchered by lust and passion, I preach to-night freedom ! a glorious
redemption for you through the blood of Jesus Christ. What an offer!
What a salvation ! Now, that you know you are bondsmen, why should
you hang up your chain ? There is freedom for the man under the drink
curse, freedom for the poor woman who has made herself the slave of
vice and disgrace. Freedom for us all, for we are all bound in the chains
and the darkness of unbelief, and the tryanny of our adversary the devil.
Freedom for that pickpocket who has just come in, freedom for you, my
fellow, and new life and new days for you. If you will only accept the
Lord Jesus Christ, and turn from your evil ways. He will save you and
redeem you, and blot out your black shameful past. He will make you a
new creature. Oh, what a privilege to declare such a salvation ! A
salvation that means freedom, the opening of the prisons to them that
are bound, the striking off of all fetters, of all bad habits that have beaten
into the soul. God pity you ! Further, there was salvation that night
from the stroke of doom, the threatening to the first-born. There is
salvation to-night from the awful doom that awaits the unrepentant
sinner.
SAVED BY THE BLOOD OE ANOTHER.
There was another point, and I hasten to mention it. It is this: I
think I see an Israelitish father, a poor slave in the Egyptian brickfield,
and Moses gathers them all together and tells them that God is going
to break their bonds, but they are to kill a lamb and sprinkle the blood
on the lintel and the door posts. Now I see an Israelitish father, on
that historic fatal night, take that lamb and kill it, and I see its life’s
blood, smoking hot, flowing into the basin. Now if that father killed
that lamb, not simply with his knife, like any butcher in the slaughter-
house, but with his mind, his thought, his heart, work, work , working
behind the knife, was he not bound to have stamped on his soul some
thought like this: “If my first-born son is not to die, something
innocent has to die in his place ” ? Substitution, substitution ! The
innocent giving its life in place of him who was in danger of the judg-
ment stroke. That is the core of the Gospel according to Jesus, accord-
ing to Paul, according to John, according to Isaiah, according to the
redeemed up in heaven. “ Thou wast slain, and hast redeemed us unto
God by Thy blood, out of every nation, and kindred, and people, and
tongue,” There is no feeling so universal as that. The death of the
Lamb of God is the very nerve and core of our salvation from guilt and
doom. Substitution ! I know that all that language about being saved
by His blood, although it is Scriptural, yet it is said to be unfit for our
ears; it is “gory,” and unphilosophical, and mere language of the
shambles. If that father had only killed the lamb with his knife, of
course nothing could save it from being a mere shamble of the slaughtei'-
house. But see the difference. By faith, by faith they kept the passover!
“ Through faith he kept the passover and the sprinkling of blood lest
He that destroyed the first-born should touch them.” It was sublime.
By the heart’s faith in God the operation of killing the lamb was lifted
far above the mere material and mechanical and the aspect of the
slaughterhouse. There is the Lord’s Supper. I don’t need to explain


that to an audience like this. You all know the elements of the Christian
faith. You know what the Lord’s Supper means. Now if you sit down
to the Lord’s table without faith in your heart, you can degrade that
ordinance and make it meaningless, grotesque, and wholly unintelligible.
You can degrade it into a mere mumbling of a morsel of bread and sip-
ping of a mouthful of wine. But if you have faith in Jesus in your
heart, oh ! what a mighty elevation ! What a tiansformation ! You are
at the foot of the Cross. You are in fellowship and actual touch with
Jesus Christ crucified for you. Jesus risen from the dead and alive in
your midst. What a difference faith makes in the things of God’s word
and our salvation.
Another thing. I have touched substitution, the great dome and cen-
tral tower of all the edifices of revealed truth. That is the dome that
shoots above the pile up to the sky. He died for us, the Just for the
unjust, that He might bring us to God, That is the turret that strikes
the skv, rising above all the edifices of revealed truth. Never forget
that. Never be deceived or misled.
THE ONE MAN WHO UNDERSTOOD THE CROSS !
Did you ever think that when our Passover Lamb was slain for us—
Jesus, the spotless, innocent Saviour—did you ever think of just one
man who had the right view of Jesus at the cross ? I have often thought
of all the thousands —and there was a bigger crowd than we have here
to-night—scoffing, mocking, questioning, arguing, and a great many of
them quite indifferent, and in the midst of them Jesus hanging crucified!
But I think there was one man, and he was not a disciple or a religious
man, who had the right view of Christ as He hung there. Who was lie?
The disciples didn’t understand Jesus. At the cross they thought that
was the end of everything. They didn’t understand that that was the
defeat of sin and the victory for ever for God and His people. I think it was
Barabbas, an utter outsider ; for the last shall be first. It was Barabbas
who, for murder and sedition, had been flung into prison. He should
have been slain that day, but, by a custom, wdien mercy triumphed over
judgment, a noted criminal was released, and Barabbas, to his great sur-
prise, was released, and Jesus put in his place. And I think I see
Barabbas with all the other people pouring out through the citv gates to
the place of public execution, and he goes with the crowd; but ah! there
is something in his breast that others do not feel. I see him worming
his way till he comes up to the foot of the central cross, and I
do believe Jesus held Himself in life till Barabbas came and looked
at Him; and as poor Barabbas stood and looked up into the pale,
pinched face of our Jesus, he would surely say within himself, ‘‘ Whoever
you are, and whatever they say about you, you are there in my place, you
are there for me, for me. But for you I had hung there in death, shame,
and hell.” My friend, if you are hard pushed for a theory of the atone-
ment, take the Barabbas theory till you get a better. Stand to-night at
the foot of the cross, and look up and say, “He died for me. He bore
my sins in His own body on the tree. By His stripes lam healed.”
Substitution! It is a grand theory. It preaches well, and it pays well,
and it sings well. It puts a bone in a fellow’s sleeve to preach substi-
tution. You have only to trust Him. It sings well. Oh the sweet
hymns founded on that theory, while all the bloodless theories are mute
and dumb. Theij won’t sing! My friend, that is the core of it. There


He hangs—our Passover Lamb. The doom is coming. Be wise. Accept
Christ first and then ask questions next. Ask questions if you will, but
pass in behind the blood-mark first. Then we may discuss the reason
and cause, but I advise you to pass in behind the Cross first. Ihe doom
is on the way. Life hangs by a thread.
THE SHAME OF THAN KLESSN ESS.
I will tell you a story that always strikes me as being a point in a sad
way. I think it was in Dumfries, in the South of Scotland, a lady, the
wife of the owner of a beautiful mansion and property near by the town.
That wife and mother was taking a drive through the streets in her
carriage drawn by a pair of beautiful ponies, with her young son and
heir sitting on the seat beside her. She drew up at a tradesman s dooi.
The ponies were reputed to be perfectly quiet and had always been quiet.
She left her little son sitting on the seat and stepped on to the pavement,
and went into the shop and gave two or three orders. But while she
was there some noise, or something, startled those two well-fed, well-bred,
highly mettled beasts, and off they went full-gallop down that street, and
the boy sitting there helpless. The street goes down-hill and there is a
sharp turn and a ravine and a bridge at the bottom ; but I do not need
to tell you that no pair of bolting horses ever takes a sharp turn and a
bridge at the bottom of a steep hill. A stonemason was working at a
building on the roadside, and he saw the horses as they came flying
down. He knew what would take place, and in a moment he made up
his mind, and flinging down his tools he made one spring at those mad
beasts. He hung on to the reins. He was rolled and dragged and
trampled, but he hung on, and they were eventually pulled up with no
harm to the lad. The man was carried home, and for forty-eight hours
he lingered in consciousness before he died, but in great agony ; and all
thx’ough those weary hours he would moan out in his pain every now
and again, “ Has she never come to see me? Why doesn’t she come
to see me? Has she never sent to ask for me ? ” And how it happened
I don’t know, but during those forty-eight hours neither the lady, nor
anybody from the lady, called on that poor fellow, and he passed away
and died unthanked and unacknowledged—he who had given his life to
save the son who was dearer to his father and mother than their own
life. You say, “ That is awful.” So do I. Men and women ! beside
me to-night, all invisible to the naked eye but beside me, there stands
One with a pale face and a bi uised, broken body, and it was fo : you He
died to arrest you from the gulf of destruction. And shame, burning
shame on you, if you never even thank Him or give Him one adoring
smile and say, “Jesus! at last I understand. For me, Lord Jesus,
Thou didst die. Forgive my coldness and hardness and unbelief, or my
empty formality.” He died for me.
TAKE YOUR BUNCH OF HYSSOP!
Now to-night, when you just trust Him, you’ve taken your bunch of
hyssop and dipped it in the blood and sprinkled it on the lintel. It needs
personal trust, not knowing what is taking place inside of you; not in
ceremonies, but by trusting everything to Jesus Christ. He has done it
all, and left you nothing to do but to “ believe on the Lord Jesus Christ
and thou shalt be saved.” That is better than trusting to feeling, or to
ceremony. That is trusting to the Rock that can never fail —Christ


Himself—and what He has done and what He is doing, trusting in the
Word that can never be broken. You will have plenty of feelings
and inward witnesses along that line by-and-by ; but trust Him in the
dark without the feeling and you are saved, no matter what you feel or do
not feel. He says so. That settles it. Now take your bunch of hyssop
and dip it in the blood, and claim your own share in that atoning
sacrifice. Let none of you go out of the door of this house without doing
that. There are a great many temptations to abandon faith in Jesus
Christ and Him crucified, and glorified, and coming in the clouds of
heaven ; but let none of you go out of the door of this house until the
morning—that is, having come to Christ, abide in Christ till the
morning. Bless God for every white and whitening head in this
assembly; for you the morning is coming, but it is coming for all of us
sooner or later. Who will laugh then ? The believers will rejoice when
tney see how completely they were saved behind the finished work of the
Redeemer Jesus.
Now I would rather send you away longing for more than weary of
hearing, so I will stop here. But I want a second meeting to-night. I
have come to point you to Jesus. I preach these things because I believe
them, and they go beyond all I can say in their reality and blessedness.
Now lam going to tell you—if you wait to the second meeting—l am
going to tell you how I decided myself. I am your own brother, and I
would like to tell you the story of my own conversion. Forget that lam
a minister, although I am, and went through all the eight years of
Presbyterian training; but I do not want to be professional, and cut off
from you, and if you will wait I will tell you just as if I were your own
chum and companion, your own father’s son, brought up with you. I
will tell you how I, a quarryman’s son, a working man’s son, just like
some of you here, when I was twenty or so, just like some of you are,
made up my mind, and just by a turning was able to do it. Now give us
a chance to get nearer still in this little meeting of personal testimony—
in the second meeting.
V.—A BUSINESS MAN’S SERMON.*
Before I begin my discourse I would like to tell you how delighted 1 am
to find such a large number of you business men here on mail day.
When I saw that so many active business men are willing to come here
and leave their home letters to the last hour, I was delighted. It w T as
just the worst day for starting a business meeting. I will try, if possible,
to let you away by five minutes to two o’clock, but that means I will have
to drop something, and I will drop the collection. (Laughter.) Aren’t
you surprised ? (Laughter.) But I will take care to get level with you
before the week’s done, (Laughter.)
My subject is Daniel vi. 10. “ Now, when Daniel knew that the
writing was signed, he went into his house.” What was the writing?
The decree that Daniel’s enemies had got the King to sign, that if any
man made a petition of any god or man for thirty days, save of the King,
he should be cast into the den of lions. And the King became a mould
of wax in the hands of those designing enemies of Daniel in Babylon,
and signed the decree. “ Now when Daniel knew that the writing was
signed, he went into his house, and his windows being opened in his
* Midday meeting for business men, Melbourne Town Hall.


chamber towards Jerusalem, he knelt upon his knees three times a day,
and prayed and gave thanks before his God as he did aforetime. Then
those men assembled and found Daniel praying and making supplication
before His God.” And they smirked, and they smiled, and they said :
“ Our plot has worked like a charm, and he has fallen right into our
hands.” And they went and told the King, and reminded him of the
decree. The King could not go back upon his own signature, and
Daniel was sent to the lions’ den. And you remember God’s mercy, and
in the morning Daniel was found untouched, and the King was exceed-
ingly g ad, and he commanded them to take him up out of the den.
“And the King commanded, and they brought those men which had
accused Daniel, and they cast them into the den of lions,” and they
haven’t been heard of since. (Laughter.)
Now the hinge of the whole story is this: When Daniel knew that
the writing was signed; when he knew all the wrath, and craft, and
envy, and malice of his enemies, he went away and did, says the
Scripture, “ as he did aforetime .”
FIXED POINTS IN LlFn.
Even although a man is not much of a religious man he would give a
large sum of money to hit upon some settled principle of conduct that
would reduce all life’s complexities and perplexities to one focus, one
point, one thing to do. Now I will give it to you for nothing, and from
God’s Word, and from the case of a man who tided it and found it to
work, namely, Daniel. To have one fixed purpose, one settled principle,
and let all the world swing round that as it may, what would not some
men give here to find that principle? You know, when you are tempted,
troubled, tried, cast down, and destroyed by the world, the flesh, and the
devil, and when you are tossed and thrown about by every wind that
blows, at those times you feel the need of something to help you. If
you could only get this solid rock below your feet, and firm faith within
your heart, you would be safe, and you would save your soul alive, and
you would be a landmark and a lighthouse for others wrestling with
trouble and sin.
What brought Daniel into this trouble? Answer; his religion. I
sometimes find men and women talking about religion as if it was a
kind of thing that fits like a glove, or an old shoe; a thing for Sunday
only, or for a special ceremony, and that has no connection with daily
life, and especially no connection with business. Now Daniel was a suc-
cessful man ;he was a man who rose. An exile, an alien in race and
religion, a captive, everything against him; but he rose because he was
the best man there. It was not through favouritism that he rose to be
Prime Minister above all his subordinates; it was because he was the
best man. That came out of his religion, but it brought him into
trouble with his enemies. They were envious at another’s joy, “I am
sick,” says the poet, “ I am sick of a strange disease—my neighbour’s
wealth.” Your neighbour is getting on too well for your comfort. This
was the feeling of Daniel’s enemies towards him. Daniel rose to be
Prime Minister although he was a foreigner, an outsider, and belonged
to a captive, subject race, because of his religion, which brightened and
strengthened all the qualities in him, and we find that his royal imperial
master preferred him above all others.


THE TROUBLE THAT RELIGION BRINGS.
I want to say here, friends, that religion got Daniel into trouble. It
will do the same for you. God pity the man who is trying to happen
upon a religion that will keep him out of trouble. There is no such
religion. It the devil has palmed that off on you pitch it away. It
brought Daniel into all the envy and malice, and jealousy and plotting
against him. His very enemies said, “We shall find no cause against
this Daniel, ’ and they said it with a hiss, “ this Daniel, curse him ! ” The
hated foreigner rising above us to be Prime Minister in our own court
and country, an outsider, an exile. “We shall find no cause against
him as concerning his faithfulness and capabilities ; we shall only find
cause against him concerning the law of his God.” That was the tap-
root of Daniel s excellence in his business. His religion ; his favour
with God ; his fear of God. That thing, the fear of the Lord, is the
beginning of wisdom. That’s why some of you have never struck it yet.
It is not cunning compromise. It is not being a sharper. If a man
wants to be a long-headed, clear-sighted, successful man of business let
him take a leaf out of Daniel’s book. That wifi make you long-headed
and wise. For the lack of it the devil is pulling you about as if he had
you by a chain. “ When Daniel knew that the writing was signed.”
His religion brought him into trouble, as I have said, but it also pulled
him through it. Now there is no keeping out of trouble. Whether you
are a Daniel or an utter hypocrite, an utter worlding, a man of the world,
there is no keeping out of trouble. The only difference is that if you
belong to Daniel’s band you will not only get into trouble, but, bless
God ! you will get out at the other side. That is the tremendous
difference. With Daniel’s faith you will get out of trouble as well as into
it. But without Daniel’s faith and without Daniel’s God never a soul of
us, I don’t care how cunning and crafty he may be, never a soul of us
but will fail in the end. Depend upon it, that is the difference. A
sterling faith in God that gives you a fixed principle of conduct in all
circumstances, as the world wags. My brother, it will bring you into
persecution and conflict with the men of the world. But it will bring
you through on the side next salvation. “ Who are these,” John said,
when he got a vision of heaven, “ that are arrayed in white robes, and
whence came they?” And he got the answer: “These are the old
veterans; these are they who came out of great tribulation.” They went
into it, but it pulled them out. “ These are they who came out of great
tribulation,” and there they are, before the throne of God for ever, safe,
safe for ever from the wolf’s jaw, and the dull ass’s hoof ; that is, safe
from the gleaming teeth of envy, and the dull kick of stupidity. Safe !
THE GREAT DECISION.
Further, when Daniel knew that the writing was signed he went into
his house and he did as he did before, “ he prayed to God three times
a day,” as if there were no life hanging in the balance. Now would you
not like to have a principle like that, to do just the same when there is
danger and risk as you did when all was smooth and plain, and there was
no lion’s den threatening you if you stuck to your principle and your
God ? Daniel had that principle. Who is this Daniel ? Daniel was a
Jew. Now lam not to be spoken of as running down the Jews. In
what I am going to say next, 1 am only quoting a report that has gone


abroad. It is this : That the man has to be up very early who has to be
up before a Jew—(laughter)—and to sit up late at night to see a Jew
going to bed, if there’s anything to be got by that. And mark, if you
budge I’ll take it off the Jew and put it on to the Scotchman. (Laughter.)
Now Daniel was a Jew, and one would have thought that this Jew would
have said, “ I see their little plot and I will make diamond cut diamond,
and meet prick with prick, and craft with craft, and I’ll beat them at
their own game, and I’ll save my religion, and I’ll save my salary too.”
It’s a wonder he didn’t say it, being a long-headed, sagacious, and states-
manlike Jew. It’s a wander he didn’t say, as John Bunyan would say
for Mr. Worldly Wiseman, and that tremendously clever devil’s advocate,
Mr. Facing-both-ways, “ I am in a difficulty. On the one hand is my
conscience, on the other my situation. If I obey the dictates of my
conscience, if I keep that up I lose my situation ; but, on the other hand,
if I tamper with God and my conscience, I draw the knife across my own
throat, I lose my God and my soul.” It is not in all the wisdom of the
world, nor in all its wise men to help you if you are in a pickle like that.
God, faith, a good conscience, and the hope of heaven in the one scale,
and some worldly position or attraction in the other scale, and you can’t
have both, and you are a fool for trying. (Applause.) Silence, please!
Let there be a grim silence. I want no cheap cheering. Let there be a
grim, desperate silence. lam talking of the possibility of an awfnl
tragedy, a man to change eternity for time, and to barter away his soul
for bread and earthly possessions. Now Daniel would have nothing to
do with compromise, and nothing to do with policy, and with facing
both ways; but, when he “knew that the writing was signed,” that the
plot was laid, he walked straight to his room. In he went, and his
enemies -were on the watch, and they saw him going in three times a day,
and praying and giving thanks unto his God as he did aforetime. Oh !
if you possessed this principle that Daniel had, one thing to do, one thing
to mind—God, faith, conscience ! —you will never, lose anything worth
the having !
THE FAITH THAT SINGS.
Now see him down upon his knees. He did not pray silently ;he did
not sing dumb. He prayed and sang aloud ! I wonder what "Psalm he
used ? This Psalm-book was not written only for us. The Psalms were
written for Daniel as well as us, depend on it. I have one here that
would fit him splendidly. Listen to this : “ The Lord is my light and
saving help, who shall make me dismayed ?” As he prays and sings his
enemies come along, and sniff, sniff, sniff round about his door, and with
a devilish leer on their faces they whisper, “Ah! we’ve got him now!
Listen ! Listen ! He is praying to his God ” —“ The Lord is my light
and saving help ; who shall make me dismayed ? ” —“ My life’s strength
is the Lord ; of whom then shall Ibe afraid ? ” Man ! you need to°be
in a tight place to find out what is in the Bible, and to derive the full
benefit of the comfort it can afford. You want the arm of God holding
you, in the temptation and in the crisis. He “ prayed three times a
day.” I almost thought I saw a sneer on a young fellow’s face there, as
much as to say, “ Prayer and business ! ” My friend, stick to facts.
That man could give most of us here points in business, and yet he
prayed three times a day.


PEACE IN TUMULT.
Let me tell you what I saw down at the Mansion House when I was
in London. Yon all know the tremendous maelstrom of vehicular
traffic that passes along at this point. To regulate the traffic, a police-
man stands there right in the centre of it, and he is technically called a
“fixed point.” His whole business is—he has no beat—his whole
business is to simply stand there in the middle of that maelstrom of
wheel traffic, and you daren’t graze him by a hair’s breadth or you and
your horse will be led off to the lock-up. If you did not have that man
there you would have that traffic interlocked in inextricable confusion,
but he is the “fixed point,” and he governs the traffic. Such a “ fixed
point ” in a man’s mind is the fixed habit of appealing to God in every
difficulty. Then business won’t rush you ; and the devil, through
temptation in business, won’t rush you if there stand up in your soul
that stalwart, fixed guiding point—the habit of appealing to God.
Prayer helps a business man. It saves him from being rushed and
being carried off his foundations and overborne and destroyed, so that
the best men of our English race are men who ever lifted their faith
and prayers to God. You may burn them and do all sorts of things
with them, but pi'ayer is the tap-root of all their diligence and faithful-
ness. That gives fellowship with God and the consciousness of God’s
presence with them and their responsibility to Him.
CATCHING A GOOD MAN.
So Daniel went to the lions’ den, and his enemies grinned in triumph.
They had him ! But they hadn't! Were you ever a boy ? (Laughter.)
And do you remember running after a bright, beautiful butterfly, and
when you got near enough making a grab at it! But you didn’t get it !
(Laughter.) Daniel’s enemies thought his religion had made a muddle-
headed man of him, but he managed to get the best of them. Have you
ever seen a dog chasing a bird? I saw a dog making after a bird one
day with his eyes flaming and his red tongue hanging out between his
jaws, and the bird flew along in front of him, merely skimming the
ground for a time; but just when the pursuit got too hot the bird
suddenly gave a little “ chirp ” and swooped upwards gracefully, and was
soon far away out of reach. You should have seen the look of astonish-
ment on both ends of that dog. (Laughter.) As much as to say,
“ Well, that’s playing it low down on me. Fancy my fooling away my
time trying to catch a hypocrite like that.”
Of course you say, “a miracle was wrought for Daniel, but I cannot
expect a miracle to be wrought for me.” Gentlemen, I will put it this
way. Supposing a miracle had not been ■worked; suppose he had been
killed by the lions; what then? Suppose he had been killed by the
lions, would his enemies have Avon in the long run ? Think of it.
After you are dead and gone, people will discuss you, and wonder why
you were such a fool as to sell eternity for trash, and rubbish and filth
and sin. Be wise ! Daniel stood in the den of lions rather than over-
throw that guiding principle that controlled his life. He was not afraid
to die rather than give that up. To try to spite a good man by killing
him, one has said, is the same thing as if you had tried to spite a ship
by launching it. That is poor spite. The ship, although built on the
land, is meant for the ocean. So the good man, although he has begun
to build, and his foundations are laid here by the grace of God, yet he is


meant lor eternity ; and blessed is the stroke that sends him to his
eternal end, the presence, the heaven of God. So, any way that you look
at it, all things work together for good to the man who holds on to God
and prayer and a good conscience. Everything comes right with him in
the long run, and life, in every case, means the long run. There is not
a life here that is not going to run across the grave into the judgment-
seat at the other side of the grave. The grave, my brother, is not the
terminus. It is only a turning, and there is life at both ends. The
terminus is at the other end, the judgment-seat of Christ, and the final
“ Come, ye blessed of My Father,” or, “Depart from Me, ye workers of
iniquity.” It is given to you and me to-day to go out from this building
and to glorify God, and to lay hold on eternal life.
VI.—THE TOUCH THAT SAVED *
(Mark y.)
Jesus was going on His way to heal the daughter of Jairus. She was
dead and He raised her to life again. He was on His way to work a
miracle, arid as he was going he worked another. Miracles, with Jesus,
are the order of the day. Oh, that question about the difficulty of
believing in a miracle! Why, there is nothing more stubbornly rooted
into human history than the history of Jesus Christ. You might as well
try to dig out of history the story of Julius Csesar, or of Oliver Cromwell,
as the history of Jesus Christ. Fie was simply a man who wrought
miracles all day long, day after day. He crowded them thick and fast, on
top of each other, for Fie was God. Then the eyes of the blind were
opened, and the ears of the deaf unstopped; then the lame man leaped
as a hart, and the tongue of the dumb began singing. When God comes,
miracles are the order of the day, and He has not left yet, but is here to-
day, ready to work the mightiest of miracles, miracles of grace, and deeds
of love and power to the dark, sin-smitten hearts, on every hand, accord-
ing to their faith. Now Jesus wrought one miracle on the way to per-
form another, and here it is: “A certain woman who had an issue of
blood twelve years, and had suffered many things of many physicians,
and spent ail that she had, and was nothing bettered but rather grew
worse, when she had heard of Jesus, she came in the press behind and
touched His garment, for she said, ‘lf I may touch but His clothes I shall
be whole.’ And straightway the fountain of her body was dried up, and
she felt in her body that she was healed of that plague. And Jesus
immediately knowing in Himself that virtue had gone out of Him”—l
know, when 1 touch the Lord, that it saves me, and He knows too. There
is nothing with so much of the actual and factual about it as saving
grace. It is no superstition or excitement. It is act, fact, knowledge.
Nothing can drive it out of us. Whereas we were blind, now we see, and
we know it. She knew there had been wrought in her a mighty change,
and the Lord knew it too.
THE CURSE OF DOUBT
You people, some of you, say you don’t quite know whether you are
saved or not; you say you will never know before you die. Isn’t it just
a little too late then ? Imagine Christ coming down to earth, shedding
* Exhibition Building, Sunday afternoon, 6th August.


His blood, rising from the dead, and pouring out His spirit to bring
home the truth, all for this—that you will never know anything of it till
you die! And, according to yourself, there is nobody so wise as your-
self! How some of you people let the living water run out ox the
Gospel ! Oh, man, for shame’s sake don’t speak till you know something.
I am sick to-day with the objections of these wise fools about saving grace.
Now see that woman. She knew it and Jesus knew it. “ Jesus,
immediately knowing in Himself that virtue—power—had gone out of
Him, turned Him about in the press and said, * Who touched Me ? ’
And the disciples said, * Thou seest the multitude thronging Thee, and
sayest Thou, Who touched Me?’” But He still kept looking round
about to see her who had done this thing. “But the woman, fearing and
trembling, knowing what was done in her.” You see that stubborn way
of putting it, knowing, knowing ; there was no superstition about it; act
and fact and knowledge; “ knowing what was done in her, came and fell
down before Him and told Him all the truth.” See another characteristic
of saving grace, truth. It is bottomed on truth , not superstition and
deceit. She told Him all the truth. And He said to her, “ Daughter,
thy faith,” not your fingers that touched My clothes, “ thy faith hath made
thee whole: go in peace, and be whole of thy plague.”
WHAT CHRIST CAN DO.
I do not know a better story in the Bible than that for illustrating
certain things about your state and mine. First of all, it is in the same
chapter with two other incidents. There is the story of the madman
whom Christ saved and recovered to right reason, and faith, and salva-
tion ; and also the story of a poor girl who was dead, but Christ came to
her and spoke, and raised her from the dead. Put the three together,
the madman, this woman with the secret wasting trouble killing her by
inches for twelve years, and that poor little girl at twelve years of age,
dead—yet Jesus’ blood met each case—and there you have a mighty ser-
mon of itself. Man, this Jesus can do anything ! The Lord’s arm is
not shortened. “I am the Lord God; is there anything too hard for
Me ? ” Bring out, bring out your dead ; there is nothing that Christ or
God cannot grapple with in the damned catalogue of the power and
ravage of sin on poor humanity. Hallelujah ! what a Saviour ! He
healed this poor woman, with her shy, shamed face. He raised the dead
girl, the daughter of Jairus. Now, for any sake, sit back in your seat and
listen, for you need this Jesus, my brother; young or old, sick or well,
rich or poor, you need Him beyond all other needs. If you get Him all
your other needs are satisfied far better than you dream. Jesus can
heal a man or woman like this one, and also all the grades and shades that
lie between, for these are just the sermons of salvation, the pictures to
us of how Jesus can heal deadlier ravages of sin in the inner man—
the soul.
“ A certain woman who had suffered twelve years from a wasting
disease, and had spent all that she had in physicians, and was nothing
better, but rather grew worse.” One point there is this : twelve years,
twelve long, weary years she had suffered. That brings in the element
of time.
TIME IS GOD’S SERVANT.
Sometimes we ministers and preachers are depressed because time is
hardening element. Some of you when young were more hopeful of


coming to salvation, but the hope and promise of your earlier days, as
the years have come and gone, has been darkened and falsified. Twelve
years ago you looked as if you were coming to Christ, but you have gone
deeper into the world and into sin ; or, if you have still the form of
godliness, it is only an empty, empty, disappointing form. Now while
that is so, we must not forget to thank God for the other side, for the
element of time is not always hardening. Bless God ! in His wonderful
providence it is sometimes a softening thing. There are people here
this afternoon, and if I had met you twelve years ago you would not
have come to hear me. But as days and years have slipped past, time
has been ripening you for salvation. Suppose it had been possible
for Jesus to have come twelve years sooner to this woman’s town,
with the reputation of being able to heal the leper, and give sight to
the blind, and hearing to the deaf, do you think she would have
listened to Him ? She was young then. The disease had not fastened
its clutch upon her. She would have tossed her pretty head, and
swung her skirts and said, “ What have I to do with preaching or
preachers ? It is all very well for old people, and sick and dying people ;
but I am young, and strong, and gay, and my day is before me.” And
you know how the world smiles on a sweet young woman, in opening
womanhood, with life before her. She would not have listened to Jesus.
You see how Christ works. He comes at the right time, and in the right
way. Twelve years made a difference. That secret trouble fastened
itself on her 'and took away her beauty, spoiled her life, killed her by
inches ; and she spent this, that, and the other thing on this, and that
and the other doctor; and as the weary years dragged on she only got
into deeper disappointment, and longed at last for death, and death even
seemed to cheat her, like the other doctors. I tell you, my dear friends,
God can bring down the swagger, and the bluster, and the bounce out of
us. Some time ago, if I had come into Melbourne, some of you sitting
here would not have looked near me. What was religion or evangelistic
meetings to you ? Talking about getting saved ! You would have tossed
your head in infinite scorn at the very thought of it. Aye, but twelve
years, and God has brought you down a bit! Twelve years, and the
starch is out of you! Twelve years, and the swagger, and the bluster,
and the bounce are subdued, and you are here—in an evangelistic
meeting! You who used to toss your head are sitting here and listening
for your life. Bless God ! listening for your life ! —it is your last chance
—and hearing about that Jesus whom you so mightily despised, and
whom you handed so generously over to sick people and old, wise folks,
who were going to die. My brother, God can take the bounce out of you ;
God can take the swagger out of you ; God can weaken our strength and
take all the bluster out of us, until there is nothing we so much crave
as the things we once despised and would not look at. So that, my good
man, my good woman, if the liord had come to this woman sooner,
before she was sick and tired and utterly disappointed with all the other
doctors, He would have made nothing of her. I think I meet her after
she was cured, and hear her tell the story of her trouble. She would say,
“ Oh, during those weary twelve years, and especially the last of them,
I thought I was ripening for the grave, and now I have discovered I was
ripening for Jesus ! ” The amazing thing is that it takes some of us so
long to ripen for Jesus. Man ! you might have known your need of Him
forty years ago. God grant that at last this audience may be ripe and


ready for Christ. Sick ! sick of yourself and the world’s cheats, and
eager at last to try the perfect cure. Come back to the Son of God by
simple faith. God grant it for His name’s sake.
THE DOCTORS WHO FAIL US.
She had spent much money on many physicians, and, says St. Mark
in his gruff way, “she was nothing better, but rather grew worse.” That
is rather rough on the doctors. (Laughter.) If you will read the same
story in St. Luke’s Gospel, you will find Luke carefully keeps out that
rub about doctors, for Luke was a doctor himself. (Laughter.) But
Mark was not a doctor, and had no nervousness about doctors’ feelings,
and I do not doubt but that sometimes afterwards Luke met Mark some-
where and said, “ Mark, you put it very low down on us about that
woman with the wasting disease.” (Laughter.) “ Spent all she had on
many physicians, and was nothing better, but rather grew worse.” My
friends, it is just the same as if you sat for your photograph. Oh, how
many are sitting for their photographs in the picture of that shrivelled,
wasted, wan, pallid, sighing, dying woman ! Going from doctor to doc-
tor, hearing of this and of that, and rushing to give it a trial, all the
while sighing and getting heavier and heavier, and the step feebler, and
the pulse fainter. That is the history of a soul away from Jesus. Some
try pleasure, some try riches, some try business, and some try sin. But
the sigh gets deeper, and at last, if the soul is honest, it turns av r ay from
all the world’s comforters and says, “ Miserable comforters are ye all,
cheats and liars, taking my money and substance and giving me no cure
in return.” I appeal to you, man and woman. What has the world
given? 'You have tried the world’s cures and remedies. Has not it
cheated you to your face? And you seem to love the cheats, and try to
pretend you are getting something in return, when you only get daiker
and heavier every year. lam face to face with men and women this
afternoon, and this is the eighth month in the year, and you never sighed
so much in your life—secretly, when nobody was looking, involuntarily,
as you have done these eight months; and you will be sighing all the rest
of the year unless Christ meets you and changes your sighing into
singing this afternoon.
You have heard of the actor, the celebrated clown, Grimaldi. One
day he came into a doctor’s room, a haggard, wretched man, and said,
“ I have got into a very melancholy condition. My very soul is dark
and glum. Can you do anything for me?” “Oh,” said the doctor,
“you want to be cheered up a bit. You go and hear Grimaldi, that
famous clown.” And a spasm of agony crept over that wretched man’s
face, and he said, “Doctor, do not trifle with me. 1 am Grimaldi!”
Man, woman, do not cheat yourself. Away from God there is no life.
THE UNFAILING HEALER.
What next? When she had heard of Jesus she came to Jesus. That
ought to be written in letters of light. When she had heard of Jesus
she came and gave Him a trial. I heaid of Jesus for years before it
dawned on me that He was the very doctor for me. How many in this
hall can say that is true of them, when you have heard of Jesus you
came to Jesus ? This woman is rare in that particular. When she
heard of Jesus she came and tried Him. She came, and how did she
come ? I think I see her driving and working her way through that


crowd. You know how the temper of a crowd is sometimes rather short,
and if you go pushing through a crowd, people turn round angrily and
say, “Who are you pushing?” and “Where are you shoving to?”
(Laughter.) And I see that poor woman, who, twelve years before, had
been very likely remarkable for her strength and life, and hopefulness
and sprightliness, pushing her way through the crowd, and men were
just going to turn round and quarrel with her. But when they saw her
thin, sharp face, all the manliness rose in them, and they made a lane
for her to pass along, and up she went to Christ. The road to Jesus is
as plain and straight and open for you as if you started off to walk
along this platform, and there is nothing to stumble over. Everything
makes room for the anxious soul. The mountains will be beaten into
dust, and the rivers will be divided, and the flames won’t burn the soul
that wants to get to Jesus. Poor, and thin, and weak, and wasted, she
tottered on her last legs to Jesus ; and they carried her there, and she
came back new—new body and soul, strong and young again—old things
passed away, all things made new ; and the touch did it!
Now just a word on that touch. I see her coming in the crowd, and
the people look round and see this woman and make a lane for her, and
she pushes on behind and lays hold of Christ’s cloak, or the tassel of it,
and she says, “ I am on the right track to-day, if all tales be true, if I
may touch but His clothes I shall be whole,” and she puts out a hand
eagerly, nervously, a hand white and pale as marble, and just gave a kind
of nervous clutch to the tassel at the end of His cloak, believing, and
that wasting curse lifted and took its flight like a dream, ultimately.
SO LITTLE ! YET SO MUCH !
Now it may not do anybody any good, but I do not care ; I am here
to preach God’s truth, and I will stand for this. The moment, the
instant that you will let that sin-sick, spoiled, blighted hand of yours
touch Jesus that instant thou art better of it—thou art eternally,
infinitely better. You have touched God. You are healed ! That is
all. Be done with all quacks, and looking to men and ministers and
sacraments, though they have all their places, and touch Him, Jesus.
How little it is to do ! If I had a title for this subject it would be this:
“ How little to do ; how much it brings us ! ” Only touch the tassel of
His robe, and how much it brings immediately. The curse of a lifetime
lifted and gone!
I was once preaching in a town in Scotland on this text—l always get
the Scotchmen when I mention about that land of Canaan. (Laughter.)
I always see the Scotch face light up. I was preaching on this theme,
and was impressing on my hearers how little there was to do. You know
a lawyer will tell you that a great part of his business to the jury is not
to be eloquent, but to repeat, and repeat, and repeat a thing so as to con-
vince the jury, and he repeats, and repeats, and does not bother about
eloquence. It is conviction he wants. And so I was repeating away on
this line, '* How little we do, and how much it brings us.” Only touched
the hem of His garment and immediately made whole ! And a certain
woman was listening, and three weeks afterwards she had a child, and
when she was departing, like Rachel—for she died—they saw her trying
to speak, so someone went up to her and found she was saying this, just
what I had been saving three weeks before, “ How little we do, and how
much it brings.” She only touched the tassel of His cloak, and touched


Him by faith ! It is so ! How little, how little ; and how much it brings !
Yonder, in Glasgow, I go into my bouse and I want a drink of water, and
.1 go and turn on a tap, and what have I done? There is a lake, Loch
Katrine, thirty miles away, among the hills in Stirlingshire, and when I,
in Glasgow, turn on that little tap I have the water of that lake to my
hand. How little we do, and how much lies behind it! —the infinite love
and pity of the Saviour. Man, touch Him ! Tap, tap that reservoir !
Tap that ocean fulness of pardon ! It is bubbling over ; and you have
turned on the tap, and you are in communion with the infinite Ocean,
Jesus Christ. Believe in Him. Do not think so much of your own faith
as of the mighty Ocean it puts you in contact with, the Son of God in
all His fulness.
A PRAYER ON THE FINGER TIPS !
Now I will just hasten to finish. You will touch Him, won’t you ?
And according to your faith so be it unto you. There is the lesson this
woman teaches us, and I daren’t let you go without drawing your atten-
tion to that, and to the sweet simplicity of it. Some of you think you have
to pray and beseech an angry God to fling salvation to you as you would
toss a coin to a hungry beggar to get rid of him, Man ! God longs to fill
you with a new love, with new hopes ! Some of you women last week
had some woman you know call on you to come into the meeting, and she
had a cup of tea with you, and at the cup of tea there was something
extra in the way of fine bread out of the bin, and after you had eaten those
nice sweetmeats she went away, and no sooner was she gone than your
little girl came in and saw what had been going on, and there were some
little cakes still uneaten, and she, young as she is, knows all about you.
She knows she does not need to pray and beseech you. She just came,
very likely, and stood beside the table, and beside those sweet cakes, and,
first of all, looked at the cakes, and then up at you, and then back at the
cakes, and then at you, and then back at the cakes, and then at you again
—(laughter)—and never said a word, and you then came over and said,
“ Mary, would you like one ? ” There was not a word spoken. My ! how
much you can do without words. That woman did not even pray or look
at Christ, for she was behind Him ; but she put a whole prayer into the
ends of her fingers as she touched the end of His garment. How much
you can do by a look ! a shrug of the shoulders ! Some of you men meet
a woman down the town, and she just looks at you a certain way, and you
are miserable. (Laughter). But perhaps another time she looks at you
pleasantly, and for the rest of the day there is a smile on your face,
(Laughter.) You smile because it is true. You sometimes say, “ Why,
I passed you in the street to-day, and I looked hard at you, but you never
looked at me.” If you would only sit there and loek —God pity you—look
wistfully into His face as that little girl looks into her mother’s lace, with-
out a word passing, you would get what you want, as she did. “ This
poor man looked, and the Lord heard him,” says the Psalmist. Oh, it is
so simple.
CONFESSING CHRIST.
The last lesson this story teaches is that you have got to confess
Christ. She was going to do it in a nice quiet way, never saying any-
thing to anybody. But it would not do. The Lord turned round, and
when He turns round on you, you are in front, not behind. (Laughter.)
“ Somebody touched Me,” He said, with meaning and significance. It


was no mere jostle. Going out that aisle, I could go out with the rest of
you, and I would be crowded, shouldered, pushed, and jostled, before,
behind, right side and left side, and that crowding and jostling would
never touch me; it would be mere bodily contact, shouldering and
elbowing. But some woman could so come behind me in the crowd and
put her finger and thumb on my shoulder, that immediately I would
turn round and say, “ What do you want ? ” You can put a great deal of
touch into your finger and thumb. There was meaning in it. There
was prayer in it; and Jesus virtually said, “Who was it touched Me ? I
heard a bell that rung in My soul, and it said, Jesus, Jesus, there is a
poor dying woman out here who never saw you before. Jesus, will you
help me?" A touch said all that in Christ. Oh, He is quick to make
the most out of the dimmest faith.
At last the woman saw she could not be hid and just told Him all.
The kingdom of heaven is built on truth, not on superstition or excite-
ment, and the Lord sealed the blessing on her when she faced Him, and
said, “ Daughter, not your fingers, for that would be superstition, but
your faith, your faith has saved you : go in peace ! ” That was worth
waiting for, wasn’t it ? Now many of you in this hall want not only sal-
vation, but assurance of salvation, and you will get that when you confess
Christ, and cease to hide and be ashamed of it. Now you know what
keeps you back. You have never confessed Jesus. If that woman had.
been allowed to slip home without confessing Christ she would have
started up before twenty-four hours with a wild hysterical cry, “ It’s back
again ! ” You have only enough religion to torment you, that’s all, only
enough to torment, and not enough to give you peace, for you hid your
light, and you were ashamed of Jesus, and you deserve to be what you
are, tormented continually with doubts and fears. Step out and confess
Christ, and He will seal the blessing on you, and put you among the
family of the saved. This woman is put down here as a nobody, “A
certain woman,” and she rose up to be a princess of the blood royal.
“ Daughter, daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole: go in peace” !
What a mighty lesson, told in such simple, striking, concrete form, for
poor, heavy, sin-smitten, wasting sinners ! Jesus is in the midst of us.
His truth is the skirt of His garment let down in among us. Lay hold of
Christ in His truth. If you lay hold of my coat, you lay hold of me, for
lamin my coat. Lay hold of some text, as I did twenty years ago, and
in doing that you will lay hold of Him in the text. Do as this woman did.
She touched something that was in quick, immediate contact with the
Saviour, His clothes ; and all these blessed words of Scripture are ju-t
the trailing skirts of Jesus let down within our reach for us to lay hold
of. Lay hold of it, then, and you have not only a text, a word, but you
have Him, the Lord. Amen.
VII.—THE MAN UP THE TREE.
0 (Luke xix.)
“He received Jesus joyfully”—Jesus and joy go well together! I like
that alliteration. “Jesus—joy”! “And when they saw it they all
murmured, saying that He was gone to be guesc with a man that is a
sinner. And Zaecheus stood, and said unto the Lord, Behold, Lord,


the half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I have taken anything
from any man by false accusation ” —and that was the temptation of his
calling. He was a tax-gatherer, and might often be tempted to do a little
rack-renting and over-valuation and to feather his own nest with the
surplus—“if I have taken anything from any man by false accusation, I
restore him fourfold. And Jesus said unto him, “This day is salvation
come to this house.” Hay and date, time and place! “This day is
salvation come to this house, for the Son of Man is come to seek and
save that which was lost.’' That text comes in as an explanation of the
story of Zaccheus. This happened; the Lord did this, for it is His
business. “ The Son of Man is come to seek and to save that which was
lost;” and Zaccheus is an illustration of the Son of Man at His work.
It is a sample case. Now the sack should be like the sample in all fair
trading ; and so it is with Jesus Christ. This sample sinner sought,
and found, and was saved by Jesus. It is simply an illustration of how
He seeks, and finds, and saves the lost in this meeting to-night. I like
to see a man at his work. It may be hard, heavy, and difficult, but I like
to see a capable man stripped to his work and pushing it through and
giving a good account of it. There is a pain comes into your face look-
ing at a bungler and sluggard, but there is a satisfaction in seeing a
capable man working. Now I have that satisfaction when I see the Son
of Man coming to do His great business—to seek and save lost men.
CHRIST THE SEEKER.
It needs amazing qualifications of head and heart, but the Son of God
has them, blessed be His name ! “ Seeking and saving ” ! Some of you
people would make very poor seekers, very poor finders. You know,
some of you men—your wife twits you with it—that if anything goes
amiss and you begin rummaging and turning things upside down, your
wife tells you that unless the lost thing comes and looks for you there
is no use sending you to look for it. (Laughter.) You turn the whole
house upside down looking for it. But there are some people in the
house who have a kind of knack of finding a thing that has gone amiss,
a kind of keen scent for lost things ; and if anything is missing it is said,
“ Oh, tell Harriet! she will ferret it out.” (Laughter.) In the old country
we had a game. Some of us went into another room, but a few remained
and hid something as cunningly as they could possibly think, and then
called the others in ; and as they came in again to look for the hidden
object, and approached near to or wandered away from it, those of us
who were in the secret said, “ Oh, you’re hot ! ” and now “ You’re cold ! ”
(Laughter.) It is a simple illustration, but I like to see Jesus seeking
the lost soul. He never goes off the track by a yard—never ! He goes
through all the turnings and windings sure and certain till He runs
him down and puts His hand on him, and calls him by his name, and
brings him home with rejoicing. ‘‘ Rejoice with me, for I have found
that which was lost.” Dear men and women, our lostness is an awful
fact. Lost sons and daughters are only illustrations of the awful facts of
lostness. The reality of being lost is yours and mine. We have gone
astray from God and are utterly lost. Lost coins may be found, lost
sheep may be tracked, the prodigal sons and daughters who have left
their homes and have buried their shame and degradation in the slums
of a big city may be tracked, but who shall seek and find God’s lost
creatures? An angel or an archangel could never find us. It takes God


to do that! God Himself, from whom we strayed, in Jesus seeking,
saving us and bringing us home, and He is filling His Church below and
His heaven above with those who were lost and hopelesss. Now just see
in detail how Jesus does it, and there is hope for any man or woman to-
night who wants to be saved.
lIOAV JESUS SEEKS.
First of all Jesus came unto the lost sinners of the world. Begin at
the beginning. « This is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptation,
that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners.” He had no need
1,0 come except for that. He does not belong here. Away up there in
happy, holy eternity He was King and Lord ot all j but He could not see
us left to sin and death, and so He laid aside His glory, and clothed
Himself in our humanity so that He might get near us and not scare us
away. As the obi writers used to say, He stepped down from star to star
until He landed on this dark world, the dwelling and the grave of a lost
humanity. And then, in this sample case, He comes closer, He comes
into the lost sinner’s town; this is “getting hotter (laughter)—and
into the very street where the toll booth of Zaccheus was, and “ hotter”
still ! He comes to the particular branch of the tree in which the sinner
is sitting. And then He calls him by name. He says, “Zaccheus,
make haste and come down ; I have got you. To-day I must abide at
Thy house,” and they went home together, and they are together yet.
That is well done, isn’t it? They never lost each other after that. From
the foot of the tree to the foot of the throne they went together, and they
are together still. Now that is what is happening again to-night, and if
Jesus can do it He will. May the Lord come in, and save, and seek, and
find here, for there are some still Ohristless, homeless, hopeless through
sin. Now a word more about this sample sinner. There were natural
difficulties at first, but at last they were all overcome. See our part and
Christ’s part. Depend upon it, if Jesus is seeking you, you will wake up
to put yourself in His way. You will not even think you are doing that,
but He will start you.
HOW CHRIST DRAWS.
Now notice in this case Jesus was coming to look for Zaccheus, and
Zaccheus all unconscious of the fact that Jesus was going to save him,
says, as he is sitting in his custom house, lifting his tax and his toll,
“There is a crowd of people, and it is that Jesus I have heard so much
about.” As we know to-day, He was on His way to Jerusalem, but
Zaccheus did not know that. He just thought, “I would like to see
Him.” “He sought to see Jesus, who He was,” and he hurried up from
his desk, and took his pen from over his ear, and crammed his papers
into the ledger, scribbled a few words on an envelope, went outside and
tacked it on to the door—“ Gone away; will be back in half-an-hour.”
(Laughter.) My, my, my ! Just think what happened in that half-
hour ! So you business men next week are just going to shut the
ledger, go into a restaurant for a few minutes, bolt a bit of dinner, and
come dashing in here to see M'Neill. And what will be the end of it?
Salvation ! They will build better than they knew. It is worth while
getting people just a little curious about you. When I came out to
preach first, I felt terribly when some newspapers denounced me. I felt
cut to the quick. I never replied, and by-and-by I began to see that if
I could only bear with it, it had a use. Curiosity to see a man who said


things that no man ought to say caused the people to come crowding to
hear him. Do not be a fool, but do not be afraid to be called a fool so
long as people come. I thank God I have not the reputation of being a
great orator, a wise scholar, a distinguished divine. If that were the
case, what would happen to me ? You would treat me as you do those
big fellows,—you don’t go to hear them ! There is something in having
people coming, even through curiosity. Do not be a fool, but don’t be
afraid to be called a fool. It has been said that a man who is in earnest
will always be a fool to people who are not in earnest and are held up by
formality and unreality. Now Zaccheus said, “ The big wigs all
denounce Jesus, and I would like to see Him.” 1 just want to show you
what cords God pulls so that He may cause us to seek Him. Curiosity ;
coming to scoff! But many a time fools who have come to scoff remain
to pray. I do not care how they come. It is very hard to convert a
sinner, and we are all sinners to begin with, and it needs God’s power to
do it; but it is utterly impossible, even for God, to make anything out
of empty pews, and I would rather have my pews filled with people than
have empty seats. Now be willing to be called a fool for Christ’s sake..
Too many of us want to have the reputation of being wise men for
Christ’s sake. God brought Zaccheus by curiosity to see a Man who had
the reputation of being out of the ordinary run.
HOW A SOUL IS HINDERED.
Next, when he came out into the street, things were in his way. A
great crowd, and he an undersized man. “He could not see Jesus for
the press because he was little of stature.” Ah, poor fellow. You get
sympathetic, don’t you ? He was a tax-gatherer. Tax-gatherers were a
hated set. They were usually broken-down Jews, who had broken with all
State patriotism and godliness to make money at a trade that was intensely
abhorred—the lifting of the taxes for the hated Roman conqueror. Such
a man was Zaccheus, a man with a hardened conscience, a non-church-
goer. But his curiosity brought him to seek Jesus. He comes. There
is a big crowd, and not a friend of his there, and he is a little, undersized
man, and that great big crowd is just like a wall built between him and
Jesus. And what happens ? Somebody, when they saw the sharp set
face of that eager little fellow, ought to have helped him to see Jesus,
but nobody did. Many a Pharisee would have been glad to hustle him
into a sidewalk and say, “What are you doing here, you who are turning
your back on all your upbringing to lift a tax for the hated Roman ? ”
But what next? Littleness of stature, everyone against him, Alps piled
on Apennines between the vision and Jesus. It looks as if you hear the
door slammed in his face. It looks as if you hear the low mocking
laugh: “ Zaccheus, you’ve worked for man, and I will pay you your
wages. . The wages of sin is death, Zaccheus. You thought I would let
you roam away to see Jesus. Zaccheus, I will let you run here and
there, and many a where. I will lengthen your chain in many direc-
tions, but if you want to go in the direction of Jesus I will tighten your
chain and pull you in behind like a dog.” He could not see Jesus, and
the devil is tiiumphant seemingly, and poor Zaccheus is going to miss
that sight of sights after all. “He could not see Him for the press,”
but, thank God, he did get to see Him. Zaccheus thanked God then,
and He thanks Him as fresh to-day after two thousand years as the first
time he saw His divine, compassionate face. Man ! there is a lot against


you, but there is a mightier lot for you. Push on. Don t give in.
Greater is He that is for you than all that can be against you, within
you, and round about.
HEREDITARY HINDRANCES.
Littleness of stature. That deserves a word. You say, “ How can you
get over that?” If he had been a great six-foot porridge-fed Scotchman,
he would have dug his way through the crowd. The littleness of stature
is worth dwelling on, because in his case it was a characteristic difficulty.
Which of you, by taking thought, can add one cubit to his stature? If,
by being terribly anxious and earnest, he could have shot up another
cubit, he could have seen Jesus ; but how can you get over that little-
ness that belongs to the birth, and blood, and heredity ? He was always
dwarfed and little, and one never-to-be-forgotten day his littleness of
stature nearly cost him everything. Now you know what keeps you back
from Christ, something that belongs to birth and blood ; it Is as much
yourself as the colour of your hair or the shape of your features; and it
was in your father generations before you. Now there is a look on some
faces as if you were beginning to see the dark root of this foul, accursed
thing, which dwarfs and stunts you—sin, sin ! “All have sinned and
come short of the glory of God.” How are we to get over that ? How
do you get over that which was in your forefather before you ? Zaccheus
was always undersized. I think I see him that morning he was born.
The gossips come in, as they always do at these times, and the poor dear
mother is lying in bed pale and asleep, and one of the gossips approaches
and lifts a little babe out of her bosom, and brings the new-born son to
the window to have a good look at him, and you can see a smile and a
smirk play all over the dames’ faces ; and the one who holds him says;
“ Look at the size of it.” (Laughter.) “ What a little mite.” And as
he grew, his littleness grew with his growth, and there he was, a little
child, a little boy. And when he was at school, in the playground—take
it home to yourself—many a painful moment he had when another boy
would come and stand himself beside him, and say : “ See little Zaccheus!
And he is thirteen and I am only nine, and I am bigger than he is!”
Aik! at last, I repeat, one day, one critical day, that littleness of stature
that was a standing joke about him—my! the devil took a turn at him
and nearly succeeded. Ah ! this littleness of stature was greatly against
Zaccheus. And you could stand up and tell this meeting just where the
difficulty gathers. Some lust, some laziness, some mental twist, some-
thing which is in you, but the roots of which are buried deep back in the
generations. “ The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the children’s
teeth are set on edge.” My sin, with all its power to dwarf, and stunt,
and blight, is mine ; and yet it did not begin with me. It is buried deep
back in the generations, and you have to go riaht back to find the root
till you come to one man and one woman who were full-sized, made in
the image of God, able to look Him straight in the face, without a blush,
without a cloud ; and they sinned, and in that moment they shrank, and
we have all been blighted and spoiled ever since. Now there is your
littleness of stature, a thing that belongs to birth and blood. Still it is
your own, with all its terrible consequences.
THE GREATEST OE MIRACLES.
Now, in spite of all the difficulties he had to contend against, Zaccheus
did see Jesus, and was saved. Let us spend a minute on that now, for


I have touched the doctrines of heredity. We hear just a little too much
about heredity just now. Novels are full of it, and it is said you “ cannot
escape your environment” Indeed ! Maybe you never knew you had
such a thing. (Laughter.) Well, now, let me tell you you can escape
it. You need not go to the devil, no matter what may be the causes that
seem to say you must.
There was a man who lived in the East-end of London. His father
was a drunkard and a gambler; his mother was a street-walker ; and you
say, a man with such a father, and a street-walker for a mother, that man
is bound to go to hell! Is he ? Yes. On the same principle every seed
and soul of Adam is bound to go to hell, as we are linked to him in the
long chain of the generations. But, thank God I there is a break in
that dark chain. Grace breaks it—Hallelujah ! Praise God ! —or there
could be no salvation for anyone. Look at that man. See the heavy,
sensual, brutal jaw, the large, wide, licentious, thick-lipped mouth, the
broad nostrils, the hard blue-pink eye in his head, the low, narrow fore-
head of him. But come nearer! Grace can change that thick bull-neck
and licentious-looking mouth and lips and the evil looking contour of the
face. Listen ! As you come closer, see the softened look in the eye, and
the kind of holy light that is trying to struggle over that face of his, and
listen to the throb in his throat as he sings “ Hallelujah! what a Saviour,”
He has been converted. He has seen Jesus, although his father and his
mother were base sinners. So with you to-night. “ Flesh and blood ”
and if you were the Queen of England you are only flesh and blood—
“flesh and blood cannot enter the Kingdom of heaven,” but, blessed be
God, grace “ breaks our birth’s invidious bar ” !
HOW A MAN FINDS CHRIST.
What happened ? Well, he looked round for some vantage point, and
naturally he saw the sycamore tree. You see, he was determined to see
Jesus. He was in earnest about it. Oh, men and women, be earnest,
and don’t give in to the voices that say you cannot be saved. How
naturally the supernatural takes place. A little man grasps the branch
of a tree and hoists himself above the crowd. The brazen-facedness and
determination that was natural to him saved him at last. I wish some
of you would be brazen-faced enough to seek Christ in that way. You
have been brazen-faced enough with sin. I think I see the dust of his
feet as he runs along, and I think I see him sprawling up that tree. But
there was something to be gained by it. Never mind how you look
running for it, God will help you. Run for life eternal! I repeat it was
rather grotesque and ludicrous, scuttling along the road and climbing up
that tree; but I defy any D.D. or bishop to climb a tree with dignity.
(Laughter.) It would take the starch out of some of you. God pity you
and your stuck-up-ness ! You daren’t call your soul your own, for fear
of what somebody would say. Zaccheus didn’t care who looked at him.
And now I see him up the tree and all panting after his exertion. I see
him looking about and wondering which is Jesus. “ I wonder which is
Jesus ? ” he is thinking. And at first, maybe, his eye falls on Simon
Peter, for many a time the servant is bigger than the master. (Laughter.)
But at last it was put beyond all doubt. Now if you want to see Jesus
you can make no mistake. There is nobody can counterfeit Him. When
you see Him you will know Him. I have seen Him. There is none like
Him. Fairer than the sons of men ; chief among ten thousand. I will


know Him in eternity the moment I open my eyes there, won’t you ?
There will be no narrow looking or making of mistakes. Jesus put it
beyond all doubt Himself. Suddenly the little man’s heart nearly stood
still, for the crowd began to move his way, and Jesus came to the place I
That word should be written in letters of light a foot long. Jesus came
to the place and looked up, and called him by his name. Men and
women, Jesus comes to the place—tiamp, tramp, tramp—never missing
a step, all the way from eternity to the place where you are. That is
well-done work, isn’t it? Jesus came to the place where I was. He is
come to-night to the very place, the very chair, where you sit. There is
no slack work with Jesus. He leaves no loophole. His work is thorough.
He came to the place where the poor fellow was, and Zaccheus’ eyes were
just beginning to burn in his head when Jesus named him by his name
and said, “ Zaccheus, make haste and come down, for to-day I must abide
at thy house.” And I believe he was converted then. There’s a man
down there, and I can so look into your eyes that you know 1 am looking
straight at you, and 1 know you are looking straight at me, and we are
eye to eye. That is how Christ looks. It is not a vague look. You feel
a thrill, “I have caught His eye and He has caught mine.” The one
looked up and saw the other looking down at him, and from that moment
Zaccheus lost himself, and the devil lost him, and the world lost him, but
Const found him. He looked to Jesus and then down he came.
Friends, I wish you would come down. You say you are so deeply
interested in our mission. Come down ! You may die, and be damned !
“ Deeply interested ” ! but never coming to Jesus, never coming inside
the church, nor outside of it either—never coming near it. 1 wish I
could rouse some of you people. Some of you rather boast about it.
You say, “We have taken sittings with Dr. So-and-so.” Zaccheus took
a sitting, and he was glad to give it up. (Laughter.) My good woman,
good man, it ought to be easy to come down. The law of gravitation
was against you going up, but it is for you coming down. My friend,
you are too high up. I don’t care how “ interested ” you are. I am
afraid some of you churchgoers are only spectators. When it dawned
on me that “Jesus loves me, He means me,'” that did it!
CHRIST IN THE HOME.
Zaccheus made haste and came down, and received Him joyfully.
And I think I see the two of them walking home together, and the little
man looking up at Him as he walks along, and saying to himself, “He
is coming home to stay with me,” And so they went home, and Jesus
spent the night with him. That finished the business. And Jesus was
so kind, and sat down, spent the night, took His supper, asked for his
wife and children (if he had them) while the supper and bed were being
got ready, took up the youngest child, put him on His knee, turned up
the little fellow’s chin, put His hand under his chin, and said to him—
we have done things like that, even you and I, bunglers like us ;to get
at the parents we have handled the children, and would our Master be
less tactful than us?—said to him, “ Well, my little man, did you ever
see Me before ? ” And the child looked up at Him as if He were
strangely familiar, for “in heaven their angels do always behold the
face of His Father.” And Zaccheus saw all this and wondered, and said
to himself—at the first he went out to see a man, and he saw Him and
he got Him home with him, and at the last he said—“ Lord, my Lord 1


Come not to damn me, though I deserve it, but to save me! ” And the
very things for the sake of which he had been ruining himself —the love
ot money—he is flinging it away, for he has got Jesus into his heart, and
knows Him as his Saviour and Lord. He met Him before the Cross,
but you meet Him after the Cross. ‘‘ And Zaccheus stood and said unto
the Lord, Behold, Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I
have taken anything from any man by false accusation, I restore him
fourfold.” And Jesus rose—the Great High Priest—and pronounced
His absolution, and that will stand the test at the great Judgment Day.
“ This day ” —that is the pronouncement of the Great High Priest, and
it never can be revoked—“this day is salvation come into this house,”
and He put him back into the family of God, and He will do the same
for you to-night. Take Jesus home with you! You need Him at home,
don’t you ? Friends, it is late to-night; it is going on for nine o’clock.
Is Jesus still to tramp the street? Yes. You have never asked Him in.
He tramps the streets to-night so far as your heart and home are con-
cerned. Then listen. If Jesus is not in your home I would not stay in
it. It may be the grandest house in Melbourne, but I would rather live
in any hovel open to the wintry sky than under the roof of a palace that
is shut against the sweet presence of Jesus in the heart of its possessor. It
is a pig-sty without Jesus. Without Him it is a place for devils to dance
together. I think I see the Blessed Lord after supper gathering them
all around about Him, and He would take out His roll of the old scrip-
tures, and they would have family worship. I wonder what they sang
when Jesus led the worship ! I wonder how He would lead the tune
and help Zaccheus and his wife and children to sing the hymn. A
Scotch metre version of the twenty-third Psalm comes to my mind. I
think that Psalm would do. Zaccheus would sing it with a bursting
heart. “The Lord is my Shepherd.” Sing the twenty-third Psalm, my
brother :
“ The Lord s my Shepherd, I’ll not want;
He makes me down to lie
In pastures green ; He leadeth me
The quiet waters by.
“ My soul He doth restore again
And me to walk doth make
Within the paths of righteousness
E’en for His own name s sake.”
And so on to the last verse. Zaccheus took Jesus to his house, and long
since Jesus took Zaccheus home to His house.
“ Goodness and mercy all my life
Shall surely follow me,
And in God’s house for evermore
My dwelling place shall be.”
The twenty-third Psalm would thus be literally fulfilled. Dear friends,
receive Jesus joyfully and He will carry you and your seed after you
home to His house for ever and ever.
VIII.—THE SECRET OF HOPE.*
You will find my theme in the Epistle to the Philippians, chap, ii., verses
19 and 13. Ido not know any text that goes more to the point, more to
* Midday address. Town Hall. 7th August.


the spot, for a man struggling with sin, and wanting to be rid of it and
get strong, and get the salvation of God. “Wherefore, my beloved
brethren, work out your own salvation with fear and trembling: for it is
God that worketh in you both to will and to do.” Is not that just where
we are weak ? Just where we are weak ? First of nil to will the right
thing, and then to do it, speak it, say it, and live it; and God is here to
build us up just where we are broken down, to give us His strength just
where we are utterly weak, and fail. God works in us, both to will and
to do His good, holy pleasure. Now let every man pluck up heart of
grace, when that is the state of the case. “ Work out your own sal-
vation.”
THE SECRET OF STEAT/FAST RELIGION.
Remember the setting of the text, please. The Apostle was away from
Philippi now, passing on and preaching in other places, lying in a dun-
geon sometimes, and he wrote back to these Philippian converts, and he
says, “ I love you very much, but I hear a little whisper that you love me
too much. You have felt it easier to believe in Christ and Uvea righteous
life while I was with you, but now there is a dulness and a heaviness.”
And he writes back and says, “ My dear Philippians, not as in my
presence only, but much more in my absence, up and at it ! You are not
disadvantaged because I, who brought you the gospel for the first time,
because I—Paul—am away from you. There is no disadvantage; it is
God that worketh in you both to will and to do of His good pleasure.”
So he says, “ My dear Philippians, rise up and show, more in my absence
than in my presence, that there was no man-made excitement that came
with a man, and left with a man. Work out your own 1 salvation, and
prove to yourself and to all who look at you that God is in it, and it will
last as long as God and you will last. It is God that worketh in us.”
That is the answer to all this cheap claptrap and babble about excitement
in religion. It is God that worketh in us. Preachers come and go. It
is God that worketh in the believer’s heart, enabling him to carry on to
the very end, to will and to do God’s good pleasure.
Hear men and women, I often think of this text as coming from a
higher source than the lips of Paul. The source of all Scripture is God
Himself, and I often think—who among us who is trying to live the
Christian life has not felt it ?—I often think it would be so much easier
to preach and pray, and believe, and live a godly life, and crucify one’s
rebellious flesh, it Christ were here among us, here in bodily form, as
He was in Galilee. And then I think I hear my text coming from the
Lord’s lips—“ Wherefore, My beloved, not as in My presence only, but
now much more,” not less and languidly, but much more energetically in
My absence, up and at it, and prove to yourself and to all who care to
look at you that this is no mere passing, failing, fainting, dying spasm
of something merely temporary. I have disappeared from your eyes that
I may reappear the more vividly in your heart. We are not disadvantaged
because Jesus is within the veil, we are mightily advantaged. It is the
Lord that worketh in us. It is a mighty mysterious miracle, but it is
the blessed experience of every faithful soul. The Lord is in us, work,
work, work, working with an energy compared with which the energy of
the propeller on a mighty ocean-liner is but a faint illustration. Jesus
in us, throb, throb, beat, beat, work, work, working, to will and to do of
His good pleasure, and bring us to port at last. Oh ! what a mighty


energy throbs, and beats, and pulses ceaselessly in a simple, trusting,
believing, soul. It is God, your Lord, your risen Saviour, working,
dwelling, beating, living, pulsing within you. That is the guarantee
that salvation goes on till grace rises into glory. It is God from begin-
ning to end.
SAVED BY ANOTHER.
You know this text has humbled some people. They say, “ Oh, yes,
M‘Neill, what do you say about this— * Work out your own salvation? ’ ”
1 hey understand that salvation is God’s free gift, and you are saved by
the righteousness of Christ, by the death of Christ, and by Christ being
your salvation in solid bulk ; but somehow or another this text knocks
the bottom out of it all, and you go away and “save yourself,” and
work out your own salvation. Now if you are honestly trying in
yourself, and of yourself, and by your own unaided goodness to work
out your own salvation, twenty-four hours of it ought to sicken
you, if you are honest. (Laughter.) Every self-righteous man in a
Oh ristian land is dishonest to his own conscience. He lies to his own
soul, and says the thing he must know has no existence. There is no
real power in him to be good or do good to himself. The self-righteous
man is a liar against the whole of God’s revelation in Christ Jesus. So,
my brother, give it up, and begin to be honest. Twenty-four hours of
trying it ought to make you ready for salvation through the merits of
another, if you are honest. But there is the awful difficulty. As David
said in the psalm long ago, “ Thou desirest truth in the inward part,’’
and just there sin and pride have made us a living lie. The truth has
left our hearts, and it is only God’s work, through the Gospel, that drives
out the lie, the central lie, out of the heart, and brings in the humbling,
healing, sanctifying truth, that saves and keeps.
THE ONE THING WHICH IS “OUR OWN.’
“ Your own salvation.” Work out your own salvation- lam not deal-
ing just exactly with the original Greek pronouns, but, as Moody said,
“It is worth while to handle the original English as well as the original
Greek;” and just take the common expression, “your own salvation.”
How can you work out a thing unless it is your own ? The whole drift
of the Gospel is that salvation becomes my own. Then I start to work
it out, but as long as I am crushed by the law, and made to feel my im-
potence, how can I work? But along comes Jesus Christ, whom God’s
law trampled under foot, and He gives me His righteousness, His atone-
ment, and Himself as a free gift, and then I begin to work. I receive
salvation by receiving God’s Christ as my salvation, and on the very
reception of it I hear this word, “Now, up and at it,” says God ; “ I will
give you plenty to do now,” No doing before you come to the cross ;
but having come to the cross, and accepted Him as your Saviour, your
Righteousness, your All, up and at it! Work out your own salvation !
It is your own, taken as a gift. The gift of God is eternal life. And
bless God it is my own, and there is nothing else that is mine !
1 want to dwell on that English word, “my own.” How much of you
is there that is your own ? A man goes about in Melbourne and says,
“My property—my pile—my own ! ” and his eye sparkles. Is that
allowable? My own property? Next morning he is pottering among
the ashes of his “own property,” It took fire over night, and was not
insured. It went up in a fiery chariot, and came down in a shower of


soot. (Laughter.) His property ! Shut your Bible, and the chapter
of accidents will tell you you have nothing you can call your own—
except your sin. That is your own, here and hereafter. Push that a
little through. Look at it a bit—“ my own salvation.” A man savs,
contemplating his wealth, “ That is my pile; I scraped it, hoarded it,
amassed it; ” and the boom burst, and where is it? Gone ! And he is
a beggar, and worse. Eiches ?—you cannot call them your own. You
hugged them, hoarded them, coveted them ; but if they were your own
why did you let them go, friend ? (Laughter.) Riches take unto them-
selves wings and flee away, and do not leave their address. (Laughter.)
I would have an empty hall in five minutes if you just knew where they
had gone. (Laughter.)
My own salvation ! God strips us and we are naked and poor. And
it is true. There are other things than houses and money that I would
like to call my own. My wife is ray own. Isn’t that fair ? That is a
rich man, isn’t he ? My own ! I won her, and I will wear her. My
own !my own! And next week he walks, a broken-hearted man, behind
her coflin. You cannot say “My own.” She leaves you while you clutch
her. Gone ! I tell you, men, you are beggars—empty ; nothing is
yours, neither wealth, nor wife, nor health. I can do without
money and lands, after all; I can do without friends, if you will just
guarantee me to be sound in wind, and limb, and brain. But, then, you
tannot. Health leaves me, and that is the worst.
Now in the midst of all that, bless God for this—there is something,
man, that is yours and mine, and a something we had neither right nor
title to—Salvation ! My own ! Mine to have and to hold and enjoy,
with a grip that death shall not relax. Death will only usher me in to
the full possession of my own salvation in my own Saviour—God—
Jesus Christ—for He is the possession, the salvation of God.
THE POSSESSION THAT ENDURES.
Now we will work it out. Thank God, dear friends, this gift of life,
salvation, pardon, peace—or whatever way you like to put it—in Jesus
Christ, that I receive when I believe in Him, it is a gift that will work
out. Many a gift won’t work out; but God says, Work out the thing you
have got —salvation in Jesus Christ—for it will work out. Many a gift
won’t. For example. There’s a minister and he gets a gift—yon
beautiful timepiece you gave your minister at the last annual meeting of
the congregation. You and he had been getting on so well together, and
he got a call to some other place but didn’t take it. (Laughter.) And
you, to show your esteem for him and his work in the Gospel, gave him
a gift, and of course that is his own, his very own, given to him from
you, a gold clock—and there it sits on the mantelpiece, and it is a
wonderful thing. It is so ornamented and filigree-worked, and there it
sits, that beautiful gift of a gold clock It tells you the day of the month
and the month of the year. It tells you the changes of the moon. It
tells you the weather. Very often it doesn’t tell you what o’clock it is,
hut a clock can’t do everything. (Laughter.) For a while that beautiful
gift works out. The elder or deacon who made the presentation told the
minister he was not to look at that clock in its mere intrinsic value as a
piece of gold workmanship nor a timepiece ; that is, be meant to say it,
but you know he was so excited he turned it all upside down but he
meant to say that. Now if the minister looked at that clock for what it


represented beyond its mere self—the love and good wishes of the people
who enjoyed his ministry—that is all right, and for a while, perhaps,
that gift does work out beyond its own mere self and its market price—
the first day or two, or the first week perhaps.
I never got one myself, but it’s coming, no doubt. (Laughter.) For
many a day, perhaps, the minister and his wife would stand before that
clock, and he says, “My ! weren’t they kind.” And she says, “ Yes, my
dear, it’s really very encouraging. It works out beyond itself.” But at
last it comes to an end. Dark days come. Troubles and trials come,
and that minister ceases to go and stand before that clock and expect
any good to work out from it. All kinds of gifts come to a dead stop,
and do not work out any farther. Listen, friend ! Jesus Christ is God’s
gift to poor sinners. He will work out and out and out! There is no
•end to Him. Je»us is no end of a Saviour; no end of a Friend The
day never dawns when Jesus, my Saviour, God’s gift to me, will not
work out deeper, richer, further than He did yesterday, and still more
to-morrow. Therefore, let to-morrow come ; lam guaranteed against it
in Christ, God’s gift to me. Now it is in Christ. Work it out of Him
into yourself. It is all in Jesus. All you need for to-day’s business and
temptations and trials and cares. Get it out of Him into you. Work it
out.
THE TRUE PHILOSOPHER’S STONE.
There is nothing for so stimulating the soul to activity as the evangelical
way of looking at God’s salvation. It is not a salvation by which you are
carried to the skies on flowery beds of ease. No, you have to put your
feet below you and tramp it. You walk there. It is no magic, or dream,
getting to heaven. You walk there, only He walks with you, and you
will never fall, and this thing works out between Christ and you, working,
working, working out every step of the road. I once heard a Salvation
Army man discoursing on the passage, ‘‘ Enoch walked with God,” and
he broke off in his rough way, and said, “ Hallelujah, brothers! Enoch
arrived at heaven in his boots.” (Laughter.) He walked there. Now
1 tell you there is no system under the moon so capable of stimulating
the soul against all laziness and delusiveness as the system of the evan-
gelical faith of the Lord Jesus Christ without works or human merit at
all. Work out your own salvation. Up and at it. It is worth doing.
It is all you need for a life of godliness. Then how am Itodo it ? By
finding your faith in Jesus. As the Apostle says in another place : “Add
to your faith, virtue, and to virtue, knowledge, and to knowledge, tem-
perance, and to temperance, patience, and to patience, godliness, and to
godliness, love of the brethren, and to love of the brethren, love itself.”
Faith in Christ, brother, will turn into everything you need. Now,
to-day, did you need a great deal of patience ? If you work out your
salvation you would have found the very patience you needed for that
cantankerous business man this morning who called on you, and instead
of losing your temper, you would have found in your faith in Jesus your
salvation from bad temper and from the temptation to shuffle your per
cents outside the fear of God. It is like the old Jewish tradition. God
sent them down manna in the desert during their wanderings. It fed
them all the time. There is an old tradition, that if when you rose up
in the morning, and though you knew it was to be manna, yet if you
■didn’t grumble or complain the manna tasted like whatever you wanted.


(Laughter,) Don’t you see? If instead of grumbling and saying, £ ‘l
wish I was back in Egypt where we had savoury stews,” if instead of
lusting after those things, and complaining as if God had deceived you,
if you just trusted God when you woke up in the morning, your manna
tasted just like whatever you wanted, if you wanted beefsteak, it tasted
like beefsteak ; if you wanted porridge and milk—(laughter)—your
manna tasted like it. My friend, you have made a big mistake leaving
God. He gives you all you really need, far better than the world. It
cheats you. Finding your faith in Jesus Christ is your salvation, hour
by hour, as well as everlasting. It is one of the delights, it is the
romance, of the Christian life to find that we have discovered the secret
of the philosopher’s stone, that touches and turns everything into gold
—the faith of the living, loving Redeemer; it works out in all directions
of salvation, from temptation, and sin, and care.
A SOBER RELIGION.
But how are you to work it out ? With fear and trembling. I know
some of you didn’t like this text this morning. You came in here and
said, ‘ £ It is cold and wot out. I hope Mr. M'Neill has something warm
for us to-day, something piping hot,” and I gave out my text, “ Work out
your own salvation with fear and trembling,” and your heart went down
into your boots, and you said, Oh, what a wet blanket! Listen. It is
no wet blanket. “ With fear and trembling.” It answers a great many
objections. One of the commonest objections to the salvation I preach
—and there is no other. Paul said if even an angel preached any other
salvation he would call him accursed to his face. Paul didn’t call every-
thing gospel, and didn’t wish every man God-speed. He said, “If an
angel from heaven preach any other than the gospel of salvation by faith
in Jesus and Him crucified, let him be accursed ; ” and Paul was a broad-
minded man. But he was none of your gentry who wag with every wind
and say, “ Hail, fellow, well met,” to every spouter and every man who
can put a smooth phrase out of his mouth. There is too much bastard
charity, mere humbug, and claptrap.
“ With fear and trembling.” It answers a lot of questions. One of
the great objections to salvation without the aid of human works and
merit, the immediate and full salvation of Jesus as your Saviour, is this:
“ Oh,” say men, “ we will take that and go away and live as we like.”
No, you won’t! I mean it. If any man says, “I am trusting to Jesus
Christ, and His blood has washed away my sins from God’s sight, and
His life is my life, and now I can go and live as I like, for salvation is
without works or human deserts ! ” you show, by saying that, that you
know nothing of Jesus. You never saw Him. I want that to go straight
home, hard and alias it is, for we are all andean, and would guzzle down
His grace and go away and spend it on our lusts. Paul said so, and I
have found it elsewhere than from Paul’s lips. Haven’t you ? Where’s
the man to whom the devil has not come and tempted him by the very
fulness and freeness of God’s grace in Jesus Christ to take that and then
give the loose to sin? “'lt’s all right! Here’s how this wonderful scheme
of glorious grace works in the direction of fear and trembling. It is
the man who is trusting in Jesus and who is getting salvation from sin,
immediate and for ever—that’s the man who fears to sin, who trembles
at his sin and his weakness and keeps far from it. Whenever God gives
the cup of salvation He has safe-guarded you, and you have only to-


drink the cup of salvation, God has put everything in it that your
fainting, perishing soul needs, and you have only to drink and live. But
wherever God gives the cup of salvation, lest it should go to your head
and make you giddy and careless, He puts into the cup an infusion of
bitters to make it roughen on the tongue, lest it be too sweet to be
wholesome.. “ Bear and trembling.” It is the saved man, saved entirely,
immediately, for ever, by faith in the Christ of God as his Saviour,
Mediator and Substitute : that’s the man that walks so humbly and with
trembling. It is bound to work that way. God has safe-guarded His
salvation that we will not take it out and then live as we like. There
was a man drowning, and when his own efforts had only kicked him to
the bottom and finished him, somebody laid hold of him from above by
the hair of the head and brought him to the bank and recovered him, and
there he stands on his feet and rejoices that he is safe and sound. Now
how does he rejoice? Does he rejoice in a careless, off-hand manner?
No ; he rejoices, but there is a fear and a trembling in it that is very
natural. He is all safe and saved, but no thanks to him. So far as his
efforts were concerned, he was so utterly lost. So with saving faith.
There is a throb, a tremble in it—“ I am so gloriously saved by Jesus
Christ and in Jesus Christ, but I was so utterly gone as regards myself.”
Therefore “fear and trembling” is the mark of the true Christian. The
fear that tends to liberty, that keeps me far from danger.
PRACTICAL QUESTIONS.
Now there is a whole answer to a great many questions. “Mr.
M’Neill, can I be a Christian and go to the theatre, or to the ball?” No !
If you are a Christian, you cannot stand to dance the night away with a
i aif-naked woman. Let me be plain. You give up your hope of heaven
to pamper and feed your flesh when you talk like that. (Applause.) I
have to talk these plain things. You cannot do it. I have heard
ministers who have so far misunderstood the situation that they have
advocated the theatre, and done this from the best intentions. But if
ever God poured contempt on that argument, He has poured contempt
on it in Melbourne. (Loud applause.) Let the minister who advocated
the theatre hang his head with shame, for God has sent to your theatres
a play so immoral that even worldly tastes cannot stand it, and are revolt-
ing against it. (Loud applause.) It does not teach to love virtue and
abhor vice. The only teaching of the play so much talked about is this :
If you fall into sin, you are damned and done for; you can never recover,
and the only thing for you to do is to go and commit suicide. That
is the nice gospel of the new play. You can’t be saved ; you have
to go and cut your throat to get out of the entanglement. I think
it is no wonder that after that kind of preaching Melbourne is at
last coming to its senses, and, four days in the week, is coming to hear
that you can be saved from sin, and that there is no need for you to
commit suicide—(applause) —and that you can be a clean man and
woman once again. But God cannot save you in your sin. He can only
save you out of it and from it.
“ With fear and trembling.” Brother, if you know Jesus Christ, and
know your own heart, you will keep as far from evil, and the contamina-
tion of it, and taint of it as you can. Like the man who wanted a
coachman, and in answer to his advertisement there came three appli-
cants. Explaining to them what he wanted, he said, “In driving to


town to my business every day the road gets very narrow, overhanging
the sea, and winds near the edge of a steep cliff that goes sheer down
into the ocean. How near do you think you could drive without going
over the cliff?” And they were caught in the trap. The first man said
lie could go within two feet, and there would be no danger with him.
The second could go within nine inches, and lead him quite safely. And
the third man, who was an Irishman, of course —(laughter) —said,
“ Troth, sir, I’d keep ye as far back as I possibly could.” (Laughter.)
Well, now, I rather think with all your talk about charity, that is the
kind of coachman you would like with a dangerous road. All this
gabble about going to the theatre encouraging you to be hardy,—it is
encouraging you not to be hardy but to be foolhardy. Know your own
weakness. He is a brave man who knows his own weakness and acts
accordingly. (Applause.) I cannot see men being befooled, and
arguments that are sophisms to the bottom, without exposing them.
GOD, FIRST AND LAST.
The last word is, “It is Hod that worketh in you.” Man ! cheer up.
Aou will get the victory over sin. You will not need to commit suicide.
Look at these things and learn the true path out of the maze. “It is
God that worketh in you.”
You have seen an engine. Being an old railway man, I love to go and
look at an engine. Now what is the grand thing about an engine !
One says that it is the driving wheel. Look at it—the huge driving
wheel. Another man says it is the steam. Well, there’s something in
that. Another man says it is the fire, for the water could not be converted
into steam and so drive the wheel but for the fire. Well, that’s well
enough ; but to me the grandest thing about the engine is our oily-
fisted friend, the driver. (Applause.) Ido not care how perfect the
engine, if you meet it without a driver you’d better clear out I
(Laughter.) It’s destruction then, and danger. The grandest thing
about it—the top stone of the whole business—is when the driver stops
on board and takes hold of the reversing rod with one hand, and makes
it go backward or forward, and the throttle-valve in the other, and has
complete control of the whole mechanism of that mighty steam-engine.
A horse needs, to finish it and use it, a rider; an engine needs an
engine driver; a man needs God, and he has got Him, blessed be His
holy name. (Applause.) Here is the glory of our salvation. It is God
—it is God that worketh in us. Therefore, man and woman, we will be
saved; cheer up. We will not go down to the pit, for it is God that
worketh in us. That is worth preaching, isn’t it? (Loud applause.)
And it is worth believing, isn’t it ? (Loud applause.) It is a big
theme, and I have only touched it, bat enough to make you and me
tingle with the courage of it. We will go out saving, “There is hope
for me, and I am going to be saved yet, for I am trusting in Jesus
Christ, and Jesus Christ is God, and He is here within me, wo’king on
the reversing rod and the throttle-valve, to will and to do His good
pleasure.”
IX—TWO OLD TESTAMENT KNIGHTS.*
I want you back to the Old Testament this afternoon—2nd Samuel xxiii,
Here in this chapter we have a list of the mighty men whom David had,
* Melbourne Town Hall. 9th August.


David had a tough job fighting his way to the kingdom and overturning
Saul, and men like himself gathered to Ids standard in the providence of
God. He was a hero of heroes. There came to him men of like spirit
and temper, and he at the top of them ; and of course God behind the
whole movement working out His word, that is bound to come to pass.
And in this chapter you have a hint of how some of David’s mighty
men won their spurs, so to speak. You have an account of some little
incident that showed that the}- were worthy of their places in David’s
ranks.
The meaning is this : We who believe in Jesus have made Jesus the
Captain of our salvation, and His Holy Spirit comes upon us to make us
new men, to enlist us in the lifelong battle for truth and righteousness
againstall untruth and unrighteousness in our own hearts and in the world
round about. And the moment you make Christ your Saviour and your
Lord the spirit of Christ comes upon you, and in His spirit you become
a soldier of the Cross—a fighter against sin, and mighty through God to
the pulling down of strongholds. The weakest and the vilest who serve
sin anil the devil faithfully, the moment they come to Jesus become the
servants of Jesus unto righteousness and holiness.
HOW ANCESTRY TELLS.
Now here are one or two lessons. One of David’s mighty men (11th
verse) was “ Shamrnah, the son of Agee, the Hararite. And the Philis-
tines were gathered together into a troop where was a piece of ground
full of lentiles, and the people fled from the Philistines. But Shamrnah
stood in the midst of the ground full of lentiles,” and he “ defended it and
slew the Philistines, and the Lord wrought a great victory.” Now a
word on that “ Shamrnah, the son of Agee, the Hararite.” The Bible
gives you your name and lineage. God forgets nothing. He remem-
bers the nest you came out of, and what it has to do with making or
spoiling you. How often you find a man’s pedigree given in the Bible,
and from it you judge whether he is thoroughbred for God or the devil.
You almost know when you read about some man in the Bible that he
will be a thorough blackguard by the nest out of which he came ; and
from another man you expect good things, for So-and-so was his mother,
and So-and-so was his father. Well, here is a man, “Shamrnah, the son
of A gee, the Hararite.” And what did he do in the spirit of David, and
in the spirit and strength and faith of a true Israelite and warrior for
God and righteousness ? This;
A LONELY HERO.
It was a time of low water and defeat and discouragement. The old
hereditary enemies, the Philistines, had overrun the land, and the
Israelites were under their heel. One day a band of discouraged Israelites
went out to reap down a poor miserable patch of lentiles, mere horse
fodder, that they had sown in the spring, and they crept out timidly to
reap it down in the autumn —that little patch of lentiles—when the
Philistines would not let them have it. It’s a nice game for the
Philistines. “ You plough and sow in the spring and then we step in
and reap.” And that was the nice little game that was going on. The
Philistines had the upper hand, and allowed the Israelites to get all the
bitter weather in the spring, and in the autumn they stepped in and
reaped. That little band of discouraged Israelites go out to reap down


these lentiles, and suddenly there is a shout and a gleam of spears and a
clatter of hoofs, and a marauding band of Philistines swooped down on
the poor down-trodden Israelites, and off they flee for their lives—all
but one man. And God thought fit to record it for you and me to-day.
Oh man, if you want to be up to date, let me repeat it, lift your head out
of the penny gossip of the newspaper and go back to your Bible. God
saw fit to record it. One man, Shammah, the son of Agee, the Hararite.
And I know how it worked in him. He just felt like this : “ Death is
better than this shameful, down-trodden, degraded existence.” And
when every other body ran, and it seemed to be the right thing to run
—it was only a patch of lentiles, let them have it—“ No,” says Shammah,
and Shammah stood in the midst of that mere patch of lentiles
and defended it. And I tell you his very audacity helped to the
victory. It took away the Philistines’ breath. They expected everybody
to run, and they had all run except this one stubborn, desperate m ai \.
He drew his sword—and maybe it was only a reaping hook—(laughter)
—and with a cry to the God of battles, the God of Israel, he just sw un g
round, and you ought to have heard the hoarse shouts, and seen the gleam
of that man’s sword as it played and flashed in the air and then buried
itself in the bodies of his enemies. And very likely the Israelites, after
they had run and were out of breath, stopped to look back, and cried
“Great God of Israel, Shammah is fighting!” And they saw the
Philistines falling below Shammah’s arm like the corn below the mower’s
scythe. And that rallied and encouraged them, and God was in it all
and the stampede and disgrace were turned into a glorious victory for God
and His people.
STOP GIVING in!
Now the lesson is this. Don’t you see what God wants vou to do is
this: to put your foot down, and stop giving in to sin, and temptation
and despair. Stand, in God’s name, and God will stand in you, and for
you, and with you. God hates defeat. God loves victory. And all that
God wants is some man to stop running and fleeing before his sins and
befoie his fears. Put down your foot. Surprise the very devil. He
expects that you have stopped fighting. He whispers to you and says,
“It is too late.” I could imagine some critics—for you know it is easv
to criticise; you have only to run away out of reach and then become "a
critic. (Laughter.) Yes. Keep out of reach and out of the road and
then criticise. And I can imagine critics saying, “ What misplaced,
mistimed valour this is on the part of Shammah. If we are going to
rebel against the Philistines and cast off their yoke let us do it properly.
Let us arrange the thing. Let us appoint a committee. (Laughter.)
Let us appoint a committee and then adjourn till next Tuesday week.”
(Laughter.) Now there is a committee man down there with a very sour
face. (Laughter.) I tell you, man, wiiat God wants is to sue the thing
done .
GIVE THE DEVIL NOTHING !
Another consideration might have been this: When a man begins to
run he can always get good reasons for it. He always makes out that it
was not through cowardice—he was running just till he could think what
to do. (Laughter,) I can imagine people saying, “ What’s the use of
Shammah fighting for that ? They have had so much, let them have
the rest too/’ That is just where the devil bowls you over and


drives you contemptuously before him. Make a stand to-day, although
it is only for a plot of lentiles. There may be some man here to-day;
and, my brother, all that is left of your life, and character, and credit,
and reputation, may be only as a mere patch of lentiles compared to a
broad-acred estate. All that is left to-day of character, credit, reputation,
hope, prospects, and of life itself, may be a mere patch of lentiles as
compared with what you started with. But, see here! Stand in the
middle of the howling wreck that is left, and God will stand by you, and
you will be saved yet. (Applause,) Now try. Drink—and you may
not be twenty-five years of age, young fellow—and drink and lust have
butchered you. Stand in the middle of the howling wreck, and God will
save you yet. He has all eternity to work in.
Now learn that lesson. Shammah could easily have said, “ Oh ! they’re
all running ; and although I’m sick of this shameful, degraded existence,
it is not worth fighting for a patch of lentiles.” But it was God’s, It
was Israel’s, and the Philistines had no right to it. See here, brother !
There is a grand sense in which the devil has no right to you. He is a
usurper—an oppressor. You belong to Christ by every right and by
every tie. The devil, and the world, and sin, and care ought not to have
you. Stand now ! Put down your foot to-day — now —and say, “By the
grace of God, here goes. I will make a stand to-day, and now.” That is
all God wants. Stop running. Stop fieeing. Stop giving in. Stop saying
it is too late, and it cannot be done. There is nothing too hard for the
Lord—nothing. He glories in defeating the devil and sin, and saving a
poor, oppressed, down-trodden soul, for He made you, and He loves you,
and He hates to see the devil running off with you. Give me a chance
now, and may God send over this meeting a wave of courage, courage.
(Applause.)
Someone wrote to me to say, “ Mr. M‘Neill, you sometimes hit us
business men hard, as if our great temptation was spending money in
pleasure, and in sinful pleasure,” and they say, “ Since the depression
lias come, that is not the case. Our great trouble now is care and
anxiety, and sore defeat.” Well, whatever it is, dear friends, God
knows, and He hates to see you bowled over by the Philistines, and your
life a slaughter from morning till night. Whatever be the case, and
however your own folly may have brought it about, God is a God of
salvation, and He is with you. He hates to see the devil having it all
his own way. Stand, like Shammah, at an unexpected time and place,
and surprise the devil, and surprise your own poor despairing, down-
trodden heart, by crying to God and rallying where you sit and stand,
and then there is salvation, glorious salvation, and God will turn the
shadow of death into the light of morning, and defeat into everlasting
victory and glory. The Lord wrought a great victory.
THE MAN WHO SLEW THE LION.
Now I want to read you another line about another man. Pass down
the list of the heroes. Here I have another man, and that is all I will
give you, the :20th verse, <£ And Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, the son of
a valiant man, of Kabzeel, who had done many acts; he slew two lion-
like men of Moab.” Now here is the other. “He went down, also, and
slew a lion at the bottom of a pit on a snowy day,” and so he won his
spurs, and on fame’s eternal deed-roll is worthy to be filed, “ Benaiah,
the son of Jehoiada, went down and slew a lion at the bottom of a pit on


a snowy day.” & Now I want you to fasten your eyes on that man Benaiah,
He slew a lion in a pit on a snowy day. That is bravery too ; bravery
of another kind. Shammah’s deed was sprung upon him, made tor him,
Down came the Philistines, and the situation was made for him, and in
a kind of desperate valour—“ death or victory”—he fought, and it turned
out to be victory and not death, for God loves to save and hates defeat.
But Benaiah’s is a different kind of bravery. Shammah’s Waterloo came
to him. Benaiah had to make his. It was a cold, snowy day, not a
heroic day.
A HERO IN COLD WEATHER.
Some of you remember days at home, days of bare, bitter snow. It is
hard to be heroic in certain kinds of weather. Napoleon used to say
that the greatest courage he knew was ‘‘ three o’clock in the morning
courage.” At three o’clock in the morning to turn out to the march ! That
is bravery—isn’t it? Now I tell you there are lovely spring mornings
when the sun is up, and the wind is fresh, and the air is exhilarating,
and the birds are singing in the trees and your own blood is tingling
in your veins, and you want to do something big. You feel just at your
best fighting weight, and you want to issue challenges—the strongest
man on earth. Aye, but there are other days—cold, snowy days, without
the glorious sun—when the skies are like lead and the air is raw and
cold, and your pulses are low. Shakespeare misses nothing, and I think
he just thinks of that in a certain little couplet. Pie talks of
“When icicles hang on the wall,
And Tom bears logs into the hall ;
When Dick, the shepherd, blows his nail,
And milk comes frozen home in pail.”
You don’t feel like a hero those days. You feel it would suit you better
just to sit over the fire and toast your toes. That seems to be the best
thing. It was a day like that. Oh ! the amazing things God puts down
in His book. They are so everlastingly fresh and full of meaning.
THE LION IN THE PIT-
It had been a hard winter, snowy and wet, and a lion that had been
the terror of that land for months or weeks back was roaming about, for
under the pangs of hunger these brutes get desperate and do things they
do not ordinarily do, and in this hard weather and this extreme snowfall
that lion was famished and maddened, and was raging and ravaging
roundabout; and one cold snowy day, while all the inhabitants of the
place were quietly at home, the air was filled with the roars of that
mighty destroying brute, and men sat over the fire indoors and con-
gratulated themselves they were at home—all except one, Benaiah. And
Benaiah went to the door and listened, and heard the roar of that lion as
it came through the dull, heavy air, filled with the snowflakes, and his
face brightened and he said, “ Thank God ! By where the roar is coming
from I think that lion has fallen into the pit. The mouth of it was
covered with brushwood, and that again is covered with snow, and so he
has not seen it.” “ The roars,” he would say, ** come continuously from
the one place. Pie is raging round the bottom of that pit mad, for he is
in a trap.” g And when all the other men sat still and said, “ Benaiah,
you don’t mean to say you are going out,” he took down his sword and
felt its edge; and with nobody to cheer him, and everything dull, and
chill and depressing, out he went, and I think I see him go plodding on


through those snowflakes, on, on, guided by the roaring of the brute in
the pit till he came to the edge of it, and found his surmise correct. He
looked down, and the mad brute’s eyes gleamed up at him, and he gave
a roar that shook the earth. The lion was in the pit, and thei'e stood
Benaiah, and with a prayer to the God of Israel, —and the God of Israel
was watching and the angel was recording—knowing that only one would
ever come out of the conflict alive, Benaiah leapt down into that pit.
Instinctively for a moment they took opposite sides, the man and the
maddened brute. They wat ch each other. Then there is a spring and
a roar, and the lion is down and Benaiah’s sword is through its heart.
“He went down and slew a lion in a pit on a snowy day.” (Applause.)
THE WILD BEAST IN TUB HEART !
Now, dear friends, I want to send you back to your Bible. Do not
despise it. Read it. I will tell you one thing this story means. We
want more courage of the nntrumpeted kind. In every man’s fallen
nature there is a lion that needs to be slain. If it gets abroad God pity
you ! But because it is driven in under the surface, don’t make any
mistake; it is still there, and you must go down into the pit of your
fallen nature, with the sword of God’s spirit in your hand, and put the
brute to death, or it will kill you. Haven’t you learnt that yet ? Show
no mercy to your sin. Stab it to the heart, or it will murder you. Some
of us, because sin is driven in out of sight and is not raging abroad, as in
the case of the harlot and the drunkard and the open adulterer, you
think it is not there. That is the deadliest kind of sin. Go down into
the pit. You know your sin. Sitting where you are, do not you some-
times feel the growling brute within you that wants to come out and
destroy you, and to destroy others through you? Now in God’s name
put the knife through it where you stand and sit. Put the knife through
it. Death to your lusts, my brother. Death to them or they will damn
you beyond recovery. Death to your craving for drink. Death to your
craving for gain, no matter how you get it. Death to your lust for
woman. Put the sword through its heart. It is unheroic in a way.
Nobody knows about it but yourself. There is nobody to cheer you on,
but it is the battle of battles. It is every man’s spiritual Waterloo. God
carry you through it 1
CHRIST THE LION SLAYER.
But there is one more lesson and I am done. A great lesson to
encourage you to the other. When I see Benaiah go out on that chilly,
snowy day—when nobody asked him to go, and he might have stayed
at home—to kill that terror of the countryside at its maddest, caged in
a pit on a snowy day, do you know what I think of? I think of one of
the darkest days the world ever saw. Thank God, it will not ever see a
darker. The world touched bottom that day. One dark, awful, dismal
day, and a Man as human as ourselves—they called Him a carpenter’s
son, from Nazareth, but He was the Lord of all, and He had no need to
come. He might have stayed at home there in holy, happy heaven,
worshipped and adored by holy angels and archangels for ever. But the
lion had broken loose here on the earth, and was raging and ravaging and
destroying men. Sin and the devil were working awful havoc, and one
dark, cold, depressing day, with not a soul to cheer Him on—“ they all
forsook Him and fled”—Jesus, the heavenly Benaiah, God’s dear Son, in


cur flesh and nature, single-handed and alone, met front to front, face to
face, Sin, Death, and the Devil, and He fought, and fought and ivon.
He destroyed the Destroyer.
“ XTp from the pit He arose,
With a mighty triumph o’er Ilis foes ;
He arose a Victor from the dark domain,
And He lives for ever with His saints to reign.
Hallelujah ! Christ arose ! ”
And He died, and His death was the death of the Destroyer. And He
lives, and His victory is mine, I have no strength against sin, but His
battle was for me “more than conquerors through Him who loved us.”
Now my lesson comes round to the same point, and I say to any
defeated man or woman, Down with sin, your life a failure, and the
thought of all eternity unbearable. Look to Jesus ! Trust in Jesus !
Faith in Christ has a battle shout in it. Faith has the victory. Only
to be able this afternoon to believe in God’s dear Son, that is my victory
over all the temptations of sin and Satan. The believer is the conqueror.
His very faith in Christ, that is the victory. Try it now. Try it! All
that Christ did was for us, and we have it in having Him our Saviour,
our Captain dwelling within us and giving us His own spirit. No longer
ours ; that is utterly useless and corrupt.
Now I have kept you long enough. There are things to do, dear men
and women. Lay hold of God. La} r hold of Jesus Christ, and then
away back to business redeemed, recovered, saved by the Lord Jesus
Christ, the mighty Conqueror over your sin and misery.
X.-A CRIPPLE AS A TEXT. 4 *
You will find my theme in the book of the Acts of the Apostles, 3rd
chapter. It is about something which happened when this preaching was
just at the beginning. The Lord had just recently been crucified, the
Lamb of God who taketh away the sin of the world, and the Gospel dis-
pensation of preaching the name of Jesus was just beginning. Jesus had
risen to the Father’s right hand, where He is now, and had poured out His
spirit upon His preachers, and what is so common now was a new thing
then—preachimg the name of Jesus crucified, risen, and gone to God’s
right hand. [Mr M'Neill then read the first ten verses of Acts iii., con-
cluding thus : “And they were filled with wonder and amazement at that
which had happened unto him.”]
AVIIEN GOD RINGS THE BELL !
John Foster has a splendid remark on this miracle. When Peter and
John did this work of grace and power on that poor man, he co-operated
with them —of course, that is always implied—by believing on the name
of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom they proclaimed to him. The people
fl eked together, a great crowd, and Peier and John got preaching one of
the very first New Testament Gospel sermons to a big crowd in Jerusalem ;
and John Foster says that this miracle was the ringing of the bell to draw
the people together to hear the Gospel, the glad tidings of forgiveness of
sins, and salvation, and life eternal, through the name w r hom Peter and
John preached—Jesus, crucified a few weeks before, and now risen to God’s
right hand, entered into gl >ry, and all power given to Him in heaven and
♦Exhibition Building, 10th August


on earth. Says John Foster, “When God wanted to preach His sermons
through Peter and John, in order to bring the people together He rang the
great bell of the universe : Pie worked a miracle.” Now you are going to
listen to the ringing of the bell that brought the people flocking together,
for when God rings a bell it is a sermon. There is meaning as well as
music in it. This miracle of bodily healing is a sermon of Divine grace in
its operation and effect on our poor palsied, helpless souls.
A TYPICAL MAN.
Who was the man ? “A certain man lame from his mother’s womb.”
Remember this is the beginning of the Gospel, and it was in the Lord’s
purpose and plan that His name and all, don’t you see, that lies behind
His name, all that the name of Jesus stands for, should come into conflict
with sin in its darkest, deepest, deadliest form. A man suffering because
the roots of this business are buried back in the generations, “ lame from
his mother’s womb, and who never had walked.” My sin is mine in an
awful sense, and I bear its consequences ; but it didn’t begin with me.
The roots of it are buried back deep in the generations. It belongs to
birth, and blood, and ancestry, while it is mine, and I deserve to suffer.
“ The fathers have eaten sour grapes, therefore the children’s teeth are set
on edge.” Our sin is ours, conscience tells us that, if we are honest ; but
it didn’t begin with us. We come of a fallen stock, a guilty, tainted,
polluted race. Now isn’t it amazing that Christ should have ordered it
that that man, in whom the problem of evil in the world assumes its
darkest form, was the man challenged by the name of Jesus at the begin-
ning of its triumphant career ? Because you know there is a problem of
evil and misery in the world, and evil and misery that do not begin with
me. “Lame from his mother’s womb”! “ How can this be, if God is
good ? ” say some sceptics. “ How do you account for a man lame from
his mother’s womb in a world that is said to be governed by a good God?”
and they say, “ There is the darkest form of the problem ” ! Jesus
challenged the problem at its blackest and darkest, and gloriously solves
it here and hereafter if you will only let Him. Depend upon it, all misery
of every kind comes from the one tap-root, sin, sin —our breaking away
from God. Jesus is the perfect cure. There is your man. See how the
problem garhers round him. See him sit ing there —impotent, helpless,
held down and kept back, and crushed by the awful burden that nothing
in you, and nothing in your poor fallen race, can help, for we are all down,
all spoiled from the beginning. Blessed be God for Jesus ! What a
difference He makes ! Cheer up ! No wonder the Gospel is called “ the
Gospel ” —glad tidings to helpless, fallen, collapsed humanity. But it
works along the line of the individual. Everything personally, individu-
ally, man by man, woman by woman.
AT THE TEMPLE GATE.
Now see how it works our. This typical man, representing all the
mischief in its blackest form, there he is, lying. Jesus has just been
crucified, and has risen to God’s right hand, saying; “All power is given
unto Me in heaven and earth. Go ye, therefore, in My name, preach Me,
my Gospeland here at the threshold it meets with this. Peter and
John were going up into the temple, and that poor man was lying there
at the gate begging. Over on the continent, you know, people are sup-
posed to be extra tender-hearted when going to church, and at and near


the church gates is the great place for beggars and helpless people coming
and being lifted and carried if they cannot come themselves, just because
we are supposed to be more tender-hearted. So, in this narrative, Peter
and John were going up into the temple, aud the poor man fastens his eyes
on them and begins to beg in the stream of people passing into the temple.
“ Seeing Peter and John about to go into the temple, asked an alms.”
And Peter and John didn’t walk past him. Aren’t you surprised at that
a little ? Peter and John might have been so occupied talking about great
things that bad happened, talking about Christ’s death and resurrection,
and about His ascension, that they would have been too busy discussing
these mighty themes to notice this poor fellow, and have gone away up
into the temple and left him lying there. No, the Gospel doesn’t walk
past the problem like that. It walks up to it and challenges it in the
name of the risen Lord.
THE CURE OF THE WORLD.
Every other scheme I know of to some extent walks past the real problem-
The Gospel of Jesus Christ alone walks to the problem, bends over the
problem, and in the name of Jesus solves the problem. That is so, or I
will stop preaching ! I cannot afford to spend my time preaching, and you
cannot afford either to spend your time listening to anything less than
salvation —being lifted, by God's grace, out of the misery, and muck, and
collapse of sin. No more “ reformation no more social science, and
better wages, and better dwellings, but salvation, the solving of the awful
problem of our sin and utter collapse ! Blessed be God, the perfect cure
is here, for Christ is here in the power of the Holy Ghost, through the
preaching of His blessed name. Now Peter and John challenge it, instead
of walking past, and talking of the resurrection, and discussing theories of
the atonement. And we ministers have to learn not to pass the problem
and allow a dear sick fellow creature to lie sweltering. We must bring men
down before we can lift them up. The whole difficulty in saving, for
example, Professor Huxley is to ku ock Professor Huxley off his feet and
get him down. (Laughter.) That is the trouble. You can’t lift a man
before he has fallen, aud the great trouble with some of you people is that
you think you have got some strength. The Gospel of Jesus can never
reach you as long as you are in that mind. Till a man is laid utterly
helpless and low, and is convinced of his own utter helplessness, Jesus is
no Saviour, and you will not get His salvation. Now they challenged it.
Peter aud John said ‘‘Look on us.” And 1 am here to-night to say to
every poor man and woman, Look this way. I challenge your need, I do
not pass it by. At the very worst, I do not care what you are ; in the
name of Jesus I challenge you. Look this way. Focus jmur very heart
on the message I proclaim and the Name I speak under. “ Look on us.”
Aud he looked. I like that. There ought to be something in the
preacher’s face that compels attention. There ought to be something in
the preacher’s very manner that makes poor sin-sick, down-trodden men
and women say, “He seems to be in earnest. He speaks with some
emphasis and confidence. Here goes. I will listen to him.” That’s the
beginning of it. He gives heed to Peter and John when they fastened
their eyes on him and said, “Look this way.” Not that, they were any-
thing, but they magnified their office, and magnified their Master’s name.
He looked on them and expected to receive, says the narrative —“Hegave
diced, expecting to receive something. *


A VIIY SERMONS FAIL.
He didn't at all expect to receive what he got. There are men and
women come to this meeting and they don’t expect to receive salvation
this evening, but the Lord gives you more than you ever thought or
dreamed oh It was only a confused thing at first; but how God brought
life eternal out of it! Man, if you will only begin it, dark and confused
as you may be at the first, begin it, look this way. Fasten your thoughts
outside yourself to Himself, and the light is bound to come sooner or
later. There ia no failure in the soul that looks to Jesus. Light and life
are bound to come. I like that: “He expected to receive something.”
Now next Sunday, when you go to church, go with that man’s face on
you, expecting something, and God won’t disappoint you. It is not in
Him to do it. You know you often find fault with us preachers. You
say, “ What’s the use of going to church ? There is nothing in it. I
just come away as I go, as empty and as cold. There is nothing in it.”
Very likely; because you came for nothing, with nothing in you; no
expectation of anything higher than your head, or beyond yourself, and
nothing in me, the preacher. And two times nothing is nothing. (Laughter.)
Some of you think that two times nothing is two, because you were not at
the board-school when you were young. My dear friends, look here ! I
will take my own share, and so will every minister ; but you must take
yours. Bring your contribution to the preacher ; bring it and expect to
have. Bring a hungry soul, bring your need and misery, and the Lord
won’t see you disappointed. He will wake us up, just because you are
there, and He cannot think to disappoint an eager look in the face of
your heart, expecting, hoping, that something will be done to you that
the world cannot do and you cannot do for yourself.
BETTER THAN GOLD.
Now I will hasten on. He looked. They wakened him up. They
focussed his thoughts and be expected to receive something, and then
there seems to come the chilling disappointment, a painful anti-climax.
“ Silver and gold have I none.” And it is a wonder the man didn’t turn
round and say, “ What are you trifling with me for, then ? Why do you
speak to me ? I thought you were going to give me silver or gold.” 1
bless Gid for the way Peter and John did it. I think you must have
learnt by this time that there is something better than silver and gold,
that silver and gold cannot touch the plague of your sinful heart. What
better are you for all your wealth ? What worse are you for all your
poverty ? It is grace you need, Christ you need, rich or poor, doing well
or doing ill. Silver and gold, bless God, do not touch this problem.
They are not in it. Lift up your thoughts above the world. Lift up
your thoughts above silver and gold. You have a deeper need than even
work and wages, a deeper need than silver and gold and all it means —
and I admit that it has its place, —the need of your soul that is collapsed,
perished, and there is where the Gospel goes. I wish people would under-
stand that the Gospel is not —and 1 am not —against benevolent schemes
for feediug the hungry and clothing the naked. “But the first thing,”
us Dr. Chalmers in Scotland used to say, “ gentlemen, when you become
preachers, be known as the man of one commodity—the Gospel of Divine
help and salvation.” Some of us are getting into too much of a wholesale
business. The same with politicians and with social democrats and 1 don’t
know how many other kinds of “rats.” (Laughter.) All that these


benevolent schemes do is only to smooth the passage to the grave. They
do not touch your soul. They do not touch eternity, where you will soon
be, rich or poor, employed or unemployed, in eternity for ever. Oh that
God would give your preachers grace to be courageous enough to put the
first thing first —your soul, your eternal need —for you will soon be there,
and all these secondary things will come in their right places. The Gospel
is not a big scheme for giving blankets and coal, and boots and free
rations. The Gospel, first of all and last of all, is this; bringing Jesus
Christ the Lord into all men’s hearts to save the inner man for ever. Now
you may have it to-night. If that is an anti-climax I cannot help it. If
you think your main need is summed up in the need of the body, in what
is represented by silver and gold, of course the Gospel will be a disappoint-
ment to you, and you will say it is a sham ; because it gives you nothing
to eat or to drink and does not touch your body or your wages it is
nothing.
A PHILOSOPHIC QUESTION.
Now that man suddenly had to solve an old problem that the philoso-
phers have been at since Aristotle’s day, and it is not settled yet by the
philosophers, for they never settle anything. What is that ? The old
philosophic question, what is the sunvnum bonum? not the “maqnum bonum.”
That is a kind of potato. (Laughter.) What is the summum bonum ? That
is, What is the chief good?” And that poor beggar began to be a
social philosopher, and though Peter and John seemed to disappoint him
he held his tongue, and waited to hear them out. “ Silver and gold have
I none” —and he began to think li Even if you had pocketfuls, it doesn’t
touch my real need” —“but such as 1 have give T thee ; in the name of
Jesus Christ of Nazareth, rise up and walk.” That is something to have,
isn’t it? Put silver and gold alongside of that. Pile into the scale on
one hand Coolgardie, and Johannesburg in AAica, and Kimberley, with its
diamonds, and all the mines of the earth, put them into one scale, and
the name of Jesus in the other, and your scale kicks the beam. Jesus
outweighs all the other things infinitely, endlessly, gloriously. His measure-
ments are infinite in every direction. The rest are no cures, none
whatever.
THE HEALING NAME
In the name of Jesus of Nazareth, rise up and walk. More than that.
Peter took him by the hand, and as Peter bent down and gripped that
poor man who never had walked, lame from his mother’s womb, tempted
many a time to curse God and die that he had been brought into existence
like this —as Peter stooped and took him by the hand, that glorious
Being who sits above the stars, God, stooped in him, and with him, and
Christ’s power tingled down into that helpless man. His Creator grappled
with him again, and lifted him into newness of life and character, for he
must have believed ; if in his heart he didn’t believe in that name of Jesus,
it would be an empty name, only so much breath blown past him, as use*
less as the wind round about him. That is all Jesus is to some of you.
He blows past you like the wind, for you don’t believe in Him, therefore
you are not saved. Oh, receive Him ! For as many as receive Plim, to
them gives He power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe
in His name. Have not I been at it every night? Won’t you give me
this credit ? I have never varied by a hair’s breadth from this, to point
to sin as the wound, and Christ as the cure. Faith in Christ is the means


by which I personally got it. “He that believeth on the Son of God is
passed from death unto life.” “ Thy faith hath saved thee: go in peace.”
I cannot make it plainer. You have to do it. You have heard it.
Receive it, and it fastens its power on your heart and life and destiny for
ever. You are joined to Jesus by the link, the cord of simple faith in
His name. He believed. He yielded to the pull of omnipotence. That
was it. He yielded to the pull of omnipotence, and up he came, and what
a coming up it was !
THE SALVATION THAT LEAPS AND SINGS !
He had never walked, and we are told later on that he was about forty
years of age, and he thought he had lost so much time that he began
jumping to make up. (Laughter.) He leaped. He walked. He praised
God. I wish I could get some of you to understand how far back you
are ; how much you have lost of real life, and of the real pleasure of life.
But the moment you begin to trust Jesus, begin to sing ! Begin to shout
for joy ! I tell you it is strictly in place. When I see that man walking,
and leaping, and praising God, I say, “ How consistent ! That is not a
fool or a madman. How consistent is his action with what has happened
to him!” “Walking and leaping and praising God”! Now, dear
Christian men and women, we are awfully far behind here. We have
muzzled our mouths, and if we do trust in Jesus, and are saved by Him,
and are walking in a new strength, we seem to go as if—“ Oh ! I’ll be
down next time.” (Laughter.) Oh, you laugh ! It is time you laugh
at your own fault. Come, dear friends ! Of old times when God touched
the mountains they smoked. Sinai leaped before the Lord, the God of
Israel; and if Jesus has touched your black, dumb, guilty soul with His
grace and His word, shall you be dumb and silent ? No ! God forgive
us. Let us show to all around what a dear Saviour we have found.
Declare God’s works with rejoicing. Be worthy of what has happened
to you. Passed from death unto life ! Passed from condemnation and
fear to justification and sonship, a filial relationship to God that He will
never deny anyone i Sons and daughters of God Almighty ; as safe as if
we were iu heaven. After a few days and nights we will get to Him.
“ Whom He justifies them He also sanctifies, and whom He sanctifies them
He also glorifies.” Not a link wanting ! And as for the body in the
resurrection morning, every believing soul down here will draw up after it
on the resurrection morning a body fashioned like unto His own glorious
body, without spot or wrinkle or any such thing. Oh, when it breaks on
my soul what Jesus has done, and is doing, and what He is going to do in
the end, I am amazed at our unbelief, and that the stones of the street
don’t rebuke our dumbness and our fear of man. Is not it wonderful ?
So he just yielded. Yield now, not to me. I speak the Word. I preach
Jesus ; but it is Jesus Himself that you yield to, and it is Jesus Himself
has laid hold of you when you trust in His blessed name. And what a
difference!
A PARABLE.
, Now all that happened to that man’s body is but a feeble type, a picture.
The glorious reality is what happens to my soul when I trust in Jesus
preached to me, Jesus crucified, Jesus risen, Jesus speaking to you by His
own mouth in the Gospel of His grace. Trust Him now, and do not be
afraid, dear friend, that it has happened. You are a new creature. All
old things have passed away. God is rejoicing. The angels in Heaven
are rejoicing. Rejoice thou also ! Awake and sing, ye that dwell in dust.


Awake and sing ! Arise, shine, for thy Light is come, and the glory of
the Lord is risen upon thee. Hell has lost you. Sin has lost yon. Christ
has claimed you. Thou art saved by faith in the risen Saviour. It is so.
The Lord says so. Prove it to be so by being done with doubt, done with
looking into your own thought. Fastening your thought on the real focus,
Jesus Christ, what He is, what He has done, what He says to me, that
word of His on which I rest secure.
The Lord add His blessing, and may many a poor sonl to-night—sunken,
collapsed, hopeless, helpless, and crushed —believe on Jesus Christ present
with us by His Word and Spirit, and in believing pass into life and peace
and rest. Amen.
XL—THE MAN GOD CHOOSES*
Mt text is in Ist Samuel, 16th chapter. I will tell you what it is about:
The story of how David was chosen by God’s prophet, Samuel, to be
king, in the room of proud, self-willed, rebellious Saul. Saul was
rebellious and proud, and so God set him aside from being king, and
anointed and appointed young David, the son of Jesse, to be king in
Saul’s stead; and here is the history of that memorable transaction, with
great meanings that are up to date for you and me in Christ Jesus, in
the gift and offer of His Gospel to us to-day. [Mr. M'Neill then read
from the Ist to the 13th verse of the chapter, concluding with, “ ‘and
the spirit of the Lord came upon David from that day forward,’ and it
rests with him yet.’’]
Now that is an old story—a good old story about a shepherd’s family
out in the bush, told to city people. I hope you will be able to follow it.
You city folk, just think how homely it is out in that quiet country
district, where they were going on with the day’s work; and suddenly
the great prophet, the man who was more to the land than its king, and
chariots, and horsemen, God’s ambassador and mouthpiece—Samuel—
arrived at that country farm, and called the sons of the old farmer
together. For, he said, “ the Lord has sent me to choose a king from
among your sons.” And in they came and out they went, one by one,
one by one, beginning at the eldest, and it looked as if the whole thing
were a fizzle and a wild goose chase. And the youngest, who was not
considered worthy to be brought in, in this general roll-up of the family,
he got it. The spirit of the Lord came upon David, and David was
chosen to be king in the midst of his brethren. Now I will tell you why
I preach that. Because it is part of the Word of God that liveth and
abideth for ever. Get rid of the notion that your Bible is like any other
book. In that Bible you have God’s wisdom, God’s ways revealed to
endless generations for their instruction and salvation, and when I see
Samuel coming to that father’s house with a gift in his hand—the gift
the offer of a crown, a throne, a kingdom—l magnify mine office. lam
not Samuel, neither are you the sons of Jesse ; but I bring you a gift
and an offer in God’s name, and you have rolled up and gathered in to
hear of it, and it brings you an opportunity, compared with which the
gift and offer by Samuel of a crown and a kingdom to one of the sons of
Jesse was a light, passing, temporary, and tinselled business ; I come in
God’s-name—l magnify mine office—to offer this afternoon to whomso-
ever will, a crown, and a kingdom, and a place that passeth never away.
* Exhibition Building', Sunday afternoon, 12th August.


Ob, what a magnificent situation is created for us when we come to hear
God’s preachers offering eternal life in the name of Jesus —not limited
and strict, but to whomsoever will receive it, and be crowned for ever
with it.
THE MAN THAT IS TOO BIG
Now you see the meanings, the eternal meanings and applications of
the Word of God that abideth for ever. How did Samuel get along?
Very like the way we preachers get along. lam sure you yourselves now
see the drift of it. Here is Samuel coming to offer a crown and a king-
dom, and in come the possibles, the probables, the candidates. In comes
Eliab, a big fellow, seven feet by four—(laughter)—and, of course, it’s
for him ! He is the eldest son, and he is good looking, and he knows it.
My !if he could only have forgotten it! That’s the trouble with some
of you fellows. Oh, don’t imagine it’s only girls and women who stand
before the mirror. You know how long you spent this morning at the
sit of that tie—(laughter)—and to get the twist out of that collar, and
parting your hair in the middle and plastering it down in front. Oh,
you’re a little proud. Bring in the eldest son ! And Samuel was just
going to give it away to him, for many make that mistake. I thank God
it is not my business. I make the offer to whomsoever will, and at the
same time God guides it all the while and settles it on the head. I see
Eliab, the eldest son—a fine, big, stal vart, handsome fellow—and Samuel
was just going to crack the horn of oil over his head when something
arrested him. God’s spirit spoke with Samuel’s spirit; “Samuel,
Samuel, look not on his countenance nor on the height of his stature,
for I have refused him,” And Samuel’s face flushed, and he would say
to himself: “ Dear me ! I was just going to make the mistake over Eliab
that the whole kingdom made over Saul,” Why was Saul appointed
king ? Because he was a big fellow, head and shoulders above the
people; and by this time they had bitterly found out that mere physique,
and good looks, and bulk, and appearance won’t do. Behind it there
wa*s the pride of the devil, and rebellion. And here was Samuel going
to make the very same mistake over Eliab that the whole nation had
made over the king whom God had rejected. Big, head and shoulders
above the people like Saul. Why didn’t Eliab get it? Because he
was too big for the place. Too big ! Too big ! Why are not some
of you saved ?
WHAT PKIDE COSTS.
Look me in the face. Why are not some of you saved ? Why aren’t
you a Christian ? It is for no other reason so much as this ; You are
too proud for the Lord to touch you. If you want God’s salvation never
to settle on your head then go with a high look and a proud uplifted
heart. This is what spoiled Eliab. He was proud ; he was lifted up.
That is what hinders salvation from coming into some souls here—self-
conceit, pride, empty, abominable, disgusting pride of yourself. Pride
of face ; pride of place ; pride of purse; and, in some cases, pride of
grace, the deadliest of all; spiritual pride, the most damning pride of all.
So proud and lifted up through fancied attainments in grace that, although
you have been coming here for three weeks, you have never listened for
yourself. I can bring no message to you ; you know everything. There
is nobody so near hell as the proud, conceited, and darkened soul ol that


person. Now, men and women, let us know it, and, where God humbled
Eliab, may God humble some of us. Perhaps I shall never have another
chance to preach to some of you. We will never meet till the great day.
May God make me faithful. The one thing, brother, the one thing,
sister, that keeps you back from being saved is your damned pride. It is
time you knew it. Pride! Lifted up, conceited ; for what, I would like
to know. What are you ? What have you to be proud about? What
have you ever done ? Oh, stoop your head or you will never get into
God’s kingdom. Eliab came in too big. The door, as I said the other
night, into God’s kingdom is very low, and you have to go down on your
knees to get through; and if you come sailing up with all your inches
3 r ou will dash out your brains on the lintel. Stoop, for God’s sake, stoop !
Don’t brain yourself in your silly, senseless, infatuated pride. Now may
God send it home to you. I do not know who needs it, but it is
desperately needed by some. Eliab lost it because he was lifted up
in his own eyes. God regardeth the proud afar off. He gives His
grace to the lowly. So out went Eliab. He never was so small in his
life. He went out, his cheeks burning, his eyes blazing, for he came in
with the air of a man—the eldest of the family, you know—the air of a
man who would say, “ Of course, if there’s such a thing going, I get all
the big plums, anyway—(laughter) —it is bound to be for me.” And he
would say to his brothers, “You need haruly come in. I’m going for it.
It’s bound to come to me.” Now, my friend, look out! The days and
the years are passing, and God’s salvation has not crowned your head yet,
not because God is unwilling, but because you are too proud to humble
yourself as an empty sinner should. Exit Eliab.
THE MEN THAT ARE TOO LITTLE.
Now I want to hasten on. In came the others—Abinadab, and Sham-
mah, and the other seven —and they didn’t get it. Why? Now jog
your sides when you read the Bible. Stir yourself up and say, What
does this mean? Why didn’t these other fellows get it? I’ll tell you
why. Eliab didn’t get it because he was so big; the others didn’t ge't it
because they were too small. There are the two extremes. Some people
are too big, and (I say it advisedly) some people are too small, and sordid,
and mean, and dull for the Gospel to make anything out of them. I
think I see them when their old father gathered them together and said,
“ Look here, lads, Samuel has come, and one of you is to be a king.’’
Well, Eliab’s pride burned up at once, and he thought, of course, it must
be he. But the others grumbled, and grunted, and said, “ I dinna want
to be a king.” (Laughter.) I don’t want to be a king. Well, then,
you’ll never be a king. They actually said, “ What’s the use of stopping
us in our work; it’s all a humbug and a sham.” And the Gospel is a
humbug and a sham to you who are a humbug and a sham. You make
it what you are yourself. You cannot make a silk purse out of a sow’s
ear. Look at those fellows. A day’s ploughing, and a day’s reaping, and
a day’s eating, and a night’s sleeping—that was the measure of them.
To tell them that God’s prophet was coming with an offer that one of
them was to be a king, it never made them open their dull eyes a little
bit wider. To trudge at the plough-tail, that was all that was in them.
An animal at one end of the plough, an animal at the other. (Laughter.)
Yes. I tell you it was a horse pulling it, and a dull ass guiding it,
(Laughter.) It comes to that.


WHAT MAKES PREACHING HARD.
Now you see what I arn putting. On the one hand, men anil women,
the preacher must humble pride, and on the other hand he has got to
sting some people into some kind of consciousness that there is some-
thing higher than your head and beyond what you put into your mouth.
Man, there is a God. There is a heaven. There is an eternal glory.
God help you to lift your head from between your feet, and look the
preacher in the face. These clod-hoppers could not take it in. (Laughter.)
You smile! Can you afford to smile? Has not the preacher for years
to some of you been preaching again, and again, and again the unsearch-
able riches of Christ, and it has been casting pearls before swine. He
might as well—according to the old phrase—he might as well whistle
jigs to milestones as preach the Gospel to an empty thing like you,
You never take it in. No, you don’t. And you think of this, and that,
and of the other thing, and I might as well preach to that post as to
you. But tell you of work, and especially tell you of wages, and whisper
in your ear, “ Coolgardie.” (Laughter.) Talk to you about nuggets—
and a pretty nugget you are—and you’re all attention ! God help you !
Tell you about work ; tell you about wages ; tell you about a good thing
in the way of stocks and shares ; tell you about something that belongs
to trudging at the plough-tail of the world’s work; or tell you about the
theatres and amusements, and you open your ears. But tell you about
pardon, peace, life everlasting, the gift of God, and your eyes get as dull,
and your face gets as heavy that—God pity us who have to preach to
fellows like those whom Samuel met with the offer of a crown and a
kingdom ! I tell you, brother, it is dry work trying to wake up men and
women to believe in something higher than their heads—something
unseen, and, therefore, eternal. Like Peter Bell—you know Words-
worth’s Peter Bell? When he went out on a spring morning, he never
saw anything in Nature. He only looked at Nature as a cow looks at it,
as so much pasture, grass, fodder. Says Wordsworth :
“ A primrose by the river's brim
A yellow primrose was to him,
And it was nothing more,”
Tell him that they are the harbingers of spring and he would say,
“ What? what?” He cannot eat the harbingers of spring. I tell you
it happens every Sunday, man, and it takes the heart out of the minister,
that dull, empty, vacant, sordid look on the face of you. It would kill
the heart out of ati angel who would attempt to preach. Look at these
seven. In they come, one by one, and looked at Samuel with that fine
nil admirari look. They looked up at Samuel, and Samuel looked at
them. I repeat it—l may never see you again till the great day. The
almost maddening, if not saddening, thing is the way that some people
can stand the offer of Christ and the Gospel. God pity you ! Neither
up nor down on that side. Dead ! Dull as ditch water, and as stagnant
and dirty ! The only thing you have any interest in is something that
belongs to meat and clothes, and this perishing, passing world. Oh, it
is terrible ! It is the preacher’s cross. Isaiah wailed over it, and so do
we all.- “ Who hath believed our report, and to whom is the arm of the
Lord revealed?” That’s "the trouble. They virtually didn’t believe,
and they could not get back too soon to the plough-tail, and the
day’s work and day’s meat, and the night’s sleep. Like Bunyan.


You remember the man with the muck-rake raking in sticks and straws,
while an angel hovers over him with a crown to put it on his head, and
he won’t drop the muck-rake to look up to heaven. Oh ! men and
women, do you hear me? I’m preaching eternal life, and offering it
to you ! God waken us up to understand !
Now don’t be too big, and don’t be too little. Waken up ! Jog your
sides. Say to yourself, “ There’s something here, and here’s my oppor-
tunity.”
THE MAN THAT GOT IT !
The next thing is David : David got it. We all know that. God
chose David. I believe in election. For one thing election saves time.
It’s better to give it to David than let the others try it and bungle it.
Election saves time. Don’t quarrel with election. Election is salvation
from the point of view of the all-seeing, all-knowing God who knows the
end from the beginning. But election is never meant to keep you and
me out of heaven. The offer is unlike Samuel’s. It is ‘‘whosoever
will ” ! Don’t you see how actually these men shut themselves out ?
You can’t come to Samuel and say, “Oh, well, Samuel, if I’m to get it, I
will get it; if I’m not to get it, I won’t get it.” Well, you will not get it!
Every man had his chance, and the first man was too proud, and the other
man was too sordid and small, and David got it; and, mind you, David
took it. David could have refused it. I see Samuel, and a flush, an
angry flush, is mounting on his withered cheek, and he turns round
sharply to Jesse, the old father, and says, “Are all your children here?”
And he would think to himself, “ I’ve got all these in, and the one I was
going to give it to the Lord would not let me, for He saw into his
heart; and as for these others, there is no disappointment on their
faces that they have not got it. “Are all your children here?” And
Jesse would say, “By the way, there’s the youngest.” Like the old
mother who, if you ask her how many children she has, has got to begin
and count them. (Laughter.) Some of you are that way. Samuel
said, “ How many children have you ? ” And Jesse said, “By the way,
there’s the youngest, and he is out keeping sheep.” And Samuel clapped
his hands and said, “ Send and fetch him.” And they brought him in;
and he was ruddy, and goodly to look to. The devil hasn’t got all the
good-looking ones. When they went out to look for David he was there
keeping the sheep. I know of a boy who was sent by my father to keep
crows out of a field—a very humble occupation, and yet a very needful
one—to keep crows out of a cornfield that was ripe, and they were just
having a feast. But if anybody had come to my father’s house to offer
that boy ten kingdoms, and had gone out to get him, they would have
had a fair day’s running to find him. He was sent to keep the crows
away, but half-an-hour afterward all the crows in the region were in that
field ; but, as the poet says, “ The boy, oh where was he ? ” (Laughter.)
Depend upon it, faithfulness comes out in little things. He might have
been away bird-nesting; he might have been away along the stream, far
down the glen, and Samuel would have had to put on his hat and go away
down there after him before he could have been found. It is something,
that when Samuel came suddenly and without warning to that man’s
house, ivith such an offer, the one who was to get it was outside keeping
sheep. When they went outside they got him faithful to his post. Stick
to your daily task. Be diligent under God’s eye, where He has placed


you, and He’ll not forget you. No squared stone is allowed to be outside
when God comes to build. Be diligent. Don’t think the place is
unworthy of your gorgeous abilities. Be diligent in the humblest calling.
Make God’s eye your taskmaster, and God will promote you. David was
diligent in his earthly calling, faithful in a kind of mean and humble
situation that was given to the youngest just because it was a mean, little
job; and when they went for him, there he was, faithful at his post.
Then when he came in there is still more of it, and with that I close. I
see David come in, and he is told what is up. And Samuel says, “I’ve
come to anoint you, in the name of the God of Israel, king over Israel,
in the room of rejected, unworkable, dangerous Saul.”
TAKING GOD’S OFFER.
Now wait a minute. Doesn’t it show some rare qualities in that young
lad’s spirit—a mere herd-lad in his father’s house ; the youngest among
his brethren—that he didn’t draw back and, with a seeming modesty,
say, “ Samuel, Samuel, 1 beg your pardon, this has been sprung upon
me; I have no ambition that way. I—l—l have had no time to think
about this. The present king is still on the throne. How have you
arranged to get him to fall in with me if am to take his place?” Not a
question! Not a question ! Not a difficulty ! He just bent his head,
and allowed the blessing and the crown to come upon his head. I speak
to some this afternoon—a brother, a sister ; there is your difficulty. You
are not like Eliab—you are not proud ; and you’re not like the other
fellows—too little, and sordid, and utterly dead to another world and
to spiritual things. You are awake to them. But here is your difficulty:
you want to ask questions. You don’t see how this is to work out. You
say, “ If 1 take Jesus Christ as my Saviour this afternoon, how is it going
to work out? I didn’t intend that when I came. I only came just to
the meeting.” Exactly, brother; exactly, sister. But the Lord has
dealt belter witli you than you expected. Come, now, finish it. liaise
no difficulties where Christ raises none. The only difficulty about the
Gospel offer that ever I saw is this: It is too good to be true. Is not
that the real, the only difficulty? My God ! that God should come to
me, that God should meet me, that God should say to me, “ Thou art
the man ! Mark him, note him, not for death or destruction, but for life
and salvation for ever.” The great difficulty is to rise to realise the truth
of it. But it is true, brother! It’s true this moment; true for whoso-
ever will receive it—immediate, eternal life. Deceive it as a free gift from
the King Himself, whose servant only I am. Only His mouthpiece; the
gift is His. You deal with the Lord Himself; and David stooped to
conquer all his difficulties in the simplicity and dignity of faith in God.
He asked no questions. He allowed Samuel to claim him and seal him
for God’s service. Allow the Lord this afternoon likewise to claim and
seal you for His service here and His glory hereafter, and it is done.
WAITING FOE THE CROWN.
It took years to bring it about for David, and there was bitter persecu-
tion ; but all that was promised in bis father’s house to the herd-lad
that afternoon gloriously came to pass. It may take years, my brothers,
years, my sisters, and it may only take hours. “ The sands of time are
sinking, the dawn of heaven breaks ; ” but as sure as I offer eternal life
as a free gift in the name of Jesus, and as sure as you rise in a conquer-


ing faith to overcome all questions and all difficulty, and accept the
offering, so surely in that day God will reveal that you and He met here
this afternoon and clasped hands in an eternal covenant that sin and
death shall never break. Oh, rise to the occasion ! I offer you eternal
life, full salvation, without works, without personal merit, without
desert, through the rich grace of Jesus Christ, to whosoever will. May
your heart rise up and say, “I will; Lord, give it to me,” and you have
it. You came in a drunkard, a harlot, a debauchee, a poor worldling, a
thing of mere buying and selling, and eating and dressing and sleeping,
a votary of pleasure, a giddy butterfly; but as surely as your soul wakes
up under the sound of etexmal truth, to grasp the situation, so surely
God is faithful, salvation is thine. Thou hast accepted what God i&
offering. Take it! Accept it in a believing, unquestioning spirit.
I say this in closing. When I was a lad, about eighteen or nineteen
or twenty—l forget now which—just doing a day’s work, the offer came
to me, and God wakened me from mere worldliness and from all tempta-
tions to live a mere animal earthly life. He wakened my dim eyes wide
enough to see that offer and to accept that offer ; and I came, and I said,
“ Christ for me.” And the end of it isn’t here yet. God is not done
yet, and the rest is yet to be. And it has been grand ; and all through
the years God has kept me, no credit to me. All praise to Him who has
bond and security, and fulfilled all that He has promised to all who
receive Him in meek simplicity. It may be sixty years aftewards before
you reach the heavenly kingdom. There is a young lad down there, or a
young girl. Do you accept Jesus Christ this afternoon, and, like David,
you go away back to your sheep ? David did not stay for the crown ; he
went away back to his sheep ; but he was a king even while he was a shep-
herd. He was God’s alone, and the Spirit of God—the earnest, the
security of all the rest—the Spirit of God entered his spirit and changed
him from that day forward.
THE SURE REWARD.
Sixty years after this, some young fellow who accepts Jesus Christ in.
simple faith this afternoon will be lying, dying, old, grey, wrinkled,
withered. I will go further than that—may be poor, destitute, desolate.
All that the world calls success never came to you, just because you gave
your heart to Jesus, and you entered along the path that meant cruci-
fixion, pain, contempt, having to allow a fortune to go past you because
you would not sell your heaven for gold. And I see you 1} ing dying, as
the world would say, old, desolate, defeated. But you are not defeated.
You remember Marmion, Sir Walter Scott’s hero. You remember when
he was lying dying on the battle-field he heard his leader’s name shouted
in his ear, and that very name revived him, made him die with a shout
like a conqueror on his lips. You remember the lines:
“ The war, that for a space did fail,
Now trebly thundering, swelled the gale,
And—Stanley ! Stanley ! was the cry ;
A light o’er Marmion’s visage spread
And fired his glazing eye,
With dying hand above his head,
He shook the fragment of his blade
And shouted ‘ Victory !' "
And I don’t care how poor or desolate you may be, if you accept Christ
this afternoon, when you come to die, if I stand over you and breathe in


your ear that one name “ Jesus,” it -will rally you, you will die conqueror,
more than conqueror, and pass into your eternal glory with your crowned
Lord. Man! don’t be afraid. Don’t hang back. It’s true ! & Eternal life
is true ! Jesus is here offering Himself to be your Saviour for ever.
Rise to the call and you have Him, and God will work it out in you, and
by you, and with you. And remember the moment you take Christ you
get your first instalment, the earnest of all the inheritance. The spirit
of Jesus comes upon you from this moment and forward. Amen and
amen. Meet me now, on that day. Set your heart to it that we meet on
the crowning day. We will meet to part no more. We will meet who
this afternoon have risen to clasp hands with Jesus Christ in the give
and take of His offer of eternal life. We will surely meet, not one
missing, for “ it is an everlasting covenant ordered in all things, and
sure.” Only, 1 charge you, humbly pray and rise up, from sordid, sodden
dull worldliness, to simple glorious faith in Christ Jesus.
XII—THE DELIVERED LEPERS.
(2 Kings vii.)
This story represents to us a great truth ; we need to see to-day on both
sides of it, Samaria was besieged. Here is the record: They were
sitting hemmed in by the Syrians. Syrian enemies all round about
them, blocking them in, keeping any provisions from reaching them.
Then Elisha said : “Hear ye the word of the Lord: To-morrow, about
this time—(God has His eye on the clock) —to-morrow, about this time,
shall a measure of fine flour be sold for a shekel, and two measures of
barley for a shekel, in the gate of Samaria.” although at that time they
were dying with famine, they were so closely shut up and besieged. Then
a lord, on whose hand the king leaned, answered the man of God and
said : Behold !if the Lord would make windows in heaven this thing
might be”—as if God can make a heaven without windows. Oh ! some
people are blockheads—-(laughter)—and he was a lord. “ Behold, if the
Lord would make windows in heaven ” —as if God has shut Himself up
in a dungeon with no windows to it—“ if the Lord would make windows
in heaven might this thing be; ” and that stung the prophet. I tell
you it is that thin-lipped, sneering infidelity that provokes the lightning.
Sweep your heart clean of that curse—sneering in God’s face. Remember
the old proverb, The man who spits at heaven finds the spittle back on
his own face.” That lord sneered at the Word of Promise that, by
to-morrow, at this time, there would be abundance instead of starvation
and famine; and the prophet answered sharply in reply to the sneering
incredulity, “ Behold ! thou shalt see it with ihine eyes, but thou shalt
not eat of it.” That is true to-day. God’s salvation all round about,
and poor scoffers dying, but not eating, drinking, living. “ Thou shalt
see it with thine eyes, but thou shalt not taste of it.”
THE LEPERS’ LOGIC.
Well, the story jumps away ! There were four leprous men at the
entering in of the gates of the city, and these lepers said one to another,
“ Why sit we here until we die? If we say we will enter into the city,
then the famine is in the city and we shall die there. If we sit still here
we die also. Now, therefore, come, let us fall to the army of the
Syrians who were besieging the Israelites—“ If they save us alive we


shall live ; and if they kill us we shall but die, and it is death any way.
Let us try our enemies besieging our countrymen.” And they rose up
in the twilight to go to the camp of the Syrians ; and when they were
come to the uttermost edge of the camp, “ behold there was no man there,
for the Lord had made the host of the Syrians to hear a noise.” With
what infinite contempt God scatters His enemies. God rattled some-
thing and they rose and ran. (Laughter.) Oh ! with what contempt
God answers His enemies. There is a deal of infidelity in Melbourne,
and scepticism and sceptics write to me letters. I got one to-day just
spueing with blasphemy. I often think if there was a rumble of an
earthquake the men who write the scoffing, blasphemous letters woul 1
be yelling up to heaven for mercy. (Laughter.) “ The Lord made the
host of the Syrians to hear a noise of a great host, and they said one to
another, Lo, the king of Israel hath hired against us the kings of the
Hittites and the kings of the Egyptians to come upon us. Wherefore
they rose and fled in the twilight, and they left their tents and their
horses and their asses and the camp as it stood and fled for their lives.”
And when these four lepers came to the uttermost edge of the camp, “they
went into one tent and did eat and drink,and carried thence silver and gold
and raiment and went and hid it, and came again and went into another
tent and carried thence also and went and hid it. Then said they one to
another, We do not well; this is a day of good tidings and we hold our
peace. If we tarry till the morning light some mischief will come to us.
Now, therefore, come and let us tell the king’s household, though they are
sitting shut up there starving, and their enemies have packed up and
gone, or gone without packing up”—(laughter) —and off they went. So
they came and got the poor people to believe it. Then came God’s ful-
filment and what He said, “ The people went out and spoiled the tents of
the Syrians; so a measure of fine flour was sold for a shekel, and two
measures of barley for a shekel, according to the woid of the Lord.
And the king appointed the lord on whose hand he leaned to have charge
of the gate, and the people trampled on him in the gate, and he died,
according to the word of the Lord.” “ To-morrow, about this time, shall
a measure of fine flour be sold for a shekel.” The lord answered and
said, “ Behold, if God made windows in heaven such a thing might be •”
and the prophet said, “ Thou shalt see it with thine eye, but thou shalt
not eat thereof; and so it happened unto him, for the people trampled
on him in the gate, and he died.” It comes round, you see ; it comes
round. It may be a long way round, but every word that God hath
promised that shall stand. Now the great lesson about this to you and
me is this ; Those four leprous men were in a sad pickle. As the people
in Scotland would say, they were between the de’il and the deep sea,
and there was not much hope for them. They were lepers, dying in
that way, and being banished men, as all lepers in those days were,
having to stay outside cities in the lonely country plain. Here they
were; they had got hemmed in, the Syrians, had come up and were
blockading the Israelites, and they were perishing with famine and
hunger, and these poor lepers woke up one day and said, “ What are we
to do? If we stay where we are we die. If we go to our countrymen
in the city we die.” There is nothing for them. They are dying. The
famine is in the city. “Come now,” they said, as the last shift, “let us
go to the camp of the enemy. If they save us and pitch us something,
to eat we will live; if they kill us we shall but die.”


THE EMPTY CAMP.
And I see them rising and creeping along in the dark, expecting every
moment to be challenged, but never a challenge ! And the camp stand-
ing there, horses, asses, tents, provisions for a whole host, and not a sign
nor a vesture of an enemy or a human being. Man ! I cannot read that
without seeing it is up to date. I wish some poor fellow or fellows here
would rise out of their misery and make a shift. Man ! don’t sit until
you die. Take up that leper’s word. Why sit we here until we die? You
have grown old enough, some of you now, to see all the swagger and the
bluster and the bravado of sin and worldliness pretty well beaten,
battered, and hammered out of you. Then comes the danger of sinking
down in dull, leaden despair. Now don’t! don’t despair! There is a
doQr you have never tried yet, a door where you think there is nothing,
or only the barest chance. A door where you think there is an enemy.
Don’t sit still ! Cast about ! make a move! make a move ! Don’t
sink down in sin, deadness, dumbness, and dogged despair. Cheer up,
man ! When all doors slam in your face there is an unexpected door.
Go and try it. Just think of the surprise that came to these men.
Death, as Tennyson said about the Light Brigade and its cannon—
“Cannon to right of them, cannon to left of them,
Cannon in front of them, volleyed and thundered.”
So with death to these poor lepers, death within them, because of their
loathsome disease. Death by famine in the city. Death by the hostility
of their enemies in the besieging camp, and yet they lived. Bless God!
yes, they lived !
A BLESSED PARABLE.
I wish some of you would understand and see. Dear men, see how
death creeps in upon us. Ah! one of the sad things of advancing years
is the way in which man’s horizon darkens and gets limited. In his
young days he thinks the world is wide, and that he has lots of room,
and lots of scope, and he talks about his “ liberty ” and freedom ; and it
may be, long before he is thirty, death ! death ! in various forms lias
hemmed him in, and closes down on him like a rat in a trap, Death!
Hell! Destruction ! closing in, hemming him in, and shutting him up.
When you started off, the devil promised you liberty, freedom. Now the
life you live has no more room in it than the airing ground of a dungeon.
Right and left you are caught, hemmed in, shut up, and you have no
more freedom than a dog chained up in a back yard. Man, be honest I
be honest! The devil and the flesh promise us liberty, freedom. We
live to see the day when all that lie is found out and our freedom turns
to bondage, and the life that was promised us is simply death creeping
in on every hand. Now I have to say that I must convict men of sin
and folly ; and then, having said it, learn a lesson from those poor
frightened fellows. “ Why sit we here until we die ?” Don’t despair;
make a move, cast about. Dear brother, it is God’s world yet. You are
not a rat in a trap. The devil hasn’t got you, and you will live to prove
to all eternity, I trust, that just as he was going to lay his big black paw
on you and squash you, he misses you. He missed you. But you
deserved it, and so do I. 1 deserve to be filled with my own doings. I
deserve that God shall leave me to get my belly filled of what I wanted
to have. But, blessed be His name! there is mercy with Him, and we
are all bound to say with the Psalmist, “ He hath not dealt with us after


our sins, nor rewarded us according to our iniquities. For as the
heavens are higher than the earth, so great is His mercy towards them ”
that humble themselves and go back and repent. These poor lepers had
death on every hand, like you and me, and up they awoke, and they
said, “ Here is a strange thing, but we will try it. We will go to the
camp of our enemies;” and when they came no challenge, nothing to
alarm them, and tents filled, and they went into one tent, and they did
eat and drink.
god’s abundance.
Henry Ward Beecher used to put a slight emphasis on certain words
in that passage. You run it over and don’t notice it. “ They went into
one tent and they did eat and drink.” Henry Ward Beecher used to
read, “ They went into one tent and they did eat and drink ! ” You just
see them, four men at the last gasp, and suddenly they land on the pro-
visions for an army, and then they tried to eat it. (Laughter.) It
reminds me of the harvesters in my father’s early days. They came over
from Ireland. It was a great business to come over to reap the harvest
from Ireland to Scotland, and splendid reapers they were ; but they ate a
good deal to keep them up, and after a day’s reaping down the harvest of
the fields they sat down to a spread of potatoes, and the potatoes in those
days were worth eating. (Laughter.) One man described it “We sat,
and we sat, and we sat, and ate ‘praties’ till we couldn’t see one another
across the table for skins.” (Prolonged laughter.) I just feel as if it was
the story with variations told by those lepers. Now, dear men, you
smile, and I have no objections to smiles and tears. I have made you
part with a good deal since we have been here. It has not been all
smiling, I have seen the tears falling. They came from, the same
foundation. If you carry a bowl of water and stumble it spills first
over this side and then the opposite side. It is just the spilling.
(Laughter.) Now the Lord be praised for anything that awakens us up
out of our slovenliness and wooden-headedness. Whatever those men
felt that day when they went away, sleeping in the darkness, the barest,
slenderest chance that there was any hope for them in the camp of their
enemies, and their utter amazement, their overwhelming surprise when
they discovered no enemy there and a whole provision of an army at the
mercy of their hunger'—all this you may have to-day if you go where you
never went yet, where you never thought anything was to be got, or, if
there was anything, it was a terror and an enemy. Man ! there you sit,
and the devil has made you believe up to now that God is an enemy, that
God is your last enemy, and that the wisest thing for a sinner to do is to
forget God, keep away from God, for if you go near God He will cut you
down. And it’s a he, and a hideous he ! There is no terror in God.
Go and try ! “ Fury is not in Me.” Man ! slip away and try God. You
are at the last gasp without Him anyway, and you will find G-O-D spells
not terror, wrath, and a curse. God spells abundance, mercy, peace,
grace, life everlasting. Like those lepers, all their fears disappointed and
their hopes gloriously exceeded. That is why the Bible all through
magnifies Goa’s love and mercy if we will only go and try Him, “ The
greatness,” said the Apostle, “ the exceeding greatness of His kindness
towards us in Christ Jesus.” “ The unsearchable riches of Christ” high
above our need as the heavens are high above the earth. Now, poor
despairing, down-trodden, bruised, battered, discomfited men and women,


play those lepers’ part. Fly away to God and you will find that God is
not an enemy and a terror, or that God doesn’t dole out a scrimpy,
niggardly pardon. God gives abundantly. “ Let the wicked forsake his
way and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the
Lord, and He will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for He will
abundantly pardon.” Abundantly ! Man ! why should you starve your
soul another hour? Come to Christ! There is no terror. The enmity
has been abolished. All that might have frightened you Christ has routed
out, scattered it, cleared it away. Now there is nothing left for a sinner
but to draw in his chair and fall to. Draw in your chair to the Gospel
feast, poor pi'odigal, sick of the swine trough. Draw in your chair, sit
down, and eat, drink, live. There is abundance in God for each and all.
Now that is the first lesson.
THE PERIL OF THE SAVED.
I will hasten in five minutes to give the second lesson. We are in two
dangers with the Gospel. First of all the danger of sitting still in a
dumb, numb, sodden despair, and letting death and hell creep in and
overwhelm us. Then, after we have got rid of that and gone to Jesus
Christ in simple faith in Him, how trembling and frightened, it may be
lashed or driven by fear or drawn by love—l don’t care if you come;
bless God if you come. And you find all your enemies and fears
have been routed and scattered, and there is nothing but love of Christ
and forgiveness. The next danger is also “to sit still.” Why sit we
here in the region of condemnation and famine until we die ? Up, and
let us try this unexpected quarter, and lo ! there is salvation and life in
abundance. Then the next danger is yet to “ sit still.” The first danger
is to die from famine, the next danger is to die from over-feeding. Now
is not that a great danger among Christians? Come now ! While I
was preaching in the first part of my sermon some of you did not take
much interest; and I don’t wonder. You have gone to the Gospel feast.
You believe in Christ and have salvation, and you know it and rejoice in
it. But look here, the dry-rot of Melbourne to-day and Melbourne’s
Christianity is this : many of us are degrading the Gospel feast into a
selfish, disgustful guzzle. (Hear, hear.) A dirty guzzle. (Applause.)
See what these men said after they had stuffed themselves full and
then as much left as ever. A blush of shame crept on their cheeks ;
they said ; “ This is a day of good tidings, and we held our peace, and
our brethren are frightened for nothing and starving on the edge of this
abundance, and we know about it, and we are trying, to guzzle it all our-
selves.” Now I say, friends, it is high time the blush of shame
crept over the cheeks of some in this meeting. For God’s sake
be ashamed of the utter selfishness of your past Christianity, and
repent and begin over again. Where is the man or woman in
Melbourne to whom you ever went as a saved sinner as you
should have gone, and taken them by the hand and said; ‘‘ Poor
friend, don’t despair. I was like you and thought I was dead and
damned and done for; but I crept away to God in fear and trembling,
scarcely daring to hope there was anything in that direction, and oh !
dear friends, come with me ; there is bread, enough and to spare ! Oh !
that my Saviour was your Saviour too.” Spread the light! Hand on
rhe torch that lights the darkness and the gloom. Oh this disgustful
sitting still and trying to waste upon ourselves what God meant for


mankind. Here we are towards the close of the nineteenth century and
millions, millions of our own flesh and blood starving for lack of Jesus,
while we are nearly perishing from over-feeding. Like the Israelites
they ate and ate, and ate and ate, till the food came out of their mouths
and the rot swept them off like a pestilence. God’s manna can turn
sour and stink on your lips if you are selfish and idle. Spread it ! share
it! divide it !
SPREAD THE LIGHT !
The very essence of the Christian spirit is the mission for saving
others. Going with a light in my face and a word on my tongue as if
great good news has happened and I had found it out, and I cannot keep
still till you come to the same salvation too. May God revolutionise our
churches ! May God revolutionise our own heaits ; and having come to
Christ for ourselves, and having found pardon, peace and life eternal to
our glad surprise—may we never get over the surprise of salvation—may
Ave go forth to Avaken up the city. Waken up those who are ready to
perish, and say to them, ‘‘Come! Come ! Come! “It is finished. The
veil is rent, the welcome sure, the access free. Noav then we leave our
banishment, O Saviour, and return to Thee.” But what do Ave do? We
come to church and we come home from church, and we rub shoulders
for a life-time with poor, heavy-hearted, laden, dying, despairing, sinful
men and Avomen ; and we profess to have received the one thing that
changed for us the shadow of death into the morning light of life and
peace for evermore through Jesus Christ, and our lips are dumb and our
testimony utterly silent! “If we tarry till the morning light some
mischief will happen to us;” now, therefore, let us go and tell to all
around us what a great Saviour we have found, and God will bless you.
This very afternoon you may make the light of dawning hope spread on
some dark human heart. Believe me, dear friends, far more than we
think it our fellow-men, whom Ave rub shoulders with every day, are
hungering Avith a deadly hunger for what the world cannot give. Shame !
Burning shame to you and me if, knowing Christ, we do not testify of
Christ to the perishing. Don’t turn the Gospel feast into a selfish
guzzle. It will do you no good, none whatever. Spread it! Show it !
Become an enthusiast for salvation of others and you will increase the
sweetness of it on your own tongue, and your appetite will grow by what
it feeds on, and your Christian life, even down in the city, will be gilded
and gladdened with this true poetry and true romance—the romance of
finding opportunity in my daily calling to whisper to men of that great
treasure, that find, that amazing surprise, the truth, that “God is love,”
and in Christ Jesus Avaits to pardon immediately every sinner who will
only try Him. May God grant it! Amen and amen !
XIII,—THE SHEPHERD PSALM.*
I have been asked on several occasions when I Avas going to preach on
the twenty-third Psalm to business men, I will do it now. [Mr. M‘Neill
then read the entire Psalm.]
We had in Scotland a very famous violin player —at least, that is what
you must say noAvadays, but we called him a “fiddler” in those rough
times. We called him Neil Gow. All have heard of Neil Avho could
-X-Closiiig midday service in the Town Hall, 17th August.


play the fiddle so well. Arad Neil was asked by a friend one day to tell
him what was the test of good playing on the fiddle, and Neil gave back
a very shrewd answer, involving a very shrewd test of fiddle playing, when
he said, “Can ye gar yersel’ greet wi’ yer ain fiddlin’?” Are you play-
ing to yourself ? Have you got rid of the mere mechanics, and the
fingering, and the professionalism, and the thought of the audience?
Are you absorbed in your own theme? Is it your own soul that is play-
ing to itself ? “ Can ye gar yersel’ greet wi’ yer ain playin' ? ” Well, that
was the test for violin playing, and that is the test for preaching; and I
tell you, dear men and women, we are apt to be preaching to and for
other people, and to get absorbed in the mechanics of preaching. And
I feel when I come to the twenty-third Psalm that I am just in the midst
of a severe test. Unless I can make it “ thrum ”on my own heart-strings
I Avill not very likely “ thrum” very much on yours. For we all know
this Psalm, we are letter perfect in the Psalm. Away back as long as we
can remember we knew the words of the twenty-third Psalm, either as
they are here or in some Christian hymn. Some of you Scotch people,
even while I mention it, your hearts are touched, and there is a special
interest, or, at any rate, a special familiarity with it. As our poet has
said about the rowan tree which grew by the cottage;
“ Oh rowan tree ! Oh rowan tree !
Thou wilt aye be dear to me ;
Entwined thou art with mony ties
O harne and infancy. 1 ’
And the twenty-third Psalm is entwined with many ties of home and
infancy. We heard it sung first by lips that now we trust sing the new
song before the throne.
I WROTE IT MYSELF !
The keynote of the Psalm is a personal note: the Lord and myself.
Whoever the singer is, he makes no parade of his personality. He does
not announce himself. Commentators and scholars write great pon-
derous articles to-day about the authorship of the Psalms. It is a great
question to-day. Our forefathers believed it was David who wrote them,
but some moderns know far better than that; at any rate, they don’t
know who wrote them, but it wasn’t David ! There is one Psalm, the
ninetieth Psalm, headed, “A Prayer of Moses, the Man of God,” and the
modern scholars are pretty much agreed that that is the only Psalm David
wrote. (Laughter.) That’s a way they’ve got. Now I sometimes say,
when I hear all this bother about who wrote the Psalms —who wrote the
twenty-third Psalm—l feel inclined to say, “ I wrote it myself!” At
any rate I was just going to say something like that when he said it for
me. For there is the touch of grace, as well as the touch of nature, that
makes the whole world kin. In Scotland yonder we were ail just going
to say things, they trembled on our tongues, we had all been thinking
them and feeling them in a vague, dim kind of way, things about wee
modest daisies, crimson-tipped, and about mice and men generally, when
out spoke an Ayrshire ploughman, called Robert Burns, and when he
spoke we all said, “My ! the very thing I was going to say myself”—
and we are all become poets ever since. We all started then, and tried
our hands, with varying degrees of success. Now that happens in the
twenty-third Psalm. As you go over it you just say, “Dear me, yes, if I
didn’t say that myself, I was just going to say it. It was just trembling


at the end of my tongue.” So it was, and God sent along that many-
sided genius, the sweet singer of Israel, and He touched his heart and
lips, so as to make quite sure that the common Christian heart and the
common Christian tongue, in all ages, not in any dim, vague fashion,
but in clear, limpid, tender, true, musical speech, would give vent to
what it felt, and knew, and thought of God, and of His great salvation.
There is to be no dumbness in our feelings, and God has opened every
dumb heart, and set every dumb tongue singing in the twenty-third
Psalm, The personal note swings like a pendulum between those two
points—“ the Lord ” and “ myself.” “ The Lord ”is“ my ” Shepherd, I
shall not want. “ He” maketh “me” to lie down. “He ” restoreth
“my ” soul. “1 ” will fear no evil in the dark valley, for “ Thou ” art
with “ me,” right on to the end. “ I,” “I ! ” man, of no account, name-
less, anonymous, even if my name were known, a day’s work, and a
night’s sleep—and “I” will dwell in the House of the Lord for ever.
WHO OWNS THE PSALM?
Now let an audience like this, every man and woman apart, just
strike that personal note and begin to sing it in your heart, “ The Lord
is my shepherd, I shall not want.” It is not a psalm that was meant for
special times, and for particularly good people to sing away at until they
got to everlasting bliss. It is every man’s who will take it up. If you
start and say, where } r ou sit this afternoon, “ These be the terms on
which I wish to stand with God for evermore,” then God says, ‘‘Amen;
so be it.” God will never put you to confusion, and pluck the psalm
out of your hand and tongue, and say, “ That was only meant for
special people.” It is for any man ! Whosoever will, let him be dumb
with unbelief or mere empty formality; but let your heart open out
towards the Shepherd Jesus on these terms, and He will never put you
to confusion.
There is an old jubilee rhyme I heard the Jubilee Singers sing years
ago, and I never forgot it, “ Been a-listenin’, been a-listenin’, been
a-listenin’, all the night long, for to hear some sinner pray.” And I can
often think that God might say, “I’ve been listening, I’ve been listen-
ing, I’ve been listening all your life long to hear you, dumb, dark sinner,
sing.” Don’t disappoint Him another moment. “ Awake and sing, ye
that dwell in the dust.” God would tempt you, God would entice you,
and invite you by the sweet simplicity of this matchless song, to try how
it sits and fits in man’s mouth and on man’s lips. Come, dear brother,
put on this garment of praise ! Lay off the spirit of heaviness, and you
will find that this garment of praise sinks into your shape and make, for
it was made for you. Try it and wear it ! Ido not even ask you to be
a singer. It is the music of the heart that this Psalm evokes, for it is
there that we either sing or are silent through unbelief and care and sin.
I don’t ask you to sing with your voice. It is the music of the heart
that the Lord wants to evoke in this song. Can } r ou “ croon ” ? Do
you know what “crooning” means !
“ CROONING ” THE PSALM.
My mother was no singer, but she could croon. I cannot define it;
but I have seen her take a child—for we in our house were of all ages
and stages; you could get samples of every kind and size there—
(laughter)—l have seen her take a child, cross and fretful; you know the


state into which a child sometimes gets, just a little bundle of crossness.
There is no use trying to correct it, for bodily exercise profiteth only for
a little. (Laughter.) I have seen my mother just take that little one on
her knee and sit down on a “ creepie,” Do you know what that is ? I’ll
break your heart with these words ! She sits down on a stool, you know',
takes the little cross thing on her lap, lays her mouth upon that little
one’s ear, and begins to whir-r-r-r-rr-r away. And you know what’s the
end of it! “ Songs without words,” you know—you have them at home
on your piano. As you sing them sometimes they are songs without
words or music. (Laughter.) What is the end of it? What is the
effect on the child ? Why, after five or ten minutes, that cross little
thing would be lying there all stretched out, with not a cross look or
a frown, or a wrinkle on its little face, but bathed in perfect peace, and
sound asleep.
X wish you would not be too old—don’t be too big or too wise in your
own conceits—to allow the Holy Ghost, the Comforter, the great nursing
Father in God’s family, to just take you into His arms, you poor careworn,
harassed, toiling and moiling business men. Be a child in God’s arms
this afternoon, and let Him “croon ” into your restless soul and broken
heart the endless music, the fathomless peace and strength of the twenty-
third Psalm. “The Lord is my Shepherd.” There is the whole difficulty,
if you are to be a Christian—let me say at the end of my mission what
I have been saying all the time—if you are to be a Christian you have
to give up self, wicked or righteous, and lean all your weight, both feet,
on God. There is the simplicity and there is the whole difficulty of
salvation. It is to make that one step, clean and clear, out of self into
Himself, and there abide for ever.
THE SHOUT OF FAITH.
“The Lord is my Shepherd.” The Lord I The Lord! Strike that
keynote, dear brother. Try it again ! That last time was wretchedly
flat. Come, now, again, and again. Compel those wretched scrannei-
pipes of yours and mine to ring out that major note —the Lord ; “the
Lord is my Shepherd, 1 shall not want”—and I tell you the devil anti
doubt will flee from you. He keeps Haggling, naggling at your elbow to
weaken that strong major keynote. Baffle him ! Defeat him ! King it
out! “ The Lord is my Shepherd , I shall not want.'' And He is so.
I hasten on. “He maketh me to lie down in green pastures, He
leadeth me beside the still waters.” I want just to “thrum” these
strings as if it were an old harp, in the hope that some music may abide
in your hearts, and you will start off to do it by yourselves if you
have come to Jesus Christ, for He is the “ Lord ” referred to by the
Psalmist. That is true. That is not only poetry. It is poetry, but it
is fact. The trouble with some poetry is that it is a mere blowing of
soap bubbles, and they burst whenever they touch the solid ; but God’s
poetry has the bed-rock of eternal fact and truth in it as well as music,
and rhythm, and poetry. It is solid fact, up to date, and on to all
eternity.
“l SHALL NOT WANT.”
Say that now to your heart, and say it again, and say it in God’s great
name, under the sign and seal of the blood of the Shepherd who died
for the sheep, and see if it won’t make you bl ighter and lighter. If it won’t,
then God’s best has failed to comfort you, that’s all. “ I shall not want.”


TESTING THE PSALM.
Now 1 don’t know what life means ior me, and I began as far down as
anybody—a poor man’s son, nothing but one man’s wage to depend on,
and that wage shortened by every shower that fell, and that in a country
where showers do fall. (Laughter.) And yet I don’t look as if the Lord
had forgotten our family, do I? 1 look as like my food as my woik,
don’t I? Ah ! dear friends, it is true, and I cannot say any more about
it. I feel like that politician who, wishing to impress on his audience
the truth of a certain statement, said, “That is not only a fact, but it’s
true.” (Laughter.) I am just there. It is so. “ The Lord is my
Shepherd, I shall not want.” I stand here to say this. I will put it in
the severest Avay. Test your psalm : test it and you will find that every
link of it is stamped and tested, and you can weigh your eternal destiny
on it. I don’t know what, to come to the severest, I don’t know what
death, and judgment, and eternity will mean for your preacher. In that
solemn hour when 1 turn my back to the world and my face to the wall,
which means eternity, I do not know what death, and judgment, and
eternity shall mean when all my sins and shortcomings, personal and
ministerial, like vultures come swooping down upon my dying bed. But
my psalm gives me confidence. Whatever death, judgment, eternity
shall mean for John M £ Neill, I have made the Lord my Shepherd, and
I shall not want. He wdl stand near and carry me through, and make
it good, whatever death, and judgment, and eternity shall demand. Jesus
will satisfy the demand. How can you live an hour without Him?
Man ! clutch Him where you sit?
GREEN PASTURES.
“He maketh me to lie down in green pastures ; He leads me beside
the still waters.” Now what does that heart-string yield to us as we
“ thrum ” it? It yields this: Try to remember how God the Shepherd
has led you and what He has been to you for this world. Now, for all
the talk about the depression, it has been “ green pastures and still
waters” for a good many of us. What are green pastures and still
waters ? You go and ask any sheep. Ask any sheep what do green
pastures and still waters mean, and any sheep of any sense will say,
“ That means a high old time for a sheep.” (Laughter.) My dear
friends, God has been amazingly good to some of you. I speak to some
of you ladies ; you have never so much as had a wet foot, unless you
wanted it wet. You have absolutely never had any severe troubles, except
the troubles you kept up yourself, and the troubles that you gave other
people. You are well born, well brought up, well sheltered all your life.
Ii has been “green pastures and still waters” for you for this world.
AH that some of us know of trouble is to sit here in some land-locked
haven under a hill, and as our boat gently rocks upon the sunlit bay to
look out and see the great white waves go racing past the harbour’s
mouth, where others are battling for life in the billows. Down on your
face and thank the Shepherd for being so good to you for this Avorld as
well as the next. “ Green pastures and still waters.”
life’s troubles.
But I am not forgetting that some of us have had troubles and trials.
It has been with some of us disaster upon disaster and sorrow upon
sorrow, and sickness and death all round about us. Hear me, friends !


If you have made the Lord Jesus Christ the portion of your heart—if
more and more you have let your soul go out to Him and rest yourself
on Him—then it is “green pastures and still waters ” whether it is or
no. The Lord Himself is a fat portion to the man who dwells in Him.
The Lord Himself! It makes you rich beyond the dreams of avarice to
be able to say, “ He is mine and I am His in the give and take of His
own Gospel,”
I am not forgetting that some of you have risen early and sat up late,
and whatever is included in green pastures and still waters as regards
wealth and competence, there is something to be said for your own
energy, and thrift, and industry. But understand this—that the whole
secret of faith in the Lord Jesus Christ is this; No matter how rich I
am, I sing my twenty-third Psalm with dependence on Him as if I didn’t
know where my supper and bed were coming from. And no matter how
poor I am for this world, I sing my twenty-third Psalm as if I were a
millionaire and didn’t know how to invest my money. It is glorious,
the power of faith, to cut us loose from this present perishing, passing
world, and to give us the dimensions and space and atmosphere of eter-
nity, where we will soon be for ever.
Now I am not denying that some of you may have risen early, and sat
up late, and been thrifty, and “ made your pile,” but don’t forget it came
from Him all the same. Some of you are born with a silver spoon in
your mouth. I tremble for you. You cannot sing the twenty-third
Psalm with the spoon in your mouth. (Laughter.) Put the spoon in
the plate. (Laughter.) Get rid of it somehow. Get a thankful heart.
My dear friends, if the Lord came—l may have said this before, but it
will bear repeating—you are looking only at your side of the business ;
but if the Lord Jesus Christ came and took away His share out of your
brain, and business, and qualities, and out of your body, the very devil
would not be made up with what is left, and I would not touch it with a
stick. (Laughter.) It all comes from Him. One thing about faith is
that it shuts you up to God’s Christ naked, empty, bankrupt, and a
beggar apart from Him, and it enables you to trust less to the world’s
wealth or poverty.
THE VALLEY OF THE SHADOW.
I hasten. I want to touch that fourth verse, dear to me as mother’s
milk to a child. The fourth harpstring, “ Yea, though I walk through
the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for Thou art with
me.” One of my oldest memories is to hear that fourth verse on my
mother’s lips. I think we make a mistake, dear men, if we only use this
fourth verse as a night-light for a dying chamber. It is that, but it is
more than that. You may be dead before you know what struck you.
We may not need to go into your chamber. As ministers we are often
summoned to the bedside of the dying, and we are no sooner there than
the fourth verse of the twenty-third Psalm comes to our lips. How often
have I said it ! “Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow
<>f death, I will fear no evil, for Thou art with me.” It is needed by the
Christian every day of his life, and it is needed along the valley filled
with shadows, the shadow of death over it all; and it comes desperately
near us at times, and is dark and gruesome and gloomy. My dear
mother was five and twenty years in the valley of the shadow of death;
five and twenty years never a day without pain ; five and twenty years


never a night with two hours of unbroken sleep on end, and fighting the
battle with ill-health and poverty and a struggling family to support.
For five and twenty years in the valley of the shadow of death ; but all
through that quarter of a century that light shone till it brought in ever-
lasting day. Man, I know the Psalm ! It is flesh and blood to me. I
have seen it not only sung, I have seen it worked out in flesh and blood
and daily life. Don’t stand up and tell me there’s nothing in religion.
There’s nothing in anything else but religion. (Applause.) The com-
mentators point our, and it is right, that it is not the valley of death
itself. Since the Shepherd died for the sheep, death died with Him.
He abolished death, and you know that part of Christ’s work. He has
never got enough credit for it from us all. It is only when death comes
to you two or three times, as in my case, you need to have your father
and mother and wife die to realise fully how gloriously Christ has done
that piece of work. He has abolished death, and there is no such thing.
Speaking of my dear ones, I could not think them dead if I tried.
Neither can you. Examine yourself, and you will always find you think
of them as living. He hath abolished death. That bit of His work has
been done magnificently, but it is “ the shadow of death” that is men-
tioned in this fourth verse. The shadow remains.
“i don’t like 'shadows’”!
The commentators, I think, strike a falsetto note when they say it is
“only the shadow of death,” and that it is only fools and children that are
afraid of shadows. Now I hope lam not a fool, and certainly I am no
longer a child, but I don’t like shadows. lam neither a fool nor a child,
and yet I don't like shadows. If I were going past a graveyard at twelve
o’clock at night—now a commentator would just think nothing about it—
(laughter)—but I’m not built that way, I’d be rather inclined to whistle
to keep my courage up. I would like to have you with me, wouldn’t you ?
(Laughter.) But I believe I’m as brave as the average commentator for
all that. I think that’s a falsetto note. I don't like shadows and dark-
ness, and the commentators say—and there’s truth in it, but it’s a little
overdrawn—they say that the shadow of a sword won’t cut, and the
shadow of a dog won’t bite, and that’s true. But the shadow of a dog
means a dog round here somewhere. (Laughter and applause.)
It’s a falsetto note to talk about shadows, I don’t want your shadows.
It may only be the shadow of a dog, but then it is so like the brute, and
for me, at any rate, you may as well kill me as frighten me to death.
There are a number of you dear people, and this is the way with you.
You are in fear of a day you never saw and never will see; but it’s a
real fear, a real misery to you. Now the grand thing about the Psalm
is this : It does not leave out the shadows. It does not try to explain
them away and make out they are light. It simply says He is with us.
Mind you, the fourth verse is not even a promise: “ Thou shalt be with
me,” It is simply the statement of a fact. “ Thou art with me ! ”
Think of that now and cheer up. Shadows are shadows, such harmless
things, you say. Go back to your Shakespeare and remember how he
makes one of his characters jump up, and with a wild start say: “By
the Apostle Paul, shadows to-night have struck more terror to the soul
of Bichard than could the substance of ten thousand soldiers armed in
proof and led by Shallow llichmond.” Shadows ! why if God only let
loose on your bed to-night the shadows, the ghosts, the haunting spectres


of what you have been, and what you have done, and what, in justice,
you richly deserve, He could scare us through dreams and terrify us
through visions till we would loathe our bed and weary for the blessed
day. Thank God that in the midst of the spectres and the ghosts and
the shadows of our own sins and guilt, He is with us, nearer to us than
fear, nearer than the accusations of my conscience that are only too well
founded ; nearer than them all is Jesus Christ, whose blood speaks peace
to all my terrors and vanquishes all my darkness and my fear. Dear
brother, if you are trusting in Christ, I don’t care what your sins and
fears and alarms may be, they are only shadows. He is with you ; He
will be with you to the very end. Trust Him. As the night brings out
the stars, so the darkness, and the fear, and the gloom bring out His
presence with us to the very end.
HEAVEN AT LAST !
And then the last verse, “ I will dwell in the house of the Lord for
ever.” Heaven at last! Ibid you good-bye to-day. How sweet to
think the next is heaven. Heaven ! That’s the next—we know it.
There’s no link missing. God has not made a railroad and left a few
rails out, here and there an alternate rotten sleeper. (Laughter.) No!
It’s all solid, all the permanent way is fair, and the rolling stock too.
And you just sit still, you believe it.
Travelling one day in an express train in England, I noticed an inti-
mation to travellers posted inside the carriage: “ The doors of this com-
partment are not locked on either side,” And I thought they might
just as well have finished it by saying: “ The doors of this compartment
are not locked on either side ; therefore, don’t be a fool, let them alone !
Enjoy all the liberty and all the freedom you can inside those doors; but
don’t go showing your hardiness by tampering with them, opening them
a little bit, and putting your foot out just to show how brave you are.”
What an ass you are, playing with destruction like that! Now God has
given us room and ease and safety, but it is inside very definite bounds.
Don’t try to make them wider. To go beyond God’s bounds is fool-
hardiness and danger. Sit back ! Stay inside ! God will take you there
all right.
The next is heaven. It is glorious to think of the believer’s position.
Take a broad look at it to day, and, as we bid each other good-bye,
remember the certainty, the certainty of meeting again. “ Life,” says one
■of our poets, or poetesses, rather—“ Life, we have been long together.”
I am applying it now to life as well as to each other :
“ Life, we have been long together,
Through pleasant and through cloudy weather ;
'Tis hard to part when friends are dear,
Perhaps ’twill cost a sigh, a tear.
Then steal away, give little warning,
Choose thine own time, say not good-night,
But in that brighter clime
Bid me good morning.”
So I bid you “ good morning.” We have met at the Cross of Christ,
that’s where the morning breaks and the shadows begin to scatter. The
next, beside the Throne, in the meridian splendour of Christ’s own
presence, not one missing. “My sheep, and I give unto them eternal
life and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of My


hand.” “I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.” If heaven is
anything like the road to it, how grand must heaven be ! for the road to
it is splendid ; filled with God all the way, and God in His utmost glory
awaiting us at the end of it.
We will rise and sing the hymn “ God be with you till we meet
again.”
XIV.-THE UNSEEN HELPERS.*
I wish you to go back this afternoon again to the Old Testament, the second
book of Kings, 6th chapter. We have had a narrative out of this chapter
already, and we found it interesting, with application up to date, and a
meaning for our lives to-day—the story of the young fellow whose axe-
head parted company with the axe handle and fell into the stream. In
the same chapter there is another story. It is an old trouble. The
Syrians fighting against the Israelites. They were neighbours and always
raiding the borders—as the English and Scotch used to do in the old days.
They never rightly understood “which cattle belonged to who ” as the
man said. (Laughter.) They were always riding across the border and 1
lying in wait for each other. Because of the prophet the King of Israel
was able to escape several times ; and when the King or Syria got to know
this, he stopped laying traps for the King. He thought: “If I can only-
catch Elisha, he is worth all the rest of the Israelites. He tells them what
I think in my bed-chamber. If I can catch Elisha then I can do them
real damage.” And one of the servants of the King of Syria said r
“Elisha the prophet that is in Israel telleth the King of Israel the words
which thou speakest in thy bed-chamber. And he said, Go and spy
where he is, that I may send and fetch him. And it was told him, say-
ing, Behold, he is in Dothan. Therefore sent he horses and chariots and
a great host, and they came by night and surrounded the city. And
when the servant of the man of God had risen early and gone forth,
behold a host encompassed the city with horses and chariots. And his
servant said unto him : Alas, my master ! how shall we do ? And he
answered : Fear not; for they that be with us are more than they that be
with them. And Elisha prayed and said: Lord, I pray Thee, open his
eyes that he may see. And the Lord opened the eyes of the young man,,
and he saw ; and lo! the mountains were lull of horses and chariots of fire
round about Elisha.’’
SHARING PERIL WITH CHRIST.
Now there is a great lesson there. Just let me plunge into the middle
of things. We have no time for introductions. The first point is this :
There is a young fellow now—Elisha’s servant; Elisha’s body servant,
Elisha’s close, faithful, personal attendant —holding a position we can all
imagine to be of great pride and dignity, and about which he would talk
to his children and children’s children : I was Elisha’s body servant,
that great prophet who worked the miracles, who was more to Israel than
all the chariots, and horses, and battalions, and batteries and armies. I
attended him personally. I was close in, under his own hand.” A
position of great privilege, and a position of great honour, but, as it turned
out, a position of great danger. For when the King of Syria, mad with
rage because the Israelites had escaped his plot, sent to cut off Elisha, to
pin him down, and surround the city with an enormous host that he might
♦ midday address, Melbourne Town Hall.


be quite sure he would catch Elisha and cut him off from helping the
Israelites with a prophetic gift and revelation of all Syria’s spies, then the
servant was in the same danger as his master ! Now I want to preach to
young men just a word. My dear young brother, I thank God for this,
that when 1 became a Christian I had the pluck and courage in me; for
naturally I was and am as timid as anyone could be. I can run like a rein-
deer. (Laughter.) But when the Lord brought me to know Himself, I
came out and out. I was forced into it. I did it with a fearful timidity,
but lam glad I didn’t make the mistake that others are making. I went
right into the middle of things. I left the world behind me. I came
close up to. Jesus Christ. Nowit is a position of great danger; all the
contempt and scorn and persecution falling upon Christ; and it will fall
on us it we are His personal body servants: and I would like for any
Christian here to be, as it were, His body servant. Cleave to His person !
Cling close to Him ! It will bring you into danger, persecution, contempt
and reproach ; but mind, it will bring you into deliverances and revela-
tions of Christ’s power and grace such as that man will never know who
follows Christ afar off, and is timid and afraid, and allows whole heaps of
things to come in between him and close personal allegiance to a personal
Lord and Saviour. Stand into the place of danger ! In is the place of
revelation, and vision, and deliverance, and victory continually.
THE COST OF COWARDICE.
Now some of you, dear men, don’t know this, because you won’t pay the
price. If you want to catch the influence, revelation and blessedness of
Christ you must share His peril. “ Where I am, there also shall My dis-
ciple be.” And where is He, our heavenly Elisha ? In the midst of
Melbourne’s contempt and reproach, and scoff and scorn. Are you His
servant ? Be where your Master is. No shirking ! If you shirk the
Christ you shirk the crown. No cross, no crown. If we are ashamed of
Him in a perverse and crooked generation, ashamed of Him before men,
of us Hje will be ashamed.
Now I say the young fellow in this story stands as a vivid lesson to us.
Because he was Elisha’s servant he had a position of great honour and
privilege, but also of great danger. When his life was such he did not
send in his resignation and say, “ I have been long enough here.”
(Laughter.) But that is just what happens very often. Many a young
fellow meets with doubts, temptations and difficulties, and be begins to
say, “I think it would pay better to lower the colours and turn down the
light.” Don’t turn it down ! The devil may cut it off at the meter.
(Prolonged laughter.) Don’t cut it off. Don’t turn it down. Be out
and out. I repeat my own testimony, but I don’t want to be looked upon
as a model to any here. lam a solemn warning, it may be. (Laughter )
I trace all my blessedness to this, that the very day I began to servo
Jesus Christ I had to forget degrading cowardice and compromise, and had
to stand in so close to Jesus Christ in open testimony that Jesus had to
hold me to it. I couldn’t stand in my own strength. Now a number of
you are trying to hold in your own strength. Stand so close to Jesus that
the mud that is thrown on Him will come on you too. His glory and
divineness shall be your glory and victory and divineness too.
THE SECRET OF SWIMMING.
I remember when I was a lad I learned to swim. I began in my old
age to ride a horse and haven’t got on properly yet—(laughter) —but I am


sticking to it—(renewed laughter). I never fell off, for when the horse
came down I came with it. (Applause.) I have done a little in swim-
ming; I have swum three miles in a stormy sea and been fresh at the end
of it. But when I was a lad I was nearly not learning swimming at all
because of timidity. (Laughter.) We were brought up at the sea-
side and fond of bathing. I have seen us lads going in at all times of the
day. Coming home sometimes we would meet another band of youths
going for their swim, and they would look at us with long faces and ask us
if we had been in. (Laughter.) “Ah ! have you been in ?” “ Yes ! of
course we’ve been in.” (Laughter.) “ Well, come in again then.” (Laughter.)
And because we were so often paddling in the tide I quite believed that at
last I had solved the art of swimming; but doubts were robbing me of
the real pleasure and delight and exhilarating enjoyment of it. There
was no deep water at the part we frequented. It was a quiet sandy
beach. You could always put your toe on the bottom, do you see?
(Laughter.) I might perhaps doubt whether I had put my toe down, but I
was always sure my companion had his down all the time. He was always
sure I had mine down ! Well, I did “ touch bottom ” —as I hope you
have done with your depression here in Melbourne. (Applause.) We
just knew enough about swimming to torment us. We would start out
here and see how far we could go, and when I saw the great stone-; getting
blurred and my friend bobbing about, we grew alarmed. 1 said, “We
have got to solve this business,” and we would swim gradually out deeper
and deeper beyond our depth, when we would just touch bottom and begin
again. But that is tormenting. So we went out in my companion’s boat
one afternoon at high tide, out in the middle of the Frith where the
vessels are berthed, and we anchored our boat in water, as deep as that
roof is high above the floor. No chance of getting your toe on the bottom
there—(laughter)—and we said, “It we can swim from that boat over
yonder to this boat, that would be the test.” We should have solved the
problem. I remember we stripped and sat on the gunwale, and, as the
poet says:
“We lingered shivering on the brink,
Fearing to launch away ”
There we sat, when Bob gave me a push. (Laughter.) I fell, and in
tumbling in I dragged him after me —(laughter) —and fortunately we
survived, or I wouldn’t be here now. (Laughter.) I remember, dear
men, the sense of pride we had. We wouldn’t condescend to go in wading
in the shallows ; we went into deep water. We could do it.
Some of you dear fellows know just enough about Christ and salvation
and power in Him to torment you, and not enough to save you. Man !
Don’t be afraid ! Go off! Your own depth—that is what is spoiling you,
keeping you in sin, and in shame, and in the shallows. Go out, so that
Christ can hold you up, and gloriously He will do it. But you will never
know the invigorating power of full salvation till you do launch out. You
stand close into the thick of the persecution, then Jesus will lift you and
uphold you continually. Well, this fellow, don’t you see, got into trouble
through being body servant to Elisha.
ON WHICH SIDE IS THE MAJORITY ?
_ And he rose up that morning early, and his heart nearly stood still and
his face grew white. Gleaming spears, chariots, tramping horses all round
about that little town. Completely surrounded and cut off by their


•enemies ; and he rushed to his master and brought him out. “ Alas, my
master ! ” raising his hand*, “ What shall we do ? ” And Elisha answered:
“ Fear not, for they that be with us are more than they that be with
them,” and in answer to prayer he saw the mountain full of horses and
chariots of fire round about Elisha. Man, I don’t know whether it helps
you, but when I was living in London, just as you are living here in
Melbourne, sometimes I would be depressed with the thought that the
Christian seems to be for ever in a fearful minority. Has that never depressed
your heart ? Christ never seems to tell on the streets. Theie is always
the-same overwhelming number on the side of sin and Satan and worldli-
ness and pleasure and mere empty formality ; and many a time I have
got help and courage from this : “ Fear not, for they that be with us are
more than they that be with them.” Fear not, young brother ! To the
outward eye, the eye of sense, things are depressing; to the out-
ward eye the throng of pleasure passing seems overwhelming. They
outnumber us and overwhelm us. Take another look ! Man, you belong
to a bigger thing than you have given God credit for. The biggest thing
in the universe—the Church of the living God. (Prolonged applause.)
We have come to Mount Zion, the City of the living God, to an innumer-
able company of angels, ,to the general assembly and church of the first-
born whose names are written in heaven, and to the God the Judge of all,
and to spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus, whose blood speaketh
better things than that of Abel! “ Fear not, for they that be with us
are more —head for head, count for count —than they that be against us.”
Crowded as all Melbourne streets seem to be, full of worldliness and of
people who seem to care nothing for religion, and overwhelming the count-
ing on the other side ; but God could fill your streets with a procession
from early morning till latest night—pell mell, brigades on brigades,
battalion upon battalion, rank up m rank —God could cram Melbourne
from morning till night with His living witnesses. They that be with us
are more, by mere count, than they that be on the side of the world and
Satan. Cheer up ! Rub your eyes! Take another look ! Jesus has the
infinite majority. Now believe it, for we need it. We are all apt to think
we belong to a feebled, decrepit, bankrupt kind of business because we are
Christians, and the world expects because a man is a Christian he will get
a little knock-kneed. (Laughter.) When a man asks you if you are a
Christian, pull yourself up and say, “Yes! thank God I am! Are you
not one too ? ” and finish it by saying, “ You don’t mean to say you are
such a fool as not to be a Christian ? ” The other fellow is the bigger
coward. Fear not! Fear not, for they that be with us are more than
they that be with them. Just because they are invisible they are nearer.
Moses is with us, Abraham is with us, Isaac is with us, Martin Luther,
John Knox, Wesley, Whitfield, Chalmers —man ! they are with us. Not
dead; none of God’s children are dead. Alive! A great cloud of
witnesses. Let it thrill us and fire us. Oh, may God take the cowardice
out of us and fire us with divine courage !
Tilt: GAIN OF AN OPEN EYE !
And how did that strength come ? Through an open eye. The Lord
had not to send them ; they were there all the time. Elisha saw them,
and because he saw them he had calmnness and strength. What is the
difference between the closed and open eye ? The whole difference
between strength and weakness, betwixt close walking with Christ and


being timid, forsaking Him and fleeing. To see what is here already, the
actual fact and situation, as created by God’s grace for every believer in
Jesus Christ. Oh 1 for the open eye. It makes such a difference. One
man goes out on a spring morning, and he has the eye that sees —and what
does he see and hear ? Pie almost sees the grass grow and he hears the
thrum of the coming spring and of autumn. Another man goes out and
he is one of the dull fellows with no eye for beauty and loveliness. He
only saw what the cow saw, and the ox saw, and what the bullock saw.
(Laughter.) And I tell you he is like many of you ; but it need not be if
you have the eye that sees. May God give us the open eye. May we see
the situation that has been created for ns since Christ was given. Eternal
victory to the man who sees Jesus. Then you are calm and cool like
Elisha. The world will be there, but jmur horizon is widened, your
sky is no longer the size ol your window. You see beyond ; that is why
the martyrs triumphed. They saw the stake and the jeering and mock-
ing crowd, but beyond it all they saw God, Christ the King ! They
saw the spirits of just men perfect, and they despised the danger, despised
the persecution. Out of weakness they were made strong, waxed valiant
in fight, trod beneath their feet the earth, the devil and the flesh, for
they saw Jesus and were victorious. What a difference it makes being
able to see ! Don’t some of you poor fellows wish you could see ? I tell
you it would make Melbourne a different place if only your eyes were
opened to see Jesus and get the effect that faith brings, the victory that
overcomes the world. Faith is victory. Just to see and know and believe
fills this world with the power and the glory of the world to come. As
our poet has said referring back to the burning bush. Earth, she said :
l ' Earth is crammed with heaven since Christ has come ;
Earth is crammed with heaven, and every common bush
Afire with God ;
But only he who sees takes off his shoes.”
The rest sit round and pick blackberries. 'Phey don’t see any glory ia
the flame, for they don’t believe in God and Christ.
THE FINAL VICTORY.
Just a word and lam done. Think of the final benefit of that vision.
Death itself is eternal victory. All things work together for good to the
fellow whose eye is opened around and enlightened to see and know Jesus,
with all that that means. You are independent of the world then 1 You
neither care for its frown nor for its smile. You see beyond it and are
independent of it. I remember once when I was going over from New
York to London in the Aurania, of the Cunard line. I was standing up
on the hurricane deck one day, looking at nothing or anything. It is a
monotonous business crossing the ocean. They say that the British sail
whitens every sea. That is an allegory. In a kind of way perhaps they
do. Sol was thinking, when suddenly I espied a sailor mopping down
the deck. He wasn’t at all an heroic looking man —a very ordinary sore
of duffer. (Laughter.) You wouldn’t have given him five shillings for
all that he was worth. You think of all the poetry that has been written
of sea and sailor—“ Ye mariners of England, who guard our native seas ”
and then you look at him, and it wouldn’t fit. (Laughter.) A mere
steam-boat porter —but I cannot say anything about porters, for I was one
myself. W hen suddenly the boatswain whistled, and the sailor was called
awa} r . He flung down his mop. The vessel, I should say, was reeling.


and tossing dreadfully; it- required great watching to keep your feet.
The sailor jumped on to the bulwarks, leapt into the ratlines, and up he
climbed, and still straight up. Then he went right out to the point of a
yard ; and, standing securely and holding on to the hurricane deck, I felt
a little swimming even to look at him. He didn’t seem to think of dan-
ger. He went out to that yard-arm, and, hanging on to the very point
of it, fastened something that had broken loose. There he was hanging
over that yard, and at every roll he seemed to be flying through square
miles of sky, utterly unconscious of his peril. Then he came in from the
yard-arm, and down the mast, and down the ratlines, jumped on to the
deck, ran along and grabbed up his mop and went on swabbing and
swabbing and swabbing. (Applause.) When I saw him come back, I, a
superior first-class passenger, a distinguished London divine —as I looked
at him now, I felt inclined to take off my hat and say to him, “ Sir” —
(loud applause)—“Sir, I beg your pardon ; I couldn’t do that; I could
only ‘swab.’” (Continued applause.) No objection to cheering; but,
man, you do see. Be a Christian, a believer in the Christ of God and in
eternity, a man who has had his eyes open to see beyond things seen and
temporal. There is a stage at which you are just like any other man,
toiling and moiling away ; but the difference is this ; Sometimes in the
Providence of God the humblest believer is ordered up alofr, and he goea
with that splendid unconscious courage that faith in Jesus Christ creates.
When you who are without Christ are put in circumstances of danger, you
reel and stagger and are lost. The Christian rises like a bird above the
power of circumstances —like my friend on the reeling masthead, as safe
as on the deck.
DANGER UNDER US.
You have a courage that prevents your head from reeling and your feet
from slipping and your soul from being cast into hell.
Wouldn’t you wish to keep a sure foot and a clear eye, and have always
room to live in, and move in, and enjoy your life, instead of being a mere
swabber and no more in you than to swab ? Now, men and women, that
is the divine secret of faith in Jesus. Like Elisha, and like Elisha’s
servant, you behold God, you rise out of all traps and dangers.
“ They that wait on the Lord shall renew their strength; the} 7, shad
mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run and not be weary ; and
they shall walk and not faint.” Whatever the day, whatever the hour
requires, faith in Jesus Christ gives you what you need. Wings to fly
with ; feet to walk with.
Try it! I pray Elisha’s prayer: “Lord, open these young men’s eyes
that they may see ; ” and out from these doors, maybe, there are going a
band of young men, a baud and company of men and women ot all ages
and all conditions, the eyes of whose understandings have been enlightened
to see Jesus present with tiiem, and in that beatific vision to have present
and eternal victory over the World, the Devil, and the Flesh. Amen.
XV. —THE STORY OF RUTH*
You will find my subject in the first chapter of the book of Ruth, and a dear
old story it is. Let me read it.
[Mr. M'Neill then read the narrative, drawing special attention to the
16th and 17th verses of the chapter]: “Entreat me not to leave thee,
* Exhibition Building-.


or to retnrn from following after thee, for whither thou goest I will
go, and where thou lodgest I will lodge; thy people shall be my
people, and thy God my God; where thou diest I will die, and there
will Ibe buried. The Lord do so to me, and more also, if aught but
death part thee and me. And when Naomi saw that Ruth was stead-
fastly minded ” —there’s a sermon for us! 0 Lord, give us a steadfast
mind. We are cursed with indecision and half-heartedness, and facing both
ways, and blowing hot and cold by turns. ‘‘When Naomi saw that Ruth
was steadfastly minded to go with her ” —she let her, for she couldn’t help
it. There was no other way out of it, so on they went to that strange
country—strange to Ruth—the land of Israel.
“Entreat me not to leave thee nor to return from following after thee.”
This story naturally applies to some of us here to-night. We may forget
the intervening years, and read our own history into it, changing things
that must be changed in that old story. Here is the “ touch of nature
that makes the whole world kin” and the story of Ruth and Naomi is
up to date in this meeting in Melbourne to-night.
THE STORY OF A HOUSEHOLD.
You know the history. A woman and her husband and two boys left
their home in Israel, crossed the border, and went away into the heathen
land of Moab, as times were bad, to make them better. By-and-by the
husband died, and was buried in foreign soil, and by-and-by the two lads
grew up, and instead of going back home to Sc—l was going to say to
Scotland —(laughter)—back home to Israel for women of their own kind;
they married the women round about them; and by-and-by these two
grown-up lads—married men now —they died, and old Naomi was left.
Just think of it! Tnink of the tea r s that fell. Tliiak of the tears that fell.
Think how there was just one spot in that foreign country that she often
crept away to see.
“ There are kind hearts still for friends to fill,
And fools to take and break ’em;
But the surest friends are the oldest friends,
And the grave’s the place to seek them.”
Her husband and two sons lying in a quiet corner of a grave-yard ! And
then the wonderful thing happened. That poor old lonely, desolate, withered
widow rallied herself one day and said, “ I’ll away back ; I can’t stay here
any longer ; there’s nothing to keep me here now ; I’ll away back now tf
my own land, to my own country, to my old associates, my old friends.” And
off she started along the road, and the two young widows or daughters-in-
law, Orpah and Ruth, see her along the road a bit. You know what a
“ Scotch convoy ” is. You spend the evening with a man, and at about
eleven o’clock at night he comes out to see you off, and goes with you to
your door, and then, of course, you have to see him back home again, and
then he walks back with you—(laughter)—and so you wander up and down
the most of the night that way. (Laughter.) And I see that old woman
and those two young women going along the road, and then back again and
to and fro again, and at last Naomi says, “We may as well part now. Let
us separate.” And then they protested that they would go with her, and
she dissuaded them, and Orpah flung her arms round her and kissed her,
and, wiping the w oman’s tears out of her eyes, and not seeing well the road
she was going, slipped away back home. And Ruth should just have done
the same when—she didn’t; and all her life and destiny were altered, com-


pletelyaltered, for evermore by that one act. My! what a little does it!
You just come to the parting of the ways, and you either go on, or turn
back, and it must be a mere puff of wind, so to speak, passing over you that
decides you to go this way rather than that way. And eternal issues come
out of that simple, seemingly chance decision. From small seeds what
great trees grow ! What mighty gates swing on invisible hinges!
HOW RUTH “ BURNED HER SHIPS ” !
Ruth should just have kissed Naomi and gone away back with her sister-
in-law, when she did the unexpected. She flung her arms round old Naomi,
and in a voice that palpitates as though it spoke in our startled ears beside
us to-night, she said, '* Entreat me not to leave thee, Naomi, or to return
from following after thee. For whither thou goest I will go, and where thou
lodgest I will lodge ; thy people shall be my people and thy God my Qcd;
where thou diest I will die and there will 1 be buried : the Lord do so to me
and more also if aught but death part thee and me.” Now there’s the touch
of nature, and I pass on to show that here we have the touch of grace, and
that’s what makes this worth preaching Put in Naomi’s place the Lord
Jesus Christ. Take away Ruth and Orpah, and put in their places yourself,
and there is the story up to date, and worth the telling. You say, “ Oh,
Mr. M Neill, it’s a risky thing to make Jesus Christ stand in the place of
poor old desolate Naomi.” No, it isn’t. Look at Naomi. Is she attractive
or desirable to the natural heart and eye ? No, she isn’t. That’s why we
marvel at Ruth. Ruth was young and fair. She had her market still to
make, at home, there in Moab, among her own people and kind. Why
should she elect to go to a foreign land, with all its uncertainty, with that
woman, old, and desolate, and poor, and lonely ? The amazing thing to me
is the sublime faith that throbbed, and palpitated, and choked in that
sobbing,impassioned decision of Ruth, to be fellow-pilgrim with that lonely
Israelite back to the old land. Now what Ruth did with Naomi, do you,
my friend, with the Lord Jesus Christ. The great value of this story—to
put it in a sentence—to me, is simply this. When I see Ruth throw her
arms round that poor, desolate, lonely old woman, and elect to go with her
to she knows not what, I say to myself, “There’s a sample of how men and
women in this meeting to-night ought to decide for Jesus.” Men and
women, decide for Him ! But when you are at it put some blood-heat and
emphasis into your decision. Don’t put a hand as cold as ice into His, but
if you’re going to decide for Him, man alive 1 put your soul into it—if you
have got any soul left in you. Give that at last to Jesus, where it should
have been given all the time. Give Him that heat of yours, that passion of
yours that you have given to money-making, and sin, and lust, and the devil;
for the sake of everything give Jesus (Jurist your passionate, emphatic,
whole-hearted decision.
the “prudence” that destroys.
We preachers have to argue occasionally with people. We have to set
the way of life and blessing on the one hand, and the way of death and
cursing on the other hand; and having set this out in clear, intelligent,
scriptural, logical fashion, we stand and we say, “ Choose ye this day
life and blessing, or death and cursing. But I think every now and again
we are entitled to leave mere cold logic and setting things merely in the
dry light of the understanding, and come at people with a sweep and say,
“ For God’s sake, decide ! and decide heartily, emphatically, like Ruth for
Naomi.” Man, if you will only do it, you will frighten the devil ten miles


out of your reach. (Laughter.) Do you know why the devil hangs on to
Borne of you? It is because even when you seem to put your hand in
Christ’s, he thinks you are rather wanting to draw it back again; and he is
right, and so he hangs on and hangs on, and hangs on, and keeps whispering,
whispering, whispering in your ear that you’ve made a mistake—you’ve flung
yourself away, lost yourself; and at last you listen to him, for you were
listening all the time. But to-night, now, learn from Ruth, and with just a
kind of glorious recklessness abandon him and fling yourself away to God.
And the man who flings himself away to God finds that he has got life
eternal. It is prudence and calculation that is damning the souls of some of
you. Prudence and caution and calculation! Some of you see nearly as
far behind you as in front of you, and you are always looking all round. I
wish you would get blindness on for once and look straight ahead like
Ruth. Ruth might have calculated fifty things, and every calculation would
have gone dead against what she did. Worldly prudence and wisdom and
sagacity were all against her, and yet she decided, and decided passionately
and emphatically, to go with that old pilgrim along that untried, unknown
track. I wonder what helped her to it! Look at her there —I think this
helped her. It often does us good to be brought up sharply and told, “ Off
or on.” “ Stand in or out.” I would like to say that to some of you
to-night. “Well, well,” I say to you, “you’ve heard this gospel now for
a year. Come, it is to be settled to-night. Off or on. Stand in or out.’’
Jesus Himself says, “ I would thou wert cold or hot. Because thou art
lukewarm I will spue you out of My mouth.” You are a disgust to
the Son of God, It does us good, I say, to be brought up by a round turn
to this decision. Now or never! Off or on! The path of faith, or the
path of unbelief —which? For you cannot travel in both, and you are a fool
for trying. You can’t.
“ orr, on on.”
I wonder what helped Ruth to decide ? I think it was just this. I think
she was brought up by a round turn, and had to face the question—off or on,
“ Naomi with me, or Naomi without me.” And suddenly the poor old widow
began to bulk more largely in her eyes than she had thought, now that she
is brought to face this: with her or without her, forever more. She is
remembering, no doubt, that day when her young husband died, when the
sun seemed to go out in blackness of darkness, when her heart was bursting
and crushed with grief. And she is remembering how, in that day, the gods
of Moab turned out to be no gods at all to comfort the bursting widow’s
heart; and she is remembering how she crept away to her mother-in-law,
old white-haired Naomi, and Naomi prayed to that Father of the fatherless,
that Husband of the widow, the God of Israel. And as Naomi prayed to
her God, Ruth remembers how the wild throbbing of her heart grew still,
and she actually dried her eyes, and life seemed to take on shape and mean-
ing and purpose again. And there on the roadside to-day, when she is made
to feel, “ now it’s with Naomi or without her forever more,” it just rushes
through her mind, and she thinks “ Dark days will come still, and what will
Ido without Naomi ? She is the one link that binds me to the God of
Israel, and His comfort, and peace, and salvation.” And as it swept through
her mind, she let herself go with a magnificent recklessness and said,
“ Naomi, I may not be able to do even with you, but I cannot do wanting
you. Here goes ; lam yours, and you must be mine, and we will tramp it
out together, please God, in life and in death.” I wish some of you would
say that to Jesus to-night. My friend, Jesus is well recommended to you.


You may play fast and loose with Him, young fellow; you may play fait and
loose with Him, young woman. But ask your father; ask your sweet
mother, and she will tell you what He has been, what bright chapters He
has written in your family history. Jesus is well recommended to you. He
has been the best friend of the family in its dark days and troubled hours,
and it is a burning shame of some of you the way you treat Jesus, your
father’s Siviour and your mother’s Saviour too. On that very plea—because
of what He has done for you and yours in past days—l urge you to decide
for Christ to-night.
THE CONCEALED CHRIST.
There she stood, that lonely, desolate old woman. I said you may think
it seems risky to make her a type of the Lord Jesus. Is it? The words of
Isaiah come into my mind with startling plainness. How suitable they are!
Naomi, to the eye of sense, and prudence, and cautiousness, and worldly
wisdom, was a poor, lonely, desolate woman, and nothing desirable lay on
the road with her. What is Jesus? Now what is Jesus to the lust of the
flesh, and the lust of the eye, and the pride of life ? What is Jesus ? Let
Isaiah answer. “ A root out of the dry ground, having no form nor come-
liness,” and as we see him there is nothing that we should desire him. He
is old looking, sapless, withered, and unattractive. Admitted, dear brother ;
admitted, my si iter ! When I preach Jesus and the life of faith, it is just
like asking you to go with Naomi, old and withered, and the day nearly
done, and nothing desirable along that track. And when the world comes
romping up in all her finery, and when she smiles on you, you go after the
world. The world seems far more fair and sweet. My friends, the world
is a cheat, and a liar, and a murderer. May God open the eyes of some of
us to-night to see the harlot’s brow below the paint. May God strip off the
paint and reveal the harlot, and may you start back with a shudder and clasp
hands with Jesus Christ. If I might say it with reverence, and I do, the
worst of Him is on the surface. He seems to be a “ root out of the dry
ground,” and having “ no form nor comeliness,” but all those who have ever
clasped hands with Him and drawn up close to Him have broken out with
a certain man long ago, and have said, “ He is chief among ten thousand,
and altogether lovely.” And we count the days and years before we came
to Jesus as days and years of madness and delirium. We were surely out
of our minds in those days, when we could see no beauty in the Son of God
and could keep back our hearts from Him. May God bring us to our right
mind to-night. Come up close to Him, and the nearer you come, He
becomes more and more transfigured.
“ For, oh ! the Master is so fair,
His smile so sweet on banished men,
Tnat they who meet Him anywhere
Can never rest on earth again.
“ And they who see Him, risen far
At God’s right hand, to welcome them,
Forgetful stand of home and land,
Desiring fair Jerusalem.”
Oh ! Christ has wonderful power to draw the heart, and cut it loose
from all the seductions of a false, and a lying, and a deceiving world. May
we find it so to-night.
WAYS OF REJECTING CHRIST.
Another thing, I would like to point out the contrasts. There were two
of them, you remember, Ruth and Orpah. I may help some of you by a


word or two about Orpah. Ruth went along the path of faith, not prudence
and worldly wisdom. Now look at Orpah. How did she do with Naomi ?
Orpah kissed her, but left her. Orpah didn’t turn round to Naomi and say,
“ Naomi, good-bye, old lady, good-bye; I’m glad I’m rid of you.” No!
She didn’t say, “ Look here, Naomi, I never liked you and your upsetting
way, thinking yourself better than anybody else, and always looking down
on us Moabites, always bragging about your religion and your God, and
thinking there was no one like ycurselt.” And Orpah might have said,
“ I’m a liberal-minded person, and I hate the dogmatism and self sufficiency
of your old creed. Good-bye, old lady ! I’m glad I’ve got rid of you ; I’ll
be freer and easier without you. I’ll no longer have your rebukes, and your
‘ Don’t do this,’ and 4 Don’t do that,' and ‘ Don’t do the other thing.’ IM
get doing as I like, and go in for balls and step-dancing and anything I
like.” Now T see the cross look on your faces, and no wonder. Orpah finds
you Only remember, Orpah didn't do that; she didn’t turn round and
abuse Naomi. And lam speaking to many to-night, and I sav, dear
friends, you don’t turn round and abuse Jesus Christ. You don’t turn round
and violently part company with Him and deny Him with oaths and curses
and go off into roaring, rampant, foul-mouthed, blasphemous infidelity and
atheism. We have not the pluck, most of us, to do that. We are afraid
to do that. We kiss Him and—leave Him. Ail Jesus Christ gets from some
decent people here is what Naomi got from Orpah—the kiss that means
not “ I am ceming,” but “ 1 am going, I am departingthe mere kiss
of conventional religious etiquette. I wish I could tell you in His Name
how disgusted He is with it. Keep your cold etiquette-kisses for those who
want them. He doesn’t. You stand up behind the hymn-book and sing.
It is Orpah kissing and leaving. You go to church regularly. It is Orpah
kissing and leaving, going back to the world and to its gods and its doom.
Oh I may God bring us out on the other side.
I heard of a lady who flounced out of one of our meetings, and she said
—well, she said in effect—l prefer Orpah. It was just a bit of bounce, you
know. She felt what was said, and she wanted to conceal it bv swaggering
a bit. But I trust she is back here to-night, with a little more sense. Don’t
say you prefer Orpah. Don’t pass such a slight upon your intelligence a&
well as on your faith. Oh! there is so much of it, you know.
THE KISS THAT FREEZES
Orpah is so kind—kissing her, you know. But Christ wants ycur feet , not
your lips. How did her feet go ? Orpah’s feet carried her away : back to
Moab, towards its doom, and its gods, and its idolatry, and its emptiness, and
its death, at last. How did the feet go ? not the face. Some of you turn
round your face to Jesus and give Him the kiss of religious etiquette, but
your feet go back to the world, back to its gods and its doom. “ I thought
on my ways,” says the Psalmist, ‘-and turned’’—not my face— but “my
feet unto Thy testimonies.” Then you are turned, not till then. I wish I
could do something to tear to pieces that hollow, heartless, deceitful mere
etiquette and sentiment; that kisses Christ with the cold kiss of religious
etiquette; that wearies for the Sunday to be over, to get back into the
Monday and its buying and its selling and its worldliness. Wearying for the
Sunday to be done, and going back with a great big gulp of satisfaction,
“Thank God it’s Monday, and that weary formality is over for another
week.. Oh, may God search us as with a lighted candle, for it is a desperate
blight, this Orpah business. You see two ladies there —I have often thought
of it down at the railway station. One has invited the other to come and


stay with her during the Agricultural Show week, and long before the week
is up—between you and me—they have got utterly tired of each other. But
they smile every morning when they co ne down to breakfast, and embrace
each other and lean their cheeks against each other, and do everythin* but
kiss ; and they “ my dear ” each other, and help each other too, and go
shopping together, and go to the Show together; and at last the week is
done, and they go down to the train together, and thats the best walk
they’ve had all the week (Laughter.) And the train comes into the sta-
tion and the one steps into the carriage to go away home; and when she
gets inside she puts down the window and leans out to kiss “good-bye,”
and they exchange the usual civilities—you’ve seen this many a time your-
self—and they say, “ How happy we have been together, and how the time
has flown by ; I never knew a week to pass so quickly.” You kaow the
usual style; and the one leans down and the other looks up and they kiss,
and the very kiss says, “ How happy we are to part! ” (Laughter.) And
I tell you, dear men and women, the Lord sees that. You cannot deceive
Him. He sees how happy you are to get done with tne sermon on the
Sunday. He sees how glad you are when it is a ball, or a dance or a party.
He sees how your heart can rejoice then, and how weary you are of any
little attentions you are compelled to pay Him. Now stop ! You must
either go with Orpah back to the world, or with Ruth along the pathway
of faith. You can’t do both, friends.
THE GAIN THAT GOES WITH CHRIST.
Just a word more about Ruth and I’ll let you go. Ruth decided, the
decision of faith. Orpah walked by sight. Orpah said to herself, no doubt,
“ Now, I must not let my impulses carry me away. I must not let myself
become excited. Tnere’s Ruth, she will spoil herself. I must keep myself
well in hand, and although I like old Naomi after a fashion, I must not fling
myself away on that withered old woman. I must be prudent and cautious.
There’s such a thing as commonsense and caution.” And so she just kissed
ner good-bye and left. But Ruth made that passionate, reckless decision to
go she knew not where, and experience she knew not what, and parted with
prudence and worldlv wisdom, and my! it turned out she did a clever thing
even for this world. You know what happened. Away she went with Naomi,
and I tell you they had rough times of it for a little. Things were very
bare, and they had to make themselves busy. Ruth had to go out and glean
—it was harvest time—to pick up a living with her fingers’ ends, to support
herself and her aged companion. And one day, lonely, forlorn, poor,
picking up a living with her fingers’ ends, gleaning among the sheaves, she
heard—and oh, she would have told you, with a flush in her cheeks, that she
never forgot the moment when she heard —".he manly steps of Boaz coming
through the stubble. And Boaz and Naomi were kith and kin. You remember
the story—the wooing. It was somewhat different from yours, perhaps, but it
was quite as honourable, and the end of it was that that stalwart “ laird ”
if “ squatter ” brings it nearer, then “squatter” be it—(laughter)—.that
stalwart “ squatter ” lost his heart—hearts are wayward things, you kuow—
(laughter)—to that Moabitish lass. And they got married, and had a child.
That child had a child, and that one had a child, and the end of the business
is that Ruth’s blood ran in the veins of Jesus of Nazareth! Was not that a
good stroke for this world as well as for the next ? Man! look here. Tne day
comes as surely as God lives, as surely as I am preaching, as surely as you
are sitting there, when you, if you don’t accept Jesus Curist, will stand con-
fessed an everlasting fool, who missed life’s grand opportunity. Missed it!


Aye, and you will curse yourself for a fool to all eternity that it was within
your grasp and your reach down here to take Jesus and go on through the
world on the pilgrim’s path hand in hand to glory with Jesus, and you
were such an earthworm—there was so much mud and dirt in your eyes—
that you grubbed, grubbed, grubbed down in the dirt, and let Jesus go on
without you. Now He is going on. Are you to go with Him? Or are you
to go away back without Him ? Off or on ? Off or on ? Come, now, you
are in the parting of the ways. You and Jesus, like Orpah, Ruth and
Naomi, are standing there, and Jesus is going on home. Are you going
with Him? You may have to give up a lot. It’s an untried path; you
don’t see how it is to work out. Leave all that to Him. Take Him;
decide for Christ, and make Ruth’s confession of faith your confession of
faith. Say to Jesus, to-night, “ Jesus, I’m all in a puzzle. My heart is
in a conflict; I didn’t expect to have this issue presented to me to-night,
but I feel that I’m in the crisis of ray history. Jesus, I feel as if I
would be torn in opposite directions—the world and my lusts tugging
me this way and the Lord and His love and salvation pulling the other way.
Jesus, if I cannot do with Thee, I cannot do wanting Thee. Here goes :
Christ for me.” Say that, though it is like tearing the flesh from the bones.
Say it! God help you to say it! And He has got you. Say it, and Christ
has you. Say it in your heart, “ 0 God, as lam a man, and not a brute*
Christ for me. I know my lusts—l know the public-house is there waiting
for me, and the harlots; but Christ for me.” Say it, and He will have you,
and hell is baffled and heaven is won —Christ has you. Come, now, make
that decision as if you meant it. No faithlessness; you’ve passed the time
for that.
PARTNERSHIP WITH CHRIST.
Then the rest of her creed, how well it fits ! “ Where thou goest,” she
said, “ I will go ” Man ! the Christian is a going concern, and there’s a
mighty few of them in Melbourne, isn’t there ? (Laughter.) You worldly
people are stuck in the mud ; you are sailing up and down in a ditch. I’d
as soon eat dirt as live that life. The Christian is a going concern. He has
all eternity to work in. “ Where Thou goest,” through shame, and reproach,
and persecution, and false friends, that is His road, and you will go with
Him, won’t you ? And you will always have Him with you, and the mud
flung at Him will glorify you, don't you see ? “ Where Thou goest I will
go.” No stagnation in the life of a Christian, but freshness and variety.
Your own household will keep you on the jump. Your foes will spring up
on every hand. It will keep you from being dull, at any rate. It will keep
you from getting the “ doldrums ” if you become a true follower of Jesus
Christ.
“ Where Thou diest,” for there is death in the business. Where did He
die ? On the cross, a public spectacle. So do we. Paul says, “I am
crucified with Him,” with Him. Paul says, “As the world treated my
Master, gibbeting Him on the cross, it does the same to me.” “ The world
and I are quits,” says Paul. “It has crucified me ; I have crucified it; I
have no connection with it; I have broken clean and clear of the world with
its gew-gaws, and its doom, and its curse. Where He died, so will I.”
“ Where Thou diest will I die, and there will Tbe buried.” Yourself, your
own self, and nature, crucified with Him, buried with Him, and then you
are a new creature, risen with Christ, risen into newness of life, filled with
the spirit of the risen Jesus, and so on and on to the epd. Everything
altered, everything different, everything changed. “ Whither Thou goest I


will go; where Thou lodgesc I will lodge.” You will become a lodger in
your own property, just staying in your house a night, a mere sojourner ,
sitting loose to all your wealth if you are a wealthy man, and sitting loose
to all your poverty if you are a poor man. Pushing on, only for a night
here, only for a day there—pushing on, pushing on, pushing on, nothing
here to keep you.
A man came to ms the other day and said, “ Can you tell me the road to
So-and-so ? ” I said, ‘‘l’m sorry; no, I can’t, for I’m a stranger here.” So
it is with us in the Christian life. When I feel the enticements of the
world come pulling at me, I say, “ No, thanks, I’m a stranger here, a
Scotchman ; I dinna belong here.” (Laughter.) We must be pushing on
and on with Him to the end.
THE SUPREME PORTION,
There’s a story told about a Primitive Methodist preacher in the early
days when they were poor and mightily despised, and I tell it to illustrate
the life of faith. Your portion is not here; it’s on ahead. He had been
preaching forty or fifty years up and down in England, and had become old
and frail and poor, for the Primitive Methodists were poor and the tramping
about preachers were poor, and there were no funds to support a man when
he came to the dregs of life and reached old age. And there came one day
to this poor old tramping about minister a wealthy brother, and he said,
“ You’re getting old and you’ve been at it a long while now, preaching up
and down?” “Yes.” “You have nobody to support you in your old
age?” “No.” “ Well,” he said, “ I have a little place at So-and-so and
I don’t need it, and I’ve watched your work of love and honoured you as a
servant of our common Lord and Master Jesus Christ, and He has blessed
me beyond what I need; 1 wish you would go and take possession of that
little place. I’ll give you as much as will keep you, as well as the house,
furmsned and all.” W ell, he took it, and lived in that little place at his
ease and had no care, everything at his hand, nothing to do, and he liked it
for a wee while. And then, do you know, he got tired of it and locked up
the place, set out for where the wealthy friend lived and found him, and
giving the wealthy friend the key, said, “There it is, back to you.”
“Hallo!” he said, “what do you mean?” “Oh!” he said, “it would
kill me, that place. I cannot stand it.” “ How’s that? ” he said. “ Well,”
he said, “just for this: When I was tramping up and down the country
preaching, and just getting my bread and supper where I was preaching,
and then on again the next day, there was a hymn I used to sing many a
time tramping along the lonely country roads, and it made my heart run
over with gladness. But since I have taken that little place of yours it has
spoiled the taste of that hymn on my tongue, and I would not give up the
hymn for anything.” The hymn is a familiar one—
“ No foot of land do I possess,
No cottage in this wilderness —
A poor wayfaring man.
I lodge awhile in tents below,
Or gladly wander to and fro
Till I my Canaan gain ;
There is my house and portion fair,
My treasure and my heart are there
And ray abiding home.”
“ And,” he said, “ I would not lose the sweetness of that hymn for all the
world would give me.” Well, I’m Scotch enough to admit that I’d have


tried to sing the hymn and keep the house too. (Laughter ) But it s a
good illustration of what I’ve been trying to urge all night. My friend, you
can’t have both. Take Him, Jesus Christ, and the moment you take Him
you get His pardon, His peace, His life. His destiny, for evermore. One with
Jesus, your sms gone, your condemnation gone, and new days ahead of you
for ever and for ever. Oh that God might open our eyes as we stand at the
parting of the ways, and that the multitude of men and women here might
play Ruth’s part and elect to go along the path, not of sight, and caution,
and worldly prudence, but of faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.
XVI.—DAVID IN THE CAVE ADUILAM *
You will find my text to-night in an incident taken from the life of David’
1 Samuel xxii. How it fared with David, and how it fares with great
David’s greater Son, and with those who come to His side. “ And David
departed hence and escaped to the cave Adullam, and when his brothers
and all his father’s house heard of it they went down thither to David.”
But not only did his brothers and his father’s house go and join him, but
“ every one that was in distress, and every one that was in debt, and every
one that was discontented, gathered themselves unto David and he became
a capiain over them, and there were with him about four hundred men.”
GOD IS NOT IN A HURRY !
Now I know that this looks far enough away from Jesus and His salva-
tion, but it is not so far away as it looks. You have in the Old Testament
a great deal of Christ. Once you find Christ in the New Testament, and
carry Him back with you, there’s a flood of life and meaning flung upon the
Old Testament. And when I read these two verses that tell me about how
David had a hard time of it before he came to the ttirone, I see David’s
greater Son, the Captain of our Salvation, the Lord’s Anointed, the Lord
Jesus Christ. Now just see how He looks up at us out of this old bit of
Israel’s history.
You remember how it was that he came here. He was God’s anointed
king. God, you remember, had rejected Saul, because Saul had rejected
God. God gives up no man till the man finally abandons and rejects God.
Saul rejected God, so God could no longer work with Him; therefore, God
set Saul aside from being king, and went, you remember, and appointed and
anointed his successor—young David, a shepherd lad, the son of Jesse the
Bethlehemite. And then a strange thing happened, or didn’t happen. You
would have thought that God would have come, or rather that Saul would
have given in ; that Saul would have resigned ; that he would have sent for
his God-appointed and nominated successor, young David, and would have
said, “David, there’s the throne to you. Behave yourself in it more wisely
before God and the people than ever I did,” and that then Saul would have
gone back into that obscurity from which he never should have emerged.
Aye, but that’s just what Saul didn’t do ! When did mortal man ever make
things easy for God, or for God’s Christ ? Our hearts are set, set in us to
oppose and resist, and thwart God to the very utmost. That’s the natural
set, and bias, of every son of Adam. We never give in till we can’t do any
better; and if it were not that God breaks us down with His mercy, we would
all be crushed by the iron rod of His judgment, and the rod will fall unless
mercy accomplishes a mighty change of heart. Well, you know Saul didn’t
give into God and make things easy for God. Saul got more rebellious than
* Exhibition Bui] ding.


ever, and he actually sought the life of David, and huated him like a part
ridge on the mountains, and nearly succeeded. But, of course, he could not.
Threatened folk live long, and those who belong to God, they will be well
threatened ; but, dear friends, “ not a hair of your head shall perish.” “In
your patience possess ye your soul.” Saul sought David’s life.
GOD S SILENT METHODS.
And then another thing you would have thought would have happened.
You would have thought God would have been compelled to show His
hand, that He would have been compelled to come out ot His secret place
and in four-and-twenty hours, don’t you see, to lift the royal seat and empty
Saul out of it, set it down again, and plant young David on the throne in
place of proud, rebellious Saul, and all in twenty-four hours. No ! God didn’t
do it in twen y-four hours. But if you will boil down the history of a
handful of years that is exactly what God did. The only difference is that;
God took His own time; but that’s just what He did. As surely as God
did it and said it, so surely it came to pass. Saul went down to death, and
destruction, and dishonour. David, whom he persecuted and hunted for
his life, David came to the throne, and sat upon it for long years in peace
and honour, for the mouth of God had spoken and the power of God accom-
plished. Now you see where we are. Take away David, put in his place
David’s greater Son—our anointed Jesus, God’s eternal K ng—and where
are you ?
“ Our Lord is now rejected.
And by the world disowned,
By the rbany s’lll neglected.
And b? the few enthroned ;
But soon He’ll come in glor\,
The hour is drawing nigh ;
For the crowning day is coming
By-and-by.”
Don’t be misled by the slowness and the outward seeming of things. Jesus
is crowned, and as surely as God lives all that God has promised to Him,
and to those who believe in Him, shall come to pass And all that God has
threatened against those who neglect, and reject, and resist the Lord Jesus
Christ, that , coo, snail come to pass. Everlasting destruction to those who
oppose, and neglec , and reject, and trifle with and play false towards the
Heavenly Davi , the Lml Jesus Christ. Now see how that works out.
god’s chosen one in a cave !
David—where our text comes in—hiding in a hole in a hillside ! Yet he
was a king ; and he was God’s king, and yet Saul was allowed to badger,
and persecute, and hunt him for a while. Rut God neither was dead, nor
did He sleep. God takes time, in poor Saul’s interest, to let poor besotted
Saul get a chance to see the situation, and repent and submit to God’s mercy
before he must be crushed by Goa’s j idgment on his sins. But alas ! alas !
nothing will warn some people, and there are men and women in this house
to-night, and you are just on Saul’s track, the straight road to doom. The
very slowness, and patience, and forbearance, and long-suffering of God is
making you harden your hearts till at last you say, “ There’s no God. 1 here’s
no Jesus, and I’ll live as I like, and what the worse am I ? I eat well and
sleep well, and I don’t believe in your Jesus, and I don’t mean to.” Well,
brother, go on with your brief—your brief swagger, and bravado, ano
bluster. You’ll never swagger and bounce in hell, and that’s where you 11


go. Go on! Keep it up, poor fool, while you may, for you'll not keep it
up long. Go on, and swagger, and rant, and bounce, and bluster that you
won’t come to Jesus, and you won’t give in to Jesus, and you’ll spit—you’ll
spit at heaven. You’ll find the spittle back on your own face. Go on
with your swagger and your bluster. There’ll be no bouncing and swagger-
ing in hell. So keep it up for the few brief days of your only chance. And
yet, while I say such things, I would be persuaded better things of you. Ah,
poor soul! Be wiser than Saul was. God could come, God could hasten
things, God could bring in the eternal kingdom of Jesus in twenty-four hours
and sweep, sweep with the besom of destruction into perdition all that
resist and reject the crowned, crucified, glorified Jesus. But in your
interests God delays. He doesn’t like to cut a man down suddenly. He
knows how stubborn we are ; and therefore in His long-suffering mercy He
engthens out the day of grace, to give unbelievers and rejecters room and
time to repent and submit to be saved. So, as Bussell Lowell says, “ Truth
tor ever on the scaffold ” —David, although he is God’s man, hunted by proud
persecuting Saul, as if there were no God and no promise to David —
“ Truth for ever on the scaffold, wrong for ever on the throne,
Yet that scaffold sways the future, and behind the dim unknown
Staudeth God, within the shadow, keeping watch above His own.”
God is not dead, and God is not sleeping. Don’t be a fool. Repent, and
give in to Jesus Christ, or you will be crushed in the end.
GOD AND ONE MAN MAKE A MAJORITY.
Now just see how God set things working quietly, silently ; in small ways,
but God set working a process of sapping and mining that undermined
Saul’s dominion and brought it to its overthrow, and brought David, although
it took years to do it, to all that God had promised, and to the fulfilment of
God’s purpose, through David, So with Christ, and so with the Gospel.
See how things began to work. David, God’s anointed king, has to run and
hide in a hole in a hillside, as if there were no God, and the whole thing
were a fizzle and a fraud. And Saul is hot upon his track, going to catch
him when—he didn’t! (Laughter.) How often the devil and wicked peo-
ple have been going to blot out the Jesus, going to blot out the Gospel, and
have just been going to catch the poor thing by the neck when—it escapes
them, and here it is living yet, and going to live. Bless God ! for ever.
David in the cave Adullam ; Saul upon his track, and what do I read?
When David was hiding in the cave Adullam, when “ his brothers and
all his father’s house heard about it, they went down” and joined him.
Well, that’s something for David. Saul’s very persecution is overdoing
itself, overleaping itself, fallen on t’other side. David’s brothers and his
father’s house went away and joined their brother ; and now Saul has to
reckon, not with one, but with a little band of them. There’s more to kill now
than Saul bargained for ; David’s brothers and his father’s house. Maybe
only a dozen. Maybe only a baker’s dozen ; but “ who hath despised the
day of small things ?” God was with them, and one man with God at his
back is in an overwhelming majority. God was with them. The eternal
purpose and word of God were with them; and when that dozen men, up-
country-men, fanners’ sons, shepherds, went away and joined their young
brother, Saul’s face might have grown white with fear. On the throne,
surrounded by his courtiers and his army of flunkeys, when that lonely
little band gathered together, with God Almighty in the midst of them.
Now I want just to say, cheer up. Fear not, little flock. It is your
Father’s good pleasure to give you the kingdom.” And the gates of hell


shall not prevent it, and God will give it to us, hands down, in the end.
God will win with infinite ease, and overwhelm His enemies with everlasting
contempt. Don’t be among them. Give in to Jesus. Come over to His
side. Surrender to the Son of God your heart, and your will, and your
history and destiny, that it may be well with you.
THE TALK IN JESSE’S KITCHEN.
I see those men. I wonder what helped them to go over there; for
mind you, it was a big risk. They had to give up their farm. They had
to give up all their worldly prospects and start off on a new career, and s
very risky one, taking sides with their persecuted brother and kinsman,
maybe to be destroyed by furious Saul along with him. I think it worked
this way. You up-country people, just give me your ears. One evening at
home yonder in Bethlehem in Judah, David’s brothers and his father’s house
were sitting in the father’s kitchen, talking of things before they went to
bed. The beasts were suppered and bedded, and the men were suppered
and would soon be bedded. And just before they went to bed, as is still a
common thing, they drew in their chairs —if they had them—or else, if
they hadn’t, they sat on logs, and they began to talk. Now I don’t care
where conversation began among David’s brothers and his father’s house,
but I know where it ended always. My ! they couldn’t forget about David.
David was their brother. One day God’s prophet had come, and actually
in God’s name anointed their young brother to be a king. All the world
might scoff, or all the world might forget it, or Saul might get mad about
it; but David’s brothers couldn’t forget it. There was a touch of blood
between them and David, and although the kingdom didn’t come all at once,
and things seemed to miscarry, and poor David had to flee for his life, they
never forgot about him. And on this evening, shall I say they were talking
about him ? for it’s the absent brother who is never absent. It’s the empty
chair that’s never empty. It’s the brother away in America, or away back
in Europe, or away in eternity—that brother is never away. It’s the empty
chair that’s never empty; and David’s brothers and his father’s house
talked—whenever they got a chance to talk —talked about David, David,
David, all the time. Be sure about it. “My ! ” they would say, “ I wonder
where David is to-night.” And maybe the wind rattled round about the
farmstead, and it was a wild kind of night, and one would say to
another, “ Poor David; I wonder where David sleeps to-night.” “ That
was a queer story about David,” they would say, and I imagine
Eliab—Eliab, you remember, was David’s eldest brother Eliab sits up
and he says, “Brothers, it’s all over with David. In the market
to-day I met a man who had seen a man, who had met a man (laughter)
who had told him that it’s all up with David. He’s hiding there in a cave
in the wilderness, and Saul is hot upon his track. And the next thing we’ll
hear is that David has been destroyed, and that’s the last of a strange dis-
appointing story.” And then a great silence would fall on those brotners of
David; and then it would be broken in some fashion like this. Up gets
Eliab, and I tell you Saul at the throne should have seen the dangerous
light that shifted and shone in the eyes of him, and the red glow that burned
on his swarthy cheek ! And Eliab’s big fists clenched, and his manly mouth
twitched, and he says, “I can stand this no longer. I have stood it long
enough. The man who rises to kill my youag brother David, be he
king or commoner, has got to know the extent of his contract. There sto
be killing no one. i’m off to David.” And as Eliab delivers his soul and
expresses his determination to go and see David through this business, a


shout, a snoui rang through that farmer’s kitchen. Taose other brothers
just sprang to their feet and shouted. Aad they went to the wall, and they
took down their reaping hooks and battered them into swords; and
their ploughshares, and hammered them into spears, and David’s brothers
and his father’s house are off. and away to run all risks with David. Now
if you don’t see the Gospel in that, go and get an operation performed o i
your eyesight, for you’re as blind as a bat. (Laughter.)
BLOOD BROTHERHOOD WITH CHRIST.
What does it mean ? Why it means this ; Here’s a great multitude o
people to-night. Who are you? Who are yon? I’ll tell you— David’*
brothers ! David’s brothers and his father’s house. There’s a touch of
blood between you and Jesus Christ! You are professing Christians, born
and brought up that way. You’re not infidels, you’re not scoffers, you’re not
atheists, you’re not even that harmless milk-and-water thing, an agnostic.
(Laughter.) No, you are David’s brothers. When some of you fellows trv
to talk infidelity, man ! it doesn’t sit well in your mouth. (Laughter.) We’re
not brought up that way. You are David’s brothers in his father’s house,
born and brought up with Jesus. In His Sunday-school and Bible-class, and
His Church ; and you’re no more an infidel than I am. You could not be.
You drank in with your mother’s milk the name of Jesus, and who He is.
and what He is, and the Christian has eternally the best of it. But here’s
what you lack. Man! you lack pluck. You lack courage. You’ve allowed
the world to cow the soul out of you You daren’t call your soul your own.
for fear of the world, like David’s brothers and his father’s house. My !
many a time on cold spring days like what we have at home when David’s
brothers are ploughing on the farm, and your hands get frozen off you with
that cold bitter spring wind, they would stop and slap their hands, so.
(Laughter.) “My ! ” they would say, “ there’ll be no more ploughing on
cold bitter spring days when our David comes to the throne. He’ll surely
never be lifted to the throne and leave us to trudge at the plough-tail.” And
then at last it dawned on them that David was rot ashamed of them. They
were ashamed and afraid about David, and they ltd Saul to think that thev
were his citizens, that they agreed with his persecution of that brother of
theirs on whom their secret hopes were set. And on that day I have des
cribed, what they got was this : they got the courage of their convictions.
May God give you the same to-night, for Jesus Christ's sake. Just the
courage, my brother, ray sister, the courage of your convictions Deep,
deep down in your heart you believe in Jesus Christ; hut you lack courage.
You have allowed yourself to be reckoned with the worldling, and you’re not,
you're not of that kin! But you allow yourself to be reckoned among
them. May God give you the courage of your convictions, and bring you
over to the side of Christ, where your true convictions lie, mind you.
There are heaps, heaps of us here to-night, and we have a sneaking notion
of Jesus, and we believe that the Cnristian has the best of it. Oh for
courage ! Man ! take your side with professing Christians, with the name
of Carist named on you. Don’t go hiding, and let Jesus bear all the con-
tempt, and the scorn, and persecution. Be with Him. “No cross, no
crown.” If we suffer with Him, we shall also reign. Not otherwise ! Aud
some of you are shirking the cross, and the contempt, and the persecution,
and you are shirking the crown and the glory of the salvation, too. David’s
brothers and his father’s house got the courage of their convictions, and off
they went to their persecuted brother when things were at the lowest, and


they fought their way to the crown together, and God bihind them all. Oh
what a parable, what a prophecy of what is happening to-night.
Christ’s kin.
Now, my friend, wend your way to Jesus. There’s a touch of blood—
I’ll pull on that string again, it’s an audience for doing it —there’s a touch
of blood between some of you and Jesus. Why the very name you bear—
and I know grace doesn’t run in the blood, tut it counts for something in
God’s regard—the very name you bear, when your father and mother bore
it, it was known as the name of Jesus’ man, Jesus’ woman, out and out. No
cowardice ! Your father, your mother, was known as belonging first, last,
always, to the blessed Christ, And you, bearing that name that you bear,
with that birth and upbringing that belonged to you, and living the life you
live in Melbourne, or in Victoria! Man ! you’re the meanest thing that
crawls. In mercy to your father, in mercy to your mother, change your
character or change your very name. May God send that shaft whistling
to the mark! It’s a dastardly shame the way some of you fellows and
women are living here in Victoria. Back yonder in Scotland you know how
you were brought up You know how close your line runs to Jesus Christ
and His salvation. Oh, you dastardly cowards! May God sting you into
courage ! May He sting some of you into c .'urage ! It’s a dastardly shame
of you, you , you, on the side of the world and the devil! What a burning
shame ! Hide your head ! Change your character, or, in mercy to those
who sent you into the world, change your name ! Now I hope you will take
that hard speech from a roan who loves you well enough to tell you that
truth to your face. The devil is going to molly-coddle some of you into
hell. He flatters you, and fools you, and you are led by the nose! God
save the unmanly cowards here who are biding their deepest, dearest inbred
convictions about Christ and His salvation ! And may He bring jou by the
round turn, up and back from all playing fast and loose with your conscience,
and what you know to be right ! Oh, may God get out of this audience, at
any rate, His brethren and His father’s house. Professing Christians ! step
out ! It will be the making of you. There will be new days lor you, and
when you come to Jesus He will say nothing about the past. He will take
you, and forgive and forget all that’s black and shameful that lies
behind, and you 11 make a new start, and your pith at last will be peace.
You’ve come to your father’s God, your mother’s Saviour, the true home and
rest of ail the deepest longings and convictions of your soul as well.
Now I pass on. This thing spreads. Not only, don’t you see, did Davids
brothers—his kith and kindred—having convictions they could not get rid
of, not only did they follow and go to David and run all risks with him,
but people who are no friends to David at all—everyone in distress, and
everyone in debt, aad everyone that was discontented —went to him.
THE LOGIC OF BAD TIMES.
For it was bad times in Israel. Booms burst, b-nks broke, and things
collapsed generally, and there were a lot of people unemployed, and a lot of
people got into d< bt, and a lot of people got into distress, and what hap-
pened ? Everyone that was in distress and in debt suddenly brgan scratch-
ing his head and saying, By-the-bye,” they said, “ wasn’t there something
about Saul being superseded, and a young fellow over there in Bethlehem
Judah being appointed by the great prophe* - , Samuel, in God’s name to be
our new king?’’ Don’t you see if tnere hadn’t been any destruc ion, and
want of work, and getting into debt, and being broken down, they never


would have thought of David. Saul would have done them. But the very
distress and the misery aud the breakdown of their earthly fortune made
them think of David, and at last they went and joined him.
Look at your colony here. What has brought some of the best blood
out here to Australia, and out to New Zealand and America? What was it
brought out here some of the best blood you’ve got ? It was getting into
distress, and getting into debt and difficulty at home. Tilings got too tight
there. Things got too hot there. Tilings got too miserable there, and you
jumped, and you didn’t lose by it. Now why shouldn’t God use the same
means for Jesus Christ! Man ! that’s the meaning of your depression;
that’s the meaning of the bad times. As the "ight brings but the stars, so
the dark night of distress, and trouble, and trial, and disappointment, and
loss, and blight to all my cherished earthly plans, brings out the Star of
Bethlehem. Jesus begins to bulk in ray thoughts as never before, and Igo
to Him, driven by the sharp spur of despair! I don’t know how it is here ;
but I know that back yonder in Scotland fifteen years ago we were fairly
carried away with good times and big wages. J oiners, masons, carpenters,
miners were wearing gold watches and drinking champagne. (Laughter.)
And I tell you Christ's kingdom made mighty little progress in those proud,
fat days. But when the City of Glasgow Btnk broke, when a great panic,
and disaster, and depression came, then Jesus got a show. Man! it’s the
same story. I’ll go bail for this statement, that I could not have struck
Melbourne with my Master’s Gospel at a better time than the time I’ve
come —the time of your depression.’ Where’s your gold watch and cham-
pagne now ? (Laughter.) What o’clock is it now on your gold watch and
chain ? (Laughter.) You contrive to know what time of day it is without
it. You contrive to slacken your thirst without champagne, and maybe
you’ve come to Christ into the bargain. Blessed be God for distress ! I
believe when we get to heaven we’ll find that the bursting of the land boom
was a big boom for Christ. You’ll find it so, depend upon it. (Applause.)
He hangs round when the skit s get dark and the winds begin to blow, and
when the waves begin to rise, and your boat’s going to sink. When all
your fair weather friends leave you, Jesus hangs round there in the hope
that you’ll give Him a cry, “ Lord, save me; I perish.” And you are saved.
Blessed be God for distress ! It drives many a man to Jesus. Everyone
that was iu distress, and everyone that was in debt and persecuted by a
remorseless creditor, ran away to David. Moonlight Sittings got common
about that time. (Laughter,) I didn’t think you knew what moonlight
flitting was. (Loud laughter.) I hope you’ll do it. That’s what I’m smiling
at: that you’ll see it and j ust beat up for Christ. Any port in a storm.
Come on; try Jesus, Now, when all doors are shutting against you You
that are landed in defeat and disaster, and loss of all your earthly treasures,
man! you’re ripe, ready for the Son of God. And He waits at your side
to this end. Elmg yourself battered, tattered, torn, empty, defeated, crushed,
into His arms. This glorious Scripture stands true of Him, and I would
like to repeat it if it was my last breath : “ Him that cometh unto Me I
will in no wise cast out.” Did you ever hear such good news? Come to
Him ! Oh ! come.
GOD TAKES BROKEN-DOWN FELLOWS !
“ Everyone that was in distress ” ! God takes broken-down fellows ;
broken down in the world, broken down by bad times, broken dawn
by his own sin. Come to Jesus. Now try. llemember the Scripture
I quoted that stands over the door of His kingdom: “ Him that cometh


unto Me I will in no wise cast out.” Come! He’ll take you and
He’ll ask no questions as to why you didn’t come when you were worth
something. Come ! When the world, and the devil, and your own com-
panions are flinging you away like a sucked orange. Come to Jesus and
He’ll take you, and forgive you, and save you, and receive you and ask no
questions. Blessed Lord, there is none like Thee, none, for a broken-down
man or a broken-down woman ! None !
god’s angel of discontent.
“ Everyone that was discontented.” I’ll close with that. There were
folks in those days in Israel, and they went to David. Don’t you see what
it reads—4oo—quicker, perhaps, than I’ve taken time to tell it. and that
lonely fugitive finds himself at the centre of a band of 400 men who had no
more to lose, and everything to gain with David; who had broken with
Saul, and broken with the past, and started out on this new career with
David and God’s purpose behind them. And I say there were people who
went because they were discontented. Now that’s different from the others.
They were not in distress, or debt, but they were unhappy, restless, discon-
tented, ill at ease. If I spoke to tnis audience to-night as an - audience
composed of people broken down, and in debt, and distressed, and in the
ruin of their earthly hopes, I would be wrong. The depression has not
affected some of you to any extent worth speaking about. Your fortune
stands fair and firm, and the storm has been over you and not bent you down
like some other tall trees that grew beside you once in a day. And yet,
my friend, away from Jesus, are you contented? Everyone that was dis-
contented went the same road as those binkrup+s, and broken-down beggars,
and adventurers. Some of them were wealthy, some of them gave up com-
fortable positions, perhaps at Saul’s court, and all their friends thought they
had lost their reason to throw up these positions to go after that young
shepherd lad who said God wanted him to be king in the room of Saul. But
they did it. I’ll live, I trust, to see it in eternity, and it’s going to happen
here to-night, although only the great day is going to tell it. But that’s
going to bring men and women to Him to-night. When I spoke to you
about distress, that didn’t reach you; but when I ask you men and women
who don’t care how well off for this world you are apart from Jesus Christ
and His salvation, tell me, are you contented ? And if you will be honest,
your heart will answer, “ Not contented. Restless, ill at ease, weary, dis-
satisfied in the midst of my worldly comfort—a gnawing restlessness that
spoils everything.” Everyone that’s discontented, come to Jesus. He’ll give
you peace. Don’t try to give peace to your hungry heart with wealth, and
pleasure, and society, and amusement. Don’t choke your hungry heart with
chaff and sawdust! Come and fill your heart’s hunger out of the love of the
Son of God. Come to Jesus. He’ll fill your hungry heart. Wealth can’t
do it. Society can’t do it. Comfort can’t do it. Jesus Christ was made
for your heart, and your heart was made for Him. “ O God, our hearts
were made for Thee, and they’re restless till they get back to Thee.” Isn’t
that so? There’s the meaning of all your discontent. Your heart is want-
ing Jesus, and it will totter to Him of its own accord if you’ll only let it.
Unhand your heart! Don’t hinder it. It’s wanting to Jesus, that’s the
meaning of its restlessness and its unhappiness. Now let your heart go to
Him. Let yourself alone to-night, some of you ! Don’t torment yourself
and you’ll just lie down in His bosom.


HOW JESUS CALLS.
I bless Gcd that Jesus means peace, peace, peace that the world can’t
give ; peace that the world can’t take away. Jesus, that Being who
hung upon the cross, and lay in the cradle, and lay on a mother’s
bosom, and came out a man among men, and hung uu the cross,
and died to blot out our sins ; and that’s a fact. Ail unbelief and criticism
comes a day too late. The Cross is a stupendous fact, and all hell’s spades
can never dig it out of the earth now. The Cross is a stupendous fact, and
all unbelief can never affect the Cross. Jesus has died. It never can be
blotted out and altered. You are doubting and questioning a day too late.
The thing is done that you are doubting and questioning. Jesus has died ;
Jesus has risen. Jesus is with us, a Saviour, Lord, King to every heart
that will come and trust Him, Now He stands among u«, and He cries,
as He cried of old, “ Come unto Me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden.”
You with bent back ! You with furrowtd brow and grey hair ! You with
the withered cheek ! You with the broken heart! You with the accusing
conscience ! You with the black pas% with all its shame behind you, and
a dismal future in front of you—“ Come to Me, all ye that labour and are
heavy laden with guilt and sin, and fear and trouble—come to Me, and 1
will give you rest.” Peace, pardon, hope, life eternal, life with Me, in Me
forever and forever.
May the Lord plead His own cause, and may this whole Exhibition
become —what shall I call it ?—a cave of Adullam, with every man and
woman in it on Christ’s side. Glory to His name. Amen.
XVII. —VOICES THAT CALL*
You will find the subject for my closing utterances in the Book of Reve-
lation, the 22nd chapter and 17th verse. The Lord bless it spoken, and
the Lord bless it printed and circulated. Revelations, 220 d chapter, 17th
verse: ‘ 4 And the Spirit and the Bride say, ‘ Come,’ and let him that heareth
say 4 Come,’ and let him that is athirst come ; and whosoever will, let him
take the water of life freely.” I’ll repeat it: “ And the Spirit and the
Bride say, 4 Come ’ ’’■—-come to the Saviour— 44 and let him that heareth say
‘ Come,’ and let him that is athirst come ; and whosoever will, let him take
the water of life”—just another name for God’s Christ— 44 let him take the
wa'er of life freely. ’ Oh ! what a text! Tee Lord help me to sound it
in the hearts of men and women here to-night!
THE CALL OF THE SPIRIT.
Now, first of all, notice, dear friends, what stands at the back of all this
Gospel preaching and inviting of men and women. The word of God.
The Spirit says 4 * Come ”! I find some people who have a peculiar notion
about the Spirit of God. Tney believe in Him. They believe that with-
out the quickening operation of the Holy Spirit, through the Gospel, men
and women cannot of themselves come to Jesus, and that’s right. But how it’s
got into their heads 1 don’t know; but they believe that the Spirit of God
—who alone can enable dead sinners like you and me to come to a living
faith in a living Saviour—they’ve got the notion that He’s not in a hurry
to quicken us; that the chances are that He won’t quicken us—the likeli-
hood is He'll pass us by ! That’s the devil’s doctrine of the Holy
Spirit ! He ha«< tried diligently, and be gets a lot of people to believe
* Closing 1 service (31st August) at the Exhibition Building.


that, while the Holy Spirit alone can really make J sus warm and living
to our hearts, so that we believe Him, and know Him, and trust Him,
yet the Spirit of God, somehow or oiher. He’ll very likely pass you bv and
not do it. Now that’s all destroyed in this text. Tne Spirit of God says
‘‘ Come,” and He means it when He says it. My dear friend, if you’re kept
out of the kingdom, out of heaven, it’s not because the Holy Spirit is not
working, and striving, and willing, and longing to bring you to Jesu*. It’s
His work. Why should not He do it, and be delighted in doing it? The
Spiri; of God says “ Come ” !
Away up yonder in the Highlands of Scotland there are numbers of good
people ready to believe the Bible from Genesis to Revelation ; but the devil
has got them to believe that the Holy Ghost does not say to the sinner
“ Come.” He rather says, “ Wait, wait till I help you and I’m not going
to be in a hurry to help you to come to Jesus.” Now there may be some-
body here like that. My friend, don’t believe in the Holy Spirit in that
dishonouring, hurtful, hindering fashion. Tne Spirit of God, wbh full
heart, full purpose, says to every Christless man and woman here to-night,
“ Come! Don’t wait, don’t stay away, don’t hang back, don’t raise ques-
tions as to whether you are one of the elect or not. Come, come, come ,
come.” Whosoever will, let him come and take Jesus to his heart’s con-
tent. God has left no link missing, God has left no weak link in the chain
of salvation, and the Holy Spirit, whose work undoubtedly is all-important,
is here to do His work, and this is His work: to say to Christless, weary,
wicked, dead, sinful men and women, “ There’s Jesus, a Saviour. You
know Him ; He is revealed in the Scriptures of truth. Now come to Me.
I, the Holy Ghost, lift Him up ; I, the Holy Ghost, want to bring you to
Him. I say, Come.”
THE FIGURE BEHIND THE PREACHER
Oh, I love that doctrine. I believe God will bless us to-night. Why?
Just because I’m honouring the Holy Ghost. It’s not the evangelist, it’s
not the preacher, it’s not the singer : back of all our preaching and sinking
and appealing there is the magnificent energy and power of God the Holy
Ghost. The Spirit says, “ Come.” He’s the great evangelist in the gospel
dispensation, therefore let no man or minister be ashamed of evangelistic
work. It’s the work of the Holy Ghost, and dignified forever thereby. Oh,
there’s nothing dearer to His heart than saying to men and women, “ Come,
come.” He speaks not of Himself, but He talks of the things that are
Christ’s, shows them to us and says to us, “ There’s a Saviour provided, a
Saviour for you. Come, come, come to Jesus ! ’
Now don’t hang back. Tne Spirit of God, in good faith, invites you
to-night, not to stay away, not to give in and say, “ It’s not for me.” He
says, “ whosoever will.” Come, don’t wait. Come to a present, provided,
all-sufficient Saviour.
But more than that. My dear friend, that makes our meeting very
solemn when you are invited by God the Holy Ghost to come. I charge
you, don’t trifle with it another five minutes. It’s very blessed that God
the Holy Ghost should be the preacher in the preacher, that He should be
behind all human instrumentality, to give it divine power and efficacy, so
that it cannot fail. But it makes it tremendously responsible for you.
“ Quench not the Spirit.” “ Grieve not the Holy Ghost.” He is no mere
influence. You could not grieve an influence. He’s a person. “ Grieve
not the Holy Ghost.” “ Resist not the Spirit,” who invites you with a
gracious summons to come, not to judgment, but to Jesus.


1 roust tell you a story about a man in our meetings in Ayr, away back in
Scotland. You know the good old town of Ayr. We were preaching there,
and two men—like some of you—were in from the country; and we were
preachirg, and God the Holy Spirit was with us, and brought home the
truth with power to those men’s hearts and consciences. That’s the sign
that He’s working, when your heart and conscience waken up and are
aroused to think and feel the truth of things divine and eternal. At the
close we proposed to have a second meeting, just to clinch the business, and
strike while the iron was hot, and one of those men said to his companion,
“ I’m going to wait.” He said, “ I want to see this thing through. I never
felt as I have felt to-night the nearness of Christ, and my need of being
saved from sin, and guilt, and death.” But his companion resisted the Holy
Ghost, strove against Him. He rose up and said, “ No, no ; I’m not going
to sit here any longer. This makes me uncomfortable. I wish I hadn’t
come. I can’t stand this ; I don’t believe this.” And he banged away out.
Half-an-hour later he was cut to pieces by an engine at a level crossing!
Resist not the Spirit of God. I don’t dogmatise about this man’s doom; I
only say, “ Quench not the Spirit.” Trifle not with Him who speaks in your
heart and conscience while my voice speaks in your outer ear—the Spirit of
God trying to lead you to a present Saviour. Don’t trifle with, or grieve,
or quench the Holy Spirit, your best, most patient, most loving friend.
THE CALL OF THE BRIDE.
But my text says, “ The Spirit and the Bride say, ‘ Gome.’ ” What is the
Bride? The Bride, my dear friends, just brings out the other side of
preaching. I’ve been lifting the curtain, and showing you the divine back-
ground to all this human business —that the Spirit of God and the powers of
another world are falling upon us when we are listening to the gospel of the
Saviour’s love and presence. But there’s a human side. “ The Spirit and
the Bride ” —the Spirit through the Bride. That is to say, the Bride is a
beautiful name in the Bible to describe all the company of living souls in
Jesus Christ. There’s a human side as well as a divine side, a visible side
as well as an eternal and invisible. . “ The Spirit and the Bride.” The
Bride, as it were, is the incarnation of the Holy Ghost for purposes of
preaching and evangelising the souls of men—to make it visible, palpable,
real, tangible. The Holy Ghost comes not in ghostly, invisible fashion—a
breath, a whisper, a something mysterious and uncanny—to make your flesh
creep and your hair stand on end. The Spirit of God comes by a man as
human as yourself, a sinner saved by grace like yourself, who once cared for
none of these things; but the Spirit of God quickened him, got him to
believe, and then holds out to you the hands of divine compassion and
entreaty, and says “ Coroe to Jesus ” in your own speech wherein you were
born. The Holy Ghost finds speech to cleave your dull ear and reach your
heart and quicken you into faith in Christ. Is not it beautiful, the union of
the divine and the human in preaching Jesus for the acceptance of our faith
“ The Spirit and the Bride say, ‘ Come.’ ” If I could bring to this platform
to-night all the people in ail the world —aye, and in all ages—all the
redeemed from heaven who have lived, and trusted, and died in the faith
of Jesus, and found in Him their Saviour from sin, their Saviour to holiness
and heaven; if 1 could bring that company, suppose it were possible, and
set them on this platiorm, and say, “ Oh, Bride ” —for that’s the beautiful
name for us all in our collective capacity—“ Oh, Bride of Christ! Oh, wife
of the Lamb ! there be men and women on this floor and in those galleries
who do not know Jesus. Bride of Christ, what hast Thou to say ? ” Not


only my voice and the voice of the ministers and Christians here, but the-
voice of the whole Church of the Living God would be lifted in ont'
magnificent silvery shout till the building rang, and the whole concave of
heaven—this whole Southern Hemisphere—rang with one magnificent
shout: “ Come, come , come to Jesus ! Come away ! ”
You talk about the differences among Christians. I’m sorry for some
of them, but thank God the things wherein we agree are greater than the
things wherein we differ. And the whole company of believers of every
name on earth and in glory unite in this: that if there’s a man here who
doesn’t know Jesus, we have just one thing to say to you, “ Come, come, come
to Jesus; come away.” Thank God there’s no shadow of a difference there!
Now come along, you’re well invited ; you’re well invited. There’s nothing
has such magnificent backing, both of God Almighty and the best beings
that ever lived, as the Gospel call to come to Jesus. Nothing, absolutely
nothing, is so backed up by the best backing in the universe, God and the
experience of redeemed men and women in all the earth, and up in heaven.
“ The Spirit and the Bride say, ‘ Come. ’ ” Man! that’s all that’s left, all that’s
left. A Saviour has been provided— Come , come , come.
REPEAT THE MESSAGE !
I pass on. My text says, “ And let ftim that heareth say, ‘ Come.’ ”
There’s work for you Christians. Every Christian should be—l’m going to
quote a long word with an ugly historical meaning and association, but it’s
a good word, and I’m sorry the devil should have it, and we will take it away
from him to-night, and give it to Jesus—every Christian ought to be, in the
best sense, a propagandist, a propagandist., Let him that heareth push this
business. Turn round at once, and begin to be a preacher yourself among
your own set; sticking to this text, “Come to Jesus.” Not arguing, or
controverting, but saying wisely, tenderly, humanely, with the backing of
the Holy Ghcst behind it—“ Come, come.” “ Let him that heareth say
‘ Come.’ ” I tell you, dear men and women, it never was meant that we
Christians should have a meek mind, or be the fashionless —do you know
what that means?—(laughter)—fashionless, pithless, pithless creatures we
are. A Christian was meant to be a restless sort of fellow whom the world
can’t stand. God help us Christians in Melbourne—Melbourne can stand
us far tco well. It oughtn’t to be able to. You ought to roast it out, and
make it look on you as it looked on far better fellows, and called them pesti-
lent fellows. These pestilent fellows, who let nobody alone, who have turned
the world upside down, and din, din, din into your ears this Jesus of theirs,
and there’s no other name under heaven among men, they’ll tell you. where-
by you may be saved but Jesus. Ah, yes, thaPs what the world needs
to-day, as well as at Pentecost; Christians who must speak out what is burn-
ing in their bones, and they cannot keep still. Let him that heareth accept
his personal responsibility for the evangelisation of the world, by taking his
own share where God has placed him, and say, “ Come.’ Work it out in
your daily life without becoming a minister ; in buying, and selling, and
mixing with your fellow-men. Have an eye for Jesus, and a tongue for your
blessed Master’s cause, and He will bless it. “ Let him that heareth say,
‘Come.’ ” Don’t say it’s a feeble thing. Of course it’s feeble ; but through
the Holy Ghost it will he divinely efficient. Now there’s your loving com-
mission, work it out. Be a propagandist for Christ. Be restless, pushing,
unceasing. Say, “ Come.” Say it! Gcd will bless it. He s anxious.
There’s a big work to do, dear men and women, and there s little time to do
it in, and the issues are tremendous. Men are dying. Time is flying.


Hell is filling. Christ is coming! Up and at it! “ Let him that
heareth say, ‘ Come. ’ ” God wants this big work to have impressed in r o
it a multitude of simple-hearted, warm-tongued evangelists. Let him that
has heard with the hearing and the faith turn round and say, “ Come.”
THIRST AS A TITLE.
And then my text goes on to say, “ And let him that is athirst come.”
Oh for grace now to save somebody here ! Is there anybody here athirst ?
What is physical thirst ? Isn’t it a desire in my very being to go and
drink? Waen I’m thi sty I don’t want anybody to come and tell me to
drink. There’s the appeal in my thirsty throat. Let him that is athirst
for Jesus drink Him down according to your thirst. Now you who wrote
me to-night saying you were anxious, bring your anxiety to an end. All
you that are dry, begin and drink. All you that are thirsty, longing, anxious,
“ let him that is athirst come.” Waen I go along a ho r , dusty road, on a
hot, oppressive day, and get tired, and leg-weary, and faint, and thirsty,
and suddenly at the bend of that dusty, hot road, I come upon a bubbling
fountain spring, do 1 look along that lonely, empty road and say, “Oh
i hat there was somebody here to tell me to drink, to invite me to drink ” ?
There’s the bubbling fountain, here am I thirsty; the one invites the other
—“ deep calleth unto deep.” And I step down and drink long, without any
further telling. Man ! hear ; oh, hear, Jesus is nearer to you than hands
and feet. Are you thirsty for Him ? Are you weary and sick, and tired of
sin and yourself and the world? Man ! drink Him down. Believe in Christ
to your heart's content. He’s made over to you like that bubbling fountain,
made over without any reserve or condition, to my thirst and desire. Let
him that is athirst, longing, desiring to have Jesus, have Jesus and settle
it; finish it. Take Him. What’s wrong with Him? But, ah! how timid
we are ! We stand at the water of , life as we would not stand at the bub-
bling spring. We’re dying for Him, and yet not drinking. We have put
it into our very hymn. I have no objection to miking free with a hymn. One
of them runs like this :
“ I know I am weak and sinful,
It comes to me more and more ;
Though I scarce can see for weeping,
I’ll knock at the open door.”
Well, well; you’ll knock at the open door. Don’t you think that’s
etiquette run to seed ? [Laughter.) Isn’t it ? Isn’t it politeness overdone ?
What are you chopping at ? What are you knocking at an open door for ?
Heaven help you ! come in, and don’t stand there blubbering at an open
door. (Laughter.) Man alive ! come in, come in, come in ! Tie door was
left open that when you came weeping there might be no more knocking,
and the Lord Himself is standing in the door to receive you. Come away.
Come away.
THE AUTHORITY OF “ I WILL.”
Last of all. The last ring of the Gospel bell. “And whosoever will,” let him
take Jesus Christ freely . “ Take,” might not be enough; but G>d overflows.
“Take freely;” “whosoever will.” Now a word and I’m done. When I spoke
just about people being thirsty, anxious, longing to be saved, some of you felt
rather heavy ; for, look here, you’re not thirsty. You would give your right
hand, I believe, some of you, if you could get back the feelings, the long-
ings, the desires after salvation that you used to hive. Bat they have left


you now. You are older, colder, harder, deader ; and you know it. And
when I spoke just now, and said, “ Let him that is athirst come,” your face
almost grew white, and you wanted to rise up and say, “ Mr. M'Neill, must
I be In a state of anxiety about my sins before I can come to the Saviour ?
If so, good-bye to salvation for me. I’m as dead as the seat I sit on, and
I couldn’t squeeze out a tear about my sins, nor a cry for salvation.
And, as regards my feelings, I’ve no thirst, no longing; and yet
I know it's all true. It’s all true, and there’s no help for me but
Jesus. But I’m not anxious, nor weeping.” Now, brother, listen!
God has come down to your level. “ Let him that is athirst come.”
But He goes further—“ and whosoever is willing”—“ whosoever will, let
him take the water of life freely.” Don’t you see this ? I can make a
decision by my will, in cold blood, that’ll bind me, and tell on me as much as
any decision made in hot blood, and desire, and excitement, can’t I ? Can’t
you make a decision in cold blood as well as in hot blood ? And it holds you,
binds you, changes, it may be, all your after life. Now God comes down
there and says, “ Whosoever is willing,” without a throb of excitement.
Don’t work up anything ! Let yourself alone. And remember this: God
makes us willing. Don’t resist Him ! He does everything. Quench Him
not. He is seeking to make you willing while I’m preaching ; and if you,
are not made willing you will find in the great day that it was because you
put forth a certain dogged, stubborn, resisting, rejecting power, and shook
God off, lest, lest He might make you willing to yield to the Saviour ! Oh 1
the malignant power of the natural unbelief of the human heart! May
God give you the victory over it to-night. “ Whosoever will.”
DECISION IN COLD BLOOD.
Let me illustrate it. We have come to the point of decision—then I’ll
let you go. You can make the decision without excitement, without desire.
There were two men in Glasgow fifteen or twenty years ago when the
bank broke, and emigration got common. Some of you came out here just
then. You remember how everything tumbled down, and you emigrated
out here. Now I shall imagine two tradesmen in the city of Glasgow, and
its dull times, and they’ve heard of this land, and the emigration agent
comes and takes them one by one, these two specimen joiners—shall I say
carpenters ?—and he says, “ Look here, Australia is the country for you ”
or Canada, or New Zealand, or America, whatever it may be. “ Look here,”
he says, “ the Government is giving assisted or free passages to tradesmen
and their families,” and he expatiates on their advantages “ But,” he says,
“ I’ll not ask you to decide to-day ; but we’ve chartered an emigrant steamer
lying in the Clyde, and I’ll be round in ten days to get your decision and
sign the papers.” And then he goes to the other man and makes him the
same offer. Now the first man is one of your excitable men, and small
blame to him. It’s no sign of weakness, is it ? And during those ten days
that joiner—my ! he’s shaken up, I tell you, “ Shall I or shall I not pull
up my anchor, and sail away to unknown parts and try to work out my
fortune there ? It’s a big venture.” Small blame to him if he gets excited.
He can hardly sleep. He can hardly eat his food. Wherever he goes he
seems to see it on the very walls of the buildings—Australia.” It shakes
him. People see that he’s moved, and at last, after a terrible time of being
torn to pieces by contending thoughts, the five or ten days are up, and the
emigration agent comes with the papers and says, “ Off or on ; what do you
say ?” and his face turns white and his lips ashy, and he says, “ I will,” and
he takes a pen and signs the papers for that assisted or free passage out to


the new country. And I tell you he never did such writing in his life—
(laughter)—all shaking—and he is a strong fellow; it looks just as if a spider
had crawled out of the ink-bottle on to the paper—(laughter)—a fearful
signing of his name.
THE COOL MAN’S ACT.
But I said there was another; and the other—he is one of your cool fellows.
It doesn’t make him up or down. The emigrant agent says, “ I’ll be round
in ten days; I’ve been speaking to your mate there. Just think it over.”
Now you would never know it was in his head at all. He whistles as he
goes about, and you’d never know it was working in his “ noddle.” He’s
thinking so far. He’s not excited at all. His wife hardly knows anything
about it. She says to neighbouring women, “ I think there’s something;
but he’s generally a kind of man you never can tell; I’ve no idea.” Then
up comes the emigrant agent, after the ten days, and says, “ Off or on. Here’s
the paper ; will you come ? The steamer’s there waiting ; we’ve got our
party. Yes or no ; are you willing?” And the calm fellow doesn’t turn a
hair. He wonders himself that he should be so cool about it, and he says,
“ Yes ; I will.” And he doesn’t turn white, and he signs with a firm, bold
hand; or rather—for to say “ Yes ; I will,” for a Glasgow joiner is pedantic
English—he just takes the pipe out of his mouth for a minute and says,
“Ye’ a wa’ ’’ —(laughter) —“ All right, I’m your man ; wha’s your paper ?”
and he signs the thing straight away, quite calm, quite cool, even accusing
himself, saying, “ What a queer kind of fellow I must be, doing a thing
like that —a kind of spin ot a coin whether Igo or not!” Now which of
those men, the cool or the excited man, which lands first in Australia ?
My friends, they go on the same boat, and they arrive together, don’t they ?
After they make the decision and commit themselves to that steamer, their
hot blood or cold blood don’t tell upon the propeller, do they ? (Laughter.)
Now, my dear friends, you may be “ as cool as they make ’em ;” for all that,
God comes down to your level and says, “ I’ll reach you here.” And you
make a decision like that, wondering in yourself that you are so cold. Come,
now, whosoever is willing, without excitement, without longing, without
being in a state. “ Art thou willing ? ” and if you are, you should commit
yourself to Him; and it’s He—He does the business and takes you home.
He’ll take the coldness out of you. Put your hand in His, and my word
lor it, He’ll warm you. Give Him a chance now—He’ll catch you there.
Play the man now ; don’t be cowardly ! Don’t double back on your tracks
now 1 Are you willing ?
THE MARRIAGE DEED.
Like marriage. How often I’ve come down to my church to marry
couples. There stands the man; there stands the woman, and here I stands
merely the officiating minister. And notice that, by the very law of the
land, marriage turns upon the word in my text, “ Whosoever is avilling.”
I say to that man, “ Art thou willing to take this woman ? ” And I
say to the woman, “ Art thou willing to take this man ? ” Mark you,
I say no single syllable about excitement, and being worked up, and in a
state about each other, and desire, and longing, and affection. “ Art thou
willing? ’ Mark that. And I don’t care how cold they may be. If they
make that decision it is binding and tells upon them for all their after life.
“Art thou willing ? ” I hope, and in many cases of marriages—now I want
no smile, for it’s a serious thing on the human side, as well as the Divine—
I hope, and in many cases I’ve known it so, that the love came after the


marriage. It was not there before. “Art thou willing ? ” In every case of
the union to Jesus, all the feelings and all the love come after union. It’s
impossible to have them before. Gome to Jesus, and He’ll change you. la
the very touching of Him you are born again, changed through and through
and the change will work out to all eternity.
THE “I WILL” OF CHRIST.
Now, friends, I stand up. It’s a marriage, a scriptural illustration. There
stands Jesus. There you stand, a poor, empty, Ghristless, sin-smitten, ruined
soul, without Jesus; and I say to Jesus —and who am I? Listen, suppose
it was Paul here to-night. Who, then, is Paul? or Apollos? Who are
they but ministers, ministers by whom you were joined to Jesus, in the give
and take of the Gospel ? And I say, friends—or rather, I say to Jesus—l
see Him among us to-night—“ Jesus, Jesus, Jesus, down from the Cross, up
from the grave; Jesus, art Thou willing, art Thou willing to take this soul
into union with Thyself for ever?” And, although He does not need to
speak, I almost think I hear Him say, “ Willing ? am I willing ? Let the
Cross, let My own Word in a hundred places declare My good faith to take
whosoever will take Me.”
THE “l WILL” OF THE SOUL.
Now I turn to you, man or woman, whom I never saw before, and perhaps
never shall see again till the great day. Listen ! I place you up, friends, in
front of Jesus, and I’m just the officiating minister, but I put the question
to make it plain, binding. I have spoken to Jesus: now I spaak to your
soul, “ Soul, art thou willing to take this Jesus for all that He’s worth? To
take Him, art thou willing ? ” And I don’t care how coldly, if you will
only say in your heart, “ Yes, I will,” He has you ! He has you ! And in the
name and by the authority of the Word of the Lord Jesus Christ, that can
never be broken, I proclaim you Saviour and saved; and whom God hath
joined the gates of hell shall not divorce. Go out leaning on His arm.
That’s all. Don’t part company with Him at the church-door. Don’t make
it a secret, hidden, shamefaced marriage. If He’s not ashamed to give
Himself to you, don’t you be ashamed to confess Him before the world.
Is not that a glorious salvation? The blessed Son of God, who lived, who
loved, who died on the cross, who did all that in order to save us— He meets
us to-night, and He says, “ Whosoever is willing, whoever will say to Me in
the daylight, the clear daylight of My own offer, ‘l’ll take it. Yes, Lord, I
will,’ ” then ;
“ ’Tis done, the great transaction’s done.
Thou art the Lord’s, and He is thine.”
And, as in the case of the emigrant steamer, all the rest is His business.
He’ll keep you. He’ll work this out to-morrow, that to-morrow you are so
frightened about. You have Christ now with you to solve the difficulty;
light the battle all the way home to glory. Let us bow our heads in silent
prayer that every man and woman may get their own opportunity of saying
“ I will ” to Jesus.


Mf. .
him
f (JKo
a cgu^i
f
i


PURE LITERATURE FOR THE HOME.
—s—■ i-
THE
“SOUTHERN CROSS”
r\ a
* ENLARGED 9 A PAGES, C»
TO -ofl<=“
MAKING IT
THE LARGEST AND BEST PURELY
JOURNALS
IN
AUSTRALASIA .
Sent Post Free to any of the Australian Colonies, New
Zealand, and Tasmania.
3s. 6d. per Quarter.
MELBOURNE OFFICE :
OPPOSITE G.P.0., ELIZABETH & BOORKE STS


AN IDEAL CHRISTIAN
COLLEGE FOR GIRLS.
Methodist Ladies' College,
HAWTHORN, VICTORIA.
PRINCIPAL - - REV. W. H. FITCHETT, B.A.
HEAD MASTER - J. REFORD CORR, M.A..ULB.
Staff of 28 Resident and Visiting Teachers of the highest standing.
£40,000 HAS BEEN SPENT ON THE COLLEGE, MAKING IT A
SCIENTIFICALLY EQUIPPED SCHOOL OF THE
FISST ORDER-
ITS special features are; Perfect conditions of Health
and Comfort; Pure Companionships; Every Class
taught by an Expert. ..
BRIGHT, REFINED, AND HAPPY COLLEGE LIFE !
Students from all the Australian Colonies, from
New 'Zealand and Fiji, are found in the College
classes.
COLLEGE HANDBOOK (I with Photos) ON APPLICATION.
Edgerton and Moore, Printers, 241 and 243 Flinders Lane, Melbourne.
