

REPORT OF THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
1917-18.
THE PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
AUSTRALIAN SOLDIERS’ REPATRIATION FUND.
MARCH,1918.
Presented pursuant to Statute; ordered by the Senate to he printed , 22 nd May , 1918.
[Cost of Paper. —Preparation, not given; 817 copies; approximate cost of printing and publishing, £33.]
No. 87.— F.8060.— PRICE 1s. 6D.




INDEX TO REPORT.
PAGE
Administration .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ ~ 9
„ Expenses .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. 13
Anzac Work ~ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ 7
Assistance to Returned Soldiers .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 10-13
Board —Constitution —personnel .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5
Commonwealth Control.. .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. 14
~ „ Recommendations to Government.. .. .. .. .. .. 14
Conference —Federal and State Ministers .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. 18
Contributions—appeal for .. .. .. .. ~ .. ~ .. .. 6
~ voluntary in relation to Special Taxation .. . . . . .. .. .. 8
Executive —Appointment —personnel .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ 6
Finance —Operations .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 9
“ Fund ” —Establishment .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. 5
„ Relation to other Funds .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. 15
Land Settlement .. .. .. .. .. . . . . .. .. # . 18
Local Committees .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. ~ ~ t ; 15
Lord Roberts’ Memorial Workshops .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. 13
Official War Films .. .. .. .. ~ . . .. .. .. # t 9
Regulations—Board .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 6
Secretary .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. ~ ~ 22
Soldiers’ Settlement Board .. .. .. . . .. .. .. .. .. 19
State War Councils .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ # _ 15
Taxation —Re Contributions in kind .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 8




The Chairman,
Board of Trustees ,
Australian Soldiers' Repatriation Bund ,
Melbourne .
Melbourne, sth March, 1918.
IR ’ This Report is submitted in accordance with the statutory requirements under section 6,
sub-section (3), of the Australian Soldiers' Repatriation Fund Act , No. 7 of 1916.
THE INCEPTION OF THE FUND.
In 1915, pursuant to a recommendation of the Federal Parliamentary War Committee,
the State War'Councils were brought into existence as the official bodies to deal with returned
soldiers generally. In addition, there were many private organizations concerned in aiding
dependants of men on active service and also returned men and their dependants. The aid afforded
by these private funds was, however, of a temporary or ameliorative character only, and the
work of dealing with returned soldiers had not proceeded very far before the need of some financial
assistance towards permanent re-establishment became evident.
Accordingly, at the beginning of 1916, the Federal Parliamentary War Committee propounded
the idea of the Repatriation Fund, from which advances might be made to returned soldiers
or their dependants for “ the purchase of stock, seed, plant, or by way of general assistance—as
distinct from ameliorative aid in a word, a fund which would subserve the purposes of general
civilian re-establishment. i „
This idea, having been indorsed by a Conference of Federal and State Ministers (Melbourne,
February, 1916)' was embodied in the Australian Soldiers’ Repatriation Fund Act, which vested
the administrative control in a body of Trustees representative of all parties in the Federal
Parliament and outside interests, the Prime Minister of the day being Chairman. The Fund was
to be raised primarily by voluntary subscriptions in cash or kind, with such supplementary grants
as the Governments of the Commonwealth and the States should see fit to make. While the
Trustees were responsible to Parliament for the general assembling and allocation of the Fund,
the Act constituted the State War Councils the bodies through whom appeals should be conducted
and advances made. Over the State War Councils the Trustees had no administrative control.
On the 18th April a special appeal was issued by the Federal and State Governments
(Schedule 1), and to enable the Fund to become immediately operative the Commonwealth Parlia-
ment voted a contribution of £250,000 to supplement some large private donations then promised.
The Board, acting provisionally, met on the 5th May, 1916. The Hon. J. C. Watson, the
Honorary Organizer for the Federal Parliamentary War Committee, was present at the meeting
by request, and explained the position of the movement at that date.
The Act was assented to on the 31st May, 1916 (Schedule 2), and the Board, as at first
constituted, included the following
The Prime Minister of the Commonwealth.
Arthur S. Baillieu, Esquire.
The Hon. Sir J. Langdon Bonython, K.B., C.M.G.
Rt. Hon. Sir John Forrest, P.C., G.C.M.G., M.P.
John J. Garvan, Esquire.
E. Grayndler, Esquire.
Samuel Hordern, Esquire.
The Hon. J. M. Hunter, M.L.A. (Queensland).
The Hon. Sir William Irvine, K.C.M.G., M.P.
Senator the Hon. J. J. Long.
Senator the Hon. E. D. Millen.
Denison Miller, Esquire.
The Hon. J. Page, M.P.
The Hon. Alexander Poynton, M.P.
0. Morrice Williams, Esquire.
A Sub-committee, consisting of Senator Pearce, who was Acting Prime Minister, Messrs.
Baillieu, Denison Miller, Page, and Williams, was appointed to consider matters of organization.
A further Sub-committee, consisting of Senator Millen, and Messrs. Grayndler, Hordern, and Miller,
was appointed to suggest regulations.


Executive of five, consisting of the Chairman (The Prime Mnkter) Mr. 0 hbrncfwfi amstvhn
was elected Deputy Chairman), Sir Langdon Bonython, Messrs Baillieu GrayndlT T c
powers and functions of the Executive Committee "of the Board are shown in SchSe 3
Mr. it. J. Hilbert was appointed Secretary to the Board
the total number of meetings held by the Full Board and the Executive Committee and the
attendances of members are set out in Schedule 4. and tlle
Cool- PC * M p eS1 £ U tl 10n ° f 8enat0r , Mlll T’ the Govcrnr,lent appointed the Right Hon. Joseph
n p* J va cancy, and on his return from England Mr. Hughes took the place of
Senator Pearce, attending the meeting held in Sydney on the 23rd August, 1916.
REGULATIONS.
v « P r ° vlded th at the disbursement of moneys and the allocation of property should
XhS^w r ° Ugt th ® Sta * e . War Counclls - and accordingly the Board, in framing regulations
(Schedule 5) to govern the adimmstration of the Act, provided that each State War Council should
appoint a Special Committee to conduct appeals and determine applications for assistance.
Ihe benefits of the Act are extended to any person who is or has been a member of the
Commonwealth Naval or Military Forces enlisted or appointed for or employed on active service
outside Australia, or employed on a ship of war or enlisted for service in connexion with Naval or
Military preparations or operations The Act includes the dependants of such soldiers and sailors
to the war" 7 S ° ° f Impenal Reserve Forces who was a bond resident in Australia prior
fl r 1 r.limnt 0^iS10n^ ll ? We k er ’ W8 f made t0 regard as illeli gible, except in special circumstances, any
apphcant deemed to have adequate means or to be adequately provided for in any scheme
discharge ° 7 3117 G ° Vernmental or private a g enc L or an 7 person not in receipt of an honorable
Mam classes of assistance provided for were general assistance, sustenance, farming plant
seed, live stock, tools of trade, small businesses, and any business or industrial undertaking of a
kind to give employment to a collective body of soldiers.
The regulations also provided for the submission of returns to the Board in connexion with
the administration of the Fund.
In addition, certain regulations were issued under the War Precautions Act providing for
the undermentioned matters :— 5
1. Prohibition of use in trade of the word “ Anzac ” and similar words.
2. Prohibition of use of the word Repatriation 55 in connexion with any fund.
2. I or bidding the raising of funds for patriotic purposes without the consent of the
State War Council.
4. Goods advanced by State War Council not to be mortgaged, pledged, or disposed
of without the consent of the State War Council.
(Schedule 6.)
APPEAL FOR CONTRIBUTIONS.
When the regulations came into force and the Special Committees were established by
each State War Council, the Executive proceeded to the organization of the appeal for contributions.
This involved the creation of a very elaborate system of record and accounts. The Fund
contemplated by the Act was to be not entirely, nor even chiefly, a cash fund. It was to take
anything or everything possessing value in use or exchange—securities, land, houses, stock, new
or second-hand machinery, implements, furniture, utensils, seeds, plants, manure, timber,
minerals (anything and everything) the idea being that while the number who could and would
give cash might be relatively limited, the number able to make a contribution in kind was
potentially limited only by the number of the population of the Commonwealth. Every bank
was appointed a receiver ; every Local Committee associated with a War Council an authorized
collector. The system had to provide for the recording of every contribution; for the
concentration of cash and securities in the Head Offices of the banks in each State ; for the
recording, assembling, housing, marketing, insuring, and valuing of kind at a thousand’different
centres ; for the management of properties and stock while being held for allotment or sale; for
appreciation and depreciation ; for freights and the machinery of transfer from locality to
locality ; and to have and to hold all this miscellaneous collection in such a way as to satisfy the
requirements of audit on the one hand, and the requirements of allotment, principally as loans, by
a Committee sitting in the capital city of each State.


Seeing that the operations would cover the Commonwealth and that reliance had to be
placed at so many points upon Honorary Committees formed, in the first instance without regard
to any special fitness for these multifarious duties, the Executive proceeded to' install the system
with War Councils, not without misgivings.
27th October, 1916, was set apart as Repatriation Day, upon which the first appeal should be
consummated, but before the War Councils had time to take definite action the first Conscription
Campaign was launched. This campaign having occupied the attention of most of the members
of the State War Councils, and of the Local Committees associated therewith, it was deemed prudent
to postpone definite action until the excitement had died down. 15th December, 1916, was then
fixed upon, but owing to the political situation nothing definite was done. Subsequently the State
War Councils of Queensland and South Australia did launch appeals, which resulted in the con-
tributions amounting in value to £12,358 and £34,713 respectively.
New South Wales never reached the stage of organizing a definite general appeal, although
some action was taken to this end ; Victoria, Western Australia, and Tasmania never attempted
to do so. Except in Queensland and South Australia, the opinion was strongly held that the
Fund should be raised by taxation.
In view of the heavy expenses involved in launching an appeal, the Commonwealth
Government decided to grant the sum of £5,000 to the Board for the purpose of covering publicity
expenses. As the main appeal, however, did not take place, the Board only found it necessary to
draw on the Commonwealth Government to the extent of £500, representing £250 each for
Queensland and South Australia (Schedule 19).
THE ANZAC SCHEME.
Along with suggestions for the general appeal, the Repatriation Executive approved and
communicated a scheme which was designated “ Anzac Work.” This scheme which was originated
by Mr. Gerald Mussen, contemplated an organized effort on the part of the manufacturing industries
of the Commonwealth to turn out, in wholesale quantities, definite lines of articles required for the
establishment of returned men, e.g., clothing, furniture, farming implements, and so on. The
primary industries were also brought in. In the case of the manufacturing industries, the employers
were asked to give their plants and the men their labour, the Repatriation Fund finding the cost
of the raw material where necessary. The goods so produced were to be allotted as gifts. In the
case of the primary industries similar co-operation on the part of employer and employee was
contemplated, but the produce was generally to be realized and placed to the credit of the Fund
in the form of cash. The production was to be managed by Committees representative of employers
and employees in each trade. The scheme had the approval of representative employers and
various industrial unions in Victoria, with whom alone it had been discussed in any detailed way.
The Executive considered that the operation of this scheme over a period could put them in
possession of immediately “ allotable ” goods (apart from the realization in money) amounting
to a very large total in value. To the extent that the goods were allotted it was considered that the
cash resources of the Fund would be saved, and as these goods, less the cost of the raw material,
represented newly-created wealth, they would be clear gain.
But “ Anzac Work ” like the general appeal, vras held in suspense pending a favorable
opportunity for action. Meanwhile, the Government of the day announced the policy for raising
£10,000,000 for the Fund by means of a special wealth levy, and in view of this, as also the necessity
for establishing some more definite form of Commonwealth control, the Executive did not think
it wise to urge the War Councils to proceed with the appeal for voluntary contributions.
At the end of December, 1917, the Trustees held contributions to the value of £130,325 Is. Id.,
which, plus interest accrued, totalled £133,134 6s. lOd. This amount is made up as follows:—
£ s . d.
Cash .. .. .. .. .. 108,889 17 5
Contributions in kind —
Securities .. .. .. •. 20,666 15 0
Real property .. .. .. . • 626 15 0
Miscellaneous .. .. .. •. 82 8 1
Contributions in kind realized .. .. 59 5 7
Interest on bank balances and debentures .. 2,809 5 9
133,134 6 10
Particulars as to the contributions received in each State are set out in Schedule 15.
The State Governments were approached with a view to securing a remission of transfer
fees and stamp duties on property donated to the Fund and in every case the response was
favorable.


VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS IN RELATION TO SPECIAL TAXATION.
Tlie Commonwealth Government proposed that in the event of any taxation being imposed
or the purposes of the Repatriation Fund scheme, taxpayers would be credited to the eLtenTof
their voluntary contributions. As no indication was given that this decision covered gifts in kind
the Executive Committee of the Board submitted the following recommendations to the Prime
deduction 1 ? SUpP ° rt ° f the P ro P osal that 8 ifte in kind should be allowed as a taxation
(1) It that in large part the Fund will be represented by contributions in
(2) If kind is not recognised as a subject of tax abatement, the tendency will be to
discourage contributions in this form, and the Fund will suffer to that
extent.
(3) The Trustees have encouragement to hope for great results from a scheme of
co-operative effort on the part of manufacturers and their staffs in the production
of goods adjudged necessary for the purposes of the Fund. This co-operative
e oit, it is hoped, will embrace the manufacturing resources of the Commonwealth
in certain lines. Those goods contributions, which may run into hundreds of
thousands of pounds, will not be realized in cash, but will be held as goods for
direct allotment. It is intended that the value of each factor in the contribution
shall be publicly acknowledged separately, labour (individualized) so much ;
plant, materials, and supervision, so much. Under this scheme a manufacturer
might be able to make a contribution to the Fund of a cash value of several
thousands of pounds, whereas he might not be able, or might not be disposed
to give as many hundreds in cash direct.
(4) Similarly, men who, perhaps, would be willing to surrender land, or stock, or other
forms of property in substantial amounts, might not choose to figure as cash
contributors at all.
(5) The regulations under the Repatriation Act provide for the valuation of contribu-
tions in land, stock, and material. These valuations, which are necessary
for the system of record, and also for the calculation of allotments, will be
arranged by the War Councils and their Local Committees. While probably
not in all cases ideal, it is reasonable to presume that they will represent a fair
average. It is submitted that these valuations should be regarded as sufficient
in the special circumstances.
(6) That whatever objection there might be to accept such valuations or to concede
deductions on account of “ kind ” in relation to taxation in general, it cannot
have the same force in relation to problematical specific taxation, which is all
that is at present involved.
(7) That the Trustees have evidence of misapprehension on the part of several who
are disposed to be large contributors, that in the event of taxation supervening
on voluntary contributions, they would be exposed to the same liability as others
who, while perhaps more able to give, had yielded to no sacrificial impulse.
They feel it to be unjust that they should be placed in that position.
(8) If contributors could be given to understand that they could not be penalized for
generosity, the Trustees feel that the response to the appeal would be much
more liberal.
No reply was received from the Government to this request, although in a speech made by
the Prime Minister in Sydney, on the 23rd August, 1916, it was stated that the Government would
allow contributions as a deduction against Repatriation taxation. There is no doubt that the
delay in giving this formal official assurance has militated against the appeal for funds. Many
donations have been received by the State War Councils subject to this condition. The Queensland
State War Council is holding large contributions in cash, and has also promises of stock of
considerable value subject to the condition that taxation allowance is made. As the Trustees
could not accept contributions to which a condition was attached, such contributions do not appear
in the accounts submitted.


OFFICIAL WAR FILMS.
• In July, 1917, the Commonwealth Government handed over two Official War Films entitled
the “ Battle of the Ancre ” and the “ A.I.F. in France ” for the benefit of the Repatriation Fund.
The Board decided to exhibit the films, and entered into an agreement with the Australasian
Films Co. Ltd. to conduct the showing throughout the Commonwealth, the company receiving a
commission on actual results.
The pictures have been shown in all States except Tasmania, with very satisfactory results
for the Fund.
A further film entitled “ Sons of the Empire ” was secured in October, 1917, and exhibited
in Melbourne and Sydney. The same degree of success, however, did not result, and it has been
decided to withhold it for the present.
Three other films are under order. They are entitled “ The Battle of Arras,’’ “ The Battle
of Messines,” and “ H.M. the Kings Visit to the Grand Fleet.”
The net proceeds received to the 31st December, 1917, were £8,258 2s. 6d., and from this
amount a provision of £3,000 has been made to meet the cost of the films.
ADMINISTRATION.
The Executive Committee of the Board issued confidential instructions for the guidance of
the Special Committees of the State War Councils in dealing with claims for assistance. The
memorandum dealt with the various classes of cases which should receive consideration, and notified
the maximum amounts of assistance which could be given. The Executive Committee was called
upon from time to time to determine cases which were beyond the scope of the authority of the
Special Committees of the State War Councils. These cases represented applications presenting
special features, or where amounts were applied for above the amount of the advances which the
State War Councils were authorized to make. Altogether, 748 special cases were dealt with by the
Executive to the 31st December, 1917, and of this number 690 were approved. This was practically
7 per cent, of the total cases dealt with. An analysis of these special cases is set out in Schedule 13*
FINANCE.
On the 31st December, 1917, the Australian Soldiers’ Repatriation Fund was in credit to
the extent of £398,464 Is. 2d. This amount was received from the following sources : —
£ s. d, £ s. d.
Commonwealth grant .. . . . . .. . . 250,000 0 0
Interest thereon .. .. .. . . . . . . 7,044 11 10
Exhibition of War Films .. . . . . .. .. 8,285 2 6
State Contributory Funds (Schedule 15) —
Queensland .. . . . . . . 12,358 5 1
New South Wales .. .. .. 24,111 5 8
Victoria .. .. .. .. 58,786 15 2
South Australia .. . . . . 34,713 11 1
Western Australia .. . . .. 2,275 5 5
Tasmania .. .. .. .. 889 4 5
133,134 6 10
398,464 1 2
Against this amount, gifts, expenses, &c., to the value of £75,383 Is. 9d. (Schedule 21) were
written off on 31st December, 1917, leaving assets to the value of £323,080 19s. 5d. (Schedule 7)
as follows :—
£ 5. d.
Loans granted by State War Councils .. .. 146,631 1 0
Property held for allotment .. . . . . 376 10 0
Toy Factory, Adelaide .. .. . . 900 0 0
Contributions in kind (Schedule 14) .. .. 21,375 18 1
Cash .. .. .. .. ,. 153,797 10 4
323,080 19 5
It will be noted that provision of £3,000 has been made (Schedule 7) for the cost of the
Official War Films.


Receipts and Expenditure.
/Ci . _ J 1 lle n total received to the 31st December, 1917, amounted to £389,046 Os 8d
(Schedule 8) as follows : — *
£ s. d.
Commonwealth grant . . .. .. 250,000 0 0
Cash contributions (Schedule 15) .. .. 108 ? ,889 17 5
Official War Films .. .. .. .. 8 ? 285 2 6
Interest .. .. .. .. ’ ‘ 9,853 17 7
Contributions in kind realized .. .. 59 5 7
Loan repayments .. .. .. .. 10,193 3 2
Gifts revoked .. .. .. .. 108 5 1
Property realized .. .. .. .. 1,656 9 4
389,046 0 8
The funds are under statutory authority disbursed by the State War Councils, and the
allowances made by the Board to the 31st December, 1917, for this purpose amounted to £247,000
(Schedule 20) —
£ s. d.
Queensland.. ., .. .. .. 51,000 0 0
New South Wales .. .. .. .. 59,000 0 0
Victoria .. .. .. .. .. 75*000 0 0
South Australia .. .. .. .. 50,000 0 0
Western Australia .. . . .. ,. 7,000 0 0
Tasmania .. ., .. .. .. 5,000 0 0
247,000 0 0
Disbursements were made by the State War Councils to the extent of £235,248 10s. 4d.
(Schedule 8) for the following purposes, leaving balances in the hands of the State War Councils
of £11,751 9s. 8d.
£ 5. d.
Assistance to soldiers and dependants—-
Gifts 73,286 11 0
Loans .. .. .. .. 156,824 4 2
Loans written off .. .. .. 1,396 1 5
Expenses .. .. .. .. _ 508 10 7
Default account, Brisbane .. .. .. 285 13 10
Losses on Property .. .. .. .. 14 10 0
Property for allotment .. .. .. 2,032 19 4
Toy Factory .. .. .. ., 900 0 0
235,248 10 4
To the 31st December, 1917, contributions in kind were donated to the Fund to a value of
£21,440 3s. 8d. From these donations, tools of trade to the value of £5 were allotted, and £59 5s. 7d.
was realized in a sale of miscellaneous contributions, leaving a balance on h$nd of property to the
value of £21,375 18s. Id. (Schedule 9).
Position of the Fund at 30th June, 1917.
Statements are submitted under Schedule 22 showing the position of the Australian Soldiers’
Repatriation Fund at the 30th June, 1917.
ASSISTANCE GRANTED.
It might be reiterated that while the Board is responsible for the finances of the Fund, the
actual disbursement of moneys is, under the authority of the Act, carried out by the State War
Councils, bodies over which the Board has no control.
To the 31st December, 1917, applications were received to a total number of 10,654, and of
these 7,327 were approved and assistance granted, and in 3,327 cases the applications were refused.
In the 7,327 approved cases the sum of £73,286 11s. was granted to applicants for various
purposes, and loans were made to the extent of £158,220 5s. 7d. The statistical return
(Schedule 11) is submitted showing a complete analysis of the assistance granted from the Fund in
the various States.


—
Discharged to
31st December, 1917.
Total Number of
Applications.
Expenditure per
Man Assisted.
Queensland..
4,938
1,821
£
40
New South Wales
13,483
3,930
24
Victoria
13,548
3,288
28
South Australia
3,778
1,238
41
Western Australia v.
3,478
206
39
Tasmania
1,159
171
43
Total
40,384
10,654
—
It is difficult to make any comparison in the figures as between the States as the extent and
nature of the assistance available from other sources in the various States must be taken into
consideration.
In New South Wales the total number assisted was 2,313 for an expenditure of £55,591, or
£24 per head, whereas in South Australia, owing to the fact that a large number of men were
granted assistance for house building, an expenditure of £44,730 was incurred on behalf of 1,089
applicants, or an expenditure of £4l per man assisted.
The total number of men discharged on the 31st December, 1917, was 40,384, and the
following table indicates the number of men discharged in each State, number of men who applied
for assistance from the Repatriation Fund, and expenditure per man assisted :• —
Schedule 10 shows the extent of the operations in each State and the expenditure on account
of gifts and loans, together with the percentage of loans repayments on the instalments due on the
31st December, 1917.
NATURE AND EXTENT OF ASSISTANCE GRANTED.
The main classes of assistance were :—
Sustenance. —It was proposed that an allowance should be paid to those in need of assistance
during the initial period of re-establishment; that is to say, the particular undertaking on which
the applicant had embarked, or while the applicant was undergoing technical training. Altogether,
997 such cases were assisted, and the expenditure thereon amounted to £16,373 16s. 6d.
Furniture. —This form of assistance was recognised as tending to the permanent re-establish-
ment of the men, and where applicants were in necessitous circumstances, the Special Committees
of the State War Councils were authorized to make grants of essential articles of furniture only.
The grants were confined to married men, and single men with dependants, requiring such
assistance.
It was originally contemplated that this class of assistance should be made from the produce
of the Anzac Scheme, but, as already mentioned, the scheme was held up pending formulation
by the Government of a definite policy as to the sources from which the Fund would be
sustained.
It has been found that this class of assistance has been abused in many cases, the returned
soldier taking the view that the grant was due to him, not in relation to his necessities, but as a
matter of right. Consequently, the State War Councils have been only to grant same where
it is found that the applicant is not in a position to obtain necessary articles of furniture required
for the establishment of a home.
The total number assisted was 2,253, at a cost of £54,947 4s. 7d.
Vocational Training. —The facilities for technical training were provided, in the main, by
the State Governments through their existing institutions, but in none of the States has a definite
and comprehensive system of training men for occupancy of the land or other vocations been
formulated. However, where special instruction was necessary, only recognised teachers or teaching
institutions were availed of, and the cost was borne by the Repatriation Fund.
The total number afforded instruction in special cases was 447 at a cost to the Fund of
£4,535'18s. 4d.


Tools of Trade. —Provision was made by the Board for the equipment of men taking up
employment, and tools of trade and personal equipment were supplied where necessary. The total
number assisted in this way was 830, at a cost of £10,349 4s.
Farming , Plant , Seed , Live Stock. —The responsibility for settling soldiers on the land
was the function of the State Governments, and where the advances through the State under
the Settlement Scheme were considered adequate for the purpose, no additional allotments were
made from the Fund. However, if cases did not come within the scope of the State Government
scheme —as in the case of men engaging in share farming or operating on private land-assistance
was granted.
Although the. States undertook the responsibility of placing the soldier on the land, until
1917 there was no uniformity in the conditions under which the men should be assisted.
Consequently, the assistance in this direction from the Fund varied considerably in each State.
In Victoria, for instance, as the Soldiers’ Settlement Bill had not been passed by Parliament, the
Fund came to the assistance of men who had been allotted blocks by the Lands Department, but
who were without sufficient capital to make a start. A number of direct advances in sums up to
£l5O each were accordingly made to these settlers; but as, under the Premiers’ Conference agree-
ment, these advances were a State obligation, the Executive, as the result of the Victorian
Government’s negotiations, considered that the best method of dealing with this matter was to
advance the Lands Department a lump sum of £lO,OOO. This advance has been repaid.
A similar arrangement has been made with regard to advances to soldiers taking up the land
under the Soldiers’ Settlement Scheme in Tasmania, but to the 31st December, 1917, no amount
was paid out.
There has been a strong tendency among men to take up poultry farming. The living to
be obtained from this industry is at all times precarious, and although the Special Committees
of the War Councils may be presumed to have made a careful selection of men and that each
proposition has been closely investigated, it is considered that a great many failures will
result.
The total number assisted in land settlement was 688, at an expenditure of £43,820 14s. sd.
Small Businesses and Plant. —The matter of small businesses has been a very difficult one,
and in the smallest business a certain amount of special knowledge and aptitude is required,
especially as the amount advanced from the Fund for this purpose in any one case has not exceeded
£l5O. The demand for this class of assistance has been particularly heavy owing, probably, to
the illusion of personal independence which seems to attach to a small business.
The State War Councils have been asked thoroughly to investigate any propositions of
this kind and also to see that the applicant possesses special suitability for this class of occupation.
Unfortunately in certain States the percentage of failures has been fairly large, and, on the experi-
ence gained, the Trustees are of opinion that this form of assistance should be rigorously restricted
to cases which cannot be suitably dealt with in any other way.
The total number assisted was 1,041 at an expenditure of £54,745 11s. Id.
Homes. —At the Premiers’ Conference held in January, 1917, it was decided that State
Governments should, through their existing institutions, grant special facilities to soldiers desirous
of building homes or reducing onerous mortgages. The States were to advance up to 75 per cent.,
the Repatriation Fund to advance 25 per cent., not exceeding £75 to provide a margin of safety.
The number assisted was 306, at a cost of £23,691 os. 3d.
Tteneival of Artificial Limbs. —The Premiers’ Conference held in January last resolved
that the renewal and repair of artificial limbs should be the duty of the Repatriation authority,
and this resolution was acted upon by the Board.
The Defence Department is making the initial provision for limbs; subsequent supply
being the responsibility of the Repatriation authority.
The Fund has assisted 130 cases, at a cost of £677 18s. Id.
Indidgence Passages.—ln April, 1916, the Commonwealth Government decided to grant
indulgence passages on transports to members of the Australian Imperial Force who, being totally
or permanently incapacitated, desired to return to their friends or relatives in England, if the
latter were prepared to care for them.
In view of the fact that recommendations were being made on behalf of men who could
not be considered permanently or totally incapacitated, the Minister of Defence desired that the
responsibility for granting passages should rest with the Repatriation authorities.


After consultation with the Minister it was decided to accept this responsibility, and the
Executive laid down the following principle for the guidance of the State War Councils in dealing
with future cases : —
“ If in the opinion of the War Council and the Military (Medical) authority, the
applicant in point of character, aptness and physical condition is likely to earn his own
livelihood and become an asset to the community in an economic sense, the recom-
mendation of an indulgence passage should be withheld, but if, on the other hand, it
should seem to the War Council, in the light of the medical opinion and the general
circumstances, that the applicant is likely to be a burden on the community, it would
be to the advantage of himself and of the Commonwealth that he should be returned
to those elsewhere who are prepared to see to his welfare.”
Since this decision was given the policy has been extended to embrace wives and families
of soldiers, and also to provide passages to the Commonwealth in special cases
Miscellaneous. —In addition to the above, 303 cases were assisted generally at a cost of
£14,685 18s. 3d.
APPLICATIONS REFUSED.
The total number of applications refused was 3,327, and a classification of applications is
set out in Schedule 12.
TOY FACTORY, ADELAIDE,
On the recommendation of the State War Council, Adelaide, the Trustees advanced the
sum of £900 to the Special Committee of that Council for the purpose of establishing a Toy Factory
wherein it was proposed to employ returned soldiers in the manufacture of toys. The venture
proved unsatisfactory, and on the 24th June the Council decided to close down the Factory.
At the end of that month the assets had not been realized, but the position of the accounts
showed a loss of £362 Os. 6d. It is understood that the State Government of South Australia is
taking over the machinery and equipment for training purposes, but arrangements have not been
completed.
IRREGULARITIES, STATE WAR COUNCIL, BRISBANE.
The audit report on the Queensland Repatriation Accounts disclosed a defalcation of
£285 13s. lOd.
The Board has advised the State War Councils of the expediency of seeing that officers
holding responsible positions are insured under fidelity guarantee.
EXPENSES.
A sum of £508 10s. 7d. appears under this heading, and the particulars of this expenditure
are set out in Schedule 16. The amount represents expenditure incurred in effecting allotment
of property and does not include administrative expenses which were borne by the Federal and
State Governments respectively.
The administrative expenses of the Board of Trustees were borne by the Commonwealth
Government, and to the 31st December, 1917, the sum of £4,905 15s. 9d. was expended as per
Schedule 17. It may be pointed out that this includes the sum of £1,362 14s. 3d. expended on
books, stationery, &c., supplied to State War Councils in order to secure a uniform system of record
of a character adequate to the larger requirements of the Fund as originally conceived.
POSTAGE GRANT.
In view of the heavy cost involved in securing returns from Local Committees for contri-
butions received and investigations made of cases, the Government authorized the Board to draw
on the Commonwealth to the extent of £1,000 for postage. As a general appeal, however, was
not launched, except in two States, the Board did not have occasion to call for more than £395
(vide Schedule 18).
LORD ROBERTS’ MEMORIAL WORKSHOPS.
A proposal was made to the Board through the High Commissioner for the training at the
Lord Roberts’ Memorial Workshops of 100 limbless men in certain trades, with the object of
ultimately utilizing the services of those men as instructors on their return to Australia. The
cost per man was fixed at £50, and sixteen trades were enumerated in which instruction would
be given. The Committee governing the organization expressed its’willingness to place at the
disposal of the Commonwealth authority patent rights, secret processes, and designs for use in
connexion with similar workshops which subsequently may be established in Australia.


Tie High Commissioner recommended the proposal and the Minister for Defence agreed
but suggested that the selected men be discharged from the Australian Imperial lW and be
paid by the trustees from the Repatriation Fund. ’
+1 Th r fffnoo^ 6 i 9° mmlttee of the Board recommended to the full Board the allocation of
the sum of £5,000 for the purpose of training 100 men, and this was agreed to
feteps were taken to secure information as to the employing possibilities of each trade in
fOT training 8 ' 811 dasses a P ro P er proportion of the total number of men admitted
wea] ,, proposal however, was not proceeded with in view of the decision of the Common-
training oTsoMei° Wh ° 6 q - Uestl0n of re P atri ation and formulate a scheme for
LEGAL WORK.
o , The services of the Commonwealth Crown Law Officers were placed at the disposal of the
Board of Trustees. The State War Councils also had the advice of the State Crown Law Officers
in connexion with the work.
Dnder the Australian Soldiers’ Repatriation Fund Act many legal difficulties have arisen
in respect to the acceptance of contributions of property, and also in relation to securities for
advances made. The Board being a Trustee body could not in a convenient wav delegate its
power of acceptance of property, nor was it in a position to secure advances in ordinary wav of
eg a i procedure. In most cases an acknowledgment of advance has been taken with the condition
that the applicant will complete any further documents required by the Trustees. This was
done m order to safeguard the Fund until the legislation contemplated by the Premiers’ Con-
ference of 1917 was enacted.
In certain States where the State War Councils have been established corporate bodies, the
ordinary legal securities can be taken, but where the State War Councils are not thus constituted
an acknowledgment of advance has been obtained.
INTEREST.
Although the regulations provide that interest can be charged after a certain date, the
Trustees have not thought fit to inflict this penalty.
ADOPTION OF COMMONWEALTH CONTROL.—RECOMMENDATIONS TO COMMON-
WEALTH GOVERNMENT.
Repatriation Fund and its Relation to other Funds and Organizations.
The experience in dealing with returned men and the dependants of men demonstrated
the need for a substantial equality of treatment irrespective of States, and this could be assured
only by Commonwealth control.
Although the administrative policy of the Repatriation Trustees was designed to secure
equality of treatment so far as the Repatriation Fund was concerned, there were so many activi-
ties carried on by the States, and outside the jurisdiction of the Trustees altogether, that their efforts
at best only touched the fringe of things. Moreover, the Repatriation Fund Act itself disclosed
serious defects. Under it the Trustees, as previously mentioned, while responsible for the assembling
and allocation of funds, had no control over the actual administration, which was carried out
by the State War Councils ; the Trustees had no say in the regulation of activities however closely
related they might be to the general purposes of civilian re-establishment. There were also legal
defects in the acceptance of property donated to the Fund, and of the acceptance of securities
over advances made. The Board also found that it was unable to allot moneys to any of the
territories of the Commonwealth as distinguished from the States.
Further, indefiniteness existed as to the obligations of the State Governments mainly in
regard to the cost of the administration of the Fund. Four States, viz., Queensland, Victoria,
Western Australia and Tasmania, intimated that in their opinion that cost should be defrayed
by the Fund, or by the Commonwealth Government.
The other matters then outstanding in regard to State control were : —
(a) Railway freights.
( h ) The precise responsibility of the States in regard to : —
House applications with reference to (1) necessitous widows and the totally
incapacitated ; (2) generally.
Supplementary pensions.
(c) Whether advances to settlers were to be confined to permanent improvements
only, or whether they were to be extended to plant and stock, and the amount.


(d) The policy to be adopted to give land applicants an opportunity to gain rural
experience.
( e ) The policy to be adopted in regard to technical training.
(/) The necessity for action to provide that from the patriotic funds in existence a
sufficient sum shall be placed at the disposal of the War Councils, or other
approved body, wherewith to meet the soldiers’ claims for immediate amelio-
rative aid as distinguished from repatriative assistance.
(g) Arrangement with State Governments to take over settlement and building lands
donated, crediting the Fund with the value as assessed by an approved body.
Patriotic and Other Funds.
In addition to the Repatriation Fund, the principal agencies and activities operating in the
work of catering for the needs of soldiers and their dependants were —
1. Red Cross.— The purpose of the Red Cross Funds is well defined. (These funds
are restricted to provision for the sick and wounded soldier while he remains
technically a soldier).
2. Australia Bay Funds— These are restricted to the needs of soldiers on the strength.
3. Patriotic Funds. (Lord Mayors’, Mayors’, &c.).—Restricted to provision for the
dependants of men on service.
4. Comforts' Funds. —For the supply of comforts to men on service.
5. Amelioration Funds— For the relief of the small cash necessities of men on their
return whether before or after their discharge.
Local Funds.
While it was in contemplation that the Repatriation Fund should be a National Fund on
a voluntary basis, it was felt that the existence of some local funds and the projection of others
would seriously interfere with the principle of equality of treatment, and with a view to securing
control over these funds a regulation was passed under the War Precautions Act in September
1916, prohibiting the raising of money without the consent of the State War Councils.
In accordance with the Act the disbursement of moneys from the Repatriation Fund was
the duty of the State War Councils, which bodies were asked to form local War Service Committees
for the purpose of appealing for contributions and reporting on claims for assistance.
The fact that no general appeal was launched has resulted in very few committees being
constituted, but local support and advice was always freely obtained and given in dealing with
the applications for assistance.
State War Councils.
As has been stated before these are and have been the official bodies dealing with Returned
soldiers generally. They were honorary bodies appointed by the State Governments, and were
composed of representatives of the Federal and State Parliaments and business and ’ industrial
interests.
Under the scheme of organization suggested by the Federal Parliamentary War Committee
the Councils were sectionalized in sub-committees to deal respectively with
Disablements. -The provision of artiffical limbs and other surgical aids, and the training
of maimed men for useful occupations.
Employment. —Finding of positions for men able to enter employment.
Land Settlement. —The registration of men desiring to settle upon the land, and the
notification of the various State Lands Departments of those deemed suitable.
Finance.— Collection and distribution of funds for general ameliorative purposes.
Local Action.— The foundation of Local Committees throughout the State to act as
auxiliaries to the central body generally, and also to organize working bees
to assist discharged men settling in the district to get their holdings quickly
into a producing condition. These Local Committees were able to watch
over the interests of dependants.
The general returns show that 40,384 were discharged to the end of December, and that
approximately 18,693 men, or 46 per cent., have registered for employment with the Councils’
Bureaux ; the great majority of men have been introduced through this agency.
They also, in association with the Technical Education Institutions in the States and
through private teaching establishments, prepared a percentage of men for new occupations and
introduced others to such opportunities for land settlement as the State Governments were
offering.


Only in one State (Victoria) had a Council raised and disbursed’ its own fund for
ameliorative purposes. In the other States this work has been left to the other funds in existence.
Since July, 1916, they have acted as the statutory channel of administration for the
distribution of funds provided by the Eepatriation Board.
Until the end of June of last year the entire expenses of the Councils were defrayed by the
respective State Governments, and their staffs were provided mainly by the State Public Services,
supplemented by temporary appointments from the ranks of the returned soldiers where suitable
men were available.
Since July, 1917, the expenses of the Councils, which at present are at the rate of over
£25,000 a year, have been borne by the Commonwealth.
It is the activities of these State organizations, rearranged and expanded, which will become
the concern of the Commonwealth Department of Repatriation.
Recommendations for Commonwealth Responsibility and Control.
A memorandum addressed to the Prime Minister in respect to the definition of the functions
of the States in relation to the administration of the Repatriation Fund dealing with the situation
as then existing and subsequent developments, called for further recommendations which were
drafted at the request of the Prime Minister.
These recommendations the Prime Minister caused to be circulated at the Conference of
Premiers in January, 1917, as the recommendations of the Executive only, the Conference having
intervened before they could receive the indorsement of the full Board of Trustees.
The recommendations were drafted in the light of the experience which definitely pointed
to the necessity —as it appeared to the Executive—of giving the Trustees direct control of the
administration of the Fund, and of associated Funds. The Executive also had before it the Prime
Minister’s intimation that the division, as formerly understood, of land settlement finance from
the general repatriation finance controlled by the Trustees, could not continue, and that advances
for land settlement would have to be met out of the Fund. Furthermore, the Executive took
into consideration the Prime Minister’s statement that the Repatriation question, as a whole,
must be considered as a Commonwealth responsibility, and also must be the concern, primarily,
of the Commonwealth authority.
The Executive’s general recommendations for dealing with the problem, as a whole, upon
a basis of Commonwealth responsibility and control, were as follows :
1. That the entire question of the re-establisment of discharged soldiers, and the care
of the dependants of soldiers generally, be made the concern of a Common-
wealth authority, and that it be considered whether the Board of Trustees—
composed as it is of representatives of all parties in Parliament and of leading
business men —is not a suitable body to be constituted such authority.
2. That it be the business of this central Commonwealth authority to devise a sub-
stantially uniform system of dealing with returned soldiers and the dependants
of soldiers on service, or of soldiers who have died as a result of service, in
respect of—
(a) Immediate Amelioration , i.e ., the provision of means for meeting
immediate cash necessities. —This either by supplementing the
military pay before discharge or of sustenance after discharge until
employment or remunerative occupation can be found.
(h) Care of the totally incapacitated. —To include housing where necessary.
(c) Training of the partially disabled for a Useful Vocation. —To include the
provision and renewal of artificial limbs and other aids.
( d ) Employment generally.
(e) Assistance towards permanent re-establishment by —
(1) Settlement on the land, to include advances for improve-
ments, plant, seed, stock, and sustenance during the
initial period.
(2) Small businesses where such are deemed a desirable form
of provision.
(3) Grants for tools of trade.
(4) Assistance towards house establishment —( a ) loans for house
building or purchase (to include the conversion of existing
mortgages when terms onerous); .(b) grants for furni-
ture to a prescribed amount.


( f ) Care of dependants —
(a) of men who die.
(b) of men on service ; to include school endowments in cases
where the pension allowances are insufficient to provide
an education of the same standard as the children
would have received had the father not died or become
incapacitated.
(g) The co-ordination of governmental and private efforts for the expansion
of existing and the promotion of new industries to meet the demand
for special and general employment.
(h) The assembling and administration of funds.
3. That the War Councils of the States, in so far as it may be deemed expedient by
the Commonwealth authority to retain their services, shall be constituted
Commonwealth bodies operating within broad lines of policy indicated from
time to time by the central Commonwealth authority; that their staffs be
responsible, through the War Councils, to the Central Commonwealth authority;
and that where such staffs consist of members of the State Public Services,
the State Governments be asked to permit the continuance in employment of
such officers where desirable for a period up to two years after the conclusion of
the war without prejudice to their rights under the Public Service Regulations
of the respective States.
4. That all funds available for the assistance of returned soldiers or for the dependants
of soldiers deceased, at home or abroad, be placed under the control of the
Commonwealth authority to be uniformly administered by its officers with
or without the advice of such honorary committees as may be determined.
Such funds to exclude those subscribed for purely Red Cross purposes, for
local application, or for relief in the Allied countries.
5. That the Commonwealth authority be vested with power to control all appeals
for funds for war purposes and to prescribe the conditions governing the
administration of all funds so raised.
6. That the office of the Commonwealth authority in each State capital shall act as a
registration and clearing centre for all soldiers on their return and that every
returned soldier be obliged to register there before his discharge, giving
particulars as to his needs (if any).
7. That, in regard to general and special employment, vocational training, allotments
of money for re-establishment, and for such other purposes as may be deemed
expedient, the practice of associating honorary committees with the
administration be continued, but such committees to be advisory only.
8. That, being relieved of the expenses incidental to the functions now discharged by
the War Councils, the State Governments be asked to place at the disposal
of the Commonwealth authority all State facilities which it may be considered
by the Commonwealth authority to be necessary for vocational training, such
facilities to include training for rural occupation.
9. That, in regard to land settlement, the States be asked to bring their legislation
designed for the benefit of soldiers into substantial conformity, and to make
provision each for the treatment of soldiers of the United Kingdom and the
other dominions in the same manner as for the Australian soldier.
10. That land be provided for occupation by soldiers, and the advancement of moneys
furnished by the Commonwealth for improvements, &c., and the subsequent
supervision of the settlers, and the collection of instalments, be undertaken by
the State administrations, subject to general conditions prescribed by the
Commonwealth.
11. That the States be asked to agree to a uniform scale of advances to soldiers desiring
to build or purchase dwellings in certain areas, or to convert existing mortgages
of an onerous character, the Commonwealth authority to guarantee the
“ margin of safety.”
12. That the States be asked to co-operate in the development of large national
enterprises, as, for instance, afforestation, * calculated to provide an
“ employment reserve ” for men who cannot be otherwise placed for the time
being.
F. 8060.—2


13. That the States be asked to afford free railway passes to men travelling to employ-
ment and also free freightage of all goo'ds which may be despatched in connexion
with -Repatriation purposes.
14. That on all bodies concerned with the repatriation of men under the Common-
dethable m8 ’ representation of soldiers who have been on active service is
Conference of Federal and State Ministers held in January 1917
r “ mendations submitted to the Prime Minister were’the basis of the
ST i rtf Repatriation proposals at the Inter-State Conference held in January, 1917,
ana were, in the mam, adopted J
The 'principal decisions of the ConfeTence in question weve ;—
(1) The definite establishment of Commonwealth control over all matters affecting
Repatriation.
(2) State control of land settlement, acting in conjunction with the Common-
wealth Government through the instrumentality of the “ Soldiers’ Settle-
ment Board of Australia.”
As a result of the Conference steps were taken to give effect to the decisions, and the
Australian Soldiers Repatriation Act was passed by Parliament in 1917, authorising the
of^tWsnatfomfwork^ e^ a^na^10n Department for tPe purpose of controlling the administration
Land Settlement.
r^g ar( i to land settlement, this phase of the Repatriation question has been left to
the States as having the machinery existing for giving effect to any policy decided upon.
from the beginning the arrangement has been that land settlement should be the
responsibility of the States, and should be effected through existing State departmental
machinery. At first the States were to do everything that was necessary in this direction, without
reference to the Commonwealth. Then it was agreed (Conference, February, 1916) that, while
the States should still find the land, the Commonwealth should “ provide funds by way of loans
to the States for the purpose of making advances through the agricultural banks or similar
Government institutions against improvements effected by soldier settlers, and that such loans
s ou d be advanced at interest not exceeding 31 per cent, in the first year, increasing by A per cent,
each subsequent year to the full rate of interest at which the money had been raised, plus
working expenses, the difference between those rates and the cost to the Government of the
money to be borne equally by the Commonwealth Government and the State Governments.”
At the same time the State Governments were invited to liberalize the conditions applying
to the repayments for land, and land bank advances, if practicable upon a uniform basis.
The position, viewed from a Commonwealth stand-point, still remained unsatisfactory,
because of the want of uniformity in the legislation of the States relating to settlement, and
because also of the unsuitability of this legislation (designed for ordinary settlement) in some cases
to suit the special requirements of discharged men.
SOLDIERS’ SETTLEMENT BOARD OP AUSTRALIA.
At a further Conference (Federal and State Ministers, Melbourne, January, 1917) the
previous resolutions were re-affirmed, but in order to .provide a nexus as between the States and
the Commonwealth, the Conference provided for the appointment of a Board consisting of a Minister
from each State and a Commonwealth Minister, to be known as the “ Soldiers’ Settlement Board
of Australia.”
The Board was empowered to consider and make recommendations in respect to—
(a) The maximum or minimum advances to be made to each settler irrespective of land
provision.
(b) The purposes for which advances may be made, i.e., whether to cover stock, seed,
plant, and implements, as well as fixed improvements.
(c) The percentage of advances which may be made as against appraised value of
improvements.
(d) The rate of interest which should be paid by settlers.
(e) The duration of initial period during which interest or instalments will be suspended.
(/) Generally to secure, as far as the varying conditions of each State will allow,
uniformity of conditions throughout the Commonwealth for soldier land
settlement.


( g) To receive, summa rize, and circulate a monthly report to be furnished by each State,
showing the number of applications for land made by returned soldiers, the
number of applicants placed during the period involved, the number of
applications remaining in the books, and such other information as to progress
of soldier settlement as may be of interest.
(h) To consider all matters in relation to the scheme and to make such recommendations
as from time to time may seem, necessary for its successful operation.
Queensland agreed to the general resolution, but stood out of the agreement as applying
to the Board. The effect of this action was to place this State outside the scope of the land
settlement scheme in so far as it had relation to Commonwealth assistance in the matter of advances.
RESOLUTIONS OF SOLDIERS’ SETTLEMENT BOARD OF AUSTRALIA.
The Board met in Melbourne in July, 1917, and considered various questions which had not
been defined by the Premiers’ Conference.
Although the maximum amount of the advance in any one case was not specifically stated
in the resolutions of the Premiers’ Conference, it was generally understood in the discussions and
public announcements that the amount should be £500.
It became necessary to indicate more clearly the conditions under which the advances
might be made, to reconsider the maximum in some cases, and to determine whether the advance
should be confined to men settling upon Crown land or land resumed by the Crown, or whether
it might also be available to men settling on private land or engaging in share farming.
The Board agreed : —
(a) That where the Commonwealth makes available to the States moneys for advances,
the full amount charged to the individual shall be expended upon his particular
holding. (This amounted to an affirmation of the Commonwealth’s responsi-
bility to see that the soldier settler got the full benefit of the advance. It had
been brought to the notice of the Minister that in some States some of the
expenses of making areas available for group settlement—as, for instance, the
making of roads within the area —were being charged against the advances.
The Minister took the view that this was properly a charge against development
work, and the soldier’s liability should be rightly confined to expenditure on his
own holding).
(b) That the advance made to any settler shall, as far as practicable, be expended in
such improvements as the settler $iay effect or direct.
(c) That the advance shall be for the purpose of effecting improvements or purchasing
implements, stock, and things deemed necessary for the successful cultivation
of the land.
(< d ) That the advance made available under the general scheme may also be granted
in respect of land owned or to be purchased by a soldier settler. Similar advance,
except for the purpose of improvement, may be made in respect of lands leased
by a settler on such security as the Government of the State concerned may
deem sufficient.
( e ) That advances may also be made by any State to enable soldier settlers to carry
on operations as share-farmers on such security as the State concerned may
deem sufficient.
(/) That provided their military records are satisfactory, soldiers enlisted in the
Australian Imperial Forces, but not sent to the front, be given the privileges
extended to returned soldiers.
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES IN CONNEXION WITH THE
NATURE OF COMMONWEALTH CONTROL.
The full Board of Trustees met on the 11th January, 1917, and, inter alia, considered the
final recommendations of the Conference of Federal and State Ministers, held 5th January.
After discussion on the question of the establishment of Commonwealth control, the Board
resolved —
“ That it be a recommendation of the Board that a Repatriation Commissioner for
Australia be appointed.”
2 2


decision as to what form Authority ”wuldtakf' ? &
Executive Committee of the Board, acting on behalf of the full Board
forwarded the following communication to the Prime Minister 8 IUU ±soard ’
giR Appointment of a Repatriation Commissioner and Us to the
■ n .,-af* “ *• * JMlon of 11. Board tlal . Eopatriatio. Commtaio.o, for A.atr.li. b,
tssS^^mis;ss^~^=^
(а) That the Board is representative of all parties in the Federal Parliament, and of industrial business
tbtu^ a "Tt l nte , rests ’ and a convenient medium for the representation of any special interest
which might be deemed desirable, as for instance, the returned soldiers.
(б) While the Board is responsible to Parliament in a general sense, it is sufficiently removed from direct
political pressure to secure a reasonable independence in administration.
4 It should be recognised, however, that if the Board is to be constituted the “ Commonwealth Authority ” the
scope of its jurisdiction will be very much wider than it is now. Under the existing Act, it is charged with the assembling
and administration of the Repatriation Fund only. Under the new conditions, it would have the oversight of all fandf
tb Jsiu tO , P ?. P . OSe ® connected with the War, and be responsible for the administration of such of them as may be made
the subject of direct control. It will, in addition, be responsible for all the direct activities—other than those connected
with land settlement designed for the re-establishment of the discharged soldier, and the care of his dependants The
widei range of function, involving much more than is connected by the word “ trustee,” it would seem necessarvto chanve
ferisbrtio nat T fr ° m B °tn d t Tl , UStees ”*? “ Anstralian Repatriation Board,” and to widen the scope of the covering
S ", In an > case, the Trustees are advised it will be necessary to make the Board a bodv corporate in order to
facilitate the procedure in connexion with the receiving and allotment of property, ' P
( 5. If the Government concurs in the suggestion that the Australian Repatriation Board be constituted the
to°a B^rdT^DLltors 011 * 7 ’ ** CommlSsloner or DlrectOT would stand to it in the relation of a chief executive officer
The Chief Executive Officer could be held responsible for the conduct of the Administration, and would exercise
such powers as devolved on him. * ’ u exeicise
As a matter of practice he would manage all the activities which it may be necessary to set in motion, to facili-
tate the general re-establishment of men, and would only refer to his Board broad matters of policy involving the
allocation of funds and the principles of treatment which he may propose for general application. He would have
admimstiative control of the Staff, but the relationship of that control of appointments would depend upon whether
it is the desire of the Government to treat the Board’s staff as part of the Commonwealth Public Service. In the latter
case, the Commissioner, through the Board, would look to the Service to supply his staff. In the event of the Govern-
ment deciding to treat the Staff as outside the scope of the Public Service Act, the Commissioner would recommend
appointments for the Board s approval. Seeing, however, that it may be convenient and even necessary to employ
certain officers who are already members of the Public Service and that there would be difficulty in transferring these
without prejudice to their rights, if the Board’s staff were outside the Act, the simpler method would be to treat the*
Staff as part of the general service. This would not prevent recourse to outside sources in cases where the reouire-
ments would not be suitably met from the ranks of the existing Service. 4
6. The arrangement above indicated involves the Board being the repository of the Commonwealth Authoritv
and the Commissioner or Director being made executant of that Authority, The alternative—which found less favour
in the discussion at the Trustees’ meeting, was to make the Commissioner the chief repository of authority and the Board
an advisory body only. The Executive, after consideration, does not think that this method is to be recommended
as it would still mean a measure of divided control. The Board, in these circumstances, would still have responsibility
tor the h unds—or at least the Repatriation Fund, which will always represent the bulk of the total available funds
That responsibility involves not only the custody of the Fund, but also the collection of that part of it which is obtained
through voluntary contributions. The collection and care of contributions (largely as they will be in kind) involve
a wide and unavoidably elaborate machinery, of which the War Councils of the States and large numbers of honorary
bodies are part. If, therefore, the Commissioner were to have an ambit of operations independent of the Board it would
be difficult in practice to say where the Board’s activities should cease, and his begin. Moreover, if the Board is to be
responsible for the disbursement of millions of money, it must have the right not only to lay down the general principles
which shall govern allotments, but also have some say in the administrative system which is to be relied upon to give
those principles effective application. If, for instance, the Board is to allocate money for sustenance during training
for an avocation, it would want to be satisfied that the training machinery is effective. If it is to give assistance pending
the provision of employment, it would want to be satisfied that the methods taken to bring men in touch with employ-
ment were the most expeditious, that could be adopted, and so generally. With the Board as the ultimate authority
it would require such information on all points as it thought necessary, and it would be the Chief Executive Officer’s


duty to supply it. With the Commissioner an independent authority, the Board’s position would be no more satis-
factory than it is now. It would merely hand oyer money without having the power to see that it was effectively spent.
With the Commissioner acting as Chief-Executive of the Board, the administration would still be in his hands, but he
would have to satisfy the Board with his results, and in the last resort there would be only one authority.
,
7. The Executive recommends : /
(1) That the Board of Trustees of the Repatriation Fund be constituted the “ Commonwealth Authority
to discharge the functions indicated in the recommendations agreed to at the recent Conference of
Premiers. , ,
(2) That the name of the Board be changed to “ Australian Repatriation Board,” and that it be made a body
corporate. ■-y . xl
(3) That the Repatriation Board be required to meet at least moAtJj/br on such other occasions
as the Chairman may consider necessary.
(4) That a man of wide administrative experience and capacity be appointed Chief Executive Officer of the
Board with the title of Commissioner (or Director).
(5) That the Commissioner’s appointment be for five years, except that in the case of gross incompetence
or misconduct, or prolonged ill-health he may be removed by the Commonwealth Government, on
the advice of the Board, on payment of the equivalent of one year’s salary.
(6) That the Chief Executive Officer of the Board have full authority over the Administration of the Board’s
activities, suject to the review of the Board as to matters of general policy.
(7) That the Commissioner present to the Board monthly such financial statements or other information
as the Board may require.
(8) That the Board’s staff be subject to the Commonwealth Public Service Act.
(9) That provision be made for the representation upon the Board of returned soldiers.
(10) That the Board shall present to Parliament annually a complete report upon the work of Repatriation
generally, and a statement of the finances at the close of the financial year.
8 The foregoing recommendations have relation solely to the resolution passed at the Trustees meeting. If
there are any variations of the arrangement contemplated by that resolution upon which you would wish to have the
view of my Executive. I am directed to say that the same will be supplied on receipt of your request.
Following upon this communication, the Deputy Chairman of the Board and Mr. Arthur
Baillieu who were the members of the Executive available at the time, while considering themselves
as an Executive bound by the terms of the Board’s resolution, held personal views, and felt
compelled to submit the same to the Prime Minister. Their recommendations were—
(l) The complexity of the problem calls for the application of a combination of faculties
not usually found, in a strong degree, in any one man.
(2) The area of criticism is so wide, and the feelings of the public in this regard are so
tender, that even the best individual performance is likely to fall short ot
expectations ; and to expose an individual to the full brunt of the criticism
which is inevitable, would be to jeopardize his health if he should be a sensitive
man, and if he be not a sensitive man, he, most probably, would lack the
fundamental qualification for the position. His other capabilities apart from
the essential for success in the administrating authority would be the possession
of a sympathetic imagination. Without sympathy, there would be lack
of the all-important human touch. Without imagination there would be lack
of resource in finding a road through the new, various, and difficult situations
that will continually arise. If you have in view a man who can combine these
qualities with wide knowledge of life at many points (including the political
intricacies of industrial life at the present time), with administrative facility
and energy of action, by all means appoint him. But such a combination in one
man is rare, and the experiment of appointing one man on the off-chance, seems
to us to be hazardous.
(3) The mere geographical consideration impresses us. This administration will be as
wide as the Commonwealth, and if it is to be effective it should be, at all points,
fairly intimate. At the beginning, certainly, a personal visit to all the States
will be necessary in order to piece together the machinery m conformity with a
unified policy. But we can conceive that occasional, perhaps frequent, visits
will also be necessary. One man would have difficulty in so distributing himself.
True, he could act on the reports of inspectional officers as do the general
managers of businesses with Commonwealth ramifications. But, while the
problem at hand has business elements, it is not a business as ordinarily under-
stood It has to do with the disposition of human factors which are not only
variable, but abnormal. Situations will arise in different parts of the Common-
wealth requiring prompt treatment, and they will not arise m all parts
simultaneously.


(4) For these reasons chiefly, Mr. Baillieu and myself think that the object in view
three rather °tiia Ii ° f & WViTfn* by tb ® a PP ointment of a Commission of
dOTartmentaW? Wlth thr ® e , men > the field would be more effectively
departmentalized, while the responsibility would be spread, and being snread
SJ**iS2r** f p*.5 yJS& h SS3Z&
system of traS > v\°” 7 necessary to determine the most effective
system of training (which is a fundamental question), but there is a further
question of employment and the wide re-absorption of men into the mdSrial
the community involves special arrangements with the industrial
offiTtaud S^ arran f men r\ Wllicl1 ma7 mean Ver7 cons iderable modification
moBon d l Pra I 1 "® ° f th ° Se f8 anizati ons. This, together with the pro-
motion of special employments, and the survey of industrial activities generally
., £ fi 11 , 1 , 16 ver y continuous attention from a competent mind. The question of
the bon* 111118 a UndS ’ and °j tact 1 ful inter course with, and regulation of all
onorary bodies associated with the collection and distribution of funds
likewise requires responsible attention. In addition, there is the general
ersight of the administration as it applies to the Commonwealth as a whole.
(5) We have considered the question of cost as between a Commission of three and of
one, and have concluded that in relation to the general object, this is not
important The cost of three need not, in fact, be appreciably more when it is
reflected that the work of two additional Commissioners would still have to be
JS? 7 + ? ffice i S of SU P 0 ™ r qualifications, paid accordingly. The only difference
is that the officers would not carry the same responsibility, and would not, in
all cases, be able to act directly and with the requisite authority.
(6) Three Commissioners would be members of the Repatriation Board, and act as the
Executive of such Board without any assistance from the honorary members
ibis arrangement would fit in conveniently with the conception of the Board
as the Commonwealth Authority.”
(7) A Commission of three would permit of one member being a returned soldier—an
officer of.standing—thus meeting the view of the returned soldiers as a body
more fully than would be the case if their representation were confined to
membership ot the honorary and non-executive section of the Board.”
jTHE SECRETARY.
i rl As “ embers of the Executive, we feel we cannot close this Report without reference to the
Mlv reX P /r r SeCre a17 ’ M J-T J ffi Gi,bert i When tbe Trustees ™de the appointment they
jT/tI 1 1 d lm of the office, and how essential it was for the successful working of
W D bX rtm X tha t S10u d be bn ,® d b T a man of capacity and special gifts. They thought
they had secured such a man in Mr. Gilbert. Experience has proved they were right. Mr Gilbert
came to this office with a wide knowledge of the literature of repatriation. He had also been
personally associated with the movement from its origin in the Commonwealth, To this knowledge
and this experience Mr. Gilbert adds the rare faculty of being able both to grasp principles and to
master details In the preparatory work connected with repatriation, he has rendered service of
the highest value Most zealous in the performance of his duties, he has not spared himself in any
admiffistrative abflit\ Xe ° UtlVS bave had the S reat advantage of his literary skill as well as of his
(Sgd.) 0. MORRICE WILLIAMS,
Deputy Chairman.
(Sgd.) D. J. GILBERT,
Secretary.


SCHEDULES.
No. 1. Appeal issued by Commonwealth and State Governments.
No. 2. Australian Soldiers’ Repatriation Fund Act , No. 7of 1916.
No. 3. Powers and Functions of the Executive Committee of the Board.
No. 4. Attendances of Members of the Board of Trustees and the Executive Committee of the Board.
No. 5. Regulations issued under the Act.—Statutory Rules, Nos. 142 and 288 of 1916.
No. 6. Regulations issued under the War Precautions Act. —Statutory Rules, Nos. 97, 218, 255, and 263 of 1916.
No. 7. Balance-sheet, 31st December, 1917.
No. 8. Statement of Receipts and Expenditure, 31st December, 1917.
No. 9. Statement of Receipts and Issues of Contributions in Kind, 31st December, 1917.
No. 10. Statement showing Disbursements by way of Gift and Loan in each State.
No. 11. Analysis of Assistance Granted.
No. 12. Analysis of Cases Refused.
No. 13. Analysis of Special Cases submitted to the Executive Committee of the Board.
No. 14. Statement of Contributions in Kind held on 31st December, 1917.
No. 15. Statement showing particulars of the State Contributory Funds, 31st December, 1917.
No. 16. Analysis of Expenses charged to the Fund.
No. 17. Analysis of Expenses of Administration to 31st December, 1917.
No. 18. Expenditure under Postage Grant to 31st December, 1917.
No. 19. Expenditure under Publicity Grant to 31st December, 1917.
No. 20. Statement of Advances made to State War Councils.
No. 21. Statement showing Gifts, Expenses, etc., as written off at 31st December, 1917.
No. 22. Statement of Accounts at 30th June, 1917 —
(а) Balance-sheet.
(б) Statement of Receipts and Expenditure.
(c) Statement of Receipts and Issues of Contributions in Kind.
{d) Statement showing position of Gifts and Loans Accounts in each State.
(e) Statement showing Contributions in Kind on hand, 30th June, 1917.


SCHEDULE 1.
AUSTRALIAN SOLDIERS’ REPATRIATION
FUND.
Appeal by the Federal and State Governments.
On 18th. April, 1916, the Federal and State Governments
issued the following joint appeal to the citizens of
Australia :
In pursuance of a decision of the recent Inter-State
Conference, the Governments of the Commonwealth and
States have authorized the foundation of a fund to be called
the “ Australian Soldiers’ Repatriation Fund,”
The purpose of the fund is to enable those who have been
unable to fight for their country to fulfil their obligations
to our brave troops by assisting soldiers and their dependants
to gain a permanent livelihood after the War, either on the
land or in some other occupation, thus independently
supplementing Governmental efforts to the same end.
The Federal and State Governments have recognised the
Nation’s debt and duty to the soldiers by taking action to
secure them preferential employment, and by arranging
to provide land on liberal terms to those desirous of becom-
ing settlers. This provision, however, considerable though
it is, must necessarily leave many subsidiary requirements
of returned soldiers unprovided for. It is to meet such
requirements, to enable the making of advances or allow-
ances to soldiers or their dependants according to their
necessities, that the Governments have authorized the
foundation of the Australian Soldiers’ Repatriation Fund.
The Fund is vested in a Board of Trustees representative
of all the States, and its administration will be conducted
on lines determined by an Act of the Commonwealth
Parliament. It is intended that the administration shall be
as broad and flexible as possible, framed on principles
which, it is assumed, will accord closely with the natural
wishes and intentions of subscribers.
It is expected that a large number of soldiers will on their
return desire to engage in agricultural pursuits, while con-
siderably more will have no definite promise of employment.
It is, therefore, obvious that the provision of a large fund
is essential. The Governments of the CoTnmonwealth and
States are confident that it is within the capacity and will
of private citizens to furnish the moneys needed to achieve
the objects of the fund. We therefore invite contributions
in money or hind from members of all classes.
Our soldiers are risking their all for us. Already many
thousands have sacrificed their lives, and more have suffered
injury and hardship past description. We promised these
gallant men that we would care for them on their return ;
we extend the same assurance to those who are enlisting
still. It is not to be imagined that our pledges can be
perfectly fulfilled by remitting our notes of honour to the
Nation for redemption wholesale by the Governments.
Our soldiers made it possible for us, while they were
toiling, fighting, suffering, dying, to live in peace in this
fair land, and thrive unhampered by the dreadful realities,
the awful horrors, of war. Only by some sacrifice of this
world’s goods can we demonstrate our gratitude, and dis-
charge our special individual obligations. By sacrifice is
meant such contribution as will involve a loss that will be
felt. We can only requite their sufferings and care for their
necessities with money or its equivalent. But since this
is all that it is possible for us to do, it is imperative that we
should do it ungrudgingly and thoroughly, as becomes the
discharge of a debt of conscience.
We make this appeal, relying fully upon the generosity
and patriotism of the Australian public to recognise in
unstinted measure the obligations due to those brave and
gallant men whose unparalleled deeds of valour have evoked
the Empire’s admiration. '
G. F. PEARCE,
Acting Prime Minister.
W. A. HOLMAN,
Premier of New South Wales.
A. J. PEACOCK,
Premier of Victoria.
EDWARD G. THEODORE,
Acting Premier of Queensland.
CRAWFORD VAUGHAN,
Premier of South Australia.
J. SCADDAN,
Premier of West Australia.
W. H. LEE,
Premier of Tasmania.
AIMS AND CONSTITUTION OF THE FUND.
Federal Government makes Initial Grant of £250,000.
HOW THE PUBLIC CAN HELP.
General Object.
The object of the Soldiers’ Repatriation Fund is to provide
general assistance to returned soldiers and their families,
as distinct from the ameliorative aid at present dispensed
by the various patriotic funds. The existing funds, to
which the public has subscribed so generously, are for the
most part devoted to the needs of wounded and incapacitated
soldiers and the maintenance of their dependants. The
proposed Repatriation Fund, as its name implies, has a
wider significance. It is designed to help the great body
of our soldiers, on their return from the war, to re-establish
themselves in those peaceful walks of life from which they
were drawn by the call to arms.
To Supplement Government Efforts.
Though launched with the approval and support of the
Commonwealth and State Governments, the Repatriation
Fund is in no sense a Government Fund, nor is it intended
to relieve the Commonwealth or States of any of their
responsibilities to the soldiers. It is really designed as a
people s tribute to the whole body of our soldiers who have so
gallantly fought and suffered for us, and its purpose is to
supplement the efforts of the authorities in helping those
of them who may need help to make a fresh start in life,
whether at their former trade or calling, or in some new
occupation to which personal inclination or physical reasons
may incline them. Thus, mechanics may be supplied with
tools and equipment ; men anxious to set up in a small
business may be advanced the necessary capital ; others
who take advantage of the land settlement facilities offered
by the States may be helped to maintain themselves until
their crops are marketable ; and so on. All such assistance
will, of course, be irrespective of Government advances to
settlers against improvements, or for the purchase of stock
or machinery ; or of Government aid to soldiers in any other
direction.
The Community's Obligation.
There is a widespread feeling amongst the public that
something worthy of Australia should be done in this
direction. In responding to the call of their country, the
soldiers have, many of them, made substantial sacrifices.
Thousands have already given their lives. All have played
their part nobly in the war. As the Prime Minister happily
phrased it, “ Our soldiers have carved for Australia a niche
in the Temple of the Immortals.” For the national service
thus rendered the community is under a debt of obligation
which money cannot repay. The least the community can


do, however, is to acknowledge the obligation and show its
gratitude, and the Repatriation Fund provides the means of
doing both.
Sacrifice for Sacrifice.
On their return from the war a large proportion of our
soldiers will have little or no monetary resources. Many
will require assistance to enable them to start life afresh.
It should be our aim to secure that, as far as possible, no
soldier shall find himself in a worse position after the war
than he was prior to enlistment. It is proposed, therefore,
to invite the public, not merely to subscribe liberally to
the Repatriation Fund, but also to make some sacrifice of
property or personal possessions, in order that ample funds
may be raised with which to enable the men who fought our
battles to pick up the threads of their industrial life under
conditions which will insure them a decent livelihood. The
soldiers by their sacrifice have secured our liberties and
given us peaceful enjoyment of our property and posses-
sions. Is it just that the sacrifice should be all on one side ?
This appeal is especially directed to the well-to-do members
of the community ; to those citizens whose donations to the
patriotic funds have, so far, merely trenched upon their
pocket-money, involving no personal inconvenience, still
less sacrifice.
A Chance for Everybody.
The Repatriation Fund is open to subscriptions in cash
and kind. The Commonwealth Government heads the list
of contributors with an initial grant of £250,000. Cash
subscriptions need not necessarily be made in a lump sum ;
the disturbance of existing business arrangements may be
obviated by spreading instalments over two or three years.
Citizens whose command of ready money is limited can
supplement their contributions in cash by gifts in kind.
Donations of property, war bonds, debentures, and other
interest-bearing securities will be received gladly. Pas-
toralists and farmers may ear-mark stock or wool clip,
land or crops, for the benefit of the Fund ; mechanics and
artisans who can spare but a few shillings from their wages
may supplement these by volunteering their services in the
building of homes for the wives, children, and aged mothers
of fallen or disabled soldiers.
Australia’s “ Welcome Home ! ”
Australians have repeatedly demonstrated that they are
not lacking in generosity. The goodwill of the community
has only to be organized to produce prodigious results.
We have seen such results in the immense sums collected
for the starving Belgians and Serbians, for the Red Cross,
Australia Day, and the various other patriotic funds. In
all these appeals the claims of humanity were strongly in
evidence. This appeal for the repatriation and re-establish-
ment of our soldiers touches the public more intimately
perhaps than any of the others. It will be our welcome
home to the gallant sons who went into the valley of death
to protect our homes and those near and dear to us ; to
preserve civilization from the onslaught of a barbarous
militarism ; to safeguard the freedom and independence
of this young Democracy and the world-wide Empire to
which it is our privilege to belong.
DETAILS OF THE FUND.
Administration.
1. The Australian Soldiers’ Repatriation Fund is designed
to provide general assistance to returned soldiers and their
families, with a view to their re-establishment in civil life.
2. A resolution embodying the principle of this Fund was
adopted by a Conference of representatives of the Common-
wealth and State Governments and of the Federal Parlia-
mentary War Committee held in Melbourne on 17th and 18th
February last.
3. The Fund is vested by an Act of the Commonwealth
Parliament in a Board of Trustees, consisting of fourteen
members, six of whom are members of the Federal Parlia-
mentary War Committee, the other eight being nominated
by the Commonwealth Government. The Prime Minister
is chairman of the trust, ex officio.
4. The Board of Trustees consists of the following :
Representing the Federal Parliamentary War Committee :
Senator the Hon. E. D. Millen (N.S.W.) ; the Hon. Sir
William Irvine, K.C.M.G. (V.) ; the Hon. James Page (Q.) ;
the Hon. A. Poynton (S.A.) ; the Right Hon. Sir John
Forrest, P.C., G.C.M.G. (W.A.) ; Senator the Hon. J. J.
Long (T.) ; Nominated by the Commonwealth Government
to represent the general public : Mr. Arthur S. Baillieu (V.);
the Hon. Sir Langdon Bonython, K. 8., C.M.G. (S.A.) ;
Mr. J. J. Garvan, Mr. E. Grayndler, Mr. Samuel Hordern,
Mr. Denison Miller (N.S.W.) ; the Hon. J. M. Hunter (Q). ;
Mr. 0. Morrice Williams (V.).
Organization and Collection .
5. The organization and collection of the Fund in each
State is in the hands of the State War Council, which will,
as far as possible, secure the assistance of the local War
Service Committees in canvassing their respective districts.
6. The Fund, or such portion thereof as the Board of
Trustees may determine, is to be allocated in accordance
with requirements, as determined from time to time, to the
State War Councils for distribution.
7. It is intended that the Fund shall be raised entirely
by voluntary effort, and the whole proceeds devoted to the
needs and interests of the soldiers, their families, or de-
pendants on such conditions as the trustees may approve.
All services in connexion with the Fund are to be, as far as
possible, gratuitous.
8. The Repatriation Fund is not confined to one or more
States. It is a national—an Australian—fund for the benefit
of Australian soldiers and their dependants.
9. “ Dependants ” are as defined in the War Pensions Act
1914-1915.
Scope of the Fund.
10. Soldiers returning to good positions are not likely to
require assistance ; but all soldiers or dependants of soldiers
in need of financial support towards re-establishment will
participate in the benefits of the Fund. Ex-soldiers who
are mechanics and artisans may be helped in the purchase of
tools to enable them to resume work at their trades. Others
who may desire to set up in a small business for which
they are fitted may be advanced the necessary capital,
Those who take up land can be helped, where necessary,
to maintain themselves until their land becomes productive ;
such assistance to be irrespective of advances made by Land
Banks or other governmental agency. In short, assistance
of a general kind will be afforded to returned soldiers and
their families, as distinct from ameliorative aid dispensed
by other funds.
11. Provided their military records are satisfactory,
soldiers enlisted in the Australian Imperial Force, but not
sent to the front, will be entitled to the same privileges as
those extended to returned soldiers.
Classes of Donations.
12. Subscriptions to the Fund may be made in cash and
kind. Cash donations need not necessarily be made in a
lump sum —interference with business arrangements may
be obviated by contributing regular instalments extending,
if desirable, over two or three years. From those who have
no ready cash available, gifts of landed property, war bonds
debentures, and other interest-bearing securities, will be
welcome. Pastoralists, graziers, and stock-owners are
asked to contribute from their flocks and herds ; such stock
to be delivered at the nearest saleyards without charge,
as may be arranged by the local War Service Committee.
Farmers are invited to ear-mark portions of their crops,
wheat, oats, barley, maize, &c., for the soldiers. Market
gardeners can give potatoes, onions, &c. ; orchardists, cases
of fruit ; dairymen, a cow ; and so on. Many other ways
of raising money for the Fund will suggest themselves to the
voluntary workers on the War Service Committees,


Suggested Procedure.
13. Cash donations, war bonds, debentures, &c., will be
received by any bank or Government Savings Bank, in
town and country.
14. Where landed property is donated, the owners are
expected to execute a legal transfer to the trustees of the
Australian Soldiers’ Repatriation Fund, and lodge the deed
with the nearest bank. Such property will be realized at
the discretion of the Trustees.
15. Gifts of stock, goods, &c., will be received by the
Local Committees authorized by the War Council of the
State, who will arrange for their sale, the proceeds to be
placed to the credit of the Trustees of the Fund, and a bank
receipt handed to the donors for the amount so realized.
Auctioneers will be asked to give their services voluntarily
in this connexion, and the country press may also be counted
upon to help the cause by the free advertisement of sales, &c.
16. All services rendered by the banks and other agencies
in receiving donations, keeping accounts, &c., will be free of
charge. The banks have also agreed to allow interest on
the daily balances at the credit of the Fund.
Authorized to Receive Contributions.
17. Contributions to the Fund will be received on behalf
of the Trustees by the following : —-
The daily press in each of the capital cities.
The Hon. Secretary, Federal Parliamentary War Com-
mittee, Federal Parliament House, Melbourne.
The W T ar Council of each State, and any committee
within a State authorized by the War Council of that
State.
Any branch of the Commonwealth Bank in Australia.
Any branch of the Associated Banks in Australia.
The Lord Mayor or Mayor of each capital city.
Donations may also be sent direct to the —
Secretary,
Board of Trustees,
Soldiers’ Repatriation Fund,
Auditorium Building,
167 Collins-street,
Melbourne.
Banks to issue Official Receipt
18. For contributions in cash, deeds, bonds, or other
securities, the only authorized receipts will be issued by the
receiving banks. All other than banks who are authorized
to receive contributions will, day by day, pay the same into
a bank, and receive an official receipt for each contribution,
such receipt to be posted to the contributor.
19. All branches of banks receiving funds will remit the
same daily to their chief offices in the capital city ; re-
mitting warrants to give name and address of contributor
and the amount contributed, and to have attached a dupli-
cate of the official receipt handed to the contributor.
Remittances are to be made free of exchange.
Special Receipt for Gifts in Kind.
20. Where contributions to the Fund are made in kind,
the War Service Committees will give an interim receipt
on a special form to be provided, pending the realization
of the property and the payment of the proceeds into a
bank. In cases where the gifts comprise stock and plant
and machinery, the former might be registered and branded
with the Government brand, and left in the possession
of the donor until wanted, while the latter could be numbered
and stored locally.
Progress Reports.
21. The head offices of receiving banks will supply the
State War Council and the Board of Trustees with a weekly
statement showing particulars of contributions.
22. War Service Committees will furnish a weekly
return of all donations in kind to the Secretary of the
State War Council, who will in turn advise the Board of
Trustees.
23. All promises of donations should be registered by the
War Service Committees and included in the weekly returns.
24. Lists of Subscribers to the Fund will be made available
from time to time for publication in the press of the Common-
wealth.
25. Contributions in cash entitle the donors to exemption
from Federal income tax to the amount of their contri-
butions.
SCHEDULE 2.
THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
AUSTRALIAN SOLDIERS’ REPATRIATION FUND.
No. 7 of 1916,
An Act to make provision for the Administration of the Australian Soldiers’ Repatriation Fund.
[Assented to 30th May, 1916.]
Be it enacted by the King’s Most Excellent Majesty, the Senate, and the House of Representatives of the
Commonwealth of Australia, as follows :
Short title.
Definition.
1. This Act may be cited as the Australian Soldiers' Repatriation Fund Act 1916.
2. —(1) In this Act, unless the contrary intention appears —
“ The Fund ” means the Australian Soldiers’ Repatriation Fund ;
“ The State War Council ” means, in regard to each State, the body appointed or recognised by
the Governor in Council of that State as the State War Council and approved of by the
Governor-General ;
“ The Trustees ” means the trustees for the time being of the Fund.
(2) For the purposes of this Act — .
{a) any person who is or has been a member of the Forces within the meaning of the War Pensions
Act 1914-1915, or to whom that Act applies or has applied as if he were a member of the
Forces, shall be deemed to-be an Australian soldier within the meaning of this Act; and
lb) any person who is a member of the family of a member of the Forces within the meaning
of the War Pensions Act 1914-1915 shall be deemed to be a dependant of an Australian
soldier within the meaning of this Act.
Vesting of
Fund.
3. The Fund shall be vested in and placed under the control of the trustees appointed by or under
this Act.


4. —(1) The following persons, that is to say—
The Prime Minister of the Commonwealth ;
Arthur Sydney Baillieu, Esquire, of Melbourne, in the State of Victoria ;
The Honorable Sir John Langdon Bonython, K. 8., C.M.G., of Adelaide, in the State of South
Australia ;
The Right Honorable Sir John Forrest, P.C., G.C.M.G., Member of the House of Representatives ;
John Joseph Garvan, Esquire, of Sydney, in the State of New South Wales ;
Edward Grayndler, Esquire, of Sydney aforesaid ;
Samuel Hordern, Esquire, of Sydney aforesaid ;
The Honorable John McEwan Hunter, Secretary for Public Lands of the State of Queensland ;
The Honorable Sir William Hill Irvine, K.C.M.G., Member of the House of Representatives ;
Senator the Honorable James Joesph Long ;
Senator the Honorable Edward Davis Millen ;
Denison Samuel King Miller, Esquire, of Sydney aforesaid ;
The Honorable James Page, Member of the House of Representatives ;
The Honorable Alexander Poynton, Member of the House of Representatives ; and
Oliver Morrice Williams, Esquire, of Melbourne aforesaid,
shall be trustees of the Fund.
Trustees of
Fund.
(2) The Prime Minister shall be ex officio chairman of the trustees.
(3) At their first meeting in each calendar year the trustees may elect one of their number to be
deputy chairman until the first meeting in the next calendar year.
(4) In the absence of the Prime Minister from any meeting, the deputy chairman shall preside, and
if he be also absent the trustees present may elect one of their number to act as chairman at the meeting.
(5) If at any time any vacancy arises in the number of the said trustees, by resignation addressed to
the Prime Minister, or in the case of any trustee other than the Prime Minister by failure without leave to
attend any of three executive meetings of the trustees convened during a period of six months, or by death,
or other cause, the Governor-General may appoint another person to be trustee to fill the vacancy so arising.
Every such appointment shall be notified in the Gazette.
(6) At any meeting of the trustees seven trustees shall form a quorum.
5.—(1) At any meeting of the trustees at which not less than two-thirds of the whole number of
trustees are present, the trustees may appoint an Executive Committee of the trustees.
. (2) The Executive Committee shall consist of the chairman and the deputy chairman of the trustees,
and of three other members elected by the trustees.
(3) The members elected by the trustees shall hold office for twelve months from the date of their
election.
Trustees may
Executive
Committee,
(4) Any vacancy occurring in the office of an elected member of the Executive Committee may be
filled by the election of another member by the trustees.
(5) Two members of the Executive Committee shall form a quorum.
(6) The Executive Committee shall have and may exercise such powers and functions as are conferred
or imposed upon them by the trustees.
6. —(1) The trustees shall be charged with the duties of—
(a) allocating to the various State War Councils such sums or property as the trustees from time
to time determine ;
(b) investing in securities of the Commonwealth or a State, or on fixed deposit or on current
account in any bank incorporated or carrying on business in the Commonwealth, such
part of the Fund as is not immediately required for the purposes for which the Fund has
been established ; and
(c) selling or otherwise disposing of, or postponing the sale or disposition of, any property forming
portion of the receipts of the Fund.
(2) The trustees may pay from the Fund all proper expenses of and incidental to admiuistration of the
Fund.
Duties of
Trustees.
(3) The trustees shall forward to the Prime Minister, for presentation to the Parliament, an annual
report upon the receipts, expenditure, and administration of the Fund.
7. The sums or property from time to time allocated by the trustees to a State War Council shall
be held by the State War Council upon the trusts following, namelv :
To apply such sums or property (subject to such conditions as the Governor-General, on the
recommendation of the trustees, from time to time prescribes, and after payment of all
proper expenses of and incidental to the receipt and expenditure by the Council of the sums
or property allocated to it) for such purposes, being purposes for the assistance and benefit
of Australian soldiers and of their dependants, and in such manner as the Council in its
discretion thinks fit.
Distribution by
State War
Councils.
8* (1) -AM books and accounts kept by the trustees and by each State War Council in connexion
with the Fund shall be audited from time to time by the Auditor-General of the Commonwealth.
(2) The report of each audit shall be made to the Commonwealth Treasurer, who shall cause a copy
of the report to be laid on the table of each House of the Parliament.
Audit of
rund Untsof
9. The Governor-General may, on the recommendation of the trustees, make regulations prescribing
the conditions under which a State War Council may expend any sum or dispose of any property allocated
to it by the trustees, and may make regulations for carrying out or giving effect to any other matter arising
under this Act.
Issued by direction of the Board of Trustees, and with the approval of the Federal and State
Governments.
Regulations,
June, 1916.
Australian Soldiers 5 Repatriation Fund,
Auditorium Building, 167 Collins-street, Melbourne,


SCHEDULE 3.
AUSTRALIAN SOLDIERS’ REPATRIATION EUND.
Act No. 7, 1916.
Powers and Functions of the Executive.
The Executive
Committee may
operate on
account.
The Trustees of the Australian Soldiers’ Repatriation Fund, in pursuance of the powers conferred on
them by the above Act, hereby confer and impose on the Executive Committee the following powers and
functions:—
1. The Executive Committee shall operate on the Australian Soldiers’ Repatriation Fund Account
for the purpose of :
[а) Paying all proper expenses of and incidental to the administration of the Fund.
(б) Advancing sums to the State War Councils in accordance with Rule 3 of these Rules.
(c) Effecting any allocation or investments which the Trustees decide to make under section 6
of the Act.
(i d ) Making temporary arrangements for the disposition of money or property pending the decision
of the Trustees.
Payments to be
by cheque.
2. Payments shall in all cases be made by cheque signed by any two members of the Executive and
countersigned by the Secretary.
Money may be
paid prior to
authority being
given.
3. Where in the opinion of the Executive Committee an advance is urgently required by a State War
Council before the date of the next meeting of the Trustees, the Executive Committee may advance to the
Council a sum or sums nob exceeding in the aggregate the sum of £5,000, but shall Report the fact of the
advance to the next meeting of the Trustees.
Clerical
assistance may
be appointed.
4. The Executive Committee may temporarily appoint such persons as are necessary to carry out the
work in connexion with the Fund.
5. The Secretary and Staff shall be under the control of the Executive.
SCHEDULE 4.
MEETINGS OF BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
Total Number of Meetings held to the 31st December, 1917 .. 10.
The Prime Minister (Chairman) .. •. • • • • • • • • 8
Mr. 0. Morrice Williams (Deputy Chairman) .. .. . • • • • • 10
Hon. Sir Langdon Bonython
Mr. A. S. Baillieu .. • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 10
Rt. Hon. Joseph Cook (appointed 26th July, 1917) ... .. • • • • 5
Rt. Hon. Sir John Forrest .. .. • • • • • • • • • •
*Mr. J. J. Garvan .. .. •• •• •• •• •• ••
*Hon. J. M. Hunter.. .. • • •• •• •• •• •• 3
Mr. S. Hordern
Hon. Sir William Irvine .. • • • • • • • • • • • • 3
*Senator the Hon. J. J. Long
Senator the Hon. E. D. Millen (resigned 10th July, 1916) ..
Mr. Denison Miller .. . • • • • • • • • • • • * *
Hon. A. Poynton .. • • • • • • • • * * *' * *
Hon. Jas. Page .. •• •• •• •• ** ** " ~
Mr. E. Grayndler
Leave of absence granted — , ~ r
*Mr J. J. Garvan .. .. 9 months during absence irom Australia
J. J. Long • • 3 v ” ”
*Hon. J. M. Hunter .. .. 2 ~
MEETINGS OF EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
Total Nuinlber of Meetings held to 81st December, 1917 .. 68.
The Prime Minister (Chairman) • • • • • • • • * * * * 7
Mr. 0. Morrice Williams (Deputy Chairman) .. • • • • • • * * ™
Mr. A. S. Baillieu .. .... • • • • * * 1 • ''
Hon. Sir Langdon Bonython (Adelaide) • • • • • • * * * ‘ °
Mr. E. Grayndler (Sydney)


SCHEDULE 5.
STATUTORY RULES.
1916. No. 142.
REGULATIONS UNDER THE AUSTRALIAN SOLDIERS’ REPATRIATION FUND
ACT 1916.
I, the governor-general in and over the Commonwealth of Australia, acting with the advice of the
Federal Executive Council, and on the recommendation of the Trustees, hereby make the following Regula-
tions under the Australian Soldiers’ Repatriation Fund Act 1916 to come into operation forthwith.
Dated this seventeenth day of July, 1916.
R. M. FERGUSON,
Governor-General.
By His Excellency’s Command,
G. F. PEARCE,
Acting Prime Minister.
Australian Soldiers’ Repatriation Fund Regulations 1916.
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Australian Soldiers’ Repatriation Fund Regulations short title.
1916.
2. In these Regulations, unless the contrary intention appears —
“ Approved Bank ” means a Bank approved by a State War Council as a Bank into which
contributions may be paid to the credit of the Fund.
“ Authorized Collector ” means a person or persons authorized by a State War Council to receive
subscriptions to the Fund.
“ The Executive ” means the Executive Committee of the Trustees.
Definitions.
3. Contributions to the Fund may be made to a State War Council or to any authorized collector or
may be paid by the contributor to the credit of the Fund at any Bank approved by the State War Council.
Contributions—
how made and
acknowledged.
4. (1) Each State War Council and each authorized collector shall pay to the credit of the Fund
at an approved Bank daily, or at such other regular intervals as the Trustees direct, all contributions received
by them other than contributions in the form of securities not transferable by delivery and contributions in
kind.
Contributions—
how dealt with.
(2) Each State War Council and each authorized collector shall lodge at an approved Bank in such
manner as the Trustees direct all contributions in the form of securities not transferable by delivery.
(3) Contributions in kind received by a State War Council or an authorized collector shall, subje
to the provisions of this regulation, be dealt with in such manner as the Council directs,
(4) Where the contribution in kind received by an authorized collector consists of live stock the
authorized collector shall cause the stock to be recorded and branded in accordance with the directions of
the State War Council, and shall, if the contributor is willing to retain possession of them until the Council
is in a position to dispose of them, allow the stock to remain in the possession of the contributor until that
time.
(5) If the contributor is not willing so to retain possession of the live stock, the authorized collector
shall—■
(a) cause the live stock to be sold by public auction and pay the proceeds of the sale to the credit
of the Fund at an approved Bank ; or
( h ) otherwise deal with the live stock as directed by the State War Council.
(6) Where the contribution in kind received by an authorized collector consists of goods of a perishable
nature, the authorized collector shall cause the goods to be sold by public auction and shall pay the proceeds
to the credit of the Fund at an approved Bank.
(7) Where the contribution in kind consists of plant or machinery or any other article which in the
opinion of the State War Council it is desirable to retain, the authorized collector shall record and deal with
the articles in such manner as the State War Council directs.
5. —(1) Each authorized collector in a State shall furnish to the State War Council of that State
weekly a return in duplicate in accordance with a form approved by the Trustees showing—
{a) all contributions in the form of securities not transferable by delivery ;
(b) all contributions in kind ; and
(c) all other contributions,
and the manner in which each contribution has been disposed of or dealt with.
Returns by
authorized
collectors and
State War
Councils.


Banks* 18 ” y
.« , (2) , ,° n f C . opy of tlie return spall te retained by the State War Council, and the other copy, to which
co^ v / f /, ach . ac^ through the press or of each official receipt issued by the
Collector shall be forwarded by the State War Council to the Trustees. J
i .. ® ® a f State ] Var Council sball forward to the Trustees weekly a return of all contributions received
7 i^ m r n Q r . lb + Ut w ac n com P amed I b y acknowledgments through the press, or copies of the official
receipts issued by the State War Council to the contributors.
, . 6 -T~P The Head Office in each State of each approved Bank shall furnish to the State War Council
ot that State weekly a return in duplicate in accordance with a form approved by the Trustees showing—
(U) particulars of all sums paid in to each branch of the Bank in that State to the credit of the
Fund ;
(6) particulars of all contributions in the form of securities not transferable by delivery lodged
with each branch of the Bank.
(2) One copy of the return shall be retained by the State War Council and the other copy shall be
forwarded by it to the Trustees.
contributions
bv
Council?
... J' State War C °™cil shall, when forwarding any return to the Trustees in pursuance of either
° ] 6 t P re r. edln g regulations, either incorporate in or forward with the return particulars of the
value of eacJl contribution.
CoTmSIr
8.—(1) For the purpose of organizing and soliciting contributions to the Fund, receiving and
de ermming applications for assistance from the Fund,, and the general administration of the Fund within a
State each State War Council shall appoint a Special Committee one of whom shall be a qualified accountant
who need not necessarily be a member of the State War Council.
(2) The Committee shall meet at least twice in each month for the transaction of business.
gstfg
indict
requirements.
9 ' , Before the close of eacb mouth each State War Council shall apprise the Trustees of the probable
sum required to meet applications for assistance from the Fund during the ensuing month.
Mattersin
which assistance
may be g ven.
10. The following shall be the classes of matters in respect of which applications by or on behalf of
Australian Soldiers and their dependants will be considered :
(a) General assistance and sustenance ;
(b) Farming plant ;
(c) Plants and seeds.
(< d ) Live-stock ;
(e) Tools of trade ;
(f) Small businesses ;
iff) Business or industrial undertakings of a kind to give employment to a collective body of
soldiers ; and
( h ) Any other class of matter approved by the Trustees.
Applications for
assistance.
11. —(1) Applications for assistance shall be made to a State War Council or the Special Committee
thereof in writing on a form approved by the Trustees, and shall set out the nature and extent of the
assistance which the soldier or his dependants requires or require and the manner in which it is proposed
to expend any sum which may be granted to him or them.
(2) Applications shall be dealt with as far as possible in the order in which they are received by the
State War Council.
(3) The State War Council or the Special Committee thereof shall investigate each application, and
shall take into consideration the degree of assistance (if any) already received by the applicant from other
sources, whether public or private. Before any money is advanced the State War Council or the Special
Committee thereof shall be satisfied that the purpose of any loan or gift is likely to be achieved having
regard to the character and previous experience of the applicant and shall determine, subject to any limita-
tions and principles laid down by the Trustees, the nature and extent of any assistance given.
(4) The State War Council or the Committee thereof, as the case may be, shall regard as ineligible
any applicant who—
(a) is deemed by it to have adequate means or to be adequately provided for under any scheme
promoted by any Governmental or private agency ; or
( b) has not received an honorable discharge from the Naval or Military Forces ;
but may, if it thinks fit, recommend the application of any such applicant for the favorable consideration of
the Trustees.
(5) The Trustees may thereupon investigate the application and determine whether any and if so
what assistance shall be given to the applicant.


(6) A State W 7 ar Council or the Special Committee thereof shall not in any case without the"approval
of the Executive advance or allot to any one applicant for any of the purposes specified in regulation 10
money to a greater amount or property of a greater value than the maximum amount or value from time
to time determined by resolution of the Executive, and communicated by it to the State War Council.
(7) In any case where the State War Council or the Special Committee thereof refuses an application
for assistance it shall furnish to the Trustees a statement setting out —
(а) the name and address of the applicant ;
(б) the nature and extent of the assistance applied for ; and
(c) the reasons for refusal of the assistance.
12. Where a soldier applies for assistance and produces a discharge from another State, the State
War Council of the State to which the application is made shall inform the State War Council of the State in
which the soldier was discharged with a view to ascertain if he has already received assistance from the
-p -i
±und.
Soldiers
onestate* w
a PP'y in g f ° r
assistance in
another.
13. Subject to these Regulations, the State War Council or the Special Committee thereof may expend
or dispose of, for any of the classes of matters specified in regulation 10 any money or property allocated
to it by the Trustees.
Power to state
to expend^ 8
moneys.
14. —(1) Each State War Council or the Special Committee thereof shall furnish to the Trustees
immediately after the close of each month, or at such other periods as the Trustees determine, a statement
setting forth —
[а) the amount of any moneys advanced by it during the month ;
(б) the nature and value of any property allotted by it during the month ;
(c) the names and addresses of the persons to whom the moneys were advanced or the property
was allotted ; and
{d) the purpose for and terms upon which the moneys were advanced or the property was
allotted.
(2) The Statement shall be accompanied by the legal documents executed for the security of moneys
advanced and property allotted.
Returns to be
furnished to
Trustees.
15.—(1) Except as hereinafter provided all assistance given to a soldier or his dependants shall be by
way of loan which, for the original period of the loan, shall not bear interest.
Form of
assistance.
(2) A State War Council shall require a person to whom a loan is granted to execute such legal
documents as the Trustees require to secure repayment.
(3) In fixing the terms of repayment the State War Council shall have regard to the purpose for which
the loan is desired.
(4) In cases where the recipient has been unable to repay the whole or part of the loan within the
period fixed by the State War Council or the Special Committee thereof but satisfies the State War Council
or the Special Committee thereof that he has made proper use of the assistance given the State War Council
or the Committee thereof may consider an application for renewal of the loan for such period and at such
rate of interest and on such other conditions as they may deem reasonable.
(5) Where property is allotted to any person the value of such property shall be regarded as a debt
due by that person be repayable in the same manner as a loan of that amount when the amount
is within the maximum generally fixed by the Trustees ; but when the value is above that minimum the
excess shall bear interest from the beginning at the rate fixed by the State War Council or the Committee
thereof.
(6) Where a State War Council or the Special Committee thereof is satisfied that the advancement of
money or property by way of loan will not be sufficient for the purpose required without special provisions
for the sustenance of the applicant in the first place, it may provide for such sustenance by the payment,
by way of gift, of such amount, not exceeding the amount from time to time fixed by the Executive and
notified to the State War Council, and under such conditions as the State War Council thinks necessary.
(7) Where a State W T ar Council has prepared and the Trustees have approved a scheme for the
maintenance of applicants desiring to enter upon a course of technical education, the Trustees may make
provision for the maintenance of any applicant by the payment, by way of free gift, of such amount, not
exceeding the amount from time to time fixed by the Executive and notified to the State War Council, as the
State War Council thinks necessary, for the period of the course.
(8) In the case of—
{a) any widow or dependant of an Australian soldier who has died on active service or as a result
of active service ; or
(6) any Australian soldier whose injuries preclude a return to his former occupation, the State u
W r ar Council may, if it thinks fit, grant assistance by way of free gift, of such amount
(not exceeding the amount fixed by the Executive from time to time and notified to the
State W 7 ar Council), upon such conditions, as the Council thinks fit.


factors of
purchased or
SSSaa.
~ + +L I6 ’ be , a condltlon of tlle g rant any assistance by way of loan under these Regulations
that the person to whom the assistance is given shall at all reasonable times permit any inspector producing
an authority in writing from the Chairman of the State War Council to enter upon any land and premises
upon which there is any property which has been purchased for or lent to the soldier or dependant under
these Regulations, and shall produce to the inspector such books documents and goods and disclose to him
such information as he requires for the purpose of forming a true estimate of the financial position and
prospects of the soldier or dependant. 1
i + A al i ? f °^ at n° n obl i ained h y the inspector in pursuance of this regulation shall be communicated
only to, the state War Council.
Power to vary
conditions of
loan, gift, &c.
(3) The State War Council shall not disclose to any body or person except to the Trustees, and then
only in a confidential manner, any information communicated to it in pursuance of this regulation.
17.—(!) The State War Council may revoke, recall, or vary the whole or any part of the conditions
attached to any loan, gift or promise of assistance to, or of any contract solely between the Council and an
Australian soldier or a dependant of an Australian soldier, if it is satisfied—
[a) that the conditions attached to the loan, gift or promise or the terms of the contract, have
not been or are not likely to be carried out by the soldier or dependant, as the case may
be ; or J
(b) that owing to the misconduct, idleness or incapacity of the soldier or the dependants as the
case may be, the purpose for which the loan, gift, promise, or contract was granted or made
is not likely to be achieved.
(2) When a State War Council revokes, recalls or varies any conditions in pursuance of the last
preceding sub-regulation, it shall forthwith furnish to the Trustees a statement of the reasons for such
revocation, recall, or variation.
Recovery of
loans.
18. Subject to_ these Regulations, the Chairman for the time being of a State War Council, or the
person thereto authorized in writing by the Chairman is hereby authorized and required to take the necessary
proceedings for the recovery of the amount of any loan the whole or any part of which has not been repaid
by the recipient within the period fixed by the State War Council.
STATUTORY RULES.
1916. No. 288.
REGULATIONS UNDER THE AUSTRALIAN SOLDIERS’ REPATRIATION FUND ACT 1916.
L the governor-general, in and over the Commonwealth of Australia, acting with the advice of the
Federal Executive Council, and on the recommendation of the Trustees, hereby make the following Regu -
lations under the Australian Soldiers' Repatriation Fund Act 1916 to come into operation forthwith.
Dated this twenty-second day of November, 1916.
R. M. FERGUSON,
Governor-General.
By His Excellency’s Command,
W. M. HUGHES,
Prime Minister.
Amendment of Australian Soldiers’ Repatriation Fund Regulations 1916 (Statutory Rules
1916, No. 142).
Amendment of
Regulation 5.
1. Regulation 5 of the Australian Soldiers’ Repatriation Fund Regulations is repealed, and the
following regulation inserted in its stead :
“ 5. (1) Each authorized collector in a State shall furnish to the State War Council of that
State weekly a return in accordance with the form approved by the Trustees, showing—
(a) All contributions in the form of securities not transferable by delivery ;
( b) all contributions in kind ; and
(c) all other contributions ;
and the manner in which each contribution has been disposed of or dealt with.
“ (2) A copy of each official'receipt issued by the collector shall be attached to the Return
furnished in accordance with the last preceding sub-regulation.
“ (3) Each State War Council shall forward to the Trustees weekly a return, in accordance
with the form approved by the Trustees, of contributions received by it directly from contributors,
and of all contributions received by the authorized collectors and by the banks in that State.”
Amendment of
Regulation 6.
2. Regulation 6 of the Australian Soldiers’ Repatriation Fund Regulations is amended—
(a) by omitting from sub-regulation (1) thereof the words “ in duplicate ” ; and
(b) by omitting sub-regulation (2) thereof.
Amendment of
Regulation 14.
3. Regulation 14 of the Australian Soldiers’ Repatriation Fund Regulations is amended by omitting
sub-regulation (2) thereof, and inserting the following sub-regulation in its stead :
“ (2) The statement shall be accompanied by a return in accordance with the form approved
by the Trustees showing the depreciation or appreciation in value of the property thus allotted as
compared with the assessed value of that property when donated to the Fund.”


SCHEDULE 6.
STATUTORY RULES.
1916. No. 97.
PROVISIONAL REGULATIONS UNDER THE WAR PRECAUTIONS ACT 1914-1915.
T rFNERAT in and over the Commonwealth of Australia, acting with the advice of the Federal
Executive Council, hereby certify that, on account of urgency, the following Regulations under the
Precautions Act 1914-1915 should come into immediate operation, and make the Regulations to come
operation forthwith as Provisional Regulations.
Dated this eighteenth day of May, 1916. R M FERGUSO N.
•, Governor-General.
By His Excellency’s Command,
G. F. PEARCE,
Minister of State for Defence.
War Precautions (Supplementary) Regulations 1916.
J These Regulations may be cited as the War Precautions (Supplementary) Regulations 1916.
o'_rn No person shall, after the first day of July, 1916, without the authority of the Governor-
General or of a Minister of State, proof whereof shall lie upon the person accused, assume or use in connexion
wfthanvtrade business calling, or profession the word “ Anzac ”or any word resembling the word Anzac,
m any word notified by the Governor-General, by notice in the Gazette, to be for the purposes of this
regulation a prohibited word.
Short title and
citation.
Prohibition of
use in trade of
word “ Anzac”
and similar
words.
m Without limiting the meaning of the preceding sub-regulation, a word shall be deemed to be
assumed or used by a person in connexion with any trade, business, calling, or profession if—
(a) it is applied (whether as a trade mark or otherwise) to any goods manufactured, produced,
sold, or offered for sale by that person ; or
(b) it is used as the name or part of the name of any firm or company registered in Australia.
(3) The Registrar of Trade Marks shall— .
( a ) refuse to register as a trade mark any word the assumption or use of which in connexion with
V any trade, business, calling or profession is prohibited under sub-regulation (1) of this
regulation; and . . . , ,
(h) unless otherwise directed by the Attorney-General, cancel any existing registration of any
such word as a trade mark, and refuse to take any step or further step in connexion with
any application for the use of any such word as a trade mark.
(4) The Registrar-General or other proper officer of a State charged with the registration of firms and
companies may —
(а) permit any firm or company which has been registered under a State Act, and in the name
of which there is included any word the use of which in connexion with any trade, business,
calling or profession is prohibited under sub-regulation (1) of this regulation, to amend
the name of the firm or company by the omission of that word and, if the firm or company
so desires, the substitution of any other word or words ; or
(б) cancel the registration of any firm or company which refuses or fails to apply within a reason-
able period for the amendment of its name.
STATUTORY RULES.
1916. No. 218.
REGULATIONS UNDER THE WAR PRECAUTIONS ACT 1914-1916.
I, THE governor-general in and over the Commonwealth of Australia, acting with the advice of the Federal
Executive Council, hereby make the following Regulations under the Precautions Act 1914 1916 to
come into operation forthwith.
Dated this sixth day of September, 1916. R M FERGUSON,
Governor-General.
By His Excellency’s Command,
G. F. PEARCE,
Minister of State for Defence.
War Precautions (Supplementary) Regulations 1916.
(Statutory Rules 1916, No. 97, as amended by Statutory Rules 1916, Nos. 112, 122, 128, 129, 135, and 167.)
The War Precautions (Supplementary) Regulations are amended by inserting at the end thereof the
following Regulations:—
“ 12 No person shall, without the authority of the Trustees appointed by or under the
Australian Soldiers’ Repatriation Fund Act 1916 or of a State War Council (proof whereof shall he
upon such person), assume or use in connexion with any fund in relation to the war the word
“ Repatriation ”or any word resembling the word “ Repatriation whether such fund was
established before or after the date of this Regulation.
F. 8060. —3
Prohibition of
use of Word
“ Repatriation
in connexion
with any fund.


Raising of fund
for patriotic
purposes
forbidden
without consent
of State War
Council.
lie u^'tttLT 011 W e h °’ W K hOUt the appl '° Val ° £ a State War Council (proof whereof shall
lie upon the person) invites subscriptions, or organizes any scheme for raising money for any
Cd ’ shalTfe 2 f m ff relati ° n to the , war > other than the Australian Soldfers’ Repatriation
1 und, shall be guilty of an offence against the War Precautions Act 1914-1916.”
STATUTORY RULES.
1916. No. 255.
REGULATION UNDER THE WAR PRECAUTIONS ACT 1914-1916.
MAI ®P’ act *y As the 'Deputy of the Governor-General in accordance with the provisions of the
Constitution, acting with the advice of the Federal Executive Council, hereby make the following
Regulation under the War Precautions Act 1914-1916 to come into operation forthwith. °
Dated this eighteenth day of October, 1916.
JOHN MADDEN,
By His Excellency’s Command, , DepUty ° f the 6ovem <> r -General.
G. F. PEARCE,
Minister of State for Defence.
Prohibition of
use on private
houses, &c., of
word “ Anzac”
and similar
words.
War Precautions (Supplementary) Regulations.
(Statutory Rules 1916, No. 97.)
The War Precautions (Supplementary) Regulations are amended by inserting, after Regulation 2
thereof, the following Regulation :
A ’ P erson after the first day of November, 1916, without the authority of
the Governor-General or of a Minister of State, proof whereof shall lie upon the person accused
use as the name or part of the name of —
(а) any private residence, or
(б) any boat or vehicle, or
(c) any charitable or other institution, or any building in connexion therewith,
the word ‘ Anzac ’ or any word resembling the word ‘ Anzac’, or any word notified by the Governor-
General, by notice in the Gazette , to be for the purposes of this regulation a prohibited word.”
Goods advanced
by State W'ar
Council not to
be mortgaged,
Ac.
STATUTORY RULES.
1916. No. 263.
REGULATION UNDER THE WAR PRECAUTIONS ACT 1914-1916.
I, sir john madden, acting as the Deputy of the Governor-General, in accordance with the provisions of
the Constitution, acting with the advice of the Federal Executive Council, hereby make the following-
regulation under the War Precautions Act 1914-1916 to come into operation forthwith.
Dated this twentieth day of October, 1916.
JOHN MADDEN,
Deputy of the Governor-General.
By His Excellency’s Command,
ALBERT GARDINER,
for Minister of State for Defence.
Amendment of War Precautions (Supplementary) Regulations 1916.
(Statutory Rules 1916, No. 97, as amended by Statutory Rules 1916, Nos. 112, 122, 128, 129, 167 218 219
250 and 252.)
The War Precautions (Supplementary) Regulations 1916 are amended by inserting at the end thereof
the following Regulation :
“ 17.—(1) No person shall, without the consent in writing of a State War Council, sell or other-
wise dispose of, or pledge or mortgage in any w T ay, or deposit by way of security, or, where the goods
were or are advanced for a specified purpose, use for any other purpose, any goods to which this
Regulation applies.
“ (2) The goods to which this Regulation applies are —
(a) any goods which were, before the commencement of this Regulation, allocated by a
State War Council under the powers conferred by the Australian Soldiers’
Repatriation Fund Regulations 1916 ; and
(h) any goods which are, after the commencement of this Regulation, allocated by a
State War Council under the powers conferred by the Australian Soldiers’
Repatriation Fund Regulations 1916.”


SCHEDULE 7.
AUSTRALIAN SOLDIERS’ REPATRIATION FUND.
Balance-sheet, 31st December, 1917.
Liabilities.
£ s. d. £ s. d.
Australian Soldiers’ Repa-
triation Fund —
Commonwealth Grant 250,000 0 0
Interest .. .. 7,044 11 10
Official War Films .. 5,285 2 6
262,329 14 4
Less gifts expenses, &c. 75,383 1 9
— 186,946 12 7
State Contributory Funds—
Queensland.. .. 12,358 5 1
New South Wales .. 24,111 5 8
Victoria .. .. 58,786 15 2
South Australia .. 34,713 11 1
Western Australia .. 2,275 5 5
Tasmania .. .. 889 4 5
133,134 6 10
320.080 19 5
Provision for cost of War Films .. 3,000 0 0
323.080 19 5
Audited and found correct —
Assets.
£ 5. d.
Loan—
Loans granted by State War Councils.. 146,631 1 0
Property held by allotment .. .. 376 10 0
Toy Factory, Adelaide .. .. 900 0 0
Contributions in kind {vide Statement 14) 21,375 18 1
Cash at Bank .. .. .. 153,797 10 4
*
323,080 19 5
(Sgd.) O. MORRICE WILLIAMS,
Deputy Chairman.
(Sgd.) J. W. ISRAEL.
(Sgd.) H. C. ELVINS, Accountant.
SCHEDULE 8.
AUSTRALIAN SOLDIERS’ REPATRIATION FUND.
Statement showing Receipts and Disbursements from the Inauguration of the Fund on the 31st May, 1916,
to the 31st December, 1917.
Receipts.
£ s. d. £ s. d.
Grant to Commonwealth Government .. 250,000 0 0
Cash contributions (as per Statement 14) 108,889 17 5
Exhibition of Official War Films .. 8,285 2 6
Interest on Bank bal-
ances —
Commonwealth Grant 7,044 11 10
State Contributory
Funds .. .. 2,396 18 3
9,441 10 1
Interest on Debentures .. .. 412 7 6
Contributions in kind realized .. 59 5 7
Repayment of Loans .. .. . . 10,193 3 2
Gifts revoked ~ .. 108 5 1
Property realized .. .. .. 1,656 9 4
389,046 0 8
Disbursements.
£ s. d. £ s. d.
Assistance granted to
soldiers and de-
pendants—
Gifts .. .. 73,286 11 0
Loans .. .. 156,824 4 2
Loans written off .. 1,396 1 5
231,506 16 7
Expenses .. . . .. .. 508 10 7
Default Account, Brisbane .. .. 285 13 10
Losses on property .. .. .. 14 10 0
Property for allotment .. .. 2,032 19 4
Toy Factory, Adelaide .. .. 900 0 0
235,248 10 4
Bank Balances— £ s. d.
Australian Soldiers’
Repatriation Trust
Fund .. .. 10,044 11 10
Australian Soldiers’
Repatriation Fund
Account .. 128,975 15 11
Repatriation War
Pictures Trust
Account .. 3,025 12 11
State War Councils
Advances Account 11,751 9 8
153,797 10 4
389,046 0 8


State.
Gifts.
Loans.
Loans written off.
Total Loans.
Repayments made.
Percentage of
Repayments on
Instalments due.
£
S.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
5.
d.
£
s.
d.
Queensland
2,881
14
11
46,923
17
10
411
14
3
47,335
12
1
3,095
16
4
48
New South Wales
23,781
0
4
31,490
3
3
319
16
6
31,809
19
9
3,725
6
11
66
Victoria
26,993
18
5
42,985
10
2
80
18
3
43,066
8
5
1,494
11
3
31
South Australia ..
18,028
14
6
26,260
7
0
441
0
5
26,701
7
5
929
18
8
43
Western Australia
399
7
10
5,016
15
6
142
12
0
5,159
7
6
770
17
6
57
Tasmania
1,201
15
0
4,147
10
5
4,147
10
5
176
12
6
60
73,286
11
0
156,824
4
2
1,396
1
5
158,220
5
7
10,193
3
2
-
Note. —Tools of trade to the value of £5, donated to the Fund, were issued as
a gift.
SCHEDULE 9.
AUSTRALIAN SOLDIERS’ REPATRIATION FUND.
Statement of Receipts and Issues of Contributions in Kind from the Inauguration of the Fund on the 31st
May, 1916, to the 31st December, 1917.
Receipts.
£ s. d. £ s. d.
Beal Property —
As per Statement 13 .. .. 626 15 0
Securities —
As per Statement 13 .. .. 20,666 15 0
Miscellaneous—
Tools of trade .. 5 0 0
Wheat .. .. 125 13 8
Horse .. .. 10 0 0
Chaff .. .. 600
146 13 8
21,440 3 8
Issues.
£ s. d. £ s. d.
Balance in hand .. 626 15 0
Gifts .. .. 20,666 15 0
Tools of trade .. .. .. 5 0 0
Realization
Wheat scrip .. 77 3 1 48 10 7
Horse .. .. .. .. 10 0 0
Chaff .. .. 5 5 0 0 15 0
21,375 18 1 64 5 7
Balance 21,375 18 1
21,440 3 8
SCHEDULE 10.
STATEMENT SHOWING THE EXPENDITURE GRANTED IN EACH STATE BY WAY OF GIFT AND LOAN
TO THE 31st DECEMBER, 1917, AND THE REPAYMENTS MADE ON ACCOUNT OF LOANS.


Analysj
IS U-b vr
All States.
Queensland.
New South Wa
,les.
—
No.
Gift.
Loan.
No.
Gift.
Loan.
No.
Gift.
Loan.
Vocational training
Sustenance —
Attending classes ..
Awaiting land returns
General
44f
477
33
487
£ 5.
3,946 14
8,119 16
466 11
5,583 13
675 2
83 5
d.
7
11
4
7
1
3
£
589
1,441
33
728
2
s. d.
3 9
3 5
18 8
12 7
16 0
38
67
1
163
6
£ s. d.
242 3 10
242 2 2
29 2 6
1,165 3 9
28 10 0
£ 5. d.
112 1 8
318 0 1
29i 15 0
2 16 0
241
37
10
55
123
£ s. d.
2,144 11 8
441 4 7
124 7 11
648 12 0
645 2 1
£ s. d.
85 13 4
339 8 3
33 18 8
92 3 5
Surgical aids
130
18
3
2,253
301
5
311
830
320'
4
327
37
34
38
22
48
30
149
118
25
0 6
16
53 16 11
25 0 6
Fares
Indulgence passages ..
Furniture
Homes
House improvements
Plant
Tools of trade
Farming — •
General
Stock Dealers
Poultry
Orchards and market
gardener
Small businesses —
Bootmakers
Boarding houses, &c.
Butchers
Fish, game, &c.
Furniture, &c., making
Greengrocery, fruit, &c.
Groceries, &c.
20 10
46,184 5
90 5
51 5
1,485 5
3,998 18
272 11
583 6
58 1
92 9
50 9
4 12
15 12
63 15
190 16
62 10
0
7
8
0
2
2
10
0
0
5
5
0
2
9
7
5
8,762
23,411
138
6,065
6,350
26,467
271
13,974
2,193
1,394
2,257
1,534
1,833
1,292
7,176
8,455
19 0
9 7
0 0
10 2
5 10
18 6
0 0
11 3
5 10
12 5
1 4
7 0
12 8
9 8
7 9
1 2
2
136
169
1
36
183
108
47
2
2
7
8
7
10
11
59
14 15 0
190 3 3
110 0
1 5 0
15 0 0
799 5 4
9 15 0
34 1 5
13*17 6
1 0 0
2 0 0
4,822 6 0
9,265 9 7
13 0 0
1,806 17 6
2,405 17 2
8,715 15 3
100 0 0
2,625 6 9
142 1 1
290 5 4
582 3 0
361 6 6
391 12 3
556 4 1
550 0 9
4,368 18 9
786
5
211
402
59
1
78
12
7
18
5
11
1
26
12
15,803
50
1,302
1,892
198
16
13
50
7
9
2
1
11 11
0 0
5 8
18 4
9 10
15 3
1 0
0 0
3 6
12 2
0 0
15 8
1,899 19 0
215 0 0
1,500 2 10
1,561 19 3
5,316 2 6
100 0 0
4,325 14 1
816 16 0
195 0 0
1,104 10 10
385 0 0
265 15 7
148 16 0
1,418 19 10
934 4 4
Hairdressers, tobacco-
nists, &c.
Hawkers, &c.
Milk rounds
Motors, cabs, &c.
Photographers
Tailors
Miscellaneous
42
377
50
79
23
31
303
173 6
447 19
45 0
23 0
14 2
483 3
9
6
0
0
11
11
2,414
14,366
3,825
6,071
910
2,020
14,202
6 5
2 9
6 8
0 1
17 8
10 7
4 4
7
34
2
30
11
10
66
0 7 0
4 6 3
24 0 0
705 3 10
1,612 13 4
150 0 0
2,327 11 6
436 16 0
710 10 1
3,646 1 1
9
101
5
26
2
6
64
163
86
120
6 9
2 0
0 0
505 11 11
3,931 1 6
586 10 6
2,270 19 7
159 2 9
464 13 0
3,152 16 7
7,327
73,286 11
0
1 158,220
5 7
1,240
2,881 14 11 I
47,335 13 1
2,313
23,781
0 4
31,809 19 9
Victoria.
South Australia .
Western Australia.
Tasmani
a.
•
No.
Gift.
Loan.
No.
Gift.
Loan.
No.
Gift.
Loan.
No.
Gift. 1
Loan.
Vocational training ..
122
£ s. d.
1,524 11 1
£ s. d.
241 6 9
37
£ 5.
9 10
d.
0
£ s. d.
81 0 0
i 2
£ d.
16 13 0
£ .
s.
d.
7
£ s. d.
9 5 0
£ s. d.
69 2 0
Sustenance —
Attending classes ..
355
7,305 10 1
644 8 7
7
70 19
10
63 5 C
i 10
60 0 3
41
1
6
1
35 0 0
Awaiting land returns
General
22
215
313 0 11
3,034 17 8
139 7 3
43
641 12
8
155 2 11
9
1
88 7 6
1 10 0
25
0*
0
0
5 <
0 0
25 4 C
Surgical aids
Fares
Indulgence passages ..
Furniture
Homes
i
650
3
12 10
12,080 5 11
721 i9 9
75 0 0
1
604 ]
123
3
28 5
5 15
1.6,869 3
na o
6
0
0
o
204 2 2
13,856 0 (
75 0 (
{ 29
) 1
) 1
127 io 6
29 5 8
965
50
9
0
6
0
48
1,113 11 0
149 2 (
House improvements v
Plant
Tools of trade
23
198
30 0 0
1,235 13 4
904 13 10
977 4 7
22
23
110
10
9
0
6
0
821 13 f
509 3 (
* 8
5 13
12 io 0
11 2 2
295 0
346 14
0
9
ii
n
15 0 0
49 19 0
737 2 ‘
549 6 ’
Farming—
General
Stock dealers
Poultry
134
147
58 7 0
422 9 4
11,381 18 0
30 0 0
5,084 15 0
12
1
31
6
50
0
0
0
0
614 16 ]
41 0 (
1,208 15 (
L 2
) ••
) 18
I'-
214
623 :
6
17
8
9
5
6
225 0 <
106 3
Orchards and market
gardener
19
45 0 0
1,052 8 9
4
-
182 0 (
) ••
•
0
0
* *
Small businesses —
Bootmakers
21
30 9 5
585 9 6
3
Q
12
0
0
283 17 ’
309 10 (
7 1
0 4
40
140
0
0
*
Boarding houses, &c.
Butchers
Fish, game, &c.
Furniture, &c., making
Greengrocery, fruit, &c
Groceries, &c.
6
6
22
? 16
. 77
31
29 8 5
4 12 0
5 0 0
63 15 9
54 11 7
60 14 9
120 17 6
475 0 0
718 16 9
423 8 9
3,165 19 6
2,107 6 6
O
2
6
2
22
10
121
5
0
250 0 i
357 8
114 0 1<
1,326 2 1
554 11
5 1
1 2
0 1
8 12
7 3
ll 6 o
73
100
50
495
150
0
0
0
5
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
3
.
#
220 0
340 0
Hairdressers, tobacco-
10 0 0
325 16 6
: 6
1 57
244 19
2,452 9
251 6
42 5
6 . •
, .
nists, &c.
Hawkers, &c.
20
163
958 1l
4,858 11 8
26
14
0
8 7
9 5
• •
621
240
17
0
3
0
15
1 1
9
0 0
889 9
55 0
Milk rounds
32
45 0 0
i 2,542 9 5
» 5
l 3
0 2
100
0
0
| 3
227 0
Motors, cabs, &c. ..
15
23 0 C
9 16 8
280 15 2
1,103 4 C
*
*
74 18 1
75 0
i 2,552 17 1
1 l
40
0
0
1 # ,
25 0
495 0
Photographers
Tailors
Miscellaneous
8
12
99
i 200 0 C
1 745 7 6
! 3,808 3 8
l 1
; 2
} 55
17
0
c
0 ..
1 11
41 8 9
547
15
1
1
8
2,418
26,993 18 f
>43,066 8 I
> 1,089
18,028 14
: e
► 26,701 7
5 144
:399 7 1C
(5,159
7
e
i 123
1 1,201
15 0
i4,147 10
SCHEDULE 11.
AUSTRALIAN SOLDIERS’ REPATRIATION FUND.
Analysis of Returns of Assistance Granted in each State to 31st December, 1917.


States.
Land
Improve-
ments,
Mortgages,
&c.
Farming
Implements,
Stock, <fec.
Homes,
including
Land for
same.
Furniture.
Plant and
Tools of
Trade.
Businesses.
Educational.
Financial
and other
Assistance.
Total
Number of
Cases.
Queensland
New South Wales ..
Victoria
South Australia . .
Western Australia
Tasmania
41
34
17
2
3
99
228
126
8
•7
2
54
63
- 41
7
2
4
•21
286
113
33
8
40
157
143
25
10
172
653
351
57
41
16
84
116
35
2
3
" 70
78
44
19
10
2
581
1,615
870
149
64
48
97
470
171
461
375
1,290
240
223
3,327
—
Queensland.
New South Wales.
Victoria.
Gift.
Loan.
Gift.
Loan.
Gift.
Loan.
Sustenance
Furniture
General Assistance
Farming, Implements, &c.
Plant and tools of trade ..
Small businesses
Vocational training
£ s. d.
15 0 0
£ 5. d.
150 0 0
4 0 0
£ s. d.
154 0 0
435 0 0
19 3 6
170 1 4
3 0 0
225 0 0
22 0 0
£ 5. d.
304 0 0
505 0 0
139l 0 0
10,410 2 6
1,019 0 0
10,710 10 0
227 0 0
£ s. d.
35 0 0
325 0 0
287 0 0
42 0 0
£ s. d.
36 0 0
797 7 3
591 13 6
16,569 3 11
944 0 0
14,148 7 1
350 15 0
15 0 0
154 0 0
1,028 4 10
23,314 12 6
689 0 0
33,437 6 9
—
South Australia.
Western Australia
Tasmania.
Gift.
Loan.
Gift.
Loan.
Gift.
Loan.
Sustenance
Furniture
General Assistance
Farming Implements, &c.
Plant and tools of trade ..
Small businesses
Vocational training
£ s. d.
50 0 0
50 0 0
£ s. d.
200 0 0
175 0 0
145 0 0
£ 5. d.
50 0 0
75 0 0
£ 5. d.
100 0 0
350 0 0
200 0 0
£ 5. d.
50 0 0
£ s. d.
50 0 0
75 0 0
35 0 0
800 0 0
865 0 0
2,075 0 0
15 15 0
100 0 0
520 0 0
125 0 0
650 0 0
50 0 0
3,915 15 0
SCHEDULE 12.
AUSTRALIAN SOLDIERS’ REPATRIATION FUND.
Analysis of Cases included in the Returns of Assistance Refused to 31st December, 1917,
SCHEDULE 13.
AUSTRALIAN SOLDIERS' REPATRIATION FUND.
Analysis op Special Cases submitted for Determination and approved by the Executive to the 31st
December, 1917.
Total number of cases submitted, 748, of which 690 were approved and 58 refused.


—
Scrip No.
Description.
Hate
of
Interest.
Where Deposited.
State.
Value.
Total.
%
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
Securities (Deeds,
159198
£10
Bonds, &c.)
159199
£10
U
Common-
New South
80 0 0
008022
£50
wealth
Wales
169913
£10
ii
Bank
War Bonds
116700
£100
4i
->
20426
£50
273447
£10
4i
Common-
Victoria
200 0 0
273448
£10
4i
► wealth
273449
£10
a
Bank
..
250161
£10
250162
£10
ii
J
004092
£50
Common-
Western
50 0 0
wealth
Australia
Bank
War Savings Certifi-
L019316
£5
cates
L031696
£5
L031697
£5
Common-
Victoria ..
36 15 0
A188110
£1
>■ wealth
A188111
£1
Bank
A109741-A109750,
■>
A177236-A177250
V£1 each
(inclusive)
j
\
-
Debentures—
Melbourne Harbor
C1328-1427
1
Trust
C1816-1865
I
/►£100each
4
E.S. and A.
Victoria ..
20,000 0 0
C1882-1931
j
[
Beath, Scbiess, Ltd.
1001,1002,1003
£100 each
5
Common-
Victoria ..
300 0 0
wealth
Bank
20,666 15 0
Real property —
13 J acres at Lis-
, ,
, ;
. ,
State War
..
270 0 0
more
Council
Five lots at Coburg
. .
. .
State War
..
356 15 0
(29,31,32,33, 34)
Council
626 15 0
Coburg Valley
Estate
Land
, ,
. .
. ,
. .
, ,
Miscellaneous
, ,
..
Wheat—Scrip
. .
, ,
. .
,.
77 3 1
. .
Chaff
. ,
. .
, .
5 5 0
82 8 1
21,375 18 1
—
Total.
Queensland.
New South Wales.
Victoria.
South Australia.
Western Australia.
Tasmania.
£
. s.
d.
£
s.
d.
■ £
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
s. d.
Cash contributions
108,889
17
5
12,198
18
2
23,472
15
7
35,773
3
3
34,436
5
11
2,152
5
4
856
9 2
Contributions in
kind—
Securities
20,666
15
0
.
80
0
0
20,536
15
0
50
0
0
Real property ..
626
15
0
.
626
15
0
.
Miscellaneous ..
82
8
1
77
3
1
5
5
0
Contributions in
kind realized
59
5
7
48
10
7
10
15
0
Interest on bank
balances
2,396
18
3
159
6
11
558
10
1
1,313
3
3
261
5
2
71
17
7
32
15 3
Interest on deben-
tures
412
7
6
411
5
0
1
2
6
*
• '
133,134
6
10
12,358
5
1
24,111
5
8
58.786 15
2
34,713
11
1
2,275
5
5
889
4 5
SCHEDULE 14.
AUSTRALIAN SOLDIERS’ REPATRIATION FUND.
Statement of Contributions in Kind held on 31st December, 1917.
SCHEDULE 15.
AUSTRALIAN SOLDIERS’ REPATRIATION FUND.
Statement showing Particulars of the State Contributory Funds on the 31st December, 1917.


—
Totals.
Queensland.
New South Wales.
Victoria.
South Australia.
Western Australia.
Tasmania.
£
s.
d
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£ s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£ s.
d.
Fares ..
13
4
11
13
4
11
, .
Freights and cartage
40
12
3
8
14
3
31
18
0
Travelling
27
19
5
20
14
7
7
4
10
Returned property
222
2
11
9
2
6
81
7
4
86 2
4
32
11
5
0
3
6
12 15
10
Expenses
Legal expenses
(duties, &c.)
48
16
9
11
17
3
0
5
0
4 4
0
11
4
0
21
6
6
Postages and tele-
grams
7
19
8
7
19
8
Telephone -
20
4
4
20
4
4
Stationery
6
16
11
6
15
11
..
0
1
0
Furniture
16
0
6
14
0
6
..
2
0
0
Sundries
104
12
11
47
6
5
11
6
0
42 16
0
2
5
0
0 19
6
508 10
7
160
0
4
132
1
2
133 2
4
43
15
5
25
16
0
13 15
4
SCHEDULE 16.
AUSTRALIAN SOLDIERS’ REPATRIATION FUND.
Analysis of State Officers’ Expenses to the 31st December, 1917.
SCHEDULE 17.
AUSTRALIAN SOLDIERS’ REPATRIATION FUND.
Expenses of Administration from 12th May, 1916, to
31st December, 1917.
Board of Trustees' Administrative Expenses.
£ s. d •
Salaries .. .. • • • • 2,517 11 10
Books and stationery .. .. • • 166 10 7
Travelling expenses .. .. • • 266 3 3
Office requisites .. .. • • 179 111
Petty cash and miscellaneous .. .. 294 5 7
Printing and advertising .. • • 119 8 4
Stationery, books, &c., supplied to State War
Councils .. ■ • • • • • 1>362 14: 3
4,905 15 9
SCHEDULE 18.
AUSTRALIAN SOLDIERS’ REPATRIATION FUND.
Expenses of Administration from 12th May, 1916,
to 31st December, 1917.
Expenditure to 31st December , 1917, under Postage Grant of
£l,OOO.
£ s. d.
Queensland .. • • • • • • *5O 0 0
New South Wales 110 0 £
South Australia • • • • • • 0 0
Western Australia .. • • • • ~
Tasmania • • • • • • • • 20 0 0
395 0 0
SCHEDULE 19.
AUSTRALIAN SOLDIERS’ REPATRIATION FUND.
Expenses of Administration from 12th May, 1916, to
31st December, 1917.
Expenditure to 31 st December , 1917, under Publicity Grant
of £5,000.
£ s. d.
Queensland .. . • • • • • 250 0 0
South Australia .. .. .. 250 0 0
500 0 0
SCHEDULE 20.
AUSTRALIAN SOLDIERS’ REPATRIATION FUND.
Statement showing Advances made by the Board to
the State War Councils to the 31st December,
1917.
£
Queensland .. .. • • • • 51,000
New South Wales .. • • ' • • 59,000
Victoria .. .. • • • • 75,000
South Australia .. • ■ • • 50,000
Western Australia .. .. •• 7,000
Tasmania .. .. • • • • 5,000
247,000
SCHEDULE 21.
AUSTRALIAN SOLDIERS’ REPATRIATION FUND.
Statement showing Gifts, Expenses, etc., written off
at the 31st November, 1917.
£ s. d.
Gifts .. •• £73,286 11 0
Less Revoked .. 108 5 1
: 73,178 5 11
Loans written off .. • • • • 1,396 1 5
Expenses .. . - • • • • 508 10 7
Default Account, Brisbane . • • • 285 13 10
Losses on property .. . • • • 14 10 0
75,383 1 9


SCHEDULE 22A.
AUSTRALIAN SOLDIERS’ REPATRIATION FUND.
Balance-sheet, 30th June, 1917.
Liabilities.
£ a. and.
Australian Soldiers’ Re-
patriation Fund —-
drant, Commonwealth
Government .. £250,000 0 0
Interest .. .. 6,085 14 1
Less —
Gifts .. .. 28,488 5 4
Expenses .. 180 17 4
Deficiency Account,
Brisbane .. 285 13 10
Loans written off 299 o 0
226,831 14 7
State Contributory
Funds —
Queensland .. 13,374 19 2
Less Gift .. 5 0 0
13,369 19 2
New South Wales .. 22,162 7 11
Victoria .. .. 45,960 8 1
South Australia .. 26,178 12 10
Western Australia 1,946 19 8
Tasmania .. 856 15 11
337,306 18 2
Assets.
£ s. and.
Cash in banks —
Australian Soldiers’
Repatriation Fund
Trust Account .. £122,525 16 6
Australian Soldiers’
Repatriation Fund
Account .. 107,027 4 8
State War Councils’
Advances Account 15,426 14 7
Loans .. .. .. .. 69,818 3 2
Advance —Victorian Lands Department
for Soldiers’ settlement .. .. 10,000 0 0
Toy Factory, Adelaide . . .. 900 0 0
Returned property on hand pending sale
or re-allotment .. .. .. 279 8 9
Contributions in kind {vide Statement) .. 11,329 10 6
' 337,306 18 2
(Sgd.) 0. MORRICE WILLIAMS,
Deputy Chairman.
Examined and found correct —
(Sgd.) J. W. ISRAEL.
(Sgd.) H. C. ELVINS, Accountant.
SCHEDULE 22b.
AUSTRALIAN SOLDIERS’ REPATRIATION FUND.
Statement of Receipts and Disbursements from Inauguration of the Fund on 31st May, 1916,
to 30th June, 1917.
Receipts.
£ 5. and.
Grant, Commonwealth Government .. 250,000 0 0
Contributions—
Queensland . . 13,255 2 10
New South Wales 21,696 4 0
Victoria .. .. 33,665 6 3
South Australia . . 25,940 7 1
Western Australia 1,871 16 0
Tasmania .. 833 10 8
Interest on Bank bal-
ances .. .. 7,712 3 8
Lite resign Debentures 204 17 6
Contributions in kind—
Realized .. .. .. 51 19 2
Repayments—
Gifts revoked .. 30 17 3
Loans .. . . 3,497 3-0
Property returned and sold .. . . 484 9 3
359,243 16 8
FA 060. —4
Disbursements.
£ s. and.
Gifts .. .. .. .. 28,519 2 7
Loans .. .. .. .. 73,315 6 2
Loans written off .. .. 299 3 0
Property returned (property returned,
but not yet sold or re-allotted,
£279 Bs. 9d.) .. .. .. 763 18 0
Advance (Victorian Lands Department)
for Soldier settlement .. .. 10,000 0 0
Toy Factory, Adelaide .. .. 900 0 0
Expens s .. .. .. 180 17 4
Deficiency in Accounts, Brisbane .. 285 13 10
Bank balances—
Australian Soldiers’
Repatriation Fund
Account . . 107,027 4 8
Australian Soldiers’
Repatriation Fund
Trust Account .. 122,525 16 6
State Advances Ac-
cbunt .. .. 15,426 14 7
359,243 16 8


States.
Advances by
Trustees to
State War Councils.
Gifts.
Loans.
Loans written
off.
Total Loans.
Repayments.
Percentage
of
Repayments
on
Instalments
due.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
Queensland
21,000
0
0
486
13
1
14,865
11
8
14,865
11
8
1,086
10
0
63-4
New South Wales
31,000
0
0
11,694
12
10
17,698
15
1
17,698
15
1
1,404
18
1
61*5
Victoria
58,000
0
0
12,097
9
0
39,196
10
9*
n
0
0
39,273
10
9
520
15-
8
17-7
South Australia
16,000
0
0
3,891
2
1
7,622
1
8
199
3
0
7,821
4
8
231
15
3
49 • 7
Western Australia
3,000
0
0
180
6
7
2,189
7
7
23
0
0
2,212
7
7
189
0
0
68-7
Tasmania
2,000
\
0
0
168
19
0
1,742
19
5
1,742
19
5
64
4
0
61*0 .
i
131,000
0
0
28,519
2
■7
83,315
6
2
299
3
0
83,614
9
2
3,497
3
0
SCHEDULE 22c.
AUSTRALIAN SOLDIERS’ REPATRIATION FUND.
Statement of Contributions in Kind Received and Disposed of from the Inauguration of the Fund on the
31st May, 1916, to the 30th June, 1917.
Receipts.
£ s. and.
Real property (as per Statements) .. 626 15 0
Securities (as per Statements) .. 10,620 0 0
Miscellaneous—
£ s. and.
Tools of trade .. 5 0 0
Wheat . * .. 118 14 8
Horse . . .. 10 0 0
Hav .. .. 6 0 0
11,386 9 8
Disposals.
£ s. and. £ s. and.
Balances on hand .. J 626 15 0
i 10,620 0 0
Gifts—Tools of trade .. .. 5 0 0
Realization—-
Wheat scrip .. 77 10 6 41 4 2
Horse .. .. .. .. 10 0 0
Hay .. .. 5 5 0 0 15 0
11,329 10 6 56 19 2
Balance .. .. .. 11,329 10 6
11,386 9 8
SCHEDULE 22d.
AUSTRALIAN SOLDIERS’ REPATRIATION FUND.
30th June, 1917.
Statement showing Advances made by tee Trustees to the State War Councils, the Allotments made
THEREFROM, AND REPAYMENTS RECEIVED ON ACCOUNT OF LOANS.
♦ This amount Includes advance of £lO,OOO to State Lands Department, Victoria, since repaid.


rviAi I'jiu
jl\ 1 W-L’ JL ivvj
Description.
State.
Value.
Total.
Where Deposited.
Nature of Property.
Scrip No.
Face Value.
Rate of Interest.
—
.. £ s. d.
£ 5
. d.
War Bond
159198
£
10
U% •• .
Commonwealth
Bank
N.S.W.
1
70
0
0
•
159199
10
44%
ff ff
<
ff ”
ff ■ ff
008022
116700
50
100
ii%
U%
ff ff
ff f>
. \
to; ■■■-■
:
ff ff
20426
50
AlO/
/0-, - •
, ff *f
ff ”
ff W
273447
273448
10
10
U%
ii% ■■
a ff
ff . ”
\
0
ff ff
273449
10
4i% ••
>f ff
99
9* *9
250161
10
••
a ff
9 9 #
ff ff
250162
10
ii°/o ■■
ff ff
9 9
W.A.
50
0
0
ff 'ff
Debentures . .
004092
C1328 to
Cl 427
50
“*2%
4% due 1939, Mel-
bourne Harbor
E.S. and A. ..
Vic.
10,000
0
0
Trust
1001
100
5% Beath, Schiess,
Ltd.
Commonwealth
Bank
9 9
r 300
0
0
1002
100
9 9
9 9
ff
9 9,
1003
100
9 9
9 9
if ff
99
10,620
626
0
0
Land
13 acres at Lismore
State W ar
Council
99
270
356
0
15
0
0
15
0
Five lots at Coburg (29, 31,
>» ff
99
32, 33, 34, Coburg Valley
Estate)
Wheat Scrip
4122 and
376 bushels 50 lbs., original
-
Certificate
1633
value at 4/7 £118 14 8
77
10
6
Credited by ad-
ff ff
y
99
%
vance
41 4 2
»
•
77 10 6
J
Chaff
2 tons
£6 0 0
1 Darling and
S.A.
5
5
0
82
15
6
Less sold
0 15 0
( Sons
1
11,329
10
6
SCHEDULE 22e.
AUSTRALIAN SOLDIERS’ REPATRIATION FUND.
Statement of Property held at 30th of June, 1917.


REPORT AND STATEMENTS.
er, r. .J. Garvan, Senator the Hon. J. J. Long, Hon. J. J. Poynton, M.P.
Mr WiOiLr P seconded WmTho T SUbm J ted w f e .received and adopted on the motion of
* p - the mot “« *■ D —
- That the report and statements of the Executive as submitted to the Trustees be
presented to Parliament, in pursuance of section 6 sub-section (3).”
The following letter from Sir Langdon Bonython was tfead :
The Secretary of the Trustees of Repatriation Fund.
Dear Sir,
absence^T^saTd TsV t 0 for
srs:;: 1 ’ but wide knowledge ° f - the zt
-^ IINISTER stat ed that he desired that the letter be placed on record. He felt
sure that the Board recognised the excellent work done by Mr. Williams and Mr Baillieu He
desired to say a word of praise in regard to the manner in which the duties have been carried out
and regretted that so far, the services of Mr. Williams and Mr. Baillieu had not been secured for
the Repatriation Department as at present constituted, but he felt sure they will accept the
assurance that the Government appreciates to the full the labour of the Committees, and he desired
to thank them sincerely- tor their patriotic and assiduous services.
Mr Poynton fully indorsed everything in Sir Langdon Bonython’s letter as to the strenuous
and capable work done. He pointed out that the work was of a very important nature, and carried
out with the zeal and earnestness that could not be expected from any other man.
Senator Long suggested that, as the opinion expressed the views of the Board, the letter
of Sir Langdon Bonytholi, as a resolution of the Board, should find a place in the Board’s Report.
Senator Long moved—
ol • 61^ 01 ' ° f Sl^t ngd ° n B ? I S^ 0n ’ callin 8 attention to the splendid honorary services of the Deputy
Pr - allm^ n ’ • °L^ 10lT ice Williams, and Mr Arthur S. Baillieu (which sentiments were generously supported by the
Prime Minister, Mr. Joseph’Cook, and Mr. J. Poynton) be embodied in the report of the Board of Trustees.
Mr. Cook seconded the motion, which was also supported by Mr. Poynton and carried
iii imously. 17
(Signed) W. M. HUGHES,
Chairman,
4.4.1918.
