

FEDERATION OF THE EMPIRE
COLONIAL DEFENCE.
|sy jTa.MES pourxs p^AWFOP^D..
Mlellmgtoit:
LYON AND BLAIR, PRINTERS, LAMBTON QUAY.
iBB 5 .


?
?
. ' a.'ili' trl?F !|\J:
1
<
9
*
? M: I


Ilnstralasan Jfctrcration.
FEDERATION OF THE EMPIRE
COLONIAL DEFENCE
j3Y jIAMES pOUTTS p^AWFOi^D.
?*K><o)@)xi>*<c^oXq)>o]^?
Wellington:
LYON AND BLAIR, PRINTERS, LAMBTON QUAY.
1885.




AUSTRALASIAN FEDERATION.
FEDERATION OF THE EMPIRE AND COLONIAL DEFENCE.
James Coutts Crawford.
The question of the federation of the Australasian Colonies has
reached the stage of the introduction of an enabling Bill into the
Imperial Parliament. That of the federation of the Empire has not
passed beyond the suggestive stage, and no practical scheme has as
yet been produced. Colonial defence presses for immediate action.
The question of federation, both Imperial and Colonial, calls for
discussion, and I have a material point to bring forward which seems
hitherto to have been overlooked :
When in England, I attended on several occasions at the meetings
of the .Royal Colonial Institute, to hear papers read on the subject of
the ? Federation of the Empire,? and I have also read most of the
speeches which have been made on this subject.
The proposals made are in general entirely unsatisfactory, and
resolve themselves into ? protection ? for produce and manufactures
within Imperial limits. It is needless to say that, it is hopeless to
suppose that the mother-country would go in for differential duties
against the world to favour the colonies, and highly undesirable that
she should do so ; and, therefore, the propositions made are simply
impracticable and Utopian.
No one as yet seems to have hit upon the point upon which the
whole question of federation hinges, and, unless settled satisfactorily,
any scheme would be subject to fall into ruin. This point is the
liability of the trade of the colonies to be utterly ruined by some war
in which England might be involved, and in which the colonists had
no interest.
Patriotism is one thing, poverty is another. The colonists are
patriotic, and retain a warm feeling of affection for the mother-
country ; but, in case of a prolonged war with a powerful maritime
State, their patriotism would be put to a severe strain if they found
that their produce could not be taken to a market, or only conveyed
thither at unprofitable rates of freight and insurance.
This risk and difficulty would be obviated by declaring their inde-
pendence, and hoisting their own flag ; and it is evident that under
the supposed circumstances there would be strong temptations to
adopt this course. How to solve this problem, I have often considered
without finding a solution, until lately I came across an article in the


Pull Mall Budget of 17th October, 1884, by M. Emile de Laveleye,
the distinguished Belgian writer, which seems to meet the difficulty,
and induced me to cry Eureka, I have found it.
The question is the immunity of private property at sea.
It appears that in the year 1856, all Europe, with the exception
of England, was willing to agree to this immunity, and that probably
still all nations will agree to it, if England will give in. That it is
England?s interest above all other nations, to agree, is clearly pointed
out by M, Laveleye, because she has infinitely the greatest amount of
property afloat, and because from the extension of the railway system
of Europe it would now be practically impossible to blockade the
ports of any Continental State. Supposing the French ports were
blockaded by England, the trade of France would simply be diverted
to Belgian, Italian, or Spanish ports, from which the goods would be
conveyed by railway. There would be some inconvenience, but no
stoppage of trade, whereas Britain being an island, could receive no
similar help from neutral ports.
Now, the question of the immunity of private property at sea
affects the Australasian Colonies in a greater degree than most others.
These colonies can only be attacked by sea, whereas Canada, for
instance, is open to the United States along an extended land
frontier.
It is of the first consequence that the Australasian Colonies should
strongly press upon the Home Government the urgent necessity for
the speedy agreement of the nations as to the immunity of private
property at sea. Had we now an Australasian federation, the point
could have been urged with far more force than it can be by individual
colonies. Let this point be carried, and then the defence of the
colonies is simplified. We must go on with our fortifications. We
must defend our ports and our coaling-stations; but the attention of
the fleet would not be distracted by the necessity of protecting large
numbers of merchant ships, or which might perhaps be more genial
occupation, making capture of those of the enemy, and dividing the
prize-money. It may be hard upon naval officers to have to forego
the pleasures of prize-money ; but their wishes must succumb to the
higher wants of political life.
With immunity from capture of the imports and exports of the
Australasian colonies, war would have few terrors, at all events so
soon as the chief ports were placed in a defensible state. No large
expedition is likely to be sent against them ; and should the landing
of a small force be effected on an undefended part of the coast, the
Volunteers ought to be able easily to dispose of it.
No large force would leave Europe for the purpose of attacking
these colonies without the knowledge of England, and the British
fleet would doubtless prevent its arrival, or, if not, would help in
forcing it to surrender.
Canada is in a different position as regards the United States, but
another war between Great Britain and the States is so unlikely, and
would be so unnatural, that this danger seems unlikely to arise.


As to the question of the ?Federation of the Australasian Colonies,?
much must depend upon what this federation means. Is there to be
a Senate and House of Representatives as in the United States, or
two Houses of Parliament as in Canada, or is there simply to be an
Assembly of Delegates to regulate the higher political questions of the
colonies ?
The former arrangement would doubtless be best for Continental
Australia, if the various colonies can settle their jealousies and agree
as to their tariff. Whether or not it would suit New Zealand, is a
question which requires careful consideration, and is not to be decided
off-hand. It will be time enough to form an opinion when the pro-
visions of the enabling Bill are known. There are many difficulties
in the way of federation, but these were as great in the case of
Canada, and will no doubt be as successfully overcome. What a
commanding position Canada now holds to that when its provinces
were separated. A similar position would be held by an Australasian
confederation; its word would have far more weight in the world
than the separate utterances of the different colonies.
But if the colonies are not yet ripe for a federation of the first-
class, they ought to commence with at least a delegated body, who
should arrange for combined action as to defence, postal arrange-
ments, telegraphs, and, if possible, tariffs. They should also be
competent to advise as to foreign matters, such as those of the French
recidivistes, and annexation in the Pacific,
Imperial federation is a much more difficult question. If it means
anything practical, possibly it means large representation in the
British House of Commons, a body already too large and too garrulous
for work.
Are the colonies prepared to take the responsibility which this
would involve ? Are Canada and. Australia ready to consider ques-
tions of Indian policy, of the Eastern question, of the neutrality of
Belgium and Holland, of possible war with one or more Continental
States ? Probably they would be wise to avoid the risk of deciding on
questions of this kind, with which they have no real concern. If the
representatives of the colonies were small in number they would carry
no weight, if numerous they would be in the position of deciding
questions in which their interest was remote.
In fact the question of Imperial federation is hedged round with
difficulties which may be surmountable, but of the mode by which this
is to be brought about, its advocates have not as yet suggested any
practicable scheme.
As I have already stated, however, the preliminary to Imperial
federation lies in the acceptance as international of the immunity of
private property at sea?without this the strain of allegiance may be-
come too irksome. At the time of the Crimean War the colonies
suffered no inconvenience?the enemy was not active in nautical war.
The experience gained since that time as to the damage which may
be done by a single ?Alabama,? shows that a dozen or two vessels of
similar class in the hands'of the enemy may mean ruin to our trade.


It is all very well to say that it is the duty of the British Navy to dis-
pose of them, the difficulty will he to catch them. Lord Nelson sailed
all the way to the West Indies in search of the French fleet, which he
afterwards found and destroyed at Aboukir Bay, The ? Alabama ?
cruised in all latitudes for years, capturing, burning and destroying,
before she was overhauled and captured by the ? Ivearsage.?
I make the following extracts from M. de Lavelege?s article :
? The best means for England to protect her trade on the high
seas, after having fortified and increased the number of her men-of-
war, would be for her to consent to recognise the great principle of
international law, which all other States have declared themselves
willing to admit. This principle is respect for private property at sea
as well as on land. At the Paris Congress of 1856, privateering was
condemned, and the rights of neutral vessels were recognised in the
following articles: ?
?1. Privateering to be definitely abolished.
? 2. A neutral flag to protect enemies goods, with the exception of
war contraband.
? B. Neutral merchandise, even under an enemy?s flag, cannot be
seized upon (war contrabrand always excepted).
? The United States refused their adhesion to the abolition of
privateering, referring to their traditional policy, which claims
general respect of private property, by men-of-war as well as by
privateers. All the States were ready to accede to this proposal with
the exception of England, who remained obstinate in her old ideas,
thus this splendid reformation could not be effected
? The Institute of International Law, which counts among its
members some of the very highest authorities on this subject, solemnly
and unanimously adopted the principle of immunity of property on
sea as on land, in spite of the opposition to the proposal of the English
members. . . . It is my belief that English statesmen and jurists
who refuse to recognise a principle of justice, which all the other
States desire to see universally established, are misguided in thus
acting in contradiction to what is equitable, and that their conduct is
in opposition to the true interests of their own country.
? The only State who could be seriously injured by capture is
precisely one who, by some inexplicable blindness, is anxious to main-
tain it?England. One cannot indeed reflect without trembling on
what would be her position in the event of a maritime Power, such as
France or the United States, declaring war against her. If England
were to destroy the entire French fleet, French trade would be un-
injured, and could be carried on through Genoa and Antwerp, while
England herself, under similar circumstances, would suffer incompara-
bly more?in the first place, being an island, she would not possess the
resource of neutral ports and railways ; in the second, because her
merchant navy, which is spread over all seas, is vulnerable in its very
power ; and thirdly, because her industries are dependent upon her
exports and imports. She imports provisions and raw materials, and


exports manufactured goods. If the liberty of the seas be com-
promised or threatened, her whole economic edifice would be shaken.
Manufactories would then be closed, means of subsistence lacking,
workmen losing their wages, and the entire social body threatened
with terrible convulsions
? England could never prevent France and America sending out
rapid and powerfully armed cruisers, who would chase and capture
English trading vessels, or deprive the owners of customers by forcing
them to raise the insurances on them, and consequently the prices of
their goods. . . . Can it be doubted for a single instant that France
would be capable of sending out from such ports as Brest, Cherbourg,
and Toulon twenty cruisers better armed and more rapid than the
famous American privateer (the ?Alabama?)? Those English pub-
licists who believe capture to be an indispensible weapon in the hands
of their country, base their opinions on events which occurred at the
beginning of the century,?
? They do not realize that the recognized immunity now accorded
to neutral flags, and the use of steam on land and by sea, have com-
pletely transformed maritime warfare. Henceforward capture will
become an ever-increasingly terrible arm when directed against Eng-
land, and a completely inefficacious one when directed by England
against other nations. If in 1856 the Foreign Office had thought
well to accept the principle of justice and humanity proposed by the
United States, and agreed to by all the other powers, the cries of
alarm which are now agitating England, need never have been
raised.?
The case as regards England could not be put in plainer language,
and in more logical terms, than in the above extracts. As regards the
southern colonies, the application is sufficiently obvious. These
colonies are dependant on their exports of wool, tallow, gold, &c., for
their wealth and prosperity, if not for existence. Prevent the export
of these articles, and ruin falls on every one, from the small farmer to
the State itself. The consideration of this matter leads up to the
necessity for federation of the Australasian colonies. The subject is
one pressing for immediate solution, because France is evidently ready
to go to war for an idea, if she saw any possible chance of success, ?
the idea being to keep herself prominently before the world, ?and
even Germany, naturally one of the most peaceful of States, is
apparently becoming restless.
There is no doubt that New Zealand should be fortified without
delay. Sydney and Melbourne are fortified. Adelaide is distant from
the shore ; and Brisbane a long way up a narrow river. Port Jackson
has the narrow passage at the Sow and Pigs to force. Port Phillip
has a long and winding narrow channel to pass through before reach-
ing Melbourne, both could be readily defended by submarine mines,
whereas Wellington, Auckland, and Lyttelton lie right open to an
enemy, with broad and deep channels leading up to the respective
towns ; but the chief New Zealand ports are totally unarmed and
lie exposed to the attacks of the smallest cruizer. Under present


circumstances, our Volunteer Force is an entirely useless body for
external defence. It has been a useful force for internal defence, so
long as there was danger from the Maoris ; but that risk has nearly
passed away.
Unless the ports are fortified, it is evident that the Volunteer
Force could do nothing against a foreign enemy. A cruizer might
run into Wellington, Auckland, or Lyttelton at any hour of the day
or night, and under the threat of burning the town, compel the
citizens to ransom the place with all the money in the Banks, or else-
where. What could the Volunteers do under present circumstances ?
If they fired any popguns at the enemy, these would have no effect,
and it would only draw the enemy?s fire upon the town. They need
not land a man. In fact the whole business would be utterly humili-
ating to the colonists in addition to being ruinous.
With proper forts and means of defence all this would be changed.
The Volunteer Artillery would man the batteries; the Infantry,
Cavalry, and Field Artillery would parade in readiness to resist any
attempted landing either in the town or at any undefended part of
the coast.
I think two propositions may be considered to be fully estab-
lished ;
(1.) That the federation of the Australasian colonies is desirable.
(2.) That the immediate fortification of the New Zealand ports is
indispensible.
(3.) That the federation of the Empire is desirable, if any one will
kindly produce a practicable scheme for carrying it out.
In the meantime, with the assistance of M. de Laveleye, I
have shown how an outwork may be captured, which so
long as it is held by the enemy, would probably eventually
wreck any scheme of federation.
If federation is to be that of the English-speaking States, it is difficult
however to see how the United States is to be left out of the reckoning,
particularly as the latter has been simply and instinctively carrying
out the instinctive, although possibly not the planned, policy of Eng-
land, to increase and multiply and replenish the earth; to found
States, and enlarge the bounds of civilization.
The slightest consideration will show how much the wealth and
progress of the Australasian group of colonies depend upon their
exports. In food of all kinds, cereal products, meat, &c., they
have a large surplus product to dispose of after supplying the
wants of their own population. In wool only a small fraction
is required for colonial use, and the enormous balance finds a
market in Europe, and thereby returns great wealth to the colonies.
Suppose that we were unable to export these commodities, it is
clear enough that ruin would be the result. We could not use
them?they would lie and rot. When Australasia has a population
of twenty or thirty millions, the case will be very much altered, for
then there will be many more mouths to consume the food, and more
bodies to be clothed, but that is an affair of the distant future.


And here let me put in a word of warning to those who talk glibly
about protection to native industry. There is such a thing as a war
of tariffs as well as a war with swords.
A war of tariffs would be essentially dangerous to the southern
colonies on account of their great dependance on their exports. There
is a duty upon wool in America, and the consequence is that we do
very little busines with the United States. If the theory of protection
were correct, then Great Britain should put a heavy duty upon im-
ported wool and mutton. What would the effect of this be in these
colonies ? The reply is easy ?ruin to the farmer, low wages to the
farm labourers. Already we find France going in the direction of pro-
tective duties upon food ?who can say whether in the rapid political
changes taking place that England may not some day adopt a retro-
grade policy also ? If she does so she has had certainly every
encouragement from her own colonies.
Of course protection is not prohibition, but it is a step in that
direction, and sometimes practically amounts to the same thing. At
the present moment these retrograde doctrines stand right athwart any
scheme for an intelligent federation of the southern colonies, and of
any reasonable plan for a federation of the Empire
The tendency of the present day is towards the aggregation of
small States into large, of a number of weak into one powerful body.
Thus we have seen the various kingdoms and dukedoms of Italy
merged into one as the Kingdom of Italy, without any federal bond.
In Germany we find the whole nation united in one Empire, although
partially retaining the system of federation. The Government of the
Dominion of Canada unites all the provinces of that immense territory,
retaining the federal system, and only requiring time and population
to become a State of the first magnitude. The United States gives
another example, but that belongs to a previous period.
In the very nature of things there must be an Australian federa-
tion ?it cannot possibly be avoided, and the sooner now that it is
established the better. Its representation ought to have a local habit-
ation and not be a peripatetic body. I would suggest Albury or
Bathurst. The former place would be convenient for New South
Wales and Victoria, and also for South Australia, as soon as the rail-
way system is complete.
Should New Zealand join the federation, these localities would
suit as well as any other.
As opposed to the aggregating force which has been at work in
concentrating small States into large ones, there has always been a
minor dispersive power at work. Thus we find the Particularist
party in Germany wishes to re-establish the old States; the old pro-
vincial party of New Zealand would restore the provinces and reduce
the Central Government to a nullity; the Irish would make fragments
of the grand British Empire, but the aggregative force is by far the
most powerful of the two, and may possibly even bring about the
federation of the Empire, as it is certain to bring about that of
Australia. The absurdity of the different provinces of that country


being as now foreign States as regards each other, is too manifest to
require argument. Hostile tariffs, breaks of gauge in railway lines, ?
different laws on matters of general interest, point directly to the
necessity for federation. Things are not so bad as they were in Italy
in former days, when one might pass through several States during
the day and be constantly pestered about passports and baggage ; but
Victorian duties levied along the line of the Murray are a reminder of
the same barbarous state of affairs.
As regards Imperial federation, it appears to me that colonial
representation in the British Parliament will in no way meet the re-
quirements of the case. If the thing is to be brought about, it must
be by the creation of another representative body elected by Great
Britain and by the colonies.
Possibly an assembly of this kind might work ; but, on the other
hand, it might soon come into conflict with the British Parliament.
Political and economical science is farther advanced among the lead-
ing men of England than it is in the colonies, and differences of
opinion would doubtless result from this cause. In the nature of
things there would, doubtless, be a struggle for ascendency between
the new body and the old parliament;?in fact, there are difficulties.
If a Dictator could take the rule of the federation into his hands, the
matter would be simple enough; but representative bodies with possi-
bly conflicting or over-riding powers, are difficult to handle.
Let us hope that some leading mind will produce a scheme likely
to be successful.
As an example of the necessity for Australian federation in the
matter of defence, King George?s Sound may be instanced. This
harbour is the key for the command of the whole inward trade of
Australia and New Zealand. If seized and held by an enemy, the
danger is obvious. But the Colony of Western Australia is evidently
too poor and too thinly-peopled to be able, from its own resources, to
fortify and hold this position. The cost, therefore, ought to be borne
either by the whole of Australia, or by Australia and Great Britain
combined. Albany would also require a garrison to man the guns,
for I suppose its population would be quite inadequate for the purpose :
it is only a village. The expense of this garrison could not be borne
by the revenues of Western Australia, and it would be inequitable that
she should have to pay the cost, because it it not her commerce which
is to be protected, but that of the other colonies.
With regard to the outward trade to Europe and America, Wel-
lington, and not Auckland, is the key of the position. None of this
trade passes anywhere near the latter port, and it is therefore too far
off. In the case of New Zealand joining in Australasian federation, it
might be suggested that help should be given to fortify Wellington,
but it would not be wise to advance this claim, because New Zealand
could hardly sue in forma pauperis like Western Australia, and is not
deficient in population, and because both Melbourne and Hobart
might advance similar claims as lying in the line of the commercial
route.


The difficulties in the way of Imperial federation are so great that
lam tempted to make a suggestion. Suppose that it was found ex-
pedient that the large colonies, such as the Dominion of Canada and
the proposed Australasian confederation, should set up on their own
account, could there not be an interchange of citizenship without per-
manently changing the allegiance ? Could it not be arranged by
some simple form that the inhabitant of one or the other country
could transfer his citizenship and allegiance as often as suited his
convenience, and the paths of public service or of industry be equally
open to him in both countries.
The Bar of England received a great acquisition from America
when the late Mr. Benjamin joined it. Such instances would, under
the proposed plan, no doubt become numerous. Wealthy colonists
like to have the avenues of public life in England open to them and
to their sons. Englishmen seeking fortune repair to the colonies. In
fine, the younger branches of the family having set up a separate
establishment, wish to keep up an affectionate family feeling with the
old folk at home, and these reciprocate the sentiment. Few of us
who were born and bred in the old country would like to change our
allegiance. We are proud of belonging to the greatest nation the
world has ever seen?the mother of freedom. We are proud of her
history, ancient and modern, and proud of our race.
But the point which is my text cannot be avoided. In case of
war the present connection of Great Britain and her colonies is a
terrible source of weakness both to the former and the latter. I have
above thrown out a suggestion for what it is worth. Let us hope
that something better may be considered feasible.
In conclusion let me make a few remarks as to annexation in the
Pacific. If the Home Government had shown a little more energy,
any difficulties likely to arise might Jiave been avoided. As matters
stand we must make the best of it, although the presence of foreign
flags in the Pacific necessitates preparations for defence on the part of
Australia and New Zealand, which might have been avoided had the
Home Government been less supine.
German annexation is not, however, to be dreaded like the acquisi-
tions of France. The Germans mean business, and not points of
attack. French settlements are unprofitable, require heavy outlay
for their support from the mother country, and are chiefly intended
as points d'appui to attack our commerce in case of war. But is it
wise for Germany to fritter away its power in the acquisition of a few
Pacific islands, situated in the tropics, and which can give no outlet
for her labouring population, but only find employment for a few
planters and traders ?
One can understand the aspirations of Germany for the acquisi-
tion of colonies where her national life and language may be repro-
duced, but lands for this purpose are now difficult to find. I would
suggest that, if the thing is to be done on a sufficient scale, arrangements
might be made with the Empire of Brazil, a country of enormous
extent, stated by Burton to be equal in resources to the territory of


the United States. Much of Brazil lies within the tropics and is, no
doubt, very warm ; but much of it is table-land, with a pleasant
climate. That much of the country is suited for German colonization,
is proved by the success of German communities already settled
there. The population of Portugal is quite inadequate to the peopling
of Brazil, even if assisted to some extent by the so-called Latin races,
who, however, seem to prefer settling in the States of the Bio de la
Plata ; and therefore there is a fine opening for Germany with its pro-
lific population. The Imperial family of Brazil might be Germanized
by intermarriages, and the country eventually become more German
than Portuguese.
Nevertheless the great stream of German emigration will doubtless
continue to flow to the United States, and to the British colonies,
where they escape from functionaries, and already find large numbers
of their race thriving citizens, and where they are welcomed as being
among the best of colonists.
Far better that Germany should go in for settlement on a large
scale, such as I have indicated, than that she should waste her means
on the acquisition of a few Pacific Islands, the trade of which will
probably be with Australia and not with Europe.
Germany, with other Continental States, has gone in for the pro-
duction of beetroot sugar to such an extent that the raison d'etre for
the acquisition of sugar islands no longer exists. Coffee, cotton, and
other tropical products can probably be produced cheaper for the
European market in Brazil or other nearer countries, and copra
remains as an export to Europe. Is it worth the cost of expensive
Government establishments, of the cost of men-of-war, of possible
fortifications ?
Perhaps it would be best to leave most of the groups of the
Pacific Islands to be governed by their own people, with the assist-
ance of white settlers, such as has eventuated in the Hawaiian
Archipelago. Which Kingdom is safe from annexation as being
under the regis of the United States ?
Tahiti was getting on very well under this system, when the
French must needs step in and interfere ; and it is French policy
which prevents this plan being carried out over the Pacific. Of
course we know that there are two different races in the Pacific, with
different capabilities for government, and that the more savage
peoples, such as those in the Solomon Islands, may be untameable,
but the bulk of the communities might have been taught to govern
themselves and develop their natural instincts, without being swamped
in foreign habits and customs.
On the other side of the Indian Ocean, we find the French ruth-
lessly and truculently trying to destroy the rising civilization of the
Hovas, ?a race allied to the Maoris. A most interesting experiment
was in progress as to the further advance of this people in civilization
by their own efforts, when the French enter on the scene, and appar-
ently without the slightest righteous claim, proceed to bombard the


ports of Madagascar, and carry war into a peaceful country. We
hear much of the losses of British subjects, but little of the injury
morally and politically done to the Hovas.
The proposition which I have made is only intended to be used in
the last resort, failing all means of finding a practical mode of Im-
perial federation, and of securing the immunity of private property at
sea.
I can see one test which would strain Imperial federation to the
utmost. Suppose the United States attacked Canada?so,ooo,ooo
against 5,000,000, with an extended frontier which could be cut
wherever convenient; how is the federation to defend the Dominion ?
It would probably be found impossible, although, if very earnest in the
matter, the Canadians might defend themselves.
On the other hand it is not impossible to imagine the Dominion
annexing the States, not by war but by the example of superior insti-
tutions. The constitution of the United States has many good points,
but it did not steer quite clear of some of the nonsensical ideas of the
French Revolution. The constitution of the Dominion was formed
when political knowledge was more advanced. Scotland annexed
England, why should not the Dominion annex the States ?
Let us, however, imagine the colonies, or the federation of Austra-
lasia, called upon to decide upon the question of a war which involved
their fighting the United States, probably in a matter with which they
had no concern. Any one can see without argument that a great
difference of opinion would arise, and possibly the majority would
be against the war. The commercial relations of Australia with
America are with the States and not with Canada. Although under
different Governments, the inhabitants of both countries are near
relations to the Australians, and it would puzzle most Australians
to tell the difference between a Canadian and a Yankee.
Next let us suppose Canada and Australia to be called upon to
support a war undertaken in defence of the neutrality of Holland or
Belgium, or of the Duchy of Luxembourg, or to protect Asia Minor,
or defend Constantinople. It again requires no argument to see the
difficulties here.
Australia might be ready to fight for Egypt and the safe passage
of the Suez Canal, whereas Canada would probably say this is no
business of mine.
The interests involved are altogether so complicated, and so various
that a practical scheme for Imperial federation is one of the most
difficult questions of the day.
Miramar, 30th December, 1884.
LYON AND BLAIR, PRINTERS, LAMBTON QUAY, WELLINGTON, N.Z.










*
