



CSJ






AUSTRALIAN STORIES FOR CHILDREN






if " n||^M
jTxIh, - , j
: I | - 11 I |] '!» * ]
i\ - " f % ■ 1
\ ! •'
• s — f i • "I I « lipj
l jfe^
t ( Y ! J uMT Ml * |
I V r\ ' . \ ! ' I ' 1 W 1
■ i \ >, HI Mil
—ii'in n 'ih*mnK Lili _ Fit in? J


AUSTRALIAN STORIES
FOR CHILDREN
KIT MURRAY
Illustrated by
EDWARD SCOTT-SNELL
LONDON
HOUGHTON & SCOTT-SNELL
REGENT HOUSE, REGENT STREET, W. i


Printed in Great Britain for Houghton & Scott-Snell, Ltd., by
Stephen Austin & Sons, Ltd., Hertford.


CONTENTS
FIRE FIENDS 9
PETER ...... 12
KING FISH AND KELPIE . . .20
THE CHICKEN WHO WOULD NOT BE TOLD 26
UNTOLD GOLD . . . . .32
THE TAJ MAHAL 39
LITTLE JARRAH . . . . .46
NIGHT WIND 51
BORONIA FAIRIES . . . -55
SPRING IN ENGLAND . . . .60




ILLUSTRATIONS
HE LOVED THE SUN WITH A GREAT
LOVE .... Frontispiece
DOWN THE RAIN FAIRIES DROPPED,
PITTER-PATTER, AS QUICK AS THEY
COULD FALL : f. . . facing page N
THEY ROWED UNTIL THEY REACHED THE
HEART OF THE SUNSET facing page 37
HERE COMES DAWN-WIND, I MUST GO
facing page 54
THE FAIRY MEETS THE SEA BREEZE
facing page 56
LIKE A LOVELY THRUSH SINGING, WAS
THE TUNE HE PLAYED facing page 62




FIRE FIENDS
The Fire King had awakened from his
long winter sleep and busily planned a war
against the gum trees. Away in the engine
of a train he hid his fire fiends called sparks.
The train was going to the country where
gum trees grew and grass as high as the
fences waved in the hot sunlight. Then
birds sang and locusts sang too —" Zizz-zizz "
was the song they sang.
When the Fire King saw that dry, golden
grass, he said to the sparks, " Hop out !
Hop out ! This is the place we are looking
for."
Quickly the sparks flew this way and that
way, curling through the grass like golden
snakes.
" We'll soon show them who is master,"
said these fiery sparks, and on they rushed
until the grass was burning fiercely ; then
they were joined by a fiend called Flame,
who said : " Come to the gum trees," and,
bearing a banner of red and gold, fierce
Flame led the way. Full of fiendish glee they
swept on their way.


In the distance was a house at the end of
a pine drive.
" I'll race you," said one fire fiend to
another, and away they flew leaving black
desolation behind them.
" Let us burn the house," said one fire
fiend.
" Won't the children be frightened ! " said
another fire fiend in great glee, for they were
cruel and ruthless fiends.
The mother saw them coming. Catching
the children by the hand she ran down the
hill.
" Where shall we go, Mummy ? " said Pat
in a little whimpering voice as they rushed
along. To the creek the mother ran, but the
fire fiends were close behind. The mother
pushed the children down in the water of
the creek and tried to shelter them from the
sparks and burning sticks.
" We'll all be burnt —burnt dead ; I don't
want to be dead," said John.
Meanwhile, a number of rain fairies in a
dark cloud saw how near the fire fiends were
to the children.
" Mother Cloud, let us help those children,"
said the rain fairies.


.


Down the rain fairies dropped, pitter-patter, as quick as
they could fall.


FIRE FIENDS
" Yes, yes, away you go," said the mother
Cloud.
Down the rain fairies dropped pitter-
patter, pitter-patter as quick as they could
fall. The fire fiends hissed at them and put
out a screen of steam clouds, but the rain
fairies were too much for those fiends. Soon
they conquered, and, although all was black-
ness and desolation, not a spark was to be
seen and fierce Flame with his banner of
red and gold was extinguished.
With sorrow the children looked at the
havoc wrought by the fire fiends, but they
soon forgot their sorrow when they
remembered that the rain fairies had saved
their fives, and when down the well, hanging
to a charred bit of wood, they found their
pussy safe and sound.
Good old Mother Earth soon spread a
cloak of green over the burnt land. Many
trees burst forth in new leaves and joy reigned
supreme, all because that dark mother Cloud
had come to the rescue and turned her silver
fining inside out. For, you know, every
sullen cloud has a silver fining of joyous little
raindrops.


PETER
Peter was born in a land of sunshine within
sight and sound of the sea and he loved the
sea with a great love. His home was on a high
cliff at Manly. It had a wide veranda in
front and a gay garden to the cliffs' edge.
Even when in bed Peter saw the sea and
heard it beat on the rocks below. Sometimes
it thundered ; that was when the old man
of the sea broke loose and made a great storm.
Sometimes it only said : " Hush ! Hush ! "
Then Peter went sound asleep.
When morning came all the stars dis-
appeared as the sun, like a ball of gold, popped
over the horizon. Then Peter went away
down in the breakers. Such a roar and such
a rush the breakers made as they chased
each other in, while seagulls flew overhead
and searched for their breakfast.
Until Peter was old enough to go to school
most of his life was spent on the beach
building sand castles which were quickly
levelled by the incoming tide, or racing on
the hard sand with his dog, Tim.
When he grew bigger he spent much time


climbing among the rocks in search of wonders
of the sea left in the deep pools at the low
tide. He peered into the pools and poked
the many coloured anemones just to see
them fold their lovely colours out of sight,
while Tim, a forepaw each side of the pool,
with his head on one side, peered into the
depths of the pool seemingly as interested
as Peter, for sometimes there were tiny fish
left there by the tide and once there was
a little octopus. How Tim growled at it !
Tim loved barking at the little brown and
green crabs that skittered along the rocks
on stiff legs. Frontways, sideways, and
backways—you never knew which way they
would go ! Tim followed them carefully
until they stopped. Then he stopped too,
for a wise dog like Tim was not taking
any chances with those sharp-clawed little
crabs.
Then the tide came in and curled and
hissed on the rocks and stretched long
snowy fingers up to where Peter played and
a ninth wave came and drenched them. Then
away Peter and Tim ran for they did not want
to be washed down among the jagged rocks
and long swaying seaweed.


Best of all was shooting the breakers—
right through a cave of green as clear as
glass Peter dived until he came to the deep
water. Then with outstretched arms he came
in on a foaming wave and was tossed on the
sand. When he was tired of shooting
breakers he stretched himself on the warm
sand and played with Tim.
Peter loved Tim for he had been his best
chum ever since Tim was a tiny puppy, when
hardly a shoe in the house was safe from
Tim's worrying teeth. Another pal of Peter's
was Jim Gordon, the captain of the surf-
club. What Jim Gordon did not know about
the sea was not worth knowing. Besides
he had been to the War and many wonderful
tales he could tell.
It was a sore trial to Tim when Peter
played football. Tim thought football was
a game he would like to play, but when
Peter played Tim was left on guard at the
edge of the field. Sometimes when the fun
was fast and furious he barked with delight;
then Peter said : " Shut up, Tim ! " But
when in the midst of the game all Tim could
see was Peter's boots under a crowd of boys.
Tim had to whine—how could he help it ?


Why wasn't he allowed to join in, then all
those boys would not all crowd on top of
Peter.
But football was soon over and then back
they went to the sea.
Peter's birthday arrived. The day before
he heard his mother say to his father :
" I think he is old enough."
And his father said : " Anyhow he is a
good swimmer so he can't come to any
harm."
The mystery was solved on his birthday
when his father and mother gave him a surf
board.
Peter felt quite grown up as he proudly
carried it down to the surf while Tim circled
around and barked furiously. Out into the
deep water Peter pushed the board and
holding on tightly tried to come in on it.
But it was not as easy as it looked—off he
slipped and the board gave him a great bang
on his tummy which left him breathless.
But soon Peter learned to manage it and
one day he managed to come in standing
erect on the board, much to the delight of
Tim who barked incessantly at the water's
edge.


One day Peter's father came home from
Sydney and said : " Well Peter, your cousin
May is coming to stay for a few weeks."
What in the world was he to do with a girl
—girls were no use —and a girl from Woop-
woop (which means back-block country) ;
well, what was the use of funking it; she
was coming, so that was the end of it. Next
morning Peter and his mother took the boat
to Sydney and met May at Circular Quay.
May looked rather jolly Peter thought.
She had eyes as bright as a squirrel's, rosy
cheeks, and a large laughing mouth. Perhaps
it wouldn't be so bad and sometimes
she could amuse herself with Tim, thought
Peter.
May was wildly excited when she saw all
the boats and the sea and the tiny yachts
with white sails that flitted like white butter-
flies over the sea.
Soon their boat came to the heads and
a strong north-east breeze made the boat
rock heavily. May seized her aunt's hand
for she was quite sure the boat was going
over. Then suddenly she became very
grave and her colour turned green and
yellow.


" Oh, Auntie, I feel so ill. Do you think
I am going to die ? "
Her aunt smiled. "It is all right, May.
We will soon be in smooth water. You won't
mind the boat rocking when you have been
across the heads a few times."
Next day Peter took a frightened May into
the surf. Huge waves came tumbling in,
chasing each other in glee. Then there came
a steep wave, green and clear as glass. Up,
up it went —a moment's hesitation while the
spray flashed from its crest —then down it
thumped behind May and the next thing
she knew was being tumbled over and over
and dumped head first in a smother of foam
and sand. But after May had been shot
up the beach a few times and swallowed
a lot of salt water she thought it was rather
good fun. Peter taught her to swim and soon
she could shoot quite a good breaker.
Time passed: each day brought new
adventures, a picture show, a merry-go-
round, a punch and judy show, or they
sat on the beach and ate candy and ice
creams which Tim shared, for he liked ice
creams.
While they ate the ice creams Peter told


l 8 AUSTRALIAN STORIES FOR CHILDREN
May about all the wonderful things he
intended doing when he grew up.
"I am going to fly like those gulls," he
said, pointing to some gulls flying across
the sea, " and I am going to see all the places
Jim Gordon has seen."
The day before May went home they went
for their last surf. A stiff north-easter was
blowing. Whew ! How it blew white caps
as far as you could see and a nasty channel
had formed on the beach.
Peter was gaily coming in on a breaker
when he heard a faint voice call: " Peter !
Peter ! " And there was May caught in
the undertow which was swiftly carrying
her out to sea.
Quickly Peter caught hold of her and tried
to get her out of the current. Fortunately
May kept calm, but Peter was tired and the
current was strong. Then he heard a voice :
" Cheerio, Peter," called Jim.
" It is all-right, lad," called his father.
Then he knew they were safe. Jim Gordon
took May and Peter put his hands on his
father's shoulders. " Take it easy, lad."
And Peter was glad to take it easy for he
was just spent.


Soon they were safe on the beach where
Tim whimpered and frantically licked Peter's
face, never heeding May.
Next day a sorrowful May went back to
Woop-woop. " Peter is going to miss you,
May," said Peter's mother, and Peter knew
that it was true.


KING FISH AND KELPIE
Pat and John were going to La Perouse
for the day in a great red car. Through the
busy streets of Sydney and through Centennial
Park they went.
As usual a stop was made at the Palm
Avenue, for there they fed the ducks in the
pond alongside the Avenue.
Among the many ducks was one called
Brownie. Pat liked her best of all because
she always seemed to be trying to stand on
her head in the water, and Pat spent many
hours trying to stand on her head but so far
without success. They looked vainly for
Brownie and then when they were giving up
hope of seeing her they suddenly spied her
paddling along as hard as her legs could
paddle, with five lovely fluffy ducklings
trailing along behind her.
" Quack, quack," she said as she swam
along the bank to show off her fluffy little
ducklings. " Quack, quack ! "
But there was not a crumb left as all the
other ducks had gobbled them up.
Off they went; Thompson making up for


lost time as he drove along past the Rand-
wick race course and Kensington golf
links, until at last they arrived at La
Perouse.
First they went to the aboriginals' camp
where the natives had boomerangs for sale.
One of the aboriginals tried to show John
how to throw his boomerang. Off it sailed
like a bird through the air and then it
started to come back : slower and slower it
came and with a final wriggle, as if it
were alive, fell right at the feet of the
aboriginal.
Wildly excited at this, John tried to do
likewise, but in vain. They tried to get it
to return : it would go all right, but coming
back was quite another matter.
The aboriginal, with a grin, said : " Some
day ! "
" Maybe some day," said John in dis-
gust.
Then they tobogganed down the steep
sandhills at the back of the little beach.
At last, tired out, they flung themselves on
the hard beach, dirty, grimy, and happy,
and paddled their toes to get the sand from
between them.


Suddenly a cry rang out and a fisherman
had sighted a shoal of king fish. At his
call the fishermen and a Kelpie pup ran to
a boat at the water's edge. The pup seated
himself in the bows of the boat, as though
used to the job, and quickly the men rowed
over the gleaming water, dropping the fishing
net as they went. The net was buoyed with
corks on its topmost side and weighted with
lead at its lower edge. Around they circled
and swiftly came in with the other end of
the net. Then they hauled slowly, and walked
backwards from the water's edge, their eyes
intent on their catch.
Gleaming fish jumped within the net in
a vain endeavour to escape, while overhead
circled shrieking gulls.
Pat, John, and the Kelpie danced around
in wild excitement.
Presently the children came back to where
their mother was. Pat carried a little silver
fish.
" Look, Mummie, the fisherman gave
me this for my very own. Isn't it a
darling ? "
" This is Mac," said John, as he hauled
the dog forward. " Isn't he a dear ? "


" Hasn't he lovely velvet eyes. I wish
we owned him," said Pat.
" Look at his nice wet nose," said John.
Mother smiled and said : " Dogs always
have a wet nose when they are well."
"Do they ? " said a surprised John.
" When I have a wet nose Nurse says
I have a nasty cold, and must have some
physic."
After lunch Pat and John played with Mac,
throwing along the beach, stones which
he quickly returned to them. Suddenly
a look of fear came into Mac's soft brown
eyes.
Down the pathway from the road came
a couple of men with a bulldog on a leash.
After a glance in search of stray dogs, the
owner loosed Bullie for a run. Bullie's sharp
eyes had spied Mac. Swiftly Bullie ran,
while Mac sped along the wet sand as hard as
he could go.
Bullie's owner saw his mistake and rushed
along the beach calling : " Bullie ! Bullie ! "
But Bullie paid no heed.
Along the beach the dogs bolted. At last
Bullie overtook Mac and with a fierce snap
he had the pup by the throat. The pup


struggled but once a bulldog gets a hold, he
does not leave go. At last Mac, with the
intelligence of a Kelpie, drew his enemy
into the water. Still Bullie held on. Out
to deep water Mac swam, Bullie still held on.
A few waves had washed them over, and
Bullie underneath had gradually swallowed
more water than he wanted. At last,
breathless, his iron jaws relaxed. Mac swiftly
swam to the shore without one backward
glance at his enemy, rushed along the beach,
made a swift dab of joy with his tongue at
Pat's face, and away he went to the main road.
" Isn't he a dear, brave dog," said Pat.
" I wish w r e had him for our dog."
It was soon time to go home, so laden with
baskets and boomerangs they went to the
main road where the car was, and there on
the pathway outside a wdiite cottage was
the children's pet. He wagged a delighted
tail at the sight of his chums.
" Would you sell me that pup ? " said
their mother to the fisherman who leant
over the gate and smoked his pipe.
" Why, yes, seeing as how I have tw r o like
him I think he could be spared," said the
fisherman.


Mother made an offer which the fisher-
man accepted and Mac was bundled in
the back of the car with two happy
children.
" Haven't we had a 'licious day, mother
dear," said Pat.


THE CHICKEN WHO WOULD NOT
BE TOLD
It was springtime and all the gay spring
flowers lifted their lovely faces to the sun,
for in Pat's garden surrounded by high trees
were many flowers, and their fragrance filled
the air, while the birds held high revelry
in the tree tops.
It was a lovely place where Silver, the
old Wyandotte, had her nest under a wide
spreading Camphor-laurel. All the gay birds
kept Silver from feeling lonely, for sitting
on eggs was a tedious job.
The little brown bulbuls with crested head
and petticoat of red said : " Chickup !
Chickup ! Chickup ! " all day long.
Sometimes a kookaburra came ; with head
on one side he peeped at Silver, made a noise
like gargling his throat, and then he laughed
—" Ho ! ho ! ho ! He ! he ! he !" he said,
while the little Indian doves salaamed to
each other and said : " Koo ! Koo ! Koo ! "
which made Silver feel very sleepy. But
she wakened up when William Wagtail said :


" Sweet pretty little creature," as he chased
the black cat across the garden.
Best of all the birds Silver loved the
blue wren. He had such a perky tail. And
his spots were just the colour of a lovely
summer sky. When he knew Silver was
sitting on her eggs he always came and said
" Chit ! Chit ! " to her and cheered her up.
Now the blue wren had been busy making
a nest for Mrs. Wren and he had not seen
Silver for quite a long time. One morning
he balanced himself on a pink rose bush with
his perky tail erect. " Chit ! Chit ! " he
said, which means " Listen ! Listen !", and
then he tried a new note for his song, like a
peal of silver bells it rang.
Suddenly a bright eye peeped at him from
behind a piece of hessian hanging over the
front of a box.
"Is that you, Silver," he said. "At your
old job of hatching chickens ? My wife is
busy too. I made her a nest in the Virginia
creeper away from the horrid black cat."
"Yes, here I am again," said Silver.
" Pat and John did not set too many eggs
this time, but their aunt arrived with three
more. The aunt laughed and said : 'You


might not have to wait so long for these.'
I wonder what she meant ? "
Every morning Pat and John brought food
and water and lifted Silver off her nest.
After food and drink and a dust bath she
hurried back to her nest.
One morning when it was not nearly time
for the chickens to come out, Silver heard
" Peep, peep and looking under her feathers
she found one of the eggs was broken and out
came a lovely yellow chicken.
Pat and John were excited when they saw
that yellow chicken and wondered how it
came so soon. The problem was solved
when Auntie arrived and said her old brown
hen had sat on those eggs for two weeks and
then left them. She knew what a clever old
hen Silver was and thought she would see
what she could do with them.
Such a trouble that chicken was for it
always wanted to stray. Silver could not
leave her nest and she knew it was not safe
for Goldie when the black cat was roaming
around ! And sometimes there was a big
fat washer-woman called Jane —she might
tread on Goldie for she never looked where
she was going.


" Cluck ! Cluck ! " said Silver. " Come
under my nice soft feathers. It is nice and
cosy under my feathers, Goldie.'
" Peep ! Peep ! A nice feather bed I do
not want," said naughty little Goldie and
away he ran around the corner. Such lovely
grubs Goldie found around the corner, but
suddenly he spied the black cat which had
crept near. A very startled chicken shrieked
and ran back to his mother.
Silver's trouble was soon ended for next
day she heard a great crackling of shells
and out came nine lovely black chickens.
" Peep ! Peep ! " they said and looked
around as pleased as could be to come into
such a lovely world. As black as satin
those chickens were and Silver was a proud
mother when she showed them to the blue
wren.
" They are not like you, Silver, but they
are very nice," said the blue wren.
" Cluck ! Cluck ! " said Silver as she
scraped around for food while the little blue
wren taught his teeny weeny babies how
to fly.
Silver's only trouble was Goldie for he
still strayed away and when she scolded him


30 AUSTRALIAN STORIES FOR CHILDREN
for being naughty all the black chickens
said :
" We would not do so, we always do as
we are told."
One day Goldie had wandered far. Looking
up he saw Jane coming with a basket of
clothes. She could not see Goldie —where
would he go ? Such a funny chicken he looked
half running and half flying. At last frightened,
he gave a shriek and flew straight into a tub
of water. Such a frightened chicken was
Goldie as he struggled to get out of the tub
and he thought of all the times he had
disobeyed his mother . . . then he lost his
senses.
Pat came to look for Goldie before she
went to school for Goldie was her favourite
chicken. At last she found him where he
lay unconscious in the water. Many tears
were shed, for Pat thought Goldie was dead.
But there was life in the chicken yet.
It was a very draggled little chicken that
they took out of the water. Pat's mother
wrapped Goldie in warm flannels and placed
him by the fire. Soon a delighted Pat saw
the chicken open his eyes, then she took him
back to his old hen mother.


A very subdued chicken was put under
his mother's wing ; all that wise old mother
said was : "You must have thought you
were a duck when you went swimming in that
great tub." Then she popped a fine worm
under his beak, for Silver knew Goldie had
at last learnt a lesson he would not soon
forget.


UNTOLD GOLD
The breeze which stirred the tree tops and
wrinkled all the blue water of the harbour
was laden with the scent of gum trees, for
where Pat and John lived at Cremorne you
could see the harbour in all its beauty.
Across the harbour they saw Farm Cove
where the grey warships lay, beyond that
the gardens, and beyond the gardens the
city rising high against a blue sky.
In the tree tops level with their veranda
birds sang gaily and a couple of kookaburras
laughed loudly at a joke of their own.
" Come, children, I am taking you to
Neilson Park for a picnic," said Mrs. Holmes.
" Nurse has packed a hamper and you must
bring your buckets and spades to play on the
beach."
The children quickly found their hats and
away they went to the ferry. As they crossed
the harbour they passed great tramp steamers
waiting to take the wool to the other side of
the world. One great white ship had already
gone and on the red buoy where it had been
moored sat a radiant little white seagull,


its red legs as red as the buoy it sat on. It
looked rather sad for it knew that the great
white steamship would give it no more food,
for morning and evening they threw food
out of a hole in the ship's side and that little
gull had no need to search for food.
Reaching Circular Quay they quickly
boarded the boat for Neilson Park. Down the
bright blue harbour they went. They pointed
out their home to mother and nurse. Passing
Garden Island John was interested in the
many warships there while Pat was lost in
admiration for the lovely figureheads upon
the point.
" Look, John," said Pat, " that one has
a gold bangle on her arm. I wonder what
ship she was on ; she must have seen some
lovely places in her travels. Oh, I wish
Mum had lots of money, then we could travel
and see lovely places too."
Arriving at Neilson Park they climbed
the steep green to a shelter among the
trees.
" Tell us a story, Mum," said Pat.
" Very well. I shall tell you a story about
a party the Wistaria Fairies gave to welcome
Spring at Wentworth House."


" Oh, yes ! " said John, " that is here,
at Vaucluse."
" The Wistaria Fairies were busy preparing
a party away down at Wentworth House
and sweet Spring was to be the honoured
guest.
We must be very busy,' said the Fairy
Queen. ' The Sun will lend us sunbeams,
the wind will stir the trees, and we shall have
some butterflies, and softly humming bees.'
" Swiftly they worked a lattice of tough
brown stems and there all the Wistaria
Fairies in perfumed gowns soon appeared ; as
they shook their soft mauve skirts sw r eet
fragrance filled the air.
" In the midst of all the preparations a
little rain cloud appeared.
What does that nasty rain cloud want,
coming here to-day,' said the Fairy Queen.
Suddenly pitter-patter, pitter-patter, the
rain cloud fell in their midst.
Pray don't be angry,' said the little
Rain Drops, ' we only came to w r ash the faces
of these dainty elfin flowers.'
" Through the tall pine trees came the
Blue Wren with his drab wives three. ' Chit !
Chit ! Chit !' pealed his silver bells.


" ' It is all right/ he said, ' I have brought
some jolly Kookaburras to laugh aloud in
glee —then your party won't be dull/
" ' Excellent/ said the Fairy Queen. ' What
about some Daffodils to blow their golden
trumpets and gay, sweet birds for an
orchestra/
All the leaves were fluttering,
All the gay birds sing,
Little twisty fragrant winds
Whispered : " Here comes Spring ! "
" Then came Spring with her favourites,
Joy and Mirth, her arms full of flowers and
a chorus of gay birds.
" All the wavelets on the little beach danced
with joy and sparkled on the yellow sand to
welcome her.
" Sweet Spring said : ' Why, what a lovely
party ! I have brought you some more flowers;
I have roses sweet of red and pink and ferns
for shady bowers.'
" It was such a happy party the fairies
gave sweet Spring.
" They played and danced until the shadows
lengthened on the soft green lawns. Then
the day was over and the fairies drowsed in


sleep ; into that fragrant garden golden stars
did peep."
" What did the golden stars peep at,
Mum ? " said Pat.
"At the fairies asleep of course. Now
run away children and play on the golden
sands."
" Oh, I wish they were golden, then we
might get a lot of money for them ; they
are only yellow," said Pat.
Away down on the beach the children played
with bucket and spade, building a lovely
castle, while the little waves ran up the
beach to look at the strange thing growing
up on the sand.
Hotter and hotter beat the sun on the
beach while lovely seagulls circled overhead.
" If this was gold instead of sand I would
buy a motor car," said Pat.
" I would buy a boat like that one over
there," said John, as a lovely yacht heeled
before the breeze like snowy seagulls slant
their wings.
" I wish I had a boat," said John in a
tired voice.
" Here you are," said a squeaky voice,
and there on the crest of a wave was their




They rowed until they reached the heart of the sunset


bucket transformed into a shining blue boat,
with spades for oars.
Quickly Pat and John stepped in.
The setting sun was a golden glory in the
west.
" I am sure there is gold where the sun
sets ; let us go there," said John.
Straight up the fairway they went for
the sun had laid a golden pathway to guide
them. Up that golden pathway they rowed
until they reached the heart of the sunset,
where the sun had turned everything to
gold; all the grains of sand, the rocks, and
the trees were golden.
Full of joy Pat and John collected golden
sand in their boat at the same time they
discussed the many places they would visit,
the many things they would buy, and the
nice things they would have to eat. To eat !
At that thought they suddenly discovered
how hungry they were with nothing to eat !
Even the fruit on the trees had turned to gold.
With troubled minds they realized that
gold was not everything, and longed for
Mum and Nurse with bread and jam or nice
fresh eggs to eat. They wished they had never
come in search of gold.


Pat opened her mouth to cry when suddenly
they heard Nurse's cross voice saying : " What
are you children doing, asleep on the sand ?
Come at once to tea ! "
There they were on the beach and all the
little waves were laughing at them.
Then they realized that untold gold does
not bring untold joy.


THE TAJ MAHAL
A long time ago there lived in India a
great emperor called Shah Jehan. He was
very rich and powerful, and lived in great
splendour in a palace built on top of the
great red fort at Agra, close to the lovely
Jumna river.
It was a wonderful palace all built of white
marble, as smooth as satin. On the marble
floors were rich Persian rugs, the hanging
curtains were of rich brocade embroidered
with gold. Overhead were jewelled lamps,
and huge cushions all the colours of a rainbow
were heaped on the floor. All the marble
pillars were inlaid with precious stones.
Shah Jehan had a beautiful little wife,
her name was Arjumand Banu, but when
she became his wife she was called Mumtaz
Mahal, which means crown of the palace,
for Shah Jehan loved her very much, even
more than he loved his kingdom or his
riches.
She was a lovely little lady, gentle and
sweet, with soft brown eyes and hair like
black satin, and her jewels were priceless.


Mumtaz Mahal had special apartments
called the Jasmine Tower. Those apartments
were all white marble, with screens of pierced
white marble and a marble balcony, which
looked out over the lovely Jumna River,
where they saw the boats sailing along
bringing more riches to their palace. Some-
times the water of that shining river was
stirred as a crocodile snapped at some tooth-
some morsel, while great kites hovered high
in the blue sky and whistled and sighed,
and wished they had found that toothsome
morsel.
From the balcony they saw camels, heavily
laden, coming along the road, or a tiny
donkey laden with bundles of green, far
bigg 6l " than itself. Sometimes they saw the
donkey's heels fly out at the slave who drove
him. Then there was heard the sound of
gay laughter, for those little Indian ladies
were as gay as many children.
Storytellers charmed them with tales of
adventures, or love, or singers sang them
love songs, full of the notes of birds those
songs seemed to be, or perhaps they sang
a song of battle, while the little ladies reclined
on the silken cushions and ate sweet-


meats, or turned over the jewels in their
caskets.
Part of the floor was inlaid with squares
of black and white marble. There they
played their games of chess or pachesi,
with slaves for living pieces, or else the
dancing girls danced wonderful dances for
their amusement. But it was not always
peaceful in that lovely palace. Sometimes
they heard the sound of trumpets or the
clashing of scimitars outside the fort while
a fierce battle raged.
In the queen's apartments there was a
wonderful bathroom. All the ceiling and
sides were made of pieces of mirror set in
plaster which was gilded, and the jewelled
lamp reflected all the lights from the mirrors
in the water of the marble bath.
When there was a wedding in the palace,
bowls of precious stones were poured over
the heads of the bride and bridegroom to
bring them luck. All the slaves scrambled
for those precious stones as they fell to the
ground.
Below the palace in the fort were lovely
gardens, there the little ladies wandered
when it was cool and the fragrance of red


roses, orange blossom, jasmine, and frangi-
panni scented the air. They always had sweet
scented flowers, for all Indians love perfume.
Little parrakeets and birds flew all around,
while on the lawns peacocks trailed their
lovely tails, and little monkeys scrambled
around and played.
Around the gardens there were little bazaars,
where the merchants brought silks, jewels,
and perfumes for sale. Sometimes the little
ladies sent the merchants away, and played
shop themselves with the Emperor and
princes for customers. They thought it was
great fun.
When Shah Jehan moved his court to
the Marble Palace at Delhi they went in
great state, in jewelled palankeens or on
elephants all decked with jewels and gold,
with long hangings of velvet on which jewels
were embroidered. Very important those
elephants looked, except their wicked little
eyes which still twinkled and their absurd
little tails which hung out from all the
grandeur; even their trunks were festooned
with jewels, when with stately tread and
slow they took their precious burdens to
Delhi.


When they arrived at the Palace in Delhi,
the emperor held a Durbar or reception, to
which native princes and members of the
Court came, and in the outer court the
people presented their petitions, for Shah
Jehan was a very just ruler and good to his
subjects.
At the Durbar, which looked like some
gorgeous scene from the Arabian Nights,
the Emperor wore gorgeous robes of state,
in his turban he w T ore the Koh-i-noor diamond
which means " Mountain of Light That
diamond now belongs to Her Majesty, the
Queen of England.
The Emperor was seated on the Peacock
throne in the Audience Hall. The Peacock
throne of gold had two gold peacocks with
tails outspread for the back. The tails were
composed of precious stones to represent
the colours of the birds' tails. On the arm
of the throne was a small green parrakeet
carved out of an enormous emerald, while
overhead was a canopy of pearls.
Behind pierced marble screens the ladies
of the court looked on, themselves unseen,
as Indian ladies are always purdah (screened
from sight) when men are present. The


only time they were able to have their faces
uncovered was with their family; even in
the temple they worship behind marble
screens.
One day the lovely little Mumtaz Mahal
died and Shah Jehan was heartbroken. For
two years he mourned for his little queen,
then he decided to build the Taj Mahal, as
a memorial to his much loved queen.
For twenty years twenty thousand men
and elephants laboured to build the most
wonderful tomb in the world. In the midst
of a lovely garden, on the banks of the Jumna
River, the building slowly grew, while soft
little Indian doves in the trees salaamed and
said, " Koo ! Koo ! "
First they built a high platform of white
marble with four slender minarets of snowy
marble at each corner. Then an enchanted
palace slowly grew—a fairy palace it seemed,
with its marble domes shimmering in the hot
sunlight, like mother-of-pearl. Inside that
lovely monument, Mumtaz Mahal was buried.
Over her tomb was placed a coverlet of pearls,
pierced marble screens surrounded it, and
overhead a richly jewelled lamp hung from
the dome.


The merest whisper of a prayer was wafted
to the dome, and an echo like fairy voices
was heard. As though in a whisper, the
little sleeping lady answered the prayer of
her much loved Shah Jehan.


LITTLE JARRAH
Little Jarrah was a tiny hardwood sapling,
and he lived in a great forest in Western
Australia. In that dense forest many birds
sang for they loved those evergreen trees.
Sometimes flocks of gay parrots came there
and the sun peeped through and nodded
gaily at little Jarrah while the sunbeams
played at hide-and-seek with banded wallabies
and soft little 'possums.
Although it was such a lovely place little
Jarrah was never satisfied ; he always longed
to see something more of the world than he
saw beneath those great trees.
Near to Jarrah grew a tall tree called
Karri —quite one hundred feet high Karri's
trunk towered before there were any
branches.
One day Jarrah said : " What can you see
up there, Karri ? "
Karri said : "I see a wide river shining
like silver. On it are many black swans with
lovely red beaks ; their baby swans are like
little balls of grey fluff. On the other side
of the river the fairies have spread a carpet


of lovely flowers, blue like the sky, gold like
the sun, red like the sunset, and pink like
the flush of dawn are the colours of the
carpet."
Jarrah knew the blue of the sky, and gold
of the sun, because he could see them over-
head between the tree tops but he had never
seen a sunset or dawn—how could he down
in the dense forest ? But he had seen the
swans as with outstretched necks they
flew across the tops of the trees. " Honk !
Honk ! " they said and he saw the lovely
white quill feathers underneath their black
wings.
One hot day when not a leaf stirred Karri
said :
" Be thankful, Jarrah, that you are small
for here comes a Willie Willy."
Great whirling clouds of dust came with
terrific force as if a thousand dust devils
were let loose and all the trees shook with
fear. All their leaves were slit to ribbons
and many broken branches fell on little
Jarrah's head.
Suddenly Jarrah started to grow up into
a tall slender tree. He grew so tall his back
ached trying to keep it straight, but when


the rain came his back grew stronger and then
Jarrah became a very fine tree.
One day Jarrah saw a red glow among the
trees.
" Is this the sunset, Karri ? " he said.
" No, it is a bush fire. Fire fiends are seek-
ing to devour us," said Karri.
How these fire fiends hissed and crackled ;
they even burnt little Jarrah's nice new
leaves.
" This is the end of me," said Jarrah.
But not so, there was life in Jarrah yet.
Things looked very black but there came
the rain and soon it washed all the black
from Jarrah and soon he put forth new leaves,
but many of the trees were burnt to
death.
One day some men came through the
forest.
" That has grown into a fine tree ; it will
do for our next shipment," said one of the
men. And Jarrah was a proud tree when he
heard their praise.
Next day a man came with a sharp shining
axe and chopped at Jarrah's trunk. " Chop !
Chop ! Chop ! " Harder and harder he
chopped until poor Jarrah quivered all


over and—Whoosh ! Down he fell to the
ground.
The man cut all Jarrah's branches off
and all that was left of him was a great
brown trunk. Then the men put chains
around him and a team of bullocks hauled
him away to the railway.
" Good-bye, Karri. I'm off to see the
world," said Jarrah.
After a long haul he was put on a railway
truck with other logs. Away they went
through country where cattle and sheep
were grazing and fruit trees flowering, until
they came to a town by the sea. Jarrah
wondered what the sea was like. A bit
of blue sky upside down, he thought. He
was slung up on a big ship and away he went
over the blue and white sea with seagulls
wailing overhead. When they arrived at
New Zealand Jarrah was taken with other
logs to a nearby sawmill.
For many days Jarrah lay in the
wind and rain. All day long he heard a
humming like the bees made when they
swarmed in Karri's branches; but it
was only the saw humming and Jarrah
wished he could see Karri and the 'possums


50 AUSTRALIAN STORIES FOR CHILDREN
and hear the birds sing, or see the fairy-
carpet.
One day men took him into the sawmill
and the cruel saw cut him up into sleepers
for a railway line.
Now Jarrah holds up long ribbons of steel
while people seeing the world ride gaily
overhead.


NIGHT WIND
It was Christmas Eve, and Night Wind
was on his way to Christmas revels in the
bushland near Collaroy where many Christmas
Bushes grew. He w r as a soft little eddying wind
that blew here, there, and everywhere. He
had been very busy after a hot day. Wherever
there was an open window he had blown in.
He had whispered over the bed of a tired
woman and given her happy dreams; he
had fanned coolness from his wings and
soothed the tired children in their hot beds ;
and over the bushland he had blown and
gathered fragrance from the bush flowers
by the way.
At last he reached Christmas Bell Avenue,
which was the entrance to the home of the
Christmas Bush Fairies.
All the Christmas Bells swung on their
slender stems and rang a gay peal of bells
of red and gold, then all the fairies
knew that Night Wind was on his way.
He caressed the gum leaves as he passed
and all the little birds in their nests gave


sleepy little murmurs of content at his soft
touch.
" Here comes Night Wind ! Here comes
Night Wind," the fairies cried, for they
all loved the soft wind that brought
joy and coolness after a hot summer
day.
He frolicked around with the fairies for
a while and then with a sigh of content
folded his wings and sank to rest beneath
a huge Christmas Bush: then all was
still —nothing stirred —only the twinkling
stars.
Very lovely the Christmas Bush Fairies
looked, with long, slender, silken wings of
palest green and stars of rosy red upon their
heads. The Flannel Flowers were invited
to the revels, they all wore gowns of white
velvet, each petal of their skirts tipped with
pale green and on their heads they had a soft
fluffy head-dress just like a ball of thistledown.
Many fairies were absent from the revels
and the others were very sorry. Some people
had pulled Christmas Bushes and taken them
away in the cars.
" Never mind," said Night Wind, "at
Christmastime we should give joy to everyone


and those fairies have given joy to many for
I saw some of them when I blew through the
open windows and through the hot streets.
In one house I saw an old lady put a piece
of Christmas bush in a letter for her son
across the sea. ' Bill always loved the
Australian bush flowers,' she said. In another
house I saw a party, all the place was gay
with Christmas Bush, coloured lights, and a
Christmas tree covered with toys. They
were all very happy and when I came through
the city I saw a poor child gazing with delight
at a piece of Christmas Bush he had picked
up as it fell from the car. He did not have
much fun because he was very poor but that
flower gave him joy."
The little fairies felt happier when they
heard how much joy had been given to
others
The Moon had lighted her lamp and
a jazz band of locusts provided noisy
music.
" Biz . . . biz . . . biz . . ." went the band.
" Biz . . . biz . . . biz . . ." and all the fairies
danced until they could dance no more, while
a belated Bunny Rabbit who should have
been in bed long ago gazed with rapture


from a clump of bracken at those jolly little
elves.
Suddenly Night Wind stirred. " Here
comes Dawn Wind ; I must go." He whistled
shrilly a joyous tune and away he blew.
Then all the birds sang matins to welcome
Christmas Day.


HSTj V MB,, , r
r r JjjgEJ^^SSV
miH \ V J JUnlL 1 [




BORONIA FAIRIES
Far away in the bush at Dee Why by the
sea lived the Boronia fairies, they were
lovely little fairies, and their gowns were
the colour of pink rose.
Every night the Boronia fairies had a
party, and the moon fairies slid down a
big moonbeam and joined in the fun.
They danced and danced in the moon-
light and a soft wind blew their petals
until the air was full of the fragrance of
Boronia.
Some of these fairies climbed the gum
trees tall and visited the gum-nut babies
who never came to the parties because they
w r ere too young. Fairy told the gum-nut
babies about some children who had come
to pick wild flowers, but a wise woman with
them had said : " No, no, the flowers are
prettier growing and filling the air with
perfume," so the children left the flowers
alone.
" Just think how few there would have
been left for our party if they had picked the


56 AUSTRALIAN STORIES FOR CHILDREN
flowers," said the fairy, then away she slid
down a drooping gum leaf: that is why
sickle shaped gum-leaves always drooped,
because the fairies used them for toboggan
slides.
Then the party started; all the fairies
danced and sang in the moonlight, while
little bunny rabbits peeped around the
trunks of the gum-trees, and watched
the fun. Some of the faries floated around
among the gum-trees on pieces of thistle-
down.
" Thistledown is so old fashioned I think.
I should like an aeroplane," said one fairy,
and away she flew on a dead gum leaf and
looped the loop ten times, then away she
flew in search of a sea breeze.
I have had a busy day. I stirred the blue
and white breakers, and twisted their foam
to spray, up and down, up and down the
breakers played all day," said the Sea Breeze.
Suddenly something went wrong with the
aeroplane ; round and round it spun and
then plop it fell to the ground.
Something wrong with the propellor,"
said the leaf with a chuckle as it twisted its
little stem, but the fairy was safe, she had


The fairv meets the Sea Breeze.




used a bit of thistledown for a parachute,
and had made a good landing.
Suddenly long bracken fronds of brown
and green unfolded, and out popped the
bracken elves.
"It is time the music started," said the
bracken elves with an important air.
Along came the crickets, frogs, and locusts.
The frogs' eyes nearly jumped out of their
heads with excitement, for they had been
chosen to play the 'cello in the fairy
band.
" Chirp chirp," sang the crickets.
" Crawk krok," w T ent the 'cello.
" Zigg," sang the locusts.
And the breakers on the beach played the
great big drum.
" What a lovely band, such fun," said the
fairies as they frolicked around.
" Such fun ! " scornfully said the stiff
Waratahs, and they held themselves very
erect. "We call it most undignified ! "
" Undignified ! " said one of the fairies.
" It is good to make people happy so we
thought being happy ourselves made others
happy too."
Nearby was a great big spider, fast asleep


58 AUSTRALIAN STORIES FOR CHILDREN
after a feast of flies. He was very tired, he
had worked all day making a fairy a robe
of cobweb lace with dew-drops around the
hem.
He was suddenly awakened by the sound
of fairy music—up and down, up and down
he jazzed until he was quite giddy. I dare say
you have often seen a spider dance with
delight when he found a fly in his web ?
That was nothing compared to the way that
spider danced to the fairy music ; he even
tried to do a Charleston, but soon found his
legs tangled up in his web, so decided he would
have another sleep.
On went the dance.
Suddenly around the trunk of a gum-tree
came a horrible tiger snake. The frog saw
him first and all the frogs prepared to hop
away. They did not want to be gobbled up
by that snake !
" Ha, ha, ho, ho, he," was heard from the
gum tree. (Just an old kookaburra who had
stayed awake to see the fun.) Quickly Mr.
Kookaburra dropped down on the snake,
caught it by the neck, flew away to the branch
of a high gum-tree, and dropped the snake
crack on a stone. Then with a chuckle of


delight, he said : " I never expected any
supper," and he gobbled the snake up.
In the midst of the fairy supper composed
of honey and nectar and all sorts of good
things, the gum leaves whispered : " Here
comes Rosy Dawn," and away all the fairies
flew, for when Rosy Dawn comes, all fairies
sleep.


SPRING IN ENGLAND
Spring, the queen of flowers, had been
visiting other lands, and had left the Snow
Queen in charge of her special domain at
Kew. The Snow Queen was beautiful, but
her rule had been severe and cold, and Spring
thought it was time to return.
On the wings of a soft wind, accompanied
by the birds and butterflies, she swiftly came
and landed on top of the biggest flagpole
in the world, 215 feet high, made from a
Douglas Fir from Canada.
When Spring saw the havoc wrought she
wept (mortals call her tears April showers).
All the trees were leafless, and all the flowers
buried beneath a mantle of snow.
Spring waved her wand, and banished the
Snow Queen to the North Pole for six months ;
then she started spring cleaning. Her hand-
maidens, the merry sunbeams, danced around
and cleared all the frost and snow from the
ground. Then Spring called to the birds :
" Sing, sing, sing ! waken all the flowers,
for they still are sleeping in the shady bowers,"
and all the birds sang a song of joy until the


SPRING IN ENGLAND
grass carpeted the ground, and the fruit
trees unpacked their trunks, and donned
their new dresses : —pale pink gauze the
peach trees, white silk the cherry trees, and
white silk trimmed with pink the apple trees.
Their gowns had been ready quite a long
time, but they did not dare unpack them
while the Snow Queen was there.
Spring came down from her high flagpole
and wandered through the meadows on a
carpet of palest green, and where she walked
daffodils popped up and waved their golden
bells, buttercups lifted their faces to the sun,
and white daisies flushed with delight, for the
buttercups had kissed them, and left a heart
of gold.
Then Spring said to a skylark, " Fly,
fly, fly ! to the sky so high and bring me
blue for dresses for my sweet bluebells."
Up, up in the sky flew the skylark, singing
a breathless song of joy as he soared.
Meanwhile, sunbeams danced across the
gay garden with its many scents of many
flowers—away they danced past the Chinese
Pagoda, past the Queen's thatched cottage,
until they came to a lovely woodland and
there they prepared a ballroom. The mighty


62 AUSTRALIAN STORIES FOR CHILDREN
branches of the oak and beech trees formed
the roofs, the green leaves the curtains, and all
the floor was covered with a blue carpet, for
the bluebells had donned the new gowns the
skylark brought them from the sky.
Night came, and with it a bright moon,
and then all the fairies arrived. They listened
to a nightingale's song, for the ball could not
begin until their much loved Peter Pan arrived,
and he could not come until the last cry,
" All out, all out," sounded across Kensington
Gardens.
At last the gates were locked and away
Peter Pan flew. He was just in time to see
the fairies crowning Spring with a diadem
of dewdrops.
Then, standing on a tree stump, Peter Pan
played his flute. Like a lovely thrush singing
was the tune he played.
The fairies danced and danced until the
sun arose on wings of gold, then they all
flew away and hid in the flowers.
With the coming of the sun came a call
from the trees. " Cuckoo, cuckoo, cuckoo,"
and all the mortals said, " Why Spring is
here."


Like a lovely thrush singing was the tune he played.












CAJ


:: --- _ ' V . -■ . ; ' - • : . -
