

m ;
,
PRICE TWOPENCE
Jlusitr;tlia:
CONDITION OF THE AUSTRALIAN COLONIES.
WRITTEN ANI> TURLISHEP BY
DANIEL SM ITH,
Who has just returned'from Australia,
MAY, 1885,
V.ntrml at Stationer® Hall
A Warning to Intending Emigrants
BEING A SHORT AND TRUE ACCOUNT OF THE PRESENT




THE AUSTRALIAN COLONIES.
RS7%
N presenting my pamphlet to the public, I wish it to be
sfH understood that in writing this, Ido so without prejudice,
to caution intending emigrants against the false reports
that are circulating in England as to the flourishing condition
of the Australian Colonies.
Eor many yearn I agitated the land question in this country,
upon the principle that the people of the United Kingdom should
have the land divided in small plots, say four acres, at a fair rent, so
that a man could keep himself and family in comfort. But the cry
arose that the Australian Colonies could provide work for all the
people in the United Kingdom at high wages. I then ceased to
agitate that question. I little thought at that time I should ever
see those Colonies.
The reader will perhaps remember the great agitation that has
gone on for years with regard to the Tichborne case. Having taken
an active part in that question, I was sent out with Charles Orton
to Hew South Wales to endeavour to find his brother Arthur. On
the 18th October, 1882, I left London for Glasgow, took passage
there on the 25th October, 1882, and arrived in Sydney on the 18th
December, 1882. I was in the Colonies for two years and two
months, and travelled some hundreds of miles into the interior, and
am able, therefore, to give the reader a truthful account of the climate,
what the country produces, and what the emigrant may expect to
meet with when he arrives there. Before I left, I thought that any
country was better than England for a working man to live in; but
I have formed a different opinion after seeing what hardships the
emigrants have to endure in the Australian Colonies. I sincerely
hope that a thorough investigation will be instituted as to the working
of Her Majesty’s Colonies, and so prevent a few grasping knaves from
enticing working men to that country under the pretence that there
is plenty of work at high wages. Such a report is entirely false.
I had an idea when I left England in 1882, that I should be
able to bring back a flourishing account; but, alas! the truth


must be told, to warn the intending emigrant against the delusive
reports that are being circulated in this country. . After the reader
has read this pamphlet, and has not been cautioned thereby, he
will remember me when perhaps too late, and say with the poet:—
‘ ‘ O why did I cross the salt foam,
For a country wretched like this?
Alas! there’s no place like home,
For its comforts and friends I do miss.”
What ought to be done, in my opinion, is to cultivate the land
at home, which would make this country flourish, and find enough
work for all the present population, and as many more. One acre
of land in England will produce as much as fifty acres in the
Australian Colonies. As the reader will see, there are Squatters in
New South Wales whose lands are of as great extent as the JDuke
of Sutherland’s (the largest landowner in this country), and pay
only a few pounds per annum to the Colonial Government for rental.
Is this the way a new country should be governed? It is true the
land of the Colony is not what it is represented to be, but those men do
not pay a fair share of the taxes. We complain in this country of the
rich not paying their share of the taxes ; the people of the Colonies have
a greater reason to complain. These Squatters are the men who rule the
country, and it is to their advantage to get emigrants to go out, so as to
make labour cheap. lam sorry to say they have succeeded. These
men,, years back, had to pay double for labour what they have to now.
There is nothing for the people to do in the bush, only a few boundary
riders are employed at about 15s. per week. Will this find work for all
the emigrants who are sent from England every year ? The towns in all
the Australian Colonies are crowded with emigrants just now, and the
climate is against them, as you will see as you read on.
Sydney, the capital of New South Wales, is a town of good size,
with' a park and domain (as it is called) in its centre. On the 19th
December, the day after my arrival, I went for a walk into the park ;
a hot wind was blowing from the North East, and the dust was enough
to blind one. I asked if that sort of weather lasted long, and was told
“ about two months in summer.” I thought if men had to work in
that heat they must have very strong constitutions to stand it. I
found that men had to work in that heat, and very hard too; very few
people in England work so hard. I asked if the climate varied. I was
told.it was always hot in Sydney in summer. I made these inquiries
<as I did not know I should stay in Australia two years odd. I felt the
heat very oppressive, being a fresh arrival. At the end of the summer,
the rainy season commences; I then felt the cold as keen as I did in
England, and could wear a great-coat with as much comfort as at home.
I found that the people who were born there wrapped themselves up in
winter as much as we do in England. I had always been given to
understand that there was no winter in Australia; but I found out
that there was. In some parts of New South Wales (not 100 miles


from Sydney) the frost and snow is very severe, although very hot in
summer. Also the insects are very troublesome in summer. The
mosquitoes and flies are as terrifying by night as by day, so that it is
difficult to sleep. The small sand flies are so numerous that they get
into people’s eyes and blind some. There are more blind people there,
in proportion to the population, than in any other part of the known
globe. There are many more disagreeable things connected with the
climate of Australia, but space will not allow me to detail them now.
I would now draw your attention to the habits of the people.
When I landed in Sydney in 1882, the population of that town was
about 200,000, and there seemed to be plenty of work for all who
were there then. The people looked well dressed, and I found them
very agreeable and very kind—that is the working classes, as I
mixed very little with any other class. The so-called rich think
more of themselves in Sydney than the aristocracy do- in England.
I never went to a working man’s cottage without being asked to eat
and drink, and if one refused, it was taken as an insult. I don’t think
any one at that time wanted a meal who was willing to work.
All the working class, as a rule, have a cottage of two rooms and
a kitchen each, for which they pay from Bs. to 10s. a week ; some
have larger ones, with four rooms and a kitchen, for which they
pay from 15s. to <£l a week. The rent must be paid every Monday
morning.
The reader will ask, What do they live on % Mutton and beef
is plentiful of the sort; it varies in price from l|fl. to Bd. per lb.,
that at is the fore-quarter of very poor sheep, and to 3|d.
the hind quarter of the same class of sheep; the best mutton is
about sd. per lb. Beef steak (common), is 4d. per lb., best rump, Bd.;
one pound of English beef is better than two pounds of this. The
people eat meat three times a day. Bread is about the same price
a 3 in England. Tea, 2s. 6d. per lb.; sugar, to 4d. per lb. (the
same sort as we get in England for Id. and l|fl. per lb.); plums, or
rasins, and currants, 9d. per lb. Vegetables are very dear; I have seen
small cabbages sold at Is. 2d. each. All other vegetables are pro-
portionally dear. Preserved fruits are very dear, as they are imported
from other parts of the world; oranges and peaches are the two
cheapest, because they are grown in the Colony, though some seasons
even they are very dear—when I left, oranges were fetching 2d.
each. Eggs are 3s. per dozen; milk, Bd. per quart; butter, 2s. per
lb. Wearing apparel costs about double what it does in England.
The reader can judge for himself how many of these things a working
man, with a wife and family, is able to get out of his scanty earnings.
I use the word scanty. A labourer gets 7s. per day of eight hours,
or £2 2s. per week, which would be very good if the work was
constant. If a man gets a job and it lasts a month, he thinks him-
self lucky ; but often it lasts only for a few days, then he has to
look out for another job, wandering about sometimes for weeks to-


gether. I can speak with safety on this point. Men are out of work
half their time, except those employed by the Government; and
as a rule, these Government situations are filled by the friends
of those in power, so that a new comer has no chance of a constant
situation.
If the Colonies were governed by proper men, it would make it
better for everybody in the place; but matters will not mend under
the management of such avaricious individuals as are at the head of
the Colonial Governments. The reader will therefore see for himself,
if a man earns £1 per week, take one week with another, and has
to pay double for rent and provisions to what he has to pay in
England, how far the pound will go. I told the people in Sydney
that £1 in England was as good as £2 in the Colonies, and thousands
of poor emigrants there confirmed my r statement.
I have mentioned that when I landed in Sydney in 1882 there
was work enough for all there then. The Government had books
published and sent to England, and offered to assist men and their
families to the extent of £lO per head to go to New South Wales.
As they said in the report, work was plentiful at high wages. The
result of this was that 40,000 emigrants were brought out from the
United Kingdom during the time I was there, and many thousands
flocked from New Zealand and the other colonies, owing to these reports.
When the people landed there was no work for them. The reader
will say if the New South Wales Government did not want these
people they would not send for them, and the author must have some
motive in writing this pamphlet. I have a motive, which is to caution
the emigrant against the false reports as to the flourishing condition of
the Australian Colonies, and to advise him to stay at home.
The Australian Governments are borrowing large sums of money
from England under the pretence of making railways into the
interior. They have made railroads from Sydney, Melbourne, Port
Adelaide, and other parts of the Colonies, south, west, and north.
The money has been borrowed at 4 per cent interest. I was in the
New South Wales Parliament House one night last year, when the
discussion was on, “As to the advisability of making railways that did
not pay.” Mr. A. G. Taylor, M.P. for Mudgee, stated that he was
prepared to prove that all the railways and tramways in New South
Wales, after the working expenses were paid, did not yield 2 per cent.,
thus not earning even the 4 per cent, upon the money borrowed, and
if it were not stopped the Government would ruin the country. The
reader will ask who the men are at the head of the New South Wales
Government. I can tell him. Mr. Stewart is Prime Minister, Mr.
Dibbs, Colonial Treasurer, and Mr. Wright, Minister of Public Works.
These are the three principal ones. You will see as you read on the
character these men have, and the objects they have in bringing
emigrants from England to the Colony.
When the Home Government gave the Colonies power to make


their own laws and appoint a responsible (government, and to sell
the land, part of the proceeds were to be applied to bring emigrants
from the United Kingdom and find them work. The Government
of New South Wales are selling the land and bringing the emigrants
out, but are not finding them work, although they say there is plenty
of work if the emigrants like to do it. I deny that this is so.
At the end of April, 1883, I was in Sydney, and saw a great
number of people out of work. I inquired the reason, and was told
that the Government of New South Wales had voted £150,000 to
bring emigrants from England, but there was no work for them to
do. I informed the reader at the beginning of the pamphlet there is
a Domain Park, which runs down to the harbour, where there are
rocks and caves. I was walking one night round this Domain, and
saw a number of young men lying under these rocks. I asked some
of them what they were lying there for. They told me they were
emigrants from England, could get no work, and were starving. I
had joined a Society called the Democratic Alliance. I went to the
Society on the Monday evening, and stated what I had seen round the
rocks in the Domain. It was agreed that a party of four gentlemen should
go and visit the rocks in the Domain, and prove if my statement was
correct. The party went the same night, and found all what I had
stated to be quite true. A Committee Meeting was called, and it was
decided that a meeting of the unemployed should be held at the Queen’s
Statue, at the top of King Street, on the Friday following, and that
Mr. Flour, Mr. McQueen, and the Author, be entrusted to manage
the meeting. Bills were printed and circulated, announcing the
meeting; members of Parliament were invited and attended, and
condemned the action of the Government in bringing out emi-
grants to that Colony while there was nothing for them to do.
It was a very large meeting, of not less than 7,000 people. It was
agreed that a subscription list be opened to relieve the immediate
wants of the sufferers; Mr. McAvoy was Treasurer, Mr. Flour, Mr.
Walker, two other gentlemen and the author were appointed a
Committee to receive subscriptions. It was also agreed at the meeting
that we should wait on the Colonial Secretary and the Minister of
Public Works, and state the position of the emigrants. We went and
saw Mr. Stewart, the Prime Minister, and told him what we had seen
round the rocks in the Domain. That noble gentleman told us he did not
believe our statement. We asked him to go and satisfy himself, or send
someone whom he could believe. An inspector and two detectives
were sent round the Domain at midnight to see if our report was true.
The three policemen reported to the Colonial Secretary the same as we
had done before them. We waited on Mr. Stewart the next day, and
he had to admit that it was very hard for these men to have to lay
under the rocks at night, and he would see what could be done for
them. Some old buildings in Macquarie Street, that were used as a
barracks for the police, were opened for the men to lay down in at


night, and a blanket was supplied to each as a covering; and to satisfy
their immediate wants a small piece of bread and cheese and some tea
was served out. This was continued once a day for a week, after which
the men were not allowed to sleep there any longer. We then waited
on Mr. Stewart again to ask the reason for this, but no answer could
we obtain.
TTC UMUOUIi. t -
All this time we were holding large out-door meetings, and
collecting money to feed the destitute. These agitations were continued
for four months, and during all the time shiploads of emigrants were
coming into Sydney, and nothing for them to do.
There are a great many female servants in Sydney, and those who
employ servants make it a rule to have a fresh one every time an
emigrant ship comes in, and discharges the previous one; so the new
comers write home to their friends and tell them that “ they got a
situation as soon as they landed.” This is the deception that was
resorted to. Sydney is crowded with servants. Many young women
who have no friends in the Colony, and cannot get situations, have to
turn eventually to that immoral life on the streets. I have been in
London forty years, but have never seen so much prostitution (take the
respective populations of London and Sydney), as I saw in Sydney
during the time I was there. The cry is they want female servants
not servants, but slaves, as the so-called ladies expect a young woman
to work from daylight to dark, in the heat, as it is there.
There is another deception that is resorted to, to deceive the young
men, by telling them there is plenty of work up the country if they
will go, and/free passes are given to any part of the colony. I
have seen it advertised in the newspapers that men were wanted at
a certain place, sometimes from 300 to 400 miles up the country, and
when the poor fallows get there no men were wanted; but no free passes
are given them to get back. This is done to get them out of the town.
Numbers die in the bush, either of starvation or broken hearts, to
think they had been so foolish to leave a home in England for a wretched
place like that.
I. promised the reader I would say something about the characters
held by a few of the members of the New South Wales Government,
and the object they have in view. Mr. Stewart, the Prime Minister,
is a large employer of labour, owning coal mines, and a paint and brush
manufactory. He wanted to get labourers for three shillings a day, as
he said he had himself worked for that amount in the Colony. Mr.
Dibbs, the Colonial Treasurer, has an interest in a Shipping Company
knows as the A. N. S. There was a strike at the Company s wharf
in 1880 against the employment of Chinese labour. Mr. Dibbs told
the men “he would make them eat grass before he had done with
them; ” so by bringing emigrants out and flooding the labour
market, he thinks of getting the men at his own price. Mr. Vi right,
the Minister of Public Works, another large employer of labour, is
a carrier (of the firm of Wright, Eaton & Co.), having about a hundred


men in their employ. Mr. Wright told me, when 1 waited on him to
ask him to do something for the poor men that were out of employment,
“ that the working men might go to Hell, and I might go with them.
These are the class of men that comprise the Government of New South
Wales. They are all determined to flood the labour market so that they
can get the men at their own price.
I have told the reader the Colonial Governments are borrowing large
sums of money from England under the pretence of improving the
Colonies; but I am afraid the New South Wales Government would
find a great difficulty in accounting for the millions they have borrowed.
It is well known these rich men pay no Income Tax. All the taxes
have to be raised out of the principal articles of consumption, and
the small rents paid by the Squatters for their large tracts of land.
Just before I left, in November, 1884, some very large meetings
were held, and I told the Government of New South Wales that
the Home Government ought to make a thorough investigation into
the working- of the Colonies, and send out proper men to manage
them for the benefit of all who were there. If this was done, the
Colonies would be a credit to England; but as it is no w they are
a disgrace. . , . ,
I will now direct your attention to the question of the land leased
from the Government of New South Wales by the Squatters. A
comprehensive return of the land so leased was made in 1878, a copy of
which I obtained from the Government. I have always condemned the
principle of allowing one man to hold sometimes thousands of acres in
England. How is it in the Australian Colonies'? In New South Wales
there are 4,272 men called Squatters, who hold; between them
152,799,591 acres of land, for which they pay £165,947 3s. per annum,
which averages about one half-penny per acre. The reader will at once
say, “ This is the country to go to, where we can get land in abundance
for almost nothing. How can this man substantiate his statement that
emigrants landing in the Colonies can get no work, and are starving ?
But the reader will understand that no man can take land or any sort
of business without money ; if a man emigrates to New South Wales,
where there is plenty of land, he can obtain 640 acres for £1 per acre ,
he must, however, pay down, before he takes possession, one-fourth of the
money (£160), the other three-fourths can remain, to be paid by
instalments within ten years. If the emigrants, when they landed, had
from £3OO to £4OO, I don’t think but they could get a living by
working hard; but with this amount of money could he not do well in
England 1 The reader may think this land very cheap; I can assure
him it is very dear, as it is generally covered with scrub and gum-trees,
and is worth at least £l2 to £2O per acre to clear it before anything can
be grown. If it should be a dry season, the farmer would not get the
seed he had planted in return ; many have been served in this way who
have taken land in New South Wales. The land held by the Squatters
is principally made into sheep runs for wool-growing, and this costs very


httle for labour. I travelled far into the interior, as I wanted to see
what the country was growing. I went from Sydney to Hay, a
distance of nearly 500 miles, calling at different places, but nothing
could 1 see growing in the shape of corn or vegetables ; only sheep and
cattle were being raised. I stayed in Wagga-AVagga sixteen days, and
went a long way round to see the state of the country; it was November
when 1 was there the weather was very fine, the grass looked green and
long, and the cattle and sheep were fat. I made the remark that it was
•r dlstnct ’ an( * _ was told if I could see that place in two months’ time
i the drought set in, not a blade of grass would be Seen. What I was
told came true m iess than two months; everything was parched up,
nearly all the sheep and cattle died for the want of water and grass. In
New S°u L h Wales alone 6,000,000 sheep and 4,000,000 cattle perished,
and hundreds of men were ruined. Poes the reader think this the sort
ot place for a poor man to go to ? I think not.
• Manufactures of the Australian Colonies.— ln Victoria a little cloth
is made, a few boots and shoes, and there is one ship-building yard for
repairing ships. The whole that is done in the Australian Colonies one
oneniW “ C ,° uld d ° Then .V° u will say there is a good
opening for skilled workman—one would think so : I thought so when I
arrived there m 1882, but soon found out my mistake. Nearly all the
manufactured goods are imported from England and America, and as the
greatest quirnfaty of goods so imported are used by the Government, no
doubt a large discount is given to the Governments by the exporters By
this means manufacturing is not encouraged, and thousands of good
workmen are walking about starving. Then you will ask, Have they
got the raw material in the Australian Colonies ? I can answer in the
ffirmative. In New South Wales there is an abundance of coal, iron
copper, tin antimony and silver. The colonies could therefore do their
nng ’ 67 w ere properly managed, and there could be
iTthe^haul r ° r f man y more f en n tha n at present; but as it is at present
iJeadoTbet r ’ “ beC '° me '™ Se for the
I spent most of the two years and two months in New South
Wales, which is considered the best colony of the seven, and thousands
have migrated from New Zealand and Van Pieman’s Land through
the glowing reports. Queensland is a terrible place for fever- the
heat is so intense that thousands leave and go to New South Wales
Many who I know m Sydney came from Queensland, they could not stay
there as it was so unhealthy; not only unhealth;, but as the
t ernment are bringing emigrants to Brisbane and Bockbampton by
thousands men, women, and children are lying about starving-a
disgrace to any civilised country. I have told the reader of many
deceptions practised upon the emigrants in New South Wales and
the other places, but had nearly forgotten the following: There is a
law there that the Squatters, or anyone who employs labour, can hire and
do hire, servants for twelve months at so much for the year ’ and


rations, and a hut, or house, if you can call it by that name, built of
bark and rough wood. The employer is not compelled by law to
advance any money until the year is up, unless he pleases. If he intends
to swindle you out of your wages he will not advance you any mone} T .
You will say, “He cannot swindle me out of my wages; here is my
agreement for so much, and if he does not pay me I can summon him.”
There are hundreds of cases where men have agreed for twelve months,
and just before the year is up the employer brings an accusation against
the man for neglecting his work, or some such frivolous pretence; so the
employer refuses to pay the man his wages, and the man summons his
master for the wages due. Now let the reader see who the judge is
that is going to try the case—a Squatter of the same stamp as the one
that has been summoned. The judge, or magistrate, hears the case;
the master makes the accusation against the man, the judge dismisses
the case and tells the man he may think himself lucky he was not sent
to prison for six months for neglecting his work. This is a dodge that
is resorted to very often in the Colonies; hundreds of poor fellows
work from six to ten months, then are swindled out of their wages in
the way I have described. This system is practised more upon new
comers, as the old ones are up to the tricks. The reader may think this
is not true, but let him inquire into the character of many of the
Squatters and where they came from. Most of the old Squatters were
sent out of England for the country’s good. Take the case of Old
Billy Long, who was feent to New South Wales for his life. He became
rich, and died worth nearly £1,000,000. This old Long was one of the
greatest tyrants that ever lived. Mr. Dailey, the present Attorney-
General, married one of Long’s daughters, and Sir James Martin,
Chief Judge, married another daughter. These are the sort of nobility
you get in the Colonies; this is the pure blood that the honest working
man of England must go about 14,000 or 15,000 miles to serve and be
at the mercy of. I would sooner take a rope and hang myself than be
at the mercy of such nobility. When I landed in Sydney, in 1882,1 was
introduced to a number of these so-called gentlemen by an old trans-
port. I thought they were gentlemen—they were to look at—but I
found them to be quite the opposite. The only men who I found
anything like honest were the working men who had gone there
within the last twenty-five years; some of them had saved a little
money when the times were good, but now there is no money to be
saved.
I have told the reader what the emigrant may expect to meet with
if he goes to the Australian Colonies without money. If he takes money
with him he is all right, because if he does not like it he may return
home again. Without money in the Australian Colonies you are lost.
I have just mentioned that there is no money to be saved in the
Australian Colonies. Why not 1 Because, the country does not pro-
duce the same results as a fertile one does, and you cannot depend upon
it for rain.
i aECW


The Government of New South Wales borrowed a little while ago
£5,000,000, from England, and this year another £13,000,000. I have
no doubt but that the country will be better this year while the money
lasts, then it will be worse again, as they keep bringing into the
country shiploads of emigrants from England.
When I left Sydney on the 6th December, 1884, it was announced
in the three leading newspapers of Sydney the day before I left, that. I
was about to leave Sydney for London, and a meeting was called to bid
me farewell. About 3,000 persons assembled, and many of the poor
emigrants said they wished it were they who were going home as well,
as there was no prospect for them to get a living there, and what to do
they did not know. I was asked by the Chairman to make known in
every town in the United Kingdom the dreadful state of the Colonies,
and to caution people against the false reports that have been circulated
in England as to the high wages and plenty of work. This was the
injunction I received from that large meeting in Sydney the night
before I left. In reply to the Chairman and speakers, I promised to do
my best to caution intending emigrants not to leave England for the
Australian Colonies, as they were in a worse state of poverty there
than any part of the United Kingdom was. I wish the Colonies were
in a flourishing state, so that the working classes could emigrate to a
country where they could be better off 1 than they are in this country,
and thin the population, so that it would be better for those that are
left; but I don’t believe in sending the people to a worse country than
the one they leave.
I think I have said almost enough to caution anyone not to be
tempted by the false reports circulated in this country that there is
plenty of work at high wages. I advise the reader not to go to the
Australian Colonies. What are the people to do ? Trade is very bad,
thousands are out of work and starving. Is there any remedy for this
state of things ? There is plenty of food produced for the human family
in the world. Yes, the reader will say, but not in England. If there
is plenty grown, we cannot get it without money; if out of work we get
no money to buy food with ; how then ? There is only one way out of
the difficulty. I said one acre in England would produce as much food
as fifty acres would in the Australian Colonies. You may say, “ I don’t
believe it! Look at the splendid beef and mutton that is sent over from
these Colonies; if the land is so bad,how can the Squatters produce
such fine sheep and cattle?” The answer is, that most of the meat
comes from New Zealand and Tasmania, the two Colonies most like
England as regards climate. They send all the best to the English
market, and eat the worst themselves. If the country was as it is
represented, in a flourishing condition, would there be so many starving
as there are ? . I refer you to the reports that have appeared in the
newspapers, a few extracts of which appear at the end of the pamphlet.
Thousands have left Eort Adelaide through the depression there, and
Yictoria and New South Wales are about the same. In spite of all this,


shiploads of emigrants are flocking in from Eng and. What does it all
mean ? There must be an under-current at work somewhere, to get .
people out of the United Kingdom, and, as I thmk, !ov “ f ”, t he
break in this country. If it was more generally known here oi the
deception that is practised to get the people away, it would be the mea
of causing one. I would suggest that a Commission should be appointed,
sav of four members, two by the Government, and two representatives of
the working classes, to go through the Colonies, and report
upon the working of them, and so prove whether the repOTts from t
Colonies circulating in this country are true or false. 1 be
first to offer my services to go. If my pamphlet is false, I could .
prosecuted ; but if true, it would be the means of stopping emigrat
as it is conducted now. ...
I think I have told the reader most of the difficulties the ,
has to contend with, and what he may expect if he* leaves a home jd
work in England to go to any of the Australian Colonies. The i.eader
may think lam prejudiced ; if so, I can assure him he mistaken. Ihe
people there treated me with the greatest kindness and aspect The
Government of New South Wales did not treat me well; and why
Because I told them, when I arrived m England I would 1
about them and the Colonies ; and I was persecuted by
of New South Wales for assisting to feed the poor starving e g •
In concluding this part of my pamphlet, I would warn every man and
woman who thinks of emigrating to the Australian Oolomeß, not to go
unless he or she takes enough money with them to pay their passage
home again, if they do not succeed there.
I wll now draw your attention to a remedy for the general distress
now prevailing in the United Kingdom, and which would also obviate
the necessity for emigration from this country. I of
that I used to agitate the advisability of dmdmg the toge teacte of
country now lying waste into small allotments of about foul acres
each. This plan I suggested twenty years ago; but did not get the
support then for the plan as I think will be given to it now. On
Friday, April 24th, a meeting was held at Willis s Booms, attended by
the Dukes of Westminster and Argyll, and other noblemen, to take
into consideration the advisability of forming a Company to buy large
estates and divide them into small allotments, varying from y
acres and sell them to the working classes. This is a step in the right
direction, as the land of the United Kingdom is fast going out of
cultivation because the farmers cannot grow corn att e ““ of
price, having to pay a heavy rent for the land. The Uukes ot
Westminster and Argyll think the land of this country ought to be
in the possession of the peasant class. Sir Loyd Lindsay, a gentleman
who befievesin this new land scheme, has offered a large farm of 400
Teres, which he had bought for £4,000, to the new Company If W
can be bought for £lO per acre and a working
for £4O, upon which he can make a good living for himself and family,


what a glorious thing for that man and the country generally ! I know
from experience that one acre cultivated by the spade will produce as
mucl| as two cultivated by the plough. You will see upon 400 acres,
at four acres to each man, there would be 100 men employed, and each
man could keep a cow and a few pigs or sheep. The four acres could
be apportioned: for wheat, one acre ; potatoes, one acre ; 'general
vegetables, such as cabbages, peas, beans, turnips, carrots, &c., one
acre; and the remaining acre for the cow, and the man could do all the
work himself with ease. This I speak from experience. It will be seen
that 100 cows, 100 sows, or 300 sheep, could be easily kept on the 100
acres. Any industrious man could save enough in twenty years to keep
him in his old age and bring up his family in comfort. I know a farm
of 400 acres in Suffolk, which was considered a good farm, with twelve
men employed upon it, and kept twelve horses; five cows, about 300
sheep, and about twelve head of cattle were fatted every year for the
London market. The reader may remark, “ Are we to be all tillers of
the soil ? ” No, certainly not; let them who like the life go to it. I
think if this proposed Land Company buy the land, they will have more
applications than they will be able to dispose of. If not at the first
starting, they would after it proved to be a success, as I feel con-
fident it would be. You will say, “A man must have money
to take four acres, and keep himself and family for the first twelve
months.” So also must a man have money who emigrates to the
Australian Colonies. He has to pay £4 each for himself and wife,
and £2, for each child, and provide extra clothing. I have no doubt
the money difficulty would be got over, as numbers of gentlemen would
lend a fpw pounds to an industrious man, at interest, for a short time ; he
could easily pay it back without distressing himself and family. This
new land scheme, if carried out, will, I believe, save this country, and
make it greater than it ever was. I hope and trust those noblemen and
gentlemen Who have interested themselves in the scheme, will persevere
with it. It is an old idea of mine, and one I saw tried forty-five years ago,
but without success then. It would give employment to all the surplus
population, and produce enough for all our own wants without buying
from foreign countries. If the new land scheme is likely to produce the
blessings I have described, is the plan not better than sending men to a
country where they are baked with the heat, and tormented day and night
with mosquitoes, fleas, and ants ? You may think I have exaggerated, but
I have not I could paint the description much blacker without departing
from the truth. What I have written is mostly with regard to town life ;
and if the people of England could see what the bush life is like, they
would say I had not described it half black enough. I could give the
reader some fearful accounts of what happens in the bush through bites
from snakes, bad water, and drought; and their mode of living is anything
but pleasant. A friend of mine, now in Sydney, lived on a Sqatter’s run
in the New England district, where they did not see a white person some-
times for weeks together. The man and his wife told me a fearful tale


of bush life and the hardships they had to endure. The first year I was
in Sydney I heard some such tales, but dicl not believe them, and. thought
I would see for myself. I found all I had been told was true. If I
was to give the reader a detailed account of what I saw in the Colonies
it would fill a large book. As this is within reach of every man, it ought
to be enough to caution every reader against being deceived about the
so-called “ Promised Land,” or “ Paradise.”
I see by the Sydney newspapers that have been sent to me since I
arrived in London, that shiploads of emigrants are being landed in
Sydney. What will be done with them I cannot tell; starvation is staring
them in the face. It was thought by the English many years ago, that
slavery was a disgrace to the Americans. I think this system of
assisted emigration to the Australian colonies is a disgrace to England.
The slaves in America were provided with food and clothing; the
emigrant is left to starve. This is civilization with a vengeance!
There is now a great outcry, how wretchedly the poor of London are
housed. Compare the poor of the Australian colonies with those of
London. If you could see the two places, as I have done, you would
say those of the Colonies are the ones that have reason to complain.
Go into the back slums of Sydney and other towns, and they are worse
now than London was forty-five years ago ; Sydney is a great deal
worse now, than London was at that time. I do not believe in filth,
neither do I believe in starving the people who are willing to work,
or sending them to a country where they cannot get a living. lam not
one of those individuals who make a great noise about religion ; buJLI do
believe we have to answer for all the wrong we commit in this world,
and I think there is a great sin being committed by those whfflfenow
the state of those Colonies, and advocate sending emigrants as
there is no chance to get a living. Ido not believe it was designed by
Providence that a white population should inhabit those Australian
Colonies, and, I think, many would say as I do if they could see
them. It seems to me the land is cursed, like Sodom of old,
for its wickedness. Last year I saw in one of the London newspapers
that a question was asked by one of the Irish members in the House of
Commons, how many of the old transports there were at present sitting
in the different Parliaments in the Australian Colonies ? Mr. Gladstone
replied, “ Only one, and that one was in Queensland, and he was an
Irishman.” I can enlighten Mr. Gladstone a little more upon this
question. In Tasmania, or VanDieman’s Land, not a few who compose
the Parliament are old “lags” or transports, and the Sydney Parliament is
a very little better. It is said that all the records of prisoners have been
destroyed, so that no one could trace their antecedents, and what they
were transported for. I was told this by some of their companions who
served with them. If the reader could see some of those noble gentle-
men, how high they carry their heads, he would not think they were
given a free passage to Hew South Wales for the goud of the country
they left. Those men who were sent away from England are most hard-


hearted, and treat their fellow-creatures most vilely. What sort of
Government was in power in England at the time they allowed those
sort of men to make laws for honest men, and also to starve them, is a
mystery to many. I must *leave it to the reader to judge for himself.
There are mysteries in this world that I cannot solve, and the above is
one of them.
The reason why I am taking these steps in the matter, is because I
promised the people of the Australian Colonies I would make it known to
the people of the United Kingdom how the emigrants are treated when
they get to the Australian Colonies. That promise, with God’s help, I
will carry out, and by so doing I hope to stop the cruelty of transporting
honest men to these wretched countries. If a man has money, let him
go and see for himself, and if he doesn’t like it he can return. The
reader may ask, “ Are there no good things in the Australian Colonies that
Englishmen can enjoy ?” I know of none; if there were any, many of the
rich men of England would go and settle there. Those that have made
any money in the colonies, have left, and returned to England to spend
it—Sir Daniel Cooper, Sir McArthur, and Sir Wm. Wilson and
others, have returned. This shows that they prefer England to the
Colonies. The poor emigrants do not consider the cost of return
passage—3rd Class, £lB 18s. each adult, and half-price for children
under 12 years of age, and bedding and utensils also have to be found;
they then see the impossibility of getting back home. I have two sons
who had an idea of going to some of the Colonies, and Ltold them when
I left London in 1882 that I should see if there were a better prospect in
the Colonies than in London. My sons are all well educated, but I
should be very sorry to see either going to those Colonies to seek a
living. I think I have convinced them there is no place like Old
England, after all the abuse that is helped upon her. lam in hopes
things will mend for the working classes if the proposed new
land scheme is carried out. In concluding the pamphlet, it is
hoped the reader will think seriously over what I have stated.
If he has any friend or friends thinking of «§oing to the Austra-
lian Colonies, I trust he will advise them to enquire of someone
who has been in them for some time, as I have, and hear what
they have to say about their flourishing condition, &c. If the reader in-
tends to go, do as I have advised—viz., to take enough money to get
back again. You will see from the newspaper cuttings below that my
report of the state of the country is fully borne out; I cannot state less
than I have to tell the exact truth of the matter. I hope to be supported
by those who have left and returned to this country within the past
twelve months. I have not made any accusation as to the poverty of
the country, only as to the last two years. I have told the reader what
the climate is like, of the habits of the people, what the country produces,
how it is governed, nnd who they are that govern it. I will use my best
endeavours to cause an investigation to be made by the Home Govern-
ment into the question of the emigration system as now practised ; and I


may mention, in conclusion, that I am in communication with a Society
in Sydney who will send me all particulars af to the labour market m the
Colonies, and on subjects generally; and I am, therefore, in a position to
supply anybody with information, who may desire it on these points.
Extract from the “ Echo,” of Monday , 13 th April, 1885:
We note that a large meeting of unemployed men has been held m Adelaide,
South Australia, and that the Government of the Colony have been called upon
to take some steps to meet the prevailing distress. The meeting was not make up
of new colonists, nor was it one of those gatherings of loafers, which pass for
meetings of the unemployed in New York.
honestly endeavoured to make headway m Adelaide, and had faded That
character was given to them by more than one public man on the platform.
Here are a few assertions which were made by the speakers : The wages paid
Adelaide aggregate £4,000 a week lower to-day than they did eighteen months
ago; are empty; the expenditure of the Destitute Board has risen
from £2O 000 to £3o,ooo.within four years; and a large proportion of the
steadiest workmen have left the city. If these assertions are accurate—and we
have no reason to suppose otherwise—why did the South Australian Parliament,
during the last Session, vote something like £50,000 for immigration No
wonder men are unemployed in Adelaide when the Government tempted immi-
grants to a Colony that could hardly sustain the population it had. A few days
fgo we quoted the circular of a Sydney firm in which it was stated that more
men we?e wanted for Government works in Sydney. The authority of that ten
was of course, undeniable, but Englishmen must remember that the natural
Sifting of the labour kaleidoscope in Australia will soon transport workmen
from South Australia to New South Wales.
Extract from “ The Hospital Gazette and Students’ Journal,”
Saturday, 11th April , 1885 :
Hitherto it has been generally recognised that the colonies present a suitable
field for the reception of medical men who find the old country over-crowded.
This was so up to a recent period, but unfortunately nearly every corner of the
globe where the English language is spoken is over stocked with needy practi-
tioners. On this subject, a correspondent writes as follows to the British Medical
Journal You will be conferring a great benefit on many members of the
urofession by inserting this letter in your journal as a caution to them not to
come here. I have lately arrived, after selling my practice at home, and am
struck at the enormous extent to which medical practice is overdone m the
colonies; not a ship arrives but that it brings one or two medical men, in
some cases with their families, and this has already resulted m disappointment
and great expense, on account of their having to retrace their steps. During
the nast few years so many have arrived, and the Universities have also been
turning out their own men, that the country is overfull, and, as a necessary
consequence, underselling is going on, and, in Sydney, a gentleman has started
a nrovident dispensary. The population which pours into America does not do
so here • and if farmers are washed put in England, they are burnt out here
for want of rain; in many parts, no rain falls for upwards of a year. In the
whole of these colonies, there are not, at the present moment, a dozen practices,
genuine or not, for sale.


1 Extracts from “ Sydney Daily Telegraph,” March, 1885
THE UNEMPLOYED.
The agitation among the unemployed, which assumed such large pro-
portions some months ago, is now a thing of the past, and one of its results
—the Government relief works—will soon be a thing of the past also. The
Registrar cf the works says that out of 400 men who were originally employed
only 180 remain, the odd 80 of whom are married men. The single men seem
to prefer their present mode of living, and evidently have a desire to stay where
they are. A number of them were recently offered work at 20s a
week with good rations and long engagement; but the offer was declined with
thanks by all to whom it was made. It is said that numbers of men employed
on the Field of Mars have in their possession from £lO to £l5. With reference
to the married men in Banks town, the Superintendent hopes that the greater
portion of the scrub (which has become so dry as to be dangerous) will be cleared
away in about three months, and there will then be no further' need for
the services of these men. It is understood that in view of these facts, the
Government has decided to dispense with the services of all the single’men
working on the Field of Mars, Wentworth Park, and at the University on
December 31, while the married men will be kept on until March 11, 1885
FOUND DEAD IN THE BUSH.
Brewarbina, Wednesday.
A man, whose name is unknown, was found in a dying state on a run
within 10 miles of water and 15 of Brewarrina. He was covered with ants
which had eaten into his face.. He expired shortly afterward, his death evidently
havmg been caused by thirst. Near the body were discovered a bag, containing
£2B m gold and silver, and the body of a dog. &
THE IMMIGRATION ACT.
Brisbane, Monday.
, T u r ol V ce court, on Saturday, a passenger was charged wittf a
breach of the Immigration Act in having attempted to leave the colony
within three months from the date of his arrival, and was remanded. The
defendant arrived in the B. I.S.N. Co.’s steamer Chyebassa on Wednesday,
and was arrested aboard the Cahors as the steamer was about to leave for
Sydney.
Copies of this Pamphlet may be obtained of the Publisher, at
28, Clerkenwell Close, London, E.C.
PRINTING AND ADVERTISING COMPANY LIMITED, 121, FLEET STREET, LONDON, E.C.




