

w
jto
V - i
[S'!
to
1^










CHAMBERS & SEYMOUR.
Iroriiiio-nger
CORNER OP
COLLINS & SWANSTON STS., MELBOURNE,
Manufacturers of the
PARAGON KITCHEN KAN(S
Securing Perfection in Cooking with Economy in Fuel.
KITCHEN REQUISITES in great variety.
GAS COOKING STOVES.
CHAMBERS & SEYMOU
UJ
S
cd*
CO
U-i
I
CD
3=
==
Tc be bad of all Grocers in Melbourne and Suburl


PREFACE.
In these Colonies, Housekeepers with small incomes
hare long felt the want of a Cookery Book the receipts
in which should not involve the use of costly ingredients,
or culinary, or other utensils, beyond their means. The
fact, too, that none of the Cookery Books procurable
f.re written especially with reference to Australia, its
lifferent products and seasons, will, we hope, render
. his people’s Edition of Popular Colonial Cookery
aally welcome to the Housekeeper, for whose use
|ie Publishers have spared neither trouble nor expense
Ji compiling it.
Melboubne, February, 1882.
■{
>
3 ]SP|
v
!l
. %
f


Ax R>
Jjlatmtee anb premier .fflattafactater of
By Appointment to Houses of Parliament, New Zealand
FACTORY:
40 LATROBE STREET WEST,
WALKER,
< ®
? i
so
<<
5) w
g X w
2 si 53
3 C X
g 0> p,
e r*
3 2>
• O*
o 21
5 a
Gas Cooking Stove
id Victoria.
Every Stove is Guaranteed for Twelve Months; and should any
chaser of a Gas Cooking Stove be dissatisfied with it, the full
amount will be refunded if returned within two months.
MELBOURNE


INDEX.
BEEF—
, , , PAGE.
Beefsteak and Oysters, Stew’d 46
Bubble and Squeak ... ... 47
Bullock’s Heart, to Dress ... 45
Corned, Boiled 42
Fillets de 44
Fillets de 44
Hashed 47
Hashed ... ... ... 47
Kidney, Stewed 46
. „ to Fry ;;; 46
Liver for Gravy 45
Minced '' 47
Olives ... ’ 41
Ox Cheek Stewed 41
Ox Cheek Stewed 41
„ Tongue 45
Ribs of. Rolled 42
Rump Steak Broiled ... !.. 46
»> ~ Fried 45
Shin of, Stewed—Family Dish 43
Silver Side of, Boiled 4.3
Sirloin of, to Roast 42
Spiced 45
Steak Stewed, Plain 46
Steak Stewed, Plain 46
Stew ... ... ... 43
To Boil 42
iISCUITS & CAKES—
Biscuits, Oatmeal 11l
Plain 113
Buns, to Make 113
Buns, to Make 113
Cakes, Icing for 109
j, Josephine 109
„ Lemon 110
~ Lemon 110
„ Plain 112
„ Plum, Plain 112
Plum, Plain 112
„ Rich 113
Pound 110
„ Pound 110
.. Rice 109
~ Rock 113
„ Sally Lunn 113
~ Seed, Common... ... 110
Soda . no
BISCUITS AND CAKES—
(Continued). pAOK «- ||j
Cakes, Sponge ... , no
Ginger-Bread 112
Nuts, Ginger-Bread 112
Scones m
„ Dropped 11l
Short-Bread 11l
„ Plain ... ... 112
Snaps, Ginger 112
REAKFAST-
Bacon Broiled 93
BREAKFAST—
Bacon Broiled 23
Black Puddings, to Broil ... 25
Bread 20
„ Brown 22
Chocolate 19
Coffee 19
Crumpets 20
Eggs and Bacon 23
„ ala Bonne-Femme ... 23
„ Boiled, for Breakfast ... 22
„ Buttered, or Egg Toast 2S
„ Poached 22
Feet and Ears, Pigs’ 24
Fish, Smoked, nice way to Cook 25
Fish Cake 25
Kidneys, Pigs’ 24
Muffins, to Toast 20
Muffins, to Toast 20
Mushrooms, Broiled 24
Mushrooms, Broiled 24
Omelet 23
Red Herrings, to Cook ... 25
Rolls, Breakfast 22
„ „ Plain ... 22
Sausages 24
Shrimp Toast 24
Sponge, to Set the 21 \
Tea, to Make 19
Toast ... 20 - ,
~ Cream 20
Yeast 21
I :■


BREWING AT HOME
—WINES, ETC.—
PAGE.
Beer, Home Brewed 120
joeer, xiumc ...
Champagne, Mock —J
Egg Flip
-Eigg-enp p .
Gingerbeer
umgrauccL ...
Lemonade r~i
Wine, Elder "V
Whev
Xiiuei ... ••• , 01
Whey “l
CARVING— See pages 125-136
CEEAMS—
Coffee
Lemon
Pine Apple, Shape of 1
-tine
Pink Sugar, to Make jhl
X 111 A. OUgdlj ...
Stone
ft .
Velvet 10i
CUEING- BACOjN ainu
HAMS, ETC., POT-
TING, COLLAEING,
ETC.—
Bacon, to Cure -
Beef, to Collar °8
Fish, Potted ... ... - ®
Fowl and Ham, Potted ... 88
Hams, to Cure ... ... «7
~ Tongues, and Beet,
Yorkshire Fashion ... 88
Head, Potted ... g 9
Neats’Tongues, to Cure ... 87
Ox Tongue, Potted 87
Pork, to Pickle 86
CUEING BACON AND
. CUE,HIES AND INDIAJN
DISHES—
Beef or Mutton, Cold Roast,
Curry of
Bread, Stale, to Curry ... 73
Curry, to Boil Rice for ... *1
Eggs, to Curry ... ...
Mutton Cutlets or Chops, to
Curry 1%
Rabbit Curry, A
CURRIES AND INDIAN
FISH —
Barracouta
Bream, Boiled f*
„ Fried
Conger Eel, Baked 30
„ Boiled 30
Eels - 26
FISH— (Continued).
PAGE.
Eels, Baked 30
~ Boiled ••• 30
„ Pried * ••• 30
Fftit-liead
Flounders. to Boil
Fried 29
King Fish, Boiled ... ••• 29
Mullet, Sand 28
ixlullcu, oitiiu. ... -r
Murray Cod, Boiled 27
Baked 27
” Perch Boiled... ... 27
Oysters
To Broil
lO
To Fry ... ... ••• •••
Trevalli and Schnapper, Boiled 28
rreviuii aim
„ to Fry 28
Trout ...
Whiting, Boiled 28
DUIUJU ••• ••• -
Fried
Shell-Fish—
Crayfish 81
„ to Dress ... 31
Mussels, to Stew 32
to Scallop ... ... 32
Oysters, Fritters 31
„ Scalloped 31
’’ , to Stew 31
Prawns or Shrimps 32
FOECEMEATS OE
STUFFING—
Forcemeat, A Common, for
Veal or Hare -
Made Dishes or Soups, Egg-
balls for ... ••• 4,1
Stuffing, Sage and Onion, for
Geese, Ducks, or Poultry ... 40
GAME —
Ducks, Wild, to Truss and
Roast
An oil Roast ... be
Quail, to Roast
Snipe, to Dress
HAEES AND RABBITS—
Hare, Hashed 66
Jugged 6fi
to Roast a 65
„ to Truss a 65
Kangaroo, Jugged ... 67
Rabbit, Another Way to Dress 67
„ Boiled, with Onion
Sauce 66
„ to Roast a
„ Wild, Jugged-


TELLIES AND SWEET
DISHES—
page.
Blancmange 107
Cakes, Cheese, Curd for ... 106
» » 106
»» .. Lemon ... 106
-r A GW 106
Jelly, Chocolate 105
Chocolate 105
Clear Apple 105
Cow-heel ... 105
~ Cow-heel 105
Eusse, Charlotte 106
Busse, Charlotte ... 106
Trifle 105
LAMB-
Chops 53
Cutlets and Green Peas ... 53
Cutlets and Green Peas ... 53
Forequarter of, Boast 52
Ery
Head 53
Head ... ... ... 53
Leg of, Boiled ... ." ". 53
Leg of, Boiled 53
~ Boast 52
Saddle of 52
Saddle of 52
Shoulder of, Boast ... 52
Shoulder of, Boast 52
Target of, Boast 52
MADE DISHES—
Beef, Cold Boast, Fricassee of 69
Calf’s Heart, Boasted 70
Calves’ Feet, Boiled ... ." 71
Calves Feet, Boiled 71
Kidneys, Sheep’s 69
Ox Tails Stewed 69
Pigs' Fry 71
Sippets 70
Spatchcock—English Fashion 71
Spatchcock—English Fashion 71
„ Indian Modeand
Sea Fashion... 71
Toad in a Hole (Simple) ... 70
Veal, Minced 70
MEAT PIES AND PTJD-
DINGS-
A Plain Crust for Children ... 74
Pastry, Potato, to Make ... 74
Patties, Oyster 76
Pie, Chicken 76
s ie, Chicken 76
~ Mutton 75
Mutton 75
Pork, Cheshire 75
„ Pork, Cheshire 75
~ Babbit, Plain 75
~ Sea 7j
~ Veal and Oyster 75
Pudding, Beefsteak 76
„ Mutton 77
„ Mutton 77
~ Suet 77
~ „ Crust for ... 74
„ Vea) 77
MEAT PIES AND PUDDINGS—
(Continued). pAQE^
Puff-paste, Common ... ... 74
Short Crust with Dripping ... 74
MEDIUMS FOR COOK-
ERY-
The Bange, Gas Stove, Colo-
nial Oven, Camp Oven, etc. 9-12
MINCE MEAT—
Apple 92
Egg 92
Egg 92
Lemon 92
MUTTON—
Breast of, with Green eas ... 49
Chops Broiled 50
Cutlets 50
~ ala Maintenon ... 50
~ with Tomato Sauce... 49
Haggis (Scotch Beceipt) ... 51
Haricot of 50
Hashed 51
Haunch of. Boast 48
Leg of, Boiled 48
Leg of, Boiled 48
~ Boasted 48
Loin of, a Kebobbed 49
Loin of, a Kebobbed 49
„ Boast 49
Neck of, Stewed 49
Saddle of 48
Sheep’s Head 51
Shoulder of, Boast 48
Stew, Irish 51
ON MAEKETING—
Apples 17
Bread 18
Butter 18
Butter 18
Dripping 17
Ducks 16
Eggs 16
Eggs 16
Fowls 16
rowis 16
Geese 16
Hares 16
Milk ... 18
Suet 17
Turkeys 16
J. lli JvCj' 5> ... ... ... ... lO
Vegetables 17
PANCAKES & FRIT-
TERS-
Fritters, Apple 102
~ Batter for 102
Batter for 102
Oyster 102
Oyster ~ 102 •
Tomato , 10?'


PANCAKES AND FRITTERS— I
( Continued). pAGE
Pancakes 161
, Common 101
PASTES & PASTEY-
Custards, Paste for ... ... 89
Glaze Pastry or Sweet Dishes,
to Ice or 89
Paste, German 89
Pies, Mince 92
Puffs, Lemon 91
Short Crust, Very Rich ... 89
Tart, Apple 91
~ Cherry 90
-W. __ OA
Damson 90
Gooseberry 90
Jam, Open 91
Red Currant and Rasp-
berry 90
„ Rhubarb 90
Tartlets 91
Orange 91
PICKLES—
Eggs 120
French Beans 119
Gherkins 118
Mushrooms 119
Onions U 8
Piccalilly 119
Red Cabbage 11°
PORK—
Bacon, to Boil 59
Ham, to Bake a 59
to Boil a 58
Leg of, to Bake and Stuff a ... 58
~ Boil a 58
~ Roast a 58
Loin of, to Roast a 58
Pickled 59
~ LU JDUIA a ...
Leg of, to Bake and Stuff a ... 58
Pickled 59
Pig, to Bake the 57
Pigs’ Head, Boiled 59
„ „ to Roast a ... 59
~ Tongues 69
Puddings, Black 60
JJ J.UHSUCB ••• ••• •••
Puddings, Black 60
„ White 61
Saveloys 60
Sausage, Bologna 60
~ Cambridge 60
„ Oxford 60
Sucking Pig, to Scald a ... 67
Sucking Fig, t
PQULTEY-
Duck, to Roas
Stewed
Duck, to Roast a 64
Stewed ... 64
POULTRY— (Continued). rAGE>
Fowl, to Truss and Roast a ... 64
Fowls or Chickens, to Truss
and Boil 65
Giblets, to Stew 64
Goose, to Truss and Roast a 63
Turkey, Boiled 63
„ Hashed 63
, Legs of, Broiled ... 63
Roast 62
PEESEEVES & PICKLES—
Jam, Black Currant 115
Damson 115
Raspberry 115
Red Gooseberry 115
„ Rea uooseoerry
„ Strawberry 114
” Tomato H 6
Jelly, Black Currant 116
~ Orange 116
„ Red Currant 116
Marmalade, Apple 117
Apple 117
Melon 117
„ Melon 117
„ Orange 117
” Rhubarb 117
PUDDING’S, BAKED
AND BOILED—
Amber 100
Apple and Crumb 94
Apples and Rice 98
Apple, Baked 94
„ Currant Gooseberry,
or other Fruit 93
Arrowroot, Baked 95
Baked ..’ 93
Bakewell 95
Batter 101
Bread 94
„ and Butter 95
„ „ Marmalade ... 95
Cherry 96
Christmas 98
College 96
Cup 97
Custard, Boiled 96
~ for 96
Dumplings, Apple 94
„ Baked ... 94
Currant 97
Hard 100
nara i-w
Yeast 100
Rig 101
Hasty 97
Jam Roly-Poly 97
Mother Eve’s 95
Orange 97
„ Marmalade 97


PUDDINGS, BAKED & BOILED
—{Continued). pAQE
Plum 98
Potato -98
Rhubarb, Boiled 100
Rice, Ground 98
Rice, Ground 98
„ Plain 98
~ ~ Boiled, for Chil-
dren 99
Sago, Baked 99
Sago, Baked 99
„ Boiled 99
Semolina 96
Snow Ball for Children ... 99
Suet, Plain 100
Tapioca, Plain 99
Treacle, ~ 99
Yorkshire 100
ICEIPTS FOR THE
SICK ROOM-
Apple Water 123
Arrowroot 123
Arrowroot 123
„ Water 123
Barley Water 122
Beef Tea, Hasty 122
„ „ Raw 122
„ „ Strong 122
Cream of Barley 122
Drink, Strengthening, for an
Invalid 123
Fish for Invalids 124
Fish for Invalids 124
Gruel, Barley 122
„ Oatmeal 122
„ Sago 122
Jelly, Oatmeal 123
Milk and Rum 123
Milk and Rum 123
Pudding, Arrowroot 124
„ Invalid’s 124
Rice Water 123
Rice Water 123
Soup, Invalid’s 124
Suet and Milk 123
Suet and Milk 123
Wine, Egg 124
IUCES & GRAVIES—
Butter, Melted 38
Gravy for a Goose or Duck ... 39
Mustard, How to Mix 40
Sauce, Anchovy, for Fish ... 39
„ Apple 39
„ Arrowroot, for Plum
Pudding 40
„ Bread, for Roast Tur-
key or Game 39
t> Common Egg 38
„ Horseradish, for Boil’d
Mutton or Roast
Beef 39
SOUPS-
SAUCES AND GRAVlES—
{Continued). pAGJ ,
Sauce, Mint, for Roast Lamb 39
„ Onion, Common ... 39
„ Oyster 38
Parsley 38
Tomato 39
SECOND COURSE
DISHES, RELISHES,
ETC.—
Beef or Mutton, Devilled ... 107
Cheese, Macaroni and 108
„ Toasted 108
if -LOaSteU. ... ... lUo
Fondue, a 108
Indian Devil Mixture 107
Rabbit, Welsh 107
AtaOUlOj TV cloil ... ... ... lu/
Ramakins 107
SOUFFLES AND OME-
LETTES—
Omelette, Cheese 103
~ Friar’s 102
~ Friar’s 102
„ Sweet 102
Souffles, Chicken 103
Chicken 103
Omelette 103
Vanilla ... 103
Broth, Scotch Barley 36
~ Scotch Mutton ... 36
Gravy 34
Green Pea 38
Hare 37
Rare 37
Hotch Potch 36
Kangaroo Tail 35
Kidney 35
Kidney 35
Liebig 37
Macaroni 37
Ox Head 36
„ Tail 35
Pea - 37
„ Plain, for Family Use ... 38
Plain Beef 34
STORE SAUCES—
Mushroom Ketchup, to Make 41
Sauce, Hot, Resembling Wor-
cestershire Sauce 41
TRIPE—
Roasted 47


fNBEtf.
*eal-
Breast of, Roast 54
Calf’s Brains and Tongue ... 55
~ Head, Boiled 55
„ „ Hashed 55
~ ~ to Prepare ... 54
„ Liver and Bacon ... 57
Cutlets 56
Fillet of, to Roast a 54
Fricandeau of 55
VviiTrtlrlrt Drtll a/I
x ncanueau oi ... ... ... oo
Knuckle of, Boiled 56
„ Stewed, and Rice 56
Loin of, Roast 54
Shoulder of, Boiled 55
Roast 54
~ ~ xwasi/ ... ... «»
Stewed with Vegetables ... 56
VEGETABLES, VEGE-
TABLE PUREES, &
SALAD MIXTURE—
Artichokes, to Boil 83
Aorvoro ffno Rml S.»
Asparagus, to Boil 83
Beetroots, to Boil 81
Broad Beans, to Boil 81
Broccoli, to Boil 80
Brussels Snrouts, to Boil ... 81
Brussels Sprouts, to Boil ... 81
Cabbages, to Boil 80
Carrots, to Boil 79
Carrots, to Boil 79
Cauliflowers, to Boil 80
Cucumbers, to Dress 84
A PEW GENERAL
PAGE.
Cucumbers, to Dress 84
A FEW GENERAL
PAGE. I
Beef, Ribs of 126
~ Sirloin of 126
Calf’s Head 128
Fish 136
Fowl, Boiled 135
„ Roast 134
Goose, Roast 135
Ham 132
Hare 133
Kid 132
Lamb, Forequarter of ... 131
Mackerel and Whiting ... 136
Murray Cod’s Head and
Shoulders 136
Mutton, Haunch of 131
„ Leg of 130
CANNING, PE
PAGE.
Beef.—To Preserve —To Pickle
for Long Keeping 138
Berries, Plums, Cherries, &c. 137
Canning Fruits. —Peaches and
Pears 137
Cement for Canning Fruits... 137
VENISON—
CANNING, PRESERVING,
PAGE.
VEGETABLES, VEGETABLE
PUREES, AND SALAD MIX-
TUBE— {Continued). page.
French Beans, to Boil ... 82
Green Peas, to Boil 82
Haricot Beans, to Boil ... 82
Horse-radish 85
Mushrooms, Grilled 84
How to Choose 84
Stewed 84
~ oueweu ... ...
Onions, to Stew and Brown... 83
Parsnips, to Boil 83
Potatoes, Baked 79
„ to Bake under
Meat 79
to Boil with Skins on 78
to Fry 79
Mashed 78
~ New, to Boil ... 78
~ to Steam 78
Salad 85
„ Crayfish 85
Summer 85
~ ouinmer ... ... ... w
Spinach, to Boil 81
Turnips, to Boil .... ... 80
Vegetable Marrow, Boiled ... 82
Hash, to 62
Neck of 61
HINTS ON CARVING.
PAGE.
Mutton, Loin of 131
„ Saddle of 130
„ Shoulder of 129
Pork 135
Rabbit, Boiled 133
~ Roast ... 134
Sucking Pig 132
Tongue, Boiled 133
Turkey, Boiled 134
~ Roast 134
Veal, Breast of 127
„ Fillet of 126
T.nin r\f
Loin of 128
Neck of 127
Shoulder of 128
Fresh Meat—To Keep a Week
'or Two in Summer 138
Fruits Preserved in Syrup... 137
Strawberries 137
Tomatoes... 137
Tomato Chutney 138
Tomato Sauce ... ... ... 138


THE RANGE, GAS STOVE, COLO-
NIAL OVEN, CAMP OVEN, &c.,
AS MEDIUMS FOE COOKERY.
A FEW pages on the above subject may’not he out of place
here. I hope that, while this Book of Cookery for the
people makes its way into the homes of the farmer and the
mechanic and artisan, it may also penetrate to the kitchens of
the more fortunate classes, who have at their hands every new
and improved appliance of culinary utensil. There are in use
now, however, so many different kinds of cooking ranges, from
the .old, awkward kitchen range of fifty years ago to the
wonderful gas stove which modern science has supplied us
with, that any attempt to treat of them all would occupy
more space than I have at my disposal, so I must confine
myself to general hints as to the management of kitchen
ranges.
The first business of a cook in the morning is to see that
all the flues are perfectly clear, and the dampers in perfect
working order. With some ranges this morning cleaning is a
tedious operation, but the newer and more expensive ranges
can be cleared of soot, &c., in five or ten minutes. When
every flue and damper is in proper order, and the draughts
unimpeded by soot or ashes, the cook may depend on a day of
comparative comfort and success in her cooking. But during
this morning operation of cleaning the range, the gas stove,


now in such general use, is an infinite comfort, as the kettle
may be boiled on it, and a hurried breakfast prepared in the
space of a few minutes.
Where a gas stove is regularly used, it is most necessary
to consider economy in the use of the gas, which may be
greatly wasted in incompetent hands. It is an absurdity, for
instance, to allow a continuous flow of gas in the process of
simmering or after the oven has reached the required heat.
It is necessary, therefore, to closely watch the process of
cooking, and turn off the superfluous gas when it is no longer
required.
Have your light ready before you first turn on the gas, and
see that the flame is blue. When the burner is obstructed, or
the Bunson not in working order, the light will be white. In
one case turn off the gas, unscrew the burner, and examine it
for any foreign substance; in the other, turn off the tap and
re-light it at the burner. Instructions concerning these
matters are supplied with all gas stoves.
To Boil on the gas stove turn on your tap, and set on the
kettle or boiler. When the water boils, you may turn down
the gas as low as you can so as to keep it boiling.
To Bake —Light the gas five minutes before you are ready
to use the oven. If you roast a joint at the same time
you must keep on the full power of the gas.
To Hoast —You may suspend your joint or place it on
the gridiron, or under the roasting flame, in those stoves
which have no gas inside the oven. If you hang it, do so
with the largest part of the joint at top. You may lower
the gas when the oven is thoroughly heated and the meat
has commenced to cook. Baste the meat, but do not turn
it, and keep the oven door shut as much as possible.


To Fry —Use the smallest burner for strength of heat.
Have plenty of fat in the pan, and keep up a steady heat.
To Grill —Light the burners, and when the top plate
is hot put the steaks or chops on the gridiron under it.
Place a small plate beneath it to catch the gravy. One turn-
ing will be found sufficient. On the lean part of a steak you
may, with benefit, rub a small bit of butter. Under the
flame of the grill burner will be found the best place to make
toast.
The gas stove will be found a perfect boon to the house-
keeper on ironing day. Having lit the gas in the smallest
burner, place the iron over it. It will heat in a few minutes,
when it may he replaced by another. ‘lf two irons are only
required, the gas may be lowered when the first is thoroughly
heated.
I trust I may not be accused of prejudice when I add to
these few simple hints of cookery by means of the gas stove
that, from personal experience, I think it the most perfect
and wonderful appliance of modern cookery. It possesses
every desirability in economy and cleanliness, while the most
elaborate as well as simplest dishes, for which the receipts are
given in this book, may be prepared by its means. It has
one other great desirability in a climate such as ours, viz.,-,
that the exact amount of heat required for the cookery in
any household can be obtained almost instantly, while a
flame has only to be extinguished to as instantly leave an
apparatus without heat. Need I add that, in an Australian
summer, such a capability in any medium for cookery is a
most desirable one.
It is true that the gas stove has a great drawback in the
fact that it cannot be offered as a culinary convenience to our


country friends, for gas is necessary to its use, and among our
Australian farmers’ homes, of which we are so justly proud, it
is an impossibility. This fact we may, however, regret less
when we remember the sound, wholesome, and delicious food
prepared in the colonial oven, or even the more humble camp
oven itself. Some of the most appetising bread I ever tasted
was prepared in the latter humble oven, and there are few of
the plainer receipts in this book that may not be used and
cooked in the humble camp oven when in accustomed hands.
Let me, however, recommend, in conclusion, that uhe gas
stove he considered a desideratum to every householder who
can at all accomplish its purchase, and the lowness of price
renders it nearly within the means of all.
•HSiPS^'


pints to ponsektepcrs.
ON MARKETING.
It is an advantage, in dealing with, even the most
conscientious tradesmen, for a housekeeper to be a good
judge of the commodity purchased; and in no line is this a
greater fact than in the choice of butcher’s meat for the
table. Whether a housekeeper wishes to select her joint
personally at market or shop, or order it at her own door,
it is equally of importance to her interests that she knows
good meat when she sees it, and can select the most suitable
joints for her means and purpose. Hundreds who will read
this page may not require the few hints I am about to give
them on the selection of meats and other articles of household
consumption, but there are also hundreds of young house-
keepers who may learn a lesson of care and economy in its
perusal.
Beef, as the staple meat of almost all lands, claims the
first place. Ox beef of a fine grain is best. You may know
it by its bright red colour, intermixed with grains of fat if
it is good and has been well fed. Never purchase beef the
fat of which is yellow, if you can avoid it; the fat should
be white, the suet also firm and white. Choose meat that
has plenty of fat about it; lean beef is certain to be tough
and bad. The beef of heifers is, of course, paler, because
younger than that of ox beef ; it is closer in the grain ;
the fat is also paler and the bones necessarily smaller.
Never purchase beef that is dark-coloured; it cannot be
good.
In treating of the joints into which beef is usually divided,
I may mention the sirloin or rib as being the best for
roasting. The middle rib is the most profitable, and do not
select one rib, as you will find it dries up in cooking. A


single rib can, however, be utilised in one manner profitably
for a small family. Take out the bones; make a stuffing
with bread, chopped onions, a little bit of dripping or
butter, or in lieu of onions, chopped parsley ; lay the stuffing
on the meat; roll it up ; tie it with a bit of twine, or
skewer, as may be most convenient, and roast. You will find
the result a dainty dish, though a small one.
If you order a sirloin, choose it from the chump end,
which has a good under-cut or fillet, as then, when you have
used your roast joint, you may have from the fillet one of
the best dishes ever served, viz., fillets de bceuf, for which you
will find receipts as I progress in this book. Some prefer
the rump to the sirloin, but it is too large to serve whole ;
cut a joint from the chump end to roast.
Where there is a large family and economy is essential,
a buttock of beef is very profitable ; it has no bones, and
when roasted affords rich gravy. To be tender it ought to
be hung for some time, a thing impossible to the small
housekeepers in our hot season. The round or silver side
are devoted to boiling and salting; the neck affords “ gravy
beef,” and is used for making soup or gravy; the “thin
flank” may be collared or salted. A “ rump steak” may be
ordered for grilling or frying, a “beefsteak” for stewing,
puddings, or pies, &c. The inferior parts of beef will make
good bouilli , for the making of which excellent dish you
will find receipts further on.
Yeal, to be good, must be young. The calf should not
be older than eight or ten weeks before being killed, or
the flesh will be coarse and less delicate in flavour. For
old veal a lower price should be charged. The flesh of
veal should not be moist or clammy; it should be dry,
white, and closely grained; if it is moist, or feels clammy
to the touch, it is unfit for cooking.
The best joints of veal for roasting are —the fillet, loin,
shoulder, and thick end of the neck. For a small family
stew the breast or knuckle, or boil the knuckle. If you
stew breast or knuckle, serve with parsley and butter. The
head of the calf is by many considered a delicacy. Calf’s
feet are used boiled, stewed, or for jelly. Yeal makes good
stock for soups or gravies, and its delicate flavour makes
it a valuable meat for all “ made” dishes.
Our next most valuable meat for the table is mutton,
and here, in the colonies, we have it in such abundance and
so cheap that it must form the staple meat for families


where economy is the first consideration. Wether mutton
is considered the best; you may recognise it by a knob of
fat on the upper part of the leg. It should be of a dark
colour, and have plenty of fat. The colour is important as
being a proof of age, for, contrary to most other meats,
mutton is best when old. To be in perfection, mutton
should be four or five years old, but such mutton is rarely
to be bought at a butcher’s; one meets with it only at
up-country stations or houses where they kill their own
animals.
As to the joints of a sheep, all may be roasted, but the
saddle is best. The haunch is next best to the saddle,
and is the leg and loin undivided. The leg may be boiled
or roasted. Chops may be cut from the loin, cutlets from
the middle of the leg, and best end of the loin or neck.
The leg is sometimes cured and smoked as a ham ; the
breast of mutton is often salted and boiled. The scrag
end of mutton may be stewed with rice.
Lamb should be small, of a pale red, and fat. Lamb is
generally roasted.
Never purchase pork from an inferior butcher if possible ;
it is best to get it from some dairy farm or country place,
where you know it has been well and carefully fed, for
diseased pork is very dangerous food. The fat of pork
should be Arm, and the lean white and finely grained, while
the skin should be smooth and thin. If the flesh feels
clammy to the touch, the pork is unfit for food. Be certain
that, if the fat has kernels in it, the pig has been measly
and is highly dangerous. Pork should be used fresh and
not hung long.
If bacon is good, the rind is thin, the fat firm and
pinkish, the lean tender and adhering to the bone. Busty
bacon has yellow streaks in it, and should never be purchased
or used.
Hams are tried by passing a knife or skewer into them up to
the knuckle ; if the knife or skewer smells sweetly, the ham
will prove good; a tainted smell will be detected if the
ham is bad.
The roasting joints of pork are the spare rib, loin, and leg;
the other joints are salted; the leg may also be cured and
boiled. The sides or flitches may be made into bacon; the leg,
cured and smoked, makes ham.
All meat should be wiped with a dry, clean clotb as soon as
it comes from the butcher’s ; fly-blows should be immediately


cut out, and in loins the long pipe that runs by the bone should
be removed, as it soon taints the meat. Never receive bruised
meat. If you wish to keep your meat hanging longer than
usual, dredge it well with pepper ; powdered charcoal dusted
over it will also prevent its tainting. In very hot weather it
will be found beneficial to keep a lump of charcoal in the safe
or larder, the charcoal absorbing the unpleasant smell from
tainting meat, and preventing further decay. The charcoal
should be frequently changed.
With respect to all meats, pray remember that the best,
and therefore the dearer, joints are in the end most economical,
as they contain more meat than the others; but very large
ones are not economical for a family, nor are they as whole-
some.
Turkeys— When the legs of a cock bird are black and
smooth, and the spurs short, the bird is fresh. The eyes also
ought to be bright and full, and the feet supple ; the absence
of these signs denotes age and staleness ; the hen may be
judged by the same rules.
Fowls —The young cock has a smooth leg and a short
spur, and when fresh the vent is close and of a dark colour.
Hens, when young, have smooth legs and combs ; both will be
rough if the bird is old. A good capon has a thick belly and
large rump, a poll comb, and a full breast.
Choose white legged fowls for boiling.
Geese —The feet of young geese will be yellow and free
from hair. The feet, when fresh, will be pliable, but, if stale,
the feet will be stiff.
Ducks may he selected by the same rules.
Hares —When a hare is young and fresh, the cleft in the
lip is narrow, the body will be stiff, the claws sharp and
smooth ; old and stale hares will be the opposite of this ;
rabbits the same. In order to ascertain whether a hare is
young or old, turn the claws sideways —if they crack it is
young. The ears should be tender and capable of bending
easily.
Eggs —M. Soyer tells us that the best way to ascertain their
condition is to “hold them up to the light, forming a focus
with your hand; should the shell be covered with small dark
spots, they are doubtful. If, however, in looking at them,
you see no transparency in the shell, you may be sure they
are rotten and only fit to be thrown away. The most precise


way is to look at them by the light of a candle ; if quite fresh,
there are no spots upon the shells and they have a brilliant
yellow tint.” If eggs are very bad they will rattle. Some
persons place them in a basin of water ; if the egg turns
upon its end, it is bad ; if it lies obliquely, it is not quite
fresh, but may oe used for puddings, etc.
Eggs to be preserved for future use should be quite fresh
from the nest.
Eggs may be kept fresh for a long time by brushing
them over with oil or gum and covering them with bran.
The object is to prevent the air from entering the pores of the
shell. Some housekeepers preserve eggs by placing them in
lime water. Pickled eggs are a pleasaat addition to cold meat.
A receipt will be found further on.
Vegetables —All vegetables should be purchased fresh-
looking and crisp. Especially avoid using stale, decaying
vegetables ; they are unwholesome.
Apples —-The heaviest apples are the best. Select those
which, when pressed by the thumb, yield to it with a crackling
noise. Prefer large apples to small ones ; there is less waste
in peeling and coring them.
In these colonies, where fruit is almost unlimited, and when
almost every family has its own plot of garden ground, or
can procure fruit fresh from shop or market, it would be
almost invidious to give any hints as to its selection. The
treatment of fruits of various kinds as preserve, compote, etc.,
will be found further on in these pages.
Suet —Suet is so necessary in the preparation of puddings,
etc., in a family, that no care will be wasted in preserving it.
It may be kept for twelve months in this way : —Choose the
firmest and most free from skin or veins, remove all trace of
these, place the suet in a saucepan at some distance from
the fire and let it melt gradually; when melted, pour into a
pan of cold water; when hard, wipe it dry, fold it in white
paper, put it in a linen bag, and keep it in a dry, cool place.
When used, it must be scraped, and makes an excellent pie-crust
with or without butter.
Dripping is also of great assistance to a housekeeper. It
is most useful for frying, will make a good pie-crust, and may
also be used as a substitute for suet. Dripping is best wben
clarified. To clarify dripping place it in cold water or luke-
warm water, stir it web all tbrougb the water, then allow it


to remain until the sediment is deposited at the bottom, when
the dripping will be found clarified and floating on the top ; it
ought then to be packed in a jar till required.
Butter should be kept in a cool dry place and closely-
covered from the air. An excellent plan, where it is not
convenient to ice the butter, is to dissolve some saltpetre in cold
water and stand the butter crock in the solution, so that the
water may reach well up the sides of the crock. Now place a
cloth over the crock and let the ends of the cloth dip into the
water. The ends will act as syphons and keep the top of
the cloth always moist.
Milk should always be kept in a cool and airy place, and
detached from anything that may impart to it an unpleasant
element. "Nothing is more absorbent in this way than milk.
Every vessel used to contain it should be carefully scalded, and
if a little soda be used in the scalding water it will be as well.
New and stale milk should never be mixed, or the good will be
spoiled.
Bread —As the main “ staff of life” no trouble ought to be
spared in its preparation and preservation. All thrifty
country families bake their own bread, as it is not only more
pleasant to the palate, but more economical to do so. In
towns, however, very rarely is the bread baked at home.
Excellent bread is driven to every door —the one danger to be
avoided being the admixture of lime, used by some bakers to
make the bread white. To detect lime, plunge a dry knife
into the bread while it is hot, when on extracting the knife a
whitish appearance may be observed. The best thing to keep
bread in is a crock or large jar. Cover it with a cloth.
BREAKFAST.
In almost every household the breakfast is a meal of
primary importance in that it must invariably influence the
remainder of the day. To the worker of brain and muscle alike
it is to the first meal of the day he owes the strength which is
to him and his family the provision of daily bread, for, no
matter how nourishing and appetising lunch or dinner may
be, it cannot properly recoup the nearly-exhausted power of
that man who has faced his daily task on an ill-cooked or
ill-provided breakfast.


And, besides, who can really calculate the influence of the
bright and cheerful meal that breakfast ought always to be.
The fresh interchange of pleasant ideas and social chat
brightens and strengthens for the duties of the day. Let it
then be the duty and pleasure of every housekeeper to see that
this meal is what it ought to be—well cooked, promptly
served, and presenting the most attractive aspect it is in her
power to give.
The humblest table may have its clean tablecloth, the
poorest cups and saucers and plates and knives be shining and
bright. There is scarcely a home, even in the heart of a town,
that cannot supply a spray of geranium or a bunch of grasses
to brighten the appearance of a table, and it is a coarse mind
indeed that is not agreeably influenced by the fresh verdure
of the simplest plant.
TO MAKE TEA.
Even this simple process may be ignorantly performed and
the best principle of the tea destroyed. "Well scald the teapot
and instantly put in the tea, pouring over it sufficient water
to thoroughly infuse the leaf. Allow more than a teaspoonful
to each person, unless the tea be exceptionally good, fill up,
and do not let it stand more than five minutes if you wish to
use it in perfection. Never allow the pot to stand by the fire,
as its own heat may be more perfectly retained by the most
homely “ cosy.”
COFFEE.
Allow about two large tablespoonfuls of ground coffee for
three breakfast cups. Have the pot well heated, lay the
strainer in, place the coffee on it, and pour over it the boiling
water. Boiled milk should be served with coffee, and a good
quantity of the hot milk used with each cup. Some cooks
put egg-shells into the pot to clear the coffee, but a little
isinglass will answer the same purpose.
CHOCOLATE.
Mix the chocolate or cocoa into a paste with a little water,
and when smooth pour on sufficient boiling water, stirring all
the time. Put it in a saucepan, and allow it to boil for a
minute or two. Add a pint of boiling milk by degrees,
when it will be ready for use. Chocolate ought to bear a
creamy froth when in the cup.


TOAST.
One of the commonest additions to breakfast is dry or
buttered toast, and one of the rarest to meet with properly
made. To remove the moisture from the bread, toast should
be slowly and carefully made. Warm the slice of bread on
both sides, and then toast gradually, moving it about so as to
secure an equal colour ; it ought to be barely a gold brown.
When toasted, remove the crust with a sharp knife, beat
down the edges, and butter Make it as immediately before
being used as possible. The bread should be at least two
days old. If the toast is to be served dry, never let it lie flat,
as it will soften, but place in a toast-rack, or edgeways on a
plate, as soon as made.
CREAM TOAST.
This is an American toast, and where there is. a dairy it
will be found delicious. Toast, and, as each slice is browned,
dip it in a basin of thin cream, and pile on a hot dish. This
toast is eaten with a knife and fork.
TO TOAST MUFFINS.
Separate the edges of the muffin by drawing them apart,
and, when you have lightly toasted both sides, pull in halves,
and butter quickly. Re-close the muffin, cut it into quarters,
and serve on a very hot plate. A proper hot water muffin
plate, with a cover, is, of course, best. Never send more
than two muffins to table at once. Renew them hot as
required.
CRUMPETS.
Crumpets are not opened, but toasted on both sides, and
buttered whole. They ought to be served separately, as
piling crumpets one over the other makes them heavy.
BREAD.
As bread is the staple food of all breakfast-tables, I think
this will be a good place to insert receipts for making it and
all home-made preparations of it. There is no doubt that good
home-made bread is not only more agreeable to the palate, but
more wholesome and nutritious than baker’s bread, but, unless
in the country, or for a large family, it is not economy to bake
at home.
Of course, a brick oven is best, and very fair bread may be
baked in the common colonial oven, but to those who under-
stand it, and know how to manage it, the common camp oven
makes the sweetest bread of all.


YEAST.
Boil an ounce of hops in two quarts of water for fifteen or
twenty minutes. Strain when it has cooled to milk warm.
Stir in about half a pound of flour, two heaped tablespoons
of brown sugar, and three good-sized boiled and mashed
potatoes. Add half a pint of your last' yeast, if you have
any, and let all stand in a warmish place, and covered, for
a night. Next day, b'ttle and cork for use. Keep in a cool,
dry place.
ANOTHER RECEIPT.
This receipt is that used for many years by the writer, and
must not be confounded with leaven. When you are
up your dough for the oven, and are sure that it is well risen
and light, have ready a clean dry bottle, and about quarter
fill it with dough which you have rolled between your hands
until it will drop in through the neck in long pieces. Cork
tightly and put away for next baking. About six hours
before you are going to set your sponge, boil a pinch of hops
in three half pints of water for ten minutes, strain, and when
barely warm pour it into the bottle over the dough. Add a
teaspoonful of sugar, shaking it well to melt the dough and
incorporate it with the liquid. Cork up and stand in a warm
place for a couple of hours.
TO SET THE SPONGE.
A wooden trough is best, and for a small quantity a wooden
bucket answers very well. Put about seven pounds of flour
into your trough, make a hole in the middle, and pour in the
whole bottle of above yeast, or a gill (or more, according to
strength) of the previous receipt. Add salt to your taste,
and mix into a soft dough with sufficient milk warm water.
Knead well, scatter flour over, cover with a thick doth and
set in a warm place for some hours, or until it has well risen.
Knead well again, adding enough of flour to make a firm
dough, and allow it to rise again for a couple of hours, when
divide into four loaves and bake.
A brick oven will take from an hour and a half to two
hours to heat, according to the quality of the wood burned
in it. When it is raked out and swept, allow it to remain
closed up for a little before you put in your bread. When
you can hold your hand in without burning for barely
twenty seconds, you may trust your loaves in it. As a
general rule you may allow an hour for two-pound loaves
to bake, and two hours for those of four pounds weight.


A well-heated oven will always bake tarts, &c., after the
bread has been drawn.
BROWN BREAD.
Good nourishing brown bread may be made by using a
fourth of rye flour to three parts of second flour. A little
milk added to the water in which it is mixed is an improve-
ment to this bread.
BREAKFAST ROLLS.
Hub a quarter of a pound of butter into two pounds of
flour. Put two tablespoonfuls of good yeast in the centre
and break in two eggs. Mix with warm milk into a thick
batter, and allow to'rise by the fire. When risen, make it
into a light dough and allow it to stand, closely covered, m
a warm °place until your oven is ready. Form lightly into
rolls, brush, over with egg, and bake for fifteen or twenty
minutes.
BREAKFAST ROLLS, PLAIN.
Take a portion of the risen dough you are about to make
into bread and knead lightly into it two beaten eggs and
a little butter ; form, and let the rolls rise on the tin for
ten minutes. Bake as above.
BOILED EGGS FOR BREAKFAST.
It is a mistake to use too fresh eggs ; they should .be at
least laid ten hours. Two minutes and a half will sufficiently
boil them to be really nourishing. Some, however, prefer
them more set. Lay them in the boiling water with a
spoon, and remove them carefully, as a cracked egg is not
only unsightly, but spoiled. Serve in egg-cups on a stand.
POACHED EGGS.
Eggs are more easily poached where there is a regular egg-
poacher. Where there is not one available, a new, small
frying-pan may be used. Add a salt-spoonful of salt and a
tablespoonful of vinegar to a pint of water, and when it boils,
break the eggs in very carefully, and boil gently for three
minutes. Lift with a slice, drain, and lay each egg on a
piece of buttered toast which has been nicely shaped and
trimmed. Serve on a small, hot dish.


EGGS A LA BONNE-FEMME.
This makes a pretty breakfast dish. Boil three or four
eggs hard, and peel them. Cut each in half, and cut off
enough of the point of the white to make them stand easily.
Remove the yolks, and mince them. Mince also a couple of
slices of boiled beetroot and cold chicken, or ham. Arrange a
bed of chopped lettuce on a small dish, lay the eggs on it, and
fill the cups alternately with the minced beetroot, or chopped
yolk, &c.
BUTTERED EGGS OR EGG TOAST.
_ Beat four eggs, and mix with three ounces of butter pre-
viously melted over hot water. Heat in a small saucepan,
and pour backward and forward into a basin held in the left
hand. Do not let it boil, but serve very hot, garnished with
slices of hard-boiled egg, or spread very thickly on slices of
buttered or dry toast as preferred.
OMELET.
Four eggs, two ounces of butter, and two dessertspoonfuls
of milk will make a nice-sized omelet.
Beat the eggs and milk together, and heat the butter
thoroughly in the pan. Pour in the eggs and milk, seasoned
with salt, or sweetened, as preferred. Hold over the fire for
a few minutes, shaking the pan to prevent burning. When
well set and fried, which will be in ten or eleven minutes,
double over and serve. An omelet is never turned.
A minced sprig of parsley, or a few chives, may be mixed
with an omelet, when it must be seasoned with pepper and
salt. Minced cooked ham may also be used. To make sweet
omelet, any jam preferred is spread over the omelet before it
is doubled and served.
EGGS AND BACON.
Have your bacon or ham fried, and the dripping boiling
in a clean pan. Break each egg into a cup, and slip it care-
fully into the hot butter or dripping. Three or four minutes
will set the whites, when lift each with a slice, trim into
shape, and serve in the centre of the dish, with the ham or
bacon around. Or an egg may be laid on each piece of
bacon.
BACON BROILED.
Bacon will broil in five minutes. Cut the slices thin and
broil on a gridiron, turning them several times. It may be
thin enough to roll if wished.


PIGS’ KIDNEYS.
Pigs’ kidneys make a nice little dish for breakfast. Treat
them as sheep’s kidneys, viz.:—Cut in halves nearly through,
and skewer them; open and broil for about fifteen minutes.
Serve with any sauce preferred, or plain.
PIGS’ FEET AND EARS
Clean the feet and ears well, and boil for four hours, when
they ought to be tender. Cool, and soak for some time in
equal proportions of vinegar and water to which a little salt
has been added. Dry them when required. Cut the feet
into two parts, lengthways, and fry in butter for ten minutes.
Have prepared a forcemeat of a little chopped parsley, bread
crumbs, pepper, and salt, and bind it with the yolks of two
eggs. Raise the upper skin of the ears and stuff them with
this forcemeat. Try with the feet, and arrange both neatly
on a dish, with a rich brown gravy, thickened with a bit of
butter rolled in flour, seasoned to taste, and with a glass of
sherry mixed ‘in it, poured over.
SHBIMP TOAST.
Shell the shrimps and boil in a little water for three-
quarters of an hour. Strain the liquor and put it in a
saucepan. Melt an ounce and a half of butter with a tea-
spoonful of flour, a pinch of cayenne, and a .squeeze of lemon
juice.. Simmer and shake until it darkens, when pour in the
liquor of the shrimps. Boil up and put in the shrimps.
Warm them through. Stir in the yolks of two eggs, and
serve on rounds of toast which have been hollowed out in the
centre.
BROILED MUSHROOMS.
These make a tasty dish. Peel and trim the stalks of the
mushrooms, wipe them clean with a bit of flannel, and broil
on a gridiron, over a nice clear fire, for a few minutes.
Arrange on a small dish, with pepper and salt, and a bit of
butter on each mushroom. Heat to melt the butter, and
serve.
SAUSAGES.
Sausages will broil or fry in twenty minutes, and, to
prepare either way, they are better to lie in boiling water for
a minute previously. This removes the oil from the skins.
Pricking with a large needle prevents them from cracking.


A NICE WAY TO COOK SMOKED FISH.
Barracouta or Hobart Town trumpeter are very nice
prepared in this way : Grease the bars of your hot gridiron.
Cut the fish into narrow bars, and wrap each in well-buttered
paper. Broil about five minutes, turning more than once, and
serve, laying the bars across each other on the dish.
TO COOK RED HERRINGS.
Clean, wipe, and cut open from head to tail down the back.
Broil on a well-greased gridiron for five minutes, turning as
required. Serve them open, and with butter spread over
each.
TO BROIL BLACK PUDDINGS.
Broil for five minutes over a brisk, clear fire, having first
made little diagonal cuts in the skin of the pudding. Serve
very hot.
FISH CAKE.
Take the meat of any left cold fish, and mince it very fine.
Season with pepper and salt, and mix with equal quantities
of cold mashed potatoes and bread crumbs. Stew the head,
bones, &c., of the fish with a bunch of sweet herbs, a sprig of
parsley, a seasoning of salt and pepper, and a pint of water.
Simmer for over an hour and a half. Bind the minced fish,
bread crumbs, and cold potatoes with the white of an egg,
form into a cake, brush it over with the yolk of the egg, dust
with bread crumbs, and fry a nice brown. Strain the gravy,
pour it over the cake, and simmer for twenty minutes. Serve
garnished with slices of lemon. This is a delicious adjunct
to a breakfast-table.
FISH.
Fish is a favourite article of food in these colonies, and
frequently forms the one dish on the dinner-table of a
small family, yet there is nothing requires more careful
dressing than fish. Fish served without proper neatness,
broken to pieces, or half raw, is simply disgusting.
If fisli be fresh, the eyes will be bright, the body stiff, and
the gills of a clear red, and the smell not unpleasant.
Chloride of soda will restore fish that is not quite fresh;


but, as decayed fish is a most dangerous thing to partake
of, it is better to be careful in this matter.
The greatest care ought to be taken to well clean the fish
before it is dressed. If you are obliged to clean the fish for
yourself, take care that you slit it low enough, and do not
leave any blood, etc., on the back-bone. In almost all kinds
of fish the portions requiring removal are the scales, gills, fins,
tail, and any impurities inside or outside the fish. Scrape off
the scales with a knife, and cut off the fins and tail with a
strong pair of scissors. You must be careful not to make too
large an incision, as it disfigures the fish, and may make it
watery, if boiled. The sound which adheres to the bone may
be left, but thoroughly cleansed ; leave the hard and soft roe
in their places ; the liver should be cleansed and returned to
the fish, but be very careful not to break the gall in removing
it from the liver. If you do, your fish will be very bitter.
Pure oil is the best medium for frying fish, as its use makes
the fish of the to-be-desired bright gold hue. If it be found
inconvenient to use oil, as being too expenisve, good dripping or
lard will do, but in every case let the fish be covered. Butter
is not a good medium in which to fry fish. It is likely to
make it soft and black.
Economical families are not likely to have a fish kettle, but
fish may be cooked very well in a small boiler. You may.
manage by placing the fish in a circle on a dinner plate and
tying it up in a napkin, place it in the boiler or saucepan, and
when it is sufficiently cooked, lift it out by the cloth, and
drain off all the water. Remove the napkin and slide the fish
on a clean cloth or napkin, folded on a dish. Serve with
suitable garnish.
The muddy smell and taste characteristic of fresh water fish
may be removed by soaking in strong salt and water before
cooking. _
Salt fish should be soaked in water before it is
is hard and dry it ought to be soaked thirty-six hours, and
the water (which ought to be soft) changed frequently. If the
fish is not very salt, twenty-four hours, or even one night, will
be sufficient.
Eels should be bought alive ; crayfish and crabs should
be heavy and very stiff. Be assured they are stale if they
feel limp ; they are often bought alive.
Oysters, if fresh, will close forcibly on the knife when
opening; if the shell gapes in the least, the oyster is losing
its freshness. When the fish is dead the shell remains open.


Small oysters are the best for eating; for sauces, or other
culinary purposes, the larger kinds are good enough.
To Fry Fish —See that they are well cleansed, and well
dry with a cloth,. dredge with flour, and brush over with a
beaten egg—then roll in fine bread crumbs. Place in your
frying-pan sufficient oil, lard, or dripping (clarified) to
entirely cover the fish. Place the pan on a clear, brisk fire,
the lard reach the boiling point and then slip the fish into
it. If the lard is hot enough, a drop of water permitted to
fall in it will spit. When one side of the fish is fried brown,
turn to the other, and when done, lay it upon a cloth or white
blotting paper to drain off the fat. Place on a reserved sieve
or drainer, and serve on a white cloth or embossed fish paper.
It should be served as hot as possible.
To Broil Fish —Have your fire very clear, and be sure
that your gridiron bars are well rubbed with beef suet or
dripping to prevent the fish from adhering to it. Put a good
bit of butter on a plate, and work into it enough of pepper and
salt to season the fish, upon which place the fish when broiled ;
then, with a knife, put the seasoned butter over every part. Be
sure it is served hot.
Murray Cod Boiled —Thoroughly clean the fish;
rubbing a little salt over it facilitates bj removing the slime.
Lay it in salt and water for ten minutes, dry well with a
cloth. Truss a large fish in the form of the letter Sas for
salmon, and simmer gently, according to size. About four or
five minutes to the pound will be right as a rule. Serve on a
hot folded napkin, garnished with slices of lemon, and send
shrimp or lobster sauce to table with it.
Baked Murray Cod— The excellence of baked Murray
cod is not well enough known. Having carefully cleaned,
stuff with veal stuffing, and sew up the opening. Brush the
fish over with beaten egg, and roll well in bread crumbs.
Butter a baking-dish, and lay in the fish. The oven must be
hot, and, when the fish parts easily from the bones, it is ready.
Oyster sauce may be sent to table with baked Murray cod.
Murray Perch Boiled— This is considered a delicious
fish by many, and is rather troublesome to clean. Cut oft
the spines, and scale ; an oyster knife is best for scaling. If
the fish is large, boil in a floured cloth for half an hour,
laying it in the kettle with cold water. Serve with parsley
sauce and a cut lemon.


Trevalli and Schnapper— To Fry— Must be chopped
across, in pieces about a quarter-inch in thickness, or may be
filleted. Mix a good batter, put in a little salt and chopped
parsley; dip the pieces in, and fry in good, clear, boiling fat
or lard. Also beat up two eggs, plain, have ready some
bread crumbs, dip in eggs in crumbs ; fry a nice light brown.
Trevalli and Schnapper —Boiled —Put into cold
water, whole, with about a gill of vinegar or slice of lemon;
throw in an onion with two or three cloves stuck in, a carrot
and a little celery. These may, of course, be omitted. Bring
to the boil for five minutes; stand aside for a quarter of an
hour; serve with slices of lemon, white sauce, anchovy,
parsley, &c.
Sand Mullet —The small mullet is a cheap and inferior
fish, and is usually fried, but the sand mullet is by many
considered one of our most delicate fish, either baked or
boiled. Melt one ounce of butter in a pan, and add a tea-
Bpoonful of Harvey’s sauce, and a glass of wine. Lay the
mullets in and bake them slowly for ten minutes. Take out
the fish, strain the liquor, and return it to the pan, adding a
small shalot, a teaspoonful of lemon juice, a dust of flour, a
little nutmeg, and six mushrooms. Simmer together for six or
eight minutes, then stir in a spoonful of cream, and three
beaten yolks of eggs. Fry the mullets a nice brown, lay in
the sauce for five minutes, and serve very hot.
Fried Whiting —Clean well, and fasten the fish with
the tails in the mouths. When particular, they are skinned.
Flour, brush with egg and bread crumbs, and again with egg.
Fry in plenty of hot lard, and serve on a napkin garnished
with fried parsley. Shrimp sauce.
Whiting Boiled —If large they will take ten minutes.
When cleaned lay them in cold water, in which a good bit of
salt has been dissolved. Bring slowly to boil, and simmer for
five or six minutes, or more, according to size. Serve on a
folded napkin garnished with sprigs of curled parsley, and
with anchovy sauce or plain melted butter.
Flat-head— This is a favourite fish, especially the rock
flat-head. They are fried in plenty of oil, and served plain,
or boiled plain, or with a delicate forcemeat stuffing. In
whatever way is preferred, however, a judicious use of lemon
juice is essential to a proper flavouring,


King Fish Boiled —Clean and dry well the fish, and
if it is large, see that your kettle will hold enough of water to
float the fish. It is best trussed round, and boiled in a floured
cloth. Boil, according to size, five or six minutes to the
pound. Serve on a napkin, and with lemon juice squeezed
freely over the fish. Send a tureen of oyster sauce to table
with king fish.
Trout —As yet we have but the sand trout in the usual
market. Clean and wipe very dry; put a wine glass of
vinegar into the water, an ounce of salt, and a cut stick of
horseradish ; boil slowly for about twenty minutes, and serve
with plain melted butter or anchovy. Trout may be brushed
with egg and bread crumbs, and fried, if preferred.
Flounders, to Boil —To boil flounders, allow a quarter
of a pound of salt and a little saltpetre to a gallon of water,
and put the fish in the cold water. Clean and empty the fish ;
pass a sharp knife down the back nearly to the bone, and
lay the fish in the kettle ; simmer for five or six minutes after
the water boils. Take out carefully without breaking, and
serve on a folded napkin with plain melted butter.
Pried Flounders —Let the fish lie sprinkled with salt
for a couple of hours after you have cleaned it; wash, wipe
dry, and brush with egg, and roll in bread crumbs. Have
ready boiling lard or oil with two large tablespoonfuls of
vinegar in it, lay in the fish and fry a nice brown; five
minutes for an ordinary sized fish. Drain on a cloth, serve on
a folded napkin with a garnish of fried parsley, and with
anchovy sauce.
Barracouta —This fish is considered one of our best,
and requires care in boiling. It is best trussed, head and
tail, when large, and, when thoroughly cleaned, is improved
by being first rubbed over with lemon juice, and then lightly
dusted with flour. Tie the round dish in a cloth if you
have not a proper fish-drainer, and lay in cold water.
Draw off the fire when it boils, and simmer until cooked—
time according to size. Serve garnished with slices of lemon
and bunches of double parsley, and with any sauce preferred.
Bream Boiled— Carefully clean a bream, sprinkle it
with salt, and allow it to remain in the salt for an hour. Lay
in cold water, and when it boils simmer for eight or ten
minutes. Serve bream with butter and parsley sauce poured
over it, and in a tureen.


Bream Fried—Clean, scale, wash and dry well. Have
ready your pan, with plenty of boiling lard and a little
vinegar. Well flour the fish, slip it into the boiling lard, and
fry rather slowly for about eight or ten minutes. Serve
garnished with a hard boiled egg cut in slices, and fried
parsley.
Fried Eels —Eels will tahe eighteen or twenty minutes
to fry. When cleaned and wiped dry, cut them into pieces
the length of your finger. Dip each piece into egg and bread
crumbs, and fry in plenty of hot fat. If the eels are small,
curl them head and tail before frying. Serve garnished with
fried parsley.
B&ked Eels —When you have cleaned and shinned the
eels, cut off the heads and divide into short bits. Mix a little
minced parsley and sweet herbs with a seasoning of cayenne
pepper and salt, and roll each piece in it. Lay them in a deep
dish, nearly covered with good veal stoct; fasten a buttered
paper over the dish, and bate for about three-quarters of an
hour. Tate out the fish, shim off the fat from the gravy, and
pour in two glasses of port wine, the juice of a small lemon,
and a large spoonful of Worcestershire sauce. Boil up,
pour over the fish, and send to table with a garnish of sliced
lemon.
Boiled Eels —Use small eels to boil. Well clean and
boil in water, to which you have put a spoonful of salt and
two of vinegar, and a bunch of parsley, for half an hour.
Serve in a shallow tureen, with parsley and butter sauce over
them.
Saked Conger Eel —Tate the bead and a good
portion of a large conger and stuff it witb the following
mixture :—Bread crumbs, minced parsley and lemon thyme,
or other herbs, a little chopped suet, grated lemon, and
nutmeg, with a few bits of butter mixed in. Fill the fish and
sew it up. Lay in a pie-dish with a pint of water, and pieces
of butter over. Flour over all, and bate in a moderate oven
for nearly an hour if it is large. Thicten the liquor with a
beaten egg, and flour and serve with bated potatoes and
tomatoes. The fish must be frequently basted while bating.
Soiled Conger Sel —Prepare and stuff as for bating
put it into bot water and boil for half an bour slowly. Serve
witb any sauce preferred, or it may be boiled plain and served
garnished witb slices of lemon.


SHELL-FISH.
Crayfish —Choose the crayfish by its weight; the heaviest
are always best. . The male is best for boiling, the hen crayfish
being the best for sauce or salads. It is unnecessary to give
instructions here for boiling this fish, as they are always
procurable ready boiled.
To Dress Crayfish —Separate the body from the tail,
remove and crack the large claws at each joint. Split the
tail down the centre with a knife. Lay a napkin in the
middle of a dish, and lav the body in an upright position on
it. Arrange the tail and claws on each side, and garnish with
curled parsley.
Scalloped Oysters —lf you have not proper tin scallop
shells, butter a small tart dish and put in the bottom a layer
of grated,bread. Over the bread arrange very thin slices of
butter, and over the butter enough of oysters to fill your dish.
Cover over with bread crumbs and butter, and dust with
pepper well. Pour in a little of the liquor of the oysters, and
bake for fifteen minutes. Brown with a proper salamander, or,
in lieu of one, the kitchen shovel heated red hot.
To Stew Oysters —Open three dozen of oysters and
remove the beards. Wash them well in their own liquor,
which then allow to settle, and strain into a small stewpan.
Add a bit of butter rolled in flour, a blade of mace, and fifteen
or twenty peppercorns tied up in a bit of muslin. Simmer
the oysters in this for four minutes, but do not allow them to
boil. Serve with sippets of bread round the dish.
Oyster Fritters —Prepare a good omelet batter, and
beard some pretty large oysters. Dip each into the batter
and then into fine bread crumbs. Fry for five or six minutes,
when the fritters ought to be a nice brown. These fritters
are used to garnish fish.
Another Way to Scallop Oysters —Open and
take the oysters from the shells. Prepare some bread crumbs
seasoned well with pepper, salt, and minced parsley. Dip each
oyster first into beaten eggs, and then well cover with the
bread crumbs. Pry lightly in butter, put them on a hot dish
while you dredge a little flour on the pan, and add a little of
the liquor, seasoned with a squeeze of lemon. Make the
oysters hot in the gravy and serve with it.


Prawns or Shrimps— Prawns or shrimps should be
boiled in strong salt and water for ten minutes. Drain and
serve. To make an ornamental supper dish, lay a large
orange in the centre of a small round dish, and stick the
shrimps thickly over it, alternating each with a little bit of
double parsley. At the top place a few shrimps with the
heads upward.
To stew Mussels— Wash the mussels well, and boil
them until they open. Take them out of the shells, saving
what liquor you can. Remove carefully the small hairy
portion at the root of the tongue-shaped member. To a pint
of mussels add half a pint of the liquor and a blade of mace.
Stew for a few minutes, thicken with a bit of butter rolled in
flour, and, when they have simmered a little, serve on toast.
To Scallop Mussels —Mussels may be scalloped as
oysters, but require rather more seasoning. A spoonful of
lemon pickle will be found an agreeable addition to the
receipts given for scalloping when either is used for mussels.
SOUPS.
The first necessity for the production of good soups is
good stocks, but in families of even ordinary means there
will always be something to serve as stock for an excellent
family soup. The water in which any fresh meat has been
boiled, any hones, even of hare or rabbit, will make stock
for a nourishing soup. Trimmings of any meats, bones of
mutton, sheep’s head and trotters, may all be used in the
preparation of stock. Sheep’s trotters especially, if procured
before being boiled, make a rich and nourishing jelly, which
is an excellent stock for many soups.
Soup should never be made with hard water, unless it is
of green peas. If green peas are not cooked in hard water
they lose their colour.
A quart of water to a pound of meat, without bone, is
the usual rule as to quantity, but if the soup is intended
to be very rich and strong, the quantity of stock or water
may be diminished.
It is a mistake to put meat intended for soup into the
full quantity of water at first; it should be placed in the
pot with a very little water, and a bit of butter to prevent
its burning, and slowly stewed until the best juices are


extracted ; more water may then be added, and if the soup
is slowly and for a long time stewed, it will be good.
Skim your soup often, removing all scum as it rises.
Take off every particle of fat from the lean meat of which
your soup should be made. Where onions are used, put
them in the soup soon after you commence to make it;
herbs, carrots, and celery three hours after. Delicate vege-
tables, such as turnips, tomatoes, etc., need not be put into
tlie soup until about balf an hour before it is served. The
seeds of celery tied up in a bit of muslin may be used to
flavour when the celery itself is out of season.
Soups may be coloured by a piece of bread, toasted very
brown, being simmered in them for a very short time.
Burning a little brown sugar in an iron spoon is also very
generally used as colouring. Burnt onions are also used by
those who do not dislike the flavour.
Be certain that your soup kettle or saucepan is perfectly
clean, and especially that no grease or grit adhere to it. A
little soda, dissolved in the hot water with which the soup
pot is washed, is an excellent thing to take away the taste of
onion or any greasiness. A teaspoonful of potash will
answer the same purpose.
Do not, unless the soup is too weak, uncover it more
frequently than is necessary for skimming ; if, however, the
soup is weak, do not cover the pot in boiling, the escape of
steam will reduce the water. Pouring in about a cupful of
cold water occasionally will make the scum rise more
abundantly, or, if you put in the proper quantity of salt
with the meat, it will have the same effect.
Use a wooden spoon for stirring soup.
< Never put in vegetables until all the albuminous scum has
risen and been removed.
Six or eight hours are necessary to fully extract the essence
from a few pounds of beef.
If possible, let the soup be made the day previous to its
being required, as the fat will then have cooled and caked on
the top of it, and can be easily removed. If your soup is good
it will be a jelly when cold.
Be certain that every vegetable added to your soup is
thoroughly cleansed and washed.
In soups, about a teaspoonful of salt is the usual allowance
to every pound of meat, but, as tastes so frequently differ, it
is impossible to give a fixed scale of pepper and salt for season*
ing. The cook must use her own judgment in this matter.


It is better to season too little than too highly, as more can he
added at table. . , ,
Fresh meat should be put into cold water for soup ; into hot
if it is to boil the meat.
Time and attention must be given to the making of a really
good soup.
Plain Beef Soup—This soup is best made of the shin
of beef or leg, and it will take five pounds to one gallon of
water. Cut the leg or shin in pieces, and place in the pot with
a gallon of water and a teaspoonful of salt. Boil slowly, and
remove the scum as it rises. When at the boiling point remove
to the side of the fire and let it simmer steadily for about four
hours. Then add five carrots cut small, two heads of celery,
three onions sliced and fried, two tomatoes, and a bunch of
sweet herbs tied up in muslin. Four turnips should be added
half an hour before serving. A portion of the meat may be
used at table, but if so it must be taken from the soup two
hours before dinner time. To make this soup perfect it should
be strained through a hair sieve, but, of course, in many
economical households using with the vegetables will be
preferred. Plain beef soup will take, altogether, four hours
and a half in preparation.
Gravy Soup—For this soup you will require for every
pound of meat three quarters of a pint of water.
Let us say soup is required for a large family; take
seven pounds and a half of gravy beef, two and a half of veal,
two and a half ounces of butter; three onions stuck with
twelve cloves, one small turnip, one large carrot, and half a
head of celery. To these add two blades of mace, half an
ounce of salt, and a small bunch of thyme and parsley. Three
lumps of sugar is an improvement in the opinion of some
persons —to others the sweetness imparted by the vegetables is
sufficient.
Let the gravy beef and veal be placed in a suitable utensil
of course a well tinned copper stock pot is best put two
ounces of butter at the bottom, and, well covering the pot, keep
it over the fire until it is well drawn down, a point in the
cooking that may be known by the smell as of a delicately
roasted joint—the butter fries the meat, the steam affords the
moisture-. Then add the water made very hot, the carrots
cut very small, and all the rest of the ingredients, including
the salt and sugar. Cover the pot, but not entirely, as all the
steam must be allowed to evaperate. Simmer gently for seven
hours, strain carefully into a pan through a sieve. This soup


will bear keeping, and can be re-heated for use, adding a little
more sugar or salt as taste suggests.
Ox Tail Soup Having cut up the ox tail into pieces,
soak in warm water for a few minutes, then add suflicient
water to boil them in—the ox tail will take three hours to
boil. When three parts done add the following, cut into dice :
two small carrots, two small onions, half a head of celery, and
two small turnips. Add four good-sized sprigs of parsley,
and one of thyme, tied in a bunch. When your ox tail is
done take out the thyme and parsley, and add sufficient stock
or water to make three pints of soup; let it boil up, skim and
thicken with a tablespoonful of flour beaten in water, add
ketchup, pepper and salt to taste, and a pinch of sugar. Boil
another quarter of an hour, skim off the grease and serve ; a
glass of sherry added just before serving will improve it.
Colour with a little brown colouring.
Kangaroo Tail Soup —Kangaroo should be bung
some time or it will possess little flavour, yet it ought not, of
course, to be bung long enough to become tainted. If in the
bush, where kangaroos are plentiful, the stock or gravy may be
made from the same, instead of beef or veal.
A 3 for ox tail soup, cut the tail into medium sized pieces,
and place in the stewpan three or four pounds of the meat
from the leg or any other part, a slice of ham or lean bacon,
two blades of mace, a bay leaf (if procurable), two onions or
head of celery, and seasoning. Add four quarts of light beef
or veal stock, place on the fire and cook gently until the tail
is thoroughly done; then strain the soup and thicken to the
proper consistency. Cook gently half an hour, take off all
fat and scum, put in a large glass of sherry, or Madeira
wine, a teaspoonful of red currant jelly, and the juice
of a lemon ; return the pieces of tail, boil up and serve,
and you will have the perfection of kangaroo tail soup.
Kidney a bullock’s kidney in the liquor in
which a leg of mutton has been boiled, and when about half
done take out the kidney and cut it into dice as you would
vegetables. Cut also into dice three or four turnips, three or
four carrots, three sticks of celery, and a bunch of sweet herbs
tied together. Season with pepper and salt. Boil slowly for
five or six hours, adding a spoonful of mushroom ketchup.
When done serve, only removing the herbs. As in the case of
almost all soups, kidney soup is better made the day before
it is required.


Hotch Botch— Take a pint of peas and boil in one quart
of water until they are soft enough to pulp through a sieve.
Cut the lean end of a loin of mutton into chops, and place m
the stewpan with a gallon of water, four carrots, four
turnips, cut into small pieces, and a seasoning of pepper and
salt Add one onion and a head of celery. When the
vegetables have boiled until quite tender, add the pulped peas,
boil fifteen minutes and serve.
Scotch Barley Broth —The flank of beef is considered
best for making this broth—about six pounds will make
sufficient for a tolerably large family. To boil six pounds of
flank, you will require six quarts of water; see that the meat
is well covered with the water, and add a quarter of a pound
of barley; boil for an hour gently, skimming frequently.
Cut into pieces three heads of celery, two carrots and two
turnips; add an onion, a bunch of sweet herbs, and a little
parsley ; boil altogether for two hours. Having seasoned with
salt, take out the beef, the onion, and sweet herbs. Serve the
beef in a dish garnished with turnips and carrots, and the
broth in a tureen.
Scotch Mutton Broth— Take six pounds of neck of
mutton and soak in water for an hour, cut off the scrag, and
put it in your pot or stewpan with three quarts of water ; as
soon as it boils skim well, then simmer for an hour and a half.
Cut the best end of the neck into cutlets, leaving two bones in
each ; cut nearly all the fat off. Put the cutlets in the broth,
and skim frequently as it boils afterwards ; cut five carrots,
five turnips, and two onions into two or three pieces each, and
add to the broth, after it has boiled about two hours and a
half. Put in at the same time four tablespoonfuls of Scotch
barley, first carefully washing it in cold water. Salt to your
taste. Put in a little chopped parsley half an hour before
sending to table. Altogether this broth will take about three
hours and a half.
Ox Head Soap —Break the bones of an ox bead, soak, and
well wash in warm water. Place in your pot with five quarts
of water. See that it is closely covered, but skim well as it
boils slowly. Put in a bead of celery cut in pieces, one turnip,
two onions, two carrots, a few peppercorns, allspice, and a
bunch of sweet herbs. Having added the vegetables, cover
closely, and let the ingredients stew gently until the soup is
reduced to four quarts. The preparation of this soup will take
altogether from five to six hours. Take out the head and


strain the soup through a sieve, leaving it then to cool. The
next day cut the meat from the head into small bits, and
return to the pan with the soup, from which you must be
careful to remove the fat; let all simmer gently for half an
hour, when it will be ready for table. Before serving add a
glass of white wine. The more frequently this soup is warmed
the richer it will become.
Macaroni Soup —Put four ounces of macaroni into a
stewpan of boiling water —add an onion stuck with cloves,
and one ounce of butter. Boil the macaroni quite tender, and
then drain the water from it, replacing it with two quarts of
clear gravy soup. Simmer for ten minutes, but carefully, or
the macaroni will burst. It will then be ready to serve.
Send to table with grated Parmesan cheese.
Macaroni may be added to white or clear gravy soup,
boiling it previously in water for twenty minutes. Macaroni
soup will take only three-quarters of an hour to prepare.
Soup Liebig —This soup requiring only ten minutes in
preparation is very convenient when haste is necessary. Take
one pound of gravy beef, and mince very fine. Boil in a pint
of water a carrot or turnip, an onion, and a clove ; add the
minced beef and simmer by the fire ten minutes; strain and
serve. The quantity will be two small basins. Stir before using.
Hare Soup —Put the hare, cut into pieces, into a large
jar, with a pound of bones, a pound and a half of gravy beef,
a slice of lean bacon, an onion, and a bunch of sweet herbs.
Add two quarts of water, and tie a bladder and paper over
the jar. Place in a kettle of boiling water, and simmer till
the hare is stewed to rags. It will take eight hours ; strain,
add an anchovy cut into small pieces, a little cayenne and salt,
and a spoonful of soy. Serve in the tureen with it a few
forcemeat balls.
Pea Soup —Strip off the outside sticks of two heads of
celery, retaining the heart for after use. Take six large
onions, a pint of split peas, two carrots and a bundle of sweet
herbs. Add a little dried mint, a handful of spinach, a few
bones or bits of bacon, with pepper and salt to taste. Boil
these materials for two hours in three quarts of spring or
filtered water; strain through a hair sieve, pressing the carrot
pulp through it. Return the soup to the pan with tbe heart
of the celery, a teaspoonful of pepper, a little dried mint, fried
bread, and spinach. Boil another hour and serve.


Green Pea Soup —Put in a stewpan, a pint of green
peas, a sprig of mint, an onion and a litle parsley. Add three
cucumbers pared and sliced, and three cut up lettuces. Place
all in the pan with a quarter of a pound of fresh butter, and
stew gently for half an hour, then pour in half a pint of thin
gravy, and stew for two hours more. Before serving thicken
with a little lump of butter rolled in flour.
Pea Soup Plain, for Family Use— One pint of
split peas, to be boiled in three quarts of water until quite
soft. Add, when boiled, a pound and a half of beef, and a
slice of bacon, a handful of spinach, a few cloves, and a little
mace. Stew for two hours, and run through a sieve ; return
to the pan, and stew for two hours and three-quarters,
with half a bunch of mint, a little cut spinach, a lump of
sugar, and seasoning to taste. Time, altogether, four hours
and three-quarters.
SAUCES AND GRAVIES.
Melted Butter— lnto a very clean saucepan put about
two ounces of butter, and two tablespoonfuls of water.
Dredge in a little flour, and a pinch of salt. Do not let the
saucepan rest on the fire, but hold in your hand, and continu-
ally keep the mixture revolving one way until it boils ; it is
then ready for table. Serve in a sauce-boat or tureen.
Common Egg Fauce— Boil two eggs for twenty
minutes, then put ther in cold water. Take them out, shell,
cut into slices, and mince them small. Make a sauce tureen
very hot, put in it your minced eggs and pour over the quarter
of a pint of boiling''melted butter. Stir round well and serve.
Parsley Sauce —Wash a small bunch of parsley well
and boil till tender ; press the water out thoroughly and chop
very fine. Pour over a pint or half pint of boiling melted
butter, according to the quantity required and the parsley
used.
Oyster Sauce —Detach, lie beards from a dozen oysters
and stew them in their own juice with half a teacupful of
clear gravy. Strain, and then add half a pint of melted butter,
hot; put in the oysters and let them simmer in the mixture
for three minutes.


Anchovy Sauce for Fish— lnto half a pint of melted
butter put three dessertspoonfuls of anchovy essence or sauce.
Season to taste. Boil for a couple of minutes. Cayenne
pepper and mace should be used in this sauce.
Gravy for a Goose or Duck— Boil for three hours
half a pound of lean beef and a set of giblets. Add one onion,
three sage leaves, some whole pepper, and a little salt in three
pints of water. Then put in a glass of port wine and a
spoonful of flour mixed smooth for thickening ; let the whole
boil up again for three minutes, when it will be ready for
table.
Bread Sauce for Roast Turkey or Game-
Simmer a sliced onion in a pint of new milk until tender.
Break up as much stale bread as will fill a breakfast cup,
strain the hot milk over it and let it soak, covered closely, for
an hour. Beat smooth with a fork, add a little pounded mace,
salt, cayenne, and an ounce of butter. Boil up and serve.
Eemove the onion before you pour the milk over the bread.
Common Onion Sauce —Beel and boil till tender five
white onions of a medium size. Squeeze dry as possible and
chop very fine. Add half a pint of hot milk, a little bit of
butter, salt and pepper to taste. Pulp all together well and
serve.
Apple Sauce —Eight boiling apples pared, cored, and
boiled, in sufficient water to prevent their burning, until they
are soft enough to pulp. Add a piece of butter and sweeten
to your taste. Beat well until the mixture is quite smooth,
when it may be served as convenient.
Horseradish Sauce for Boiled Mutton or
Roast Beef— Grate a stick of horseradish; mix it with a
wineglassful of cream, a teaspoonful of mustard, and salt to
taste. Add half a pint of vinegar. Bruise well with a spoon,
to thoroughly mix, and serve in a tureen.
Mint Sauce for Roast Lamb— Chop very fine a
little thoroughly washed and picked green mint; put two
tablespoonfuls of the chopped mint into a quarter of a pint of
vinegar. Add one tablespoonful of sugar. Let the mixture
stand for a while before being used.
Tomato Sauce— When you have removed the stalks
and seeds from six tomatoes, put them into a pan with an


ounce of butter, a little celery, and one ounce of bacon. Add
a bay leaf, a bunch of thyme, half an onion cut into slices,
pepper, salt, and cayenne, of each a small quantity. Stew
gently until tender and then put in a little flour. Add half a
pint of broth, boil for six minutes and strain. Then return
to the stewpan to simmer until rather thick. This sauce may
be served with both meat and poultry.
Arrowroot Sauce for Plum Pudding— A dessert-
spoonful of arrowroot may be rubbed smoothly either m a
little water or a glass of white wine. Squeeze m the ]uice ot
half a lemon. Add two dessertspoonfuls of sifted sugar, and
pour in gradually half a pint of water. Stir quick y over a
clear fire until it boils. You may flavour as your taste
advises.
How to Mix Mustard— Two ounces of mustard will
be quite sufficient for the cruets. Add to it half a teaspoonful
of sugar, and slowly mix with boning water until smooth and
of the proper consistence. Many mix with cold water and
omit the sugar, and some mix with vinegar, but if you try the
above I think you will prefer it.
FORCEMEATS OR STUFFING.
A Common Forcemeat for Veal or Hare
Prepare six ounces of bread crumbs, mince the peel of a lemon
very fine, a tablespoonfnl of chopped green or dry savoury
herbs, and three ounces of chopped suet. Mix all together,
and season with pepper, salt, and nutmeg. Bind with two
well-beaten eggs. The same quantity of butter, broken mto
small pieces, may be substituted for the suet if preferred.
Sage and Onion Stuffing for Geese, Ducks or
Poultry —Scald six sage leaves for a few minutes, and chop
very fine. Boil three onions until soft, draining the water
from them when about half cooked, and replacing it with fresh
water to take away the stronger flavour of the onions. Chop
the onions very fine also, and mix them with the bread crumbs
and sage leaves. Season with pepper and salt, add a piece of
butter broken into little bits, and bind with the yolk of one


Egflj-halls for Made Dishes or Soups —Take
twelve eggs and boil them hard. Pound them in a mortar
until very smooth. Add the yolks of four raw eggs, a little
salt, and sufficient flour to bind the mixture. Form into small
balls, and boil for a short time in water to set them. They
may then be used for soups or made dishes at pleasure.
STORE SAUCES.
To Make Mushroom Ketchup— Break a peck of
mushrooms into a large earthenware vessel and sprinkle them
with half a pound of salt. Put the vessel and mushrooms
into a cool oven for about twelve hours. Then strain and
measure the juice, and boil for a quarter of an hour. Add,
for each quart of the liquor, a quarter of an ounce of allspice,
half an ounce of ginger, two blades of mace, and one ounce of
pepper. Let all boil quickly for nearly half an hour. Do not
bottle until cold. Cork well, and dip the neck of each bottle
into melted resin.
A nice flavouring for any gravy may be made by mixing
this ketchup with equal proportions of lemon pickle and soy.
Hot Sauce, Resembling Worcestershire Sauce
—Take three-quarters of an ounce of cayenne pepper, five
anchovies bruised fine, two tablespoonfuls of soy, and three
pounded cloves of garlic. Pass all these through a sieve after
being well mixed. Add a quart of vinegar, and strain. B veep
closely bottled and corked for ten days, when it may be put in
smaller bottles for use.
BEEF.
DraECTioxS for choosing good beef will be found in “ Hints
to Housekeepers,” but unavoidably tough meat may be made
tender by soaking it for about twelve hours in vinegar and
water. Allow a quarter of a pint of vinegar to each quart of
water. A general rule for all joints is to allow, in cooking, a
quarter of an hour to eaoh pound.


sirloin of Beef to Roast— This is usually considered
the best joint in the bullock, and to preserve its rich juices
it must be carefully roasted. Let the fire be good and clear,
and hang the meat at the distance of about eighteen inches
from it. Have ready hot clarified dripping in the pan, and
baste the meat plentifully as soon as it is put to the fire.
Baste it thoroughly also every fifteen minutes afterwards.
About twenty minutes before the joint is dished sprinkle it
with salt and dredge lightly with flour. See that the fire is
especially good and clear to brown and froth it. Dish up on
a hot dish, and pour over good made gravy, or its own gravy,
a little salt and hot water added. Serve with little heaps of
scraped horseradish on the dish, and with horseradish sauce
in a tureen. Send Yorkshire pudding to table with this joint,
but on a separate dish.
Rolled Ribs of Beef— Have the bones of ribs of beef
removed carefully, and roll the meat in the form of a round.
Fasten with broad tape and skewers. Hang it pretty near a
good clear fire for about half an hour, when you may move it
a little back. Baste as for sirloin. About twenty minutes
before you draw it dredge with flour, and baste with butter.
Serve with good made gravy in the dish and a tureen of
horseradish sauce. To this joint half an hour additional may
be allowed in cooking.
To Boil Beef— l have previously given general directions
for boiling meat, which is far the most profitable way of
cooking it for a family. The main point is to see that it boils
very slowly, yet never ceases to boil or simmer. If, however,
the skimming is not very carefully attended to, the finest
joint will be destroyed. Skim before the pot comes
quite to the boil, when add a little cold water to raise the
scum thoroughly. Allow a quart of cold water, and twenty
minutes to cook, for each pound of meat, counting from the
time the scum has risen and the water boils.
Boiled Corned Beef— This very simple and admirable
dish very rarely comes to the table in the tempting form it
ought to. In the first place, the beef ordinarily obtained
from the butcher is not sufficiently corned, therefore see that
it has been in the brine for at least fourteen days. The silver
side of the round is the best for family purposes, although
the brisket is perhaps preferable cold for breakfast, etc.
Place water on to boil in a vessel sufficiently large. When
the water boils rapidly, put in the meat, and in five minutes


remove it from the strong fire and never allow it to more than
simmer afterwards ; put in the water a salt-spoonful of soda,
a few cloves, a blade of mace, and a little whole allspice ;
supposing the beef to weigh sixteen pounds, allow it at least
four and a half hours. It is the practice of most people in
boiling large joints, etc., to place them in cold water ; this is
just the right way to extract the juices of the meat, whereas,
by placing the viand in boiling water at first, you shut in all
the juices of the meat, and the liquor is, as it should be,
valueless. If the meat is to be eaten cold, allow it to remain
in the water until it cools.
Silver Side of Beef Boiled —Silver side is best corned
for ten or twelve days. Wash well, and fasten with skewers
and tape into a round shape. Put it in plenty of water (a
quart to the pound), and bring to the boil, skimming care-
fully. When it boils, draw the pan to the side of the fire,
that it may simmer only until cooked. When serving, take off
the tape, and replace the skewers with a silver one. Pour
over a little of its own liquor from the pan, and send to table,
garnished with boiled parsnips and carrots.
A Beef stew —Remove from two or three pounds of
rump of beef all the fat and skin, and cut it into square
pieces. Put it into a stewpan, and add about a quart of
broth. Season lightly with pepper and salt, and simmer for
two hours. Slice fine the peel of a lemon, and simmer it in
the gravy for twenty minutes more, and then add the juice of
the lemon, a spoonful each of ketchup and Harvey’s sauce,
and a thickening of flour. Allow to boil up for a quarter of
an hour, and a glass of sherry added just before serving will
greatly improve this stew.
Stewed Shin of Beef—A Family Dish— Cut
the shin in four pieces, taking care to saw the bone cleanly,
and without splinters, barely cover them in a stewpan with
cold water. Take off the scum as it rises, and add a bunch of
sweet herbs, a head of celery, a large onion, a dozen black
peppercorns, and twelve allspice. Stew very slowly for four
hours.
Hare ready boiled twelve small button onions, two turnips,
and three carrots ; the turnips and carrots must be cut up, and
will take twenty minutes to boil. Arrange the meat on a dish
and the vegetables round it, and pour over the meat a gravy
made of a pint and a half of the liquor in which it has been
stewed, thickened with flour, and seasoned with pepper, salt,
and a wine-glass of ketchup.


Beef Olives —This preparation of beef is a favourite one
and exceedingly tasty. Cut a pound and a half of rump steak
into slices of six or seven inches long, and about four wide.
Rub each over with the beaten yolk of an egg. Have ready a
cupful of bread crumbs, mixed with two ounces of chopped
suet or marrow, a sprig of chopped parsley, a little beaten
mace, and the grated rind of a lemon. Mix well and season
with pepper and salt. Spread the mixture thickly on the
steak, roll each round, fasten with a small skewer, and brown
lightly in an oven. When browned, lay the olives in the
bottom of a stewpan, pour over a pint of brown gravy, a
tablespoonful of ketchup, a teaspoonful of lemon vinegar, and
a bit of butter rolled in flour. Stew gently one hour and
a half, and serve with the gravy and garnished with forcemeat
balls.
Fillets de Bcsuf— This dish may be made with more
economy than is generally supposed, and is especially appetis-
ing. By using the under-cut of a large sirloin, the sirloin
itself may be served as another dish, and even a small sirloin
will furnish a little dish of fillets for a small family. Cut the
under-cut into quarter of an inch thick slices, flatten, and
shape them to a round. Melt one or two ounces of butter,
according to quantity of slices, and lay them on the butter in
a saute pan if you have it, or in a common stewpan. Dust
with pepper and salt, and fry for eight minutes. They must
be turned instantly when the gravy appears on the surface of
the fillets. Heap them on a very hot dish, and pour over a
gravy made as follows : —Add a little rich gravy to the glaze
in the bottom of the pan, with a tablespoonful of any sauce
preferred. Boil it up, and add a squeeze of lemon juice, a few
fried mushrooms, or a bit of anchovy butter the size of a nut.
Fillets de bceuf may also be served plainly with tomato sauce.
Ox Cheek Stewed— This is an excellent family dish.
Take half an ox head and soak it in cold water for three or
four hours, wash well and lay in a stewpan with a small
onion, a bunch of sweet herbs, a head of celery, four cloves,
and a little pepper and salt. Pour over three pints and a
half of water, and simmer until tender —it will take over six
hours. Take out the head when it is quite tender, and cut
the meat from it; strain the gravy and return it to the pan
with the pieces of cheek and a glass of port wine. Add some
forcemeat balls, boil up and serve.


Ox Tongue —A young tongue will be plump and smooth
in the skin. If fresh, two or three hours’ soaking in cold
water will suffice, but if it is cured it will take twenty or
twenty-four hours to soak. Put the tongue in cold water,
and let it gradually warm before allowing to simmer—it
should not begin to simmer for at least an hour; let it
simmer for two hours and a half more. To facilitate the
removal of the skin, plunge for a moment or two into cold
water ; and if the tongue is to be served cold, trim and glaze
it, and ornament the root with a frill of paper or vegetable
flowers. If the tongue is to be eaten hot, garnish it with
aspic jelly, and serve with macaroni or tomato sauce.
To Dress a Bullock’s Heart—The heart may be
stuffed with veal forcemeat or sage and onion stuffing as
preferred. Soak it in warm water to remove the blood, and
cut out all the ventricles, stuff, and sew up with a coarse
needle and thread. Fasten white paper around it and roast
for two hours. The fire must be strong, and the heart basted
frequently. When nearly done, take off the paper, dust with
flour, and baste to froth it up. Serve very hot, with rich
gravy around, and currant jelly, in a glass dish.
Spiced Beef— Cut out all the bones from the thin part of
the ribs of beef, rub well with salt, and let it lie for two or
three days. Pound half an ounce of mace, chop a little parsley,
and mix with half an ounce each of whole cloves, black
pepper, and Jamaica pepper. Spread this mixture over the
beef, roll up neatly and tightly, and fasten with tapes. Cover
with water in a stewpan and stew very slowly, allowing nearly
half an hour to the pound. When quite tender, lift and lay it
on a board with a heavy weight over. It is served cold.
Beef Liver for Gravy-Hang up a good bullock’s liver
to drain, then salt, and let it lie in the salt for twenty-four
hours. Hang it up again, and when it ceases to drip hang in
a cool dry place until required. This liver will make excel-
lent gravy for any made dishes or cutlets, &c.
Bump Steak Fried— A rump steak will take about
twenty minutes to fry, and. should be cut rather thinner than
for broiling. Have the pan especially clean, and good clarified
dripping boiling in it when you lay in the steak. Keep moving
it about, to prevent burning, and when you turn it be sure, it
you use a fork, not to pierce the lean of the steak, but the tat.


Have ready a hot dish, with a lump of butter and a spoonful
of ketchup on it, and when the steak is done, dust with pepper
and salt, and lay it in the butter and ketchup.
Bump Steak Broiled —This is decidedly the best and
most nourishing mode of cooking a steak. Let it be cut not
more than three-quarters of an inch thick. Have a clear fire,
and make the gridiron hot, rubbing the bars well with suet.
Place the steak upon it, and as they broil, turn frequently —a
pair of steak-tongs should be used, or, if a fork, be careful not
to pierce so that the juice will escape. Have a hot dish ready,
and mix a seasoning of pepper and salt with a spoonful of
ketchup and a lump of butter. Rub a bit of butter lightly
over the hot steak, lay it in the dish, and serve very hot.
Steak Stewed, Plain— Fry the steaks a nice brown,
and then lay them in a stewpan with half a pint of water, a
small onion, sliced, a tablespoonful of walnut ketchup, and
pepper and salt to taste. Stew slowly for about forty minutes,
thicken with a bit of butter rolled in flour, and, when it has
boiled a few minutes, serve.
Beefsteak and Oysters Stewed— Pry a pound and
a half of steak in two ounces of butter until a nice brown, add
half a pint of water and the liquor of two dozen and a half
oysters. Season with pepper and salt, and stew gently for an
hour. Then put in the oysters, half a glass of port wine, and
a bit of butter, rolled in flour. Allow all to stew for twenty
minutes more, when the stew will be ready to serve. It should
be sent to table essentially hot.
Stewed Beef Kidney —Slice a bullock’s kidney cross-
ways, and fry in a little butter till brown. Season with salt
and pepper, dredge with flour, add a little warm water, and
stew gently and closely covered for half an hour.
To Fry Beef Kidney —Cut a kidney into rather thin
slices, and soak in warm water for a couple of hours, renewing
the water twice. Slightly dredge the slices with flour, and
fry in about three ounces of butter, seasoning with salt and
pepper. Place them on a dish, slightly overlapping each
other, and to form a circle. Warm half a pint of good gravy,
with a tablespoonful of Harvey’s sauce and one lump of sugar.
When heated, pour into the centre of the ring of slices and
serve.


Bubble and Squeak —Chop one pound each cold
cooked potatoes and cabbage. Fry with a good-sized bit of
butter and a seasoning of pepper and salt. Keep hot while
you fry some slices of cold boiled beef lightly. Place on the
dish in alternate layers the slices of meat and the fried
vegetables. Pile high.
Hashed Beef —put some good gravy into a stewpan,
with two tablespoonfuls of Worcestershire sauce, one of
ketchup, a little pepper and salt, and a bit of butter rolled in
flour. Let all simmer for fifteen minutes. Remove from the
fire, cool, and take off every particle of fat. Slice some cold
roast beef, dust each with flour, and lay them in the gravy.
Stew for ten minutes more without boiling, and serve,
garnished with toast sippets.
Minced Beef —Mince a pound and a half of beef and
six ounces of bacon with two small onions. Season highly
with nutmeg and pepper. Take a sufficient quantity of good
stock, heat in a stewpan, and add the mince. Put in a hit of
butter rolled in flour, and simmer for a few minutes to thicken
it. Serve with triangular toast sippets around the dish, and
bits of hard-boiled egg on each sippet. Or send the hash to
table surrounded by a wall of mashed potatoes, and two
whole poached eggs lying on the top of the mince.
TRIPE.
Nothing is more disgusting than ill-cleaned tripe. Assure
yourself of its being thoroughly treated before selecting. Cut
away the coarse fat, and boil in equal parts of milk and water
for twenty minutes to half an hour. Boil separately four
large onions for two pounds of tripe. Strain, and when you
have dished the tripe, add the cooked onions to the milk and
water, and thicken with a bit of butter rolled in flour. Boil
up and pour over the tripe.
Tripe is, by some cooks, fried in batter, and sent to table
with melted butter.
Tripe Roasted —Trim some good-sized pieces of tripe.
Spread forcemeat over each bit, roll them up separately, and
fasten each with a small spit. Tie on a spit, and roast before
the fire for ten minutes, basting with butter, and dredging
with flour. Serve, garnished with slices of lemon, and send
melted butter to table with this dish.


MUTTON.
Roast Haunch of Mutton— Let the haunch hang as
long as possible, trim and saw off the shank-bone; cover all
over the upper side with sheets of buttered paper, and hang
within about fifteen inches of a clear fire ; roast very slowly
for two hours, basting constantly. When nearly done,
increase the heat to brown it; sprinkle with fine salt, dredge
with flour, and baste with butter to froth it. Serve with good
brown gravv, and send red currant jelly sauce to table with it.
Boiled Leg of Mutton— Allow a quarter of an hour
to the pound ; cut off the shank, trim and wipe the leg very
clean. Place it in a pan with enough of cold water to quite
float it; skim carefully as the scum rises, and boil slowly
according to size. From two hours to two and a half is the
usual time. Dish with a frill of cut paper round the knuckle
joint; garnish with mashed turnips, formed into the shape of
eggs, alternately with round pieces of carrot. Serve with
caper sauce in a tureen.
Leg Of Mutton Roasted— Hang a leg for roasting as
long as possible, wipe very dry, and dust with pepper and flour.
Trim off the knuckle and a bit of the flank. Have a little
salt and water in the dripping pan, and when the meat is
before the fire, baste well with it for a few minutes ; baste
after with the gravy as it drips ; allow twenty minutes to the
pound; serve with brown gravy in the dish, and currant
jelly separately. A wether leg of mutton roasts best.
Two joints may be made of the leg, by boiling the knuckle
and placing a layer of paste over the cut part of the thick end
to keep in the gravy. This may then be roasted as above.
Saddle Of Mutton —Cover the fat with well greased
paper, and roast as for haunch. A few minutes before draw-
ing from the fire, remove the paper, dredge with flour, and
baste with butter to brown and froth the joint. A good gravy
may be made from the dripping pan, wiiich pom.' over on the
dish. Red currant jelly sauce.
Roast Shoulder of Mutton— Spit the shoulder close
along the shank-bone and along the blade-bone. This joint
should not be basted, but simply rubbed with butter once or
twice. It requires a brisk fire and the usual time, and is served
with onion sauce. Some prefer this joint baked, and stuffed


with onion stuffing. The stuffing is inserted under the skin
at the thick end of the shoulder, which is raised with the
knife.
Boast Loin of Mutton —The loin, having so much
fat, is not an economical joint, but the meat is especially tender
and juicy if good. Roast and baste carefully for a quarter of
an hour to the pound, and brown and froth as directed fo
previous joints. Serve with its own gravv.
A Kebobbed Loin of Mutton— Remove the skin from
the outside of the loin and nearly all the fat from other parts.
Joint and cut into slices at every bone. Mince a bunch of
sweet herbs, and grate a small nutmeg. Add a little pepper
and salt and some bread crumbs. Dip each chop into the
beaten yolks of three eggs, and sprinkle each with the crumbs
and seasoning. Lay the chops together in the form they were
before being separated, tie them together and fasten on a
spit. Roast and baste well, allowing a quarter of an hour to
the pound. Serve in a hot dish, with a pint of good gravy
poured round. Season the gravy, previously thickened, and
add two spoonfuls of ketchup.
Stewed Neck of Mutton —Take four or five pounds
neck of mutton and trim off the fat. Lay in a stewpan, dust
with pepper and salt, and add a little more than a pint of
water. Simmer very gently for two hours and a half. Draw
the broth off the meat, cool, and skim it thoroughly. Add
two sprigs of chopped parsley, a little cayenne pepper, and a
bit of butter rolled in flour ; boil for twenty minutes, and pour
over the meat when served.
Mutton Cutlets with Tomato Sauce— A lean
breast is most suitable. Trim them, and chop into cutlets.
Shape the cutlets by chopping off the chine-bone, and beat
them fiat. Remove the fat from the top of the rib-bone.
Season with salt and pepper, and brush each over with beaten
yolk of egg. Dip in bread crumbs, and fry in two ounces
of butter for ten minutes. Drain them on a cloth, and
arrange, overlapped in a circle, upon a hot dish, and place
some good tomato sauce in the middle of the circle.
Breast of Mutton with Green Peas— A lean
breast is best. Out into small pieces, and fry in butter till of
a light brown. Add a chopped onion or shalot, and a minced
bunch of sweet herbs. Dredge in a little flour and a seasoning


of pepper and salt. Barely cover with water, and stew for
about two hours. When the meat is quite tender, take it out,
skim off all fat from the gravy, strain it, and return with the
meat to the pan to thoroughly heat. Have boiled a quart of
young peas, and just before lifting, add them to the meat and
gravy. Serve very hot.
Mutton Cutlets— Take a pound and a half of loin
cutlets, take off about an inch from each end of the bone of
each cutlet, place them in a stewpan in which you have melted
two ounces of butter. Season with pepper and salt, and stew
ten minutes, closely covered, so as to prevent colouring. Take
them out, and when they are nearly cold spread them over
with the following mixtureA bunch of chopped thyme and
parsley, bound with the yolk of one or two eggs. Dust over
each a little cayenne pepper. When the seasoning mixture is
spread over the cutlets, broil them on a gridiron a nice brown.
Serve with lemon juice squeezed over.
Mutton Cutlets ala Maintenon— Fry the cutlets
when you have nicely trimmed them, take them out, and allow
them to cool. Mince a bunch of thyme and parsley, and mix
with bread crumbs, seasoned lightly with salt and pepper.
Spread this evenly over the cutlets, wrap them carefully in
buttered white paper, and broil over a clear fire. Serve in the
papers, and with gravy in a tureen. The paper absorbs the
fat of the meat.
Mutton Chops Broiled— Chops may be cut from
the best end of loin or neck. They ought to he trimmed
nicely, and the skin, with most of the fat, removed. Heat
the gridiron over a hot, clear fire. While cooking, turn them
often, to retain the gravy. Season with pepper and salt, and
put a bit of fresh butter over each chop as you dish them.
Send to table very hot. Chops will broil in about ten minutes.
Haricot of Mutton— Trim and remove superfluous
fat from two pounds of loin chops, and fry them, with two
sliced onions and a good bit of butter, until a nice brown.
Pour half a pint of gravy, which you have thickened with a
little flour, over the chops. Stew slowly for nearly an hour.
Have ready two parboiled carrots, two ditto turnips, and half
a head of celery. Cut the carrots and turnips into shapes,
and the celery into slices. Add to the meat and gravy, and
simmer all for twenty minutes. Season with pepper and salt,


add a glass of port wine and two spoonfuls of ketchup, boil
up, and serve.
Irish Stew —Two pounds and a half of lean chops and
eight moderate-sized potatoes. Pee], and slice the potatoes
and put them in alternate layers with the chops, strewing each
layer with a part of four chopped onions and a dust of salt and
pepper. Pour in nearly a quart of water, and stew for about
two hours. By that time the gravy ought to be nearly
absorbed. Serve very hot.
Hashed Mutton —Cut cold mutton into thin slices,
and stew the bones of the joint with half a head of celery
sliced, a bunch of sweet herbs, a few peppercorns and allspice,
and a pint and a half of water. Stew slowly for an hour.
Pry an onion cut into rings a nice brown, and add to the
contents of the stewpan. Simmer for ten minutes, strain
through a hair sieve. Cool, remove the fat, and return to the
stewpan. Dredge the slices of meat with flour, and lay them
in the gravy. Add two spoonfuls of ketchup, one of brown-
ing, and a little salt. Heat, but do not boil, and serve with
sippets of toast round the dish.
Sheep’s Head —This is a favourite Scotch dish, and is
much better flavoured when it is singed instead of skinned.
Soak it, wash thoroughly, and saw lengthways in two parts.
Take out the brains and wash the head well. Lay in a stew-
pan with two carrots, a stick of celery, two onions, five cloves,
a little thyme, salt and pepper. Add three quarts of water
and simmer for two hours. Have prepared some parsley
sauce made with melted butter, and mix with it the finely
chopped brains you have previously boiled. Pour this on
the dish, and lay the halves of the head upon it. The broth
may be served as soup.
Haggis (Scotch Receipt)— Thoroughly clean and
boil the heart, tongue, and part of the liver of a sheep.
Mince them all finely, and mix with a cupful of bread
crumbs, and one of oatmeal. Season with pepper and salt,
and a little dried thyme and marjoram rubbed very fine.
Add a glass of port wine and two well beaten eggs. __ Three
ounces of chopped fat bacon, or finely minced suet, will be
an improvement. Have the stomach of the sheep most
thoroughly cleaned, soak in warm water for two hours, and
then in strong salt and water for half an hour. Half fill the
stomach with the mixture, sew up, and boil for six hours.


LAMB.
Roast Leg Of Lamb— a leg of lamb will weigh about
six pounds, and a quarter of an hour may be allowed to the
pound in cooking all joints of lamb. In roasting the leg, do not
hang it too near the fire, but baste frequently. About a quarter
of an hour before it is done move it closer to the fire, dredge
with flour and baste with hot butter to froth it. Pour the
fat from the dripping pan, and make a gravy by adding a
little salt and a cupful of boiling water. Serve with this
gravy strained over the meat. Send also to table with it
mint sauce and a salad.
Roast Target of Lamb —A target of lamb makes a
very nice small joint although it is only the breast and neck
undivided. Trim the neck, chop the ribs and saw off the
chine-bone. Place a buttered paper over the joint and roast
before a bright fire-*—it will take about an hour and a quarter.
Froth and brown by dredging with flour and basting with
butter as for other joints, and serve with made gravy in the
dish, and mint sauce in a tureen.
Roast Shoulder of Lamb— The shoulder will require
almost constant basting to prevent burning. Allow the same
time in roasting as above, and serve with made gravy in the
dish, and with mint sauce.
Roast Forequarter of Lamb— Trim the shoulder
and saw off the chine and shank bone. See that the ribs are
half sawn, and the leg jointed. Break the bone of the
shoulder, twist it round and fasten with a skewer. Cover
with buttered paper to roast. Just before it is done, take off
the paper, dust with salt, dredge with flour, and baste with
butter. Take out the skewer and twist a paper frill round the
shank. Serve with mint sauce, and with made gravy in the
dish. Send to table with this joint a lemon cut in halves,
some cayenne and a bit of fresh butter. When the. shoulder
is lifted by the carver, the butter is placed between it and the
ribs, the lemon, dipped in cayenne, squeezed over, and the
shoulder returned to its place before helping.
Saddle of Lamb— A saddle of lamb is roasted covered
over with, buttered paper, and the joint is frothed and browned
before lifting. It is better to be basted first with butter and
then with its own dripping. Mint sauce.


Boiled Leg Of Lamb —Soak the leg in warm water
for a couple of hours, wrap in a cloth and boil slowly,
allowing fifteen minutes to the pound. When serving, twist
cut paper round the shank-bone, and garnish the border of
the dish with cauliflower, turnips, or carrots. Send to table
with parsley and butter sauce poured over.
Lamb’s Head —Lamb’s head served in the following way
makes a delicious dish :—Bemove the brains and soak the head
in water for two hours, then boil slowly for one hour, when
remove from the pan and brush it over with the beaten yolk
of an egg. Cover thickly with bread crumbs and again repeat
the egg and bread crumbs. Dust with salt and pepper, and
brown well in a hot oven. While the head is cooking, scald,
cool, and mince the pluck fine. Boil the brains for ten minutes
in vinegar and water, and mince also. Put the pluck and
brains into a stewpan with a tablespoonful of chopped parsley,
and a little good stock. Stew for a quarter of an hour, mix
in the juice of half a lemon, seasoning of pepper and salt, and
the yolk of an egg beat up with a tablespoonful of cream.
Boil up, spread the mince on a hot dish, lay the lamb’s head
on it, and serve.
Lamb’s Fry —Boil a pound of lamb’s fry for fifteen
minutes, lift and drain it well. Brush it over with beaten
yolk of egg, and cover over with bread crumbs seasoned with
pepper and salt and mixed with chopped parsley. Fry in
clarified dripping until it is a nice brown, and serve on a
napkin garnished with fried parsley.
Lamb Chops —Cut loin chops not more than three-
quarters of an inch thick. Broil them, taking care to have a
nice, clear fire—they will broil in about ten minutes. Serve
with a -wall of mashed potatoes around them and fried parsley
strewed over.
Lamb Cutlets and Green Peas—Two and a half
pounds of cutlets from the best end of the neck of lamb.
Trim the skin and greater part of the fat off, and chop off part
of the chine-bone. Dip in well-beaten yolk of egg and inline
bread crumbs seasoned with salt and pepper. Dip again into
clarified butter, and sprinkle over them more bread crumbs.
Fry eight or ten minutes, turning as required. Pile some
nicely boiled green peas in the centre of a dish and lay the
cutlets around them. Serve very hot.


VEAL.
To Xtoast a Fillet of Veal— Having taken out the
bone of the joint, cut deeply between the fillet and udder,
and fill the incision with forcemeat or veal stuffing. Fold up
round, and fasten with skewers and twine. Spit it through
the centre, cover with buttered paper, and place it, not too
near the fire, but nearer as it cooks gradually. A little before
it is done, take off the paper, flour and baste with butter in
the usual manner for frothing. Replace the skewers with a
silver one. Have melted butter, with a little brown gravy
and half the juice of a lemon mixed in, ready, and pour it
over the fillet. Garnish the dish with slices of lemon, and
send ham, bacon, or pickled pork to table with it. Or
croquettes of potato, shaped like pears, with the stems of
parsley, may be used to garnish as preferred.
Roast Breast of Veal— Remove the tendons, and
skewer the sweetbread to the joint. Cover with well-buttered
paper, and roast for about an hour and a quarter. Melted
butter is served witb the breast, and it is garnished vath thin
slices of lemon. An entree may be made of the sweetbread
and tendons if preferred.
Roast Loin of Veal— A good loin will weigh about
seven pounds, and take three hours to roast. Treat it, as
above, with buttered paper, and dredge, baste, and troth
before removing from the fire. Serve with melted butter
poured over. The kidney may be served separately on toast.
Roast Shoulder of Veal —Take off the knuckle and
roast, allowing twenty minutes to the pound, it may be
stuffed as for shoulder of mutton, but is more delicate served
with oyster or mushroom sauce and garnished with slices ot
lemon.
Calf’s Head, to Prepare— As the colonial Cookery
Book will penetrate to many a liome where a calf s head
cannot be procured ready for cooking from the butcher, I give
here plain directions for preparing it. Soak the head for a
little while in warm water, and then take it out and dust it with,
powdered resin. The resin facilitates the removal of the hair.


Then plunge it into scalding water, and carefully scrape off
the hair. When clean, take out the eyes, saw the head
lengthways in halves, take out the brains, and remove the
tongue. Break the jaw bones, take away the gums and teeth,
and lay the head in warm water to draw out the blood and
blanch.
Calf’s Head Boiled- -Have sufficient water in the pan
to float the head, and simmer it gently for an hour and a half.
Skim as the scum rises. Serve with slices of lemon and little
heaps of fried parsley round the dish, and with melted parsley
butter over the head. Ham or bacon is eaten with it.
Calf’s Brains and Tongue —Having separated the
lobes of the brain, soak them in cold salt and water for an
hour, then drain and cover with boiling water. Clean and
skin the lobes, and simmer in half a pint of water for ten
minutes ; skim carefully as the scum rises. Brain and mince
the brains, and place them in a stewpan with a little chopped
parsley and thyme, a bay leaf, two tablespoonfuls of cream or
melted butter, the juice of a quarter of a lemon, and a little
pepper and salt. Stir well together and warm thoroughly.
Boil the calf’s tongue for two hours, cut off the roots and
skin it, lay in the middle of the dish, and arrange the brains
around it.
Hashed Calf’s Head —Cut up, but do not mince
small, the remains of a boiled calf’s head. Boil in a quart of
broth a carrot, a small onion, a bunch of savoury herbs, and
two blades of mace. Boil until it is reduced to a pint, and
strain. Return to the pan and add the juice of a lemon, a
glass and a half of white wine, two spoonfuls of ketchup, and
a bit of butter rolled in flour. Lay in the pieces of the head,
warm xip to boiling point, and serve on a dish. Grarnish with
rolls of fried bacon and forcemeat balls.
Fricandeau of Veal —A fricandeau of veal is a pretty-
looking as well as appetising dish. Cut a thick slice of veal,
weighing three or four pounds, from the fillet, and when you
have trimmed it neatly into shape, lard it in cross lines with
fat bacon. Cut one carrot, one turnip, and one head of celery
into slices, and lay them in the bottom of a stewpan, with a
bunch of savoury herbs, two blades of mace, two bay leaves,
and five allspice. Cover over all these with slices of bacon,
and lay the fricandeau on the top. Sprinkle it with salt, and
pour around enough of good gravy to cover the bacon, but not


to touch the fricandeau. Simmer gently for nearly three
hours, basting frequently with the gravy. When done, take
it out, strain, and skim off the fat, and return the gravy to
the pan. Boil it quickly to a strong glaze. Lay a puree of
green peas on the dish, place the fricandeau on them, and
ur over the glaze.
Knuckle of Veal Boiled— To boil the knuckle allow
twenty minutes to the pound. Cover with cold water, and
boil very slowly, adding a spoonful of salt when it comes to
the boil. Skim carefully. Send to table with parsley and
butter sauce, and pickled pork to eat with it. Q-reen peas or
stewed cucumbers are usually served with this dish.
Stewed Knuckle of Veal and Rice -Make the
nuckle small by taking off some cutlets, and, having broken
the shank-bone and thoroughly washed, stew slowly, and skim
for three-quarters of an hour. Add a half pound of rice, one
onion, two blades of mace, and a little salt, and stew all
together for two hours more. Lay the knuckle on a dish, and
pour over it the rice, &c., that remains.
Veal Stewed with. Vegetables— About three pounds
will make a nice dish. Wash well in cold water, cut into
middling small pieces, and barely cover with water in a
stewpan. Add a teaspoonful each of salt and pepper. Cover
closely, simmer for twenty minutes, and skim. Have prepared
two small carrots cut into slices and ornamented with a cutter
if you have one. Boil the slices until nearly cooked. Scald
and chop up two sprigs of parsley. Slice a leek, and peel and
cut into quarters six potatoes. When the meat has simmered
the time indicated, add to it a quarter of a pound of fresh
butter. Dredge it over with a little browned flour and put in
all the vegetables. Stew for half an hour. Place the meat
on a dish, arrange the vegetables around it, and pour over the
gravy.
Veal Cutlets— Chop fine a bunch of sweet herbs, and mix
with some fine bread crumbs. Hare the cutlets very small,
and dip each into well-beaten yolk of egg and then into the
crumbs and chopped herbs. Fry in butter, and when done hit
them out of the pan. Pour a little water into the pan and
mix into it the grated peel of half a lemon, a dust of flour, and
a little grated nutmeg. Lay the cutlets in this gravy, and heat
thoroughly. Serve garnished with rolls of thin fried bacon.


CalFs Liver and Bacon— After the liver has been
well soaked m cold water, dry it and cut into thin narrow
slices. For each slice of liver allow one of bacon. Fry the
bacon till it rolls, when remove it to a very hot plate, then
dust the liver with pepper, salt and flour, and fry in the same
pan until of a nice brown. Arrange on the dish alternately
with rolls of the bacon. Drain the fat from the pan, and add
a good bit of butter rolled in flour, the juice of a lemon, and a
cupful of hot water. Boil up and pour into the middle of the
dish, iou may also garnish with forcemeat balls and slices
of lemon.
PORK.
For the benefit of country residents, or those who raise their
own pigs, and cannot secure the services of a butcher, the
following directions for scalding a sucking pig and preparing
it for cooking are given :
To Scald a Sucking Pig— Have ready a large vessel
of boiling water. Dip the pig for ten minutes in cold water,
and then plunge it into the boiling water. Hold it by the
head, and shake it about in the water, until the hairs begin to
loosen. Take it out, lay it upon a table, and with a coarse
cloth rub off all the hairs ; you must rub back-wards or against
the grain. When thoroughly clean, wipe well, cut it open
and remove the entrails ; wash well in plenty of cold water,
and dry it with a cloth. Cutoff the feet at the first joint, being
careful to leave enough of skin to cover the bone. Poll a very
wet cloth around it, until you are ready to stuff and cook. A
sucking pig should not be more than a month old, and is
better cooked within twenty-four hours of its being killed.
To Bake the Pig —Fill the inside with a forcemeat
for which you will find directions elsewhere ; a veal forcemeat
is most generally preferred, and sew up with a strong thread.
Skewer the fore legs back, and the hind legs forward. Having
dried it well with a cloth, rub the pig all over with a little
flour. Place in a brisk oven for an hour and a half or two
hours, according to the size of the pig, basting frequently with
butter or its own gravy. When about to serve, cut off the head
and split it in halves ; cut the body in halves, from the tail
upwards, also, with a very sharp knife. Arrange on the
dish flat, with the backs together, a half of the head at


each end, and an ear at each side. Pour over a little thin
melted butter, with a squeeze of lemon juice in it.
Serve with bread, tomato, or apple sauce, and send to table
in a tureen its own gravy, to which you have put a little
cayenne pepper.
To Roast a Leg of Pork— A leg of not more than six
or seven pounds is best. Use a very sharp knife to score the
rind, and let the scores be pretty close together, round and not
lengthways on the joint. Place it at some distance from the
fire and roast slowly, allowing twenty minutes for each pound
of pork. Baste constantly with its own dripping, and serve
with tomato or apple sauce, or brown gravy.
To Bake and Stuff a Leg of Pork— Having scored
the leg as for roasting, cut a long slit in the knuckle, and raise
the skin as far as you can, stuff in as much sage and onion
stuffing as possible and skewer up the opening. Grease a
baking tin and bake in a moderate oven, allowing twenty
minutes to the pound, and basting frequently. Before you
draw the leg from the oven, rub it all over with butter, and
dredge with flour, then close the oven until it has browned
and crisped. Serve on a very hot dish, with a little made
gravy over, and with apple sauce in a tureen.
To Roast a Loin of Pork —Score a loin of pork of
about five pounds weight, and place before the fire, but at a
good distance, as pork requires to be cooked slowly. Baste
frequently with its own dripping ; it will take two hours and
a half. Serve with gravy you have made in the drip pan
poured over, and with apple sauce in a tureen.
A loin of pork may be stuffed with sage and onion stuffing
and baked in the oven, or the stuffing may be baked separately
and served as sauce with the joint.
To Boil a Leg of Pork —Bub a nice small leg of pork
well with salt, and allow it to lie for seven or eight days,
turning and re-rubbing with salt every day. When you are
going to cook it lay it in cold water for half an hour to whiten.
Lay in a pan with plenty of cold water, and allow it to boil
slowly. Time, a quarter of an hour for each pound. Serve
on a hot dish, with a garnish of turnips or parsnips. Serve
pease pudding with a boiled leg of pork and green vegetables.
To Boil a Ham —The ham must, he soaked in plenty of
water for twenty-four hours. When it has been soaked,
scrape it, clean and trim off any skin or loose bits neatly. Boil


in plenty of water with a few cloves, a blade of mace, a bit of
thyme, and a couple of bay leaves. It will take from four to
five hours according to its size. Eemove the boiler from the
fire, and leave the ham in the water until it cools. Take it
out and skin it very carefully. Press out all the fat you can
with a cloth laid over the ham, and then dust with bread
raspings, or glaze thickly, when quite cold ; serve garnished
with parsley or aspic jelly, and with the knuckle ornamented
with a cut paper frill, and flowers stamped from vegetables.
To Bake a Haiti' —Soak the ham for twelve hours, trim
away all rusty parts, and wipe it very dry. Make a paste of
flour and water, and cover rather thickly with it. Bake in
an earthenware dish for four hours, and in a moderate oven.
When done take off the crust and skin carefully. Easp bread
over the fat parts or glaze, and serve garnished with cut
vegetables, and with a paper frill round the knuckle.
To Boil Bacon— Soak in soft water for a couple of
hours before cooking, or longer, if the bacon is very salt.
Boil gently with plenty of water in a stewpan, allowing about
half an hour to each pound. If it is a nice piece, the skin may
be removed as for ham, and bread rasped over it while hot.
Bacon is served with veal or fowls, or with green peas alone.
Pickled Pork —Pickled pork should be nicely streaked,
and the belly is considered the best- Boil very gently,
allowing less than a quarter of an hour to the pound. Serve
with boiled greens around.
Pigs’ Tongues —Parboil the tongues, and remove the
skins. Put them in a dish, salt and lay a heavy weight on
them for a week, keeping them well covered all the time.
Dry them well, and push them into large sausage skins, tie up
each end and hang them to smoke.
To Roast a Pig’s Head —Place the head in a pan
with cold water, and boil it until you can remove the bones.
Eub it well over with minced sage, and plenty of pepper and
salt. It will take about half an hour to roast, and must be
well basted. Serve with a good gravy poured over, and with
apple sauce in a tureen.
Pig’s Head Boiled —Lay in salt for a week, wash, and
boil the head for one hour and a half. Let it boil very gently,
and send to table with vegetables.


Saveloys —The pork must be young. Skin it, remove
the bones, and lay in pickle for three days. Wash, dry, and
mince it very fine. Chop a dozen sage leaves fine, and season
with pepper. Mix with the sage one pound of bread crumbs.
Be sure that the skins are thoroughly clean, fill them with the
mixture, and boil or bake for half an hour. Saveloys may be
eaten either hot or cold.
Cambridge Sausage— Mince finely a quarter of a
pound of veal, a quarter of a pound of beef, naif
a pound of bacon, half a pound of pork, and half
a pound of beef suet. The meat must be lean, and
free from bone or gristle. Add a few chopped sage leaves and
sweet herbs. Mix all well, and season highly with pepper
and salt. Fill perfectly cleaned skins with the mixture, and
fasten the ends well. Throw them into boiling water, and,
when they swell, pierce each two or three times with a
darning needle to prevent bursting. An hour will boil them.
Oxford Sausages— Chop very fine one pound of lean
veal, one pound of young pork, fat and lean together, and one
pound of beef suet. Mix together with a pound of grated
bread, the peel of half a lemon, cut small, a grated nutmeg,
one teaspoonful of pepper, and two of salt, six sage leaves, and
a small bunch of herbs, all chopped fine. Fill the skins, and
when required fry to a nice brown in butter. They should be
served very hot.
Bologna Sausages —Boil three pounds of lean beef and
three pounds of lean pork for half an hour, put the meat in
when the water is boiling. Take two pounds of fat bacon,
and a pound and a half of beef suet. Chop very fine each
article separately. Season with a little chopped thyme, a
little ground mace, and pepper and salt. Mix all well, and
put the mixture in well cleaned ox skins. Tie them in proper
lengths, and lay in beef brine for ten days. Hang them up to
smoke, and when they are smoked, rub each with ground
ginger or pepper. They should be kept in a cool, dry place.
Black Puddings —The blood for black puddings must
be taken while hot. Add two teaspoonfuls of salt to a quart
of blood and stir till quite cold, stirring in also a quart of
groats or oatmeal. Let it soak for one night. Crumble a
small loaf and soak it in two quarts of hot mdk. Chop hne
three pounds of beef suet and a little savoury and thyme. Mix
with the suet and herbs two teaspoonfuls of salt, one ot
pepper, half a teaspoonful of allspice, half a grated nutmeg,


six cloves, and a little grated ginger. Beat up six eggs, strain
and mix in the suet and seasoning. Add the milk and bread,
and the blood and groats Mix thoroughly and fill large skins.
As you are filling, put in here and there bits of pork fat in
rather large bits. Boil for half an hour, piercing with a
needle, dry well, and hang up.
When to be used, scald for a few minutes and set before the
fire in an oven for ten minutes.
White _ Puddings —One pound of oatmeal, one pound
of finely-minced beef suet, and half a pound of bread crumbs.
Season with two teaspoonfuls of salt and one of pepper.
Thoroughly wash and dry and chop a small bunch of parsley,
leaving out every bit of stalk, and mix all togethei Fill the
skins, and boil for one hour. They must bf pierced as they
swell, to prevent bursting When boiled, dry with a cloth
and hang up. To prepare for use, toast in an oven or steam
over potatoes for a few minutes.
VENISON
A haunch of venison usually weighs about twenty or
twenty-five pounds. Trim off the knuckle partially, and saw
off the chine-bone ; fold over the flap and cover with a
paste made of flour and water only. The paste should be
rolled to about an inch thick; cover all well and tie up in
strong paper-hanging it rather near the fire until the paste
is well hardened, basting the paper occasionally. When the
paste has crusted, draw back a little from the fire, which
should be a strong one, and, of course, clear. Eoast for
about four hours, when try with a skewer if it is done—the
skewer will penetrate easily if the haunch is cooked. When
done remove the paper and paste, glaze and salamander the
top, and serve with a frill round the knuckle, and strong
gravy.
Send to table with red currant jelly in a glass dish, and
with delicately green French beans.
Heck of Venison —Neck of venison may be treated in
the same way as the haunch, with paste and paper. Allow
a quarter of an hour for every poiurd as the time for roasting.


Tn Hash Venison— Slice cold, roast venison into thin,
ne^lkefL d“Tem with . little .alt. Putm jour
stewpan a little mutton broth, and any gravy you maj have
from the venison. Add the bones, trimmings, &c. ; ®nmc
for an hour, and strain. Put an ounce and a liaLt oi
butter, a spoonful of flour, and a pinch of salt to brawni m
a stewpan over the fire. When it is brown, add the steamed
gravy, three tablespoonfuls of port wine, a pmch of cayenne,
and half a shallot. Boil up, draw to the side of the fire an
lav in the slices of venison ; heat thoroughly, the
shallot and serve, garnished with very small forcemeat bails.
Bed currant jelly is eaten with venison hash.
POULTRY.
■Roast Turkey— Having carefully cleaned the bird,
break tbe leg bones close to tbe feet and draw out tbe thigh
strings. Cut all tbe neck off, pushing back the skm so as to
leave enough of skin to turn over the back Take out the
crop and loosen the liver and gut at the throat end. Carefully
cut the vent, and draw out the gizzard and liver taking great
care to avoid breaking the gall bladder which, if broken will
give a very disagreeable bitterness to the bird. Avoid break-
fng the gizzard also, as grit may escape. The bird must
not be washed; use a wet cloth to thoroughly clean the inside
Cut the breast-bone on each side close to the back. Draw the
legs close to the crop, and beat the breast down with a rolling
pin, being careful to lay a cloth over first. Leave the legs on
the bird.
Stuff the inside with sausage or veal forcemeat, and fasten
the neck skin over the back. Skewer the pinions and thighs to
the body with a skewer long enough to pass through both
pinions/ Having cleaned the liver and gizzard, tuck one under
each wing and turn the points of the pinions on the back of
the bird. Tie a string from point to head of the skewer, pass-
ing it over the back to keep the legs and pinions close to the
bodv Fasten a sheet of buttered white paper over the breast,
and roast before a good, bright fire from two hours to two
hours and a half. Baste frequently with butter. Before
removing from the fire take off the paper, dredge lightly with


flour, and baste with the butter until the hird is nicely
browned. Serve garnished with forcemeat balls, and with
brown gravy poured over. Send bread sauce to table with
roast turkey.
Boiled Turkey— Truss a turkey for boiling almost as
for roasting, only that the legs are pushed back under the skin
before being skewered, and the ends of the legs tied to the
body with a string to keep them straight. A boiled turkey is
not stuffed. Tie it in a white cloth, and put into hot, but not
boiling water. Bring slowly to the boil, and boil slowly for
an hour and a half, or more, according to the size of the bird.
Serve with a little oyster or celery sauce, or parsley and butter
poured over, and the remainder of the sauce in a tureen.
Hashed Turkey —Cut the white meat of cold turkey
into slices. Score the legs, dredge them, and broil a nice
brown. Slice the peel of a lemon very fine, and pour over it
in a stewpan half a pint of good gravy. Add a bit of butter
rolled in flour, pepper and salt, and a spoonful of ketchup.
Put in the slices of cold turkey, and shake over the fire until
hot through.
Serve on a dish with the legs you have broiled laid on the
top, and sippets of toast around the dish.
Broiled Legs of Turkey —Cut off the legs from a
cold, roast turkey, score and season them highly with pepper,
salt, and cayenne. Sprinkle a little lemon juice over them,
and broil on a well-buttered gridiron. They will brown nicely
in a quarter of an hour if the fire is hot and clear. Serve
very hot, and with a piece of butter on each leg. Be sure that
the dish you send them on to table is hot.
To Truss and Roast a Goose— Having well cleaned
and stubbed the bird, cut the feet and pinions off at the first
joint. Cut off the neck close to the back, leaving the skin to
turn over. Draw out the gullet and tie a knot at the end.
Pass in your finger and loosen the liver, and gut at the throat
end. Cut the bird open between the vent and the rump, and
draw out the entrails. Wipe the inside thoroughly with a
clean cloth, and flatten the breast bone with a rolling pin.
Draw the legs up and skewer through the wing and middle of
the leg. Skewer in the same way on the other side of the bird.
Pass a small skewer through the small of the legs on each side,
and skewer down to the side and through the body. Cut off
the vent, making a hole sufficiently large to button over the
rump.


Fill the goose with sage and onion stuffing, fasten up the
rump, and tie the neck skin back. It will take from one hour
and a half to two hours to roast, according to size and weight,
and must be frequently basted. Remove the skewers and
serve hot with good gravy on the dish. Send up gravy and
apple sauce in tureens with roast goose.
To Stew Giblets— Dor one set of giblets allow a quart
of gravy. Clean, wash, and cut in pieces the giblets, and stew
them in the gravy for an hour and a half, with a few sage
leaves, a bunch of thyme and parsley, an onion and a seasoning
of pepper and salt. When the giblets are done, strain the
gravy, and add a glass of white wine and a piece of butter
rolled in flour. Trim the giblets, return to the gravy, boil up
for a minute or two, and serve.
To Roast a Duck— Truss the duck as a goose is
trussed, only leave on the teet, and turn them close to the legs.
Allow the duck to hang for at least a day, or longer if it will
keep. A pair is usually cooked, and one stuffed with sage and
onion stuffing, the other being simply seasoned inside with
pepper and salt. Roast before a clear fire, and constantly
baste until done. A few minutes before taking them from the
fire, dredge with flour, and baste with butter this makes
them froth and brown. Serve hot, with good, brown gravy
poured around on the dish. Send brown gravy in a tureen to
table with the ducks. Green peas are always served with
ducks when they are procurable.
Stewed Duck —Pick snd draw the duck and stuff it
with forcemeat, with a few chopped sage leaves mixed with the
forcemeat. Stew the giblets in a little water with two chopped
onions and a seasoning of pepper and salt. Pet them simmer
until the gravy is very good, then remove the giblets, and
having laid the duck in a stewpan, pour the gravy and onions
over it, and stew, closely covered, for two hours. Add a glass
of port wine to the gravy. Dish up the duck, squeeze over it
the juice of a lemon, and serve with gravy round, and garnish
with fried bread.
To Truss and Roast a Fowl— Pick and singe the
fowl, and cut off the neck close to the back. Remove the crop
and loosen the liver, etc., at the neck end. Cut off the vent,
draw, wash out, and well wipe the inside dry, and flatten the
breast bone. Pass a skewer through the first joint of the
pinion and through the middle of the leg and body. Skewer
the other side in like manner. Cut the nails off the feet and


skewer them also. Clean, and put the gizzard and liver under
the pinions. Singe the fowl carefully when you have trussed
it, fasten over the breast a bit of white, buttered paper, and
roast for three-quarters of an hour, basting constantly. Before
serving take the paper off, dredge the bird with flour and baste
with warmed butter. When nicely browned send to table on a
hot dish with brown gravy poured over.
Serve bread sauce and brown gravy in tureens with roast
fowl.
To Truss and Boil Fowls or Chickens—Bor
boiling, fowls are trussed almost as for roasting, the only
difference being that the thighs are pushed under the skin
before being skewered, and the points of the pinions passed
over the back. A string is also tied around the legs and the
rump to keep the legs in place.
When trussed, flour a cloth well and fold them in it, cover
with hot water and bring them gradually to a boil. Skim as
the scum rises, and only allow them to simmer—boiling fowls
quickly is sure to destroy the colour, and make them look lean.
Simmer from a half to one hour, according to age, and when
done, lift, and remove the skewers. Serve with either parsley
and butter, oyster, celery, lemon, or white sauce poured over
and in a tureen.
Boiled tongue or ham is usually served with fowl.
HABES AND BABBITS.
To Truss a Hare— The fore legs should be cut off at
the first joint, and the hind legs left entire when skinned.
The ears also, and the tail should be skinned and left entire.
Having well cleaned, cut the sinews under the hind legs, and
lay them forward close against the body, passing a skewer
through both, and the body. Turn the fore legs back, and
skewer them also. Skewer the head back to between the
shoulders, by passing a skewer in through the mouth and
back part of the head. Wash out and wipe the inside dry,
rub with pepper and salt, and stuff. When it is stuffed sew
up the opening, and pass a string from skewer to skewer
around the body.
To ElOast a Hare —Stuff the hare with good veal
stuffing, and sew it up. When trussed, as above,, place to
the fire, and baste well with milk for half an hour. Then


baste with butter for an hour or more, according to size.
Before taking from the fire, dredge it with flour, and baste
with butter —this froths it. Take it up on a hot dish, remove
the skewers, and serve with good gravy in the dish, and in a
tureen. The hare is placed on the dish on its belly, and the
ears should be crisp and lying back.
Hashed Hare —Cut the best parts of cold roast hare
into slices ; stew the head, bones, and trimmings in a pint of
water, with a bunch of sweet herbs, a little pounded mace,
and pepper and salt. Simmer for an hour, strain and return
to the pan. Add three dessertspoonfuls of mushroom ket-
chup, four dessertspoonfuls of port wine, and a bit of butter
rolled in flour. If you have. any stuffing left, put it in too,
or a few small forcemeat balls. Put in the slices of hare, and
thoroughly heat all together. Send to table with sippets of
toast round, and currant jelly in a glass dish.
Jugged Bare —When the hare is skinned and cleaned,
cut it in pieces, wipe it well, but do not wash it. Having
dredged each bit with flour, season with pepper, salt,, and a
little cayenne, and fry in butter till brown. Lay the pieces in
a jar ; peel a lemon, and cut in halves, and stick an onion
with four cloves ; add both to the hare, and pour over about
a pint and a half of good beef gravy. Put the jar, closely
covered, into a deep stewpan, with enough of water to reach
nearly to the neck, and boil for three or four hours, according
to age. About ten minutes before removing from the fire, add
two glasses of port wine, a tablespoonful of mushroom ket-
chup, a few small fried forcemeat balls, and a bit of butter
rolled in flour; shake well, dish and serve with red currant
j ell y- .
To Boast a Babbit— Truss the rabbit in the same way
as directed for hare, fill with veal stuffing, and roast for an
hour, taking care to baste well with butter ; beat the yolks of
wo eggs, and add to them four spoonfuls of milk, one of flour,
mixed smooth together first; beat all together, and season
with nutmeg, pepper, and salt. A little before taking from
the fire, baste the rabbit thickly with the mixture, and, when
it dries, with- butter to froth it; hare minced and boiled in
good gravy, the liver of the rabbit, pour it round it in the
dish, and serve with a tureen of gravy and red currant jelly.
Boiled Babbit with Onion Sauce— Soak the
cleansed rabbit in warm water to whiten it; fasten the head
round to the side with a okewer, and boil it gently in a sauce-


pan for a half or three-quarters of an hour ; skim well; make
your onion sauce with two large onions, peeled and cut in thin
slices ; put a bit of butter and a quarter of a pint of water in a
saucepan, add the onions, a very small piece of garlic, a salt-
spoon of white sugar ; simmer slowly till tender, and stir in a
spoonful of flour ; pour in a little milk and liquor from your
rabbit, and season with pepper and salt; put in a bit of butter,
and when ready pour the sauce over the rabbit. The sauce
should be thick. Send bacon or pickled pork to table with
boiled rabbit.
Another Way to Dress a Rabbit— Cut the rabbit
into pieces and half a pound of pickled pork into slices ; fry
both with a sliced onion ; when brown cover in a stewpan
with water and simmer for twenty minutes; season with pepper
and salt and thicken with a bit of butter rolled in flour.
Before removing from the fire, add some fried forcemeat balls.
Dish, and serve.
Jugged Wild Rabbits —Hang the rabbits as long ns
possible, skin, draw, and wipe very clean with a damp, rough
cloth, but do not wash them. Cut them up as follows :—Cut
off the shoulders and the head, chop off the legs, and cut off
the flaps and breast bones, and cut each in two. Put the bits
of rabbit in a jar, and pour over the gravy which you have
made from your trimmings as follows :—Melt two ounces of
butter in a stewpan, and pour in enough of good veal or
mutton gravy to cover the rabbit, add four eschalots, a large
onion sliced, a small carrot, and a small turnip. Tie a bunch
composed of a sprig of thyme, three sprigs of parsley, half a
bay leaf, and put into the pan, with a blade of mace, a few
cloves and peppercorns, and the least bit of garlic. Simmer
all well, strain and pour over the rabbit in the jar. Place the
jar in a pan of hot water, closely covered, and let it boil for
half an hour. Turn again into the pan, add a glass of wine, a
spoonful of currant jelly, a spoonful of ketchup or hot sauce,
as preferred, a pinch of sugar, and salt and pepper to taste.
Thicken with a little flour, and serve.
Kangaroo Jugged —Use the hind quarters only. Cut the
meat into small, thick slices, dredge with flour, and fry a nice
brown, using plenty of butter, as kangaroo is apt to be very dry.
When it is fried, put the meat in the bottom of a large jar,
seasoning each piece with salt, pepper, and a little cayenne as
you lay it in. Put on the top a peeled and quartered lemon,
and a small onion, stuck with five cloves. Pour over enough


of rich beef gravy to more than cover it, and set in a
boiler half full of water to boil three hours. When done,
turn all into a pan, and add two glasses of port wine, a table-
spoonful of ketchup, either walnut or mushroom, and a good
sized bit of butter rolled in flour. Shake all well over the fire
until the flour is cooked, when you may add a few fried force-
meat balls. Send to table with neatly-shaped sippets of toast
round the dish, and red currant jelly separately.
GAME.
To Truss and Roast Wild Ducks— A wild duck is
simply trussed. Having carefully picked and cleaned, twist
the legs at the first joint, so that the feet will lay flat on
each side of the breast; then pass a skewer through the
thighs and pinions. "
A brisk fire is required to roast wild duck ; and if roasted
before the fire, it must be kept constantly turning, and well
basted with butter. Dredge lightly, froth and brown before
removing from the fire, and serve with good brown gravy
around. Immediately before carving, the breast of the duck
should be scored across in two or three places, and butter
placed on it. Cut a lemon in halves, and sprinkle one-half
with salt and the other with cayenne pepper. Join the
halves, squeeze the juice over the ducks, pour over a warmed
glass of port wine, and carve.
To Roast Quail —Pluck the quails, singe, and draw
them. Cut off the first pinion of the wings, but leave on the
feet. Skewer through the pinions and wings, and the quail is
trussed.
Cover the breasts with slices of fat bacon, and over the
bacon put a layer of vine leaves. Fasten the leaves and bacon
round with a string, and roast. They will take about a
quarter of an hour. Serve on toasted bread, with a good
gravy around them.
To Dress Snipe— Having plucked and singed, wipe
the snipe with a damp cloth. Leave on the feet, and also the
head, which should be skinned. Truss with a small skewer,
pressing the thighs close to the body, and crossing the legs, so
that a foot may rest on each thigh. Pass the beak round
under the wing. The entrails of snipe are not usually
rempjpd.


To cook, tie a thin layer of bacon over the breast, and lay
a bit of toasted bread and butter under the spit to catch the
gravy. Roast for twenty minutes. Cut the toast in quarters,
lay in a dish, and serve the snipe on the toast. Send to table
with butter sauce.
MADE DISHES.
Fricassee of Cold Roast Beef— Take some slices
of cold roast beef, let the slices be cut very thin, and dust
them with pepper and salt. Chop up an onion and a bunch
of parsley. Put a piece of butter and three-quarters of a pint
of good broth into a stewpan, and add the beef slices, the
parsley, and onion. Let all simmer slowly for twenty minutes.
Prepare two well-beaten yolks of eggs, the juice of half a
lemon, or a teaspoonful of vinegar, and a wine-glassful of port
wine. When the meat, &c., has simmered twenty minutes,
add the other ingredients, stir briskly over the fire for a
little, and then turn the fricassee into a hot dish, which may
be rubbed with shalot, if the flavour is liked.
Sheep’s Kidneys— Take off the skins of five or six
kidneys, and cut each kidney through, but not longitudinally
in the usual manner. Dust plenty of pepper and salt over
them, and roll each piece of kidney in melted butter first, and
afterwards in fine bread crumbs. Pass a small skewer
through the white part of each to keep them flat, and broil
over a clear fire. Fill the hollow part of each with a bit of
butter, and serve with the hollow uppermost.
Ox Tails Stewed— Three tails will make a nice dish.
Cut them in pieces, and cover them in a pan with water.
When they come to the boil add salt, pepper, and cayenne to
taste ; also a bunch of parsley, two onions stuck with ten
cloves, and two large carrots. Let all boil gently for from
two and a half to three hours ; by that time the tails will be
tender ; ithen strain the gravy, and, after taking out the tails,
thicken with a bit of butter rolled in flour; return to the pan,
and let the gravy boil up for a minute or two, and pour over
the tails in a tureen, or place the tails on a dish, and pour the
gravy over them.
'


Toad in a Hole (Simple)— Make a smooth, thin
batter with the yolk of a well-beaten egg, two ounces of flour,
a little pepper and salt, and sufficient milk to form the batter.
Having buttered a pie-dish, pour in a little of the batter, and
lay in the batter some slices of cold meat, or cooked sausages.
Pour the remainder of the batter over, and bake for twenty
minutes. Serve in the dish in which it has been baked.
Calf’s Heart Hoasted— To remove the blood and
other impurities, put the heart in lukewarm water for an
hour. While it is in the water, prepare your stuffing or
forcemeat. Any of the receipts for stuffing or forcemeat given
previously in this book will answer. Having removed the
heart from the water, and carefully wiped it dry, inside and
out, fill the ventricles with the stuffing, and fasten with a
skewer, or sew up with a coarse needle and thread. Cover
with a buttered paper, and place in the oven to roast for a
whole or half hour, according to size.
Minced Veal —Minced veal is made with cold cooked
veal. Separate the meat from the bones, and put the bones,
with any other trimmings you may have, into a pan, dredge a
little flour over them, and add a pint of water. Slice an
onion ; mince sufflcient lemon peel to fill a teaspoon. Put with
the onion and minced lemon peel a small bunch of sweet
herbs, and sufficient pepper and salt. Simmer slowly all
these ingredients for more than an hour. Take advantage of
the time in which the bones, &c., are simmering to mince
the veal, but not too finely. When the bones, &c., have
simmered an hour, strain off the gravy, return to the pan, and
add the minced veal. Return to the fire, and let it warm
gradually, adding three tablespoonfuls of milk or cream. As
soon as all are on the point of boiling, take the pan off the
fire, and serve with sippets of bread placed round the dish.
Sippets —By the term “ sippets ” cooks understand
toasted slices of bread cut into various forms. The bread is
first toasted, and then the crust must be removed carefully
with a sharp knife. The common way of cutting toast for
sippets is to make each piece about one inch wide, and two
inches long ; these are placed around the margin of the dish
at intervals of about one inch and a half, and converging to
the centre, after the hash has been turned into the dish.
Sippefs are cut into other forms, diamonds, triangles, &c.


Boiled Calves’ Feet —Take the large bone from two or
three calves’ feet as far as the first joint. Steep in warm
water for two or three hours. Take them out and place
in a stewpan, with just enough of water to cover them.
Stew for nearly three hours, and serve with parsley and butter
sauce poured over them.
Fig’s Fry —Chop up a large boiled onion with a few
sage leaves. Put a pound and a half of pig’s fry at the
bottom of a dish, and spread the chopped sage and onion over
it. Peel some good potatoes, shoe them, and cover the fry
and sage and onion over with the sliced potatoes ; sprinkle
with sage and onion, and put a-layer of sliced bacon over all.
Cover once more with sliced potatoes ; fill the dish with
water, and put it in the oven to bake two hours and a quarter.
Do not let the oven be too hot to admit of the mixture baking
slowly. When cooked, brown with a salamander and serve.
Spatchcock—English Fashion —Make about one
pound or more of good puff paste, and roll it out not thinner
than the width of your two fingers. Cut the edge of the paste
into Vandykes. Poll out the pieces of paste left, and cut them
into the shape of crescent moons ; damp the paste, and place
crescents between each Vandyke. Let this crust be baked in a
quick oven until it is palely browned. Cut up and joint a
fowl, season it with pepper and salt, rub with a bit of butter
and broil; then arrange the broiled pieces of fowl on the
crust, and serve.
Spatchcock—lndian Mode and Sea Fashion —
Split a newly-billed- fowl in halves through the breast and
back, season with pepper and salt, and rub over with butter.
Well grease your gridiron, and broil the halves of fowl over a
clear fire. Make a dish very hot, and put a good piece of
fresh butter on it until it dissolves. Toast a round of bread,
and lay the broiled fowl on the toast in the centre of the dish.
Serve very hot. The fowl will take about half an hour to
broil.
CURRIES AND INDIAN DISHES.
To Boil Rice for Curry —Patna rice is best. Put
your rice into plenty of cold water ; when it boils up strain it,
and return again to the fire with plenty of cold water; let it
boil up a second time, then strain again, and set on the hob to


dry, constantly tossing about, while drying, with two forks.
This process will leave the rice tender and with every grain
separate. It will take altogether twenty or twenty-five minutes.
Curry of Cold Roast Beef or Mutton —Slice
an onion and - fry it a nice brown in a stewpan with a
good bit of butter. Add a little more than a quarter
of a pint of good gravy. Cut your cold meat into pieces and
dredge them with flour. Put the meat and a tablespoonful of
curry powder into the stewpan with the gravy and onion, and
let all boil briskly for ten or twelve minutes, stirring it all the
time. Serve with a border of boiled rice around the dish.
A Rabbit Curry —Put a good bit of butter in a pan,
and fry to a nice brown a sour apple and a large onion, both
sliced. Add a large spoonful of curry powder and a small
one of curry paste. Pour in a pint of good stock or broth.
Cut the rabbit into small pieces, and, having split the head,
dredge all over with flour ; place it in the stewpan with a bit
of bacon cut very small. Cover the pan and let all stew
gently over the fire for three-quarters of an hour. Pour off
any fat, and serve with boiled rice in a separate dish.
To Curry Eggs —Brown one large or two small onions in
butter over a smart fire ; add two dessertspoonfuls of curry
powder, and a pint of stock or broth. Stew slowly until the
onions are tender. Mix a little arrowroot in a quarter of a
pint of cream or milk, and add to the contents of the pan.
Stir and let all simmer for a few minutes. Boil a dozen eggs
hard, cut them each in half and put them into the pan with
the sauce to warm, hut not to boil, then place the eggs on a
dish with the flat ends downwards, pour the curry sauce over
them and serve.
To Curry Mutton Cutlets or Chops— Put your
chops into a pan in which some butter or dripping has been
well heated, and fry them of a nice brown ; then dust them
over with a dessertspoonful of curry powder mixed with the
same quantity of flour. Keep turning the chops about with
a fork as they fry, and when nearly cooked add a quarter of
a pint of good gravy. Let all simmer for two or three
minutes, and serve with rice piled in the middle of the dish,
and the chops and gravy arranged around the outside. This
is an American receipt.


To Curry Stale Bread —This is also an American
receipt, and in an economical family will be found useful.
Soak your slices of stale bread in cream or milk, and dust
over them a little pepper. Put on each piece a bit of butter.
Mince three onions very fine, and fry them in a frying pan
until they are coloured, stirring them about well to prevent
burning. When the onions are soft, add half or three-quarters
of a pint of milk thickened with flour, season with salt,
and let it boil up ; then place the stale slices of bread on the
pan and dust over them a tablespoonful of curry. Let them
simmer slowly for ten minutes, turning frequently, and
stirring to incorporate the curry with the gravy. Put on the
table very hot, and place new tomatoes around the dish. If
you have not tomatoes, sliced cucumber, or slices of hot,
boiled potatoes.
MEAT PIES AND PUDDINGS.
With reference to the subject ot pies and puddings,
it is scarcely necessary to say that the proper making
of the crust is of the greatest importance. Ordinary
crust may be made of clarified dripping, lard, or suet,
and there are few cooks who cannot make a good plain
paste ; it is, however, a different matter with puff-paste, for
the making of which it is very difficult to give a lesson in
words —one practical lesson from a good pastemaker being
worth all that can be written about it here over a whole page.
Where expense is not a consideration, it is better to have
the pastry-slab of marble, but a wooden pasteboard, if kept
thoroughly clean and in a cool place, will answer very well.
To make a good puff-paste it is necessary to have a cool hand
and a light touch —the latter especially —as anything like
heavy kneading destroys the puff.
In baking any kind of pies or pastries covered with paste, it
is quite necessary that the oven be hot; if the paste is put in
an oven not sufficiently heated it will become sodden and
heavy ; on the other hand, if the oven is too hot the paste will
be burned before it is properly baked. The best way to try the
heat of the oven is by placing a little bit of paste in it; if it
burns it is too hot; if it browns nicely and puffs it is ready
for your pie. I will first give you a receipt for common puff-
paste.


Common PuIF-paste —To a pound of flour, sifted if
you have a sieve, work in with a spoon half a pound of lard,
dust half a teaspoonful of salt into the flour and lard, and
mix it thoroughly ; gradually add as much cold water as will
form it into a dry paste, knead lightly, dust some flour over
the pasteboard, and roll the paste into about half an inch
thick. Take three parts of a pound of butter, and spread
one-third evenly over the paste with a knife, fold up, dredge
with flour and roll out again. Spread another third of the
butter over as before, then fold and roll again. Pepeat this
once more, when the butter will have been used and your
paste ready for use.
Short Crust with Dripping— Use the coldest water
you can procure for this paste. Put a pinch of salt into one
pound of dried flour, and mix with it thoroughly three-quarters
of a pound of clarified beef dripping. Pub well together till
you have a fine powder, and mix with sufficient water to make
a light paste. Having sprinkled your hands and the paste-
board with flour, take the lump of paste from the basin in
which you have made it, fold it and roll it out three times,
dusting each time with flour; the third time it should be the
required thickness, a quarter of an inch or less.
Suet Crust for Puddings Chop six ounces
of suet vei’y fine, carefully removing all the skin, rub it well
into one pound of flour, mix with a knife or spoon, and work
into it a teacupful of water. Poll out for use.
A Plain Crust for Children— ln a basin mix one
pound of hour and four ounces of clarified dripping ; make
into a paste with water, and roll out. Put three ounces of
clarified beef dripping, in small pieces, over the paste, roll it out
twice, folding each time. This paste will answer for any
ordinary pudding or pie for children.
To Make Potato Pastry— Pour a large cupful of
stock or gravy into a pan, and lay in it a pound and a half of
rump steak, seasoned with pepper and salt. Put a bit of butter
on the top of the steak. If you have a perforated plate, place it
over all, and cover with potatoes mashed with a few spoonfuls
of milk. Score the potatoes in any way you prefer and bake
for about two hours. It should be of a nice brown colour,
and served ,with the potatoes removed and a napkin round the
dish. Send the potatoes to the table on a separate dish,


Mutton Pie —Remove the meat from three pounds of
loin of mutton, and put the bones into a pan to make gravy,
with half a pint of water and seasoning. Cut the meat into
slices and place a layer of the shoes at the bottom of a pie-dish,
season them with pepper and salt; add next a layer of force-
meat or sausage, then a layer of mutton with the sliced halves
of mutton kidneys on top. Pour in the gravy made from the
bones, taking care to remove every bit of fat from the gravy.
Cover with a plain crust, and ornament around the edge
to your taste. Make a hole in the centre to allow the steam
to escape. Bake one hour and three-quarters.
Cheshire Pork Pie —For an ordinary sized pie you
will require about two pounds of loin of pork, six or eight
small cooking apples, seasoning, and half a pint of white wine.
Remove every bit of fat and skin from the pork, and having
cut it into thin steaks, season with pepper, salt, and nutmeg.
Line your pie-dish with puff-paste, and put in first a layer of
the pork slices, then of pared and cored apples ; dust over
with sugar, and then add another layer of pork, seasoned, as
before. Put a bit of butter on the top and cover with puff-
paste. Make an opening in the centre of the paste, but do
not ornament. Brush over with the beaten white of an egg,
and bake for one hour and a half.
Veal and Oyster Pie —Mince or pound three-quarters
of a pound of ham. Take a pound and a half of veal cutlets
and spread a portion of the ham over each, seasoning with
pepper and salt and grated lemon-peel. Roll each cutlet up,
and place a layer of the cutlets at the bottom of the pie-dish.
Strain the liquor from fifty oysters, and boil it with a cupful of
weak gravy, the peel of half a lemon, and a seasoning of
pepper and salt. Pour the gravy over the veal and oysters,
and cover with a paste. This pie may be ornamented with
paste in any way taste may suggest. Bake it for one hour
and a half. If it is required, more gravy may be added when
the pie is removed from the oven; the centre ornament can
be removed, and more hot gravy may be poured in through
the opening by means of a spoon or funnel.
Plain Rabbit Pie —Cut a large rabbit into joints, and
wash them well ; cut the head into halves. Soak in warm
water to remove blood and impurities, and drain on a sieve, or
wipe dry with a cloth. Dredge the pieces with flour, and
place in a pie-dish with three-quarters of a pound of bacon


cut into little pieces. Chop a sprig of parsley and a shallot
or onion fine, and shake over the rabbit and bacon. Place the
best parts of the rabbit at the top, and put in a cupful of
water or gravy. Put a border of paste around the dish, and
cover closely with puff paste, half an inch thick. Ornament
with a rose and leaves of paste ; place the rose in a hole in
the middle of the pie, and glaze with beaten white of egg.
Bake an hour and a quarter.
Chicken Pie —Fit a rolled puff-paste into the bottom of
your pie-dish, and arrange all round the sides a layer of force-
meat. Season two small chickens highly with pepper and
salt, and place them in the middle of the dish. Cut some
sweetbreads into pieces and season; add a few mushrooms,
with the yolks of five hard-boiled eggs strewn over the top.
Pour in a little water, and cover all with puff-paste. Ornament
the edges only, and bake for one hour and a quarter. When
the pie is drawn from the oven pour in half a pint of hot
gravy, thickened with flour.
Oyster Patties —Cover eight or ten patty pans with a
good puff-paste; place in each a small bit of bread, moisten
the edges, and cover with a thin paste. Pare carefully around
and notch with a paste cutter or back of the knife ; brush with
yolk of egg, and bake in a hot oven for fifteen minutes.
Slightly boil two dozen oysters and strain them; wash and
remove the beards, cutting each oyster into four. 801 l an
ounce of butter in flour, and place in a pan with the oysters
half a gill of cream and a little grated lemon peel. Add a
little cayenne pepper and the liquor of the oysters, and simmer
for five minutes. When the patties are baked, take them out
of the oven, and take a small slice off the paste on top;
remove the bits of bread with a spoon, as well as all the inside
paste your spoon will reach without spoiling the cover. Fill
with the oysters, and replace the piece of paste you have sliced
off. Serve very hot.
Beefsteak Pudding —According to previously given
receipt, make more than a pound and a half of suet paste, but
beat one egg into the gill of water with which you mix it, and
roll put to half an inch in thickness, well flouring the paste
board and roller. Line your pudding-basin with the paste
after you have well buttered the basin, reserving sufficient
paste to form the cover. Cut two pounds of beefsteak into
small pieces, flour and season them highly with salt and


pepper ; place them in the basin, and pour in half a tea-
cupful of water. Cover all over with the reserved paste,
moistening the edges, and fastening closely down ; then tie the
basin in a pudding cloth, well floured, and put it into a pan
with a gallon of boiling water. It will take two hours’ boiling
to properly cook. The crust of this pudding will be lighter if
it is boiled in a cloth without a basin, but it will not serve
with such a neat appearance.
Mutton Pudding —Suet paste will also be suitable for
this pudding. Cut the chump end of a loin of mutton into
slices, and season with a dessertspoonful of chopped parsley
and onion, and a teaspoonful of salt and black pepper mixed.
Put a layer of meat in the pudding-basin, and cover with
peeled and sliced raw potatoes until the basin is full. Place
over all the paste, and boil in a floured cloth for two hours
and a quarter.
Sea Pie —In economical families this way of cooking meat
will be found a nice change. Cut two pounds of lean beef or
mutton into rather small pieces, and put a layer at the
bottom of a saucepan ; dredge the meat with flour, add a
teaspoonful of mixed pepper and salt, a chopped onion, and
bunch of parsley minced fine. Put over all enough of sliced
potatoes to half fill the pan ; pour over a teacupful of water,
and cover closely with a rather thick suet crust. The gravy
of sea pie is apt to boil over the paste. To prevent this, pass
a knife down by the side of the paste occasionally as it rises.
Veal Pudding —Fry a pound and a half or two pounds
of lean veal, cut into thin collops, in a pan, with two ounces of
butter ; fry with it a few slices of bacon, and a small sprig of
thyme. Season with pepper and salt. When the pan has
been over a slow fire for about ten minutes, pour in three
spoonfuls of warm water, boil up, then remove it from the
fire to cool. Take a piece of suet crust, and line your
pudding-basin; place in the veal and bacon, pour over the
gravy, and cover over with a lid, also of suet crust. Press
the edges close, tie the basin in a pudding cloth, and boil for
one hour. The water must be boiling when the pudding is
put in.
Suet Pudding —Chop fine naif a pound of beef suet, and
mix with one pound of flour ; break in one egg, add a pinch
of salt and a gill of water ; beat all together into a paste, if
possible, with a wooden spoon. Having floured your pudding
cloth, put the paste into it, and tie it up tightly. You may


form your paste into a roll or a ball, according to your taste,
and be sure that the water is boiling when you plunge your
pudding into it. Boil for one hour and a quarter. When
done, turn out, and serve very hot, with sweet, or any sauce
you prefer, poured over it.
VEGETABLES, VEGETABLE PUREES,
AND SALAD MIXTURE.
To Boil Potatoes with their Skins on— lt is not
by any means so easy a matter to perform well even this
simple* piece of cookery as many persons imagine. Let the
potatoes be as nearly of a size as possible, and, I need scarcely
add, as clean as water can make them; place them in a
saucepan with a little salt, and just cover with water. Let
them come to the boil until tender. Try the potatoes with a
fork, and, if they are done, remove them from the fire and
Strain them well; then place the pan near the fire with the
lid off, to well dry them. Peel quickly, and serve in a hot
vegetable dish. You may place round them a napkin if you
wish. According to the size of the potatoes, they will take
to cook from twenty minutes to three-quarters of an hour
after they have come to the boil.
To Steam Potatoes —Peel them, and throw as you peel
into cold water. In about five minutes place them in the
steamer over a saucepan filled with boiling water. Let them
steam, closely covered, from twenty to forty minutes. When
you can easily pierce with a fork take them up, and serve
quickly. Steamed potatoes readily lose their colour if allowed
to remain in the steamer after they are done.
To Boil Uew Potatoes —When you have rubbed the
skins from the potatoes let them lie in cold water for an hour
or two ; this hardens them. About twenty minutes before
you wish to serve them put them in a saucepan barely
covered with water. Put on the lid, and let them boil until
they are tender ; then strain off the water, and hold over the
fire until they are quite dry. You may serve plain, or pour
melted butter over the potatoes as you prefer.
Mashed Potatoes —Carefully peel the potatoes, and
remove all discolorations. If they are old ones, there will be
more care required to do this effectually. Let them lie in


water for an hour or so, and then boil with a little salt, as
directed in previous receipts, for half or three-quarters of an
hour, according to size. When done, drain thoroughly, and,
if you have a mortar, beat well and fine with a potato pestle ;
if you have not these conveniences, rub the potatoes through
a coarse sieve, or beat them up with a two-pronged carving
fork. Melt a good-sized bit of butter in a little milk, and add
salt to taste, and beat all together into a smooth paste.
Send to table in a dish, smoothed neatly, plain, or browned
with a salamander, or in the oven.
To Pry Potatoes —Peel some cold boiled potatoes, and
slice a quarter of an inch thick. Fry them in butter or
dripping for about ten minutes. They ought to be a nice
brown. Lift them from the pan with a slice, if you have one ;
but, at all events, drain the potatoes well from the fat. Serve
piled on a dish.
Another Way— Mince the cold potatoes small, and
chop up a large onion also. Season well with pepper and
salt and one spoonful of anchovy sauce. Let all lie in a
basin until the sauce has incorporated itself with the potatoes,
stirring occasionally. Make some butter or dripping hot in
the pan, and fry until of a nice crisp brown, turning from side
to side constantly. Serve in a vegetable dish.
Baked Potatoes —Wash well as many large potatoes as
you require, and let them be as nearly of a size as possible.
Wipe them dry in a clean cloth, and bake in a quick oven for
one hour. Send to table on a napkin. To be eaten with cold
butter, salt, and pepper.
To Bake Potatoes under Meat —Parboil some good,
large potatoes, and peel them with care, so as not to break.
About an hour before the meat is drawn from the oven put
the potatoes round it; well dredge with flour, and return to
the oven. They may he served round the meat or separately,
as preferred. Some cooks like to place the potatoes with the
meat in the oven raw, but they are more certain to be equally
cooked and browned after being parboiled.
To Boil Carrots —If the carrots are old, scrape them
carefully and wash well; if they are large, cut them into
slices or lengthways, as you prefer, and boil from an hour and
a half to an hour and three-quarters. Young carrots need only


be washed and boiled with a spoonful of salt, and enough of
hot water to cover them, for twenty minutes. When they
are done, take out, and rub off the skins with a clean cloth.
Serve them whole in a vegetable dish.
To Boil Turnips —Have your stewpan ready with
boiling water, in which you have put a teaspoonful of salt, and
when you have washed, peeled, and quartered the turnips,
put them in the boiling water, and boil for an hour or hour
and a quarter, according to the age of the turnips. When
they are tender, drain and rub them through a colander,
using a wooden spoon. Return the mashed potatoes to the
stewpan, and add a good-sized piece of butter, a tahlespoonful
of cream or milk, and a little white pepper. Stir thoroughly,
and make very hot. To be served with boiled mutton, &c.
When turnips are very young they will boil in twenty
minutes, and are better served whole and plainly boiled.
To Boil Cauliflowers —In boiling cauliflowers, add a
teaspoonful of salt to every gallon of water, which should be
boiling rapidly when the vegetable is put in. Choose cauliflowers
that are close and white, and cut off the stalks so close as to
leave only the tender leaves near the flower, and lay them
head downwards in strong salt and water to draw out the
insects. Let them lie for an hour ; then drain and put them
in the boiling water until tender. They will take from ten to
twenty minutes, according to size. Do not cover the
saucepan. When done, drain and serve with white sauce in a
tureen. Young cauliflowers may be boiled each separately in
a cloth, well dredged with flour, and sent to table with white
sauce poured over them.
To Boil Cabbages— Pluck all the outer leaves off a
good, firm, medium-sized cabbage; cut off the stem, and
quarter the cabbage. Lay in salt and water for an hour, drain
and place in plenty of boiling water to which you have added
a teaspoonful of salt and a bit of carbonate of soda the size of
a pea. Never cover cabbage while boiling. They should boil
rapidly, and will take from ten to twenty-five minutes,
according to size and age. When done, drain the cabbages on
a colander, and serve either neatly in a dish or chopped up
fine with a bit of butter and a little white pepper.
To Boil Broccoli —Out the stalks close after you hare
removed the outer leaves ; the inside leaves should be cut so
as to be no longer than the flower. Treat them as cauliflower
and cabbage, as far as soaking in salt and water and boiling in


salt and water is concerned —only, of course, no soda will be
required. They will take from ten to twenty-five minutes to
boil. Lift carefully out of the water, drain, and serve with a
little melted butter poured over them. A tureen of melted
butter should also be sent to table with them.
To Boil Spinach —No vegetable requires more careful
washing than spinach, as grit is apt to adhere to it. Wash it
in several waters, and pick it clean. Put just enough of water
in a large pan to prevent its burning, and place the spinach in,
sprinkling it with a little salt. Press down occasionally with
a wooden spoon, and boil for fifteen minutes. When tender,
drain the spinach on a colander, and chop it up very fine. Put
a bit of butter the size of an egg into a stewpan, and turn the
chopped spinach into the hot pan. Add a little pepper, and
stir until hot. Send to table garnished with sippets of bread,
and with poached eggs on the top. If preferred, the spinach
may be pressed in a mould, and turned carefully out on a
dish.
To Boil Brussels Sprouts— Having carefully picke
off all the decayed leaves, wash the sprouts in plenty of water.
Have ready a pan with boiling water, with a little salt and a
pinch of carbonate of soda in it, and put in the sprouts. Boil
for about twelve minutes, leaving the pan uncovered, and,
when tender, drain and serve. Arrange piled in the centre of
a vegetable dish, and serve with melted butter in a tureen.
To Boil Beetroots —Soak them all night, and, to prepare
them for boiling, wash very clean. Put them into a stewpan,
and boil very quickly for an hour and a half or two hours,
according to size ; if they are small, an hour will suffice.
When the beets are tender, put them into cold water, and rub
off the skins carefully. Slice into thin slices, arrange neatly in
a dish, and dust with a little salt and pepper; then pour some
cold vinegar over, when they are ready for table.
When beetroot is served with cold or boiled meat it is an
improvement to make the vinegar hot, adding to it when
heating an ounce of butter. Season with salt and pepper, and
pour over the wwseasoned beets.
It is not generally known that, if beetroot is the least
broken or cut before being boiled, it will Heed all its colour
away.
To Boil Broad Beans —Shell the beans, and put them
in a pan of boiling water, with a spoonful of salt. Boil for a
quarter of an hour, if young, or from that to half an hour if


the beans are of a moderate size. Drain them on a colander
when they are ready, and send to table with a tureen of
parsley and butter sauce. Beans are always supposed to be
served with boiled bacon.
To Boil French Beans —Young French beans will
boil in fifteen or twenty minutes. Have ready a pan of boiling
water, to which a little salt has been added. To prepare the
beans for boiling, cut off the tops and bottoms, and string
them on both sides. Divide each bean into three or four
pieces lengthways, and, as you cut, throw them into a little
salt and water ; drain, and boil quickly, leaving the lid off the
saucepan. When they are ready, drain, mix a small bit of
butter with them, and serve.
To Boil Haricot Beans —A quart of shelled beans will
be sufficient for a medium family. They will require soaking
in cold water for three or four hours before being put into
the pan to cook. Have plenty of cold water in the saucepan
and a spoonful of salt, and put in the beans after they have
been soaked. As soon as they boil, draw from the fire, and
let them simmer for two hours and a half, or until the beans
are tender. Strain, and dry over the fire with the saucepan
uncovered. Add a bit of butter, a seasoning of pepper and
salt, shake well, turn them out carefully on a dish, and serve.
To Boil Green Peas— Put the shelled peas into a
saucepan of boiling water, with a teaspoonful of salt and a
sprig of mint. Boil till tender, with the pan closely covered.
Strain through a colander, and send to table with a bit of
butter and a little pepper mixed with them. When you have
placed the peas in the dish lay the sprigs of mint on the top.
Peas will take from twelve to fifteen minutes to boil, if young.
Boiled Vegetable Marrow —Put the peeled marrows
into a saucepan of boiling water and salt. They will take
from ten to twenty minutes to boil, according to size. When
done, drain and cut them into quarters or halves. Place toast
under them in a vegetable dish, and send to table with a
tureen of melted butter.
Vegetable Marrows (Another Way)— Melt a little
butter in a stewpan, add a little salt, and sufficient water to
boil the marrows. Peel, and cut them in half, shaping them
at the top as for Jerusalem artichokes. When they are
boiled arrange on a dish, and send to table with white sauce
poured over them ; or they may be cut in smaller pieces,
drained, and served with melted butter poured over them.


To Boil Artichokes —Artichokes should not be cooked
soon after they are gathered. They are better for being cut
two or three days before. When you have cut the stems and
drawn out the strings, wash in several waters to assure yourself
that no insects can possibly remain in them. Have ready
plenty of boiling water, to which salt and a little soda has
been added; be careful to place the tops of the artichokes
downward. Boil until tender. They will take from half to
three-quarters of an hour. When you can easily pull out a
leaf they are done. Drain them on a sieve upside down, and
serve on a napkin with sufficient melted butter to allow a
teacupful for each artichoke, or on a hot dish, with white
sauce poured over them.
To Boil Asparagus —When you have carefully
scraped all the white parts from the stalks of the asparagus,
wash them in cold spring or filtered water, and tie them in
bundles. When you have cut the roots even, roll each bundle
in a bit of muslin to prevent the tops from breaking while*
boiling. Lay the bundles carefully in a stewpan, so wide that
you need not place one bundle upon another, and let the water,
with a little salt in it, be boiling when you place the asparagus
in. Boil from fifteen to eighteen minutes. While the
asparagus is boiling toast a thin slice of bread, and cut it into
square pieces. When you have lifted the asparagus dip the
pieces of toast in the water, and lay them in the bottom of the
dish. Place the asparagus on the toast with the white ends
outward, and the points meeting in the middle. Send to table
with a tureen of melted butter.
To Boil Parsnips —To half a gallon of water add a
teaspoonful of salt, and, when you have scraped and cut the
parsnips into quarters lengthways, put them in the boiling
water. They will take from an hour to an hour and a half to
become tender. When ready, serve in a vegetable dish when
boiled beef, pork, or salt fish is on the table. Some persons
prefer the meat garnished with the parsnips and boiled
carrots.
To Stew and Brown Onions —Peel and trim good,
hard onions neatly, but do not cut them. Dredge lightly with
flour, and fry in butter until they are a nice, light brown.
Then place them carefully on the bottom of a stewpan in one
layer only, and cover them with good beef gravy. They will
take two hours of gentle stewing, when the gravy will have
stewed down to a thick sauce. Remove the onions (whioh


should be unbroken), place them in a dish, and pour over them
the gravy, which you may season lightly with pepper and
salt; or the onions may be used as a garnish, or for jugged
hare.
To Dress Cucumbers— Having pared the cucumbers,
slice them as thin as possible. It is not generally known that
cucumbers should always be sliced commencing from the thick
end. Spread the slices on a plate, and sprinkle with salt ;
then cover over with another plate, and flap the cucumbers
well between the two plates. Set on edge to drain, as this
draws out the dangerous juice of the cucumber. Place on a
small dish, and sprinkle a little pepper over, and then pour
over five tablespoonfuls of vinegar, mixed with three
spoonfuls of salad oil and a dust of salt.
How to Choose Mushro9ms— So many deaths have
been occasioned by the use of poisonous mushrooms in these
colonies that the greatest care is necessary in choosing them.
Never use mushrooms of which the under part or gills is white
or yellow, the true mushroom having always gills of a salmon
colour when young, and of a brown shade as it grows older.
The very young mushroom is almost round, and shows, little of
the gill—it is usually called the “ button mushroom as the
mushroom gets older it opens, and shows the colour beneath.
Stewed Mushrooms— Button mushrooms do not
require peeling. Wipe them clean with a wet flannel, btew
them in the stewpan, with very little water, until they are
tender. Mix in a basin a little milk, salt to taste, and enough
flour to make the liquor in the pan as thick as cream ; stir the
batter into the pan, and let all boil for five minutes. Jus
before you serve stir in the beaten yolk of an egg. btewed
mushrooms may be used in ragouts, or served to eat with
fish.
Another Way— Stew the button mushrooms in milk and
water, after you have carefully rubbed them. When they are
tender add a blade of mace, salt to taste, and a little good
veal gravy. Thicken the gravy with the yolks of eggs, and
serve.
Mushrooms Grilled— Large mushrooms are the best
for grilling. Peel them carefully, remove the stalks, and
place them in a dish, with the gills uppermost. Melt two or
three ounces of fresh butter, and baste the mushrooms well
with it; dust with pepper and salt, and let them lie for an


° r an k° ur an d a half. Have your gridiron quite clean
and hot, rubbing the bars with a bit of beef suet, and broil
the mushrooms on both sides. They will take ten or twelve
minutes. Send to table very hot, with a bit of butter on
each, or with lemon juice or melted butter poured over it.
Horse-radish —Horse-radish is served with cold roast
beef and some kinds of boiled fish, and it should lie in water
for an hour before being scraped. Wash very clean, and
scrape very fine with a sharp knife until the sticks will bear
no more scraping. When done it should appear curled, and lie
in light, flaky piles. Garnish cold roast beef with little piles of
the scraped horse-radish, and send some to table in a glass dish.
Salad— Chop up two or three very young onions or leeks as
fine as possible. Have also ready a head of crisp lettuce shred
into strips. Beat one or two raw eggs well, add a salt-
spoonful of mustard and another of salt. Add the chopped
onion, with three spoonfuls of salad oil and one of vinegar, and
beat the whole until it appears like thick cream. Place in a
glass salad bowl, and put the shred lettuce over it lightly;
sprinkle a little salt over the lettuce, and garnish with thin
slices of beetroot. Salad should not be stirred until it is at
table, when it is served with the sauce stirred up with a
boxwood spoon and fork.
Crayfish Salad —Use the salad mixture of egg, salt, and
mustard, well beaten, and pour into the salad bowl. Cut fine
the lettuces and endives or onions, and lay them on the
mixture. Scatter over the pickings from the body of the
crayfish, and part of the meat from the shell. Garnish with
the yolks of two or three hard-boiled eggs, cut in slices or
rubbed through a sieve, the coral of the crayfish, sliced
beetroot, cucumber, radishes, and the pieces of crayfish.
Arrange round the edge of the bowl, as a border, some hard-
boiled eggs cut in half, and with young leaves of celery
or endive ornamenting them.
Summer Salad —Cut two or three fresh lettuces and a
good quantity of mustard-and-cress. Wash some young
radishes well, and cut them, the lettuces, and the mustard-
and-cress into small pieces. Mix all lightly, arrange on a
dish, and pour under any salad mixture you prefer. Never
pour salad mixture over the vegetables. Garnish on top with
boiled beetroot, hard-boiled eggs, and cucumbers, cut into
shoes, and lay also on the top pieces of cold poultry or flaked
fish.


CUBING BACON AND HAMS, ETC.—
POTTING, COLLABING, ETC.
In these colonies the method of salting and curing meats is
necessarily different from that adopted in England or America.
In many parts of both mentioned countries it is customary
to singe the hog; here it is almost invariably scalded. To
country housekeepers any hints I might give as to the killing of
meat and its preparation for salting, pickling, or curing, would
be supererogatory, while to the residents in towns they
would be quite unnecessary.
For salting, see that the meat is perfectly fresh and good,
wipe it and sprinkle with salt —this draws the blood out. Let
it lie to drain for a few hours, all night will not be too long.
After it has drained, rub it well with salt, and pack the pieces
closely in a pickling tub, placing a lid which will fit into the
tub on the meat, with a heavy weight upon the lid. Turn the
meat over every morning, and when there is sufficient pickle at
the bottom, remove and boil it up, seeing that it is skimmed
well as the scum rises ; when cold pour over the meat. This
tmay be taken as a general receipt for the pickling of all meats.
To Cure Bacon— Pound, and mix well together, one
pound of bay salt, one pound of brown sugar, one pound of
sal prunella, one pound of saltpetre, and one gallon of coarse
saltf Rub this mixture well into your bacon, hams, and cheeks,
pack closely, and pour over a strong, cold brine—a strong
enough brine will float a potato or egg. Turn and rub the
bacon every day for a week, and then let it remain undis-
turbed for three weeks. When it has been in the brine for
that time, remove, and smoke or dry. A large side of bacon
will take a month to dry—a small one three weeks.
To Pickle Pork —Beat well together white salt and salt-
petre in the proportion of two-thirds of the former to one of
the latter. Cut the pork in suitable pieces, and rub it well
with the salt and saltpetre, taking care that every part is
thoroughly reached. Put a layer of salt in the bottom of the
pickling tub, and pack in well a layer of the pork. Cover
again with salt and add another layer of pork. Repeat until
your tub is full, put on the cover (which must always fit into
the tub) and heavily weight it. Pork will take from two to
four weeks to pickle. Be careful, when you use a piece of pork
from the tub, to cover well and replace the weight so that it
may press down the pork.


To Cure Hams —One pound of common salt, two ounces
of saltpetre, three ounces of bay salt, and one pound of coarse
brown sugar will be enough for two large hams. Mix all
these ingredients with a quart of stale, strong beer or ale, and
boil well, skimming carefully as the scum rises. When cold,
pour over the hams in your tub, and turn every day. When
they have lain a fortnight take them out, and smoke well.
Another Way —The same proportions as the above of
the salts and sugar will do ; rub the hams thoroughly with the
mixture and see that you rub so persistently with the hand
that it penetrates every part of the ham. Let the ham lie on
the board in a cool place, and in the mixture for a week,
turning and re-rubbing with the mixture every day. At the end
of a week place the ham in a small wooden tub, and baste it
with good vinegar, in which a few bay or laurel leaves and
half an ounce of cloves has been boiled. Baste several times
a day with the vinegar, using a wooden spoon, and turn the
ham occasionally. Continue this for a fortnight, and then
smoke. If this receipt is successfully followed, the result will
be a ham of a peculiarly rich and delicate flavour.
To Pot Beef —You must have lean beef for potting, and
pick every bit of skin and gristle off it. Put two pounds and
a half into a covered stone jar, with three spoonfuls of water.
Stand the jar in a pan of boiling water, so that the water may
only reach up to the middle of the jar. Boil for nearly four
hours. Then take out the meat and mince it line. Mix a
seasoning of pepper, salt, and pounded mace with it, and pound
all into a smooth paste in a mortar. Add a little gravy from
the jar, and five ounces of butter ; beat well again, and press
hard into pots; pour warm butter or lard over the tops to
keep out the air, and tie over with strong paper or bladder.
Potted Ox Tongue —Boil an ox tongue; or take a
pound and a half of one already boiled and skinned, and
pound it in a mortar with about six ounces of butter. Beat
together well a small spoonful of mace, a few cloves, and a little
nutmeg and cayenne, and add to the pounded meat in the
mortar. Thoroughly blend all, and press the mixture into small
potting-jars, pour clarified butter over the top, and tie down.
If you have any cold roast veal it may be pounded with the
tongue, and will be found an improvement.
To Cure Neats’ Tongues —Mix an ounce and a half of
sal prunella, an ounce and a half of saltpetre, and a pound and


a half of common salt. Cut the roots from three heats’
tongues, but leave the fat under the tongue. When they are
washed very clean, dry w r ell with a towel, and rub the mixture
into every part with your hand. Repeat this for three or four
days and then let the tongues lie on a dish, covered with salt,
for three weeks, turning every day. At the end of three weeks
wipe them dry and rub with well dried bran. You may cook
at this stage, or smoke the tongues for a fortnight.
Hams, Tongues and Beef, Yorkshire Fashion-
Rub the meat well over with common salt and the next day
with the following ingredients : —Mix one pound and a half of
brown sugar, one pound of common salt, two ounces of saltpetre,
half a pound of bay salt, and tw r o ounces of pepper. Rub the
ham before the fire every day.
To Collar Beef' —The thin flank of beef is best for
collaring, and seven or eight pounds of pickled flank will
make a nice sized collar for lunch or breakfast. Mix together
a large sprig of parsley and a bunch of sweet herbs —both
chopped with a seasoning of pepper, salt, allspice and nutmeg.
Spread the mixture over one side of the beef, and roll up as
tightly as you can in a round shape. Fasten in a cloth with
a wide tape, and boil in plenty of water for over six hours.
When done, place between two boards with a heavy weight
upon the top. It may be sent to table as soon as quite cold,
after having removed the cloth and fastened with a silver
skewer.
Potted Fish —Take the meat from any cold, cooked fish
you prefer, and pound well in a mortar ; add a squeeze of
lemon juice, a spoonful of anchovy sauce and a seasoning of
salt and white pepper. Beat into a smooth paste and pot,
covering as usual with clarified butter, and tying bladder
tightly over all.
Potted Fowl and Earn —Remove all the meat from a
cold, roast fowl, and cut it into shreds. Add a quarter of a
pound of lean ham and six ounces of butter, and put in a
mortar with a little pepper, salt, and nutmeg, and a pinch of
cayenne. Pound all together to a paste, mix and fill the
potting jars. Pour oxer clarified butter, and tie down with
bladder. A little ground lemon peel with the fowl is an
improvement to some tastes. Potted meats of all kinds should
be kept in a cool and perfectly dry place.


Potted Head —Chop an ox head in halves, and soak in
cold water until the blood is well drawn out. Rut one half
with two cow heels into a large pan, cover with water and
boil five or six hours. When tender, strain the meat from the
liquor and allow it to cool. When quite cold cut the meat
into very small pieces, and having taken every bit of fat off
the liquor, return all to the pan, with salt, pepper, and
pounded mace to your taste. Boil again slowly until thick
enough to jelly, and then pour into any shapes you may have.
It ought to turn out smooth and firm when cold.
TO MAKE PASTES AND PASTBY.
German Paste —Rub half a pound of butter into
three-quarters of a pound of flour, and add half a pound of
pounded and sifted sugar, with the grated peel of a lemon.
Break into a hole in the middle of the flour the yolks of two
eggs, beat the whites well and mix all together. If not
sufficiently moistened, you may put in a very little water.
Make lightly into a paste, with as little handling as possible,
roll out thin and use for any kind of pastry. It may oe
brushed over with the beaten white of an egg and powdered
with sugar before it is put into the oven.
Paste for Custards —Rub into half a pound of
flour six ounces of butter. Beat two eggs and add three
tablespoonfuls of cream, and with them mix the flour to a
paste. Let the paste lie on the slab for an hour, when it will
be ready to roll out thin for lining custard dishes.
Very Rich Short Crust —Take ten ounces of butter,
and a pound of dried and sifted flour. Roll two ounces
of loaf-sugar very fine, and add it, with a pinch of salt, to the
flour, and make into a smooth paste with a little milk and the
yolks of two well-beaten eggs.
To Ice or Glaze Pastry, or Sweet Dishes—Seat
the whites of perfectly new-laid eggs to a firm froth with the
blade of a knife, and to every white you use allow an ounce
and a half of loaf sugar. Before the pastry or cake is quite
done remove it from the oven and brush over with the whites
of the eggs, afterwards sifting the sugar over it. Return to
the oven till the egg has set, but do not allow it to remain
long enough to get discoloured.


Eor raised or meat pies beat the yolks of the eggs and a
little warm water together, and brush over the paste as above.
Gooseberry Tart —Top and tail a quart of goose-
berries, place a narrow slip of short crust round the edge of
a pie-dish, and put in the gooseberries. Dust with six ounces
of sugar, and cover with the short crust. Ornament the
edges and top in' any manner your taste may suggest, and bake
in a quick oven. The tart will take about three-quarters of an
hour to bake, and ought to be served with a custard or rich
cream.
Red Currant and Raspberry Tart— Mix together
a pint and a half of picked red currants and three-quarters of
a pint of raspberries, place them in a pie-dish, and sift among
them a quarter of a pound of moist sugar. Having moistened
the edge of the pie-dish, put a slip of puff-paste round it.
Cover also with puff-paste, after damping the edges to make
them adhere, press down and pare round the edge even with
the dish. Scollop the edges with a knife, roll out the bits of
paste you have cut off, and with a paste-cutter form into
leaves to lay on the top. Egg over and bake —it will take
from a half to three-quarters of an hour. When you remove
the tart from the oven, dredge over the top with white sugar,
and set with a salamander.
Rhubarb Tart- -Strip the sticks of rhubarb and cut
them into inch long bits. Line a pie-dish with very thin
paste, and lay in the rhubarb by layers, putting sugar between
each layer —it will take about a cupful of sugar in all. Cover
with a rich puff-paste, trim the edges smooth with a sharp
knife and make a slit in the top. It will take nearly an hour
to bake in a brisk oven. You may strew sugar over the top,
or glaze, as you prefer.
Cherry Tart —Take a pound and a half of cherries and
remove the stalks. Put a small cup in the centre of a pie-
dish, and fill round with cherries, and sugar to taste. Edge
and cover with short crust, and ornament the edges. Bake
in a quick oven from thirty to forty minutes, and serve with
sifted sugar dusted over the top.
Damson Tart —Fill a pie-dish heaped high in the
middle with the picked and cleaned fruit, and scatter well
among them five or six ounces of sugar. Pour in a few
spoonfuls of water, and edge and cover with a good puff-paste.
When baked, remove from the oven, and brush over with


white of egg, beaten to a stiff froth, and sift loaf sugar over it;
then return to the oven for a few moments to set. It will
take from eight to ten minutes to set the egg.
Apple Tart —As you pare, core, and slice your apples
throw them into a little cold water. Put the slices of apple in
a pie-dish, and between each layer sprinkle sugar to your
taste. Pour in a little water, and cover with a short crust or
puff-paste as you prefer. Apple tart will take from half an
hour to an hour to bake, according to its size.
Open Jam Tart —Cover a tart-plate or shallow pie-dish
with puff or other paste, and pare neatly at the edges.
Spread your jam carefully and smoothly over, taking care it
does not encroach on the edges of the paste. Damp the edges
and place round them a band of the paste. Ornament the top
in any way you wish—a trellice work of narrow strips of
paste looks as well as any, or each bar may be twisted and laid
diagonally, and at regular intervals, over the jam. Bake in
a quick oven, from twenty minutes to half an hour.
Tartlets —Tartlets may be mah with any preserve or
marmalade. With a tin cutter, cut twice as many rounds as
you wish tartlets, and with a smaller cutter cut the centres out
of half the rounds ; wet the edges of the uncut rounds and
place the rings upon them. Bake in a moderate oven for ten
or twelve minutes. Use the pieces you have cut out of the
centres to form any small ornament you wish —flowers, stars,
etc., and bake them also. When the tartlets are done, fill
them with preserves, and place on the top of each one of the
little ornaments.
Lemon Puffs —Whisk the whites of three eggs to a firm
froth, and add to it gradually one pound and a half of dried
and siftid loaf-sugar and the grated peel of two lemons. Beat
well together for one hour. Form into any shape fancied,
and bake the puffs on oiled paper on a tin; the oven should
be moderately hot.
Orange Tartlets —Cut two Seville oranges in halves
and carefully remove the seeds and pulp. Boil the empty half
peels until the head of a pin will easily pierce them. Take
twice the weight of the oranges of pounded and sifted loaf-
sugar, with a piece of butter about the size of a walnut, and
the pulp and juice of the oranges; beat all together in a
mortar till the mixture is a smooth paste. Bake in patty-
pans lined with a rich puff-paste.


Mince Pies —Line some pretty large patty-pans with
puff-paste rolled very thin, and fill the patty-pans with the
mince meat. Cover with the paste and pare neatly round.
Bake from twenty-five to thirty minutes in a quick oven.
Remove, and brush them over with white of egg beaten to a
stiff froth, dust over a little pounded white sugar, and return
to the oven to dry the egg. Serve very hot, with a napkin on
the dish under them.
Mince pies may he kept for a good while, and are as good
as ever when re-warmed.
MINCE MEAT.
Apple Mince Meat —Chop one pound of suet and one
pound of peeled and cored apples very fine. Stone a quarter
of a pound of raisins and-cut each in two. Add one pound of
currants, one pound of moist sugar, the juice of four oranges
and two lemons, and the chopped peel of one lemon. Measure
of ground mace and allspice each a spoonful, and one glass of
brandy. Mix well together, and cover closely in a jar for
use.
Mince meat ought to be kept in a very cool place.
Egg Mince Meat— Add to six hard-boiled eggs, minced
very fine, double the quantity, by measure, of finely-chopped
beef suet, the minced peel of a large lemon, and one pound of
currants well washed and dried. Cut into slices a quarter
of a pound each of candied citron and orange peel, and mix in
with the other ingredients. Put in a little mace, sugdr,
nutmeg, and salt, to your taste, and mix all well together with
six tablespoonfuls of sweet wine. Pack well into a jar as for
other minces.
Lemon Mince Meat— To four ounces of chopped beef
suet and three large cored and chopped apples add half a
pound of cleaned and dried currants and four ounces of white
sugar. Squeeze the juice from a large lemon into a cup, and
boil the squeezed lemon until very tender. Beat the lemon to
a mash and add it to the mince. Chop one ounce of candied
orange and citron, and pour over all the juice of the lemon.
Mix well, and jar.


BAKED AND BOILED PUDDINGS.
PuDDiitGS are boiled in either a basin, mould, or cloth, and
the mould or basin should always be rubbed inside with butter
to prevent the adherence of the pudding. The pudding-cloth
should be dipped in boiling water, wrung out and well floured
before the pudding is tied in it. The pudding-cloth should be
washed and scalded as soon as possible after use, and hung in
the fresh air to dry ; shapes of tin especially require the
nicest cleanliness.
Any pudding that is likely to swell should be tied loosely in
the cloth, or, if in a shape or basin, room left in the same way.
The water must be always boiling when the pudding is put in,
and kept continuously boiling until it is done. Always take
care that a pudding in a cloth does not stick to the bottom.
A common plate placed at the bottom of the saucepan will
prevent this.
If you boil your pudding in a cloth, the water should
completely cover it, but if in a shape or basin, the water should
not be sufficiently high to boil over the top.
When a boiled pudding is done, take it from the pan and
plunge for an instant in cold water, and turn it out immediately.
This treatment will prevent its sticking to cloth or shape.
If possible, serve immediately, as if there is any delay the
pudding is apt to collapse.
Baked Puddings —A moderately hot oven is required
for baking rice or bread puddings, but batter or custard must
have a brisk oven.
Eggs for puddings must be thoroughly beaten. You will
find them much lighter when beaten in a current of air, as the
draught, as it were, aerates them. When you can lift a
spoonful of beaten eggs without any stringy drip from the
sides they are sufficiently beaten.
Soufles should be served immediately on being drawn from
the oven, or they will fall in. They require a quick oven.
Apple, Cui'rant, Gooseberry, or other Fruit
Puddings —Make a good suet paste—one pound of flour and
six ounces of suet will make a reasonably sized pudding. Eoll
out the paste thin, and mark the size you will require for a
cover by laying the basin, mouth downwards, on the paste.
Cut the cover, and line the dish with the remainder of the
paste jbe sure to previously butter the basin. Pare and core


the apples and fill the basin with them. Add a slice or two of
thinly cut lemon, a few cloves or a little grated nutmeg,
according to taste. Moisten the edges and put on the cover,
pressing well down and paring round the edges. Have ready
the saucepan of boiling water, and when you have tied the
basin or mould in a floured cloth, boil for one hour and a half,
or more.
All puddings of fruit are made in the same manner.
Baked Apple Pudding— Beat half a pound of butter
to a cream and add half a pound of pounded sugar. Beat the
yolks of six eggs and the whites of three separately. Grate
half a pound of apples and the peel of one lemon, and mix all
well together, adding the juice of the lemon. Bake in a pie-
dish with a strip of puff-paste round the edge.
Apple Dumplings —Take as many large baking apples
as you wish dumplings, pare, and extract the core without
cutting the outside of the apple; this may be done with a
proper scoop, or with a small sharp knife. Put in the centre
of each apple a little sugar, a tiny bit of butter, a dust of
grated nutmeg, and a squeeze of lemon juice. Cut a nice
suet paste into rounds sufficiently large to cover each apple
and fold them in it, carefully pinching the edges of the paste
together. Drop into a saucepan of boiling water and boil for
an hour. When done, lift carefully out with a skimmer and
serve with butter, sugar, and nutmeg.
Apple and Crumb Pudding— Butter a deep pie-dish
and puPtedayer of grated bread on the bottom, and dot little
bits of butter over the bread. Pare, core, and slice the apples,
adding a layer of .apples next. Dust over with sugar and a
little powdered cinnamon. Repeat until the dish is full.
Bake for half an hour in a moderate oven. When ready, turn
out on a dish and serve with cream poured over, or in a jug.
Baked Apple Dumplings— Cut some thinly-rolled
puff-paste into squares sufficiently large to cover an apple ;
roll an apple into each piece and arrange them neatly in a
pie-dish. Beat the white of an egg stiff, and with it brush
over the tops. Sift pounded sugar over all and bake in a
gentle oven for three-quarters of an hour. Serve with sweet
sauce, or with butter and sugar.
Bread Pudding —Crumb the heart of a stale loaf and
put one pint of the crumbs into a stewpan. Cover with milk
and add a little nutmeg and cinnamon and the grated peel of


a lemon. When it has boiled for ten minutes, take out the
cinnamon, sweeten to taste and stir in four well-beaten eggs.
Beat well together and bake in a buttered pie-dish for' one
hour. This pudding may be boiled, but will take more time
to boil.
Bread and Butter Pudding— Butter some thin slices
of bread, and select a deep pie-dish that will hold a quart,
butter the dish and half fill it with the slices of bread and
butter. Beat three eggs well and mix with a pint and a half
of milk ; add eight tablespoonfuls of pounded sugar and one
laurel leaf. Mix well and pour over the bread and butter.
Bake for an hour in a quick oven.
Bread and Marmalade Pudding— Cut the bread
very thin and pare off the crust, butter each piece and then
spread over with marmalade or any preserve that may be
preferred. Half fill the buttered dish with the slices, and pour
over half a pint of milk into which have been well mixed two
well-beaten eggs, an ounce of sugar, and a few drops of essence
of lemon. Bake from twenty minutes to half an hour. Send
to table with sifted sugar over.
Baked Arrowroot Pudding— Make into a smooth
batter with a little milk three dessertspoonfuls of arrowroot.
Bring to the boil nearly a pint and a half of good milk, adding
the peel of half a lemon and a little sugar. Strain and mix
gradually with the batter, being careful to stir all the time,
adding, as you stir, as much butter as you could scoop with
a dessertspoon. Beat three eggs and stir in when the milk and
arrowroot is almost cold. Lay a border of puff-paste around
a pie-dish and pour in the mixture. Grate over a little nut-
meg and bake one hour. This pudding may also be boiled.
Bake well Pudding— Spread any preserve over the
bottom of a dish lined with puff-paste. Mix with the grated
peel and juice of two lemons a quarter of a pound of sifted
sugar. Beat well the yolks of eight eggs and the whites
of two, and mix with the sugar and grated peel. Melt an
ounce of butter and add, thoroughly incorporating all; then
pour over the preserve and bake in a quick oven for twenty
minutes or half an hour.
Mother Eve’s Pudding —Pare, core, and mince four
large apples and mix with them a quarter of a pound of bread
crumbs, a quarter of a pound of flour, a quarter of a pound of
chopped suet, three ounces of sugar, and the grated rind and


juice of half a lemon. Break in, without beating, three eggs
and a little good milk. Mix all thoroughly and boil in a
buttered dish for one hour and a quarter.
College Puddings —Pound a quarter of a pound of
Naples biscuits, and add a quarter of a pound of bread crumbs
and a quarter of a pound of finely chopped beef suet. Cut
two ounces of candied orange or lemon peel into shreds, and
add with a quarter of a pound of currants and two ounces of
sugar. Mix all into a paste with the yolks of four beaten
eggs, then press in flat pieces and fry brown, in lard, over a
gentle fire. Serve on a napkin with a tureen of sweet sauce.
Semolina Pudding —Put half a pint of milk into a
little saucepan, and stir into it an ounce of semolina. When
nearly boiling and thick, add an ounce of sugar, the yolks of
two eggs beaten, a tablespoonful of marmalade, and a few
drops of vanilla or a squeeze of lemon juice. Mix well, and
bake in a buttered pie-dish for ten minutes. Have ready the
whipped whites of two eggs, place lightly over the top, and
return to the oven for a few minutes to set.
Cherry Pudding —Mix three tablespoonfuls of flour to
a smooth paste with a little milk, and then gradually add the
remainder of a pint of milk. Warm an ounce of butter and
stir it in. Add a pinch of salt and three well-beaten eggs.
Stone one pound of cherries and stir them into the batter. Boil
in a buttered pudding cloth for two hours. Send to table
with a tureen of butter sauce.
Boiled Custard Puddings —Boil half a pint of milk
and half a pound of sugar with half a stick of cinnamon and
three ounces of sugar. Allow the milk to cool, remove the cinna-
mon, and add four well-beaten eggs. Stir, one way , over the fire
until it thickens, then allow it to get quite cold, when boil
three-quarters of an hour in a buttered cloth. When the
pudding is done, put it in a basin until cold, then remove the
cloth, and turn carefully out on a dish. Sift sugar over, and
serve with wine sauce.
Custard for Puddings —The yolks of two or three
eggs to a pint of milk ; beat the eggs and stir into the milk,
add a little nutmeg and cinnamon, one bay leaf, and three
ounces of pounded sugar. Stir well one way —-that is, always
to the right or always to the left —and boil to required thick-
ness. When pouring out remoye the bay leaf.


Cup Puddings —Beat three ounces of butter to a cream,
and mix with it two ounces of sugar, three ounces of flr u r,
and half a pint of milk. Beat well, and bake in buttered cups
for twenty minutes. Turn the puddings out on a dish, and
serve with wine or sweet sauce poured over.
Jam Roly-Poly Pudding —Roll out half-a-pound ol:
light suet crust, so that it will be much longer than it is
broad, moisten all around the edges, and spread any preferred
jam along the centre, roll up and punch in at the ends; roll
again in a floured cloth, and tie carefully at each end. Put into
boiling water, boil two hours, and serve with sweet or maizena
sauce.
Currant Dumplings— Dry well, before the fire or in
the oven, half a pound of washed and picked currants. Add
to half a pound of flour six ounces of chopped beef suet, one
teaspoonful of ground ginger, and a pinch of salt. Mix all
these ingredients together with one well-beaten egg and half
a pint of milk. Roll the paste into balls and drop into a
saucepan of boiling water. Boil quickly for half an hour.
This pudding may also be boiled in a cloth previously dipped
in hot water and floured; if boiled, it will take an hour and a
half.
Hasty Pudding —Mix a heaped tablespoonful of flour
with one beaten egg and a little milk, and see that the batter
is smooth and free from lumps. Season with a little salt, and
pour into half a pint of boiling milk. Keep stirring, and boil
well.
Orange Marmalade Pudding Mix with three
ounces of finely chopped beef suet five ounces of bread, crumbs.
Add a quarter of a pound of sugar, three well-beaten eggs, and
half a cupful of milk or cream. Beat all together for a
quarter of an hour. Pour in a layer into a well-buttered
mould or basin, and then spread over a layer of orange
marmalade. Repeat until the mould is full, and spread five
ounces of bread crumbs on the top. Bake in not too quick an
oven for an hour and three-quarters, place a dish over it, and
turn out to serve.
Orange Pudding —Grate the rinds of two oranges, and
squeeze the juice and pulp through a sieve. Melt a little
butter in a stewpan, and break into it the yolks of live eggs.
Add the lemon and lump sugar to taste. Stir all over the fire
until thick as custard, when you may bake in a tart dish
lined with puff-paste for twenty minutes,


Christmas Pudding —Stone and cut in half one pound
of raisins. Clean and dry one pound of currants and a
quarter of a pound of sultanas. Add three-quarters of a
pound of bread crumbs, one pound of suet, three table-
spoonfuls of flour, three-quarters of a pound of sliced citron
and orange peel, and a small nutmeg grated. Mix all, and
stir in ten well-beaten eggs, a glass of brandy, and a pint of
milk. Beat well together, and boil in a buttered mould, tied
in a floured cloth, for six hours. Turn out and serve with
arrowroot sauce, or burning brandy over it.
Plum Pudding— Chop finely six ounces of suet, and
mix with six ounces of bread crumbs. Stone and clean six
ounces each of raisins and currants. Grate half a nutmeg,
and a little lemon peel. Mix all together with five beaten
eggs, and half a wine-glass of brandy. Boil in a mould for
three hours.
Potato Pudding —Bub some good boiled potatoes
through a sieve, and add to them half a pound of butter
beaten to a cream, half a pound of sugar, and the grated peel
and juice of one lemon. Mix all well with five beaten eggs,
and bake in a quick oven for half an hour.
Ground Rice Pudding —Two quarts of milk and
half a pound of ground rice. Mix the rice to a paste with a
little of the milk, and gradually add the remainder. Boil till
quite thick, continuously stirring all the time. Add a small
piece of butter, three ounces of sugar, a little grated nutmeg,
the yolks of seven well-beaten eggs, and the whites of four.
Pour in a glass of brandy.
Plain Rice Pudding— Stir three well-beaten eggs
into a quart of milk. Add a little salt, a wine-glassful of well-
washed rice, two tablespoonfuls of sugar, a tablespoonful of
butter, and half a grated nutmeg. Butter a dish, and bake in
a hot oven for an hour.
Apples and nice —Boil two spoonfuls of rice in a
pint of milk until it is quite soft; stir it frequently. When
done add sugar to taste, and any preferred flavouring. Peel,
core, and cut in half eight baking apples, and place them in a
buttered baking-dish ; dust over with sugar, and a sprinkle of
lemon juice. Cover over with buttered paper, and put in the
oven until the apples are soft. Put the rice on a dish, cover it
over with the apples, and serve. Two or three well-beaten
eggs and a bit of butter added to the rice just before you take


it from the fire will improve this dish, and any fruit, such as
peaches, apricots, &c., may be treated in the same way. This
is essentially a dish for children, and very wholesome.
Plain Boiled B,ice for Children —Tie three-quarters
of a pound of well washed rice loosely in a cloth, and put it
into a pan of cold water; boil for two hours, and when done
turn out and serve with sweet sauce or jam. Rice treated in
this way may also be eaten with meat as a vegetable.
Snow Ball for Children —Thoroughly pick and wash
in several waters half a pound of rice, drain well and place in
a stewpan with a quart of milk or water. Cover, and let it
boil gently until all the milk or water is soaked up. First
dip some teacups into cold water and then press the rice into
them well. When cold, turn out and send to table with
butter and sugar or wine sauce.
Baked Sago Pudding —Cut very thin the peel -of a
lemon and boil for a few minutes in a quart of milk, strain
and return the milk to the pan. Stir in four tablespoonfuls
of sago and two ounces and a half of sugar. Simmer for
twenty minutes, and when cool mix in two ounces of butter
and five beaten eggs. Place in a buttered pie-dish, round
which you have placed a band of puff-paste, and bake for an
hour.
Boiled Sago Pudding —Boil two ounces of sago in
one pint of milk ; when soft, let it cool, and add two pounded
Naples biscuits, five beaten eggs, a glass of brandy, and sugar
to taste. Boil for three-quarters of an hour in a buttered
basin, and serve with wine sauce poured over.
Plain Tapioca Pudding —Put one ounce and a half
of tapioca into water to soak, occasionally stirring it while
soaking. Sweeten three w r ell-beaten eggs and mix them with
a pint of cold milk. Drain the tapioca and stir it into the
eggs and milk. Bake in a buttered pie-dish, with a little
lemon peel grated over the top. Bake one hour.
Plain Treacle Pudding —lnto half a pound of flour
rub a spoonful of baking powder and three ounces of clarified
beef dripping. Add a small teaspoonful of ground ginger,
two tablespoonfuls of moist sugar, and two tablespoonfuls of
treacle. Mix into a thick batter with a little milk, and beat
well together for ten minutes. Put into a buttered basin, tie
over it a floured cloth, and boil for one hour and a half,


Eoiied Ddiuoarb Pudding —Peel four sticks of
rhubarb and cut them into inch long pieces. Line a buttered
basin with good suet crust and lay the rhubarb in it, filling
to the top. Scatter over it four ounces of moist sugar, and
put on a cover of suet crust. Moisten the edges of the paste,
and press them well together. Tie a floured cloth over, and
put in a saucepan of boiling water. The pudding will take
two and a half hours to boil. Serve turned out on a dish with
any sauce you prefer.
Plain Suet Pudding— To one pound of flour add four
ounces of chopped beef suet and a pinch of salt, and make into
a light paste with water. Fold in a pudding-cloth in a long
roll and boil two and a half or three hours. When the
pudding is done, cut in slices and butter between each slice.
This pudding may be boiled in a basin, turned out, and served
with sweet sauce.
Amber Pudding— Pare, core, and stew six apples to a
pulp. Add a little sugar, a few drops of essence of lemon,
and a glass of sherry wine. Beat the yolks of three eggs and
work into the mixture. Bake in a buttered pie-dish for ten
minutes. Whip the whites of the eggs, sweeten, and pile the
whip lightly on the top of the pudding ; then return to the
oven for a couple of minutes to set. Pink sugar may be
strewrf over the top just before it is sent to table.
Yorkshire Pudding— With the yolks of two eggs mix
a quarter of a pound of flour, and gradually add sufficient
milk to make a thin batter. Season with pepper and salt, and
beat in the whipped whites of the eggs. Cook in a greased
dripping pan under a roast of beef, allowing the gravy to fall
on the batter. From three-quarters of an hour to an hour will
cook this pudding. Send to table cut into squares, and serve
with roast beef only.
Hard Dumplings— Make half a pound of flour into a
stiff paste, with a pinch of salt and a little milk or water.
Make it into balls and boil for half an hour ; or boil in a cloth,
and when done serve in slices with butter between.
Yeast Dumplings —Take some nicely-risen dough and
divide it into pieces. Roll into balls and place in boiling
water. Boil for twenty minutes. Serve immediately on being
lifted from the saucepan, and with sweet sauce or gravy as
preferred. Yeast dumplings should never be divided with a
knife; they should be parted with forks. If the dough is
mixed with milk instead of water it will be an improvement,


Batter Pudding —Beat together the yolks of two eo-o- s
two ounces of flour, and a little milk, well mixing so that it be
not lumpy ; the batter should be smooth, and of the con-
sistency of very thick cream. Add an ounce of sugar, the
whipped whites of the eggs, and a little lemon juice or essence.
Beat well together, pour into a buttered basin, tie over a
floured cloth, and boil for an hour.
Fig Pudding —This is a delicious pudding if made
properly. Of finely-chopped suet, flour, bread crumbs, and
chopped apples, take of each a quarter of a pound ; add a
quarter of a pound of chopped dried figs, two ounces of sugar,
and three eggs ; put in two ounces of chopped candied lemon
peel and a tablespoonful of treacle ; mix thoroughly, and boil in
a buttered basin, with a cloth tied over, for two hours. Do
not let the water in the pan reach to the top of the basin;
most puddings are best steamed. It may be served with sweet*
or arrowroot sauce.
PANCAKES AND FRITTERS.
Pancakes— The following simple instructions will answer
in the preparation of most pancakes .-—Allow to each egg a
dessertspoonful of flour, a little grated nutmeg and ginger,
and a pinch of salt. Make into a batter with good ale or
milk. The batter should not be thicker than rich cream ; if
it is not quite smooth, it may be strained. Assure yourself
that the pan is so thoroughly clean that it will not discolour a
cloth rubbed over it, and make it very hot over the fire with
a bit of butter or good dripping in it. There must not be
more butter than what will well grease the pan. Stir up the
batter, and pour in sufficient to cover the bottom of the pan
to the thickness of a shilling. While the batter is setting,
move it over the pan, so as to ensure an equal thickness.
Shake the pan to ascertain if the pancake is loose; if it is, it
is ready for turning.
There are few persons who can toss a pancake. The easiest
w-ay is to turn it over a plate, and return to the pan to brown
the under side. A pancake will cook in about five minutes.
Common Pancakes —Stir three well-beaten eggs into a
pint of milk; add sufficient flour to make it into a thick
batter ; season with a pinch of salt and a little grated nutmeg.
Fry in boiling dripping ; roll up each pancake, and send to
table very hot, with lemon and sugar.


Batter for Fritters— About half a pint of water will
mix eight ounces of flour into a smooth batter. Melt two
ounces of butter, and stir in ; whisk the whites of two eggs to
a stiff froth, and mix in lightly.
Apple Fritters —Beat well the yolks of seven eggs with
the whites of three. Strain, and pour in a pint of new milk.
Season, and flavour with a pinch of salt, a little grated
nutmeg, and a glass of brandy. Beat well, and add enough of
flour to make a thick batter. Sprinkle with pounded white
sugar six large pared, cored, and sliced apples, and let
them lie with the sugar for an hour, at least. Have ready a
pan with hot lard, and, having dipped each slice of apple into
the batter, fry them for five or six minutes. Serve on a
napkin, with sugar sprinkled over. Apricot or peach fritters
may be made in the same way. Oranges may also be'used for
fritters, peeling and slicing them, and removing the seeds.
Oyster Fritters —Remove the beards from some
tolerably large oysters, dip them into the usual batter, and
then again in grated bread crumbs. Fry a nice light brown.
They will take five or six minutes. Oyster fritters are used
for garnishing fried fish of any kind.
Tomato Fritters —Tomato fritters are, I think, entirely
of colonial institution, but are very nice to those who are
fond of the fruit. Select young tomatoes, halve them, and
cut off both ends. Dust each piece with pepper and salt;
dip first in bread crumbs, and then in a plain batter. Try
slowly for six or seven minutes.
SOUFFLES AND OMELETTES.
Sweet Omelette —Beat the yolks of four eggs with an
ounce of sifted sugar, and a seasoning of vanilla or lemon.
Whip up and toss in lightly the whites of the four eggs.
Melt a little butter in a frying-pan, and hold over an equal
fire until set, when put the pan into a quick oven for a few
minutes, or brown with a salamander. Serve with preserves
or sugar strewn over. Omelettes should never be turned.
Friar’s Omelette —Stew to a pulp half a dozen or so
peeled, cored, and sliced apples; add a little Bugar, and two


ounces of butter. Mix in the yolk of one egg, and two ounces
of bread crumbs. Butter a pie-dish, and pile the mixture in
the middle of the dish. Place in a hot oven for a few
minutes to set the egg. Have ready the frothed whites of
two eggs, and pour them over the mixture when the eggs are
set. Dust over the whites with very finely-sifted loaf-sugar
and then return to the oven for a moment or two to brown. '
Cheese Omelette —Separate the yolks from the whitfes
of four eggs, and put the yolks into a basin. Add two table-
spoonfuls of grated cheese, a little pepper and salt, and a
squeeze of lemon juice. A teaspoonful of good vinegar mav
be substituted. Beat all together until well blended. Whip
the whites to a stiff froth, and mix them quickly with the
other ingredients. Melt a piece of butter in the frying-pan,
then pour the' omelette in and fry. Brown in the oven, or
with a salamander.
Omelette Souffles— Beat to a very stiff froth the
whites of twelve eggs. Beat six yolks separately with two
ounces of sugar, and flavouring to taste. Have ready a well-
buttered tin, immediately before pouring in the" souffle;
mix the whites and the yolks very quickly, place in a gentle
oven until it is well risen and of a golden brown. It must be
carefully watched, barely opening the oven wide enough to
peep in, so that it may be removed at once when it is done, as,
if it remains many minutes afterwards, it will fall flat. If
preferred, the souffle may be powdered with sugar before
putting in the oven, or after it is taken out.
Two spoonfuls of rice boiled in milk may be added to
this souffle with good effect. The rice may be flavoured with
vanilla, and orange flower water is an improvement to the
souffle when rice is not used.
Vanilla Souffle— Add to half a pint of thick, melted
butter an ounce of sifted sugar, and a few drops of vanilla.
Stir in the well-beaten yolks of three eggs, and the whisked
whites of four. Steam in a well-buttered shape for twenty
minutes or half an hour.
Chicken Souffle —Pound the raw flesh of the wings and
legs of a chicken in a mortar, and add three-quarters of a
pint of thick, melted butter. Season with pepper and salt,
and add the well-beaten yolks and whites of four eggs.
Steam as above, in a buttered shape.


CREAMS.
Lemon Cream— Soak the peel of three large lemons in
a pint of water for four or five hours, strain, and add to the
water six ounces of pounded loaf sugar and the juice of four
lemons. Add the beaten whites of six eggs, mix well, and
strain through a fine sieve. Stir over a fire, one ivay , until the
mixture is like good thick cream ; then take it off the fire and
stir until it is cold. Serve in a glass dish.
Orange cream is made by substituting oranges for lemons,
and adding the yolks of three eggs.
Velvet Cream —Whisk an egg with half a pint of very
thick cream until it is as thick as custard, and sweeten to taste
with pounded and sifted sugar. Make a custard with two
eggs, half a pint of cool boiled milk, an ounce of sugar, and
any flavouring preferred. Add r a glass of wine, and mix all
with the cream. Dissolve an ounce of gelatine in a little
warm milk and pour in. Dip a shape in cold water, pour in the
cream, and allow it to cool before turning out. Pink sugar
strewn over looks very pretty.
To Make Fink Sugar —Drop a few drops of cochineal
over some pounded and sifted loaf sugar, and rub well
together. It will soon dry and be ready for any ornamental
icing or decoration for sweet dishes.
Stone Cream —Place a layer of preserved apricots or
plums at the bottom of a glass dish. Add to a pint of cream
the peel of a lemon grated, sugar to taste, and half an ounce
of isinglass dissolved in a little water. Strain, boil one minute,
and pour into a jug. When nearly cold, add tlm juice of a
lemon already squeezed into a cup. Stir, and pour from the
spout of the jug over the preserves in the dish. Let it stund
all night before serving. A few ratafias may be placed on the
top.
Shape of Pine-Apple Cream —Whisk well a pint
of sweetened and very thick cream: then add three table-
spoonfuls of pine-apple syrup. Dissolve half an ounce of
gelatine and mix well with the cream. Dip a mould in water,
drain it, and pour in the cream. Let it stand all night, when
it may be turned out.


Coffee Cream— Boil three-quarters of a pint of milk
with a large cupful of made coffee. Beat the yolks of eight
eggs with four ounces of pounded sugar and add. Stir quickly
until it begins to thicken, when you may remove it from the
fire, and stir for a minute or two longer. Strain it over two
ounces of gelatine. Mix thoroughly until the gelatine is dis-
solved, and then pour the cream into a mould previouslv
dipped in cold water. Leave all night to set, or cool on rough
ice if in a hurry.
JELLIES AND SWEET DISHES.
Cow-heel J elly —Clean thoroughly two cow-heels, or
three calves’ feet. Soil them in a gallon of water for seven
hours, or until the water is reduced to three pints. Allow it
to cool, and then remove every particle of sediment or fat.
Separate the jelly from the feet, and put it in a stewpan. Add
a pint of white wine, half a pound of loaf-sugar, and the juice
of five lemons. Stir in the beaten whites of six eggs, and let
all boil for five minutes. Put the cut-up peels of four lemons
into a jelly bag, and run the jelly through it into a basin.
If it is not quite clear, run through the bag a second time.
Pour in a mould, and turn out twelve or fourteen hours after
it is made.
Chocolate Jelly —To a teacupful of cool boiled milk
add one ounce of dissolved gelatine, three well-beaten eggs,
three ounces of powdered chocolate, and sugar to taste. Stir
by the fire until the eggs are set. Pour the jelly into a damp
mould, and allow it to get quite cold before turning out.
Clear Apple Jelly— Boil two dozen and a half of
peeled and cored apples, and the peel of a lemon, in a pint
and a half of water for one hour and a half. When done,
strain through a jelly bag, and add ten ounces of isinglass,
dissolved in water, and three-quarters of a pound of loaf-
sugar. To every pint of the apple juice put in a quart of
water, and boil the whole for nearly half an hour before
pouring into the moulds.
Trifle —Fill in the middle of a trifle dish some sponge
cates soaked in white wine and brandy, and lay over them
some savoy and ratafia biscuits, soaking both also in the


wine and brandy. Pour over a custard made of the yolks of
four eggs, and three-quarters of a pint of milk, with what
flavour may be preferred. On the top of the custard place
any light jam—strawberry is best. Whip to a stiff froth the
whites of two eggs, and some sifted sugar, and pile up over
the preserve. It can be served immediately.
Gipsy Cake —Place a large, stale sponge cake in the
centre of the dish you serve it in, and cut a small hole in the
middle. Mix with sufficient sherry, or any white wine, to
thoroughly soak the cake, a glass and a half of brandy, and
the juice of half a lemon. Pour this into the sponge until it
is soaked. Cut two or three ounces of blanched sweet
almonds into long pieces, and stick them all over the cake, and
then pour over all a pint of very rich custard.
Charlotte KIUSSe —Line a buttered mould with finger
biscuits so trimmed and fitted into each other that none of
the filling may escape, and see that the browned side is next
the mould. Make a whipped cream with half a pint of
cream, a little sugar, half a pint of fresh fruit juice of any
kind, and one ounce of dissolved gelatine. Add the juice of
half a lemon, and pour into the biscuit-lined mould. Allow it
to thoroughly cool. Turn out and serve with clear, sweet
jelly round it.
Curd for Cheese Cakes— Beat two eggs, and add
to them a quart of milk, and two spoonfuls of lemon juice or
good vinegar. Boil a quart of water, and pour in the eggs
and lemon juice mixed with the milk. Let all boil until the
curd rises, when it may be lifted with a skimmer, and laid on
a sieve to drain.
Cheese Cakes —Beat four eggs into half a pint of good
curd. Add a quarter of a pound of washed and dried
currants, three spoonfuls of rich cream, a quarter of a nutmeg
grated, and a spoonful of ratafia. Mix well, and bake in
patty-pans, lined with puff-paste, for twenty minutes.
Lemon Cheese Cakes —Warm a quarter of a pound
of butter, and stir in a quarter of a pound of loaf-sugar.
When the sugar is dissolved, add the juice of one, and the
peels of two lemons grated. Mix in two well-beaten eggs, and
half a pint of good curd. Bake for fifteen or twenty minutes
in patty-pans, lined with a very rich paste. A few blanched
sweet almonds on the top of each will be an improvement.


Blancmange Place in a stewpan a pint and a half of
mdk and a pint of cream, two ounces of blanched and
pounded almonds, one ounce of pounded and blanched bitter
almonds, the juice of a lemon, and the peel grated. Add one
ounce of isinglass or gelatine, a spoonful of rose-water, and-
sugar to taste. Stir over the fire until the gelatine is
cissolved. Select a quart mould for these quantities. Mix a
tew drops of cochineal with sufficient of the nearly cold
blancmange, and with it fill the top ornament of the mould
and after a little time pour in the remainder of the blanc-
mange.
SECOND COURSE DISHES
RELISHES, ETC.
Indian Devil Mixture— Mix a tablespoonful of
chutney-paste with one of ketchup and one of vinegar. Add
four tablespoonfuls of cold gravy, two teaspoonfuls of made
mustard, two teaspoonfuls of salt, and one tablespoonful of
butter. Mix all thoroughly together in a soup plate, and place
in the mixture whatever cold meat, &c., you wish to devil
Stew gently until well warmed and serve.
Devilled Beef or HfCntton —Cut your cold meat in
thick shoes, sprinkle with pepper and salt, and fry or broil to a
nice brown. While your meat is browning, prepare the fol-
lowing Melt a piece of butter in a warm plate, and add a
little cayenne or black pepper, a little mustard, and a little
Worcestershire sauce or mushroom ketchup ; the juice of half
a lemon will also be an improvement. Mix all well together,
and, having wiped the grease from your slices of meat with a
cloth, spread them with the mixture on both sides. Serve as
hot as possible, and on a hot dish.
Ramakins —With two ounces of grated cheese mix a
tablespoonful of flour. Mix also two ounces of butter melted,
two spoonfuls of cream, and two well-beaten eggs; a little’
cayenne pepper may be added or omitted at pleasure. Bake in
small buttered tins for a quarter of an hour.
"Welsh Rahhit Tw'o ounces of cheese will make a good-
sized rabbit for one person. Cut it very small; melt a bit of
butter in a small saucepan, put in half a tablespoonful of ale
or milk, and a little pepper. Stir in the cheese, and keep stir-
ring over the fire qntil it is dissolved, when add a little


mustard. Have ready a round of hot, buttered toast, and pour
the rabbit over it. Colonial cheese is found to answer excel-
lently for this purpose.
Toasted Cheese —Melt the cheese in a little milk over
a slow fire, stirring all the time —it will take about ten minutes.
Add a little butter. When melted and quite smooth, remove
and mix with it one egg. Put in a small dish and brown
A before the fire in a toaster.
Macaroni and Cheese —Break a quarter of a pound
of macaroni into short lengths, well wash and place in a sauce-
pan just covered with cold water. Boil the macaroni slowly
for a quarter of an hour. When tender, drain and put it in a
i). j deep dish. Sprinkle through it some grated cheese, and put
little bits of butter with it. Add another sprinkling of cheese,
and cover over all with bread crumbs. Melt about two ounces
of butter and pour over the bread crumbs. Brown the top,
and serve very hot.
A Fondue —Work a quarter of a pound of butter into
three tablespoons of flour, and mix with it three gills of cream.
Add a little grated cheese, and stir over a slow fire for ten
minutes or a quarter of an hour. Beat the yolks of four eggs,
and when you have removed it from the fire stir the yolks into
the mixture. Whisk the whites, and lay lightly on the top of
the pie-dish you have placed the fondue in. Bake for half
an hour in a moderate oven.
MAKING- BISCUITS AND CAKES.
As a general rule, in biscuit and cake making, the butter and
sugar are beaten together to a cream, and the lightness of the
cake depends quite as much upon these being well beaten as it
does upon the beating or whisking of the eggs. The beaten
eggs are usually added to the butter and sugar, and the flour
and other ingredients worked in gradually afterwards.
Beat or whisk eggs in an earthen basin, and in a current of
air ; they will be much lighter.
Where only a few eggs are required, beat them until you
VV IKJrtJ UIUj lew cgga aic uv»u
can lift a spoonful free of strings.
Sour milk may be used with any alkali in the preparation of
plain cakes, but not where eggs are used.


Pour boiling water on almonds and let it remain until you
can take the skins off; then throw them into cold water to
bleach. Drain them, but do not wipe. This is called “ blanch-
ing almonds.
In preparing icing for cakes, to be successful you must use
the finest loaf-sugar, and either roll and sift it, or pound in a
mortar.
If you are not certain that a cake is done, pass a very thin
splint of wood into it deeply. If done, the splint will come
out clean, otherwise the dough or cake will adhere.
Try to have your oven of an equal heat throughout. More
depends on the baking than on the preparation of cakes and
biscuits.
Icmg for Cakes —To the frothed whites of three
add a quarter of a pound of rolled and sifted sugar, and
flavour according to taste with lemon or vanilla. Beat
together until it is white, but not too stiff. It is ready when
it may be spread smoothly with a knife on a cake.
Josephine Cake —To a quarter of a pound of butter
beaten to a cream add a quarter of a pound of sifted simar
Mix in a quarter of a pound of flour, a pinch of baking
powder, and a few drops of any flavouring you may prefer 3 .
Add the beaten yolks of two eggs, and thoroughly mix all.
Put in a tablespoonful of white wine, and stir. Whip the
whites of the two eggs and mix in lightly and quickly. Bake
for one hour.
Another Way Beat a quarter of a pound of butter
to a cream with a quarter of a pound of sifted sugar. Gradu-
ally add a quarter of a pound of Hour, a little of any preferred
flavouring, a pinch of baking powder, the yolks of two eggs
and al quarter of a pound of carefully cleaned and dried
currants. Pour in half a glass of sherry, and beat well
together Just before putting in the buttered tin, toss in
nT e whlpped whltes of the‘two eggs. It will bake in
about three-quarters of an hour.
Rice Cake— Beat together half a pound of sifted sugar
and six ounces of butter. Whip the whites of four eggs and
beat in with the butter and sugar. When well beaten and
white, add the yolks of the eggs and six ounces of ground
rice. Stir well, and bake in a tin lined with buttered paper
tor one hour. A few carraway seeds may be added if wished


Common Seed Cake —Thoroughly mix half a pound of
sugar with two pounds and a half of dried flour. Make a
batter the thickness of cream with half a pint of warm milk
and a little flour ; add to it half a pint of good yeast, and pour
into a hole in the middle of two pounds and a half of flour.
Let it stand by the fire for an hour. Melt half a pound of
butter and stir it into the sponge with one ounce of carraway
seeds. Make all into a dough with milk, and bake in a tin or
hoop lined with buttered paper for two hours. When you
draw it from the oven brush over the top with milk.
Sponge Cake —Beat the yolks of five eggs with half a
pound of sifted sugar. Beat with a fork for fully half an
hour. Add the juice of half a lemon. Stir in the weight of
three eggs in flour. Whip the whites of the five eggs to a
stiff froth, and beat them lightly into the mixture. Butter
and dredge well with sifted loaf-sugar a cake shape, pour in
the mixture, and bake in a quick oven for half an hour. Or
you can bake in small cakes for half an hour.
Lemon Cake —Half a pound of pounded and sifted sugar
beaten well with the yolks of six eggs. Whisk for a quarter
of an hour the whites of the eggs and add. Stir in gradually
seven ounces of flour and the grated peel of a lemon. Bake
for one hour in a buttered tin.
Pound Cairo —Beat to a cream one pound of butter, add
one pound of sugar, one pound of sifted flour, one pound of
cleaned and well dried currants, and one pound of stoned and
cleaned raisins, a quarter of a pound of chopped candied peel,
the juice of half ale non, and the yolks of four eggs. Beat
all together well with sufficient milk to make it moist. Whip
the whites of the eggs and toss in lightly. Bake in a buttered
tin for an hour and a quarter.
Soda Cake —Beat six ounces of butter into one quarter
of a pound of sugar; add a teaspoonful of carbonate of
soda. Beat two eggs and half a pint of milk. Mix all
together, and bake for one hour and a quarter. See that the,
oven is hot.
Another Way —Mix thoroughly a quarter of a pound of
sugar with one pound of floif)*, melt a small teaspoonful of
carbonate of soda in a spoonful of warm water, and stir it,
when dissolved, into half a pint of milk. Beat two eggs
well, and when you have rubbed six ounces of butter into
the flour add the eggs and the milk, mix all well together,
and bake in a greased tin. This cake requires a steady


bven, and will take an hour and a half or two hours to
bake. It must not stand in the tin, but be baked
immediately.
Scones— One pound of flour, half a teaspoonful of
s*lt, half a teaspoonful of carbonate of soda, and half a
of cream of tartar. Mix all thoroughly and
make into a light dough with sour milk or buttermilk
Work very lightly and roll the dough out to the thickness
of a half inch or three-quarters of an inch. Have a
griddle heated over a clear and pretty hot fire, cut the
dough into squares, and bake on the griddle for a few
minutes, when turn and bake on the other side. The
scones should rise well and be arranged on edge to cool
after being baked.
. Dropped Scones —The same ingredients and quanti-
ties as for scones, but make into a thick batter with more
milk Beat well, and haying greased your hot griddle drop
the mixture on it from a spoon —-one spoonful or one
spoonful and a half may be used for each little scone.
They ought to rise in two minutes and be then turned.
Bile over each other on a hot plate as they are baked,
and serve hot and buttered.
Oatmeal Biscuits— -Mix together two heaped table-
spoonfuls of flour, one heaped tablespoonful of fine oatmeal,
a heaped tablespoonful of sugar, sifted, and a pinch each of
baking powder and allspice. Make into a pretty firm
dough with one well-beaten egg, adding a little milk or
water if the egg should not sufficiently moisten. Knead
the dough well and roll out very thin. Cut the dough
into biscuits with a paste-cutter or tumbler, or in any
shape you prefer, pierce them here and there with a fork,
and bake in a cool oven for a quarter of an hour.
Short-Bread —Three-quarters of a pound of flour, half
a pound of butter, a quarter of a pound of sugar, and
a quarter of a pound of ground rice. Work all well
together to a paste, and roll out to the thickness of a
little more than half an inch. Bake in a steady oven for
half to three-quarters of an hour, or until of a nice pale
gold colour. Ornament with an icing, over which coloured
and white comfits may be scattered. The icing is better
for short-bread to be forced on the cake through a tube.


Plain Short-Bread— Mix one pound of flour, half a
pound of butter, and three ounces of brown sugar,* roll out
thick and bake for half an hour.
Ginger-Bread —Melt in a saucepan half a pound of
butter, half a pound of sugar, and half a pound of treacle.
When melted pour this mixture oyer, and well mix it
with four beaten eggs. Add half an ounce of ground
ginger and a teaspoonful of carbonate of soda. Stir all
into one pound of flour, beat well together, and bake in
shallow tins for three-quarters of an hour.
Ginger-Bread Nuts —Melt together one pound of
sugar, two pounds of treacle, and three-quarters of a
pound of butter. When melted, stir in four ounces of
ground ginger, one ounce of allspice, two spoonfuls of
coriander seed, two spoonfuls .of brandy, and a little orange
peel cut rery small, and four pounds of flour. Mix all
into a paste * with the beaten yolks of four eggs. Shape
into nuts or small cakes, and bake on buttered paper from
twenty minutes to half an hour.
Ginger Snaps —Into a pound of fine flour well work
a pound of butter. Add half a pound of treacle, a quarter
of a pound of brown sugar, a tablcspoonful of ground
ginger, and a tablespoonful of carraway seeds. Work all
together thoroughly, and make into very thin, small cakes,
bake on a tin in a moderate oven for twenty minutes.
The snaps ought to be dry and crisp.
Plain Cake —Rub a quarter of a pound of beef
dripping into a pound of flour, add a quarter of a pound
of moist sugar, and mix well. Beat up two eggs and mix
into the eggs two spoonfuls of good yeast, and two ounces
of carraway seeds. Beat all well together, and bake in
a buttered tin from one hour to one hour and a half,
according to the beat of the oven.
Plain Plum Cake— Rub together eight ounces of
butter and two pounds of dried flour. Mix with it three
spoonfuls of good, sweet yeast, and let the dough stand in
a warm place to rise for an hour and a half. Beat the
yolks and whites of four eggs separately, and add to them
one pound of brown sugar. Mix in a glass of sweet wine,
the peel of a lemon grated, and a teaspoonful of ginger.
Work all well into the dough and make it into a proper
consistency with a little milk, if necessary. Work in at


last one pound of well washed and thoroughly dried
currants. A few carraways may be added. Bake in a
tin for two hours and a half.
Hicll Plum Cake —Take one. pound of fresh butter
and beat it to cream with your hand. Beat the yolks of
twelve eggs with one pound of brown sugar and add to
the butter. Blanch and chop fine half a pound of
almonds, and add with half a pound of mixed spice.
Stone and chop fine one pound of raisins. Clean and dry
three pounds of currants, and cut into pieces half a pound
of candied orange and lemon peel. Beat all well together
with the hand, and bake for two hours, or more, in a
tin lined with buttered paper.
Hock Cakes —Mix a pound of dried flour and half a
pound of brown sugar, and rub in half a pound of butter.
Add forty drops of essence of lemon, two beaten eggs, and
half a glass of white wine or brandy. Stir all well
together, and drop from a spoon on a hot baking plate.
These cakes will bake in half an hour.
Plain Biscuits —Melt two ounces and a half of
butter in half a pint of milk ; do not allow it to become
more than warm before you stir in one pound of flour.
Knead it into a firm paste, roll out very thin, and cut into
biscruts with a tin cutter or tumbler. Pierce with a fork
and hake for ten minutes.
Sally Bunn Cake —When a pint of boiled milk has
become lukewarm add to it half a tumbler of yeast. Stir well,
and mix into a stiff batter with sufßcient flour. Cover closely
with a cloth, and place near the fire to rise for two hours.
Beat up two eggs with two ounces of powdered sugar and a
quarter of a pound of butter. When the dough has risen, add
the eggs and sugar and butter. Knead well, and let it rise
again by the fire for half an hour. Then divide into cakes or
buns, and bake on a tin in a well-heated oven for half an
hour.
To Blake Buns —Weigh two pounds of flour and put it
in a pan. Warm a quart of milk, and mix with it two spoon-
fuls of yeast. Make a hole in the middle of the flour and mix
in the milk and yeast gradually. Cover, and let it stand till
risen before the Are. It will rise in one hour. When risen,
mix in half an ounce of carraway seeds, a little nutmeg and
lemon peel, a quarter of a pound of sifted sugar, and two eggs.


Knead lightly, form into buns, and place them upon a buttered
baking tin. Brush them over with egg : and cover before the
fire for another half an hour. About twenty minutes will
bake them. The buns are better if not too large.
PRESERVES AND PICKLES.
If you wish to make either preserves or pickles good, the
greatest care will be necessary in selecting the very best
materials. For preserves, select sound fruit, rejecting any-
thing in the least blemished, or decayed. Pick it all carefully
so that leaves, stalks, etc., are certain to be removed. Use
loaf or well refined white sugar ; for the clarifying of sugar a
receipt will be found in another part of this book.
Broad, shallow,, enamelled pans are now most generally used
for the making of preserves —their shape exposes a greater
surface, and allows the steam to evaporate more rapidly. But
many still prefer the brass or copper pan.
If a brass preserving pan is used it must be thoroughly
cleaned, as the acid of fruit acts upon the metal, and creates a
dangerous poison. These pans are generally scoured bright
with bath-brick and vinegar, but if you have half of a lemon
from which the juice has been squeezed, the pan may be well
cleaned with it dipped in powdered bat.h-brick. Always wipe
the pan, and thoroughly dry over the fire before putting in
your fruit.
Never use a metal spoon in tlie stirring of preserves a
wooden one is best, and be sure to take off every particle of
scum as it rises.
When the preserves are ready, pour them hot into the jars,
and while hot, or at least very warm, place in each jar a
piece of paper, cut to the size, so as to fit inside the rim, and
dipped in brandy ; over this pour warm, melted, mutton suet.
When the melted mutton suet i 3 cold, tie over that again
bladder, or strong brown paper. By this treatment the air is
excluded, and jams thus covered will keep in a dry place for
years.
Strawberry Jam —Scarlet strawberries should be cbosen
for making jam, not so much for the flavour as for the colour.
Half a pound of sugar will be sufficient for each pound of
strawberries. Weigh the strawberries and place them in the


pan. Let them boil for half an hour over a moderate fire,
stirring constantly all the time. Take half the weight of
chopped loaf-sugar, and mix with the strawberries, removing
the pan from the fire while so doing. When the sugar is well
mixed in, boil the jam quickly for another half hour, carefully
skimming as the scum rises. Pour into pots, and when cold
cover with papers dipped in brandy and brushed over with
white of egg, or according to previous instructions as
experience prefers.
Raspberry Jam —Three-quarters of a pound of sugar
to each pound of fruit. Place the fruit in the pan, and allow
it to .boil for twenty minutes, mashing the raspberries well as
they become heated, and boil. Add the sugar, mix well, skim
carefully, and boil for half an hour more. The jam should be
stirred constantly. When done, pot, and cover.
Red Gooseberry Jam— Carefully pick the goose-
berries free from leaves, etc., and top and tail them closely.
Boil them quickly in the preserving pan for half an hour,
carefully stirring, to prevent adherence to the pan. Add
rather more than half the weight of gooseberries in sugar,
pounded fine, and boil again quickly for a half or three-
quarters of an hour—experience will soon tell you when the
jam is of the proper consistency. Pot, and cover as previously
directed. Bough red gooseberries are the best for jam.
Damson Jam —Allow three-quarters of a pound of loaf-
sugar to each pound of the damsons. Pick the fruit carefully,
and pierce each plum two or three times with a large needle.
Lay them on a dish, and strew the pounded sugar over them.
L£t them remain so all night. On the day following, place in
a pan, and simmer gently for half an hour, then boil quickly
for another quarter of an hour. Skim as the scum rises.
Pot, and cover as usual.
Black Currant Jam —The proper proportions for
black currant jam are three-quarters of a pound of sugar to
every pound of currants. The currants ought to be gathered
on a dry day, and when they are perfectly ripe. Pick them
carefully from the stalk, and with a spoon bruise them a
little in a basin. Mix with the sugar, pounded very fine, and
then put all into the pan. Boil about three-quarters of an
hour, stirring and skimming constantly. Pot when boiled,
and cover as usual with brandied paper, and melted suet or
egged paper.


Tomato Jam —Select small, round, red tomatoes. Take
off the stalks, wash and carefully dry each. Cut each
tomato in half, and squeeze until juice and pips are extracted.
Put all in a preserving pan, stir and boil for half an hour.
When it has boiled for that time, press it through a sieve
with a wooden spoon. Return to the pan, and boil until it is
pretty thick. Having previously weighed your pan, you will
now be able to weigh the whole, and add to each pound of
the tomato three-quarters of a pound of sugar, and a little
essence of lemon and almond. Boil again quickly for
twenty-five minutes, stirring constantly with a long wooden
spoon, or stick, as it will be sure to splash. To see if
it is done drop a little on a cold plate —if it becomes firm in
a few minutes you may take it from the fire. This jam
should be poured into hot vessels, and allowed to cool
thoroughly before being tied up for keeping.
Orange Jelly —G-rate the rinds of two lemons and
three oranges, cut the grated oranges in halves, and extract
the pulps. Remove the pips, and boil the pulps and grated
rinds together for twenty minutes with a pint of water.
Strain through a fine sieve and return to the pan. Add
three-auarters of a pound of finely-pounded loaf-sugar, the
juice of the two lemons, and when all has boiled for
another twenty minutes remove from the fire, stir in two
ounces of dissolved gelatine. Pot while warm, and when cold
cover with brandied and egged papers.
Black Currant Jelly— Pick, the currants carefully,
and place them in a jar or pan with a few spoonfuls of
water —half a pint to five pounds of fruit will be found
sufficient. Cover the jar and let it stand in the oven for an
hour and a quarter. Remove and strain through a coarse
cloth. Measure the juice, and to every pint put a pound of
broken loaf-sugar. About three-quarters of an hour will
suffice to boil the juice and sugar together, when it may be
potted. When cold, fit in your previously cut and brandied
papers, and tie down closely with bladder.
Hed Currant Jelly— Sift about half a pound of
pounded lump sugar over a gallon of picked and cleaned red
and white currants, and let them lie on the dish all night.
Next day put the fruit into a preserving pan and set it over a
slow fire for twenty minutes, or until the juice has discharged
freelv. Remove and strain through a hair sieve, and after-
wards through a jelly-bag —it must be quite hot when passed


through the bag. Measure and add to every quart of juice
one pound of powdered loaf-sugar. Return to the pan and
boil quickly for twenty minutes, skimming as it requires it.
Pot in small jars or glasses, cover with brandied paper, and
tie over thick white paper.
Orange Marmalade —Cut, six pounds of Seville
oranges so as to separate the peel without cutting the orange,
and remove the peels. Place the halved peels, which will be
cup shaped, in the preserving pan with a good quantity of
water, and boil until the peels are so tender that they may be
easily pierced with the head of a pin—it will take over an
hour. While they are boiling, press the insides of the oranges
through a coarse sieve that will separate the seeds and skin
from the thicker parts and juice. Allow the peels to partially
cool, and slice them into very thin shreds. Now return the
strained juice and sliced peels to the pan with eight pounds
of loaf-sugar pounded roughly. Boil for a quarter of an hour
and pot.
Apple Marmalade —Quarter and core (but do not
pare) some apples which are fully grown, but not ripe, and
put them in your preserving pan with more than enough of
water to cover them. Boil for an hour, or until they are
pulped enough to squeeze through a coarse cloth, so as to
leave the peels behind. To every quart of pulp allow one
pound of sugar, and boil all for forty minutes, carefully
stirring all the time. Pot in large pots, as apple marmalade
keeps best in large quantities.
Melon Marmalade —Choose a pie melon that is hard,
and green, and solid. Take off the skin, and after cutting
it into pieces carefully exit out the seeds and spongy parts.
Slice and chop into dice the best parts, and spread the dice on
a large dish, sprinkle over them about a pound and a half of
sifted sugar, and let them remain all night. Peel and pulp
through a sieve six oranges and six lemons, and place the pulp,
with a pint of water and three-quarters of a pound of loaf-
sugar for every pound of the melon, in your pan. When this
boils, put in the diced melon, and boil for four hours, stirring
sufficiently to prevent adherence. Slice the lemon and orange
peels very small, and add as soon as it comes to the boil. If
this marmalade is carefully made, the jelly will be beautifully
clear, and every bit of the melon transparent.
Rhubarb Marmalade —Haying cleaned and skinned
the stalks of rhubarb, cut them into inch long pieces, weigh


them, and allow one pound of loaf-sugar to every pound and
a half of the rhubarb. Blanch and cut in little bits a quarter
of an ounce of bitter almonds, and slice the peel of a large
lemon very thin. Place all in the preseiwing pan, and boil
from an hour to an hour and a half, according to the age of
the rhubarb. Pot and cover as usual.
PICKLES
Use only the very best vinegars ; good pickles depend
entirely on the quality of the vinegar. White wine vinegar is
best.
Use no metals in the preparation of pickles, not even a steel
knife —a wooden knife may be inconvenient, but it is safe
from corrosion by the acid of the vinegar.
Boil your vinegar in an enamelled saucepan if possible, or
in a glazed earthenware pipkin, and put the pickles in glass
bottles, or unglazed earthenware jars, the acid, acting upon the
glaze of earthenware, producing a mineral poison.
The pickles should always be covered while steaming, as
evaporation injures the colour.
To Pickle Red Cabbage— Having removed the out-
side leaves from some red cabbages wipe the hearts very clean
with a dry cloth. To make nice pickle 3 the hearts should be
firm and small, and of a good colour. Slice them in long
shreds, sprinkle well with salt, and lay them on a sieve all
night to drain. Put them in jars the next day, filling the jars
only three parts full, and pour over hot vinegar in which some
whole pepper has been boiled—one ounce of whole pepper to
each quart of vinegar will be found enough.
To Pickle Onions —Peel nice, small, hard onions, and
boil them in plenty of water until quite clear —the water
should be boiling wdien the onions are thrown in. Take them
out and dry between two cloths. Thr's parts fill your jars,
and pour over the hot vinegar in which some whole pepper
and a little broken ginger has been boiled.
To Pickle Gherkins —Mix one pound of salt in two
quarts of water, choose even-sized gherkins a.nd let them lay
in the salt and water for two hours. Place them on a sieve to
drain, and when quite dry, pack them in your jars, taking care
to leave room for the vinegar. Boil in two quarts of vinegar


a quarter of an ounce of mace, a quarter of an ounce of
cloves, half an ounce of mustard seed, half an ounce of allspice,
half a stick of horse-radish, two ounces of ginger, three bay
leaves, half a nutmeg, and a little salt. Pour the vinegar and
spices hot over the gherkins, cover them closely and let them
stand for twenty-four hours. At the end of that time set the
jars in a broad bottomed pan, with sufficient water to reach
half way up the jars, and simmer until they are green—they
must not boil or the colour will be spoiled. When cold, cork
the jars and cover over with leather well tied down.
To Pickle French Beans —The beans must be
young. String them and remove the stalks. Put them in
strong salt and water until they become of a yellowish tint,
then drain and wipe them dry. Put them into a stone jar,
and pour the boiling vinegar over them, covering them closely
so that the steam is kept in. Two ounces each of whole
pepper and ginger, and a blade of mace, will be sufficient spice
to boil in one quart of vinegar. A little bit of alum may be
put in each jar, and if the vinegar be re-boiled and again
poured hot over the beans, their colour will be improved.
To Pickle Mushrooms —Select small button mush-
rooms. Do imt wash them, but wipe carefully with a bit of
flannel, dipped in vinegar. Place them in a saucepan, and
add a little pepper and salt, a little pOunded mace, two or
three cloves, and as much vinegar as will about half cover
them. Let them stew until a good deal of liquid has been
extracted from the mushrooms, when they must be removed
from the fire, and stand by it until the mushrooms have again
absorbed most of the liquor. Bottle, and pour cold boiled
vinegar over them.
Piccalilly —-Take one pound of ginger and lay it in salt
and water for twelve hours. Peel and divide one pound of
garlic, and let it also lie in salt and water three days, and then
wash it and drain on a sieve. Slice the ginger thin. Take
one pound of black pepper, one pound of mustard seed, three-
quarters of an ounce of turmeric, and a little cayenne pepper.
Put all these ingredients in a jar, and pour over them a quart
of hot boiled vinegar. Gherkins, cauliflower, small onions, and
French beans are usually selected for piccalilly, and all must
lie in salt and water for three days, and be afterwards dried
in the sun before they are added to the pickle. When you
put in the vegetables, cover all closely, and do not use for at
least six weeks.


Pickled Eggs —Soil in a pint of vinegar half an ounce
of whole pepper, a quarter of an ounce of allspice, and one
blade of mace. Boil a dozen eggs very hard, and, when you
take them out of the pan, put them into cold water to
loosen the shell, one by one, and peel them quickly, so that the
hot vinegar may be poured over the eggs when they are quite
hot. Lay the eggs ivhole in your jar, pour over the vinegar,
and cover closely.
BREWING AT HOME-WINES, ETC.
Home Brewed Beer —A wooden tub with a bung near
the bottom, a small cask, and a boiler that will hold at least
three gallons, will be required. One peck of malt and two
ounces of hops will make between five and six gallons of beer.
Lay a little wheat straw at the bottom of your tub, and
cover over with a coarse cloth ; a bit of coarse essing will do
well. Put in the peck of malt and pour over it three gallons
of boiling water. Let it stand near the fire three days, closely
covered with a sack. At the end of three days draw off the
liquid by means of the cork, or bung, in the tub, and pour on
another three gallons of boilmg water, cover close, and let it
stand for another two hours.
Put the first three gallons which you have run off into the
boiler with the two ounces of hops, and boil it for a quarter of
an hour; strain into a shallow dish to cool quickly.
Draw off the second three gallons from the tub, and boil
with the same hops for half an hour. Strain that also and
allow it to cool. When milk-warm, mix both three gallons
together and add a small cupful of good yeast; it must
ferment for two or three days and be skimmed frequently.
The yeast skimmed from this beer may be used for bread-
baking.
When the beer has ceased fermenting, put it in a small cask
that will just hold it, and permit the superfluous fermentation
to work out of the bung-hole, which should be in the side of
the barrel. When it ceases to throw up scum or froth, stop
the beer close down with a bung. The longer it is left
without being drawn the better the beer wall drink, if it is
closely excluded from the air.
Elder Wine —There are plenty of elderberries in many
parts of the colonies, and they make a very superior wine.


Choose five gallons of ripe elderberries, and boil them in ten
quarts of water for fifteen minutes, strain and measure the
liquor. To every gallon add three pounds and a half of moist
sugar, and the peels and strained juice of five lemons. Let it
boil for twenty minutes more. Remove, but while scalding
hot add the beaten whites of six eggs, and stir well. Pour it
into the cask, and when lukewarm add a little yeast on the top
of the cask, or a bit of toast spread with yeast. Tie half a
pound of bruised ginger in a bit of muslin, and, before you put
in the bung, hang it in the middle of the cask. Bottle in two
months. '
Mock Champagne —Select nice grapes before they are
ripe, and bruise them in a tub. To every quart of grapes pour
in a quart of water. Let them stand for three days ; they
may be stirred round once or twice a day. Strain, and allow
the juice to stand until it settles. Pour off from the sediment,
and stir in three pounds of loaf-sugar to every gallon of the
juice. Put it in the barrel with the bung loosely in, and let it
remain until it has done working, which will be in about
three weeks.
Lemonade —Pour a quart of water on the grated peel of
six lemons. After it has stood for some hours add the pulp
and juice, but not the pips, of the lemons. Sweeten with
sugar which has been carefully clarified, run it through a jelly-
bag, and bottle ; or it may be used fresh if preferred.
Gingerbeer —Weigh five pounds of loaf-sugar and three
ounces of ginger ; boil them in three gallons of water for an
hour. Allow it to cool, and add the juice and peels of five
lemons. Let it stand in a vessel, placing a bit of toast covered
with plenty of yeast at the top, for two or three days, keeping
it closely covered. Strain through a thick cloth, and bottle.
More ginger may be added if wished. The beer will be ready
to drink in four or five days.
Wine Wliey —Sweeten the milk to your taste and put it
over the fire to boil. When it boils pour in, to every pint of
milk, a wine-glassful of sherry wine. When it curds, strain
through muslin, and it is ready for use.
Egg Flip— A quarter of a pound of sugar and three eggs
beaten well together. Heat, but do not boil, a pint and a half
of beer, and mix gradually with the eggs and sugar. Pour
from the saucepan to a jug and back again several times, grate
over a little nutmeg, and serve. A wine-glass of spirits may
be added.


RECEIPTS FOR THE SICK ROOM.
Barley "Water —Scald two ounces of barley, and drain.
Put the scalded barley in a jug and pour some boiling water
over it. Pour a little boiling water over the peel of a lemon,
sliced very thin, and sugar to taste. Mix with the barley
water, strain, and add the juice of the lemon.
Cream of Barley —Mince two ounces of veal very finely,
and put on the fire, in a pan, with two ounces of pearl barley
and a pint of cold water. Simmer for an hour, rub it through
a sieve, add a little milk, and season with pepper and salt to
taste.
Barley Gruel —Two ounces of pearl barley and half a
pint of water. Boil for a few minutes, strain, and add three
pints and a half of fresh water to the barley. Boil down to
half the quantify, strain, and salt or sweeten to taste.
Hasty Beef Tea— Cut a quarter of a pound of lean
beef very small, put it in a pan, with a cupful of cold water
and a little salt. Boil for ten minutes, strain, skim off the fat,
and serve.
Strong Beef Tea —Mince, or pound very fine, one pound
of gravy beef, and add a very little salt. Put it into a jar,
and, having twisted a bit of greased paper over the top, set it
in a saucepan of cold water. Bring to the boil, and boil
slowly for two hours. Season to taste. This is the very
essence of beef.
Raw Beef Tea —Two ounces of gravy beef and four
tablespoonfuls of cold water. Mince the beef fine and pour
the water over it. it stand until all the juice is extracted
and the meat has lost its red colour. Strain, and add a pinch
of salt.
Sago Gruel —Let an ounce of sago soften in one pint of
water for two hours. Boil then for a quarter of an hour,
stirring almost constantly. Sweeten to taste, and before
serving, add a glass of sherry, and a little lemon juice, or
nutmeg.
Oatmeal Gruel —Mix with a little milk one ounce of oat-
meal, and add gradually a pint of water. Stir until it comes
to the boil, and boil twenty minutes. Salt or sweeten to taste,
and add a little grated lemon rind.


Oatmeal Jelly —Pour a pint of boiling water on a
quarter of a pound of oatmeal, stir well, and let it stand for
ten minutes. Stir again and strain through a sieve. Put on
to boil in a saucepan with half a glass of white wine, a little
sugar, and a squeeze of lemon juice. Boil for ten minutes, and
serve when nearly cold, with a little grated nutmeg over.
Arrowroot A dessertspoonful of the best arrowroot.
Mix smooth with a very little water. Pour half a pint of
boiling milk on the arrowroot, stirring all the time. Add a
little grated lemon peel, and sweeten with lump sugar.
Water Arrowroot —Make a dessertspoonful of arrow-
root quite smooth with a little water, and pour on it gradually
boiling water, stirring it until it becomes clear. Sweeten,
and add a tablespoonful of brandy, or a glass of wine. The
arrowroot may be mixed with the wine or brandy instead of
water.
Itice Water Boil two tablespoonfuls of rice in a quart
of water for twenty minutes. Strain, and sweeten to taste.
Allow it to be quite cold before using. This drink is useful
m cases of dysentery, colds, or sore throats.
Apple Water— Slice two whole apples into a jug, with
the juice of half a lemon. Add about an inch of stick cinna-
mon, and five or six lumps of sugar. Pour over a quart of
boiling water anu let it stand till cold. Strain, when it is
ready for use.
Strengthening Drink for an Invalid— Beat well
two eggs and a tablespoonful of sifted sugar. Mix in half a
glass of sherry and a bottle of soda water. Pour the liquid
from one vessel to another until well mixed. This drink must
only be made when it is required ; not stand.
Suet and Milk —Mince a tablespoonful of fresh beef
suet and mix with half a pint of new milk. Set it by the
fire in a saucepan until the suet is completely melted; it
should not boil. When the suet has melted, skim well and
serve in a warm cup.
Milk and Bum —The proportions are one tablespoonful
of rum to half a pint of new milk ; mix and pour from one
cup to another twice, to thoroughly incorporate. Pour into a
clean tumble-** and serve. This is usually acfininistered before
breakfast.


Fish for Invalids —Clean and scale a whiting, or any
other delicate white fish, and bone and cut it into fillets.
Take the skin from the slices. Well wash, and boil in half a
pint of water, the head, bones, fins, skin, etc. Boil a little
milk in another saucepan, and when you have sprinkled each
with salt and lemon juice, tie each fillet in a roll with a bit of
string. When the trimmings have boiled for half an
hour, strain and pour the gravy into the boiling milk. Add a
little bit of butter and a pinch of salt. Lay in the fillets and
boil slowly for a quarter of an hour. Before serving, remove
the strings, pour some of the gravy over the fillets, and serve.
Invalid’s Soup —Place one pound of finely-chopped lean
veal in a pan with a quart of water. Add a parboiled onion,
three cloves, and a blade of mace. Boil for one hour,
season lightly with pepper and salt, and strain into another
saucepan. Add two ounces of ground rice, tapioca, or
semolina. Boil again for fifteen or twenty minutes, then stir
in two well-beaten eggs, and a tea-cupful of sweet milk.
Beat up without boiling and serve.
Invalid’s Padding— Mix two ounces of bread crumbs
with two ounces of finely-chopped suet, and two ounces of
flour. Add one ounce of sugar and any seasoning preferred.
Beat all with one egg, and a little milk if it is not moist
enough to beat thoroughly. Grease a shape or breakfast
cup, twist over the top a bit of white greased paper, and
steam for half-an-hour.
Arrowroot Pudding— Rub smooth with a little water
one tablespoonful of arrowroot, and stir gradually in half a
pint of boiling milk. Sweeten to taste, and add the well-
beaten yolks of two eggs. You may season to taste with
lemon juice or nutmeg. Bake in a buttered pie dish for ten
minutes, adding, if you wish, the whipped whites of the eggs
on the top.
Egg Wine —Beat a newly-laid egg with a little water.
Mix half a tumbler of white wine with half a tumbler of
hot water, and a little pounded sugar. Stir well, and heat
over the fire until it thickens, but do not allow it to boil.
Stir one way all the time, and pour into a glass. Toast a
small round of bread, remove the crust, and cut the toast into
long, narrow sippets. Lay two or three one way on a plate,
and two or three more crosswise. Serve with th@ wine.


A FEW GENERAL HINTS ON
CARVING.
An ability to carve well is a domestic accomplishment
too much neglected in middle class life, as nothing is more
disagreeable and unappetising at table than to see a joint
hacked to pieces by a bad carver.
Let the dish on which the joint to be carved is served
be sufficiently near the carver to ensure his perfect control
over it, when the joints, especially of fowl, may be separated
with greater ease than if the joint is inconveniently far
away from him. Before commencing, it is well to ascertain
if the carving knife is in proper order, as the most experienced
carver may vainly try to neatly cut up with a blunt or
hacked knife.
In the carving of poultry, more especially, a knowledge
of the joints and their exact position is • very necessary
to prevent an awkwardness at table, which is almost as
unpleasant to witness as it is to the amateur carver
himself. To become a good carver, as for any other
accomplishment, practice is necessary. It is a good
arrangement that gives the carving, on home days, to
each member of the family in succession.
Do not allow steel in any form to come in contact with
fish. A silver slice or knife should be always used. In
helping fish, try to avoid breaking the flakes, and serve
to each plate neatly.


SIRLOIN OF BEEF,
f. In carving
sirloin of beef
it is usual to
first serve the
undercut, carv-
ing across the
bone in the
manner shown
in the engraving.
In carving the
upper part, the
slices may be
either cut in
the centre, across the bone, or lengthways from A to B
The fat may be served from D.
RIBS OF BEEF.
The easiest and now most common way to carve this joint
isjto cut in the centre across the bone. As a matter of taste,
however, it may be carved lengthways, as from A to B in the
engraving of a sirloin. The fat can also be helped from D.
The long slices may be cut beginning at the centre or from
the sides, as preferred. Sometimes the bones are removed,
and this joint filleted, when it is carved as a round of beef.
FILLET OF VEAL,
If the fillet is roasted
the upper part will be
nicely browned. Take
a slice from the whole
round at first and then
carve to serve, adding
to each plate a piece
of the first outer slice.
Help the stuffing,
which ought to fill the
place of the removed
bone and be skewered
iii tlie flap, and a little fat also to each plate,


NECK OF VEAL.
The old style of carving a neck of mutton or veal, by
separating each chop, is quite exploded, the success in carving
being so entirely dependent on the butcher’s careful jointing of
the meat. Cut in diagonal slices from Atoß, as marked in
the engraving, and do not cut in thin slices, a moderate thick-
ness retaining the juice better. Cut also from Cto D, some
persons preferring the small bones, which you thus remove
entirely from the joint. It is unnecessary to say that the
small bones are separated before helping.
BREAST OP VEAL.
To carve properly a breast of veal, it will be necessary to
first separate the ribs from the brisket, cutting from A to B,
as in engraving. The small ribs are generally preferred as
being sweetest, and must be carved as at D, D, D. Divide the
long ribs as at 0, C, C. Inquire which part is preferred, and


serve to each person accordingly. The scrag end is usually
cut from this joint before it is cooked, and used for a stew
or gravy.
LOIN OF VEAL.
When a loin of veal is served, the carver turns it over and
removes the kidney and its fat. When this is done, replace
the joint on the dish, and carve in slices as fromß to A in the
engraving of a neck of veal. A piece of toast should be sent
to table with a loin of veal, and the kidney and fat is placed
upon the toast, when the carver cuts them from under the
joint. Help with the veal a slice of kidney and fat.
SHOULDER OF VEAL.
Send a shoulder of veal to table with the under part
uppermost. Carve from the knuckle end as for a shoulder
of mutton.
CALF’S HEAD.
A calf’s head,
properly carved,
will serve a good
deal more meat
than if ignorantly
cut. Commence
from A to B,
sinking the knife
quite to the bone.
Take out the eye
with the point
of the knife, and
divide in half, serving with the meat to those who wish it.
Serve also to each a slice from the throat part of the neck,
where the throat sweetbread lies. Remove the jaw-bone and
serve the palate, which is considered a dainty by many. Some
finely flavoured lean may be cut from about the jaw-bone, and
some nide little gelatinous bits from around the eye.


SHOULDER OF MUTTON,
In these colonies a shoulder of mutton is usually stuffed,
and with benefit to the joint, which is an essentially dry and
insipid one in the opinion of many. It should never be sent to
table cold, but will make a good, sweet hash. Dish lying as in
the engraving, and carve in wedge-shaped slices from A to B.
Cut then at both sides of the bone from C to B, and serve to
each person whichever is wished for. Place also on each plate
a thin slice of fat, carving from D. The most juicy parts are
considered to lie on the under part of the shoulder. Turn the
joint over, and slice off horizontally from B to C, and from A.
The carver may cut some nice slices at D, carving down as
marked in the engraving.


A LEG OF MUTTON.
A LEO of
mutton should
be sent to table
with the thick
part placed
uppermost on
the dish. Carve
in moderate
slices from B to
C. Some per-
sons are fond
of the knuckle,
and in serving, their preference should be ascertained. The
cramp bone, too, is by many considered a dainty. It may be
separated by passing the knife round from Dto E. When
this joint is sent to table cold it is placed on the dish with the
back of the leg uppermost.
SADDLE OF MUTTON.
Place a saddle of mutton on the dish as in the engraving.
The tail is sometimes divided, and a kidney skewered under
each half, as depicted. Carve from A to B from both sides of
the hack-bone ; the slices should be thin. Serve slices of fat
from oto D. When the lengthway slices are exhausted, cut
from the vertebrae to D and C, as marked. Help a slice of
kidney if wished for.


LOIN OF MUTTON.
Carve a small loin of mutton in chops, commencing at the
end, and carve a large loin in slices lengthways. A large loin
may also be carved neatly by running the knife along the
back-bone and down the ribs, under the meat, then cut in
slices. Eat and lean are thus carved together.
FORE QUARTER OF LAMB.
Ctjt from Ato C, placing your fork near the knuckle ; cut
on from Cto B, thence to D, and so returning to A. This will
remove an almost circular piece. Lift this slice, and sprinkle
over the part you have cut it from, pepper and salt, and the
juice of half a lemon. Lay on a slice of fresh butter, and
replace the circular slice. When the butter has melted,
separate ribs from neck by cutting from E to D. As your
guests prefer you may help the neck, P, or the breast, Gr. *
HAUNCH OF MUTTON,
Place onthe
dish as in en-
graving. When
about to carve
turn the dish
so that the
knuckle is
farthest from
you, and make
one cut from
Ato B. Carve your slices then from A to C, sloping each
slice so as to keep the gravy in. Cut the fat from the left side,


KID.
Kid, if not more than five weeks old, is roasted whole, and
sent to table already carved. If older, it is served and carved
as lamb.
HAM.
Place a ham on the dish as in the engraving; it is sent to
table with the knuckle frilled and ornamented. Out each slice
from A to B, making the slices thinner at one end than the
other. For those who prefer the hock, carve nearer the
knuckle at D, and then cut from D to C, making the slices
delicately thin.
SUCKING PIG.
The engraving shows how sucking pig is sent to table. The
directions in which it is to be carved are indicated by the
lines. Divide the ribs. Ascertain the tastes of your guests,
and help accordingly, the ear and the jaw being greatly
favoured by some persons. Serve plenty of the breast, sauce
and stuffing.


BOILED TONGUE.
Carte tongue in thin slices across the centre, but do not
cut it quite through. Cut fat and kernels from the under
part.
HARE.
Cut slices from either side of the vertebrae from B to A.
Remove the legs from the shoulders by passing the knife
between and turning the legs back, when it may be easily
disjointed. If the hare is young, it may, after the shoulders
and legs are removed, be cut across the back in pieces ; but, if
old, it cannot be so treated, unless it has been boned. Remove
the head last ; cut it from the neck, and take off the lower
jaw. Halve the head from nose to the top of the skull. Help
as desired with the stuffing.
BOILED RABBIT.
The legs and shoulders of boiled rabbit are very easily
separated ; cut them off, and divide the back in parts. This
is done by firmly fixing the fork in the middle, and turning
the tail end backwards with the knife. The meat on the
loins is considered the most delicate and well-flavoured part.
Serve a portion of liver to each plate.


ROAST RABBIT
Is carved in the same way as roast hare.
ROAST TURKEY.
To carve a roast turkey
well and gracefully is one of
the table accomplishments in
which practice alone will give
dexterity and ease. Place
the fork in the centre of the
breast, and carve slices from
both sides from A to B, as
indicated by the lines in the engraving. Cut off the legs, and
separate the drumsticks by disjointing them. Then remove
the wings ; you will find the joint of the wing by inserting
the knife at B. If the turkey be stuffed with truffles, open
at C; if with forcemeat, it will be found as you carve the
breast.
BOILED TURKEY
Although boiled tur-
key is not trussed as for
roasting, it may be carved
in the same way. Some
little difficulty in finding
the joint may be occasioned
by the legs being pushed
under the skin, but experi-
ence will soon overcome
ROAST FOWL.
It is rather difficult to
give in writing clear in-
structions about carving
a roast fowl, the opera-
tion being one in which
more may be learned by seeing a good carver do it than could
be told in a page. Cut off the legs, as in other birds, lay
them back with a turn of the wrist on the knife, and cut
through the joint. Take off the wings, cutting from Dto B.
Cut off the merrythought and neck bones by inserting and


forcing the knife under the bones, lift them, and they will
easily separate. Cut through the small ribs down to the vent,
from A to B, and so separate the breast from the body at each
side. Divide the back about half-way between the breast and
rump, holding down firmly with the fork, and turning up the
right half with the knife to break the vertebrae. Now take
off the side bones, turning the neck or rump from you as may
be most convenient.
BOILED FOWL.
Boiled fowl is carved the same as when roasted, unless
obey are very young, when the breast is served whole. The
breast and wing is served as most choice. Fully grown roast
capon is carved as turkey.
ROAST GOOSE
To carve roast goose,
cut, as in the engraving,
from A to B, take off the
wings, but, unless the party
is large, do not remove the
legs, which may be devilled
or broiled. For the stuffing,
make an insertion at C.
PORK.
A leg- of pork is dished with the back uppermost, and the
crackling is removed before it is sent to table, but served with
it. Carve in thin slices across the leg, and serve crackling to
those who wish for it. A loin of pork is carved as scored by
the butcher.


FISH.
li-li -the principal thing
being to avoid breaking
the flakes. In carving a
large fish, as here engraved, cut thin slices, as from A to B,
and help with it pieces of the belly, in the direction marked
from C to D ; the best flavoured is the upper or thick part.
MURRAY COD’S HEAD AND SHOULDERS.
Pass the knife (which should be of silver or a slice) from
Ato B, and then horizontally to C. Separate thick, perpen-
dicular slices, as marked in the engraving, and help to each
plate some of the sound. The sound lies along the back-bone,
inside, and may be obtained by passing the knife or slice under
it at C. The liver of the fish is cooked with it, and served
also.
MACKEREL AND WHITINGS,
©Mackerel and whitings are served on
a dish head to tail, or with the tail in the
mouth, as in the engraving. They are
served whole, and are divided, for helping,
down the back-bone. The thick parts are
considered the best.


CANNING, PRESERVING, &c.
Canning Fruits.—Peaches and Fears— After
paring and coring, put amongst them sufficient sugar to make
them palatable for present eating—about three to four pounds
only for each bushel; let them stand a while to dissolve the
sugar, not using any water ; then heat to a boil, and continue
the boiling, with care, from, twenty to thirty, minutes, or
sufficiently long to heat through, which expels the air. Have
ready a kettle of hot water, into which dip the can long
enough to heat it; then fill in the fruit while hot, corking it
immediately, and dip the end of the cork into the “Cement
for Canning Fruits.” When cold it is best to dip a second
time to make sure that no air holes are left, which would
spoil the fruit. All canned fruits are to be kept in a very cool
cellar.
Berries, Plums, Cherries, &c.— Easpberries,
blackberries, whortleberries, currants, cherries, and plums
need not be boiled over ten to fifteen minutes ; using sugar
to make palatable, in all cases, as it must be put in some time,
and it helps to preserve the fruit. They require the same
care in heating cans, &c., as above, for peaches.
Strawberries —For strawberries, put a half-pound of
sugar for each pound of berries, and proceed as for berries
above.
Tomatoes —For tomatoes, scald and peel them as for
other cooking, then scald, or -rather boil, for about fifteen
minutes only, and can as above. Or what I think best is to use
a little salt, and put them into half-gallon jugs; for we want
them in too great quantities to stop in a few glass jare, such
as we use for other fruits. As for tin cans, I never use them ;
if you do use tin cans for tomatoes, it will not do to use salt
with them, as it has a tendency to cause rust.
Cement for Canning Fruits —Eosin, one pound ;
lard, tallow, and beeswax, of each one ounce. Melt and stir
together, and have it hot, ready to dip into, when canning.
Fruits Preserved in Syrup can be candied by
removing it from the liquor, sprinkling with loaf sugar, and
drying in a cool oven, frequently turning and re-sprinkling.
Candied fruits make a presentable dish on any table.


Advertisements.
Established. 1853.
HILET £ SOM
iumsf pi'cooloni. fmrtera, Set,,
66 a’BECKETT STREET WES']
Manufacturers of Roof Composition.
FPTTT T T'Kl , nV J T)
x X U XixXaXJLN UrXiXx,^
Manufacturer^,
AWARDED HIGHEST ORDER OF MERIT, Melbourne
International Exhibition, 1880-81.
KITCHEN RANGES
COLONIAL OVENS
GAS STOVES, <&£
CORNER OF
RUSSELL ST. & FLINDERS LANE.EAk
MELBOURNE.
REPAIRS PROMPTLY ATTENDED TO.






1508
02091516


