

riizio
AUSTRALIAN EEDEEATION.
SPEECH
THE HON. SIR HENRY PARKES, G.C.M.G,
DELIVERED IN THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY, 7 MAY, 1890.




AUSTRALIAN FEDERATION.
4 - 6- 77
Sir HENRY PARKES rose to move :
(1.) That this House concurs in the following
resolutions, adopted by the Australasian Federa-
tion Conference, on the 13th February last, at
Parliament House, Melbourne, and which have
been laid before this Assembly, namely :
(a) That, in the opinion of this conference, the
best interests and the present and future
prosperity of the Australian colonies will
be promoted by an early union under the
Crown ; and, while fully recognising the
valuable services of the members of the
Convention of 1883 in founding the Federal
Council, it declares its opinion that the
seven years which have since elapsed have
developed the national life of Australia in
population, in wealth, in the discovery of
resources, and in self-governing capacity,
to an extent which justifies the higher act,
at all times contemplated, of the union of
these colonies under one legislative and
executive government, on principles just
to the several colonies.
(b) That to the union of the Australian colonies
contemplated by the foregoing resolution,
the remoter Australasian colonies shall be
entitled to admission at such times and on
such conditions as may be hereafter agreed
upon.
(c) That the members of the conference should
take such steps as may be necessary to in-
duce the legislatures of their respective
colonies to appoint, during the present
year, delegates to a National Australasian
Convention, empowered to consider and re-
port upon an adequate scheme for a federal
constitution.
(2.) That the following members be appointed
delegates to a National Australasian Convention,
and be empowered to consider and report upon
.an adequate scheme for a federal constitution
for the Australian colonies, namely : —Sir Henry
Parkes, G.C.M.G. ; William McMillan, Esquire;
Joseph Palmer Abbott, Esquire; and James
Patrick Garvan, Esquire ; and that such mem-
bers act with three members to be similarly ap-
pointed by the Legislative Council.
(3.) That the Constitution, as adopted by the
convention, together with any documents relat-
ing to such Constitution, be submitted, as soon
as possible, for the approval of the Parliament
of this colony.
(4.) That the foregoing resolutions be for-
warded to the Legislative Council, with a mes-
sage desiring their concurrence therein, and re-
questing that the Legislative Council will ap-
point three of their members to represent the
colony at the National Australasian Convention,
to act with the four members of this House who
have been appointed to represent the colony at
the said convention.
(From the “Parliamentary Debates.”)
He said : I feel called upon in submitting
this motion to make an appeal to lion,
members to give me an uninterrupted
hearing. I have on my hands a very
large subject. Viewed from any point,
its magnitude must, I think, be admitted,
and I do not hesitate to say that I feel
somewhat unequal to it; and for that rea-
son I appeal to hon. gentlemen, wherever
they may sit, to give me, in endeavouring
to make my statements clear, an uninter-
rupted hearing. I wish to make the matters
in connection with my motion as plain as pos-
sible. I wish to submit my motion in a calm
spirit, and without allowing one word to
drop from me calculated to provoke ill-
feeling. It is necessary, however, that I
should ask the House to give me their in-
dulgence for some time in making some
prefatory observations. The first thing I
am bound to do is to put myself clear
before this House, and the country, in re-
spect to the nominations which are em-
braced in my resolutions. I can safely
say that I have not been actuated in sub-
mitting these nominations by any un-
worthy motive, or by any narrow view. I
have honestly desired to represent both
parties in the two houses of Parliament,
and I think I shall show conclusively that
I have succeeded in giving effect to that
desire. I must be permitted to doubt the
theory which appears to be put forth that
any gentleman who happens to be a leader
in" this House must necessarily be ap-
pointed to a duty such as I am about to
describe. I can find no instance of that
rule being observed, either in Europe or
the colonies. What I have to do is to ap-
point persons who fairly represent the dif-
ferent sides of political sentiment, political
opinion, and political feeling ; and it would
be a most improper course to attempt to
nominate gentlemen for a duty so large
as the one we contemplate on any other
hypothesis. Now, I beg the hon. member
for The Murrumbidgee, if he can, to accept
my assurance that I have not acted out
of the slightest disrespect to him.
Hr. Creek ; We cannot swallow that!


Sir HENRY PARKES : If hon. gen-
tlemen will permit me to proceed they
will see whether I make good my case or
not. I can say, at all events, that I have
not made these nominations from any
party feeling ; I have not made them from
any political feeling; I have not made
them from any personal feeling, but I
have made them on what appeared to me
the simple and clear ground of not nomi-
nating to this duty any person who had
declared his open hostility to what we
have in hand.
Mr. Dibbs : Does the hon. member call
that representing both sides of the House 1
Sir HENRY PARKES; If the hon.
member for The Murrumbidgee means by
his interruption that I have to ask Parlia-
ment to assent to the appointment of per-
sons hostile to the federation of these
colonies, to a convention whose only duty
is to frame the federal constitution—if he
means that, I fail to see the logic of his
contention. My duty is to see that the
question, if Parliament assents to it, is
fairly and properly dealt with, and I
should be open to the gravest charge, not
only here but everywhere, if in asking
Parliament to appoint members to this
convention I asked them to appoint per-
sons who had declared their determination
to prevent its taking place. To show that
I am justified in the course I have taken,
I will read just single sentences from the
hon. gentleman’s speeches.
Mr. O’Sullivan : Without the context!
Sir HENRY PARKES : It will be
open for hon. gentlemen to comment in
any terms they choose upon my proceed-
ings. I am now in possession of the Chair,
and I ask to be allowed to proceed. At
all events, I shall decline to take any
notice of interruptions. I find that for
six months, from the time I opened this
question before the public of the colony
and the world, the hon. member for The
Murrumbidgee has persistently denounced
my proceedings. What he might say in
denunciation of me I could reasonably be
asked to put aside, and I am prepared now
not to make reference to. it, and in point
of fact throughout this time—six months
—I have never once mentioned the hon.
gentleman’s name in public. During the
whole time that I have suffered from mis-
representation I have never replied; I
have never mentioned the hon. member’s
name. Let us see now whether I am
justified in saying that this gentleman—l
do not complain ; I have only to deal
with the facts—whether I am justified in
saying that he has declared his hostility to
federation. On the Bth November, at
Crookwell, he said :
He would never allow Sir Henry Parkes to
ignore protection in his scheme for federation.
Opposition Members : Hear, hear !
Sir HENRY PARKES : I do not com-
plain of this being said. I do not com-
plain of its being cheered, but I instance
it, as an evidence that the hon. member
for The Murrumbidgee is opposed to me in
this scheme of federation, and opposed to
the federation itself. On the 22nd Novem-
ber, at Tam worth, the hon. member said :
The majority of the colonies were protec-
tionist, and they were asked to wipe their
views out of existence, and allow one free-trade
colony, dominated by Sir Henry Parkes, to
overrule them.
Again, in the same speech, the hon. mem-
ber said :
When he was at Werris Creek Junction he
wondered what would become of his audience
if he were shunted off to Narrabri, instead of
going straight on to Tamworth. What would
become of the people who expected them to go
straight for protection if they were shunted off
to federation ? Their business was to keep
straight ahead, and they would fight for the
cause intrusted to them.
Mr. Traill : I do not see much harm
in all that !
Sir HENRY PARKES : There may
not be any harm at all; but allow me to
proceed :
He had placed protection before him as a
beacon, and to that end he would direct his
efforts. He would not be put off with the senti-
ment of federation.
On the 23rd November, at Singleton, the
hon. member said ;
Then what was our position in New South
Wales in this scheme? We knew nothing
about it ; but that our Constitution was being
knocked out of existence, and New South Wales
was to be made simply a municipality on a large
scale.
Again, in the same speech, he said :
It took Canada fifty-seven years. It would
take a good deal more time than fifty-seven
years for the Australian colonies to be bound
together in union.
Mr. O’Sullivan : On a free-trade policy !
Sir HENRY PARKES : I hope I shall
not be deemed impertinent if I say that
the hon. member for The Murrumbidgee


does not require the aid of the hon. mem
her for Queanbeyan to bring out his mean
ing. Again, in the same speech ;
It was admitted by every statesman in this
colony and out of it that before federation could
come about there must be one fiscal policy com-
mon to the whole shore of Australia. Until New
South Wales turned from her wickedness and
adopted a better policy for her people, and pulled
down the fiscal boundaries and came in common
accord with the prevailing fiscal policy of the
other colonies, federation, was an impossibility.
Mr. Traill : The hon. member admits
that himself !
Mr. O’Sullivan : They say that all over
Australia !
Mr. Slattery : All the delegates at the
conference said so !
Sir HENRY PARKES : I cannot help
it, if gentlemen read the proceedings of the
conference and do not understand them.
On the 7th March, at Wagga Wagga, after
the conference had closed, the hon. mem-
ber for The Murrumbidgee said :
He had brought with him for light reading in
the train a document for which he was indebted
to Mr. Deakin. It was a shorthand report of
the whole proceedings of the late conference
which took place in Melbourne. He had read
it and re-read it before going to bed, when per-
haps his head was heavy. He had read it again
in the morning when his head was clear, and
read it again with the noon-day’s sun glaring on
it, but for the life of him he could not under-
stand what sort of federation Sir Henry Parkes
asked them to agree to.
Opposition Members : Hear, bear !
Mr. O’Sullivan : Sir Henry Parkes
does not know himself !
Sir HENRY PARKES : That cheer
would be extremely exhilarating if it were
only intelligible; but Sir Henry Parkes
by this time had disappeared, and what
remained was the decision of the confer
ence. Though I was mentioned, there was
no occasion to mention me, because what
I had said and what I had thought was
gone, and the hon. member had before him
the unanimous decision of the gentlemen
who represented the whole of the colonies
of Australasia,
Mr. Traill : A great part of them did
not understand what the hon. gentleman
meant.
Sir HENRY PARKES : I am quite
sure I should have a difficulty in under-
standing what the hon. member for South
Sydney means; but if he had only been
nominated to this convention I should
have understood him then. The hen. mem-
ber for The Murrumbidgee proceeded to
say :
This country would do wrong to commit itself
on the bald sentiment of federation.
Then here is another picture, which, per-
haps, hon. gentlemen will appreciate better
than any of the previous ones. The hon.
member drew a picture of the internecine
quarrelling that would be sure to arise
between Victoria and New South Wales
if federation took place, and then he goes
on to say :
They were so attached to the mother country,
and their old mother, the old lady, would step
in, prevent such a catastrophe, and adminis-
ter proper chastisement to the little children
quarrelling under her nose. That was the posi-
tion of the colonies in regard to the mother
country at the present moment. Once they
federated they could not get out of their diffi-
culties. After looking over Sir Henry Parkes’
speech, endeavouring altogether to forget the
man who made that speech, and to take his
statements and assertions, and his reason why
the colonies should federate, he failed to find
sufficient reason in the speech which justified
the course he proposed.
Ido not object to that. Ido not object
to gentlemen opposing my motion, if they
think that what I propose is wrong, if
they think that it is not supported by
valid reasons; if they think that the
conference of the Australasian colonies
came to a fallacious conclusion, I am quite
prepared for them to act upon their
opinions. That is the reason why I feel
that I should be really insulting the hon.
member for The Murrumbidgee, if I asked
him to take part in a convention to frame
a constitution against which he had so un-
mistakably declared. But there was yet
another reason. At Orange, on the 15th
of last month, the hon. member—after this
outburst about our being attached to the
mother country, and to the good old lady,
as he was pleased to designate the mother
country, chastising us as little children—
said :
He did not want to say anything disloyal
to the mother connti’y ; but if they were going
into federation, it should be on the distinct
understanding that that was a step of separation
from the old country, and the establishment of
a nation of their own.
Well, this convention is not convened for
any such purpose as that. This conven-
tion is not convened, and gentlemen are
not asked to take their seats upon it,
to frame a declaration of independence.


They are asked to assemble to frame a
federal Constitution in union with the
Crown of Great Britain, and the whole of
the colonies by their delegates, their re-
presentatives, have declared that the time
is ripe for that being done. Now, if I had
so far forgotten myself as to ask this gentle-
man, the tenor of whose whole speeches are
fairly represented by the brief extracts I
have read—and they are from beginning
to end against the movement for federa-
tion —if I had so far forgotten myself, and
forgotten the interests of this country, and
forgotten what is due to my fellow-mem-
bers of the late conference, as to ask this
gentleman to consent to be a delegate to
it, I might fairly have expected him to
turn round upon me, and say : “Do you
mean to insult me ? I have opposed you
to the utmost of my power; I will con-
tinue to oppose you to the utmost of my
power; and my place is on these benches
to oppose your motion.” That is certainly
the course I should have taken myself
under similar circumstances. I think that
the highest respect that I can pay to the
lion, member is to assume that in his
opposition to these federation proposals he
is sincere. He has told me that he did
not believe I was sincere. Well, I give him
credit for intending what he said, and if
he does, it is impossible for him to sit on
this convention, or to take any other course
than to oppose the motion I am now
making. Now, I have been misrepresented
in several other respects which I desire to
put straight. It has been said that other
governments appointed the leader of the
Opposition to the late conference. That
is incorrect.
Mr.O’Sullivan: They did so in Queens-
land !
Sir HENRY PARKES: It is incorrect.
Mr. O’Sullivan ; They did so in South
'Australia and Queensland !
Sir HENRY PARKES: It is incorrect.
Mr. O’Sullivan : They did it!
Sir HENRY PARKES : The state-
ment made is incorrect, and I am going to
prove that it is incorrect. It does not rely
on my words any more than it relies on
the words of the hon. gentleman opposite.
The statement made is simply incorrect.
If hon. members will try to recollect they
will find that Mr. Gillies, the Premier cf
Victoria, when objecting to my first pro-
posal of a parliamentary convention, made
this suggestion, and this is how the late
conference came about:
Although I have cause for grave doubt as to
the success of such a movement at present
That is the movement I proposed.
there are no reasons that I am aware of which
should stand in the way of so serious and im-
portant a proposal being fully considered in all
its aspects. To insure that consideration I
would suggest to you that instead of going
through the form of the parliaments appoint-
ing representatives to a convention, it should
be accepted as sufficient if the representatives
of the various colonies on the Federal Council
were to meet yourself and representatives from
New South Wales to discuss, and, if necessary,
to advise and report upon any scheme of federal
government.
Now, in point of fact, so far as Victoria,
South Australia, Queensland, Tasmania,
and Western Australia are concerned,
there were no appointments at all. The
gentlemen who represented these colonies
were by law members of the Federal
Council; and in accordance with the strict
letter of Mr. Gillies’ suggestion they must
necessarily attend the confei’ence. In
Victoria the members of the Federal
Council happened to be two of the leading
members of the Government. In Tas-
mania the members of the Federal Council
happened to be two of the leading mem-
ber’s of the Government; but in Queens-
land one gentleman, the present leader of
the Opposition, Sir Samuel Griffith, was
not only a member of the Federal Council,
but was also one of the conveners of the
Federal Council; and Mr. Macrossan, a
member of the Government, was the other
member of the Federal Council. So that
of necessity these two gentlemen had to
come. In South Australia it was precisely
the same; so that the two gentlemen
who happened to be leaders of the Oppo-
sition —in the one case Sir Samuel Griffith,
and in the other Mr. Playford, did not
come by appointment of the Executive
Government, but came in their capacity
as members of the Federal Council.
Mr. O’Sullivan : Appointed by two
parliaments !
Sir HENRY PARKES: I am en-
deavouring to state my case in the most
inoffensive manner possible, and with a
strict adherence to fact; and I do not
understand how gentlemen who do not
respect that in such a case as this are fit
to consider the case at all. Now, we come


to the two colonies of New South Wales
and New Zealand. Neither New Zealand
nor New South Wales ever joined the
Federal Council. What did they do 1
They appointed, in both cases, members of
of the Executive Government, and in this
they followed the example which had uni-
formly been acted upon by all govern-
ments in Australasia. I need only in-
stance one—the convention that sat in
Sydney in 1883. Did not the members
of the Executive Council appoint them-
selves to that convention, notwithstanding
that the object was to frame a body which
took away a part of the constitutional
rights of the country ? Did they ask Sir
John Robertson, who was in opposition at
the time, to sit on that convention 1 Did
they not appoint themselves to the 'con-
vention ? I did not complain of that, and
I certainly do not think that we should
be complained of when we followed the
course that every other government has
taken. I now come to the misrepresenta-
tion which was made last Tuesday night :
that I, in allusion to the Federal Conven-
tion of 1883, had maintained that persons
appointed to any body of that sort to
frame a new constitution, whether a
federal constitution or any other, ought
to be appointed by Parliament; and
that I, in the conference, had failed
to carry out what I advised in 1884. What
I am doing now is strictly in accord
with what I said in 1884, as literally in
accord with what I proposed then as any
subsequent action can be with a statement
made some time previously. I was not
in the colony when the convention sat.
Therefore, it is not true to say that I
opposed it in any way. I had no means
of opposing it, I did not know what it
was ; but I was in my place subsequently
in the following year—and I then op-
posed the constitution of the Federal
Council on grounds, which I have so often
fully explained, that I take it for granted
that hon. members must know what they
are. My case is clear enough ; but what
I said was that a mere conference, ap-
pointed by the executive authority of the
respective colonies, was not in a position
to frame, and did not occupy that consti-
tutional status which justified it in fram-
ing a federal council. That is what I
said, and have I done anything incon-
sistent with that 1 Did I not, in my very
first proposal for this convention, in the
very first letter to which I set my hand,
say that the convention ought to have the
sanction of the respective parliaments of
the colonies 1 So that the doctrine I laid
down in 18§4 is precisely the doctrine
upon which I have, to the very letter, acted
in 1889. The body that met in February
was a body for consultation only. It was
never intended that it should do anything
beyond consider whether the time had or
had not come for the colonies to federate.
And so particular were I and my colleagues
that the delegates sent to that conference
should not deal with any other subject,
that we had it placed in the commission
to myself and to my friend the Colonial
Treasurer that in attending at the con-
ference we were to deliberate only on
this one question, whether the time was
or was not come for the colonies to take
steps to federate. That precaution was
taken so that we should not be drawn
into any matter of business outside that
distinct embodiment in our commission.
Well, w r e were quite right in being ap-
pointed by the same authority as all other
delegates are appointed to a conference for
this consultative purpose. But what is
my position with regard to the higher
course of framing this federal constitu-
tion ? In my first letter, dated 30th
October, 1889, addressed to Mr. Gillies,
I used this language :
Believing that the time is ripe for consolidat-
ing the Australias into one, this Government re-
spectfully invites you to join in taking the first
great step, namely, to appoint representatives
of Victoria to a national convention for the pur-
pose of devising and reporting upon an adequate
scheme of federal government. With much
deference to the views of the other colonies, it
is suggested that, in order to avoid any sense of
inequality in debate or any party complexion,
the number from each colony should be the
same, and should be equally chosen from both
sides in political life; and that, in the case of
each colony, the representatives should be
elected by Parliament and receive commissions
from the Governor-in-Council,
That is precisely the course which I re-
commended in 1884, so that my course of
conduct is consistent, without a single
flaw, in that respect. I took precisely the
course which I said oughtto have been taken
in 1883 ; and I think I may claim—if there
is any credit due to it—to be the first
person, in any station of authority in all
Australia, who proposed to give parlia-
mentary sanction to this kind of intercolo-


nial assemblages—such as the proposed
convention. It is the first time that any
proposal of the kind has been made by any
man, anywhere.
Mr. Crick : You cannot take the Con-
stitution away without coming to Parlia-
ment !
Sir HENRY PARKES : At all events
the hon. member will see that I have not
attempted to do it.
Mr. Crick : I admit that!
Mr. O’Sullivan ; It is a sort of nega-
tive virtue !
Sir HENRY PARKES : Well, that is
more than the hon. member can claim. I
can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that I often
sincerely wish the hon. member had a
little negative virtue. It would be a great
blessing to himself, if to no one else.
Another misrepresentation of my course
has been in the statement by the hon.
member for The Murrumbidgee that he
does not know what I want.
Mr. O’Sullivan : And nobody else !
Sir HENRY PARKES : I should mis-
trust myself if the hon. member pretended
to know ; but the conference understood
what I wanted, for the motion I submitted
was carried unanimously, and it was se-
conded by, I suppose, about the most bril-
liant of the advocates of protection, Mr.
Deakin; and I am perfectly sure that Mr.
Deakin would not throw any doubt either
on my sincerity or my fidelity to the cause
I had in hand. I will answer for that,
because nothing could exceed the cordiality
and the support I received from that emi-
nent gentleman in the business of the con-
ference, then and since.
Mr. Nicoll : Then he is a gentleman !
Mr. O’Sullivan : Although a pro-
tectionist !
Sir HENRY PARKES : Well, I sup-
pose there must be some assumption of
straightforwardness if the facts show
straightforwardness. In this first letter
of mine—the very first time I put my
hand to any declaration of opinion on this
question—l stated clearly enough what I
thought was wanted. 1 shall read the
passage:
The scheme of federal government, it is as-
sumed, would necessarily follow close upon the
type of the Dominion Government of Canada.
I certainly did not mean that we should
slavishly, or even largely, copy here the
details of the Constitution of Canada ; but
I did not see how we could follow on any
course which would be repugnant to the
course of Canadian statesmen. I said,
further:
It would provide for the appointment of a
governor-general, for the creation of an Austra-
lian privy council, and a parliament consisting
of a senate and a house of commons.
If that is not a clear outline of what I
thought would be the right constitution, I
appeal to any man of common-sense whether
an outline were possible in the English
language. So as to disarm myself from
any slavish copying, I go on to say that
in the work of the convention, no doubt, the
rich stores of political knowledge which were
collected by the framers of the Constitution of
the United States would be largely resorted to,
as well as the vast accumulations of learning on
cognate subjects since that time.
I should like to know how it would have
been possible, at this early stage, for the
outline of any scheme that I might have
been thinking of to have been given in
more direct or more perspicuous language.
I do not see, Mr. Speaker, how the names
which I have submitted in these reso-
lutions can be complained of. When I
spoke to the hon. member for Eden I told
him in very simple and plain terms the
position in which I found myself—that as
the hon. member for The Murrumbidgee
had declared his hostility to this move-
ment f did not see how it was possible to
place that hon. member on a convention to
frame a federal constitution. I told him
that I had applied to himself as a declared
opponent of myself personally, and of the
Government to which I belong, and that I
had done so from a desire to have a person
-who completely represented the Oppo-
sition. The hon. member for Wentworth
was absent in the country. I telegraphed
to him asking him whether it would be
agreeable to him to be nominated on this
convention, and I received from the hon.
gentleman a reply stating, if my recol-
lection serves me, that he should accept
the position with great pleasure. Well,
then we find that I, my colleague, the
Colonial Treasurer, and my colleague who
leads the Government in the Legislative
Council, represent this side, and I do not
think that we coidd get stronger men on
the other side than the hon. member for
Wentworth, the hon. member for Eden,
and the Hon. Edmund Barton. I know
of no stronger declared exponents of pro-


tection than those gentlemen. So there
appeared to be three men fairly matched
to represent the two sides in our Par-
liament ; and the seventh is Sir Patrick
Jennings, who, from his deliberate char-
acter and from his disposition to give
everything a fair consideration, I think
will represent, if I may say so, both sides.
I really do not know exactly what his
views are; but I do not. see how a more
acceptable person could be taken as the
seventh of these delegates ; and I desire
to declare again that in this proceeding it
never once occurred to me that the hon.
member for The Murrumbidgee could pos-
sibly accept a seat to frame a constitution
against which he had so vehemently and
persistently declared himself. I think,
therefore, that my course in this matter
has been straightforward ; and now I ven-
ture to ask hon. gentlemen, without regard
to where they sit in this House, to bear
with me for a minute while I restate the
course I have taken from the first. I felt
that if I undertook a matter of such large
dimensions, which so intimately concerned
not the people of New South Wales alone,
but the people of all these colonies also, I
was bound to take a course unembarrassed
by any subordinate consideration. I appeal
to the highest tribunal to which we can ap-
peal—to the people of all these colonies —
whether I have suffered at any point any
side issue to creep in; I appeal whether
I have at any time introduced any subor-
dinate question for consideration; I appeal
to that high authority as to whether I
have at any point indulged in language
that could possibly offend even the most
fastidious of my opponents. I have tried
to rise, and I have used every power of
which I am in possession, to rise to the
level of the great subject. I have replied
upon no one ; neither writers in the papers
nor speakers on the platform, however
they may have injured me, as far as their
words could injure .me, have received from
me any reply, and on this subject of free-
trade or protection, to which I am bound to
allude, but which I shall exclude from any
large consideration in my treatment of
this question, I have said from the first ih
all places and at all times that I was quite
content to leave that to be settled by the
federal parliament. I have never varied
from that first declaration. I have never
turned aside to answer the accusations
made against me, that I was taking this
matter up to enable me to slip away from
my professions of free-trade. I do not
believe any honorable opponent of mine
in this House believes those accusations.
I have stated that to the utmost of
my power, when the season justified my
undertaking the course, I should still
advocate the doctrines of free-trade. I
have stated, moreover, that supposing in
the federal parliament a majority repre-
sented the doctrine of protection, I should
as a good citizen submit; but I should
still live in the hope that that policy would
be reversed. Those have been my state-
ments, not once but always, and I repeat
them now. The hon. member for The
Murrumbidgee has accused me, amongst
other things, of not being sincere. Well,
that accusation is hardly worth noticing.
I know myself how far lam sincere. My
friends—and the more intimately they
know me the better they are able to judge
—know that I am not the man to take up
any large question unless I sincerely be-
lieve in it. I may take it up at the wrong
season; I may treat ii ineffectively or
imprudently; but Ido not think any one
would accuse me of taking up a very
large question except from a sincere con-
viction that I am right. The hon. mem-
ber for The Murrumbidgee has a very
queer way—he will pardon my just say-
ing that—of explaining himself when
he brings this charge against me. This
is a passage from his speech at Wagga
Wagga, and it is the only passage I will
allude to in my argument ;
They found that Sir Henry Parkes was willing
to sacrifice free-trade for the purpose of bringing
about federation. That was a clear proof, to his
mind, that federation was only used as an at-
tempt to crush out from the public mind the
policy of protection.
If anybody can understand that argument,
I cannot. lam accused of sacrificing free-
trade for the purpose of bringing about
federation; and then I am told that federa-
tion is devised in order to crush protec-
tion. Well, now, sometimes lam accused
of inordinate ambition, and if it should be
the case that the colonies federate, and a
federal parliament is created, and if all
the colonics represented there, except New
South Wales, are in favour of protection,
what possible chance is there of my ambit ion
ever being gratified in that Parliament?- If
I am in the minority, and this colony only


still holds fast to free-trade, what possible
chance is there for any ambition I may
cherish being gratified in a parliament
ruled by a protectionist majority, suppos-
ing I should be there, which I never may
be 1 I just call attention to these little
inconsistencies in order to show how gentle-
men will indulge in anything which, for
the time-being, may serve, not to enlighten
the public mind, but to confuse it. Now,
the first speech I made on these federation
proposals was at Tenterfield. My old con-
stituents had frequently asked me to pay
them a visit, and in coming from Queens-
land I paid that visit ; and at a dinner
which was given to me in the town, I
made my first speech on the subject. The
first man to congratulate me on that speech
was a pronounced protectionist, who is
sitting opposite to me now,
Mr. Dibbs : Let us have his name ?
Sir HENRY PARKES: I have no
doubt he will give the hon. member his
name himself when he speaks.
Mr. Dibbs : We should like to know
who he is, as the hon. member thinks so
much of him !
Sir HENRY PARKES : Well, if the
hon. member would only let his better
nature be uppermost, he would be the
man, above all others, who would think
most of me. Unless I am greatly mis-
taken, half the members of the protec-,
tionist party in the House, and out of it,
will support my motion. The gentleman
who happened to be the first to tender me
his congratulations was certainly not the
last, for a very considerable number of
gentlemen, sitting on the opposite side,
have congratulated me on the course I have
taken, including certainly some of the most
accomplished and able men in their ranks.
Mr. O’Sullivan : Is it I, lord 1
Sir HENRY PARKES: I may ease
the hon. member’s susceptibilities by
assuring him it is not he. Kow, so far,
the colonies are in accord on this subject.
The resolution submitted by me to the
conference was submitted after much con-
sideration. It was debated, I think, by
the whole of the colonies represented, and
it was adopted unanimously. Even the
colony of New Zealand joined in the
unanimous passing of the resolution, and
I am quite justified in stating, from the
explanations offered by the two gentle-
men who represented the colony, that New
Zealand will be represented in the conven-
tion to frame the federal constitution. Her
position is somewhat peculiar. It can be
accounted for by her insular position, and
her long distance from the Australian
colonies. She says, that is, her representa-
tives stated at Melbourne, they did not
feel justified in agreeing to come into any
federation of the Australian colonies at
the present time; but they express their
anxiety to be permitted to join in the con-
vention to frame the federal constitution,
and they submitted a resolution themselves
that they might at any time hereafter, if
the federation was formed, enter into that
union on such terms as might be mutually
agreed upon. So that I think lam quite
justified in stating that the position of New
Zealand is that of an anxious desire for a
federal government to be created. While
they claim for a time, on account of their
wide geographical separation from Aus-
tralia, to stand outside, at the same time
they anxiously provide for the means of
entering the federation at any future date,
if they are inclined to do so. I come now
to the resolution to which I am about to ask
the House to give its assent. The resolu-
tion was not written by me. I thought it
proper to explain in the newspapers that a
resolution was drafted by myself, and an-
other by Mr. Gillies, the Premier of Vic-
toria. Mine was a compai’atively simple
resolution, Mr. Gillies’ was a much more
extended one, by which the parliaments
are to be asked to confirm the proceedings
of the conference, and as I am now ad-
dressing the Parliament of New South
Wales, I think it right that I should read
the resolution I drafted myself. I hold a
set of three resolutions, which were placed
in my possession by the Government of
Victoria, My resolution was in these
words —the names of the members of the
Legislative Council are filled in, but of
course the same form would apply to the
Legislative Assembly :
That Mr. W. H. Suttor, Mr. Edmund Barton,
Q.C., and Sir Patrick A. Jennings, K.C.M.G.,
be the members of this House elected to act
with the members similarly elected by the
Legislative Assembly, to represent the colony
in the National Convention appointed to frame
a federal constitution for the Australian colonies.
That the Constitution so drafted and pre-
pared, and any documents in support thereof,
be submitted for the approval of the Parliament
of this colony.


As I said before, of course a similar form,
if my resolution had been adopted, would
have been required for the Assembly. I
thought, and I think still, that that would
have been sufficient, but my friend the
Premier of Victoria, thought it would be
far better to adopt the resolution in the
form in which it now is. However, on my
raising some objections to the more involved
as weli as the more lengthy form, he drew
out a second, and in that second set of reso-
lutions he embodied these words of mine
for submitting the constitution framed and
all documents relating to it for the approval
of the respective parliaments; and that is
the resolution which I have agreed to sub-
mit to this Assembly and to the Legislative
Council, and that is the resolution which
Queensland has agreed to, and which
Tasmania has agreed to; so that the four
colonies of Victoria, New South Wales,
Queensland, and Tasmania have agreed to
submit precisely the same set of resolu-
tions. That, of course, is very important
in a matter which relates to the whole
of the colonies. Now, I must ask hon.
members to bear with me while I try to
point out the nature of this resolution.
Unless there should be some strong party
here who wish to make conditions, I must
ask hon. members, not for any merely
verbal alteration, to seek to amend this
resolution, because it is in the highest
degree important that the whole of the
colonies should adopt the same form if
possible. I raise no objection whatever
if there is any considerable number of
gentlemen who wish to make conditions.
They have a perfect right to do it ; but
for the sake of any mere verbal change, I
trust no amendment will be made in the
resolution, for the simple reason that it is
so desirable that in all these cases the
words should be the same. The very
nature of this motion puts it beyond the
range of ordinary business in this House.
For the first time I stand here, and the
gentlemen who may be pleased to follow
me will stand here, dealing not simply
with New South Wales, but dealing in
prospect with the affairs of the whole of
the colonies. I admit, nay, I insist that
we must be very watchful not to overlook
the interests of this great colony of ours.
I in no way want hon. members to depart
from a strict adherence to what they be-
lieve is the interest of New South Wales;
but beyond and apart from that consider-
ation we ought to bear in mind we ought
never to lose sight of the fact that this reso-
lution relates also to the interests of Vic-
toria, of Queensland, of South Australia,
of Tasmania, and of Western Australia, in
relation to the large, the highly important
question involved in it, and to carry out
which lam moving it. From what I
have said, no one will for a moment sup-
pose that I am prepared to deprecate any
rational opposition. If there should be a
party in this House who consider it their
duty to oppose this motion, who may con-
sider it their duty to do their utmost to
prevent any resolution of the kind from
being carried, I am not here to complain
of their perfect right to exercise their
freedom of action. Indeed, I will go
further, and say that this is not a ques-
tion where rational opposition ought to
be suppressed on any ground of secur-
ing unanimity or any other object of
the kind. If men honestly believe that
the time has not come for the federation
of these colonies, now is the time for them
to speak, to speak boldly, to speak freely,
to speak without modification or disguise,
and declare their hostility ; but if that
should be the case, a momentous task de-
volves on the opponents of my resolution.
They certainly will have to show that it
is better to be disunited than united.
They will have to advocate the merits of
disunion, the merits of dissension, the
merits of border conflict. There is no
escaping from the dilemma. This motion
brings us face to face either for union or
disunion, for assent or dissent, either for
agreement or disagreement, either for peace
and free intercourse between these great
English-speaking colonies or for artificial
barriers to impede our friendly relations.
On one side or the other every man must
take his stand ; and if there are those who
are opposed to union they cannot escape
from being the supporters of disunion. Let
any man take the map of this fair land of
Australia, and he will find that the coast-
line is no less than 8,000 miles, roundly
speaking. Let any one follow the coast-
line of New South Wales from Cape Howe
to Point Danger, and he will find that it
is at the utmost 850 miles, leaving 7,150
miles of the coast of Australia over which
we, the people of New South Wales, have
no control. If you ask me what would


be the advantages of union, I will tell you
to cast your eyes along that 850 miles of
coast from Cape Howe to Point Danger,
and to answer my question—What can
you do in the interests of Now South
Wales beyond those narrow limits 1
Hence, then, there is open at once a wide
field for the beneficent action of a federal
parliament and a federal government.
Your hands are tied now; your steps
are checked ; your attempt to advance is
stopped the moment you get either to the
south of Cape Howe or to the north of
Point Danger. After traversing that com-
paratively short distance of 850 miles, your
power drops from your hands. There is all
the wide ring of sea, all the multitudinous
interests arising outside that ringandinside
that ring, but you are powerless to deal
with them, and you can only acquire power
by joining hands with the other sister
colonies, and creating in the place of tur-
moil, dissension, aggression and reprisal, one
nation of Australian brotherhood. Go to
Victoria. While that is the case with New
South Wales, Victoria has a coast line of only
600 miles, leaving 7,400 miles of the line
of coast belonging to Australia outside her
jurisdiction. North of Cape Howe, and
west of Cape Northumberland, Victoria
has no power any more than we have. It
hence opens an indescribable, an indefin-
able, a limitless field for the operations of
a federal power, and by no other means
can you reach all this region for national
activity which lies ready to your hand.
This is the task, then, for the opponents of
this motion. If there are any opponents
who are sincere in their opposition, they
will have to prove that the separate stick
is stronger than the bundle of sticks ; they
will have to prove the superiority of weak-
ness over strength ; they will have to prove
that isolated and disunited we have a fairer
chance of winning prosperity < and renown
in the civilised world than we shall have
as a united and progressive people. I do
not expect to see that proved. If no one
opposes me on the ground that we are
better off as we are than we could be
under a national government, and if my
opponents say the time has not come, I
answer this : We have only two modern
examples, I am not going back to ancient
days, because any example we could find
in Roman or Grecian history would be
very inapplicable to our day and our case.
We have only two modern examples. We
have the case of the North American
colonies which revolted, and happily—
happily for the world, happily for England
herself—established their independence at
that time. We have that example, and we
have the example of the Canadian Do-
minion. In the American example the
people of the North American colonies
were about 3,000,000 ; in the Canadian
example, at the time that the conference
sat in Nova Scotia, from whence the do-
minion constitution flowed, the population
was 3,294,056 souls. No intelligent per-
son will doubt that the census to be taken
during this year will show that the popu-
lation of these colonies is not a soul short
of 4,000,000 ; so that if population, which
as the main element of national life, is
to be first considered, we have a
status beyond North America in the re-
volt which resulted in independence,
and beyond the Canadian colonies, when
they first proposed to federate. And if
4,000,000 of English speaking people, in-
heriting with the priceless blessings of
their free constitution all the advantages
which belong to our nation and our race,
if 4,000,000 are not ripe to enter into this
united system of national life, it becomes
the persons who say so to point to the
time when they will be ripe. If they are
not ready now, when will they be ready 1
If any advantage will come from delay,
what is the advantage 1 If there are any
difficulties to be overcome, will they be-
come smaller by waiting longer 1 If there
is any danger of internecine dissension, if
there is any danger of want of good neigh-
bourhood between these colonies, when
will that great evil be cured by remaining
in the condition wherein alone it is pos-
sible 1 If, then, these positions that I take
up cannot be answered, the time is come.
The time is come whenever this House is
brought to the hour when it decides on
these resolutions. From that hour hence-
forward there will be no retracing of our
steps. From that hour straight forward will
be our course—none of us can go back. The
questionswillhave beenaskedand answered
that can be asked and answered, and all we
shall have to do is to try to reconcile our
differences amongst ourselves and between
our sister colonies, and to prepare the
way as best we can, and as best we
may, for the union of the English people


occupying these magnificent territories.
And now if the House will forgive me I
will dwell for a moment on some objec-
tions which I have occasionally heard —
objections that we would be giving up the
individual power and authority and inde-
pendence of New South Wales. In what
way will New South Wales be less self-
governed and less independent than she
is now ?
Mr. Crick : In every way !
Mr. Hutchison (Glen Innes) : The hon.
member knows she will !
Sir HENRY PARKES: If I were
only as wise as the hon. member for Glen
Innes I should know a great deal more
than Ido at present; but I do not know
that, and I must ask him to believe me
when I declare that I believe it is emin-
ently for the benefit of this dear land of
New South Wales that we should feder-
ate.
Mr, Crick ; Show us how !
Sir HENRY PARKES : I will try if
the hon. gentleman will allow me. I am
very thankful that I do not expect much
trouble from the hon. member.
Mr. Crick : The hon. gentleman thinks
I am docile.
Sir HENRY PARKES : The very
picture of docility ! There is a kind of
double expression about the hon. member,
and it often puzzles me to distinguish the
docility from the innocence.
Mr. Dibbs : We should like to hear the
hon. gentleman’s speech, not this nonsense!
Sir HENRY PARKES : I am very
thankful to think that the hon. member
for The Murrumbidgee wants to hear my
speech.
Mr. Dibbs : I do not want to hear non-
sense. This ought to be a solemn occasion !
Sir HENRY PARKES : I agree with
the hon. member, that it ought to be a
solemn occasion. I have not introduced the
frivolous, but I have got a rather heavy
task, and I feel that I might take a little
fun out of it if I can. It does not in any
way impair my ability to deal with my
subject, as I think the House will admit
before I have done. I was asking the
question, in what way would the colony of
New South Wales be better off by remain-
ing as she is at present? Under a federal
constitution, she certainly will be as well
governed ; that is, she will have the means
of being as well governed. She certainly
will be as independent. She certainly
will be the better for having all the power
which she possesses now, and, in addition
to that, her full share in the large power
under the federal government which she
has not at all now.
Mr. Dibbs : Nonsense !
Sir HENRY PARKES : This is not
nonsense. So far as her own boundaries
extend, she will be the self-governed
country she is now. But, beyond that,
she will have her share of power over the
whole of Australia, and over the whole of
the seas of Australia.
Mr. Crick : This Parliament will still
continue then ?
Sir HENRY PARKES ; Certainly.
Mr. Crick : Then where is your federa-
tion 1
Sir HENRY PARKES : I give the
hon. member up now.
Mr. Crick : I still have confidence in
myself!
Sir HENRY PARKES; Now as to
the material powers of a federal parlia-
ment and a federal government, I will
mention one of the smallest of them as
clearly indicative of many which are too
numerous for me to mention. We have
a portion of our colony so remote both in
distance and circumstances that you can
reach it most easily by going through two
other colonies. I mean the silver lands of
Broken Hill. There is a population settled
out at Broken Hill which is larger than
that of any city in the colony outside of
Sydney —larger than that of Newcastle.
It is the largest population at this moment
outside the city of Sydney. There is one
affliction to which humanity everywhere
is subject, which is greater than any other
human affliction, and this affliction comes
upon men more frequently who are
engaged in pursuits similar to those of the
large population at Broken Elill; I allude
to the unhappy fellow-creatures of ours
who become afflicted with insanity. What
a blessing it would be if we could, without
trouble, send all the victims of this terrible
disease to an asylum close at hand in South
Australia, instead of necessarily driving
them through the indescribable cruelty of
a long and heavy journey to Sydney?
There is one instance where humanity itself
would be served, as well as Australian in-
terests, if we had a federal power that
could deal with the whole continent. I


might go on enumerating the instances
where a federal government would have a
beneficent province of activity until to-
morrow morning; but it is needless. I
have adverted to them on other occasions,
and they must suggest themselves to every
intelligent mind that is listening to me
now. But the material advantages of fede-
ration would be the smallest advantages.
The moment that the 4,000,000 of people
—supposing Hew Zealand came in, or the
3,500,000, supposing she did not —united
and formed one great Australian power,
that moment would herald in many of the
most stupendous advantages that can come
to a great free nation. In the first place,
the public credit would immediately stand
higher. Whatever the separate colonies
can do, the united colonies could do in a
much more effective way. Whatever the
separate colonies can do in going into the
money market of the world could be done
much more to the advantage of the whole
by a united Australia. The moment
we became a united people, we should
have a corresponding public influence
in the affairs of the world. We should
be listened to with respect by every
power on the face of the earth, and
however influential Victoria or Hew
South Wales might be in appearing before
Europe in the person of her Agent-
General, the united Australias would be
inconceivably, immeasurably superior in
their influence upon the world. But is it
nothing to have a great and growing
name ? Is it nothing for an Australian
to have a name in no way inferior to that
of a Briton 1 Is it nothing that wherever
the flag of this country was flown the
country itself would receive respect 1 Is
it nothing to have one great union in the
place of a number of separate provincial
bodies 1 Is it nothing to be acknowledged
as the Australian people instead of having
inquiries made as to what part of Aus-
tralia we come from! How, I have had
occasion to point out the accusation against
me that I had not fairly outlined the
Government which I for one would wish
to see built up here. That accusation I
think I have fairly disposed of by quoting
a passage from the first letter I wrote on
the subject. But I heard somebody, I
think it was a prominent member too,
interrupt me when I spoke of an Austra-
lian union having a privy council. “We
want no privy council” the interruption
was. It seems to me that that interrup-
tion clearly shows how little some hon. gen-
tlemen have thought on the subject. “ We
want no privy council” said the voice.
I shall proceed now to show that we do
want this Privy Council. The Privy
Council of England is the greatest em-
bodiment of the executive power that I
suppose is known in the world. It
has grown up by a system of develop-
ment through a thousand years, from the
time when the members of the council
were the mere tools of the sovereign,
until a time when they are the real
advisers of the sovereign. It has been
developed into perhaps the most superior
Executive Council in the world. I am
going: to show and I think it is
0 o
worth my while to be at this trouble —
the difference between the residence of
the executive power in such a body as the
Privy Council, of which our executive
councils are feeble imitations, and the de-
pository of the executive power in a single
great officer, as in the United States of
America. How, I hold in my hand a book
published by a well-known lawyer, a mem-
ber of the Hew York bar; and I need not
tell hon. gentlemen that some of the most
distinguished lawyers of the United States
are members of that great bar. The title
of the book is “ The Abolition of the Pre-
sident.” That will show that the question
of the unwise arrangement of the exercise
of the executive authority in the United
States has not escaped attention and dis-
cussion. In the Ist section of the second
article of that great document, the Con-
stitution of the United States of America,
the executive power is vested absolutely in
the President of the United States; not
vested with the advice of anybody, but abso-
lutely in the President of the United States.
1 am going to show this House, and I hope
the country, how that power has been
used, notably in the case of two presidents
who reigned supreme in the United States
each for eight years. I mean President
Jackson and President Grant. 1 have had
occasion on former opportunities to point
out how the really great men who framed
the Constitution of the United States
were largely guided by the type of the
English Government in the arbitrary days
of George 111. Close observers, close
investigators, of the institutions of Ame-


ricaljave pointed tins out time after time :
that the model before those illustrious
men was the Government of Britain at its
worst epoch, in the arbitrary days of
George 111. This writer has this passage
on the subject:
That which stands out
I am only quoting for the purpose of draw-
ing a contrast between the means devised
in England for the exercise of the execu-
tive power and the means devised in the
United States for the same object. The
writer of this book says :
That which stands out more prominently than
anything in American history is the great simi-
larity of our fundamental law with the ancient
and obsolete theories of the Constitution of
Great Britain. The veto power of the Presi-
dent is no exception to this rule.
The power of the two houses of Parliament to
frame laws was presumed to beheld in check by
the king's negative, which could always be inter-
posed to prevent the adoption of an unwise or
unnecessary statute. Again, the arbitrary exer-
cise of the king’s right of veto was itself restrained
by the power which Parliament possessed of refus-
ing a grant of supplies for the service of the Crown,
The presidents of the United States have
vetoed more than 100 bills.
The Crown in England has not vetoed a measure
passed by the legislature since the reign of
Queen Anne, nor have the House of Commons
withheld supplies from the Crown since the
revolution of* 1688. Yet, in free America, both
of the powers are exercised to-day, and the pre-
sent Congress is hurling its anathemas against
the President, who, in his turn, replies by veto
after veto (1879). Congress proclaims that
it will withhold the supplies if the President
vetoes its measures. He does veto them, never-
theless, Here is conflict, antagonism. Who is
going to yield ? One must do so, or anarchy
will ensue. Although the ancient theory of
the veto was abandoned in England, it has sur-
vived with us. It was specifically introduced
into our law. All of the presidents since Jack-
son have regularly exercised it. Since the
foundation of the Government, the veto power
has been exercised by the presidents of the
United States about one hundred times.
Well, now contrast the conditions in the
two nations. The bills which are care-
fully passed through the two houses of Con-
gress have in a hundred instances been
vetoed by the chief magistrate in power;
bills similarly passed in England, never,
since the days of Queen Anne ! Now, I
am going to show how this veto power has
been used in the United States, my ob-
ject being to draw sharper attention to
the wisdom of creating a privy council
for Australia. I am particularly anxious
that hon. members should hear this part
of my case, because it cannot well be un-
derstood without close attention. General
Jackson, who had two terms in the presi-
dential chair—that is, for eight years he
was a despotic sovereign, more despotic
than any sovereign of Europe
Mr, J. P. Abbott : It was the people
who made him !
Sir HENRY PARKES: No doubt.
General Jackson in one of his veto
messages to Congress, laid down this doc-
trine. Remember, lam quoting from the
message of the President conveying his
veto on one of their bills. He says :
Each public officer who takes an oath to sup-
port the Constitution, swears that he will sup-
port it as he understands it, and not as it is
understood by others.
Mr. Kidd : He is infallible !
Sir HENRY PARKES : In that re-
spect very much like my hon. friend, the
member for Camden. Daniel Webster
among others strongly condemned the Pre-
sident, and thus spoke of it at the time :
The general adoption of the sentiments ex-
pressed in this sentence would dissolve our Go-
vernment. It would raise every man’s private
opinion into a standard for his own conduct;
and there certainly is, there can be no govern-
ment, where every man is to judge for himself
of his own rights and his own obligations.
Where every one is his own arbiter, force, and
not law, is the governing power. He may judge
for himself, must execute his own decisions ; and
this is the law of force. I confess, sir, it strikes
me with astonishment that so wild, so disorgan-
ising a sentiment, should be uttered by a presi-
dent of the United States.
Now, President Jackson, who, as I have
just stated, was not only elected to the pre-
sidency, but re-elected for another term of
four years, did many things as arbitrary
as this, and he was the sole depository of
the executive power of the United States,
I now come to General Grant. General
Grant was a man of a very different type, of
a very different character. I admit that I
am one of those who have a warm admira-
tion for his great qualities as a soldier and
a patriot. But General Grant did some
things which nobody can possibly defend ;
and I only allude to them to show how, in
the best of men, this lodgment of solo power
is sure to run into riot and abuse. This is
what Mr. David Dudley Field, the great
jurist, said of the conduct of General
Grant;
Under colour of his office alone, without any
treaty, or act of Congress, or any judicial pro-


cess, lie seized and delivered up to Spain a
Spanish subject, who had sought shelter on our
shores; and under colour of protecting a state
against domestic violence, he turned out one
legislature, and put in another, in three of the
states.
General Grant actually, by an armed force,
turned out the elected members of the
legislature, and put another body of men
in their places. That was the effect of
having the executive power of a state
lodged in the hands of one man. Charles
Sumner, speaking also of General Grant,
used these words ;
The President, without warning, precipitated
upon the country an ill-considered scheme for the
annexation of a portion of the island of San
Domingo, in pursuance of a treaty negotiated by
an aid-de-camp. Reluctant senators were sub-
dued, to its support, while treading under foot
the Constitution in one of its most distinctive
republican principles. The President seized the
war-power of the nation, instituted foreign in-
tervention, and capped the climax of usurpation,
by menace of violence to the black republic of
Hayti.
Now, I think these instances of how ex-
ecutive power is used by the President of
the great republic, are quite sufficient to
warn us, or to warn the men who are in-
trusted with the solemn and sacred duty
of framing this Constitution, from taking
any similar course of vesting the executive
power of the state in the hands of one
man.
Mr. Crick ; We are not going to have
separation just yet, are we 1
Sir HENRY PARKES : Hence, then,
it seems to me that the interruption which
has drawn from me these references to
the President’s power—it seems to me
that that interruption of, “We want no
privy council,” Avas ill-considered, ill-
timed, and Avas an expression of which
men, in their sober moments, Avould be
ashamed. The highest provision in the
machinery of a free state is to secure,
under wholesome restraints and keen re-
sponsibilities, the exercise of the executive
poAver. In all states, whateA r er, the ex-
ecutive arm of government is the most
important, and it cannot be left out. It
must be in existence. The power must
reside somewhere. In an autocracy, of
course, it resides in the autocrat, and is
exercised by his sovereign will, and it is
little short of that, as I think I have
proved, in the case of the presidential go-
vernment of the United States, which
cannot be fairly called a republic. But,.
under our form of government, this power,
whether in the Privy Council, or in the
Executive Council of one of these great
colonies, can only be exercised by the advice
of men who are responsible for all advice
they give; and I do not know how
human wisdom, can contrive any safer
depository for the executive power of a
free state. I therefore now, at this table,
say that my outline which I gave on
the 30th October last, namely, that there
should be, under a governor-general, a
privy council and a federal parliament,
consisting of a senate and a house of rep-
resentatives—is a fair outline of a consti-
tution.
Mr. Traill : The lion, member said
House of Commons before !
Sir HENRY PARKES: If it will
please the hon. member, I will say House
of Commons now.
Mr. Traill ; There are none but com-
mons in this country, and never will be,
please God.
Mr. Inglis : There are some uncoin-
mons !
Sir HENRY PARKES: I should feel
that I had committed a great affront to
the intellect of this country if I rated
the hon. member as amongst the commons.
He is not so in my estimation, I assure
him.
Mr, Traill : I do not care twopence
for the hon. member’s estimation, and
never did. He knows how he stands in
my estimation !
Sir HENRY PARKES: There are
some other powers which the federal go-
vernment would be able to exercise, and
to exercise effectively, which the provin-
cial governments cannot. It is impossible
to shut our eyes to a contemplation of the
future ; it is impossible to shut our eyes
to the difficulties which are sure to beset
this country from the multitudinous
Asiatic races. Their close proximity to
the shores of Australia—the ease with
which they can visit us—their Avonderful
powers of imitation and invention when
they have once had the track pointed out—
should never be lost sight of in estimating
the possible dangers of the future that may
flow from these teeming nations in con-
nection Avith this country, I think it was
a Avise, although a jocular, passage in that
letter which has been referred to, written
by Major-General Edwards, in Avhich he,


pointed out to us the superior naval power,
becoming more superior every year, of the
Chinese empire. They have some of the
finest ironclads afloat, they have some of
the fastest cruisers afloat, and it is well
that the people of these colonies should
realise that we have this power so near—
this power already so fully armed—this
power so well prepared to take advantage
of all inventions aud all improvements, still
further to arm itself, and to whom human
lives count as nothing. A country whose
population is of that teeming character that
it is measured by hundreds of millions—
and most authorities estimate the popula-
tion at 400,000,000 ; some put it as nearer
500,000,000 —possesses in that population
the material for almost any exercise of
human force. And if it be the case, as I
believe it is, that China is now engaging
the most experienced generals from Ger-
many, and from England itself, to train
her armed bodies—that she has already a
considerable army, and that she is fast
acquiring a navy inferior to few, both in
quality and numbers—surely it is time
that Australians understood the character
of this near neighbour. A federal govern-
ment could deal with this difficulty,—if
you like—danger, before us, for I am not
disposed to mince terms in speaking of it
—a united Australia could deal with it cer-
tainly up to the full measure of the power
of Australia. She might be weak in num-
bers, but she would not be weak in courage;
and whatever her power in numbers, in
courage, in any other element of defence
may be, she would be able to deal with it
up to the utmost limit of that power,and no
colony alone could do anything. Then,
again, there are the fair lands lying out in
all directions on the face of the Pacific.
It is almost a misleading term to call
these islands the South Sea Islands. Some
of them are extensive, beautiful, and fer-
tile lands, capable of high cultivation, and
capable of sustaining large populations.
These countries must develop steadily.
They must advance in civilisation ; they
must advance in the acquisition of the in-
dustrial arts, and as the result of all this
advancement, there must grow up a large
and valuable commerce. To whom does
that commerce rightfully belong so much
as to Australia? A federal parliament
would be able to deal with all these mani-
fold and great complicated national inter-
ests; but the separated provincial govern-
ments are too feeble even to touch them. I
have tried to show that these colonies, in
point of numbers, and in point of advance-
ment, are ripe for Australian union. I
think an impartial examination of that pro-
blem will lead every one to the belief that
the time is come when it can be success;
fully solved, and that these young commu-
nities may spring as it were into their full
nationhood without waiting any long time.
This country, so wondrously fair in its
productive powers, so wonderfully rich in
the variety of its natural resources, so
blessed with climate, so blessed by the race
who have taken possession of it—this
country is simply waiting for the divine
touch to call it into national life. If I
may be permitted, I would read two verses
written by an Australian poet. The words
are brave words.
Mr. Willis : Who is the author 1 ?
Sir HENRY PARKES : Not Willis.
Mr, Willis : The hon. member may read
it, then !
Sir HENRY PARKES ;
We have no records of a bygone shame,
No red-writ histories of woe to weep :
God set our land in summer seas asleep
Till His fair morning for her waking came.
And with fair Peace’s white, pure flag unfurl’d,
Our children shall, upon this new-won shore—
Warn’d by all sorrows that have gone before—
Build up the glory of a grand New World.
How true it is that in all the long,
checkered, blood-bespattered history of the
human race, there never was a land so
favourably situated as this fair land of
Australia; surrounded by pacific seas, lying
apart from all the warring elements of the
old civilisations of the world, waiting for
God’s fair morning, as those beautiful
words express it, when our children, not
we, shall “ build up the glory of a grand
new world.” Ten years will probably blot
out most names from the roll of those who
are listening to me ; but our children will
be in our places, with a fairer education for
the common people, with finer prospects for
all, with the way all smooth to the march-
ing feet; and our children, God willing, will
preserve that fabric of freedom which their
fathers did something to erect. They will
extend and solidify its foundations, they
will bring under its shelter all the good
and jieace-loving people of the world, and
where we stand now, men of high culture,


of pure ambition, of single-hearted objects,
will take our place; and what we are doing
now is not for us but for them—it is not
for the passing race, but for the untold
millions that will follow us, until this land
of Australia shall gather within its bosom
all the fruits of the culture of the world,
Sydney: Charles Potter, Government Printer.—lB9o.
all the lessons from the philosophy of the
world, all the high examples from the
brilliant courage of our great forefathers,
and until the flag of freedom shall be here
planted so firmly and guarded with such a
fervid patriotism that all the powers on
earth shall never assault it.




