

Pern Pftw,
Australian Soldiers’ Repatriation
Summary of the Speech
DELIVERED BY
SENATOR MILLEN
(Minister for Repatriation)
IN THE SENATE, ON 18th JULY, 1917
Repatriation is an entirely new proposi-
tion. Although much unrelated private
effort has taken place in certain of the
allied countries, no comprehensive project
has yet been submitted by any Govern-
ment. Australia is therefore giving a
lead to other nations. Repatriation is an
expression of the nation’s determination
to look after those who, as a result of the
war, are incapacitated, and to seek by
organized effort to secure satisfactory re-
instatement in civil life of those who are
capable of such re-instatement. The
nation put forth organized effort
to enrol these men in the ranks
of the army fighting for its safety.
It must with equal determination insure
that an organized effort is made to secure
their return to that civil life which at the
call of duty they temporarily abandoned.
Repatriation is not a mere proposal for
the disbursement of money. There is a.i
economic side to the problem. If 25,000
men remain unnecessarily idle for only
one week there is a loss to the community
of from £600,000 to £700,000. In help-
ing the returned soldiers we shall also be
helping ourselves by hastening the pro-
ductive activities of the country.
C. 9992.
Government Accepts Responsibility.
The problem cajmot be left to un-
directed and unco-ordinated private effort,
however earnest and determined it may
be. The nature, extent, and duration of
the work requires it to be accepted as a
national responsibility. This Government
accepts that responsibility. The Govern-
ment must have an organization which it
can direct, which will move to a pre-deter-
mined plan, and which will be responsive
to its control. I have endeavoured to
devise a scheme with which there will be
sufficient of the official element to insure
uniformity, regularity, and continuity
and as much of private assistance as cir-
cumstances will permit and the people are
willing to provide. The Government will
from time to time seek Parliamentary ap-
propriation as ma v be required to replen-
ish the Central and, and the policy of
uniformity in disbursement will be ar-
rived at—not uniformity in the amount
allotted to each individual soldier, but
uniformity of the principles upon which
disbursement shall proceed. No further
appeals to the public will be launched for
donations to the Central Fund. Local
activities, however, will be allowed very


wide scope, but they must be under the
control of the local committees to be
created under the proposed Act. They
must be for the benefit generally of all the
soldiers in the district covered, and not for
individual men, and will need to conform
to regulations as to supervision and audit.
Existing Eunds.
Repatriation shall commence at the
time of the soldier’s discharge. Local
patriotic funds will therefore be consider-
ably relieved. The public, however, will
be appealed to to sustain and continue
those funds designed for the welfare of
the soldier and his dependants prior to the
date of his discharge. At a conference
of representatives of these funds three
principles were approved—first, that the
several funds should adopt a uniform
policy; second, that there should be a com-
mon collecting agency in each State; and,
third, a recognition of the responsibility
resting upon the Commonwealth as to
supervising the administrative costs of
such funds. It was decided to adopt, both
with regard to the dependants and the
soldier, the highest scale of benefits at
present in operation. The new scale of
payments will become operative as soon
as practicable after August 1, 1917.
Registration, Paying Off, and
Employment.
It is essential that the Repatriation
Organization should have not only a com-
plete register of the men on whose behalf
it is required to act, but that it should
have that registration as early as possible.
Registration should be effected prior to, in-
stead of after, discharge. If possible, regis-
tration should be effected on the voyage
out or even prior to the soldier’s departure
from Great Britain. If practicable the
soldier should be paid off at the Repatria-
tion office instead of at the Barracks. In
that case a branch of the Commonwealth
Bank would be opened in the building and
the soldier would be invited to deposit a
proportion of his final pay, and so be safe-
guarded against temptations by which he
is now assailed. Registration having been
effected, the application of the soldier will
be dealt with. To aid the speedy absorp-
tion of the men into their previous occupa-
tions I propose the establishment in the
Central Offices of each State of a Labour
Bureau.
Training of Injured.
Those soldiers whose efficiency has been
impaired as the result of wounds or illness
will be unable to follow their previous
occupations. Elementary training will be
imparted to them in curative workshops
attached to the hospitals. Two means
seem available for providing more ad-
vanced training. One is the establish-
ment of special Government institutions
wherein the men could be given the train-
ing necessary to enable them to take their
places as qualified workmen; the other,
by an arrangement with private employers
under which the latter would pay in pro-
portion to the value of the man’s work,
the Government paying the difference be-
tween that sum and the recognised wage
appropriate to the particular occupation.
Renewal of Training.
Apprentices who had not completed
their indentures should have an oppor-
tunity of finishing their course and be-
coming qualified and skilled workmen. The
country must accept the responsibility of
supplementing their wages to enable them
to do so. Technical colleges, existing Go-
vernment workshops, &c., offer a measure
of assistance. In addition, arrangements
should be made with private firms to com-
plete the interrupted indentures, the
Commonwealth subsidizing wages as may
be necessary. If these avenues are in-
sufficient, it will be necessary to provide
special training establishments. In cases
in which a man’s capacity has been per-
manently impaired, it is proposed to con-
fer with the industrial unions and with
employers, with a view to arriving at an
understanding as to their employment.
Special provision will have to be made
for the totally incapacitated. Such cases
will be met in two ways. First, by the
establishment of hostels or homes in suit-
able locations where those who elect to be-
come inmates can satisfactorily and syra-
patheticaly be looked after. In the case
of those who, having homes to go to, or
friends able and willing to look after
them, there should, at the discretion of
the repatriation authorities, be granted an
extra allowance up to 10s. to meet the
necessities of the lease. Sanatoria will be
established for those suffering from tuber-
cular complaints. Arrangements will be
made bv which discharged soldiers need-
ing medical attention will receive it. A
2


factory will be established, with branches
in the different States, for the manufac-
ture, repairs, and renewals of artificial
limbs.
Land Settlement.
In considering land settlement, a pro-
portion of the money to be spent under
this heading ought to be regarded as
being spent in the country’s develop
ment, and not solely to meet our obliga-
tions to the soldiers. The Commonwealtl
Government recently undertook to make
advances to the States, to be in turn ad
vanced by them to the settler, to enabh
the latter to effect improvements, pur
chase plants, seed, stock, &c. The limit
in any case was to be £5OO. It was alsc
agreed to establish training farms. It
should be laid down as a principle that
holdings designed for soldier settlers should
conform to the capital available'for then
working. If a genuine effort is to be made
to provide for those of a lesser experi-
ence and no capital, and at the same time
give a distinct impetus to small settlement
then a new policy must be evolved, not
in substitution, but as an addition to the
existing proposals. For the satisfactory
settlement of this last class there are four
essential conditions—
(1) That the holding should be of
such a size that the settler’s
own labour is the most im-.
portant factor in its develop-
ment and working.
(2) That the size and character of
the holding shall correspond
with the financial resources at
the command of the settler.
(3) That the knowledge necessary to
work the holding can be ac-
quired in a short period.
(4) That the returns shall be quick.
The underlying idea of these small-hold-
ing propositions is that the Government
shall guarantee a market and organize
the handling and sale of the produce.
Hog raising affords an instance of what is
proposed. In America whole districts are
devoted to hog raising without the assist-'
ance of the dairying industry.. A market
could be assured by providing slaughter-
ing establishments, and by guaranteeing
a minimum price to the producer.
Eventually such factories could be handed
over as co-operative concerns to the set-
tiers. The Government will also make
available such scientific and practical ad-
vice as may be desirable.
Certain projects are under considera-
tion which will carry a man on until he
lither obtains, or the Repatriation Or-
ganization obtains for him, that more per-
nanent occupation which he desires and
for which he is fitted. Such reserve em-
ployment must be suitable to the varying
capacity and physical strength of the in-
dividuals. Afforestation and the Murray
River scheme suggest themselves as prac-
ticable means for absorption of such
labour. It is proposed that the Pensions
Act should be amended. Revision will be
provided for at the expiration of six
months from the granting of the pension.
Any further revision will be at the option
of the pensioner, and any alteration of
the pension must then be by way of in-
crease. Assistance in the establishment
of residences in urban areas is also under
consideration.
Central Organization.
The question now presents itself as to
the organization necessary to carry out
ihese proposals. First of all, it is pro-
posed that there shall be a Commission
of seven members as a central organiza-
tion. The members of this Board will be
private citizens appointed by the Govern-
ment, acting in an honorary capacity.
This and all subordinate bodies will in-
clude returned soldiers. The duties of
the Commission will be to prescribe by
regulations the nature and the extent of
the many beneficial activities embraced in
the work of repatriation which have been
indicated. Included in the staff with
which the central organization must neces-
sarily be provided will be one or, if neces-
sary, more inspectors, whose duty will be,
by frequent visitations, to secure uniform
and smooth working throughout the whole
country.-
State Organization.
State organizations will be charged
with the actual work of carrying out the
policy emanating from the Central Board.
In the capital of each State there shall be
created by appointment a Board of seven,
acting in an honorary capacity. It is de-
sirable that returned soldiers should be
represented. At the head of each State
there will be a responsible official, and
3


under his control the work will be sub-
divided into various appropriate sections,
such as training, 'employment, disable-
ment, land, &c. Progress would be ex-
pedited if there were in the Repatriation
office an officer whose duty it would be
to help the soldier-settler in the prepara-
tion and presentation of his application
for land to the State Lands Department.
District Committees.
Throughout Australia people will be in-
vited to create district voluntary organiza-
tions. These areas should be well defined
and co-terminous. These committees will
be invited to promote in every conceivable
way the interests of returned soldiers. A
special feature of their duty should be to
endeavour to find openings for employ-
ment in their districts. “ Working bees ”
could be established to give a man help
in the erection of initial improvements
and to assist in various other ways.
The different branches of repatriation
work will be brought under one roof.
Every effort will be made to secure eco-
nomy,, but under no conceivable circum-
stances can a very considerable expendi-
ture be avoided. That expenditure, how-
ever, will be only such as is necessary to
insure efficiency. This is a broad view of
what is contemplated, and as the last
word has not yet been spoken, it is neces-
sary to keep an open mind. These, sug-
gestions are an earnest attempt to meet
the nation’s obligations to those who, on
its behalf, have gone down into the Valley
of the Shadow of Death, and it is hoped
that the scheme will be regarded as not
altogether unworthy either of Australia or
of those who willingly and heroically
fought and suffered in her defence.
By Authority ; Albert J. Mullett, Government Printer, Melbourne.
4
