

J t~ P
HISTORICAL BIOGRAPHIES
(Empire Series)
AUSTRALIA
a Australia’s Emblem: The Golden IVattle.
Edited by - LORD APSLEY, D. 5.0., M.C., M.P.
Foreword by The MARQUESS OF SALISBURY,
G.C.V.0., K.G.
“IF”
by RUDYARD KIPLING
c .Vrice Sixpence
Published by The British Empire Educational Press Limited, 180 Mansion
House Chambers, London, E.C.


PRESS EXTRACTS
HISTORICAL BIOGRAPHIES
No. i
CANADA
" The British Empire Educational Press is doing good
service by preparing under Lord Apsley’s editorship a
series of 6d. pamphlets with an instruction value far above
their nominal price.”
Daily Telegraphy Nov. 11th, 1926.
“ Lord Apsley, whose enterprising enquiries with Lady
Apsley as to the conditions of settlers in Australia have
become so widely known, has undertaken the editorship of
the Empire Series of Historical Biographies, and the first of
the little books is now published at sixpence.”
Morning Post, Nov. 24 th, 1926.
“We wish every boy in England would read this
book.”
The Spectator , Nov. 20th, 1926.
“ At the close of this short volume of reading, any boy
will find that he has suddenly and quite painlessly learnt
much of Canadian history.”
Daily Express, January 13 th, 1927.
“ Besides cementing the bonds of understanding
between the countries of the Empire, this booklet, perhaps
more than any other of the series, is bound, as Dr. Haden
Guest expresses it, ‘to stimulate the spirit of adventure and
teach something of the great opportunities yet waiting.’
These books deserve a place in the curriculum of all the
schools in the British Commonwealth.”
The Englishman ( Calcutta) January sth, 1927


♦ J f u # >•— f #
i £' ■ **. ' ' ::!
HUM
ET# 1 £
; -2-T --~f rr Tj
jiLfdfj. * iiiyitA * 9
JWjMJ *i®
Sr
Z. ~ *r
- m$m
' 11 ii!iipft> ; _, if i >•„ :i '■
p^p^pipfff■ - - -■ >v * £ ” a *^
THE
RESIDENCE OF JOHN MACARTHUR, NEAR PARRAMATTA. N.S.W.
(Original Home of the Sheep Industry in Australia)
From an Engraving , 1821.


AUSTRALIA
THERE is a fascination in the history of a young country. In no
instance is this more so than that of Australia, and in editing
these biographies I may say from the first to the last I have been
impressed with the accuracy of that very ancient saying : “ Truth
is stranger than fiction.”
The life and death of Captain Cook is in itself a romance. That
of Sir Joseph Banks vividly describes the efforts, crowned with
success, of a marvellous man. The story of John Macarthur’s experi-
ments with sheep in the early days is a pleasure to read. The life of
William Charles Wentworth, explorer and successful fighter for the
people’s rights, reads as though it was the embodiment of the lives of
half-a-dozen great men rolled into one. The ill-fated, badly managed,
brilliant, romantic and tragic exploration of Robert O’Hara Burke
for thrilling reading is an epic that should vibrate through history
for ever. Everyone can enter into the Aladdin’s cave opened up
through the discovery of gold by Edward Hammond Hargraves.
There is some indescribable charm, perhaps the blend of Cotswold
gorse with Australian wattle, in the life of Adam Lindsay Gordon
that makes one want to read it again and yet again. Lord
Forrest, explorer and statesman, well deserves his place in these pages.
It may be that some will say that Australia has produced
greater statesmen than Sir George Reid, but certainly none more
versatile, nor one who filled so many offices, of distinction. Sir
Samuel Walter Griffith, statesman, but above all a great legal luminary
and first Chief Justice of the Commonwealth, makes a fitting close
to the book.
It is my regret that so many able men have had to be left out—
notably, Tasman, Sir Henry Parkes, Mr. Deakin, Sir Edmund Barton
and John Howard Angas.
Though these biographies were written for girls and boys of
from 12 to 18, they might be read with advantage by adults; and no
one should dream of going to Australia cither as a visitor cr a migrant
without taking this book to read on the way out.
In conclusicn I should like to express my thanks for kindly
advice, loan of books of reference, and the hearty co-operation of
those at Australia House, particularly the High Commissioner, Sir
Joseph Cook, Mr. J. T. Barnes and Mr. E. R. Garnsey.


FOREWORD
(By The Marquess of Salisbury, g.c.v.0., k.g.)
THIS book is addressed to those who are young —to those, that
is, who have enterprise and imagination and the spirit of adven-
ture. It is refreshing that the Editor has- determined to appeal to
these qualities, because they are natural to youth and they are beyond
price. And yet these qualities in these days are exposed to great
dangers. They are being assailed and undermined and explained
away by the modern heresy of routine and comfort and safety first.
Young people are told that adventure was all very well in former
days, but all that belongs to history. We have, it is said, other ideals
now—to pass such and such a standard at school and to look forward
to a competence with regular hours, congenial occupation, and a
good deal of leisure for popular recreation. lam quite certain that
the young instinct is conscious that this is not satisfying. It says to
itself—if this be all, why have I sometimes this passionate longing for
adventure ? Does all this in truth belong to the past ? Am Ito have
no opportunity ?
Of course the answer depends upon circumstances. Even the
spirit of adventure may be selfish; but to many the instinct is a call,
it is a talent which must not be laid up in a napkin, and for those this
book is written. They will learn in it that the opportunity lies in
the Empire to which they belong. Let them read of Captain Cook
and the other British pioneers. What these could do and the genera-
tions in which they lived, so in the measure of their capacity this
generation can do; and not by their comfort but by their effort the
vigour of this Empire may grow and the achievement of human
endeavour may be multiplied.
SALISBURY.


If you can keep your head when all about you
Are losing theirs and blaming it on you;
If you can trust yourself when all men doubt you,
But make allowance for their doubting too;
If you can wait and not be tired by waiting,
Or being lied about, don’t deal in lies,
Or being hated, don’t give way to hating,
And yet don’t look too good, nor talk too wise;
If you can dream—and not make dreams your master ;
If you can think —and not make thoughts your aim ;
If you can meet with Triumph and Disaster
And treat those two impostors just the same;
If you can bear to hear the truth you’ve spoken
Twisted by knaves to make a trap for fools,
Or watch the things you gave your life to, broken,
And stoop and build ’em up with worn-out tools;
If you can make one heap of all your winnings
And risk it on one turn of piich-and-toss,
And lose, and start again at your beginnings,
And never breathe a word about your loss;
If you can force your heart and nerve and sinew
To serve your turn long after they are gone,
And so hold on when there is nothing in you
Except the Will which says to them: “Hold on!"
If you can talk with crowds and keep your virtue,
Or walk with Kings—nor lose the common touch ;
If neither foes nor loving friends can hurt you;
If all men count with you, but none too much ;
If you can fill the unforgiving minute
With sixty seconds' worth of distance run,
Yours is the Earth and everything that’s in it,
And—which is more — you’ll be a Man, my son !
Published by kind permission of
RUDYARD KIPLING,


Death of Captain ,Cook
In the United Service Museum , hy permission of the Council)
CAPTAIN JAMES COOK, R.N., F.R.S,
IT is curious how many people will tell you that America was
discovered by Christopher Columbus and Australia by Captain
Cook. Neither statement, in fact, is correct. The Danes and
Icelanders had not only discovered but colonised America some 500
years before Columbus sailed. So also had Dutch and French
explorers been to Australia long before Cook ; the former had even
made some attempt to colonise the Northern parts of that great
Continent. But like the Danish settlements in America, these attempts
failed ; the herds of wild buffalo on the Northern Australian coast,
descended from the water buffalo the Dutch introduced, are all that
remain of these early settlements, and for more than 200 years
Australia was neglected and forgotten. All that was known about
it in Europe was that there existed a great Continent “ down under,”
that it had been named by its discoverers “ New Holland,” but that
it was considered of no more practical value to the world than the
land round the South Pole is to us to-day. Then came Captain Cook.
It was he who re-discovered Australia for the British race. It was due
to him that there exists to-day in the Southern Seas a new home for
Britons which one day will outstrip the old in wealth and population ;
and here is the story of this remarkable man to whom we owe so much.


James Cook was born on October 27th, 1728, at Marton in
Yorkshire, and there seems to be some doubt as to the exact standing
of his father ; some say he was a farm labourer, others that he farmed
a small holding himself, but in any event he was born in such a station
of life that he had his own way to make, and a pretty hard one at that.
At thirteen young James Cook first begins to loom on the
horizon of history as one having a possible future. When a boy of
eight, in 1736, his father was appointed a bailiff to a Mr. Skottowe,
and removed with his family to Airy Holme Farm, near Ayton, in
Yorkshire. James, or as he was better known then as “ Jimmy,”
was sent to a school kept by a Mr. Pullen where it is said that his
excellence at arithmetic saved him from many a hiding due to
him for slackness in other branches of study. In those days,
however, a thrashing at school followed more or less as a matter of
course. Out of school Jimmy was, to use the words of Mr. Pullen
himself, “ a regular demon, but without vice.” Somewhat of a
tribute from an eighteenth-century dominie. He was noted, even as
a boy of thirteen, as a leader in games and “ rags,” particularly in
snow fights, as officer in charge of boy press-gangs and in capturing
imaginary smugglers. If other boys had different views, Jimmy’s
generally prevailed.
When about seventeen, after some years assisting his father on
the farm, he became an apprentice to a Mr. John Walker, a member of
a coal shipping firm of repute at Whitby. The apprenticeship was
only for three years and consisted mainly of coasting down the east
of England, but there is little doubt but that what he learnt of practical
seamanship then was invaluable to him later on. After his appren-
ticeship expired he went before the mast for three years, and then was
mate for another three years, after which he joined the Royal Navy.
When he had been only thirty-seven days in the Navy he was
rated master’s mate.
His rise in the Service was exceptionally rapid, and he quickly
gained a reputation as an accurate surveyor of uncharted coasts and
as an astronomer and navigator. It was Jimmy’s arithmetic that
carried him through life, as you will see presently; if he had not
learned it so well at school, the history of two continents might
have been changed. His services under Admiral Saunders, in
exploring the St. Lawrence River, and his maps, received at the time
a full measure of Government approval.
Opportunity makes the man, but man makes opportunities, and
it is queer how often great events come from small beginnings. This
is how it fared with Captain Cook. Some British astronomers had
calculated that a transit of the planet Venus would occur in 1769,
and that on a certain date in that year, from a certain island in the
South Seas called Otaheite, it would be possible to make observations
of that planet which would be invaluable to astronomic science. In
other words, some old gentlemen at Greenwich wanted to know-
more about the “ Evening Star ” ; that was the opportunity.


The Royal Society requested the British Government to supply
a ship ; which they did. H.M.S. Endeavour was selected, and the
command given to Captain Cook. He was also appointed as observer
in conjunction with a Mr. Charles Green who died during the voyage.
Another very important man in the history of Australia was also
appointed, namely, Mr. Joseph Banks, a Fellow of the Royal Society,
who joined the expedition with a suite of seven assistants representing
that Society. He did not care much about stars, but was an enthu-
siastic collector of rare plants.
The Endeavour left Plymouth August 25th, 1768, under orders
to proceed to Otaheite, and after the astronomical observations had
been completed to prosecute the design of making discoveries in the
South Pacific Ocean by proceeding to the South, to explore New
Zealand, and then return home by such route as he should think
proper. Captain Cook, or as he then was, Lieutenant-Commander,
R.N., had already a reputation in many fields, and prior to this
appointment he had rendered efficient service at the capture of Quebec.
On taking command of the Endeavour, however, he was on a peace-
ful mission, and the ship was after neither an enemy, spoil nor prize
money; and the voyage, though he was unaware of the fact, was to
make his name famous for all time.
An amusing incident occurred at Rio de Janeiro which showed
that Cook possessed tact beyond the ordinary. The Endeavour
called at that port for provisions, but the Portuguese Viceroy prac-
tically put the ship under surveillance, and only the Commander was
allowed ashore with a Portuguese officer. Cook sent word that he
was greatly obliged for the honour done him in attaching an officer
to him during his stay, but he hoped His Excellency would not insist
upon it, as it was an honour that would not be paid in England to a
Portuguese officer of his rank. Later friendly relations were formed.
The main objects of their stay at Otaheite having been success-
fully accomplished, the Endeavour set sail for New Zealand, where on
landing with a party at Poverty Bay, the Maoris mistook the ship for
a large bird and were particularly struck with the beauty of its wings,
the sails. The coast of New Zealand was explored, and it was definitely
ascertained there was at least a North and a South Island.
On leaving New Zealand there was no definite intention of
going to Australia, though it was known that such a country did
exist, and there is not the slightest truth in the story that Cook dis-
covered it by accident. The land of Australia was sighted on April
19th, 1770, and on the 29th of that month H.M.S. Endeavour anchored
at what now is known as Botany Bay. This name was given to the
Bay when they landed by Mr. Banks, who collected there some
specimens which created tremendous excitement among his botanical
friends when he got home. The country they called New South Wales,
from a fancied resemblance of the landscape to the hills and dales of
Pembroke and Carmarthen.


The greatest credit is given by both Captain Cook and Mr.
Banks to the behaviour of the members of the crew and to the members
of the expedition. After some further exploration of the coast of
New South Wales, the ship proceeded home by the Cape of Good
Hope, the first time an English ship had been round the world.
Promotions and honours were awarded to the majority of those who
had taken part in its circumnavigation. It is not necessary here to
go into details of the great effects of the discoveries made on this
voyage and the part played by both Captain Cook and Mr. (afterwards
Sir Joseph) Banks.
Captain Cook had two ships under him in his next voyage, the
Resolution and the Adventure, he personally being in command of
the former and Captain Furneaux of the latter. The two vessels
left Plymouth July 13th, 1772. Owing to bad weather the two ships
lost each other for fourteen weeks, but met again in Queen Charlotte’s
Sound. After visiting New Zealand once more and many of the
South Sea Islands, the expedition returned home via Cape Horn,
having again been right round the world, only this time the other
way round !
The last voyage of Captain Cook was again in the Resolution,
followed later by the Discovery (Captain Clerke), a ship of 300 tons.
The Resolution left Plymouth on July 12th, 1776, and the Discovery
on August 10th. Their mission this time was a curiously varied one.
First they were to search for a continent which was said to exist
north of the Antarctic Circle, but between Cape Horn and New
Zealand. Captain Cook sailed all over this vast area in the South Pacific,
making the most careful observations, and proved conclusively that
there was no such continent. Secondly, they were to attempt the
passage from the Pacific to the Atlantic North of Canada. This they
were unable to do and returned to the South Sea Islands, and it was
here that while still making valuable discoveries the great sailor and
circumnavigator was killed in an affray with natives at Otaheite in
which four Marines were instantly killed and three others dan-
gerously wounded.
The Gazetteer of the following 24th January says : “ His Majesty,
who had always the highest opinion of Captain Cook, shed tears
when Lord Sandwich informed him of his death, and immediately
ordered a pension of £3OO a year for the widow.” It was Captain
Cook also who showed that by making his men drink lime juice when
at sea he need have no fear of scurvy, a disease which hitherto had
been the greatest obstacle in the way of sailors attempting long journeys
out of reach of land and fresh vegetables. Three or four statues have
been erected in honour of Captain Cook, the finest being that in
Sydney near the harbour—the most beautiful in the world.
While Australia has a wide climatic variation, there
are no extremes of temperature. Australia ranks as one
of the healthiest countries in the world.


JOSEPH BANKS
Sir Joseph Banks
THERE is an old saying that “ Man is never so great as his
work.” No better example can be shown than in the life of
Joseph Banks, whose impress on the world in the eighteenth century
was outstanding, yet whose name to the vast majority of people in the
British Isles to-day conveys little beyond the fact that he was by
way of being a distinguished naturalist.
Joseph Banks was born in Argyle Street, London, in 1743. His
father, William Banks, was a rich man, and the boy was sent to Harrow
School at nine years of age, and removed to Eton when thirteen. His
particular chum at Eton was a boy named Brougham, who was
afterwards the father of the celebrated Lord Chancellor of that name.
The boys were of the same age, and both devoted to swimming and
to taking long walks. Brougham later described him to his son as
a “ remarkably fine looking, strong and active boy whom no fatigue
could subdue and no peril daunt ; his whole time out of school was
given up to hunting after plants and insects.”
He tried to do his duty in conforming to the school courses of
Latin and Greek, but his whole heart was in learning the nature of
plants, and he even paid some women who were engaged in gathering
such for druggists to teach him what information they could give him.
After leaving school Joseph was entered at Christchurch, Oxford.
Scholarship did not attract him and he devoted almost his whole time
to the study of Botany, and all other considerations yielded to this.


His father died in 1761, while Joseph was still under age, and he
came into possession of the ancestral property in February, 1764.
This by no means led to idleness, and he followed all branches of
Natural History with great ardour. Many rich men have in the past
financed botanical expeditions to various parts of the world, but
Banks was probably the first to not only finance, but to take an active
part in such expeditions which he did on many occasions. He early
joined the Royal Society, and later was for forty years its President and
an exceedingly active one.
In the preceding biography —that of Captain Cook—it will be
remembered that Joseph Banks accompanied Cook as the representa-
tive of the Royal Society on H.M.S. Endeavour. Banks never forgot
his experiences in Australia. The useful work he accomplished there
gave it a warm spot in his heart, and when a Committee of the House
of Commons was sitting in 1779, he strongly advocated the estab-
lishment of a colony there. His arguments were convincing, the gist
of them being as follows :
The colony would in course of time atone for the loss of the
American colonies. The climate was favourable and the country
offered inducements for adventure and exploration. It would provide
an asylum to those unfortunate American loyalists to whom Great
Britain was bound by every tie of honour and gratitude to protect
and support, so that they might have a chance to repair their broken
fortunes and again enjoy their former domestic felicity.
After some years of deliberations the Government decided to
carry out the scheme, and the first fleet for Botany Bay left in 1787,
consisting of six transports, three store ships, H.M.S. Sirius and the
Supply tender. The expedition was under the command of Captain
Arthur Phillip, and the ships carried over one thousand persons.
Their destination was reached in January, 1788. After consideration.
Captain Phillip decided to make the settlement at Port Jackson
(Sydney) as presenting the most favourable conditions for the purpose.
If this short biography sufficed it would be interesting to tell how the
new colonists fared in settling, and their early agricultural efforts,
their early troubles and their eventual success, which makes up the
romance of early Australian history. This account, however, you will
have to read elsewhere.
There is no doubt that Sir Joseph Banks was in frequent
consultation with the Government authorities prior to the departure
of the expedition, and, indeed, he refused high office on the ground
that his services would be of more value to the colony if he kept away
from ministerial responsibilities.
In an interesting book entitled “ Sir Joseph Banks, the Father
of Australia,” published a few years ago by J, H. Maiden, F.L.S.,
Director of the Sydney Botanic Garden, full recognition is given to
the efforts of Sir Joseph Banks, Bart, (as he became in 1782), to found
the colony of New South Wales, and the people there still keep his


name in undying honour. During what may be called the experi-
mental stage of the venture, Banks was watching the products of the
country and sending out naturalists at his own expense.
Mr. Edward Smith, in his excellent life of Sir Joseph Banks, says
that the first botanical results came into Sir Joseph’s hands as early
as 1789. The second and following fleets took out selections of
seeds for the use of the colonists, and bore explicit instructions for the
careful handling of plants destined for Kew Gardens. Sir Joseph
also had an estate of his own in the colony, and a memorandum of
1790 gives instructions as to the supply for each family and ten
servants ; victuals for three years ; cows, swine, sheep, seed, corn,
etc., for two years, together with tools and necessaries.
During his life Sir Joseph gave enormous impulse to the study
of Natural Science. His conduct of the Royal Society for forty
years is indeed a notable accomplishment. To this is to be added so
many public activities that there was scarcely an important movement
in his time in which he did not have an active share.. The Society of
Arts, the Society of Antiquaries, the Linpean Society, the Royal
Horticultural Society, and a host of institutions over Europe found
in him an active friend. They still hold his name in veneration, and
in those days the naturalists of France, Germany, Sweden, Italy and
Russia considered Banks the greatest living Englishman.
He died on the 19th of June, 1820, being seventy-seven years of
age. During the last twenty years of his life Sir Joseph seems to
have been more or less of an invalid. Gout in particular used to
worry him a good deal every winter, and for fourteen years previous
to his death he lost the use of his lower limbs so completely as to
oblige him to be carried or wheeled, by his servants, in a chair.
In one of his last letters to a friend, he said : “ I think I shall not
last much longer, and I thank God I have had -a long and happy life,
and am quite willing to resign it.”
His end was peaceful. As Mr. Edward Smith says : “ Thus
ended a career of unexampled usefulness ; one that left the country
better and wiser ; and the whole world indebted for steps in progress
and culture to the life and labours of a most worthy English
gentleman.”
Perhaps if he could have known the Australian feeling as
epitomised by Mr. J. H. Maiden, he would have appreciated the
epitaph —
“ The Father of Australia.”
In the remote interior of Australia camels are largely
used for the transport of men and merchandise.
In 1921 Australia produced less than 1,000,000 lbs.
of seed cotton, and the estimate for 1924 is 90,000,000 lbs.
There are still millions of acres of suitable land untouched.


JOHN MAC ARTHUR
THOUGH born near Plymouth, in Devonshire, in 1767, John
Macarthur was of Scotch origin, and his father Alexander
Macarthur, an Argyleshire man, joined the army of Prince Charles
Edward in 1745. After the battle of Culloden he left Scotland and
lived for a time in the West Indies. Some years later he came to
England and established himself in business as an Army Agent in
Plymouth.
There is little or no account on record of John’s early school
days, except that it was at a private school in Devonshire. When
fifteen he was appointed an ensign (now called second-lieutenant) and
saw active service for a year; but at the close of the war in 1783 he
was placed on half-pay and then took an active interest in farming,
which was later to be of great use to himself, to Australia and to the
whole world.
In April, 1788, John Macarthur was gazetted to the 68th Foot
(the Durham Regiment), and a year later he was appointed lieutenant
in the New South Wales Corps which was being formed for service
in the newly-established settlement at Sydney under Governor Phillip
in 1788. At this time John was just twenty-one years of age and had
married a lady named Elizabeth Veale who was the same age as
himself.
There are many interesting incidents in the life of the young
couple in their early years, and they had a particularly trying voyage to
Australia, for there were no luxurious Orient liners in those days.
Here, however, in the space at the disposal of the writer, it is necessary
to confine John’s life largely to that part of it that will cause his name
to be remembered as long as Australia is Australia, for it was entirely
owing to his acumen, energy and untiring efforts that Merino sheep
were introduced into Australia, and it was he who founded the
great wool trade that is and always has been the source of Australia’s
leading industry, and which has not only built up many individual
fortunes, but has given work to countless thousands.
Such officers as had any knowledge of farming were given
grants of land for the purpose of growing food for the needs of the
growing colony. It was not long before John had 200 acres near
Parramatta, a town about twelve miles from Sydney. He called this
atter his wife, “ Elizabeth ” Farm.
There is no doubt but that from the first John was a successful
farmer, and writing to a brother in 1794, he says : “Of this year’s
produce I have sold £4OO worth, and I have now remaining in mv
granaries 1,800 bushels of corn. I have 20 acres of fine wheat-growing


land and 80 acres prepared for Indian corn and potatoes with which it
will be planted within a month.
“ My stock consists of one horse, two mares, two cows, one
hundred and thirty goats and upwards of one hundred hogs. Poultry
of all kinds I have in the greatest abundance. With the assistance of
one man and half-a-dozen greyhounds which I keep, my table is
constantly supplied with wild ducks or kangaroos. Averaging one
week with another, these dogs do not kill less than 300 lbs. weight.
In the centre of my farm I have built a most excellent brick house,
68 feet in front and 18 feet in breadth. It has no upper storey, but
consists of four rooms on the ground floor, a large hall, closets,
cellar, etc. ; adjoining is a kitchen with servants’ apartments and
other necessary offices. The house is surrounded by a vineyard and
garden of about three acres, the former full of vines and fruit trees
and the latter abounding with most excellent vegetables.
“ This farm being near the Barracks I can without difficulty
attend to the duties of my profession.”
The last paragraph would lead one to believe that soldiering was
not a very strenuous occupation at that time, for it would certainly
not be possible now for an officer on the active list of his regiment to
devote what must have been many hours a day to the care of a good-
sized farm.
Knowing the Australia of to-day, it seems impossible to believe
that for the first few years the young colony was short of food, and
yet the difficulties the early settlers met with may be judged from the
following quotation from “ Hunter’s Voyage,” written in 1789 :
“ There have been several attempts made by the gentlemen here,
who had little farms in the neighbourhood of ‘ Sydney Cove,’ to
raise grain of different kinds for the purpose of feeding a few pigs,
goats or poultry ; but although for a time their endeavours seemed to
promise ample reward, for the corn shot up very quickly, yet it was
no sooner formed into ear than the rats (with which, as well as other
vermin, this country is over-run) destroyed the whole of their pros-
pects. . . I am sorry to say that such of the corn that had escaped the
vermin, notwithstanding its very promising appearance in the begin-
ning, turned out the most miserable empty straws I ever beheld ; the
greatest part was mere straw of about two feet and a half high, and
the whole produce of an acre, when cut down, could be carried in
one hand.” It is interesting to note that Sydney Cove is the original
site of what is now Circular Quay and “ The Domain,” in Sydney—
the busiest part of a city of over a million inhabitants.
It was indeed true, and it took four years before New South
Wales succeeded in raising for itself food sufficient for its inhabitants.
Prior to that, everyone from the Governor downwards was often
reduced to less than half rations of miserable provisions. If you were
an invited guest to Government House to a meal you were expected
to take your own bread ration with you. However, the develop-


merits and natural resources of the country soon overcame such
troubles, and Australia has proved herself to be one of the greatest
food-producing countries in the world.
John Macarthur’s ancestors did not come from Argyleshire for
nothing, and there is no doubt that young as he was John displayed
considerable sagacity when he realised that for the success of the
country it was necessary to have a means of raising as an export
some raw material which could be produced without a great amount
of labour and would not deteriorate on a long sea voyage. He
realised that only by the production of some such commodity, whatever
might be the natural fertility of the country, it could not hope to
escape the alternations of abundance and scarcity even of the neces-
sities of life.
It was in 1794 that he first began to experiment in the rearing
of sheep, reasoning to himself that there was no possible article
so completely filling the necessary conditions as fine wool, and from
that time on he practically made it his life work. It generally happens
to all reformers and those who take up something new that no one
has thought of before, that they have to put up with a lot of scoffing
and laughter until it has been proved by success. John Macarthur
was no exception, and he had many trials and troubles to contend
with before he won through and was given large grants of land by
the Government, and became one of the greatest benefactors the
country has had.
In 1820 he gave evidence before a Commission sitting to report
on the industry. He stated that he had been engaged in the breeding
of sheep for more than twenty-six years. He began in 1794 with
sixty Bengal ewes and lambs which he had imported from Calcutta.
Then he procured two Irish ewes and one young ram. By crossing
the breed he discovered he could produce fine wool. In 1796 he sent
to the Cape of Good Hope and procured four ewes and two rams.
Later he purchased from the Royal flock at Kew nine rams and one ewe.
John Macarthur died at his estate at Camden, N.S.W., on
April 10th, 1834, and was buried on a site chosen by himself where
he had been in the habit of walking to enjoy the cool breeze and
beautiful view, and where he could see his flocks of sheep, herds of
cattle and horses contentedly grazing, and watch the crops spring up.
His contemporaries all spoke well of him, and Australia may
well say of John Macarthur ;
“ Well done, thou good and faithful servant.”
The raising of poultry by haphazard methods in
Australia have long since given place to skilled attention,
and the industry now exceeds £9,000,000 a year.


WILLIAM CHARLES WENTWORTH
William Charles Wentworth
NO history of Australia, biographical or otherwise, would be
complete without some account of the life of William Charles
Wentworth, a native-born son of Australia, who has been justly
termed the architect of the edifices of Australian political freedom
and intellectual culture. To him Australia owes the jury panel, the
liberty of the Press, the right of unrestricted public meetings and the
right of free speech. He is claimed to this day as Australia’s greatest
son.
William was born at Norfolk Island on October 26th, 1795.
His father, D’Arcy Wentworth, was a doctor who had com: to the
country as assistant surgeon at Botany Bay in 1790. He could claim
through his forbears relationship with Wentworth, Earl of Strafford,
the adviser of Charles Stuart. He was also connected with William
Wentworth, Earl Fitzwilliam.
At ten years of age William, with his younger brother, D’Arcy,
was sent to England to be educated, his master being Dr. Alexander
Crombie, of Greenwich, who laid the foundation of his later know-
ledge in classics, mathematics and physical science. He returned to
Sydney when 17; his master, expressing his opinion of the boy to his
father, wrote that he had “ perfect satisfaction of his conduct.”
Young Wentworth attracted the attention of Governor Macquarie
who granted him a farm of 1,750 acres on the Nepean at a place which
he named Vermont. His inclination led him to open-air pursuits.
His power of observation had been quickened by his scientific studies,
and he frequently made excursions to investigate the habits of the
native race and the geology, botany and natural history of the sur-
rounding country. With all the keenness of youth he entered into


and enjoyed every kind of outdoor sport, and on one occasion rode
his father’s horse, “ Gig,” to victory over a three-mile course at
Sydney in a challenge race run against a horse called “ Jerry,” owned
and ridden by a Mr. Broughton. William “ won in a canter.”
Young as he was, William Wentworth was impressed by the
unsatisfactory condition of the Settlement, and he agitated for a
Representative Assembly such as the American colonies possessed in
their early days. In 1812, though only 19 years of age, William was
appointed Acting Provost General, and as such he convened and
presided at public meetings.
William early made his mark as an explorer, and D’Arcy
Wentworth was particularly proud of his son when he wrote to Earl
Fitzwilliam describing the feat of crossing the Blue Mountains. “It
was accomplished,” he wrote, “by the spirited and indefatigable
exertions of my son William and two other gentlemen, who at their
own expense undertook and completed the arduous enterprise, often
before attempted, and what is likely to lead to consequences of the
utmost importance.”
Mr. K. R, Cramp, in a paper read before the Royal Australian
Geographical Society in 19x8, described this paternal pride as quite
reasonable, as he says “ For a quarter of a century the defiant moun-
tain barrier had prevented the white race from penetrating the secrets
beyond. Time after time determined men like Dawes, Patterson,
Hacking, Bass, Barrallier, Cayley and others had been driven back
baffled and perplexed.”
Wentworth’s companions on this most successful exploration
were Gregory Blaxland and Lieutenant Lawson. Mr. Cramp described
the discovery of the route as “ fraught with consequences of incal-
culable importance to the Colony.”
The hardships of this expedition had told on William’s health,
and he went for a sea voyage to England. When there he decided to
take up the study of law before returning to Sydney. He felt that a
legal training would equip him for his struggle against arbitrary
government, and give him a standing which would add weight to the
expression of his views. He enrolled at the Middle Temple and in
due course was called to the Bar.
William Wentworth at this time wrote one of the most valuable
books on Australia that had ever been written, the title of which was
as interesting as it was long : “ A Statistical, Historical and Political
description of the Colony of New South Wales and its dependent
settlements in Van Diemen’s Land, with a particular enumeration of
the advantages which these Colonies offer for emigration, and their
superiority in many respects over those possessed by the United
States of America.” This book was published in 1819. It found a
ready sale and soon ran through three editions. He urged that the
British Government should assist the redundant labouring population
to emigrate to Australia. Skilful tenant farmers in England would


become wealthy landed proprietors. The blacksmith, carpenter and
other tradesmen would very soon become independent. Above all,
he urged men with capital to invest in fine Merino sheep.
Politically, Wentworth bitterly opposed the existing Legislation,
which was merely a nominated body of from five to seven persons
with rights so restricted that the Governor alone could initiate legis-
lation and could even legislate against a Council majority and, in what
he might consider an emergency, against a unanimous opposition.
Such a Council Wentworth described as an unnatural creation and a
wretched mongrel substitute for legislation. His efforts were even-
tually crowned with success, but in the meantime his activities on
behalf of the people’s rights took other shapes, and with Dr. Warded
he started a paper called “ The Australian ” in 1824, and after a long
and bitter fight the rights of the Press were fully recognised.
The next struggle Wentworth made against existing authority
was for the establishment of a civilian jury system, and again he
scored a victory, for a law was passed which enacted that Hence-
forth all crimes and offences must be tried by a jury of twelve of the
inhabitants of the colony only.”
Freedom of speech was not allowed at that time, and public
meetings were not expressions of public feeling owing to restraints
placed upon the speakers. Here again it was owing to William
Wentworth that victory was gained and the rights of freer speech
recognised. Wentworth himself was a fearless speaker both at public
meetings, at the Bar and later in the Legislature.
It was not until 1855 that full responsible government was
granted, and for three decades William Wentworth had never wearied
in the fight.
In 1854 a statue in Carrara marble was erected in his honour.
It stands in Sydney contemplating the Great Hall of that University,
which is itself another imperishable monument to his untiring devotion
to his country. On the occasion of the unveiling, Sir James Martin
expressed the sentiments of the gathering when he said of Wentworth :
“ He has outlived the envy, hatred and malignity which inevitably
cross the path of every man who becomes eminent in public life.”
William Charles Wentworth passed to his reward on March 20th,
1872, at Wimborne, England, in his 79th year, and according to his
wish the body was taken to Australia and buried there.
On one occasion, replying to political maligners, he said : “I
can truly say that the love of my country has been the master passion
of my life. No man’s heart beats with a fonder love of his country
than my own ; and it is on my native soil I now stand. From my
boyhood up to manhood I have been devoted to its service ; I have
watched over it as a mother over its cradled child. Its welfare through
life has been the object of my devoted love and affection ; and it is
still the object of my highest hopes and aspirations,”


His body rests in the grounds of the beautiful estate of
Vaucluse in Sydney Harbour, a lovely bay with delightful grounds
and a large country mansion. From the highest parts you can see
a fine panorama for many miles, including a view of Sydney.
It may be that from here his spirit echoes a similar inscription to that
on St. Paul’s Cathedral to Wren, and says to Australians for all time :
“ For my monument look around you.”
CATTLE REARING.
The cattle-rearing industry, although common to all
the States, is carried on principally in the northern, eastern
and north-western portions of Australia, where individual
runs extend over huge areas.
Importations of the best English blood, the genial
climate, and the nutritive native grasses are responsible
for the high average quality of Australian beef cattle. Their
number exceeds 12,000,000.
Local requirements absorb about 73 per cent, of
Australia’s beef production, and the balance is exported
as frozen and canned beef.
Australia holds the record for the best milking cow,
whose production of butter for twelve months amounted
to 1,586 lbs. Dairying and poultry yield about
£42,000,000 a year.
Of all dairying countries, Australia enjoys the best
natural conditions, being favoured by a sunny climate, rich
pastures, and a good rainfall.
FRUIT AND WINE.
Australia’s orchard and vineyard production is worth
approximately £10,000,000 a year. The total area planted
is about 400,000 acres.
Australia’s export trade in fresh fruits, amounting to
nearly £1,000,000, consists mainly of apples; but a re-
munerative trade is being built up in oranges, pears and
other fruits.
The greatest expansion in fruit-growing is taking place
in the irrigated areas inland, where many millions of pounds
sterling have been spent in development.
Australia has been described as “ the Vineyard of the
Empire,” and it is capable of becoming so. Her average
annual export is about 800,000 gallons.
Upwards of £16,000,000 is invested in vineyards,
wineries, cellars and stock in Australia, and wines suited
to all tastes are grown.


ROBERT O’HARA BURKE
Robert O’Hara Burke
THE subject of this biography is not only representative of the
endurance and pluck shown by Australian explorers, but also
he is probably the most famous representative of the Mounted Police
of Australia, a body of men that for over a hundred years (1825) has
been second to none. He had been an inspector in the Force prior to
his exploration of the country from the South to the Gulf of Carpen-
taria, where Burke lost his life in what has come to be generally known
as the Burke and Wills expedition in iB6O.
Burke was born in Ireland in 1824, but there is little record of
his early days. It was known, however, that prior to going to
Australia he had served in the Austrian cavalry with the rank of
captain, and later was in the Royal Irish Constabulary, His first
appointment in Australia was as Acting Inspector at Hobart Town.
In Victoria he became Police Magistrate at Beechworth, a post he
held until 1855 when the Crimean War caused him to obtain leave of
absence, trusting to obtain a commission in some regiment on active
service. His wishes were not realised owing to the early termination
of the war, and on his return to Victoria he entered the Police as an
Inspector. At the time he started on his great exploration expedition
he was in charge at Castlemaine, being at the time thirty-six years
of age.
The Burke and Wills expedition was undertaken as the result of
an offer made by Mr. Ambrose Kyte, of Melbourne, who felt that
Victoria should do her share in the great work of exploration that
had been for long carried out by the Mother Colony of New South
Wales. “ I will give £1,000,” said this gentleman, “ towards the
equipment of a party to explore Central Australia, provided a


similar sum is contributed by the public.” There was no hesitation
in the response, and in a few days over £3,000 had been subscribed.
To this the Government of Victoria added £6,000 and another
£3,000 for camels from India.
The details of the expedition were left to the Royal Society of
Victoria. A selection committee went into the claims of the many
volunteers for membership, and finally selected eighteen with Robert
O’Hara Burke as the leader. As second in command George James
Landells, who had brought over the camels from India, was chosen, and
William John Wills as surveyor and astronomer, Herman Beckler as
medical officer and geologist, Charles Ferguson as foreman, ten
white assistants and three camel drivers from India.
William John Wills was born at Totnes in Devonshire in 1834,
emigrating to Australia in 1853. His first employment was as a
shepherd on the Edwards River in Victoria. Later he joined the
Government Survey Department, and in 1858 he became an assistant
at the Melbourne Observatory. While in that position his scientific
ability was fully recognised. Wills had previously applied for per-
mission to join an exploration party, but his claims were overlooked.
On this occasion he was one of the first to be appointed to what the
greatest authority on Australian exploration, Mr. Albert F. Calvert,
describes as entitled in some respects to the chief enterprise in the
history of Australian Exploration. Not that it was the most successful,
and it derives its main importance to the fact that the two leaders were
the first white men who crossed the Australian continent to the Gulf
of Carpentaria.
The expedition started from Melbourne on August 20th, iB6O,
and over ten thousand people assembled to take a final leave of the
travellers. Everyone was interested in the camels. It was a gay and
enthusiastic concourse, and no Australian exploration expedition had
started with so much pomp and ceremony ; the Mayor of the City
making a valedictory address to which Mr. Burke replied.
Proceeding through the settled districts, the party reached
Menindie, and here the first depot was established. From the com-
mencement there had been some friction among the leaders. Landells,
for instance, before leaving Melbourne, urged his qualifications and
received more pay than Burke. Burke cared little or nothing for
money and made no objection, but when later Landells endeavoured
in certain ways to flaunt his authority, he very strongly objected.
Then both Landells and Dr. Beckler resigned their positions, and
Ferguson, the foreman, was dismissed for insubordination. Burke
promoted Wills to be second in command, and a man named Wright,
who was foreman of a sheep station and claimed to know the country
as far as Cooper’s Creek, was given charge of the camels. When these
arrangements had been effected he divided his party, leaving half in
camp on the Darling, while he, Wright and seven others pushed on.
Good progress was made to Cooper’s Creek, but before reaching
it he made another change. Wright was promoted to be third in


command and was despatched to Menindie to bring up the rear party
with supplies. After more than a month had gone by and there was
no sign of Wright, he decided to leave four of his party there under
the charge of a man named Brahe. He decided that he himself, with
Wills and two men named King and Gray, should endeavour to
make a dash for the Gulf, taking with them six camels, one horse and
three months’ stock of provisions. They left on December 16th.
On Wright’s return to the Darling, he learnt that McDouall
Stuart had nearly crossed the continent. He therefore sent a message
to Burke, by two mounted men and a native, saying he would remain
where he was until his messengers returned. It turned out the
messengers got lost, and were not found for over a month. It is
generally agreed that in disobeying his instructions Wright was
undoubtedly in the wrong, and the final results were disastrous.
After a fairly good journey the party reached what they called,
and is still known, as the Standish Ranges, and camped at Cloncuddy
Creek, a tributary of the Flinders River. Here, owing to the swampy
nature of the ground, the camels were abandoned, and, King and Gray
being left in camp with the bulk of the stores, Burke and Wills pushed
on to the sea.
On February 28th they reached the end of their journey, but
were prevented from actually seeing the sea owing to the dense
forests of mangroves which barred the way. They were within a
mile of the sea, and leaving their exhausted pack-horse behind, the
two made a gallant effort to cut a path through the tangled growth,
but they had to abandon the task and be contented with having
practically reached their goal.
The return journey was commenced, and having picked up
King and Gray and recaptured the camels, the party proceeded to
endeavour to reach the main depot where Wright and the rest of the
expedition were to be in waiting. It soon became apparent that
the effort was a tremendous one, especially as rain poured upon them
incessantly for days making travelling slow and laborious. Gray
fell ill with dysentery and had to be strapped on the back of a
camel, but soon succumbed to the hardships. Provisions became
scarce, and first one camel and then another had to be killed for food.
According to a diary left by Wills, there were only three camels
by April 6th, and the only horse had become so weak he had to be
shot. He also records that they were so worn out that it was all they
could do to dig a grave for Gray.
On reaching Cooper’s Creek on the 21st, they found instead of a
camp a deserted stockade. A letter was there from Brahe dated that
morning stating they were just leaving for the Darling as nothing had
been heard from Wright.
This was the beginning of the end. For a while the three men
were befriended by the Blacks, but after a while they made signs that
the white man’s company was not wanted, and left them. After living


for a while on the seeds of a plant similar to clover and an occasional
shot crow, both Burke and Wills expired within a few hours of each
other. King again caught up with the Blacks who treated him kindly
until discovered by one of the relief expeditions sent out to search
for them. The bodies of Burke and Wills were re-buried, and later
they were removed to Melbourne where they were accorded a public
funeral.
A memorial was erected to the memory of both.
FACTS ABOUT AUSTRALIA.
Population, 6,043,924.
No Federal Income Tax under £3OO a year.
There are 316 Trade Unions in Australia with
membership of 800,000.
Ninety-seven per cent. British. —Great Britain has a
population of 48,000,000 persons. Australia, which is
twenty-five times larger, has a population at the present
time of only 6,000,000 people. It is estimated that Australia
can support in comfort 100,000,000 people. It is clear,
therefore, in which direction lies the outlet for Britain’s
surplus population. Australia’s people are 97 per cent. British.
In migrating to Australia inhabitants of Great Britain are
going among people of their own race —people who are
not only the same in language, dress and habits, but who
entertain substantially the same political, social and moral
ideals. If they were thinking of removing from Scotland
to England they would feel that there was no occasion for
disquiet or to disconcert themselves at the prospect. It is
also not too much to say that they would in many respects
find no novel conditions to overcome if they migrated
to Australia.
Country Towns. —Throughout the settled areas there
is evidence everywhere of a marvellous achievement in
pioneering. Good roads and excellent railway services
have long since taken the place of bush tracks. These
have been followed by a wonderful growth of country
townships. The larger of these social and business centres
are attractively and substantially built. They possess good
water supplies, and many of them are lighted with elec-
tricity. They all have, of course, churches of various
denominations, ample banking facilities, and telephonic
communication with other townships and with capital
cities. Ample opportunities for sport of every kind is
provided. The number of registered motor vehicles exceeds
300,000.


EDWARD HAMMOND HARGRAVES
Edward Hammond Hargraves
THE name of Edward Hammond Hargraves brings vividly to
mind the greatest romance of Australian history. He was,
though not the first to discover gold, at any rate the first whose
discoveries were taken seriously. A few days after his find the whole
of New South Wales was thrilled with the prospects of getting rich
quickly. The lure of gold spread, and before long most of the then
known parts of Australia were being searched for the precious metal.
Edward Hammond Hargraves was born at Gosport in 1816, and
in 1829 was sent to school at Brighton. There he was soon the hero
of the hoys and the terror of the masters, as they never knew what
mischief he would be up to next; and the pain of the cane and birch
seemed to have no terrors for him. On one occasion he persuaded
about twenty of the boarders to leave the house before morning school
and absent themselves until late in the afternoon, when he led the
party back. History does not say what happened to the other delin-
quents, but Edward’s father was requested to remove his son at the
end of the term.
From Brighton he was sent to school at Lewes, and there is no
record of how he acted there, but seemingly he behaved himself more
or less, as he remained there until 1832 when he emigrated to New
South Wales at the age of x 6. That he was a born adventurer was
evident from the very first, and directly on arriving in Australia he
proceeded to explore Torres Straits in search of beche-de-mer and


tortoise shell for the first two years of his stay in the country. He
had a certain amount of success, and with the proceeds became
engaged in 1834 in pastoral pursuits. The discovery of gold in
California in 1849 l ure d him at once to that country, but he met with
but indifferent success. He was, however, struck with the geological
similarity of the gold area of California with that of Bathurst in New
South Wales, and on his return proceeded to put his ideas on the
subject to the test.
On the 2nd May, 1851, the “ Sydney Morning Herald,” (then, as
now, one of the leading papers of Australia) published a piece of
news to the effect that Mr. E. H. Hargraves, a resident of Brisbane
Water, who had recently returned from California, had discovered
near his home gold in paying quantities.
On the Bth of the same month he gave a lecture in Bathurst,
when he publicly announced his discoveries, and he showed samples
consisting of several ounces of fine gold, the result of three days’
work. He also stated that a good deal of gold dust had been lost
through lack of the proper implements.
Many people at once commenced prospecting, and in a very few
days it was necessary for the Government to step in and make rules
and regulations for carrying on the industry in a legal and satisfactory
manner. Land Commissioners and police were appointed and licences
were issued at thirty shillings each, entitling the holder to prospect
in given areas. Before the end of the first week over 600 licences
had been issued, and every day added largely to the number.
Hargraves was presented by the Government of New South
Wales with £5OO for his discovery and also given a position as Land
Commissioner at the same salary per annum. Later he was given
£lO,OOO by New South Wales and £2,381 by Victoria in 1855. In
1877 he was granted a pension of £250 a year by New South Wales.
In 1853 he paid a short visit to England where he had the honour of
being presented to Queen Victoria as the man who had discovered
gold in Australia.
There was no delay in Victoria. Soon after the Hargrave dis-
coveries, a committee was appointed in Melbourne and a series of
splendid results at once followed, which completely overshadowed
the yields in N.S.W. The following figures show the value raised in
the early days of Australian gold-digging :
1851 : New South Wales, £468,000 ; Victoria, £851,000.
1851-1860: New South Wales, £11,500,000; Victoria,
£93,500,000.
That difference of 82 millions in favour of Victoria accounts for
the rapid growth of Melbourne, which began to eclipse in importance
the capital of New South Wales.


Sir George Reid in “ My Reminiscences ” says of these days :
“ The gold fever seized every class. The ordinary callings were
deserted. A vigorous tide of immigration set in. Happily those who
arrived were mainly of a fine type —men who could turn the gold to
good account if they won it themselves, or if they failed on the gold
fields could make good money out of the success of the more fortunate.
The gold often changed hands, but those who came in search of it
proved first-rate colonists, whether they settled in the interior or in
the rapidly-growing towns. There was a quick rise in the social
scale as the adventurer turned into the merchant, the farmer or the
‘ Squatter.’ The last was a term of reproach at first, but the squatting
class soon became the aristocracy of Australia.”
The actual discoverer of gold in Victoria was James Esmond,
who, like Hargraves, had been a “ forty ” miner in California, and he
was equally struck with the similarity of the country to that of
Buninyong in Victoria (or Port Phillip as it then was), where he
came from. When he heard of the discovery of at
once started operations and became a very successful prospector, and
opened up diggings at Buninyong, Ballarat, Bendigo, Clunes and
other places. In Victoria very many larger masses (or nuggets as
they afterwards came to be known) were discovered, ranging in
value from £4,000 to £lO,OOO.
Owing to the big finds, there was naturally more excitement in
Victoria than in New South Wales ; sailors deserted, and many ships
lay in Hobsons Bay (the harbour of Melbourne) for months at a
time, unable to get away for lack of crews. Miners from Cornwall,
and undergraduates from Universities in Europe, were lured by the call
of gold. Mechanics, clerks, sportsmen, jockeys and political refugees
from all parts of Europe found their way to the gold fields of Victoria.
In fact, there were adventurers from all parts of the world including
many who had “ tried their luck ” in California.
One week there would be a tranquil valley with a gentle stream
running through and green trees waving on the landscape. The next
week the scene was changed, and a veritable transformation had taken
place. There was a populous encampment, stores, taverns and
lodging houses, all canvas. Then there was a tented newspaper
office and a place of worship with perhaps a theatre or concert hall
roughly built of planks. This did occasionally evolve into a thriving
city of from twenty to thirty thousand inhabitants in course of time.
Sunday was always a day of rest from digging. There was religious
worship for some, but ablutions and laundry work for all.
As early as 1823 small quantities of gold were discovered, but
no publicity was made of the fact; for one reason it was believed to be
a solitary freak of nature, and also because the Governor thought
that should there be anything in it, it would be unsettling and of
disadvantage to a young Colony.


Later, in 1841, the Rev. W. B. Clarke discovered specimens of
gold on the banks of the Macquarie River, and stated his conviction
that it was to be obtained in quantities.
Hargraves died in Sydney in the year 1894 when 78 years of age.
Though there are other claimants to the discovery of gold in Australia,
there is no doubt that his was the first that caused it to become one
of the great industries of the country.
Climatic Variety.—About five-thirteenths of the area
is situated north of the tropic of Capricorn, so that while
the south of Tasmania is in a latitude corresponding
roughly to that of the south of France or of New York, the
Northern extremity of the mainland corresponds to the
South of India or to Ceylon. The altitudes of the surface
range up to a little over 7,300 feet. It is obvious, therefore,
that t|ie climate of Australia embraces a great many features
from*the characteristically tropical to what is essentially
Alpine.
Functions of the States. —Australia is divided into six
States, namely New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland,
South Australia, Western Australia and Tasmania ; the
Northern Territory and the Federal Territory. Tasmania
is an island separated from the mainland by Bass Strait.
Each of the States has a Parliament of its own with legis-
lative control over such functions as land settlement,
agriculture, water conservation, fisheries, forestry, mining,
railways, education, police, charities, etc. The States
federated in 1901, and the Commonwealth of Australia
was inaugurated.
Commonwealth Control. —The Parliament of the
Commonwealth of Australia controls Customs and Excise,
External and Inter-State Trade and Commerce, Postal and
Telegraph services, Navy and Military Defence, Navi-
gation, Lighthouses and Quarantine, Naturalisation and
Immigration, Invalid and Old Age Pensions, Industrial
disputes extending beyond the boundaries of a State. It
has control over the Northern Territory and the Federal
Territory. The Legislative Assemblies of the States, and
the two Houses of the Federal Parliament, are elected on
the one-man-one-vote principle by manhood and woman-
hood suffrage. After five years’ residence within the British
Empire, including at least 12 months in Australia imme-
diately prior to application, a foreigner may become
naturalised.


ADAM LINDSAY GORDON
Adam Lindsay Gordon
WHAT constitutes a great man in the history of a young country
like Australia ? Where you have hundreds to choose from,
and you have on account of limitations of space to confine yourself
to ten, it is difficult to select. If they were to be ten politicians, ten
explorers or ten soldiers, the task would be easyT Most people will
agree, however, that a man whose memory is loved in almost every
house in Australia, and who, whatever his faults, —and nobody will
dispute they were many, —has left a name and reputation that will live
for all time, is certainly entitled to a place. Such a man was Adam
Lindsay Gordon, the subject of this biography.
Quoth the Scottish patriot, Fletcher of Saltoun : “If a man were
permitted to make all the ballads, he need not care who made the
laws of a nation.” Gordon’s poems constitute the songs of Australia;
they are full of the life of that country, and not a man, woman or
child there but has felt some of the experiences depicted in his verses.
Adam Lindsay Gordon was born in the Azores in 1833. His
father was an Army officer in the service of the East India Company,
but left India while still a Captain on account of ill-health. He was of
a good Scotch family, being related to the Earl of Aberdeen. On
leaving India he settled at Cheltenham, and when the College there
was founded in 1841 he became Master of Oriental Languages.
Adam was in the first group of boys on the roll of the College,
the first to register being Henry James (afterwards Lord James of
Hereford) who by accident arrived at his boarding house the day
before the opening. After being a year at Cheltenham, Adam was
sent to school at Worcester for a year, when he returned to Cheltenham.
There is no disguising the fact that he was a somewhat wild boy and
difficult to manage, but he succeeded in passing into the R.M.A. at


Woolwich in 1851, where he was contemporary with his cousin,
Charles Gordon (of Chinese and Khartoum fame). One of their
instructors at Woolwich, writing of the two long afterwards, wrote :
“ Adam Lindsay Gordon, the Australian poet and stockrider, was
the exact opposite of Charles Gordon—a dreamy lad with a far-off
look in his eyes, indicative perhaps of the touching and semi-philo-
sophic ballads so dear to every Australian heart (redolent as they are
of fatalism and wattle blossoms), though scarcely indicative of the
man who beat ‘ The Favourite; ’ and yet at times that was the side
which showed uppermost in his character. Adam was a Corporal at
the ‘ Shop,’ and on one occasion was nearly degraded for insubor-
dination, but the Governor of the R.M.A. at the time saw the latent
greatness of the wild boy and gave him another chance.”
During a vacation in 1853 Adam, who was an enthusiastic
amateur rider in steeplechases, was to ride a horse in a race, but the
owner decided not to run it. This did not suit Adam, who with a
number of friends had backed the horse. The consequence was that
shortly before the race he and some others took the horse from the
stable and raced him, Adam winning by two lengths. The owner was
very angry and inclined to make trouble, so the boy did not return
to Woolwich and went out instead to Australia. He arrived in
Adelaide during November, 1853, shortly after his twentieth birthday.
Then, in order to gain a knowledge of the country, he joined the
South Australian Mounted Police in which Force he remained for
two years.
For the next ten years he was a horse-breaker, and became very
well acquainted with bush life on many sheep and cattle stations. In
1864 he inherited some £7,000, and started in sheep farming on his
own account. In the following year, 1865, he was elected to the
South Australian Legislature, but resigned in 1866. Politics did not
suit a man of his temperament.
At this time Gordon was practically unknown as a poet, but he
was known as a sportsman from one end of Australia to the other,
principally as the leading amateur steeplechase rider. He was also a
first-class shot; but he objected very much to the indiscriminate
slaughter of birds, and except for food thought birds and harmless
animals should be left alone. In one of his poems he describes his
sentiments on this subject in the following lines ;
“ But you have no remorseful qualms or pangs
When you kneel by the Grizzly’s lair,
On that conical bullet your sole chance hangs;
’Tis the weak one’s advantage fair.
And the shaggy giant’s terrific fangs
Are ready to crush and tear;
Should you miss—one vision of home and friends,
Five words of unfinished prayer.
Three savage knife stabs: so your sport ends
In the worrying grapple that chokes and rends
Rare sport at least for the bear.”


On giving up his legislative duties Adam sold his sheep farm
and moved to Victoria where the few remaining years of his life were
spent mostly in riding and writing. In 1868 he had a triple victory
at the Melbourne Hunt Club Meeting, winning the Hunt Club Cup
on “ Babbler,” the Metropolitan on “ Viking,” and the Selling
Steeplechase on “ Cadger.” The two last-named horses were his own
property.
During his latter years he wrote a good deal for the
“ Australasian,” and it was not until 1869 that it transpired that he
was the writer of the poems of which all Australia was talking. They
were poems of the open air, the songs of men who had led strenuous
lives.
Marcus Clarke, the well known Australian author, writing of
him after his death said :—•
“ The poems of Gordon have an interest beyond the mere
personal one which his friends attach to his name. Written, as
they were, at odd times and leisure moments of a stirring and adven-
turous life, it is not to be wondered at if they are unequal or un-
finished. The astonishment of those who knew the man, and can
gauge the capacity of this city to foster poetic instinct, is, that such
work was ever produced here at all. Intensely nervous, and feeling
much of that shame at the exercise of the higher intelligence which
besets those who are known to be renowned in field sports, Gordon
produced his poems shyly, scribbled them on scraps of paper, and
sent them anonymously to magazines. It was not until he discovered
one morning that everybody knew a couplet or two of ‘ How we
beat the Favourite ’ that he consented to forego his anonymity and
appear in the unsuspected character of a verse-maker. The success of
his republished ‘ collected ’ poems gave him courage, and the un-
reserved praise which greeted ‘ Bush Ballads ’ should have urged 1 im
to forget or to conquer those evil promptings which, unhappily,
brought about his untimely death.”
Adam Lindsay Gordon may not rank as a poet with Shakespeare,
Homer, Chaucer or Longfellow, but his poems are virile and typically
Australian, and there is a genuine poetic instinct in every line of “ The
Sick Stockrider.” Take the following from that poem. The poet
has evidently ridden his ride as well as written it: —
“ ’Twas merry in the glowing morn, among the gleaming grass,
To wander as we’ve wandered many a mile,
And blow the cool tobacco cloud, and watch the white wreaths
pass,
Sitting loosely in the saddle all the while ;
’Twas merry ’mid the blackwoods, when we spied the station rocfs.
To wheel the wild scrub cattle at the yard,
With a running fire of stockwhips, and a fiery run of hoofs ;
Oh ! the hardest day was never then too hard !
Ay ! we had a glorious gallop after “ Starlight ” and his gang.
When they bolted from Sylvester’s on the flat;


How the sun-dried reed-beds crackled, how the flint-strewn ranges
rang
To the strokes of “ Mountaineer ” and “ Acrobat.”
Hard behind them in the timber, harder still across the heath,
Close behind them through the tea-tree scrub we dash’d ;
And the golden-tinted fern leaves, how they rustled underneath !
And the honeysuckle osiers, how they crash’d ! ”
On the 12th March, 1870, he had two bad falls when riding
a horse called Prince Rupert. He never really recovered his
health and suffered from fits of great despondency, and in June,
1870, he was found dead at Brighton from a bullet wound evidently
ifired by himself.
His‘memory is revered in Australia, and on the tomb erected at
the cemetery his closing lines of “ The Sick Stockrider ” are inscribed :
“ Let me slumber in the hollow where the wattle blossoms wave,
With never stone nor nail to fence my bed ;
Should the sturdy station children pull the bush flowers on my
grave,
I may chance to hear them romping overhead.”
THE CAPITALS OF AUSTRALIA.
The Capital of the Commonwealth of Australia is a
new city called Canberra. The Federal Buildings have
Just been formally opened by H.R.H. The Duke of York.
Sydney, the Capital of New South Wales, has a popu-
lation of 1,039,000 persons, and ranks as the seventh city
in the British Empire.
Melbourne, the Capital of Victoria, has a population
of 912,100 persons, and is the temporary seat of the
Commonwealth Government.
Adelaide, the Capital of South Australia, has a popu-
lation of 303,600 persons, and presents an aspect of sub-
stantial comfort and solid opulence.
Brisbane, the Capital of Queensland, has a population
of 254,000 persons. It is an important trading centre,
tapping a huge area of rich country.
Perth, the Capital of Western Australia, which has a
population of 179,000 persons, is prettily situated on the
Swan River, and possesses great social and commercial
attractions.
Hobart, the Capital of the Island State of Tasmania,
has a population of 59,000 persons and a scenic beauty
which is unexcelled.


JOHN FORREST
Lord Forrest
PERHAPS, next to William Charles Wentworth, history will
acclaim John Forrest as the greatest native son of Australia up
to the present time. He was born at Leschenault, "near Bunbury, in
Western Australia, August 22nd, 1847, son of William Forrest, a
farmer who, without being rich, was well to do. John therefore had
no great advantages over his contemporaries, and through sheer
merit rose from an ordinary Australian country school-boy to receive
honours from the great countries of Europe, to be recognised as one
of the foremost explorers of Australia, to be the first Premier of
Western Australia and to hold the position until the Commonwealth
was formed, when he was elected a Member of the Federal Parliament.
Eventually he became a Peer of the Realm, so far Australia’s only one.
When twelve years of age he went to Bishop’s School, Perth,
Western Australia. He early showed an inclination toward surveying
and map making, and was frequently in trouble at home and at school
through this propensity to roam and explore even his immediate
surroundings.
John Forrest was by no means the ideal school-boy, always at
the top of his class; but he was a naturally wild, healthy-minded
youngster, and somewhat more than a typical product of the land that
produced him and the air he inhaled.
When eighteen years of age (1865) he entered the Survey Depart-
ment, and in 1869 he commanded an exploring expedition into the
interior to search for Dr. Leichhardt. During the next few years he
was in charge of several exploring expeditions, but his greatest and


most successful attempt was made in 1874, which is probably one of
the most remarkable in the annals of Australian exploration.
In the early seventies there was a great desire on the part of the
explorers of Western and South Australia to connect the two countries
by a traversible track of land, and it was felt that in such a large
area there must be a land which, if not flowing with milk and honey, yet
might be well grassed and watered. There were several expeditions,
the principal of which, prior to that of John Forrest, was in charge of
Colonel Warburton. After suffering incredible hardships, his party
managed to reach the head of the Oakover River, but the results of
the expedition were not what were expected. It is true Colonel
Warburton succeeded in crossing the desert, but arrived at the coast
not only exhausted but practically naked and starving.
In 1874 John Forrest organised an expedition, determined to
either accomplish the feat or give his life if necessary. With him
were his brother Alexander, two other whites, and two native trackers.
It was nearly seven weeks after the start before the party encountered
difficulties and serious trouble commenced. Water began to be
exceedingly hard to find, and John Forrest with one black boy left
the party to look for it. The two travelled for twenty miles over
undulating sand hills clothed with nothing but spinifex (a coarse
spiked grass). From the top of a low stony rise the view for miles
was desolate in the extreme, and apparently quite destitute of water.
During their absence from the main party they had been attacked by
natives who with difficulty were driven off. Small quantities of
water were discovered and the party pushed on. Thirty miles further
away good grass land was found and abundant water, but as they
went further the priceless fluid was only to be obtained in very scanty
quantities. Eventually the party came through and reached the
Transcontinental Telegraph line, thus concluding a most valuable
expedition in a most satisfactory manner.
For this expedition Forrest received the thanks of the Govern-
ment and 5,000 acres of land and the gold medal of the R.G.S. Soon
afterwards he became Commissioner of Crown Lands and Surveyor
General for West Australia.
About this time there was considerable agitation in the West
for State rights, as the Governor still ruled the country with all but
absolute power. It was not, however, until 1890 that the aspirations
of the country were realised and West Australia received its Con-
stitution. John Forrest, who had long had a seat in the Executive
and Legislative Councils, had been foremost in bringing the matter
forward.
John Forrest became the first Premier and held it until the
Commonwealth era commenced, when he gave it up to become a
member of the Federal Parliament. During the time he was Premier
he introduced the system of giving 100 acres of land to persons
willing to reside and make specified improvements upon it. He also
established the Agricultural Land Bank. His administration was


responsible for the construction of the great harbour at Fremantle
and the project for conveying 6,000,000 gallons of water daily to the
Kalgoorlie goldfields, a distance of 250 miles.
On joining the Federal Parliament he became Postmaster-
General and later Minister of Defence, Minister of Home Affairs and
for three terms was Treasurer of the Commonwealth. He was acting
Prime Minister for a short period in 1907.
Perhaps the greatest of all his achievements was his untiring
efforts to get through the great East to West Transcontinental Rail-
way, which he lived to see completed before his death in 1918. It was
in celebration of the opening he received his peerage as Lord Forrest
of Bunbury, but died less than six months afterwards.
During his life he received many honours, including several
from foreign countries. He was an Honorary Fellow of the Geo-
graphical Societies of Rome, Vienna and St. Petersburg. He was also a
Knight of the Order of the Crown of Italy. His K.C.M.G. was given
him in 1891 and G.C.M.G. in 1901. He had been made a Privy
Councillor in 1897, at the time of Queen Victoria’s diamond jubilee.
He was also an LL.D. of both Cambridge and Adelaide and was an
F.L.S., F.R.G.S. and F.G.S.
AUSTRALIA’S SHEEP INDUSTRY.
Of the average of 631,514,000 lbs. of wool shorn
annually in Australia, local mills now use more than 10
per cent, and this proportion is rapidly increasing.
Three generations of breeders have more than doubled
the weight of the fleece of the average merino sheep in
Australia. Stud rams have sold up to 4,000 guineas each.
In the ’aggregate Australia’s flocks total about
83,000,000 sheep, and the average weight of wool per
sheep shorn, including lambs, exceeds 7 lbs.
Machine shearing is general throughout Australia, and
it is not uncommon for one shearer to shear more than
100 sheep in eight hours.
WHEAT.
Australia cultivates 9,500,000 acres of wheat annually,
but her potential acreage is estimated at between 200,000,000
and 250,000,000 acres.
Cheap production and economic handling make wheat-
growing a profitable industry.
The combined harvester can strip, thresh and bag at
the rate of a bushel of wheat every three minutes. It is an
Australian invention.


GEORGE HOUSTON REID
Sir George Reid
THE late Dr. Arnold, the celebrated headmaster of Rugby, once
said : “ The desire of taking part in the concerns of government
is the highest desire of a well-regulated mind.” Recognising that this
is so, it is desirable that in this series there should be one whose life
was devoted to the political sphere.
In the history of Australia it is difficult to choose from six or
eight men who may be said to rank about equally. Sir George Reid
has been chosen because he seems to have had a more successrui and
versatile career than any other, both in State and Federal politics.
He was first elected to Parliament in New South Wales in 1880;
in 1882 became Minister of Public Instruction; in July, 1895, Premier.
He served two other terms as Premier of that State, and in 1905
became Prime Minister of Australia. Hr was appointed the first High
Commissioner for Australia in 1910.
George Reid was the son of the Rev. John Reid, a minister of
the Established Church of Scotland. He was born at Johnstone, near
Paisley, in February, 1845. The family, consisting of the father and
mother, five sons (of whom George was the youngest), and two
daughters, migrated to Australia in 1852 and settled in Sydney. Here
George went to school, but only stayed there until he was thirteen
when he became a junior (very junior) clerk in a mercantile firm. His
father, however, saw to it that in spare time his education was not
entirely neglected.
Oratorical gifts seemed to come naturally to George Reid.
Possibly the eloquence of his father’s sermons gave him a bias toward


public speaking, and he joined a debating club when only fifteen years;
of age. He often in later life commented on the value of the training-
he received while a member of the club. It taught him to take the
hardest of verbal knocks with a smile and a determination not to lose
his temper. In this respect he was by nature one of the best-tempered
men who ever lived, and throughout his life he was noted for his
sunny disposition.
In 1864, at the age of 19, he was appointed acting assistant
accountant in the New South Wales Treasury. In 1866, in a half-
hearted way, he took up the study of law, but it was not until 1879*
that he qualified for the Bar. In 1878 he left the Treasury and became
Secretary of the Crown Law Offices.
George’s political life commenced in 1880 when he was elected
for the district of East Sydney, one of the most important in the State..
During the campaign, Sir Henry Parkes, the Premier, who had just
received the K.C.M.G., alluded to George Reid as a young man whom
nobody seemed to know anything about. The young aspirant for
Parliament took this as his cue, and addressing the audience said :
“ Gentlemen, Sir Henry Parkes has referred to me as a young;
man whom nobody seems to know. May I remind him that thirty
years ago he stood on this very spot a candidate for your suffrages, an
unknown and untried man as I am to-day. Gentlemen, if on that
occasion you had not honoured him with your generous support he
would not now be a most distinguished knight -of the most sacred
order of St. Michael and St. George.”
He was elected by an overwhelming majority, and in less than
two years afterwards he became Minister for Public Instruction ini
the Government of which the Hon. Alexander Stuart was Premier.
George Reid became Premier for the first time in 1895, and it is
of interest to note that Sir Joseph Cook, the present High Com-
missioner for Australia, was in his cabinet as Postmaster-General,,
and later (like his chief) became Prime Minister of the Commonwealth
of Australia.
Leaving Scotland when a boy of seven George did not visit
Europe again until 1897, when he went to represent New South
Wales at the celebrations in connection with the Diamond Jubilee of
Queen Victoria and at the Imperial Conference of Premiers held
that year.
Throughout his life George Reid was a devoted adherent of
Free Trade, and as a Free Trader was elected to the first Commonwealth
Parliament. At that time the Federal Government, under Sir Edmund
Barton, was strongly Protectionist.
In 1905 George Reid became Prime Minister of Australia at the
head of a Coalition Ministry. Even then the division lists were so*
close that the Coalition never had a majority of more than two.
After six months the Government was defeated and Mr. Deakia


became the Prime Minister, the Labour Party being the deciding
factor, and its leaders decided to support for the time being the new
Government. The House was made up of Ministerialists 20, Oppo-
sition 29, Labour Party 26. The Deakin Government lasted for
nearly two years, and then Labour came into power again under the
leadership of Mr. Fisher.
It should be remembered that, Australia being on the other
side of the globe to England, politics there are different to those in
England. The Australian Labour Party is strongly Protectionist, and
the Conservative Party are divided over Protection and Free Trade.
About this time George Reid retired from the leadership of the
party so that he could devote more time to his legal practice which
was of considerable value.
No political leader in any part of the world has probably had the
personal liking of his opponents as had George Reid. It is no wonder
then, when it was finally decided ten years after the Common-
wealth came into existence to appoint a High Commissioner, that his
name should be singled out as the most suitable nominee. The
position was offered to him, and the temptation to accept the honour
was not to be withstood.
Sir George Reid made an instantaneous success as High
Commissioner, and during the six years he held the office, became
exceedingly popular with the public not only in London, but in the
other large cities of Great Britain. His ever-smiling face full of good
humour, his striking phraseology and his fund of anecdotes made his
addresses welcome everywhere.
On the 4th January, 1916, he was asked to stand as Conservative
candidate for St. George’s, Hanover Square, and a week later was
elected without opposition. He was greatly struck with this honour ;
for, as he said, he had been a candidate in Australia 15 times without
a walk-over, and here at the other end of the world he was done the
signal honour, and without a single pledge of any sort being required
of him.
Alas, he did not live very long after, dying in September, 1918,
at 73 years of age. Had he entered the British Parliament earlier in
life, there is no saying where a man of his ability might not have
reached.
At the time of his death his honours were many—he was G.C.8.,
G.C.M.G., P.C., K.C., Hon. D.C.L. (Oxon), Hon. LL.D. (Adelaide).
No man had a more facile way of dealing with hecklers, and he
always had a witty reply. On one occasion as Premier of New
South Wales he was addressing a large audience at the Sydney Town
Hall, when a man in the gallery kept on interrupting and shouting
out : “ You’re two-faced, George. You’re double-faced.” After a
while this got rather on George’s nerves, and pointing to the man in
the gallery said : “My friend over there says lam two-faced. You


State schools number -
3,473
Private schools number -
681
Students attending university
2,785
Savings banks deposits per head of
population -
37
£29 13 4
are not, sir, are you ? ” “ No, I’m not,” shouted the man. “ I
thought not,” quietly replied George. “If you had been, you’d have
left that one at home.” There was no more interruption.
When Prime Minister of Australia, he was addressing a hostile
meeting of miners in Tasmania who had decided not to give him a
hearing. He commenced : “ Gentlemen,” when the booing and
shouting began and continued for sohfe minutes, all the time George
smiling on the platform. At last in a lull he quaintly shook his head
and said : “ I only called you gentlemen.” This tickled his audience
so much that he was allowed to continue to the end of his speech.
ONE RACE, ONE LANGUAGE.
A White Australia. —To keep Australia for the white
races is a principle to which all political parties subscribe.
For all time this great island continent is to know only one
race, one language, and one nationality. To attain this
end, steps are now being taken to encourage the migration
of British people. The British Government is co-operating
with the Commonwealth and State Governments to speed
up the work. The rapid development of the British Empire
will also be promoted by Australia’s absorption of settlers
from overseas. Great Britain to-day is overcrowded ;
Australia is under-peopled.
The principal classes of manufacture are metal works,
machinery, etc. ; food and drink ; clothing and textile
fabrics ; books, printing, etc. ; processes in stone, clay,
glass, etc. ; working in wood ; vehicles and saddlery ;
ship and boat building ; heat, light and power ; furniture,
bedding and upholstery ; drugs, chemicals, etc.
GENERAL.
State railways open for traffic - 5,523 miles
Capital cost of lines open, - - £91,792,167


SAMUEL WALKER GRIFFITH
Sir Samuel Walker Griffith
IN the making of a great nation such as Australia, it takes many
different characters and many types of men to round up and
complete the work of the great explorers and adventurers of early
days. It is fitting, therefore, that there should be included the life
of one who, besides proving himself a statesman of no mean order,
was also a great law-giver and became the first Chief Justice of the
Commonwealth of Australia.
Samuel Walker Griffith was born at Merthyr Tydvil in Wales
in June, 1845, the son of a Congregational Minister, the Rev. Edward
Griffith. The family migrated to Australia when Sam was only nine
years of age. His early schooling was at Ipswich, which was at that
time part of New South Wales before the formation of the new Colony
of Queensland. After two years there he went to a school in Sydney
established by Mr. Robert Horniman, and three years later was sent
to the Maitland High School under a celebrated headmaster of those
days, the Rev. W. Mclntyre. He became one of the school’s most
distinguished boys, and also had a successful career at the Sydney
University, taking his degree with first-class honours both in classics
and mathematics. At the age of nineteen he gained the Moss
Travelling Fellowship.
Returning to Queensland he studied law, and in 1867 he was
called to the Queensland Bar. He obtained his M.A. degree in 1870,
and in 1886 he took silk and became a Q.C. (Queen’s Counsel, now,
of course, called King’s Counsel). In 1872 he was first elected to the
Queensland Legislative Assembly, where he soon made his mark and
showed conspicuous ability. Even as a private Member he piloted
important law reforms through the House, one Bill reforming the


equity side of the Supreme Court in the direction of simplification.
He worked hard and devoted himself earnestly to Parliamentary duties.
In 1875 he became Attorney General, and a year later accepted
the Ministry of Public Instruction. From 1879 to 1883 he was leader
of the Opposition, during the regime of Sir Thomas Mclllwraith
whom he succeeded as Premier. He was one of those who devoted
himself to the work of federation, and in 1888 he was elected to the
Presidency of the Federal Council, an honour repeated in 1891.
The Commonwealth Bill agreed to by the Federal Convention
of 1891 was drafted by him. He was again Premier of Queensland
in 1890 and three years later he became the Chief Justice of Queensland.
At the time of his elevation to the Bench, he had a very large
private practice at the Bar, and Parliament endeavoured in some way
to compensate him for its loss in raising the salary of the Chief Justice,
but financially it made a considerable difference to him. The Supreme
Court Bench gave him full play for his cultured faculties, and he also
found time to take a prominent part in movements designed for the
advancement of the community in education, literature and art
generally and took a very active interest in the formation of a Queens-
land University.
Through all he never failed to find time to take part in the
Commonwealth Conventions. The enactment of the Constitution
and the framework of the Federal Constitution and the High Court of
Justice Acts were his. It was natural, therefore, that the first appoint-
ment of Chief Justice of the Commonwealth should be offered to him,
and it was universally recognised that during the sixteen years he
occupied that position, no better appointment could have been made.
His judgments were models of lucidity. His keen mind always went
to the central point of an argument. It has been said of him that no
man at the Australian Bar ever had a more wonderful power of
analysis. On his retirement one Australian paper summed up his
ability in this direction as follows : “ With eminent counsel taking
opposite views, and with his brother judges crossing argumentative
words now with one counsel now with the other in order to establish
clear ground, it was delightful to listen to Sir Samuel’s clear, dignified
voice suddenly break through a mass of argument with a simply
stated and unanswerable proposition, leaving the really vital thing
exposed to view; and then as the essential point was tussled with, to
note the judicial manner in which he considered the opposing argu-
ments. This mental keenness has never left Sir Samuel. He takes it
with him from the High Court bench to-day, and Australia is the
poorer.”
In 1886 he received the K.C.M.G. In 1895 the G.C.M.G., and
became a Privy Councillor in 1901.
The main reason for his retirement in July, 1919, was owing to
the state of his health which continued to grow worse, and he died a
year later in July, 1920.


Mr. T. P. O’Connor, writing of him at the time, said : “He
made an immediate impression on you of very high intellectual
powers. His language was cast in clear-cut logic ; even when talking
casually he gave you the impression of a man delivering a judicial
pronouncement. I must add, lest this should give a false idea, that his
language and manner were charming in their simplicity. He struck
you as an amiable man, but as somewhat cold and detached. He was
given by Australia everything she had to give—a seat in Parliament, an
Attorney Generalship, a Premiership and then a Chief Justiceship of
the Commonwealth.”
Sir Samuel Griffith takes his place in Australian history as a
great statesman, a great law-giver and one of the Fathers of the
Commonwealth.
FACTS ABOUT AUSTRALIA
In strength and in durability Australian hardwoods stand
supreme. They surpass even British oak, Indian teak and
the lignum vitte.
The discovery of gold in 1851 first attracted population
to Australia. The mineral production for the last twelve
months amounted to £20,000,000. Large areas have not
yet been systematically prospected.
The supremacy of Australian horses was definitely
established in Palestine during the war. Large numbers
are annually exported to India for remount purposes.
Although of minor importance, bee farming is an
industry which emphasises the wide range of opportunities
for the land settler in Australia.
The cultivation of lucerne, the king of all fodders, is
expanding rapidly in Australia, and under favourable
conditions 6 tons of hay per acre is not unusual.
The Australian bush provides good sport, as well as
lovely scenery. The mountain streams are now favourite
hunting grounds for the devotee of the rod.
A VAST COUNTRY.
An Island Continent. —Australia is a continent em-
bracing an area of 2,974,581 square miles. In other words
it is more than twenty-five times the size of England,
Scotland, Ireland and Wales all lumped together, and is as
large as the United States of America. From North to
South is a distance of nearly 2,000 miles, and the greatest
breadth from East to West is about 2,400 miles. The
coast-line, exclusive of minor indentations, measures 12,210
miles, which gives an average of 244 square miles to one
mile of coast-line.


PRESS EXTRACTS —continued
HISTORICAL BIOGRAPHIES
No. i
CANADA
“It is a worthy idea thus to place in the hands of the
growing generation facts of the lives of such great men as
Wilfred Laurier, Samuel Champlain, etc., in so handy a
form. Other books will follow on Australia, New Zealand,
South Africa, India, and other parts of the Empire.”
Liverpool Echo, Nov. 18 th, 1926.
“It is an effort to lead girls and boys to a fuller know-
ledge of what has been accomplished by those who have
made the group of nations known as the British Empire.
Yorkshire Herald, Nov. 11th, 1926.
“In a foreword dealing with Canada, Dr. L. Haden
Guest, M.P., says that one of the chief needs of the British
Commonwealth of Nations at the present time is a revival
on a large scale of the spirit of adventure.”
Aberdeen Press, Nov. 18 th, 1926.
“Canada is for the reading of youth, giving brief,
pointed biographies of those who have made the British
Empire.”
Newcastle Journal.
“ The lives of a select number of men and women who
helped to make Canada a great Dominion.”
The Citizen ( Gloucester ), Nov. 16 th, 1926.


HISTORICAL BIOGRAPHIES
(EMPIRE SERIES)
No. 1
CANADA
Edited by Lord Apsley, D. 5.0., M.C., M.P.
Copies of the above may be obtained from
the Publishers at 6d. each. Rates for
quantities on application.
HISTORICAL BIOGRAPHIES
(EMPIRE SERIES)
No. 3
SOUTH AFRICA
By JOHN BUCHAN.
Will be Issued in May. Order Copies Now.
Publishers s
The British Empire Educational Press, Limited,
180, Mansion House Chambers,
London, E.C.
