

AUSTRALIA
THE
Ancietn Ophir:
OR, THE
GOLD MIN ES OF KIN G SOLOMON,
WITH OTHER
AUSTRALIAN INCIDENCES.
BY
G. F. GOBLE,
Twenty-five Years Resident in those Colonies.
LONDON:
1853.


LONDON; PRINTED BY FRANCIS PASSMORE. BOROUGH ROAD.


PREFATORY REMARKS.
My object in publishing this pamphlet is merely
to show that 1 am no stranger to the Southern
Hemisphere, or its golden deposits, having often
bestowed my mite towards its discovery, in various
ways, as per positive facts herein adduced.
Nevertheless, the long and short is simply this,
that in geology, as well as most other sciences,
the original discoverers of any of its applications
are only ridiculed for wasting their nightly oil and
daily wick of their own life, in promulgating datas
for future generations. During all my researches,
I never yet found any treatise on orographical
problems, or on metalogical geology, consequently,
were I to attempt to publish my opinions on such
abstruse speculations, I should gain only a loss;
for I find, particularly since I have been in Eng


land, whenever I have sent any original articles to
the press, they have been rejected, either from my
being too obscure an authority to be noticed, or its
contents not fully comprehended, else thinking
such trash unsuitable for their purposes. Conse-
quently, it is the reason why I have taken this
mode to oblige those friends who wish for copies of
several of these whimsicalities, concerning Aus-
tralian events.
Also, I anticipate to find it a cheaper mode of
disseminating my inventions and patents, and per-
haps equally as efficacious as newspaper advertise-
ments. For I really cannot afford to hire a band
to sound my day-dreams, therefore must be content
with the un-english practice of blowing my own
trumpet for a while; yet if any kind friends feel
inclined to join in the chorus, they are heartily
welcome, at the same time may oblige
Their humble factotum,
[?]
London, April , 1853.


THE ORIGINAL OPHIR;
OR, THE
GOLD MINES OF SOLOMON’S ERA.
GOLD, gold, gold, being the all-absorbing topic to the
present generation, I cannot help thinking, also, our
ancient Mends, 3,000 years ago, must have been touched
with the same mania, else King David never could have
been able to hand over to his son 10,000 talents of gold,
and 100,000 talents of silver, besides brass and iron,
without number, (vide 29th chap. 1 Chron., 4th verse,)
and by 10th chap. 2nd Kings, Solomon must have received
from Ophir above 700 talents of gold annually.
As a talent, according to Dr. Cumberland, Brerewood,
and several others, is upwards of 100 pounds, but by
Josephus, not more than fourteen, consequently, at either
rate Solomon’s pile would amount to a pretty round sum,
even in these degenerate times.
Now, where is this said Ophir, this rich auriferous area,
that was old even in the days of Solomon? as by the Bth
book of Josephus, 6th chap., it states, —moreover, the king
built many ships in the Egyptian Bay of the Bed Sea, in
a certain place called Ezion-geber, (now Berenice): this
country formerly belonged to the Jews, and became useful
for shipping, from the donations of Hiram, King of Tyre,
£


for he sent a sufficient number of men thither for pilots, and
such as were skilful in navigation, to whom Solomon gave
this command: that they should go along with his own
stewards to the land that was of old called ophie, but now
the A urea Chersonesus, which belongs to Lidia, to fetch
him gold ; and when they had gathered 400 talents together,
they returned to the King again, bringing also apes, ivory,
birds, spices, &c., finishing their voyage by going and
returning in three years.
Now I find by Ptolemy’s charts, that the Aurea Cherso-
nesus was supposed to be on the Malayan Peninsula, that
being then thought the utmost limit of navigation—but it
appears absurd to suppose such, when the mariner’s com-
pass was known long before Solomon’s time, and when
navigation and astronomy were also well understood.
The size of vessels also appears to have been large, for*
Josephus mentions that ships were broken at Ezion-geber,
for their unwieldy greatness.
Therefore, I anticipate, in Australia will eventually be
found the locale of those ancient mines, and probably not
far from the Gulf of Carpentaria, as it agrees with ancient
manuscript, respecting the far southern latitude, and tropi-
cal climes in the South Sea, which the fleet never wait
out of, also, the long easterly course steered, so that by a
three years’ voyage vessels would have the benefit of trade-
winds both ways—besides, the cargo of ivory, apes, &0.,
could no where be better procured than en route, viz.,
Ceylon, Borneo, Sumatra, Malacca, &c., procuring tin and
copper from Banca, &c., then by crossing the Straits,
reach the southern ultima, or the farthermost bounds of the
earth, as was then supposed.


If any imagine that navigation at that early period was
not perfected enow, they have only to consider that both
David and Solomon were endowed with special wisdom:
surely, then, they would possess the requisite knowledge to
point out the richest deposits on earth for a specific purpose.
Solomon himself says God gave him wisdom and under-
standing (exceeding much): and in the 7th chapter of his
Book of Wisdom, he declares that he knew the circuit of
years, and the position of the stars, &c.
In confirmation of the above, Mr. Wood states that, at
Balbec, was a finely-sculptured zodiac of the stars, by
Solomon’s superior knowledge, &c.
Josephus mentions, in his first book, that Seth was
proficient in astronomy, astrology, and geometry —even
before the flood.
See, also, the Arundelian Marbles, the works of Minos,
Homer, Thales, Confucius, Cyrus, Pliny, and many others,
all confirm the truth, that astronomy and navigation were
well known to the ancients. Even in Sesostris’ time these
sciences were fiir advanced.
Secondly, the natives of Australia have every indication
of being of Arabic and Egyptic descents, both in their
physiology, circumcision, wandering unsettled habits, and
other peculiarities; such would occur from some being left
behind at that disastrous period.
Their weapons also, are in every similar respect like unto
those used by the early Egyptians, particularly the bome-
rang, waddy, spear, &c.
Nevertheless, climate, time, and other causes would
evidently obliterate many distinct tralSTTlEe original
tribe, left so irretrievably on such a wilderness, at so
remote a period.
b 2


Thirdly, as a further corroborative proof of those islands
being inhabited by tribes from Egypt, &c., examine well
the species and habits of most of the beasts, birds, and
reptiles of New Holland, and you will find them nearly all
appear identical with those formerly worshipped in the
East as deities; particularly the serpents, lizards, guanos,
vultures, hawks, &c. Then seriously consider if it is not
within the bounds of probability, that the native dog and
cat of Australia may not be allied to the jackall and ichneu-
mon, the kangaroo to the jerboa; the emu and ostrich have
every indication of being of the same family; while pelicans,
swans, turkeys, quails, &c., are abundant in both hemis-
pheres ; even the marmot tribes have great similarity.
Neither can it be disputed, that the art of mining,
mineralogy, chymistry, and most other kindred sciences,
were not well understood by those patriarchs, as 1308,
B. C., both Memphis and Thebes could boast of superb
libraries; notation at that period also was in vogue, of a
peculiar kind, and circumcision had been practised long
before.
Lastly, I consider it easily accounted for, why the ori-
ginal Ophir should be so often controverted, as all recorded
traces of the voyages and voyagers was lost soon afterwards
(vide Ezekiel 25th and 26th chapters). The ships and
city of Tyre being annihilated, and Solomon’s generation
cut off, it requires but little thought to account for its
oblivion: nevertheless, Solomon distinctly states, that
nothing is new under the sun; and as no proverb or pre-
diction was ever hinted that the said Ophir should not be
again known, where is the incongruity or improbability of
Australia not being the original country of Ophir, (or O’far.)


On the contrary, were I to publish all the deductions and
evidences I have obtained from various sources, in proof of
the above allegations, and in confirmation of all my former
assertions, that the richest arena on the globe is in Austra-
lia, your humble servant would be deemed a
G. F. GOBLE.
Van Dkmaris Land, 1851.
P. S. It is more than 20 years ago, since I began to
notice the different peculiarities of the various tribes of
aborigines in New Holland. I could not but observe the
stunted wretches on the Swan, from their stalwart neigh-
bours on the Murray river, or the Port Lechenault tribes
to those at King George’s Sound; again, the difference of
those miserables at Spencer’s Gulf, to the Adelaide, or
Portland Bay wretches to the Melboumites, the Cape Howe
wanderers with the Sydney remnants, and the varied
marauders round the Carpentarian Gulf. It requires but
little physiological reasoning to distinguish at least two
distinct races of beings, one Egyptian, the other Malayan.
But my purpose is not with blacks, but yellows, that I wish
to show are indigenous to Australia, in greater abundance
than any other portion of this mighty globe; not only gold,
but every other metal and mineral are to be found in that
hemisphere.


In working out some orographies! problems, I found the
letter A so often to occur in my classifications, that I could
not help remarking its singularity, and_ findng scientific re-
searches unsuitable to colonial habits, I was induced to try
as below, any way to draw attention to the fact that Austra-
lia possessed the constants of the mineral kingdom in greater
variety than any other part of the world.
SINGULAR COINCIDENCES.
To the Editor of the Cornwall Chronicle.
Sir, —Allow me to introduce the following extraordi-
nary coincidental facts to the notice of unscientific thinkers,
as, by the following reasoning the land in which gold and
silver mines abound can easily be ascertained, as the
above metals are always found in countries, mountains,
and rivers where the final letter is A : where the same
begins with A, richer deposits may be expected, and the
oftener that vowel occurs in the place, the more auriferous,
consequently, I cannot help remarking that the letter A
and the word gold are often symbolical, A being the pri-
mitive article, so is gold ; A the Alpha of all languages,
gold the same. Gold also was primogenial toman, as
good gold abounded in the land of Aethiopia Avila, and
Assyria, proximate to the Garden of Eden—[Vide 2nd
chap. Genesis.]
Primitial names must be used, although I admit diffi-
culties will occur in the selection of authorities —as a gold
mine, by Pliny, is written aurifodinn; silver ditto, argen-
tifodina. Tacitus scribes auraria for gold, and argentaria
for a silver mine. Therefore, Australasia may be consi-
sidered quadruply rich, as Australia, Tasmania, Caledonia,
and Polynesia, all contain this Alpha and Omega of our
thoughts, as well as Africa, Asia, and Europa. In
America, gold and silver is largely disseminated; in
Canada, Carolina can boast of a nugget nearly 40 lbs.


weight; Alabama, Novo Scotia, Georgia, Virginia, the
river Savana, and the great mountains, ail
richly abound in the precious ores; in California, on the
Sierra Nevada, in the Sacramento and Yuba rivers.
Many years ago, in the province of Sonora, a few labourers
collected, without washing, upwards of 30,0002. worth of
gold in a few weeks: one nugget weighed 132 ozs., and
was deposited in the Royal Cabinet at Madrid.
Near Pamplona, single labourers collected 200 Z. worth
a day of wash-gold; in Paragoo, nuggets are found from
two to fifty lbs. weight each.
Mexico, Granada, and Peruvia are also rich; Panama
exports millions of the precious article. Amazonia,
Guatimala, Patagonia, also abound in both metals.
The gold and silver mines of La Plata are very nume-
rous (above 60 existed,) employing upwards of 6,000
Indians, and realizing upwards of 16,000,000 dollars
annually; the richest are those of Laricaja and Carabaya.
Between Lima and Tagna, in Africa, axe the famous mines
of Huantajaya, in a sandy plain, of such exuberance, that
pure metal could be cut out; one of these specimens of
virgin silver is preserved in the Royal Cabinet of Natural
History at Madrid. The mines Guanaxuata afforded from
1796 to 1803, 40,000,(XX) dollars in gold and silver.
From 1492 to 1803, the quantity of gold and silver
extracted from S. A. equalled in value, 5,706,700,000
dollars; the last 50 years alone produced upwards of
30,000,0002. sterling.
A mine in Carthagena yielded 300,0002. sterling a year;
the province of Amtaxia, Gallicia, and Lusitania, yielded
20,0uOlbs. weight of gold annually.
Dalmatia, in Europa, according to Pliny, produced
50 lbs. daily of surface gold.
Russia, Siberia, Kamtschatka, Georgia, and the moun-
tain of Ouralia, in particular, collects upwards of 2,000,
OOQ2. annually.
At Norwegia, in Scandanavia, very rich mines existed,
from which a mass of silver, valued at 2,0002., was
extracted and deposited in the Royal Museum at Copen-
hagen. Bossina, in Sclavonia, in the district of Srebrar-
niza, has rich mines of both metals—the silver in pure


quartz, resembling moss. Chino, or Tshino, Coreo,
Formosa, Mongolio, Molocco, Sumotro, and Joyo, are
ail metalliferous; the Sundo Islands are opposite to Ama-
zonia, (S.A.). Cafraria, Angolia, Abessinia, Nubia,
Arabia, Armenia, &c., supply large quantities of precious
metals. India, in the province of Agra, Orixa, and
Golconda, is famed for its mines of gold and diamonds; the
king of Ava and Brama suffered no gold to be exported.
Gonana, in Nigretia, is exceedingly rich in metallinous
productions.
Monomatapa is also rich; in this state are Sabio and
Sofala, the controverted land of Ophir, where Solomon is
supposed to have obtained above 26 tons of gold annually.
—[Vide 10th chap, book of Kings.] 1
Now if we try England, Ireland, and Scotland by the
abovelogic, they cannot be very auriferous, as neither of
them contain at the present period (or in ancient times,)
either a province, county, shire, river, lake, or mountain,
ending with the requisite vowel, except in Hibernia, about
Lugniguilta, and Kinchelsea, where about 1000 ounces of
gold have been gathered in alluvial soil, the largest nuggets
22 ozs.
at the present time, is similarly situated, with
the exception of Mount Jura, that divides it from Swit-
zerland ; there dust has been found in the streams that
pass through the Lake of Geneva.
The only rational logic I can give of the above singu-
larity is, that gold is generally found in the midst of
quartz, slate, clay, and sand; seldom in limestone, sulphur,
ironstone, or mould.
Nevertheless, it must be admitted that Australasia pos-
sesses all the characteristics to be classed A one in the
category of mineral productions. Albert and Victoria, the
most powerful and prolific of Sovereigns, and long may
they reign in the hearts of their subjects a wise and happy
people; and God grant that by no illiberal, narrow policy,
may that wealthiest of all jewels—that nucleus of nations,
be estranged from their escutcheons, is the sincere wish of
your humble servant,
G. F. GOBLE.
Lanuceslm, V. D. Land.


PLENTY GOLD SEEKERS.
In May, 1851, during a short sojourn in Melbourne, I
was often applied to in respect to minerals, and the proba-
bility of gold ever likely to be found in Victoria; as I could
only answer in the affirmative, so gave advice accordingly.
But hearing so many glaring absurdities promulgated,’ in-
duced me to pen the subjoined contradictions; as no reply
was ever offered, I presumed that my interference was too
truthful to be publicly noticed.
To the Editor of the Argus.
“ All is not gold that glitters.”
Sir, —Having at the request of several, gentlemen, examined
many specimens of gold stated to have been found in Victoria, all
of which hears the characteristic of Californian origin; one speci-
men! saw in a shop I firmly believe is of Mariposia production;
respecting the piece now exhibiting in Swanston street, I anticipate
also found its way from San Francisco —not that I doubt the
existence of the precious metal here in all its native purity; on
the contrary, I firmly believe it is as plentiful here as either in
Bathurst or in California, as I feel confident I could name the
latitude and longitude, within 25 miles, where it must from analogy
abound.
But respecting the gold found at the river Plenty, I very much
doubt, for several reasons, as in neither of the samples I have
examined, have X been able to discover one particle of gold. I
certainly did test two buttons of gold, said to have been procured
and produced by a gentleman on the Plenty, and if these two
buttons are the produce of one or more crucibles of quartz, what
would a few tons realize ?—richer by far than any soil I ever knew
or saw at California.
Respecting the ores of copper I have seen, I can give hut one
opinion, one half at least are from Adelaide, &c. Yet if the
native copper I handled is procurable here, Burra Burra mines
are worthless. Yet it seems strange, yellow and brown native
copper and clean sound malachite can be found without the carbo-
nates ; this is certainly a strange feature in geology. To find the
superior without the inferior is like finding a mine of hardware and
cutlery, with ores of iron below. Nevertheless, as I am only a
visitor to this town, I have no individual interest of either damping
or influencing the minds of gold seekers—neither have I any
hesitation in giving my humble opinion on all specimens that may
be shown to me, provided they are in their native state.
G. F. GOBLE.
Royal Hotel, Melbourne,


Having in my last letter distinctly stated that I could
mention the longitude and latitude within a few miles where
gold must from analogy abound, I was taunted to test the
confidence I placed in my own theory; consequently I wrote-
the following short advice. Now whether I have proved
that my scientific researches were based on assumptions
theory or not, take a nuggetory view of those quartz of
heavy proof daily wending their way to Europe.
From the Political Times.
The excitement of the gold mania being now at its full
height, we make no apology for bringing under the notice
of our readers the following valuable communication from a
gentleman who has long resided in California, and is an
excellent geologist. We have good reason for believing
that a gentleman of extensive knowledge, who was for
some time surveying in the Pyrenees, coincides in the
deductions of the writer, from practical observation.
In event, therefore, of no gold being discovered in the
Plenty, we would urge upon the public the propriety of
raising a fund to send out a surveying party to the former
locality. The subject was discussed at the late public-
meeting, but the terms of the requisition precluded any
formal motion from being put to the public. The follow-
ing is the communication:—
GOLD SEEKERS OF VICTORIA.
Having no individual interest with your success or failure in the
Gold Fever, yet I cannot help throwing- my mite towards such
persevering and legitimate industry, therefore, I hereby give my
humble opinion, deduced from scientific and practical observations,
that gold and other precious metals, I am persuaded, abound in
Victoria, consequently, I advise explorers to operate between the
Loddon, Amca , and Granite, Ranges, as their geographical posi-
tion, geological formation, meridian parallels, with other indications
denote the latitude and longitude in which the auriferous deposit
ought, from analogy, to abound. Respecting the Plenty, I do
not anticipate any gold ever was, or will be, found in it on this
side of Mount Disappointment. Silver, copper, and iron, are in
abundance; in short, about Heidelberg, every indication of copper
is apparent to any geologist, and if parties would consider that
these metals are often more profitable than gold—then why not
profit by them 1
G. F. GOBLE.
Royal Hotel, Melbourne, 12th June, 1851.


VICTORIA GOLD.
A few days after the publication of the last letter, I left
the heads of Port Philip, but was soon driven from stress
of weather into Sealer’s Cove. Taking the opportunity of
using my geological hammer, I procured several specimens
of granite, quartz, and other stones, about Wilson’s Pro-
montory ; and from the general indication, tin and other
metals are not far off. Consequently, I forwarded my
reasons and remarks to a friend at Melbourne, hut whether
he ever attended to them I know not, as my time in those
latitudes was soon after over; yet previous to leaving, I
received the following letters from a most intimate friend.
Melbourne, October, 1851.
Dear Goble,
No doubt, ere this you are gratified to hear that
gold has been found in abundance, both at Ballarat, and Mount
Alexander, the identical place you mentioned to us. It is a pity,
when you were over here, you did not proceed to the Pyrenees as
you wished, and so have had the first pick,
I have commenced regularly dealing in gold; consequently, I
would feel extremely obliged to you for your opinion and advice
on the contents of the accompanying parcel, trusting you will give
me the earliest advice. By so doing, you will confer valuable
favors on your
Sincere friend and well wisher,
Mr. G. F. Gohle, Launceston.
J. W. P.
P. S. If you can make it convenient to come over here again,
Mr. 8., Mr. W., and myself, will assist you to make up a pros-
pecting party.
p.


Launceston, October, 1851.
Dear Peppers,
I beg to acknowledge the receipt of the samples you
sent me for testing, and requesting my advice thereon in purcha-
sing gold, as you intend to buy largely. At present I advise you
to procure all you can of the Ballarat gold, in preference to Mount
Alexander. Respecting the large nugget, I find one side deterio-
rated 10 per cent with silver, the other side nearly pure gold;
owing, no doubt, to that being the under side during its solidifi-
catory process. Choose not surface nuggets, but gold from deep
pits. The quartz stones are all rich with the precious metal,
containing from 2to 10 per cent, although invisible; The yellow
clay stones contain the greatest proportion of pure metal of any
earth I ever analized. If you could procure a few cart loads, (as
you say you can,) do so in double quick time; you need nothing
else. You may always know its properties, by its specific weight
and taste, but above all, by its peculiar siennaoeous colour and
smell.
As a simple mode of recollecting the estimated value of gold
ores or quartz, is, as one per cent of pure metal in it is worth about
a thousand pounds, so will as many per centages make it worth as
many thousand sovereigns.
Silver in a similar manner may be estimated; fra: as one per cent
of that metal in ores may be expected to yield a profit of £5O,
consequently, for every two per cent, as many hundreds.
I would much like to accept your olfer of a prospecting tour
throughout Victoria, if the government would give any encourage-
ment, as I feel satisfied more auriferous spots are in existence
there. Trusting to hear from you again soon,
Yours truly,
G. F. G.
Mr. J. W, Peppers, Melbourne.


Melbourne, November, 1851.
Dear Goble,
I am extremely gratified with the result of your
analysis, and will take your advice on the purchasing of gold, both
in dust and nuggets.
Write yourself to Governor La Trobe; he will be sure to render
you every assistance in geological researches, as we have no one
here that scarce knows one stone from another. I will find you a
trustworthy man, one who has been used to a bush life for years,
and knows the country well.
Could you not invent some scientific mode of pounding the
stones; also to separate the fine dust without using mercury.
Mr. B. wishes to have your opinion on the enclosed crystal stones,
and whether they could be applied to any profitable use ; if so, he
can procure a good few.
Yours faithfully,
G. F. Goble, Esq., Launceston.
J. W. P.
Launceston, November, 1851.
Dear Peppers,
Respecting my opinion upon the stones you sent
me, 1 have several times analized such, and can come to no other
conclusion but that they are of the same family as the pure
diamond; that is, if diamonds are carbon, these are also carbon.
The last I tested was in the presence of Dr. Jenneret. I made a
hole in a piece of soft iron, then made the bar red hot, and
quenched it, to be satisfied it was not steel j not being so, I placed
in the hole one of that gentleman’s crystals in powder, luted it
close, then placed the rod in my furnace for a few minutes, until
it was a clear red heat, then quenched it again in the same water
when it was made so hard no file could abrade it; consequently, I
can only infer that the dispersion of the stone had converted a
portion of the rod into steel. The only difference I can discern
between the Cape barren diamonds and the real gem, is their
degrees of hardness and brilliancy; like a green ivory nut,
requiring time or heat to harden them. The Australian diamonds
appear to retain too much of their waters of crystalization, deprive
them of that, I have no doubt they would become valuable in the
arts. I find there are two sorts, very much the same in outward
appearance; one is pure quartz, the other of the same specific
gravity as the most valuable of all stones.
Yours in haste,
1, W. Peppers, Esq., Melbourne.
G. F. G.


A few months after gold had been found about Mount
Alexander, (nearly the centre of the spot I pointed out,) I
addressed the following letter to the Governor of Victoria,
as requested by my friends.
Launceston , V.D Land , Dec . 10, 1851.
Sir,
I respectfully beg leave to enquire, if his Excellency
the Governor of Victoria will allow myself and servant to perform
a geological tour through the province of Victoria, without being
subjected to the supervision of commissioners, orwhether it would
be requisite to take out monthly licenses for the same.
I have the honor to remain,
Your humble servant,
G. F. GOBLE.
To the Colonial Secretary , Melbourne .
VICTORIA.
Colonial Secretary's Office,
Melbourne , 2 9th Dec . 1851.
Sir,
In reply to your letter dated the 10th instant, in
which you enquire whether his Excellency the Lieutenant Gover-
nor will permit you and servant to perform a geological tour
throughout this colony, without being subjected to the supervision
of commissioners, or whether it will be requisite to take out a
monthly license for the same; —lam directed by his Excellency
to inform you, that he has no objection to your undertaking the
tour in question, provided it be clearly seen that the removal of
gold from the soil, is neither the object, nor the result of the
expedition.
I have the honor to he, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
H. LONSDALE.
G. F. Goble, Esq., Launceston.
His Excellency kindly permitted me to undertake the
tour, provided I did not remove one single nugget from the
soil; no, not a single grain of gold must you remove, but
come and tell us where the gold can be found, and we will
then charge you with a license to dig deeper.
Upon such terms, I declined so generous an offer to take
another voyage across the straits, if that was to be the result
of the inducement to scientific investigators, or nugget-ran-
ging for other people’s benefit.


VAN DIEMAN’S LAND.
In October, 1851, I published a letter in the Van Die-
man’s Land journals, showing where gold ought from
analogous reasoning to be found, giving also my reasons for
arriving at the conclusion, that the northern part of the
island was the most likely for that metal to be obtained.
Not having any copy by me, I am unable to give a trans-
cript, but recollect the orographies! lines ran on the parallel
of latitude northwards of Launceston.
So confident was I that Tasmania is nearly as auriferous
as Victoria, I offered publicly to several leading members of
a certain gold committee, to place my pick on an area of at
least one acre, and procure one ounce of the requisite metal,
by way of testing my assertions. No, that did not suit
their purpose, as the terms of their reward were, the stun
of one hundred pounds, to be paid to the discoverer of a
gold field capable of being profitably worked. In the first
place, what might be profitable to one class of men, would
be starvation to another. It is not always the quantity of
the metal, but the difficulties of access to it, that create its
profitableness or abandonment; and was it likely, that if
any person could, after his own private exertions, be able to
pick out the golden nugs like potatoes, he would be insane
enough to peach to any committee whatsoever ?
Nevertheless, the more the northern part of the island
where I have pointed out, is explored at reasonable depth,
the greater chance will there be of Tasmania competing
with her sisters in heavy metal. In fact, that portion of the
island abounds with the true irridiated tinged quartz, and
other concomitants of the golden constituents for the forma-
tion of auriferous deposits; and had there been any induce-
ment held out to reimburse my expences, I would long ere
this have proved every word of the above and following
assertions.


To the Editor of the Cornwall Chronicle .
Sir, —I take this opportunity publicly to reiterate my expressed
opinions, that not only gold « but silvery coppery iron , antimonyy
sulphury chrome , and nickely abound within a few miles of this town,
having procured them all, from their respective indigenous locales,
consequently I leave it to those interested to form their own opi-
nions of these assertions. If deceived, lam open to conviction by
any competent analytical, metalogical, mineralogical, or geolo-
gical condemnation.
Yours respectfully,
G. F.GOBLE.
Nov: 18, 1851.
Being anxious to exert myself in some useful scientific
employment, and feeling satisfied that gold abounded in
Tasmania, I transmitted a note to the Lieutenant Governor
of Yan Dieman’s Land.
Launceston , December 20, 1851.
Sib,
Having been requested by many individuals to
prospect for gold in Tasmania, consequently, I respectfully beg
leave to enquire if it is his Excellency’s intention to prohibit such,
or whether any auriferous area here will be allowed to be worked
on similar terms as in Victoria or Sydney, as I feel confident
gold abounds in this island. I would also like to know what dif-
ference would ensue to tte government, to its being found on either
crown or private lands.
1 have the honor, &c.,
G. F.GOBLE.
To the Colonial Secretary, Hobarton.
Colonial Secretary Office,
December 26, 1851.
Sir,
I am directed to acknowledge the receipt of your
letter of the 20th instant, in which you make enquiry as to the
conditions upon which gold, if found in this colony, will be allowed
to be worked; and in reply, I am to observe, that his Excellency
can afford you no information upon the subject at present, as until
gold shall have been discovered, no regulations can be framed by the
Government.
I have the honor to be, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
G.F. Geble, Esq., Launceston.
P. FRASER.


It will be observed, His Excellency declined to give any
permission to explore for gold, or say anything about it,
until gold shall have been discovered; therefore, whether
the police would apprehend me as a trespasser, or claim any
prize I might find, I knew not, and from the general apathy
shown, I concluded gold not to be grain requisite for Van
Dieman’s Land exports.
FINGAL GOLD.
Not being ashamed to record what I have once written, I
herewith transcribe an exact copy of a communication to a
Fellow of the Royal Society, Hobarton.
Launceston, June, 1852.
Dear Sir,
At your request I have analyzed the two specimens
of Fingal Gold.
1, sp. gr. 19, 1 con. 84 per cent. Gold, & 6 to 8 percent. Irridium.
2, „ „ 17 9 „ 92 „ 4 „ Silver,
with traces of nickel and sulphuret of lead.
Yours truly,
G. F.GOBLE.
In reply to another member of the Royal body the
following is a portion: —
You ask me how I think gold to have been originally formed. I
unhesitatingly say by aqueous amalgamations, by the galvanic
action of the solvent powers of nitrogen, acting on silicum and
iron chemically combining together, and not by the agency of fire.
If it ever was in igneous masses, how could those pieces of galena,
malachite, quartz, lime, and other fusible substances, still remain
unvitrified in the solid parts of the gold itself? Secondly, its
porosity, density, and appearance, all negative the fact of its last
solidifying from molten metal. I cannot imagine how any scientific
person can entertain the idea, that nuggets or veins could be
deposited in their matrix by any other mode than by solution, or
when the salts were in a semicrystalized state, as it would then by
its own superior gravity be able to press through the soft ground,
or in the veins of stones, until checked by some nonabsorbing
strata, where it would naturally fill up the hollows and crevices of
the space allotted to its sedimental depositories.


The following were cut out of the colonial papers; con-
sequently, I herewith republish them merely for the sake
of argufication.
PORTLAND BAY.
Observing a publication in your paper, that Captain Goble of
Launceston points out the locality which gold ought from analogy
to abound in V. D. Land, consequently, 1 cannot help remarking
that when in Melbourne last June, I heard the above gentleman
state, in the presence cf Mr. W. J. T. Clark, Mr. Headlaro, and
others, that about the Loddon would be found rich with gold, also
near Portland Bay, about long. 142 deg. and 87 deg. lat, gold
ought to be found; and although he felt confident the precious
dust abounded in Tasmania, he considered Victoria the richest
auriferous spot. Most persons, no doubt, considered at the time
such expressions as mere bounce, but from what I have ascer-
tained of the scientific abilities of that gentleman, I believe he was
perfectly capable of justifying those extraordinary assertions.
But no man is a prophet in his own country; had Mr. Goble
arrived from California as Baron instead of an honest
colonist, his scientific researches and opinions would have been
swaUowed de gusto.
Such are the thanks of disinterested advice. If Captain Goble’s
bold assertions are wrong, why do not those that know better,
plainly and honestly controvert the matter; surely we have in the
colonies scientific gentlemen, either able to confirm or confute
such theories, particularly when the author gives the principles
which he computes his results. What are the geologists about, to
allow a private gentleman to ridicule them ? I anticipate next,
such individuals will point out our coal beds, or locales for artesian
springs, and other colonial benefits.
Yours, a respecter of science.
M.
Portland, December, 1831.
To the Editor of the Cornwall Chronicle.
Sir, —A gentleman from the West Coast, writing to a friend in
town, mentions that, having seen in the Courier a letter signed
G. F. G., which states that gold ought to abound in our province,
consequently, I have prospected about, and found some kind <rf
yellowish metal. —Can you ascertain whether it is gold or not ?
Yours &c.,
6th December.
D.
[We know no person more competent to afford the information
required than Mr. G. F. Goble, to whom we refer our correspon-
dent.—Ed. C. C.]


As the gentleman alluded to applied to me, I herewith
copy verbatim my reply. Since I have been in England,
I have had a portion of the specimens operated on, thus
confirming all my former assertions on the subject of gold
&c. in Yan Diemans Land.
George Town, Dec. 12, 1851.
Sir,
In reply to your note respecting the samples sent me
for testing, I find nothing in the loose earth but yellow mica, the
spangles in the slate stones are sulphuret of iron, but the piece of
reddish quartz contains undisputable evidence of the existence of
gold ; therefore, would advise you to keep poking about, and try
and find a few grains of that metal, as I feel satisfied that it is not
far off; keep between the inner coast range and the western tiers.
Send me up a few more specimens from different locations, as I
should like to analyze them all. 1 hear several parties are out
prospecting; they may accidentally drop on the place. I intend,
ere long, to offer my services to form an exploring party, if any
one will bear a portion of the expenses; then I will call on you,
and point out the most likely spot. In the meanwhile keep quiet,
and prospect about the neighbourhood, until you hear from
Your wellwisher,
G. F. GOBLE.
N. B. I herewith send you a simple mode of ascertaining gold
while in the bush, in many cases it may save you much anxiety
and trouble.
Gold and Copper are the only yellowish malleable metals that
are likely to be found native.
Gold may be detected by simply chewing it, when it will appear
soft and tasteless, whereas copper is quite nauseous; copper will
also turn greenish if exposed to acids, gold is not affected by it, is
also nearly double the weight of copper the same size.
Mica and Talc are also often yellow and in scales, but their
lightness betrays their nature, being not one fourth that of gold,
although they are tasteless and not affected by aeids, they will not
bend double without breaking, or in any way show ductility.
Sulphurets may be known on being struck between hard sub-
stances, when they will fly in pieces, and cannot be laminated.
Nevertheless, every stone above four times heavier than water
must contain some kind of metal; if you find any such, send them
to me, and I will acquaint you with their quality, &c.
G. F. G.


Before closing with Australia, I am tempted to publish
a portion of other correspondence, merely to show that I am
not a stranger to those climes and seas, having been buffet-
ing about there a quarter of a century, and have always
been willing, and I trust, as competent, either physically or
mentally, to explore British provinces, as any foreigner,
whether political refugee, renegade, fellow, or what not.
SIDNEY CORRESPONDENCE.
Launceston, November, 19, 1851.
Sir,
Observing by the Sydney press that it is the intention
of his Excellency the Governor to dispatch a party on the trail of
Leichardt, to obtain if possible any information respecting the
fate of that unfortunate gentleman and suite, or complete the same
expedition which induced that unfortunate gentleman to attempt.
Consequently, I hereby offer my services to conduct the same,
&c. Although lam an entire stranger to his Excellency, I trust
I can give sufficient evidence of my capacity to attempt such an
arduous, scientific, and useful undertaking. His Excellency will
observe, by the enclosed memorandum, that probably I was the
first individual that entertained the idea, and offered in 1830, to
proceed on such an arduous and dangerous peregrination, in times
far more difficult, when the natives were completely uncivilized,
when extended prospecting had never been attempted, and without
the experience and recorded data of later explorers; therefore, if a
party is not organized for the above purpose, I should feel pleasure
to enter into arrangements for the due commencement of the same,
whenever his Excellency thinks proper to notify the time, and
other preliminaries, &c.
I have the honor to be,
Your humble servant.
G. F. GOBLE.
To the Colonial Secretary, Sydney.
New South Wales, Colonial Secretary’s Office.
Sydney, 2nd January, 1852.
Sir,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your
letter of the 19th November last, offering your tervioes to take
charge of an expedition in search of Dr. Leichardt.
In reply to which communication, I am directed by his Excel-
lency the Governor General to inform you, that the expedition
alluded to has already started.
I have the honor to he, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
E. DEAS THOMASON.
F. Goble, Esq., Launceston, Van Dieman’s Land.


Freemantle, Swan River, March 24, 1830.
Sis,
Having understood from Captain Bannister, that a
reward would he paid to any person that could succeed in traver-
sing New Holland overland, from here to Sydney, I beg leave to
offer my services to accomplish the task, or leave my bones to
bleach in the attempt.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
G. F. GOBLE.
To the Colonial Secretary, Perth,
Colonial Secretary Office,
Perth, 12 th April, 1830.
Sik,
I am directed by his Excellency to acknowledge the
receipt of your letter of the 24th March, stating that you had
understood a reward would be paid to any individual who would
attempt to travel to Sydney through the interior, &0., and to
acquaint you that no such proposition can be entertained by the
Government here.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
PETER BROWN.
G. F- Goble, Esq., Cantonement, Freemantle,
Many will no doubt think it strange that I should offer my
services, to undertake such perilous expeditions. Every man has
his hobby; unfortunately, from my boyhood I mounted that most
unthankful and unprofitable of all steeds: a scientific Pegasus,
although rather an untractable courser, is withal a safe roadster.
Many thousands of miles have I been urged, over barren trackless
wastes, sandy deserts, through swampy lakes, mazy forests, and
over rugged heights, with sleepless weeks on the raging main.
Many are the dreary times have I been wearisome and recumbent
in some wild spot, with rocks or logs for my pillow, shielded only
by the canopy of heaven from the raging blast, with sore naked feet
and hungry belly. Glad have I been, ere now, to lap the warm
blood of those roaming friends my faithful leaden messengers have
overtaken in their wild career. Yet those were days of pleasure
when the warm blood of manhood was pursuing its arterial course
with all the buoyancy the most sanguine enterpriser could wish.
Gladly now, would I exchange the dull monotonous life of a
sedentary patent, for a life of activity, could it be possible to shake
off the cares and anxiety of a rising progeny, dodging every step
of your speculative movements.
Nevertheless, there is a time when all must endeavor to banish
these traits of their juvenility, and that time forme is fast approach-
ing, when I must content myself with fingering my pen, instead of
shouldering my rifle; using my head more, and my legs less;
indulge in future dreams by forgetting all past follies, by mooring
my frail hulk in some harbor of refuge.


TAHITI.
In publishing the annexed communication from Mr. Goble, we
are gratified in offering to the public testimony to the kind
attentions of a French governor to an English ship, when appear-
ing at his port in distress. The Portland, on entering the
harbour, was becalmed between the reefs, well known at that
place; happily, it was highwater, and by the promptitude of the
governor in person, Mr. Goble’s vessel was towed out of danger,
whilst there was yet water upon which she could float. Mr.
Goble’s communications will likewise be found to contain some
information respecting that place.
To the Editor of the Cornwall Chronicle,
Deab Sir, —In reply to your note respecting the particulars of
the Portland nearly grounding at Tahiti, I beg to inform you our
situation was not from any cause on board, but owing to a dead
calm just as the vessel was passing between the reefs with the
pilot on deck —(see enclosed copy, &c.)
Respecting my opinion of that port for vessels to call at for
water, provisions, men, &c. j as for water, I know of no safer,
easier, or cheaper port on the Pacific to procure purer beverage in
any quantity. Provisions I found very uncertain, except pigs,
sweet potatoes, oranges, and pumpkins—beef or flour I could not
procure a cask; nevertheless, I cannot advise large vessels to call
for trading purposes, as the market appears too limited to be of
general demand.
To give you an idea what a mountainous country it is, I
measured two peaks; their height I found to exceed 10,850 feet,
and can be seen at sea, on clear days, 117 nautical miles.
Yours Respectfully,
G. F. GOBLE.
Launceston, February, 1851.
Papeita, January 8, 1851,
To his Excellency the Governor of
the Society Islands.
Sir, —It is with feelings of the greatest sincerity, that I hasten
to thank you for your prompt and personal exertions on behalf of
the barque Portland, when lying in such a critical position between
the reefs, yesterday. lam the more grateful such kindness was
rendered me by foreigners, and long, I hope, may such Christian
feelings exist between our respective flags.—l have the honor to
remain, your humble servant,
G. F. GOBLE.
Commander barque Portland.


The governor’s reply was characteristic of the nation which
echoed such generous sentiments, viz., that the day had gone by
for national prejudices or ignorant animosities, and that humanity,
reason, and charity, would usurp their place. His Excellency
also intimated that the Tahitians are always ready to render
prompt and energetic assistance when required, irrespective of
nationality; and that it is contemplated by the French govern-
ment to erect a lighthouse at Point Venus, and a beacon on Cocoa
Nut Point; when this is done, the port of Fapeita will be both easy
and safe to enter without a pilot, as the harbour inside is as safe
and commodious as need be required.
As a site for an entrepot for coal and merchandise, I know of
no other island in the Pacific better adapted, either for its
geographical position, salubrity of climate, safety of anchorage, and
willingness of the natives to work; also there are plenty of English-
men on the island able and willing to enter on any scheme of the
kind. The British Consul, F. Miller Esq, and Monsieur Bonard
the French Governor, both informed me they would freely offer
every .inducement to so useful an undertaking. As lam
confident that the Panaman route will eventually be the highway
to Australia; for what reason it is not adopted, I cannot imagine,
except that bugbear jealously has shown his cloven foot, or sheer
professional ignorance of its advantages has so long delayed it.
I could never pass the Georgian or Marquesian group, without
remarking on the bungling policy of the Britishers, in not being
the civilized possessors of those islands; for surely in this age of
improvement and civilization, they are worth something; Were
I in free uninterrupted possession of any of them, 1 guess I could
do something handsome by the spec, particularly now the yellow
fever is raging so prominently all round them.
Since I am so near California, I may as well quote a
passage or two from letters sent by me while there, they
being perfectly applicable to Australian events.
“I cannot leave this pandemonium, without remarking that
while geologically scanning that section of this varied world, often
have I seen the toiling trudgers plodding on their weary way, with
backs bent, and features seared; not with overladen burdens of
the glittering dust, but with disease, misery, and exposure. Many
thousands have I seen landed on these shores, in all the vigor of
life, and zenith of manhood; alas, a few months would so distort
their manly bearings, and hale constitutional features, by deduct-
ing many years from their earthly career.”
I have often heard remarked, that those individuals who emig-
grate without anything, cannot lose anything. Infatuated short-
sighted mortals I—these are often the greatest sufferers, having, in
a few months, lost their all —their health and spirits. What dust
can ever recompense such I


Thousands are now pouring into Australia, to undergo similar
unmitigated privations, and irretrievable changeableness.
As an adviser to all those who wish to emigrate there, to better
themselves, as they imagine, let them well seriously ponder on all
the chances they will have to undergo, in such a maze of perplexity
dangers, and disease. To the youthful aspirant after the tempting
nuggets, is all very well if unencumbered, or whose nonexistence
would not materially affect dependant living bodies; such may as
well try their luck in the golden lottery of life, or men who cannot
obtain a reasonable living elsewhere: and all those idle spendthrifts
and drones England is pestered with, I would also advise to take a
pick, if only for their health; their morals it cannot make worse.
But it is next to insanity for parents and people of sedate habits, or
girlish counter jumpers, or quill drivers, to emigrate; it is plunging
from a certainty to a certain uncertainty.
Many magistrates’, squires’, merchants’, and gentlemen sons,
have I seen obliged to earn a shilling by the sweat of their brow,
before they could appease nature’s cravings; aye, 1 have some-
times seen the sires in the same predicament Yet so contagious
is the yellow itch, that all that pioneers can say or do, cannot
change the current of the self opinion of thousands.
Not only the utter inutility of giving either practical or theore-
tical advice, but no amount of trouble a person may bestow by so
doing is hardly ever thankfully received, as I found by experience
when I first arrived in England a few months ago. I naturally
thought, after 25 years experience in the Southern hemisphere, I
might be able to throw a little light on some obscure thing or
other; consequently, I offered to give such mites gratuitously, and
sent several original specimens to The Times, but I -found to my
annoyance, such presumption on my part was treated with con-
tempt, for I never could get back the copies forwarded. Therefore
I am short of several useful particles of information, relative to
gold in Van Dieman’s Land j as, unfortunately, not then knowing
the usages of civilized English editors, towards uncivilized out-
landish strangers, I was fain content to put up with my ignorance
in not keeping copies by me.
Nevertheless, if any are determined to brave the chances of gold
digging, the following indispensables are requisite; first, a good
sound iron constitution, endowed with plenty of elbow grease, with •
willing hands and contented mind, sober and honest disposition ;
he may then be able to weather the storms, and draw a prize in
the golden lottery.
Francis Passmore, Printer, 45, Borough Road.


Respectfully beg leate to offer one half of either of the above patents
to any responsible Shipbuilder, Engineer, or Manufacturer who
will agree to work out the practical details, and attend to the results,
as the inventor is otherwise engaged ;~OR LICENSES WILL BE
GRANTEP ON THE MOST LIBERAL TERMS.
Through being an entire stranger to English Scientific bodies, engineers,
or tradesmen, X find it extremely troublesome to procure any sort of intro-
duction or footing amongst them. Nevertheless, if any speculative person
is willing- to join me in patenting articles, I will soOn produce a few dozen
more inventions and improvements, most of them originals, and all, I
trust, useful and profitable, if once they could be thoroughly introduced.
For further information , apply at 7, Trinity Street , Borough , London •
CONTINUOUS HYDRAULIC POWER.
This machine (invented by Mr. G. F. Goble) is one of the most novel in-
ventions of modern times i as an hydraulic power it certainly is unequalled;
for in any situation where a current of water can be obtained it may be
applied, and far superior to all other methods, either in power, simplicity,
or economy, as there are no valves, pipes, syphons, or auxiliary power
requisite, save only what nature herself supplies on the spotj no attendance
required, yet nothing but a disarrangement of its mechanism, or defect in
the stream itself, can check its onward career. As the principle on which
this application in hydraulics is founded is so mathematical, no medium
Can be defined of its power, as the height and quantity of water required
to be raised can only be limited by the mechanical difficulty in erecting
materials many hundred feet in height, to receive the outpouring waters at
top! for 100 or 200 feet or so, frames could be simply raised enough to
deliver a few 100,000 gallons per diem at a moderate outlay. —Mining
Journal,


GOBLE’S DOUBLE-ACTION SELF-REGULATING STEAM VALVES.
/ E
m
These valves completely neutralise any attempt to increase the pressure by screwing
down, as. nothing but the most deliberate interference or recklessness can prevent
their free action, or allow the chance of explosion from any excess in the production
of steam. On the top of the boiler, AA, are two suitable apertures, fitted with collars,
in which are worked, on a fulcrum, B, by being attached to a lever, C, two valves,
D opening inwards, £ opening outwards, which is kept down by a spring, 1, pressing
on the lotigest lever: it is also regulated by a series of weights placed on the spike, F,
under a perforated hood, or locked guard, G; the other valve, D, is provided with a
screw and handle, H, by which both valves can be opened to any extent desired. By
this arrangement of doable valves, it becomes almost impossible boilers can burst, if
faithfully manufactured, unless by age or other deterioration. For particulars apply
to G. F. GOBLE, C.E., 7, Trinity Street, Borough,
TRIGONAL WATER MACHINE.
This invention, patented by Mr, G. F. Goble, is admirably adapted to
shallow running streams, trifling falls of water, or in tidal actions. For
tidal power it is very applicable, as it matters not what rise or fall of wa ter;
the machinery can always remain a permanent fixture where the bottom
will admit of such stability. For deep gullies, or ravines, it is also admi-
rably adapted, as the mill-house can be erected on the top, however high,
or at the sides, as a few rods distance creates no material objection to its
working. Respecting the greatest power with the least supply of water,
we question if Mr. Goble’s invention does not obtain such, by reversing
the order of his water leverages, &c.
HYPOTHENULAR WINDMILLS.
We last week gave a description of Mr. G. F. Goble’s trigonal water
power; the same engineer has also patented a windmill. Instead of the
vanes revolving perpendicular or horizontal, on one fixed centre, Mr. Go-
ble’s invention requires two or three for its rotation ; and when moving at
an angle of about 45 degrees, it exposes the whole of the hypothenuse only
to the free action of the wind, which acting at right angles to the vanes or
sails, receives the full force of that element, thus forcing the cylinder
round, and working the internal machinery. No break or check inside
is required to stop the works, for on the bottom of the vanes, travelling
path, is a drum of the same width, with a roll of strong canvass around it,
with a wind action on one side, and a counter-weight on the other; it thus
becomes self-regulating, as it winds or unrolls as much surface, as the'
engineer or miller regulates it at commencement. To stop the working
power, it is only necessary to pull up the whole length of canvass over the
rotating sails, thus completely shutting off all further action of the wea-
ther in a few seconds. By the above principle, a few hundred feet of
surface can be exposed to the direct action of the wind continuously, each
foot receiving and imparting equal pressure. —Mining Journal.


ADJUSTING RIGGING SUPPORTERS.
A. Ship’s side above and below the bulwarks.
B. Rigging, or shroud ends, attached.
C. -Chain-plates serrated on the face, about J inch apart.
D. Serrated pieces attached to the shrouds, do. do. do.
E. Slide, or fastener, to secure both when taut.
F. Side section, showing the mode of grip, and impossibility of starting.
G. Similar section, showing another mode of fixing the ends by a Turk’s
head, fir other knot, at the bottom of the sockets, which can after-
wards be served to prevent chaffing or rotting, &c. Patentee,
V. SOURIS*
Capt. Goble has secured by patent the most simple yet secure method
of setting up the rigging of vessels we have ever seen. It consists of having
the chain-plates serrated with another piece of similar design affixed to the
ends of the rigging, and when brought together secured by a keeper, or
spunyarn served round both. By Capt. Goble’s invention, the rigging
cannot take as many minutes as formerly hours to re-adjust when required,
and is far neater than the old fashion dead-eyes and its lashings, See,
' Mining Journal , June 11, 1853.
MULTI PEDAL CARRIAGE MOVEMENTS.
This novel mode of running carriages on the road consists of endless
bands passing over two or three cylinders, and carrying with them a series
of pedals or feet, shod the same as horses, with fetlock joints, having spiral
springs in the legs to keep equal tension on uneven ground. As there are
no wheels, the imprint on the roads after the machine has passed, would
appear as if a number of horses had marched over the place. On going up
hill, it cannot slide back, neither can it roll forward on going down a decli-
vity ; its pace is entirely at command of the engineer, and the strength of
the engine. It requires no particular kind of rail, a fair turnpike road is
all that is needed for it to travel well over.


SERRATED MACHINE CONNECTORS.
This simple application is admirably adapted for quickly and firmly con-
necting railway carriages together; answers well in joining a series of iron
bars for bridges, shafts, or rods, that require adjusting or removing; acts
promptly f6r shifting wrenches, as no force can separate the jaws when
locked, can also be applied to many other useful purposes.
=vvvvvvyv'i !
Slide S to be slipped off to detach or adjust it to the distance required,
when the keeper is again to be slid over both, and with the -thumb screw
there fixed. As the teeth grip at right angles, but little pressure can act
on the keeper, however the extremities may be strained , consequently the
slide can always be pushed off, and so disconnect the parts; not so with
any other fastnings.
SPRING SWIVEL CHECKS.
These swivels may be usefully applied to relieve the impetus from the
sUdden jerks which cables, traces, dog chains, &o , are liable to. At least
25 per cent greater strain may safely be overcome by using these elastic
swivels in the place of the ordinary ones, on either rods, chains, or ropes,
where sudden movements are created. Can be made to be fixed or sepa-
rated in one minute, if requisite.
PATENTEE, G. F. GOBLE, C.E., 7, TRINITY STREET, BOROUGH,


Now be it known to Hobs, Nobs, or Mobs, that I have just patented
a door-lock, which I challenge all creation to pick uninjured. As a simple
mode of testing my opinion, I will wager any person that they do not
succeed in opening these locks under the following reasonable conditions,
which, to prevent all quibbling as to terms, size, time, &c., I will mention
beforehand:—That the lock I submit shall not exceed 6 in. square by 1 in.
in thickness; it shall not contain more than four distinct parts —viz., the
case, bolt, security, and key, consequently there are no tumblers, screws,
wards, or other confusicatory movements; being comprised of such simple
parts, I think 16 days sufficient for any attempt. —2. If any fail to perform
the first stipulation, I will give them another chance of 12 days longer,
with the following advantages:—Allow them the free use of the said lock
unattached, with all the tools the lock was made with, to do what they like
with, except unrivet the cap.—3. If not yet successful, I have no'objection
to allow the said cracksman to help to make the said lock in all its for-
mations; also, when thus made, I will place the same works in his hands
seriatim , one item each day, for eight days more, so that he may have
every opportunity to make a key to succeed in opening the same.—4. To
satisfy the most sceptical that I feel secure as my locked bolts, X will even
double the bet that no person can pick one, and I will go so far as to allow
the operator to have the original key in his possession to make as many
duplicates as he can in four days additional; as nothing can open these
locks but the proper key doing its duty, without injury, any attempt to
make others must prove abortive under the above conditions. Neverthe-
less, although Icannot pick my own invention, I can cause to be made as
many keys to each lock as I think proper; I also can make one key to
open a dozen different locks without any alteration, yet not.a duplicate of
any other key or lock in existence. If any doubt my seriousness to abide
by what I have asserted, I shall be most happy to refer them to my agents,
or if any are ’cute enough to fix me to my bargain, I herewith give my
address, where any further information may be obtained from the inventor
and patentee.—G. F. Goble, C.E., 7, Trinity-st., Boro’, London , May ,12.
TRIUMPH DOOR LOCK.
Triumph Door Locks.—Mr. G. F. Goble, C.E., has just patented se-
veral descriptions of door and padlocks of the most simple construction.
Some contain neither tumblers, springs, screws, wards, or pins, yet they
are all of the most secure kind. We were always of opinion that com-
plexity of movements never gave equal security to locks, as Mr. Goble’s
inventions testify, as his door locks of only 4 in. square can be made to
protrude a bolt nearly of the same width, and half the depth, by 1 in. thick,
strong enough, we imagine, for the most valuable of securities; while, at
the same time, the original key may be in the possession of dishonest prac-
titioners for any length of time. It would not in the least facilitate the
opening of the same lock by attempting to make others similar, as nothing
short of the proper key can open them without some manifest injury. As
far as regards economy, we should think a few shillings would suffice for
the construction, which alone is a good quality in their favour, As we
understand it is the inventor’s intention shortly to submit them to public
curiosity and sale, we should not be justified in giving any descriptive ex-
planation of their interior simplicity. Mining Journal, May 14, 1853.


Brethren,
I should feel much obliged if any
person would furnish me with a
mUJfKDM
f the following mathematical
PROBLEM.
The exact length from the centre of
S BP (S fr £ M 8 X O H
to the centre of gravity for a
CT<CL®J3B>M.
pendulum, adapted for the latitude of
oscillating in cycloidal arcs, and the
semtfciamcter
of the generating circle best
to perforin the above pendulous
OSCILLATIONS,
will he thankfully received, as I am
anxious to prove a prior calculation.
G.r.GOBIiS.
2 8
