

SPEECH
I
AUSTRALIAN FEDERATION.
THE HON. J. E. SALOMONS, Q.C., M.L.C.,
DELIVERED IN THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL, 4 JUNE, 1890.




/v/t C>3SS
1 ~~i-
AUSTRALIAN FEDERATION.
(From the “Parliamentary Dehates.”)
l sqi
Mr. SALOMONS : I hope it is clearly
understood upon what grounds I voted to
proceed with this debate to-night. It is
not that I have in any way altered the
opinion I originally expressed, but simply
because I had given my word to the Repre-
sentative of the Government, the Vice-
President of the Executive Council, the Go-
vernment wishing it, that I would proceed
with the debate to-night. If I consulted
my own personal convenience,! should have
to admit that I am in a state of health to
justify me in asking that this duty should
be undertaken by some member of the Coun-
cil at least equally competent with myself,
and who would have the advantage of
greater leisure than I have. But lam so
much indebted to the people of this colony,
and to hon. members in this House for un-
varying courtesy, that I shall do my best
to discharge the duty I have undertaken.
It is a duty which I have undertaken with
no motive, but purely from a sense of
public duty. I need not say anything
about the importance of these resolutions.
Nothing in connection with the subject
which is in any way material can to
my mind be too small for serious con-
sideration. I take the view—and I hope
in calm and well weighed words to con-
vince the country—that not only is the
proposition for a federal government a mis-
take in point of time—that is to say, that
it is inopportune—but that it is a form of
government which no country will adopt
except under compulsion. I hope to
satisfy those who will reflect that it is in-
consistent with that degree of reasonable
liberty which must ever be dear to a free
people. If I am wrong, no one will be more
glad than I shall be to have it proved to
me; but I will not be satisfied with a
bundle of incoherent metaphors. I decline
to listen to misty generalities; and in this
connection I will not even regard the
noblest thoughts that may be enshrined
even in the language of the great laureate
of England. This is a matter of serious
business. I will satisfy every member of
this Council that the benefits—and I do
not deny that there are benefits to arise
from a central government—are altogether
outweighed by other and more serious con-
siderations. Now, I must be permitted,
because I am not going to deal with this
matter in a narrow spirit, to go back for
a few moments to the origin of this move-
ment. Those who hear me will find that
I am necessarily doing so. The Government
appointed two of their body to proceed to
Melbourne. I will not now refer to their
styling themselves <c accredited represen-
tatives” ; but I should have liked to hear
the head of the present Government upon
the subject, if another man had dared to
do what he, afterwards, with his personal
domination, led the members of the confer-
ence to do. We find two members of the
Government, of their own motion, without
any mandate from the Parliament of this
country, or the people, join in the adoption
of certain resolutions. Of that I do not
complain ; but I want to see how either re-
presentative of the Government here can
defend what follows, which proves, as I
think, that the scheme is the outcome of in-
ordinate and vainglorious ambition. These
resolutions on being carried, not having
been communicated to either house of Par-
liament, or to the country, were actually
forwarded—where do hon. members sup-
pose ? I should like to hear the able
head of this Administration criticise an
act of this kind, had another man per-


petrated it—had another man dared, not
only to take the initiative in forwarding
those resolutions to the Queen, but to state
in an address to her Majesty that the
members of the conference represented the
Australian colonies. Is that true ? Did
they represent the Australian colonies 1
I say they did not. And further, as I
shall show —though at some trouble to
myself, if I am borne with by this dis-
tinguished House —that there are matters
in connection with this movement which
have never been considered. I would, first
of all, point out what seems to have been
entirely overlooked, that the resolutions
to which the legislature is now asked to
give its consent are not the resolutions as
a whole passed by the conference. Let me
ask the representatives of the Government
to explain how it is that the last of those
resolutions is omitted. Until this moment
no voice has been raised on behalf of the
Government in either House, to explain
how any one can venture to put before
Parliament the resolutions carried by the
conference and leave out one of the most
important of them. It will be found that
the resolutions now put before us conclude
at a point ending with “ scheme for a
federal constitution,” whereas in fact the
resolutions forwarded to her Majesty in-
cluded this further resolution, not one
word of which is contained in those put
before Parliament : “That the convention
should consist of not more than se\en
members from each of the self-governing-
colonies, and not more than four members
from each of the Crown colonies.” I shall
try to indicate to the country why it is
that the Government did not venture to
put that resolution before Parliament. If
anv one be within hearing of me who is
familiar with the recent political history
of this colony, they will know that the
language of ridicule and abuse was heaped
upon other men in public life by the pre-
sent Premier by reason of a suggestion
that the Crown colonies should be allowed
to attend a conference or convention like
that proposed. I wish, in the first in-
stance, to say that in addressing, not a
thoughtless mob, not a body of men who
sacrifice to a weakness loi unqualified
flattery of success in public life what is
dear to every one who is above his own
profit and particular concerns, but ad-
dressing a body of educated men as lam
Join" now, there are certain things that I
assume. For instance, I assume that I
need not prove to any one that a scheme of
government, which in itself may be objec-
tionable, may be forced upon a country by
circumstances. Because, remember that
in every proposition of this nature what
is to be considered is the balance of bene-
fit I insist at the outset upon this, be-
cause I am relying in my argument upon
hon. members’ knowledge of the circum-
stances under which the Dominion of
Canada, to which the Premier has referred,
adopted a form of federal government.
Shortly stated, we all know that Canada
first of all was divided as it were into two
nations. The terms of the very act which
confederated Canada provide that mem-
bers of parliament may address the Chair
in either the French or the English lan-
guage. All the proceedings in parliament,
and all acts of state are published in both
languages, and a person is privileged to
plead in the courts in either English or
French. Those colonies were separated
by a border line—a mere geographical
expression—of thousands of miles from
the great republic of the United States ;
and it was feared, and reasonably feared,
that unless they stood together, one of
them might be drawn into that great con-
federation ; or that if a repetition of the
irregular invasions, which are a mattei of
common knowledge, took place, no one
state might be able to fight against them.
Furthermore, there were surrounding cir-
cumstances and political exigencies in con-
nection with Canada which my considera-
tion for the time of this honorable House
will not allow me to go into in detail ; but
I hope, if any hon. member doubts my
right to assume that the geographical and
political position of Canada was in no way
analogous to the circumstances of these
colonies, to refer to the debates that took
place at the conferences held in Canada,
and at the convention in London, and in
the English Houses of Parliament. I start
therefore with this assumption, that a
federal government may be forced upon a
number of contiguous states, and that it
was forced upon Canada by reason of the
position to which I have alluded. TV ith
regard to America, I must rely on the
knowledge that every one has of history,
that what led to the union, and afterwards
to the confederation of the states of


America, bears in no way whatsoever on
the question of federation in these colo-
nies. How, let us proceed slowly. In
discussing this matter let it not be for-
gotten that I admit that although there
are great, and, as I shall show, dangerous
elements in a federal government, there
may be still greater dangers. Self-preser-
vation is the first law of nature with the
individual, and equally so' as regards a
nation, and everyonemust know who knows
the history of America, and the history of
Canada, that they were forced into this
union by considerations much higher than
any that affect the discussion of the ques-
tion in Australia. I take it, therefore,
that we ought to consider the propositions
embodied in these resolutions, and their
consequences as if Canada had never
federated, and as if there were no United
States known to the world. If any one
thinks that the form of government of a
country can raise the morals of its people
I invite them to read an article to which
the Premier himself referred in the very
year it was printed, 1884. It appeared
in the August number of the North Ameri-
can Review , and beside that article, which
had reference to Canada, was another re-
lating to the United States, headed, “Are
we a nation of rascals T Hon. members
have only to read that to be certain of
what to my mind requires no proof, that
unfortunately every and any form of go-
vernment is compatible with a low stan-
dard of morality in private life, and that
no form of government will by its mere
form have any effect upon that. How, I
have noticed that most of those who are
in favour of a federal government desire
to reject every legislative provision in con-
nection with it. When they are asked,
“ Will you give up any of the public lands 1
Will you cede the control of your railways 1
Will you allow your acts of Parliament to
be vetoed by a central government ? Will
you allow the lieutenant-governor to be
appointed by practically—as I will show
—a minister of the federal government ?”
—to these and all such questions they
answer, “ Ho.” Is it supposed that the
members of this administration or those
who advocate a supreme central govern-
ment have a monopoly of fraternal affec-
tion? I at least can say that in my
humble sphere I have never, either in
Parliament or elsewhere, uttered a word
about a neighbouring colony that might
not properly have been spoken by an in-
habitant of that colony itself; and those
who are loudest in the desire for this union
have hitherto been distinguished by an
absence of that courtesy and diplomatic
politeness which should pervade all political
communications. Ido not desire to refer
to the speeches of the Premier made twenty
or thirty years ago, but only a few years
ago, to show that the utterances of that
distinguished man were quite in the oppo-
site direction to his more recent speeches.
I do not wish to be understood to say that
that is not a fair mode of warfare in po-
litical life; because, remember, that if you
attempt to rely upon the mere opinions of
a man, I destroy the value of those opinions
if I can show that the same man recently,
with no justification of changed circum-
stances, spoke in the very opposite direc-
tion to what he speaks now. I decline to
take advantage of those utterances to estab-
lish any contention ; but at the same time
I protest against the mere name of any
man who has changed his opinions in that
way being used to conjure with. Argu-
ments, of course, are not in any way
affected by what a man has said before ;
but arguments are, I regret to say, con-
spicuously absent both from the speeches
made by this distinguished gentleman in
Melbourne, and in the other House of
legislature. I suppose that no one in this
House will doubt that I take up an un-
answerable ground when I say that you
cannot use the mere opinion of a man,
whether he be experienced or otherwise,
to back up any position, if that same man
has himself within recent times uttered
opinions the very opposite of those which
you wish now to rely upon. And if Ido
here repeat myself I must be forgiven,
believing that in some matters iteration
is the strongest argument, I desire to say
again that those who address this House
upon this question must use argument—
not mere opinion. It is very easy to say,
and any one can say it, “ Oh, some years
have elapsed, and things are different now
from what they were.” In a matter of
this nature, I submit that four or five
years are only as an hour. However,
you cannot find a man who will deal
with these questions except in generalities.
Every essential of federal government is
rejected, and the only assent you can ob-


tain is to what is called federation as a
theory—an expression I do not under-
stand. Those who wish to have all the
benefits of federation, without its burdens,
are asking for an impossibility. They re-
mind one of the case that some well-read
members of this House may remember—
the case of the fashionable young man
who proposed to marry the pretty daughter
of his neighbour. The father mentioned to
him the subject of a provision for his in-
tended wife, and what church they were
to be married in, and he said, “ Oh, I love
your daughter ; we are very much attached
to each other; and surely, as you and I
are men of the world, we don’t want to go
into details of that kind 1 ” The father
then spoke about the provision for the
children, and to that he said, “ Surely, if
I marry her, she will not cease to be your
daughter. You have kept her hitherto,
and why should you not maintain her
still ? Her children will be your grand-
children. Do you think that the mere use
of a ring, a circular piece of gold, or the
mutterings of a priest, or my then saying
this or that, are essential to the union of
natural love that will bind your daughter
and me together 1 Would you put between
us these artificial restraints to which I will
not submit 1 Give me the hand of your
daughter, and leave these details for cooler
and freer moments.” Such conduct, I say,
is exactly analogous to the conduct of those
who decline to give consent to any one
of the sine qua non conditions which are
attached to federation. In saying this I
do not mean, as I have already said, to
impute any but honorable motives to those
who are opposed to me, from the head of
the Government downwards ; but we must
nob shut our eyes to the fact that in
reality the sudden starting up of this
difficult question has had the effect of
-splitting and casting into confusion the
political party opposed to the Government,
and of putting aside all useful legislation,
and giving us instead a number of grand-
iloquent phrases about “raising the tone of
life in these great colonies,” “ the fair land
of Australia,” and so on. I will not stop
to find what I desired to read. It was one
of those bursts of unmeaning words which
bind you to nothing, and to which no
definite sense can possibly be attached. I
mean such expressions as “ this fair land,”
or that “ God has created it for some par-
ticular purpose or other ” —serious and
solemn subjects which politicians of the
hour, I regret to say, do not hesitate to take
advantage of. For years useful legislation
has been almost entirely neglected, and
now, by reason of this complex subject be-
ing, as I think, quite unnecessai'ily intruded
into the political world of Australia at this
particular time, the attention of every one
is diverted from all matters of necessary
legislation. I admit that there are in this
great question some things which are not
essential to a federal government; fori wish,
as far as my powers to-night will allow me,
to deal with the question in the most im-
partial way. I allow that such questions
as the transfer of the public lands, the con-
trol of the railways, and many others simi-
lar are not absolutely necessary to the form
of federal government. But there are things
which are essential, and without which it
cannot exist. Therefore, it is necessary not
to lose ourselves in misty phraseology, but
to see what we are talking about. The
Premier, alleging that he had given twenty
years’ consideration to this matter, stated
—and stated correctly, I think—that a
federal government, to be worth having
at all, must be endowed with plenary
powers. In order that I may be accurate,
I will ask the Chamber to bear with me
while I read his words ; and if I do not
succeed on this one point in showing that
he has not given due consideration to the
matter that he wishes to launch forth, I
will admit that I may be wrong altogether.
Now, I am going to compare two utter-
ances, which, were they not in print, it
would not be believed that the same man
hadhad the courage to speak them. In Mel-
bourne, the hon. gentleman said—and, as
far as I can pronounce an opinion, accur-
ately said —that a federal government, to
be efficient, must necessarily be superior
and have controlling powers over the pro-
vincial parliaments. His own words were
as follows :
Now, I am one of those who believe, as far as
my opinion is of value, formed upon a rather
long experience, that whatever may be the de-
cision of the conference, it will be playing at
federation if we attempt to create a federal con-
stitution with anything less than the full powers
of a fedei’al government. I am as anxious to
preserve the proper rights and privileges of the
colony of New South Wales as any person can
be of preserving the proper rights and privileges
of the colony of Victoria. Indeed, I should
almost fear to go back to the colony which has


treated me so well if I did not do my utmost to
preserve her independence in all that is con-
sistent with the province of one great federal
power. But the federation government must be
a government of power. It must be a govern-
ment especially armed with plenary power for
the defence of the country. It must be a go-
vernment armed with plenary power for the
performance of all other functions pertaining to
a national government.
And so on. Will it be believed that shortly
after that, in our own Legislative Assem-
bly, the same hon. gentleman spoke what
I am about to read ?
If, then, these positions that I take up cannot
be answered, the time is come. The time is come
whenever this House is brought to the hour when
it decides on these resolutions. From that hour
henceforward there will be no retracing of our
steps. From that hour straight forward will be
our course—none of us can go back.
I apologise to the House, though perhaps
it is unnecessary, for admitting that on a
subject of this kind, it is unwise to attempt
to be eloquent. It is the discharge of a
serious duty that we are all engaged in,
and it can only be discharged by that calm
deliberation, and it may be tedious process
that we use in our own private affairs.
But I shall not abuse the patience of hon.
members by reading more than is neces-
sary. I cannot, however, refrain from
comparing what I have read with the next
sentence, and asking the House to bear in
mind what the Premier said to the other
delegates in Victoria to see whether it is
possible by any ingenuity to reconcile the
two.
The questions will have been asked and answered
that can be asked and answered, and all we shall
have to do is to try to reconcile our differences
amongst ourselves and between our sister colo-
nies, and to prepare the way as best we can, and
as best we may, for the union of the English
people occupying these magnificent territories.
And now if the House will forgive me I will
dwell for a moment on some objections which I
have occasionally heard—objections that we
would be giving up the individual power and
authority and independence of New South Wales.
In what way will New South Wales be less
self-governed and less independent than she is
now ?
I say there never was a greater draft
drawn on the credulity of a mob than is
put into that sentence —than to pretend
that if we have a federal government the
individual power and authority of New
South Wales will not be diminished there-
by. But I am glad to see that a young
member of the Legislative Assembly at
once cried out, “ In every way.” We have
in this Chamber a member of the Govern-
ment—a man of distinguished ability,
learned in the law—whom I hope to see at
least try to deal with what I shall point
out. The Premier goes on to say :
Under a federal constitution she certainly will
be as well governed.
Mr. Simpson : I rise to order. I submit
that the hon. and learned member is out
of order in quoting at length the opinions
of the Premier, or any other member of
the Legislative Assembly, for the simple
reason that the rules of Parliament are
opposed to such a proceeding.
Mr. Faucett : Can it be possible that
the course which the hon. and learned
member, Mr. Salomons, is now taking can
be contrary to the rules of the House?
The conduct of the Premier throughout
this transaction is the very question to be
considered, and is the hon. and learned
member to be prevented from showing that
the conduct and opinions of the Premier
on the question are not consistent; that
the opinions which that hon. gentleman
has expressed on different occasions are
utterly unsupportable by argument ? Is
it to be said that because these opinions
are uttered in a particular place, and are
taken from a particular book, he is to be
prevented from using them ? I should
hope that the rules of the House are not
against such a proceeding. I am aware
that our rules on this subject are very
close, and I think entirely too restrictive
of freedom of debate.
The President : The hon. and learned
member is certainly transgressing the
rules in quoting from a speech made by an
hon. member in a debate which has taken
place in the present session of Parliament.
I understood that on the first occasion the
hon. and leai'ned member was quoting
from a speech delivered by Sir Henry
Parkes in Melbourne, but now I under-
stand that he has been quoting from a
speech delivered in the other branch of
the legislature, which is contrary to the
rules of the Imperial Parliament by which
this House is guided. Ido not think that
the hon. and learned member will have any
difficulty in establishing any point which
he wishes to establish without quoting at
length from the Debates.
Mr. F. B. Suttor : As you, Mr. Presi-
dent, have ruled that the hon. and learned


member would be out of order in quoting
at length from a speech delivered by the
Premier in a debate which is proceeding
in the Legislative Assembly, I would ask
if I might be allowed to move that the
hon. and learned member shall be per-
mitted to quote from that speech 1 I know
that although it is out of order to quote
from a speech delivered in a debate that
has taken place during the same session,
hon. members have been allowed to do so'
in the Legislative Assembly on a motion
being passed giving them permission. On
such a serious occasion as this, I think we
ought not to be bound by hard and fast
lines, and if I may be allowed to do so, I
should like to move that the hon. and
learned member be permitted to quote
from the speech delivered by the Premier
in the other Chamber.
Mr. SALOMONS : I would rather that
my hon. friend did not proceed with his
motion. It is not advisable that the rules
of the House should be lightly broken. If
they are on this occasion treated with dis-
respect, on some less important occasion
they may meet with even less deference,
and I hope the hon. member will not ask
the House to allow me any greater privi-
leges than the strictest rules of parlia-
mentary debate afford me. And I will
take the hon. member’s silence as his kind
accedence to my request. I was aware
that I was infringing the strict rules of
Parliament in quoting what the head of
the Government had said to the House of
Assembly, but I never dreamed it possible
that the Attorney-General of that Govern-
ment would rise in a debate on this mo-
mentous question and put in my way that
technical difficulty so as to prevent me
from effectively pointing out that no man
could reconcile what this distinguished
man had said in Melbourne with what he
said in our own Parliament. There are
certain small points which may in a small
thing and in a small place be properly
availed of; but there are matters in which
a nation is concerned in connection with
which to refer to a technical rule of that
kind turns‘the objection into one of deri-
sion. If I had been speaking of some mem-
ber not a member of the Government, I
might admit that there would be some
reason in preventing me from quoting from
the best authority as to what he had said ;
but seeing that my hon. and learned friend’s
chief has not denied that, without consult-
ing one member of the Cabinet, he alone
had the splendid courage, when away in
some distant part of the territory, on
the borders of Queensland, or in Brisbane,
itself, to take into his confidence another
people, and to treat with a degree of in-
difference those who are entitled by the
highest law to his unbounded confidence
—I am astonished that my hon. and learned
friend the Attorney-General did not see
that I was speaking on a matter far above
any fair reference to a rule of parliament-
ary debate; which rule could only force
me, instead of quoting, to refer generally
to what has been spoken by the Premier
in another place; but I will not stoop in
this matter to a ruse of that kind, and as
I cannot do directly what I might do in-
directly I will appeal to hon. members here
—and we are sitting here under a strong
sense of duty—to read that speech of
Sir Henry Parkes and see if it is possible
to reconcile the assertion he made in
Melbourne that the federal government
must be a government of large powers,
and so on, which I have already in detail
pointed out, with his assertion to the
Legislative Assembly, that the colony
would be as much self-governed under a
federal government at she is now. I will
point out facts, not make quotations from
statesmen’s private letters, because I de-
cline altogether to be influenced by any
letter from any man in England, however
eminent, and still less to be influenced by
the complimentary lines of some distin-
guished historian. I admit that by the
hon. and learned member’s interruption I
am for the moment taken away from
what I was about to indicate; but I desire
to say this—and the duty we are dis-
charging cannot be discharged without
some trouble—that if hon. members will
read the, I admit in one point of view,
able speech made by the Premier to the
Legislative Assembly in proposing this
resolution, and compare the statements
then made with the statements which he
made in Melbourne, they cannot resist
the conclusion that those statements are
as different from each other as black from
white. Unfortunately we have not in
this country the moral courage to em-
phasise the fact that political eminence
is only one side of a man’s life, and
that it is quite consistent with an absence


of personal distinction. Otherwise, could
it be thought that a man who has been
brought up in what I may call the atmos-
phere of constitutional law, who has been
in the public life of this colony so many
years, and who, as he himself says, has
received so much honor at the hands of
Australia, would venture, he being the
head of a government, not in a small mat-
ter, not in a thing which would only affect
some institution existing to-day, and per-
haps ceasing to-morrow, but in, as he him-
self says, the most sublime subject that
could occupy the mind of civilised man—
‘not that that is my view—l say, could it
be thought that in such a momentous mat-
ter the Premier would do what his collea-
gues have admitted he did, namely, put
forward the idea of a federal govern-
ment, without first of all not only con-
sidering it with them, but also solemnly
deliberating upon the results of such a
proposal? Though I admit that you
would not expect any man to say whether
he would agree to this particular matter
or to that particular matter of detail, but
with regard to the general scheme of a
federal government, to think that at this
moment it has been avowed by a promi-
nent and distinguished member of the Ad-
ministration that he does not know what
the other members of the Administration
think, nor do they know what he thinks !
And that is put forward as a ground of ad-
miration. Seeing that the Cabinet day by
day discusses matters such as the appoint-
ment of a clerk of petty sessions, or the
removal, it may be, of a magistrate, or the
proclamation of a public holiday—aye,
even less than this, because we have come
to such degradation, without rebuke from
any man in the country, that the head
of the Government lately opened a dog
show ; and another amiable member, of
whom I am glad to speak as a friend, alto-
gether forgetting what is due to his high
office, actually inaugurated the opening
of a commercial bar in an hotel in Sydney
—if members of the Executive can stoop
to these small things, am I wrong in saying
to you, the Upper House of the colony,
that we are being made the sport, the
plaything of an able politician, in having
thrust before us to debate, and to calmly
consider, a subject which it is admitted
the Cabinet itself had never considered ?
Of course, I should never think for one
moment of saying any word that could refer
to the head of the Government or to any
other man in his private capacity ; but
those who think that this matter can be
discussed without regarding the actions of
the Government, which are connected
with the political aspect of this proposal,
are unfit to consider I submit any matter of
public importance whatsoever. As I have
said before, I am not imputing any but the
most honorable motives to those who take
a view different from the one I take; but
you cannot blind yourselves to the conse-
quencesof having these propositions putfor
adoption before the country. I rely upon
hon. members themselves reading the whole
of the speech made by the Premier in the
other branch of the legislature, and then
comparing it with the speeches made to
the delegates in Melbourne; but I grant
that if I could show that the Premier
had advocated in the strongest Avay the
very opposite from what he advocates now
-—if I could show that his motives were
political motives—if I could prove that he
lias not at heart the real interests of the
country—which Ido not say—l would not
thereby advance my position by one inch.
I should not, I admit, have proved in the
least what I intend to prove, because this
question cannot be decided by the varying
opinions of any man, or by what his
motives are. It must be dealt with on
its merits by argument, and I intend so
to deal with it. All through the country
have been distributed one-sided views upon
this matter. Numerous extracts from
English papers, great and small, have been
sent to every mechanics’ institute, to every
public reading-room in New South Wales,
and probably throughout the other colonies
also. I mention this fact before Igo into
the root of the matter, to point out that
there are what I may call incidental sur
roundings. Some of those writings, which
as a whole cannot possibly be read seriously,
are the emanations, I may suppose, of some
young member of my own profession, sitting
in a tiny upper chamber in the Temple,
thoughtlessly drawing out these statements
about Australia, and sending them to the
provincial press, for you will find that in
two papers they are from beginning to end
word for word the same. One of these
gifted persons tells us that we have had
different gauges of railway only in order to
prevent the other colonies from running


their locomotives or carriages on our lines; terms. The greatest statesman we ever
another tells us that we have got 6,000,000
of people, and so on ; some say, “ This
must lead to a republic others say, “Ho,
it means imperial federation ”; a third
writes that he does not know what it
means ; but he says that if—“ if,” and
that is the word used by the Times —“ if
Sir Henry Parkes be right, no doubt great
changes are imminent.” And so they are.
The responsibility in this matter rests on
the Government. I am not complaining
about it; but they have tried to indoctrin-
ate the public mind with, as it were, a
picture of the benefits—and I do not deny
that there are benefits—but have alto-
gether suppressed what we should have to
give up, and what the consequences must
be if we adopt federation. They have, at
enormous expense, thrown a book like this
into every city, town, village, and hamlet
in the countiy. I wish to put the bane
and the antidote together. My hon. friend,
the Vice-President of the Executive Coun-
cil, referred in his opening speech to the
opinions of the English papers, and I want
to show what an absence there is of the
power of holding fairly the scales of jus-
tice. When the English papers fall in
with the views of those here who are advo-
cating some particular measure, they are
said to speak with wisdom, with authority,
and with a knowledge of the matter on
which they are advising us. But when
our own newspapers do not agree with
them, how different! I will endeavour to
show this from an article published in
Sydney within a few days. What does the
principal paper of the colony say ? What
it says applies to all those poor, miserable,
irrelevant, illogical, ignorant articles, with
the exception of those from the Times and
one or two other newspapers comprised
in this volume, which are in no way, to
my mind, complimentary to this country.
Forgive me for interrupting myself here,
but I want to show hon. members the
danger of legislating under the charm
of a name. You know that one of the
most prominent, one of the most intellec-
tual, one of the most experienced states-
men of England, and of high and honorable
life, is Mr. Gladstone. Hon. members
are aware of what he said the other day
with respect to our wise legislation exclud-
ing the Chinese. We know that he con-
demned that legislation in the most severe
liad in Australia, before whose name every-
one now living must pale his ineffectual
fire—Mr. Wentworth—seriously proposed
as part of the Constitution that we should
have a House of Lords or hereditary peers,
as in England. So that it must be plain
to all that Homer sometimes nods, and
that it is not because Sir Henry Parkes
has rendered what I admit to be good
service to the state; and lam one of
those who think it would be ungenerous
to endeavour to discover what are his
faults—for I admit, as all must do, that
he is a man of great ability, competent
to deal with any political question—that
we are to accept his mere assertions or
opinions, and what I am insisting on is
that under the inspiration of the moment,
moved by what motive I know not, mis-
led by what I care not to inquire, he has
without due examination placed us in a
position, the key to which he himself can-
not find, and to which I say there is no
outlet, and I venture to prophesy this—
and I say it deliberately, after as much
consideration as I have ever in my life
given to the most solemn private matter,
or the most serious professional one—that
you cannot have a federal government
without making sacrifices to which no one
will submit. Pardon me, sir, for this
digression. I was about to read—and it
is most proper that I should read—an ex-
tract from our chief daily paper, in my
endeavour to bring the people, not the
members of this House, but people outside
of it, to reflect on these resolutions. The
body of our colonists are doomed as are the
bulk of the people in all other countries,
by a necessity which cannot be obviated,
to a life of unremitting toil. But I say to
them that—rude, untutored, toil-worn as
they may be—if they have the intelligence
to guide them in the affairs of everyday
life, they have sufficient intelligence to see
that this proposal is one fraught, I do not
say with danger—l go beyond danger,
and say that it is one which would de-
prive us of liberties which must be dear to
every man whatever his station, and which
cannot, having regard to what has taken
place in Canada, be preserved to us if we
have a fedei’al form of government. As
to the views taken on Australian ques-
tions by English newspapers, I find the
following words appeared only a few days


ago in a leading article in the Sydney
Morning Herald :
The undesirableness of the Chinaman as a
colonist has, however, often been demonstrated.
The trouble now before us is, to induce the preju-
diced British public to look at the question from
anything like the same point of view as ourselves.
In this we are unfortunate that the leading Lon-
don journal treats the question with perfunctory
indifference, while papers more noted for eccen-
tric indifference than sound argument, or even
common knowledge of the subject of which they
profess to write, run wild sensational tilts at
bug-bears of their own imagination.
Does not that apply to those extracts upon
which the Vice-President of the Executive
Council —who said nothing on his own
account —relied so much for the carrying
of these resolutions 1 I will not be in any
way influenced by the writings of irre-
sponsible persons, either here or elsewhere,
nor will I be misled by an unlimited,
thoughtless indulgence in vain words and
professions of fraternal affection. I will
admit, as I have already admitted, that by
nothing I have said yet have I proved the
position I take up ; but I hope I shall be
able to show that it would have been
folly on my part, seeing how the public
mind has been impregnated with one side
of this question, not to sweep away the
fringe of the serious matter we are now
considering. Now, in the letter which,
as it were, ushered in the conference at
Melbourne, the head of the Government
wisely, as I think, used this expression;
and, remember, he used it after his admis-
sion that he had reflected on the matter
for twenty years. Hon. members must
bear this in mind. lam not speaking of
what a man may have said on the spur of
the moment, because, then, it often hap-
pens that none of us can possibly find
the very word which would most accord
with our meaning, when addressing either
this House or any other assembly; but in
a serious, well-considered letter—a letter
bearing plain evidence of serious thought
—Sir Henry Parkes said, and I think
rightly said :
The scheme of federal government, it is
assumed, would necessarily follow closely upon
the type of the Dominion of Canada.
Now, allow me to point out why the hon.
gentleman said so, because in this country
we have, thanks to the flattery we receive
from our leaders, a belief that we are the
first nation in the world. I hope at a
later hour to be able to put my hand on
a few words in which the head of the Ad-
ministration told us in effect that we were
the first among the peoples of the world.
lam not of that opinion. A nation, like
an individual, may possess millions of
acres of land, cattle and sheep innumer-
able, material prosperity of every kind,
and still the people may be ignoble—in
fact if I were to say what I wish to say
from great reflection, the whole differ-
ence between myself and those who are
favourable to federal government turns
upon the proper meaning to be put upon
one word, and that word is “ great.” Those
who wish to create this great sovereign
power talk about glory, about prestige,
about the voice of a united people, about
influence; but they do not talk about the
low standard that exists in this colony.
They do not point out what I could point
out, that we have much to regret and much
to ponder over, as we see in the case of per-
haps the greatest figure that ever moved
upon the stage of this world, the great
Napoleon—and in one sense he was the
greatest of mankind; but in the sense
that I wish to use the word he was the
meanest. Do not we know that the great
nation of France, once including in its
ranks the flower of chivalry, and always
possessed of a literature and a culture
surpassed by none, was by language of
the kind indulged in by the Premier led
to invade a neighbouring country, and had
to submit to the loss of two of its most
valuable provinces, and the heritage we
have, which is the curse of our universe,
the feeling of hatred between those two
great peoples that cannot die out 1 There
is, I presume to say, no different rule in
regard to an individual than in regard
to a nation, and I am tired of listen-
ing to tales of the extent of our terri-
tory, of the increase of our population,
of the number of millions of pounds
that we have spent upon public works,
and such themes of self-gratulation, as if
it were possible that by creating a fed-
eral parliament we could pass an act
of Parliament to create virtue. Why,
our criminal records are out of pro-
portion to our population. Do not hon.
members know what every week appear
in this city in the organs of the two
great parties into which the religious
world of Australia is divided; that each of
them indulges in language with regard to


things sacred to the other that I w r ould
not use in regard to any man? "Do not
lion, members know that we have here a
general prevalence of drunkenness which
is discreditable to the country ? To think
that £5,000,000 are spent in drink every
year by this colony alone ; and, as I am
informed on good authority, that if the
licensed public-houses in Sydney were put
one against another there would be an
unbroken line of 6 miles ! Do not w T e
also know that, with regard to our char-
itable institutions, there is the greatest
difficulty to keep them from insolvency ?
Had it not been for the disinterested gen-
erosity of members of this House, at the
instigation of the most distinguished per-
son who is now in public life—-I refer to
the hon. and learned member, Sir Alfred
Stephen—an institution which would ap-
peal to the humanity of any man, if he had
humanity—one of the institutions for the
blind—-would- have been closed ? Go and
ask our judges, and let them tell you the
difficulty there is in finding out the truth
in our courts, even from those who call
God to witness what they are saying. I,
of course, should not be one to say that we
are worse than our neighbours ; but let it
not be permitted that we should blind our
eyes to those things which make a nation
really great by harping constantly upon the
prosperity which none of us have created.
If there is a drought or a flood, is it caused
by any administration? And yet upon
such things may the prosperity of the
colony mainly depend for many years.
And so in regard to the increased popula-
tion, forsooth, or other matters that are
dwelt on with unlimited admiration by
persons who seem to think that their
auditors have no understanding. But we
must come down to particulars. When
the Premier said that he thought we
should necessarily follow on the type of
the Dominion Government of Canada, let
me submit to the House why he is right,
though it must be borne in mind that I
have already refused to believe that we
have a monopoly of wisdom, or that we
are able to place ourselves truthfully
on a level with the best men in England
or America, or even Canada. The Con-
stitution of Canada was adopted after
years of reflection and after conferences
innumerable. It was decided upon with
the knowledge of the Constitution of the
United States, and with the light of
the experience that history had thrown
upon the working of that constitu-
tion. As the most distinguished man in
Canada, wffio was the leader in the move-
ment, said, “ They had taken care to avoid
the danger which had sprung from the
form of federal government in America.”
It seems to be thought by those who ad-
dress popular assemblies, that we are blind
to things that are matters of common
knowledge. The United States, thickly
populated, prosperous, and wealthy, have
a federal government; and we are told
that if we do not adopt some form of go-
vernment, similar to the one suggested, we
shall have—but I do not believe it, as I
will point out before I sit down, because
it has no ground to stand upon—such
great differences occurring between the
surrounding colonies that they will come
to war among themselves. If they do, it
will be by reason of the treatment of
public questions in the spirit that has
animated the Premier in dealing with the
question of the Murray River; and I now
stand up to warn the country against this
possibility—that this very question may
be dealt with so as to create a very bitter
feeling between these two colonies. If
we really desire a friendly association, if we
are really moved by a wish to conciliate,
to give and to take, the key to all our in-
tercolonial difficulties could be found in
a day. But we are told that we may
come to fly at each other’s throats, and,
further, that to prevent this we w r ant
a central government to control the pro-
vinces. I apologise for having to even
remind you of it, but did the federal go-
vernment of the United States prevent
the occurrence of the most bloody and
expensive war that is known in the history
of mankind 1 You cannot wipe out man’s
passions by legislation; you cannot force
that which can only be won by words of
conciliation and affection. It is because I
have come to the conclusion, after the most
deliberate, unimpassioned, and impartial
consideration, that federal government is
force veiled, that it is incompatible with a
reasonable degree of individual freedom,
and that its establishment must inevit-
ably—l use the words advisedly give
rise to a flood of litigation, which can
be of benefit to none except to the pro-
fession of which I am a member, that I


am now speaking so strongly. I am
trying to impress upon lion, members the
fact that they must not think there is any
wisdom in those who tell them that they
will have an Australian form of federation.
They might as well say that they would
have an Australian form of adverbs, or an
Australian form of dictionaries. It is an
expression that has no meaning. You
cannot have a central government without
force, the executive of the higher power
must necessarily control the subordinate
one. The Premier, who admits that he
has reflected upon this matter for twenty
years, wisely said that the Canadian form
of government would necessarily—l do not
mean with regard to minor matters, I mean
with regard to the great outline which I
shall indicate in a moment—be followed.
I may mention, what every hon. member
knows, that the state which adopted that
form of government was the neighbour of
the only other great federal power in the
world. Can any one think that we know
better the working of the American Con-
stitution than they do? They and the
Canadians are almost one people. They
are of the same race, they have the same
language, the same manners, and, in sub-
stance, the same political institutions.
How, therefore, can it be supposed that
the most prominent public man in Canada,
when he said that they had intentionally
deviated from the American model, was
in a position of inferior knowledge to that
occupied by any one within the bounds of
New South Wales 1 Why he said so has
been published in a hundred journals. It
is in substance shortly this : that by reason
of the powers of the Senate and the House
of Representatives —that is to say, the
federal power —being, as it were, limited,
its boundaries marked out by the consti-
tution, and the residuum of power left in
the state, the weakness was created in the
link which, as a consequence, allowed the
great and horrible war to break out; and
in order, as I think, wisely, to prevent the
possibility of a similar calamity, the states-
men of Canada in conference with the
most distinguished public men in England
—for remember, that the convention that
framed the British North America Act
sat in the metropolis cf England—guided
by the sagacious councils of the experienced
permanent officers of the public depart-
ments, and with the advice of the law
officers of the Crown, and the people of
Canada being themselves represented by
men of distinguished and honorable life,
advisedly determined that the Canadian
form of federal government is the best
workable model. I deny that it is possible,
and when the delegates meet in Victoria
or elsewhere the country will see whether
I am right 'to devise what is termed a
federal form of government that shall not
have in it those essentials which are con-
tained in the Imperial act that created
the dominion of Canada. Without them
you may have a union—and I am in
favour of a union of the kind I will
indicate—but it will not meet the am-
bitious yearnings of those who are the
centre and the circumference of all that
they do. I admit that it will not allow
you to say that with one united voice you
will dictate to the islands of the Pacific.
I admit that it will not allow any of those
high-sounding phrases which have entered
into our ears, but have no right to enter
into our brains. I have yet to point out,
and I will do so before I sit down, how
everything that is necessary because
there are certain things necessary—there
are certain matters which ought to be dealt
with by the whole of the Australian colo-
nies in common —how they can be done
without any change in our Government.
But a federal government or anything ap-
proaching it cannot be brought into exist-
ence without the consequences that I am
about to indicate. I would not like this
House to think that I am speaking without
some authority. I naturally would like
to be able to lean upon some name that
would outweigh the name of any man now
in public life. Let me try to do it. I
would like to use these words, once used
by Sir Henry Parkes himself :
My lion, friend, Sir John Robertson, who has
had so much to do with the government of this
country, and who has sat through all our parlia-
ments, is intensely opposed to federation altoge-
ther ; and perhaps throughout the population of
this colony, there is no man of more powerful in-
tellect, or more capacity to grasp large questions
than the present Chief Justice, and Sir James
Martin has made no scruple of the fact that he is
altogether opposed to federation.
Now, bear in mind that it is no use telling
me that you regard the opinion of a dis-
tinguished man when you agree with
him, but that you will not listen to him,
however distinguished he may be, when he


comes to a conclusion that differs from
your own. Remember that this distin-
guished man, Sir James Martin, who is not
now living, was designated by one of the
greatest writers of Europe as a man capable
of presiding with dignity, learning, and
efficiency over the first tribunal of England.
Why was Sir James Martin opposed to
federation ? It was not a matter of party
government. He expressed this opinion
when he was outside political life alto-
gether, and it was a question that appealed,
I suppose, as much to his sympathies as to
those of Sir Henry Parkes himself. Well
now, I am not satisfied with telling the
House that Sir James Martin was opposed
to federation. I wish to satisfy you that
he thought what I think. In 1884 this
also was said of Sir James Martin :
He believes that federation would be a great
injury instead of a good to these colonies. I
know that that is his opinion ; I have heard it
expressed times out of number. Here, then, are
two instances of men who have occupied very
conspicuous positions in the country—who, by
their large influence, are calculated to lead pub-
lic opinion, and who are entirely opposed to
federation.
Will it be believed—except that there is
a sublime audacity that outrivals belief—
that the man who spoke these words to the
Assembly of this country only a few years
ago, was the Premier himself ? There may
be people who are so childish as to listen
to the irrelevant assertion that we have
grown, forsooth, in population. But let
me be just, let me use Sir Henry Parkes’
own words which I could not lay my finger
on a moment ago :
We have now reached a stage of life when we
are not behind any nation in the world, either
in the vigour, the industry, the enterprise, the
foresight, or the creative skill of our working
populations, in which I include the directors of
labour; and we are not behind in all the higher
refinements of civilised society.
There is in this only one defect—l admit
that it is only a detail—it is not true ! I
quite know that people will tell you that it
is of no moment; that it is what the people
I spoke of call a detail. We are the play-
things of words. Why, we are wasting our
time here. We, the Parliament of this
country, are supposed to be considering this
momentous question ; but here is the
country addressed through a paper of some
skill and great respectability —the Cen-
tennial Magazine —by the Premier himself.
What does he say there? Bear in mind that
I have not commented on his remarks in a
critical or technical spirit. I have long
left the matter of the two delegates being
self-appointed for I attach no importance
to it. I wish to sway no man’s opinion on
that ground. I have only insisted upon
the impropriety of the resolutions of the
conference being taken to the foot of the
throne without first being communicated to
Parliament or the country. But that, too,
I can easily afford not to revert to again;
but I find that the Premier himself has the
courage in this magazine to tell his readers,
and therefore the people of New South
Wales in the month of March, when Par-
liament was not sitting, that
the colonies of Australia have pledged them-
selves by their accredited representatives to the
election of a federal convention to frame a con-
stitution.
Well do we deserve any language of insol-
ence, well do we deserve any language of
contempt or indifference, when it can be
tolerated, that no voice has ever been
raised, either on a public platform or in the
press, to point out that there is no one who
has given this pledge but the statesman
who puts forward this proposal! His own
colleagues are men of distinction—and we
are not likely within any time I can con-
template to have a ministry embracing in
its members more honorable, more compe-
tent, and more diligent administrators than
the colleagues of the Premier, some of whom
are men of exceptional ability—and if there
was one question more than another upon
which the law officer of the Crown, the
Attorney-General, was entitled to be con-
sulted, surely it was the question of laying
down the foundation of the federal consti-
tution. But neither my lion, and learned
friend, nor the other able members of the
Government, were allowed to know the
thoughts and views of the statesman who,
forsooth, wishes to rule us with the hand
of despotism. I use these words reflec-
tively, because, at the time I speak of
these resolutions had never been submitted
to Parliament, and the Premier, instead
of reasoning with you, the legislators of
the country, abuses you—you and me, who
are able to form an independent opinion,
and sums up at last by telling us in this
serious article that
the colonies of Australia have pledged them-
selves by their accredited representatives to the
election of a federal convention to frame a consti-
tution.


If that is true, why are we here ? I
would not comment on this statement if
it were the writing of any public journal-
ist ; I would not comment on it if it were
the writing of a permanent servant of the
state, or even if it were the production of
some inferior member of the Cabinet; but
it is the head of the state, who for years
has posed as the holder of constitutional
opinions—who has nearly worn out his
lips with talking about the duties of Par-
liament, the rights of the people, the acci-
dents, the incidents, and the essentials of
responsible government, who goes without
any authority to Melbourne, agrees to these
resolutions, forwards them to the Queen,
and then, forsooth, tells the country, through
this respectable organ of intellectual opinion
—a paper, mind, read by what I may call
the better educated people of the country
that the colonies have already pledged them-
selves to the election of a federal conven-
tion. And let me go further; immediately
following he uses these words :
Let no party considerations influence the
choice or fetter the minds of the men chosen.
We
Who? “We.” I decline to be bound
by the “we” of the Premier, or of any
other man, be he sprung from the peerage
or the people.
We may with confidence leave the adjustment
of the powers of the federal and the provincial
governments to that body, the highest that we
can create, and whose deliberations and decisions
will not be considered by you, gentlemen ;
will not be considered by our colleagues in
the other House ; but
will be tried before the tribunal of posterity.
Can there be such bathos in connection
with so solemn a subject ? Of course, the
author of this movement, who no doubt
by reason of his exceptional abilities
would mount the apex of power, would
not be here when posterity were exclaim-
ing with voices similar to those now echo-
ing throughout Canada, “Why did we
enter on this wild career V lam using
words which the occasion not only justi-
fies, but also compels. Let it not be for-
gotten that these words are not spoken in
the heat of debate ; but used advisedly in
this article with regard to a man like Sir
■John Robertson, and with regard to a
man infinitely greater —to Sir James
Martin, the honored adornment of our
political and judicial life. Forsooth, the
Premier after creating in the manner
certainly not the highest manner —of a
distinguished advocate objections which
no one takes, says :
Such are the chief of the querulous objections
that meet us on either side of the way.
Bear in mind that the writer of these
words spoke of Sir James Martin in the
Assembly as a man of towering intellect,
whose views would outweigh the views of
the unthinking multitude, and then within
a few short years, when that great and
distinguished ornament in our history is
resting in his grave, he says :
But do they not come from that class of
pessimists who see evil in everything which they
have not given themselves the trouble to com-
prehend ?
Imagine for a moment the man who can
speak of that erudite scholar and great
lawyer, Sir James Martin, in language
so appropriate, a little while afterwards,
when he himself is proposing to give up
our independence and merge ourselves, I
admit, in a greater power, then saying that
the objections
come from that class of pessimists who see evil
in everything which they have not given them-
selves the trouble to comprehend.
And not satisfied with that he concludes
by saying:
But even the jealous and suspicious, and the
men of little faith, have nothing to fear.
Well, I have not attributed any improper
motive to the head of the Government. I
have not tried to find out the weak point
in either his private or his public career.
I have dealt with this question solely
upon its merits. It may be but idle to
protest against the scheme. I shall carry
no weight, because I have not mastered
the art of general abuse that seems to be
a sine qua non to success with the multi-
tude—the power of reviling, of imagining
or rehearsing those acts which are capable
of an injurious construction ; yet in keep-
ing with that view of the potent exercise
in the art of clever assertions, this writer,
the head of the present Administration,
tells the colony that even the jealous and
suspicious, and the man of little faith, have
nothing to fear. Why 1 Does he speak
about parliaments when he says :
The several existing governments will have
their safety in their own hands; they will
possess the power of review, revision, modifica-
tion and rejection.


lam willing to put a large construction true and perfectly safe. In another part
upon that, and to say that the writer pro- it says:
bably meant parliaments.
Mr. Simpson : Hear, hear !
Mr. SALOMONS : Myhon. and learned
friend, although I have the greatest respect
and affection for him, must pardon me for
saying that I cannot be turned aside by any
interruptions, because it will be found that
every interruption puts the speaker in a
dilemma. The lion, gentleman said, in a
passage which I have already read, “Now
is the time to decide it.” Nulla vestigia
reirorsum. There is no retreat; having
passed the resolution, you must go forward
and carry it out. I read a passage to that
effect. Then, forsooth, he referred to those
irresponsible, thoughtless, and poverty-
stricken utterances of the papers, some of
which the greatest journalists in the world
never heard of—some of which are mere
advertising mediums. The only place you
will find them in is a place which my re-
spect for this audience will not allow me
to indicate—the Sussex l)aily Nevjs, an
unknown newspaper; the Birmingham
Gazette; the Aberdeen Free Press; .and
the Pioneer Mail, of Allahabad. I wish to
make clear to hon. members the grounds
of my opinion, and hon. members, as
well as I, have equal means of knowing
whether I have fairly and rightly charac-
terised those so-called utterances of Eng-
lish journalism. There are, no doubt, one
or two papers of great distinction which
ought, I admit, to carry great weight
—I refer to the British Australasian ,
ninety-nine parts of which no doubt con-
sists of advertisements, and the rest no one
ever reads. The Altrincham Guardian!
Does any one know where Altrincham is ?
I happen, by accident, to know it—it is,
I believe, a tiny place in Cheshire. If it
were a kingdom and you were banished
from it any one could stand upon the
verandah and see that you left the terri-
tory. The Western Morning News , of Ply-
mouth, and other papers are quoted. The
English Times guards itself distinctly, as I
will point out. That paper says that if
the several colonies accept the invitation it
is clear that they are primd facie willing
to consider the expediency and feasibility
of entering into the federal bond. If they
decline, it is equally clear that the ques-
tion has been prematurely raised. That is
The constitution of the United States is not
without its defects, some of which were little
foreseen. And federal institutions in Canada
have not worked altogether without friction, as
the records of the judicial committee of the
Privy Council can show.
It will tax the ingenuity of Australian consti-
tutional statesmen to improve upon previous
federal experience, and to avoid errors into
which their predecessors have fallen, while the
circumstances of Australia will present special
difficulties of their own. Of these—to mention
only a few—the selection of a capital will be
one, and the adjustment of a federal tariff will
be another. Will Victoria be willing to concede
supremacy to seniority, and to recognise Sydney
as the Australian capital and the seat of federal
government, and will New South Wales, on the
other hand, consent so far to abandon her free-
trade principles as to leave the external tariff an
open question, to be settled possibly, not to say
probably, in a protectionist sense, in return for
the establishment of intercolonial free-trade ?
The article ends by saying :
Nevertheless it is impossible for England not
to wish well to this new movement of federation.
Sir Henry Parkes is a capable statesman, and
his judgment is entitled to all respect.
That is to say, to a respectful examination,
not to acceptance, because he has put it
forward to all respectful consideration as
to whether the time be ripe and the method
feasible.
If that is so the difficulties will disappear, and
federation of the Australian colonies will before
long, &c.
If that is so. I say if there be a man
within the boundaries of Australia, or a
body of men who can frame a constitu-
tion which will avoid the vital dangers
I shall indicate, I will humbly regret
that I have ever spoken against this
movement ; I will publicly apologise. I
may safely promise to do so, because I
know from any number of writers I have
referred to that the thing is impossible.
It is impossible to take the benefit without
the burden. To show how we are made
the playthings of assertions which will not
bear an instant’s examination: This colony
alone, both with regard to its minor and
its larger state matters, is worthy of the
consideration of a man with far greater
light and leading than the Premier—a
country as large as what 1 I believe I
am correct in saying that it is nearly as
large as the federated states of Germany
and Prance put together; I know that it
is larger than the whole of Germany and


Italy put together; and yet this states-
man, this man of mature years, this man
who speaks so glibly about what should
bind us together, and talks about a higher
life—asks the readers of this magazine :
Is it our settled policy, in fact, to coop our-
selves on oujr own patch of Australian soil.
“Patch of Australian soil !” Well, I quite
admit that any who would accept expres-
sions like that are lower than, or, I will
say, above any powers of that
I possess. In the same way, in this dis-
tinguished man’s speech, either in Mel-
bourne or elsewhere, he pointed out that
we had only a stretch of 800 miles of
coast-line, and “ when you get to tne end
of it,” he said, “ you are out of our terri-
tory.” That would apply -if you wanted
to unite us with Asia. If you took in all
Australia to Port Darwin, the same posi-
tion might be taken up—that when you got
to Port Darwin you were out of Australia.
Extent of territory, exercise of power, dom-
ination of political influence, the command
of large armies, and the control of subord-
inate legislatures, do not necessarily imply
a high level of public life, and can we hope
to excel —if we can rival, it will be wonder-
ful—the marvellous Constitution of the
United States ? They have a senate, cer-
tainly with no superior among the legisla-
tive bodies of the world; but you know from
a notorious trial that there is in that coun-
try at the present timean association called
the Clan-na-gael; youknowthe horrors that
have been disclosed at the state trials in
Chicago ; you know that there are bodies of
men who think it consistent with humanity
and civilisation to send men to the country
from which they sprang to destroy public
buildings and public men by diabolical
means —by means of dynamite. Do you
not, therefore, see that no form of govern-
ment is a guarantee for public or private
virtue any more than the religion a man
is born in is a guarantee of his integrity
or virtue? —neither the one nor the other—
and I would ask as a favour that hon.
members should take from the Parliament-
ary Library a recent number either of
Scvibnev's Magazine or The Century , where
there is painted one of the most horrible
pictures ever painted by the hand of man,
not of a hundred, or of a thousand, but of
tens of thousands of persons living in one
or two narrow streets of tenement build-
ings in the great city of Mew York—a
scene of depravity, horror, and misery, as
the writer admits, is not to be equalled
in any city of the old country —neither in
London, neither in Glasgow, nor in Paris,
nor in Vienna. I emphasise this so that
my listeners may know that the man who
juggles with great words, who puts before
you a picture of almost universal domina-
tion, who talks to you of prestige, who says
we shall speak with a commanding voice
in the councils of Europe, is playing with
the really higher and nobler sentiments of
mankind. He may have thought it; but
I myself have too high an opinion of this
distinguished gentleman’s intelligence, and
also of his private worth, to think that, upon
reflection, he would ever admit what his
assertions imply. They all imply that
we shall expand the ambit of our public
life in a wise and useful and honorable
direction, by magnifying the political ma-
chinery ; whereas the fact is that the more
complex you make the machinery, the
greater is the friction, and the greater the
difficulty of the individual citizen obtain-
ing a recognition of his personal rights.
Another ground —I admit a strong one
with me—for opposing federation is this.
Before I state it let me be candid. In the
beginning of this movement, knowing, of
course, that it was a matter of difficulty
and complexity, and that it was put for-
ward by a man of years and distinction, I
limited myself to the assertion that the
country vas not ripe for it, and I said,
“ If you have a senate, tell me where are
the men whoare to take their places there?”
I say it in no spirit of flattery ; but I
do assert, notwithstanding the language
inconsiderately used by some journalists
with regard to this Chamber, that it would
be impossible, taken as a whole, to gather
within the borders of New South V ales
a body of men of higher intelligence, of
more honorable life, and animated by a
fairer spirit of justice than those who are
putting the country under an obligation
by sitting in this Chamber ; but still I say
that, putting aside one or two upon whom
years are weighing, there are not even in
this Chamber men sufficient to form the
senate of this country. And, with regard
to the great house of commons that this
ambitious politician wishes to bring into
view, will any one indicate to me where-
these men are hiding themselves, and
what would become of your provincial


parliaments if your best men went out
into the country or into any other city ?
Pardon me for doing what any thinking
man knows must be done. If you want
to prove the simplest proposition in
Euclid you cannot do it except you start
with postulates and axioms. So it is
in matters of this kind. You say, “We
know that,” but it is necessary to ex-
press it. The federal capital must be
somewhere. It cannot be in the ethereal
atmosphere in which the Premier dwells.
It must be somewhere, and wherever it
is, those who do not live there must, if
members, come from more or less distant
parts of this great continent. They, there-
fore, must be either men of great wealth
to be able to bear the expense of a pro-
tracted stay so far from their homes and
their business, or they must be, as they
are in the United States, dowered, as it
were, with a very large revenue—a thou-
sand a year. We may have, perhaps,
250,000 men—l do not profess to speak
accurately in the matter, because I have
not had time to verify the figures ; pro-
bably they are less —we might, I say,
have 250,000 men within the boundaries
of New South Wales. Can you recon-
cile with reason the proposition that a
country which has only just emerged into
a state of self-government is to be bur-
dened with municipal government, with
local government, with provincial govern-
ment, and with federal government ? I
agree with those public writers who pro-
test against the federal capital being in
some small, insignificant place, far from
Sydney, Melbourne, or Brisbane. But do
you not see that, wherever you fix the cen-
tral seat of government, there you must of
necessity bring, for a large period of the
year, the senators and the members of the
popular branch of the federal legislature?
Who would dare, in figures, to prophesy
the enormous taxation to which we should
have to submit in order to carry out in all
its details this glorious scheme ? Further,
will any one doubt that whether you were
to fix the seat of government in Sydney or
Melbourne—and I decline to listen to any
other place—the value of life—l do not
care about the value of property—will be
affected ? So far as the value of property
is concerned, I do not descend to the argu-
ments which have been put forward to
you as to the effect which federal govern-
ment would have upon our railway traffic
—as to whether it would turn trade to-
wards Melbourne or anywhere else. I base
my public, as you base your private life
on much higher grounds; but I say you
must give some consideration to the con-
sequences as to both public and private life
in the great cities whose walls are far
distant from the seat of federal govern-
ment. You or I may desire to go to hear
some hon. and distinguished member of
the federal parliament speak on a matter
of vital interest. Every one is not wholly
wrapped up in a desire to ascertain what
is the wool clip of the year, or how many
lambs have been dropped, any more than
in my profession there is a universal
turning to fee-books to find out the
aggregate of lawyers’ earnings. There are
other desires, more valued reflections, that
come to every man ; and if you were to
place this central parliament away from
Sydney or Melbourne ; if you were to place
it in some small town, that town would
necessarily have to be far away from most
of the great centres of the surrounding
colonies. And you would then have re-
peated here events which have happened
in America, and which may be summed up
in the two expressions—carpet-bagging and
log-rolling. No country, to my mind, con-
sidering its age, can boast of greater or
more honored men in the walks of litera-
ture, science, or politics than can America ;
but you cannot find them in the House of
Congress. If you will turn not to English,
not to Australian, but to American publi-
cations, you will see that public speakers
and writers, in pitiful and deploring words,
mourn the low level of the actions of mem-
bers of the House of Congress. The Senate,
by reason of its embracing men who are
nominated, not by the people, but by the
state, is, no doubt, a most distinguished
body ; but that body alone can pass no
legislation. I am in favour of one of the
houses not springing directly from the
people, because I know that if you wish to
have an unfettered, candid, truthful expres -
sion of opinion, you will not create it by
universal suffrage alone. Ido not believe
—and I delight in the privilege that gives
me the freedom, which I should not have
under the particular form of government
to which I refer, to say so—l do not be-
lieve that vox populi is vox Dei. I know
that it is absurd. I know very well that if I


feel a pain in my finger I would rather take
the, opinion of one of the members of that
lion, and learned profession which has re-
cently given us several useful additions to
this House, than I would avail myself even
of the learning and intelligence of my hon.
and learned friend in another profession,
the Attorney-General. If you want any-
thing done of any kind whatsoever, you go
to men who have made a special study
of that matter ; but with regard to state-
craft—and you know it from the valuable
extract read by a distinguished member of
the Administration to the other branch
of the legislature—-the greatest political
figure who ever lived has pointed out in
language which no one can rival that the
science of government, the science of public
life, of statecraft, of politics, is one that
calls for the exercise of the highest in-
tellect and of the greatest deliberation, no
man being superior to its exercise. Yet,
forsooth, we see those who wish to win
the applause of the multitude stooping to
tell them that they are in the ranks of the
first civilised peoples of the world. As I
have said before, that statement has the
simple defect of mere detail, that it is not
true. Now, I have admitted that origin-
ally I limited myself to the objection that
this proposal was premature. I must be
forgiven for saying that if we are ever
to have a federal government, we should
have it put forward by men different from
the men who have hitherto dominated the
state. We have a great system of public
education; upon that to-night I express
no opinion, but do not let it be thought
that I am one of those who believe it is
deserving of unqualified approval. We
have, however, a great system of public
education, which will very likely in a few
years place at the disposal of the country
many young men not tarnished by the
low political struggles which have darkened
our history in times past. If any one
thinks that I am insisting too strongly
upon this point, he has only to take up
the parliamentary debates for the last
twenty years, he lias only to listen to the
language which has been addressed by one
distinguished man to another, and he will
find my justification. If we are to have
this so-called divine government, let us
have it from men who have some of the
elements of divinity about them. But com-
ing down to the level of everyday life, I
say that we have not the men of leisure
and intelligence to fill either a senate
or a house of commons. If our best men
were to enter those bodies, to what level
would our provincial assemblies have to
descend ? There may be many men who-
have formed a different opinion—l would
not presume to use language of offence in
contradicting them—but I humbly think
—I know that it is a difficult matter
to prove—that the people of the country
exercised a wise generosity in allowing a
sum of £40,000 a year to be devoted to
the expenses of those who give their ser-
vices to the country in the popular branch
of the legislature. But how much money
would be required if we had a senate and
a congress as well, because you will find
that where such bodies exist, both of them
are paid 1 So that I originally thought,
as I still think, that, apart from any other
more serious considerations, the time is-
not ripe for this ambitious scheme to be
brought within the range of what are
called practical politics. We should have,
as I have pointed out, a complex machinery
altogether out of proportion to the popu-
lation, or to the duties which that popu-
lation would call upon them to perform.
Now, I desire to state that after more
careful reflection, after turning to the de-
bates in the imperial houses of Parliament
at the time the British North America Act
was being debated ; after referring to the
language of that statute, and of the many
imperial acts that have since been passed
to modify it ; after looking at what has-
happened in Canada ever since the colo-
nies there became federated; and after
having examined the course of things in
the Canadian courts and the judicial com-
mittee of the Privy Council, I have arrived
at the conclusion not only that the time
is not ripe, but also that so long as we re-
main a colony a federal government would
be a vital mistake. It is not probable that
I shall, though I may, live long enough to
address this Chamber when the force of
events beyond our control has brought
about a fundamental alteration in our re-
lations to the old country. I hope not.
But I want to guard myself, and if it ever
did arise my present inclination—l do not
bind myself to any opinion—is that even
then a federal government, by reason of
its inherent dangers, would be a mistake.
But surely we need not discuss that now.


We must take things as they are. Of
course, if I shared the Premier’s view of
the superior position of the people of this
country as regards wealth, intelligence,
and public and private virtue, I might,
of course, come to a different conclusion.
That is to say, if we are the people
that the Premier paints us, we shall no
doubt be injured by a connection with so
inferior a country as Great Britain. But
that view is one that I decline to enter-
tain in a serious mood, and I have no
more doubt that I am addressing this as-
sembly than that this step that is proposed
to be taken is the first, but at the same
time a great stride towards separation
from Great Britain. It is well for me not
to be forced to rely alone upon argument.
It is well, if you can, to strengthen your
position by the opinion of a man who
seems to be able to charm by his name,
and I shall therefore refer to the Nine-
teenth Century, a magazine known to us
all. In that magazine, for the months of
January and March, 1884, I find these
passages —not that I want these passages
to support my opinion ; that if you unite
the colonies under the form of government
that is contemplated, one essential is that
the acts of the provincial legislatures would
be subject, not as they are now, to disallow-
ance by the Imperial Government, but by
the federal government —by the governor-
general and council—that is, by the Federal
Premier, as I shall prove before I sit down.
As far as my own individual opinion goes,
it is plain and numbers who are in
favour of federation candidly avow that
they intend that this is to be the first step
in the wildest, most unjust, and silly
direction of breaking away from the great
country from which we have sprung. Of
course, I know that I have to meet what I
might say are clever forms of poetical ex-
pression. I am not certain whether I
remember the exact words, but such a
phrase as this has been used: “The crimson
thread of kinship.” The man who used
that expression is the man who wishes to
bind us—to what ? To Western Australia,
to Tasmania, to Queensland. He is the
man who, honored by the Crown, is willing
to shut out the products of England.
Kindred ! Am I not more kindred with
the people of the country of the land I
was born in—are not hon. members more
kindred with the inhabitants of Great
Britain and Ireland—than with the people
of Western Australia or Fiji 1 As I have
said before, it is trifling with our common-
sense. But a tendency towards separation
is attempted to be created by those who
control a section of the public press, and
who desiring to support their own pecu-
liar views, cause them to travel along the
electric wire throughout the dominions and
dependencies of the empire ; all those who
read do not know that the man who has
for years used language that I would never
use against any opponent, with regard to
such as are in favour of protection—who
has stood forward to lower those who de-
sired to promote it either privately or pub-
licly—now, forsooth, is willing to join the
protection band, and against whom ? Is
it not better—would it not be more de-
fensible —to stand up for a system of
protection against Western Australia or
Queensland than against England herself?
I can speak with some advantage on this
question, because I believe I have the ap-
proval of neither party ; I am not a blind
partisan. This is a matter to which I
have often directed my thoughts, and I
know well that those who advocate free-
trade sink into oblivion the advantages
which spring from protection, and those
who advocate protection hide altogether the
great benefits which flow from free-trade.
My own opinion is that, from a fiscal point
of view, free-trade is unanswerable ; from a
social point of view I am inclined to think
that it can also hold its own; but it is a
difficult question, and I should not dare to
speak with disrespect of any man who forms
a different if an independent and honor-
able opinion. To think that wffiere there
are great countries on both sides of the
world, which have embraced, some one
system and some another, though the ma-
jority are no doubt opposed to that which
reigns in England—free-trade —to think
that any man could have so much self-
sufficiency, so much self-reliance, such an
utter absence of respect for the opinions
of others, as to speak in the tone that the
Premier has thought himself justified in
adopting towards the members of the pro-
tectionist party here! But if he were
justified in so speaking, what is his sin-
cerity now when he chooses to ask you,
in effect, in the result, to give up all that
he has advocated? I admit that if he were
proposing free-trade throughout the world


or even in regard to England, I could not
put this argument; but the proposition is
to do what! At present we receive the
manufactures, whether by hand or machi-
nery, of England, Ireland, and Scotland.
We think on the whole that it is better
that there should be an open port to the
world ; but now it is proposed that we
should shut our kindred at home out, and
why 1 In order to bring about this grand-
iose scheme. Now, I do not believe that
the ruin that is by some prophesied would
befall this country if it adopted protection
to-morrow ; and further, I will admit that,
apart altogether from a federal govern-
ment, it may be that the general advan-
tages to flow from a tariff common to the
whole of Australia would be greater than
any of the fiscal disadvantages that would
arise from the change. But what I say is
this : I am an inhabitant of New South
Wales, a large portion, not a patch, of
this island continent; we have in this
colony two houses of legislature, we have
men amongst us who have studied the
fiscal question for years ; we have a people
who have been educated upon it, and if
we change our present free-trade policy,
let us change it upon the voices of our
own colony. Do not be forced to do so
upon the voices of Western Australia,
of South Australia, of Tasmania, or of
any other colony. It is an indignity that
no man in private life would submit to.
Let us do that freely, if we do it at all,
and not on account of any desire for
federation; and let me say here : do not
suppose that if I were an inhabitant of
Western Australia I should be against
federation any more than I should object
to being admitted as a full partner of
the house of Baring Brothers. But would
they have me 1 Of course if I were an
inhabitant of that lovely island of Tas-
mania, with its 120,000 inhabitants, I
might take a very different view of the
question. If I lived there, I might con-
scientiously advocate it; but I am a resi-
dent of New South Wales, the first of
the colonies without doubt, with a capital
that is as nearly as any city can be
equidistant from all the centres of life in
Australia ; not as Melbourne is, far re-
moved from the sea, but upon the ocean
coast, with a port unrivalled in the world.
As this question of free-trade and protec-
tion has been fought so long upon the
hustings, and in the houses of Parliament
of this colony, it ought in honor to he
decided by this country alone. That is to
say, that you who are free-traders ought
to make it impossible that there could be
a federal parliament, where your voices
could be drowned by the voices of those
who are, and who must remain, unless
they will destroy the industries they have
created, advocates of a protective tariff.
There is a difference between creating a
thing and destroying it. If we had that
system here to-morrow, my sympathy would
never go with those who would tear it
down, because in tearing down the walls
we should bring down the inhabitants; and
therefore it is to be borne in mind, as
may be seen in the able speeches of the
representatives of other colonies at the
conference in Melbourne, that they de-
sire—and not unnaturally desire—to do
nothing to uproot those industries which,
although they may have been artificially
created, are now of importance to the
prosperity of the people. Nothing I have
read has in any way affected my judgment
upon that point; and I speak more strongly
than I otherwise should, for I do not view
this matter as one of life and death. I
know it is nothing of the kind, because
I am aware that protection prevails in
France, prevails in Germany, prevails in
America, and prevails in Canada; and
even the wisdom of Sir Henry Parkes
could not bring me to believe that among
all these peoples there is no one with the
wisdom of our Premier. Therefore, it
must be that there are advantages and
counter-advantages, and, like many other
matters, it has to be decided upon the
balance of benefits. If, however, we seri-
ously wish to be united with Victoria or
with any one or many of the colonies,
there is nothing to prevent us from at
once agreeing upon a common tariff.
There can be no necessity for a federal
government for that; and they are simply
talking as if they were talking to babies
when they tell us that if we are desirous
of doing away with the barriers of custom-
houses that face us when we come to
the boundaries of the various colonies,
we must federate. All we have to do is
to get the different parliaments to pass an
act assimilating the tariffs of the several
colonies. But I know that to the great
body of th® people these arguments will


have very little weight, because they
are not ornamented by fine language;
they are not adorned by a talk of universal
brotherhood ; they are not adorned by re-
ferences to the necessity of our acting to-
gether. It is said in this magazine article
that the choice is between our being as
it were enemies, always at dissension, or
forming a federal government. All of you
have neighbours, and run the risk of your
neighbour allowing his cattle, dogs, or
horses to go through the fences and trample
4 upon your garden; you run the risk of your
neighbour’s servants annoying yours ; you
run a hundred risks by having neighbours
who are not of your own family ; but do you,
on that account, propose that you should
all become one family, and sit down to the
same table as one household ? Remember
that grievances may be great, but the
remedy may be worse than the grievances.
The fact is, that if these proposals were
founded in truth, there would be no reason
why the whole world should not be joined
in one federation. If you come to what
are called first principles, and you dare to
desecrate the name of the Deity, as many
of the writers have done, by dragging it
into questions of this kind, can you resist
the argument that a man who is born in
China, or in India, whether white, or black,
or copper-colourecl, is equal in the sight of
God to the child who is born in a palace in
England; but will you, on that account,
admit him as one of your family, or even
allow him to compete with those who are
your own fellow-citizens ? No, we in this
world are dominated —we cannot, with our
limited intelligence, explain why but
we are dominated by material surround-
ings, and controlling forces which are be-
yond the power of any parliament to alter.
Man first of all regards himself, then his
family, then his city, then his colony,
then his countiy, and then all mankind;
but the man who in these thoughtless
sentences would sweep in all humanity
within the pale of his benevolence, can
be nothing but a man who has either
abandoned his reason, or would impose
upon the credulity of thoughtless listeners.
I therefore frankly avow that I undertake
a greater burden than I undertook origin-
ally ; that is to say, I do not limit myself
to saying that the time is not ripe, that
we are not sufficiently advanced to adopt
this change of government. I implore
the patience of hon. members while I
point out the foundation of the opinion I
hold. Let it not be forgotten—for Ido not
rely on my individual judgment—and you
are aware of the fact, that a man far
superior to the sagacious statesman who
now holds the helm of power—a man who
in reality, though not nominally, was a
native of the country, the honored head of
the state at one time, and afterwards the
head of its supreme judicial tribunal —Sir
James Martin came to the same conclu-
sion that I do. I say to those who hold
a different opinion, with all respect —not
using language which is common in political
controversy —do you not think that there
are considerations to which your attention
has not been directed? I know, in one
sense, that I am on a side where I do not
wish to be. lam not unaware of the fact
that if I stood here as the advocate of this
union, I could dwell upon all those sacred
themes with which are bound up our public
and private affections, as those have done
with great power who support this move-
ment. Suppose you had here a Chinese
statesman ; see the position he could take
up as to our denying his race the right to
live here. We know that there are what
I may call domestic reasons, which out-
weigh larger but weaker influences that
sway us as mere human beings. If there
be here any who think that we should
be in a better position were we to—
madly as I think—declare our indepen-
dence, I admit that the argument I am
about to put forward would have no weight
with them. But I shall conclude, until
I hear otherwise knowing that this
House is composed of thoughtful men, who
have no popular audience to satisfy, and
will not be swayed by passion or worked
upon by phrases of nationality or other
high-sounding terms —that there is no one
here who is not clear on this point: that
we have everything to lose, and nothing
to gain, by parting from Great Britain.
Indeed, I apologise for reasoning upon it.
To-morrow, if we had the nation that
some flippant speakers desire to see come
into existence, what would become of the
enormous coast line which is bounded as
it were, by the side of Asia? Could we
hold it? In treating with France as to
her mode of occupying New Caledonia,,
should we be listened to? Would it not
be ridiculous ? Some persons do not seem


to see that in some questions opportune-
ness is the vital point. A man who has
a girl born into the world may desire that
she shall one day become a mother; but
does he allow a young man over her cradle
to talk of being her husband 1 The point
of time in matters of state is sometimes
the essence of the question. I do not think
that the form of government under which
we now happily and peaceably live can
last for ever. I, of course, am clear that
a day will come when the large and pros-
perous and intelligent populations of Aus-
tralia will never submit to have their
political heads taken out of the English
House of Peers. The thing would be ridicu-
lous. But we should not be called upon
to speculate upon the possibilities of a
distant, and I hope a far distant, future.
Before that day arrives, I hope that all
the English-speaking peoples of the world
may be banded together as the police of
the universe to put down war, whoever
.speaks for it. I have no prejudices against
the natives of any country, be it on the
south, the north, the east, or the west. If
they have advantages, I am sorry that I
do not possess them ; if they have disad-
vantages, I regret it. But bearing in mind
that there are 60,000,000 people in Am erica,
that there will be one day as many or more
in this great island, that there is the
Dominion of Canada, that there are the
colonies and dependencies of the Crown in
.South Africa, India, and elsewhere, that
there are the islands from which we have
sprung—the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Ireland—does not any one see
that the day is near when the number of
persons speaking the English tongue will
be so great as to make the language and
splendid literature of Erance and Germany,
as to commerce, politics, and ordinary life,
as it were, merely classical 1 I mean that
the proportion of the possible number of
Frenchmen or Germans will be so small
that all matters of trade or commerce, or
communication between states, must neces-
sarily come to be transacted in the language
of so vast a majority, which will number
hundreds of millions ; and then they may,
in calm, deliberate, and judicial language—
not the language which is used by our
public men in communicating with their
neighbours, but in that language which
distinguishes men who are really great—
point out by reasoning the unwisdom of
deciding any matter by the power of the
sword; and, if they are not listened to, they
w T ill speak with that united power which no
single nation or combination of nations can
resist. They will dominate the ocean, they
will rule the world. I say this in no spirit
of pride, because I would just as soon be a
citizen of a small state as of a great one.
Its extent could create no compensation for
my faults or shortcomings, nor could its
greatness make amends for anything in
which I might be defective. Those, however,
who have to do with public matters know
that it is a waste of time to commence
any step in the direction of legislation in-
tended to affect a state of circumstances
which will not come into existence, per-
haps, for hundreds of years ; and so in re-
gard to this matter of separation. I, of
course, could not pretend to say, though I
hope it may be the case, that for an un-
limited period we shall stand in the relation,
or in some similar relation, to the mother
country to that in which we stand now.
But at the present time nothing can be
more suicidal to my mind than to do any-
thing to separate us from the old country.
Therefore, we have to consider what this
form of government will bring about;
and, as I have said, I desire to be aided
by those who think, and rightly think, that
they can speak with some authority. Now,
I find in the March number of the Nine-
teenth Century , 1884, an article containing
these words:
Amongst the population which I have tried
to describe as fast taking form in Australia, the
rude sentiments of independence will not lack
indigenous nourishment. The thought, ex-
pressed or unexpressed, will be, “If England
has difficulty in reckoning us Englishmen, we
are all the prouder of being Australians.”
Some form of national pride must take root,
and spread itself wide and deep in the soil, and
it must inevitably be one of two forms—either
truly British, as sharing on equal terms in all
the glory of the empire, or separately and purely
Australian, creating a peculiar glory all its own.
There will be no possibility of contentment with
the status of a dependency in the imperial
system.
In another ten years there will be an addition
to the population of Australasia of two millions,
or nearly, and the boundless resources of the
wide territory will be developed to an extent be-
yond the power of the imagination toforeshadow.
The sense of having achieved will stimulate the
passion for higher achievement. The successful
in adventure and enterprise will want other re-
wards than the mere accumulation of wealth.
The awakening ambitions of the gifted and heroic
will need fitting spheres for their honorable grati-


fication. There will be room for all on the com-
mon field of a great and united empire. Or pos-
sibly, by some untoward turn of events, a field
may be found under the flag of a new common-
wealth.
Looking to the future, I maintain that this
“only link” of the imperial connection is not
strong enough to last.
But you cannot expect to be like England,
you are only a colony. Just so ; that is exactly
what I contend is now the case, and that is
what I ventured to predict cannot continue to
be the case for any long period of time. As the
colonies year by year increase in numbers, in
enterprise, in prosperity, and in sense of power,
the want of a more congenial bond of union will
be more and more strongly felt. Federation
alone will not meet this want. It has not met
it in the Canadian Dominion. It may be, indeed,
that Australian federation, if left to itself, will
engender a feeling which some of its advocates
in England do not now take into account. It
w r ould be the federation of the limbs almost
severed from the body of the empire.
How, if these were the words of some
young enthusiast, fresh from college, I
would treat them no more seriously than
I would treat those beautiful women who
desire to rush to the polls to record their
votes. But this is the language of a mature
statesman, not spoken in the heat of de-
bate, but written for an important and
influential periodical circulating in Great
Britain and throughout the continent of
Europe. The columns of the Nineteenth
Century are honored by contributions from
persons who stand high in politics and
science in England, and the words which
I have quoted are the words of Sir Henry
Parkes himself, who deems that one of the
fruits of this federation would be to bring
into existence a state of things which he
seems to anticipate will come about in
Canada. May Ibe pardoned for repeating
a dozen words of that article :
Federation alone will not meet this want. It
has not met it in the Canadian Dominion.
It is like many subtle poisons which we
take for our benefit. They are thrown
into large quantities of water, but still
they are potent. So here in the mass of
verbiage and unmeaning, high-sounding
phraseology you can discover what the
writer intends to convey, and you find the
essence of the argument to be “that federa-
tion will not meet it,” and “ it would be
a federation of the limbs severed from the
body of the empire.” As this is a matter of
singular moment, and I may not be able ever
to again place before the House or the coun-
try the thoughts which have been forced
upon me by long and careful pondering
over this matter, I hope I shall not be
deemed trespassing too much on the in-
dulgence of this distinguished assembly if
I add to what I have read one other pas-
sage written also by our distinguished Pre-
mier. I shall read this to prove that there
is no limit to the flights of fancy which
Sir Henry Parkes will not in certain states
of mind indulge in. One might think that
he had been subject to the influence of
some fairy spirit, because what I am about
to read might be tolerated from the pen of
an enthusiastic collegian, but not from a
practical statesman. He wrote :
Taking the case of Australasia, I have ven-
tured to suggest that, concurrently with federa-
tion, in which England herself should take the
lead, a council of Australia, to sit in London,
whose functions should embrace the transaction
of all political business between the English
administrations on the other side of the globe
and the Imperial Government in England. This
council would be of the nature of the British
Cabinet itself, so far as a thing called into exist-
ence by authority can be like a thing which is
purely the outgrowth of time, experience, and
political exigency.
How, is it not plain that a man who writes
in this way is not a safe guide at all out-
side the boundaries of an act of Parlia-
ment 1 His ambition must be controlled
by the limits of the Constitution. His
fancy must be fenced in by the acts of
those who, though they may not equal him
either in age or in fancy, have yet the cold
blood of reason controlling the dangers and
inclinations of their enthusiasm. I quote
this passage to prove that in the opinion
of Sir Henry Parkes himself, not twenty
or thirty years ago, but only a little more
than five years ago, federation did not
satisfy Canada, would not satisfy us, and
must be or might be supplemented by
“ the flag of a new commonwealth.” I
do not want to see that flag floating. Of
course, I know, as this fluent speaker,
and others equally glib, are telling me day
by day, that the surroundings of life in
England, both in public and in private,
are not equal to the surroundings in Hew
South Wales. I know very well, as he
has said, that we are the first among the
nations, not only in regard to material
wealth, but also that we are not behind in
all the higher refinements of civilised life.
We have wealth
I quote this so that it may be known I
am limiting myself to the language of the


Premier himself. Said this able man, in
addressing the delegates at Melbourne :
We have wealth, and it would be impossible
for that wealth to exist if it were not for the
well-directed energies of mind and the physical
strength in creating it, which place us before all
the great peoples of the world.
If it were not that I am addressing a
legislative body, if I were free to indulge
in a flippancy which is a joy when you are
under no responsibility, I would write only
two words after that—“ Queensland rum ”
—as the creation of the state of mind
that could give forth such gross absurdi-
ties. Of course I know that this poli-
tician’s language and his life are hallowed
by sanctities above any of ours 3 and, like
many persons who mouth religion, but
never regard it, he refers to what is too
sacred to be brought into a discussion like
this. He says :
That principle of divine goodness, call it what
you may, which exists and overrules the world,
has created this fair land of Australia, situated
as it is—wisely created it for a grand experi-
ment in human government.
Imagine for a moment that a man could
part so frequently with the great friend of
his early manhood, which contributed to
and brought about all his success —com-
mon-sense —to try and make out, as if it
could be more known to him than to the
humblest of us, that the Almighty had
created “ this fair land of Australia for a
grand experiment in human government!”
And that experiment was to be made by
a man who ought certainly to be canonised
at the earliest day—Sir Henry Parkes,
our own Premier ! If we are that people,
I decline to join in with any of the other
governments. Then, what an anti-climax!
has created this fair land of Australia, situated
as it is —wisely created it for a grand experi-
ment in human government
I do not know the meaning of the ex-
pression, “this fair land of Australia,” and
when you do not know what a thing
means it must be something extremely
clever.
and there is no lion and no natural difficulty be-
fore us.
I regret very much that my onerous occu-
pation prevents me from expressing an
opinion as to what the lord of the Zoo-
logical Gai’dens can do in a matter of this
kind, and as to the natural difficulties, I
admit there are none. Besides, what
natural difficulties could prevail if the
Almighty had, as this writer says, created
“ this fair land of Australia for a grand
experiment in human government”? How
could any lion or natural difficulty put
aside the power of the Almighty 1 It is
time that this master of words was un-
veiled, not on any ground outside his pub-
lic career ; but the Premier has thought
fit not only to put this matter forward,
but also, by the kind of language I have
quoted from the Centennial Magazine, to
almost deter you from being able to muster
courage to debate it at all, for you are
told, if you do so, you are jealous and
suspicious, you are men of little faith, you
are pessimists —a word, I know, which
covers a multitude of unmeaning things,
and one which we have not given our-
selves the trouble to comprehend. A man
who uses that kind of language must, un-
less we have no courage at all, expect to
have his ideas not only examined, but,
also, critically examined 3 and he himself,
in a little preface to the publication which
he caused to be circulated from one end of
the colony to the other, quoted with ap-
proval these words, as regards this very
proposal:
Criticism is the fire through which ail new
proposals of importance are passed, and if they
cannot pass the ordeal they are better dropped.
With all respect to that experienced poli-
tician, I say that these proposals cannot
pass through the fire 3 they must remain
there 3 they are not to be taken out of the
fire of criticism 3 they cannot stand any
critical examination whatsoever. Out of
consideration for the kindness and courtesy
of lion, members, I will refrain from read-
ing, and will merely refer to the speeches
made by the delegates who met in Mel-
bourne 3 and some of them are most able
speeches. I refer to those speeches for
the sake of the opinion expressed in some
of them as to what the effect of federation
would be 3 and I also refer hon. members
to speeches of distinguished members of
our own Assembly, and to the opinions of
writers in a powerful section in our press,
to show that this would be a step towards
independence. And if I were in favour
of independence, I should still not adopt
it; but I have, necessarily, to allow that
the fact that I think it is a danger can in
no way weigh with those in favour of in-
dependence. That this is the consequence
is, to my mind, self-evident. While we are


separate colonies, no colony alone, without
being ridiculous, could think of hoisting an
independent flag. However, as there are
many who are not unwilling to adopt a re-
publican form of government even now—
many of whom I would speak with the
most perfect respect, because they are en-
titled to their opinion as much as I am to
mine, and it may be that the opinion I come
to is an erroneous one—l, therefore, as to
federation, address myself to those who are
in favour of separation from Great Britain,
as much as to those who are against it, on
another, an independent, a higher ground
altogether; and in order to make it clear,
I must come down to what the clever par-
tisans of any project always call details —
that is to say, the essence of the thing. Just
as they would call the ceremony of marriage
a detail, the maintenance of children a de-
tail, they would speak of every matter which
has minor internal machinery as merely a
detail. As I have already indicated, I
will not be so disingenuous as to pretend
that many of the provisions in the Amer-
ican Constitution, as well as many pro-
visions in the Canadian Constitution, are
of the essence of that form of govern-
ment ; but there are others that are. And
I now come to that which I must almost
apologise for having the courage to say.
If I had not spoken until this moment I
should not have lost one inch of the
ground upon which I have come to an
opinion adverse to federal government—
that is to say, my mind has been con-
vinced by what I am now going to point
out. I must put into words what is
known to everybody, and some things which
are self-evident ; to make my conclusion
clear I cannot avoid it. We all know—
and I am of course assuming that I have
the assent of this honorable House to
what I indicated before —we all know
that the form of federal government in
Canada was adopted with the sanction of
all the public men in England and of
Canadian statesmen after the most deliber-
ate consideration. I, therefore, decline
to reason with those who say that some-
how, somewhere, this fair land of Aus-
tralia can, under divine guidance, be con-
trolled by a form of government which
will not admit of being put into words.
I confess 1 cannot reason with those per-
sons. But taking the confederate form
of government as a most able piece of
political machinery, what is it 1 I give
the “ go-by ” altogether, even to so serious
a matter as the seat of Government. lam
disregarding altogether the question of
free-trade and protection. I let pass any
matter connected with the public debt,
or with the assets of the colony. I pass
by any question affecting our railways.
But, as in the human form you may take
from a man many organs, there are some
which you cannot take and leave life,
so is it with the constitution we are now
considering. The Canadian Constitution,
of course, includes the central parlia-
ment, and the Queen, I do not say go-
vernor-general, and you will find that I
am using the language of the imperial act
—the constitution includes the Queen and
the two houses of Parliament —that is to
say, a house of commons and a senate.
Now, as I cannot touch every point, I
hope to be supported in my views by
those who have much more knowledge of
this matter than I have, and who have
had much more experience in matters
of statesmanship. I hope they will sup-
plement what I, from the consideration
of my own unworthiness, and from the
consideration of time, do not presume
to put minutely before the House. I
assume that the system which creates the
superior parliament, the federal parlia-
ment, is one which cannot materially
be altered with any advantage, that is
to say, without abandoning the form of
government altogether. If you have a
superior parliament, necessarily the other
parliaments must be inferior ; so they
have in Canada provincial governments,
or state governments, and they have
the supreme government. The governor-
general of the Dominion of Canada is ap-
pointed by the Queen ; but the governors
of the different states, called lieutenant-
governors, are appointed by the gover-
nor-general, with the advice of the privy
council. Now, let me for a moment be
guilty of one of my many failings, that
of breaking away from my main argu-
ment. To satisfy hon. members that the
Premier has taken up a subject to which,
either from the want of inclination or the
want of time, he has not given due atten-
tion, I would call to the minds of any who
read the reports of the debates in the other
House the inclusion in the hon. gentleman’s
speech of a ponderous and supposed learned


reference to the Privy Council of England.
The Privy Council of England is a body
without limit to its number, and, apart
from those who form the administration,
it has no more to do with the government
of England than I have. Membership of
this council is a title of honor. I shall not
air my learning on the subject by going
back to the time of King Alfred to trace
out its beginning. The Privy Council, in
so far as the expression is used in connec-
tion with the government of England, is
the administration; and you will find
that, while the Premier proposed that we
should bring into existence a copy, as it
were, of that great body in England,
which no doubt embraces in its number all
the men distinguished in public life, and
a number of men distinguished in other
walks of life, he proposed also that we
should have a council like that of Canada.
He went on to paint the grandeur and
the antiquity of, and the reverence due to,
such a body; but in fact —and I speak
under the sanction of the plainest words in
the English language—words in the act of
Parliament itself—the privy council of
Canada is nothing more nor less than the
executive. It is in no way the counter-
part of that great body, the Privy Council
of England. I will explain to lion, mem-
bers the reason why the term was used. In
the provincial parliaments the expression,
theretofore, in vogue was the “ Executive
Council,” and in just the same way as the
term “senate” was used in order that the
upper house in the central government
might not be confounded with the upper
houses in the provinces, the expression
“privy council” was applied to the central
executive to avoid confusion with the
executive bodies in the provinces. As
well might this distinguished gentleman
say that the Canadian senate was a de-
scendant of the senate of ancient Home.
This senate, the house of commons, and
the governor-general, form the legislature,
in whom the power of legislation is
vested, the ministry being called the
privy council in contra distinction to the
executive councils in the provinces. I
am quite aware that by her Majesty’s
gracious leave those who have been mem-
bers of the privy council are entitled to
the prefix “honorable.” It will be seen
by any one who refers to any authority
that not only are these not members of
the Privy Council, with certain exceptions,
but that the same course is adopted as
is adopted here, namely : When a member
is nominated by the Governor as a mem-
ber of the Executive Council he is still a
member of that body when the Govern-
ment leaves office. But, in accordance
with a wise and useful custom, here
as in Canada, he then resigns, and if
he did not resign he would be removed.
The only privy council in Canada is the
executive consisting of the premier and
the other ministers. What knowledge
can this experienced statesman really have
of this matter, when in addressing not
a mob, but Parliament itself, he describes
in this context the greatness of the
Privy Council of England? Just in the
same way members of the Government
have spoken of the advantages of a court
of appeal in Australia to be, so they say,
as in Canada, free from an expense and
tedious appeal to a distant judicial body.
Any one who has the least knowledge in
my profession knows well that although
the power of appeal was taken away from
the Canadian courts as a matter of right,
it was held after long argument before the
judicial committee of the Privy Council—
and any lion, member who will favour me
with his personal attendance at any time
can see the books to which I am refer-
ring—that the Dominion was still a de-
pendency of the Crown, subject to legis-
lation by the Imperial Parliament, that
the Queen was the head of the Executive,
and that although there was no right of
appeal, the prerogative existing in the
Queen as the fountain of justice from
time immemorial, had not been taken
away. In consequence of this —and lam
now coming to one of my most strong
objections—the shelves of the library of
any lawyer in the city are filled with
reports of cases heard on appeal—in the
December number I believe there are
five—by the judicial committee of the
Privy Council. Now, to prove that I de-
sire, as far as my knowledge will enable
me, to be judicially fair, I think, after
some consideration, although I may be
wrong, since it is a difficult point, that
if the imperial act of Parliament which
created the federal government in Canada
expressly took away, that is, if the Queen
had chosen to relinquish, her great pre-
rogative as the fountain and dispenser of


justice, it would have been legal and con-
stitutional. So, therefore, I admit that it
would be possible in our act, if such an
act is passed —and I know it never will
be ; but if it could be —to ask the Impe-
rial Parliament that not only should there
be no right of appeal, but also that the
Queen should give up her prerogative and
divest herself of the power of hearing a
petition of appeal. But I am satisfied
that any person who is capable of reflec-
tion will see that that would not make
the slightest difference, but would only
make bad worse. Bear in mind that you
must have what the Premier terms “ vast
plenary power,” and that, as far as I can
judge, is the opinion of nearly all of the
delegates. You must have this supreme
power vested in the federal parliament.
What would happen I am going to prove
to hon. members. Under this form of
government the Assembly might give
months of consideration to a bill, and we
might give months of consideration to
it ; but the governor of the province—and
I want to draw attention to what as
far as I know no one has yet drawn
attention to —might reserve it for the con-
sideration of the federal executive. Now,
does not every hon. member see what the
position would be 1 Would any of us de-
vote our attention to public affairs in a
legislative body, if the governor of the
province could reserve our acts for the con-
sideration of the federal executive, and I
will suppose, which is probable, that Sir
Plenry Parkes would be the first premier
of the federal government. The Canadian
states, struggling with a bond to which they
were forced to submit, appealed for aid to
the Imperial Parliament and to the judi-
cial committee of the Privy Council, as I
will prove to any one who doubts it; but
it was pointed out that the power was
vested in the Executive without any right
of appeal. What is meant by the Execu-
tive l In Canada the governor-general
refused to remove a lieutenant-governor
of one of the provinces, and the ministry
insisted that, although the power was
vested in the “ Governor, with the advice
of the Executive Council,” the governor
was in the same position as the Queen,
and must act on the advice of the
ministry or find other advisers. The
matter was referred to the home
Government—l am sorry to say that
the lieutenant-governor died of a broken-
heart by reason of the ignominy to which
he was subjected—and it was held that
the governor-general was bound to act
upon the advice of the Executive Coun-
cil. The Executive Council removed
the lieutenant-governor. What does that
mean 1 The Premier has launched this
mighty project without consulting the
Cabinet. Numbers of acts of government
of the greatest importance are done by the
Premier in accordance with constitutional
government, and afterwards ratified by the
Executive Council merely upon his report
or opinion. So in the same way, because no
man can possibly investigate the details of
every Government department, matters
affecting every department are brought
into law on the report of a minister. Now
does not the House see that if Sir Henry
Parkes—and he, probably, is the most
competent man in Australia to assume
such a position—were the head of a federal
government, he would have the power of
appointing the lieutenant-governors -of all
the provinces ? I admit that it would be the
act of the Executive; but, of course, we
know that in a matter of this kind the voice
of the head of the Government would be
the mostpowerful. Aslion. members know,
it is a rule of constitutional law that if a
party is defeated in Parliament the Go-
vernor is bound to choose his advisers from
the dominant party. Now suppose —and I
knowthat there are men most distinguished
in the law and in public life who hold a
different view from mine as to federation,
but I should be glad if they would point out
the possibility of refuting what I am going
to indicate—suppose that the seven colonies
of Australia were united under one go-
vernment, and a measure came before the
federal parliament in which New South
Wales and Queensland took one view and
Tasmania and Western Australia and the
other colonies took another ; according to
the resolution which has notbeen put before
us, the Ci’own colonies might also be repre-
sented. If the members representing Tas-
mania and Western Australia and the other
colonies displaced the existing government,
the governor-general would be compelled,
in accordance with constitutional usage,
to take his ministers from the successful
side. That ministry would then be com-
posed of representatives of, say, Western
Australia, Tasmania, Soxitli Australia, and


Victoria. Is it not, then, self-evident that
we in this colony should in that case be sub-
ject to the control of a ministry which did
not embrace one representative of the
colony? Under the Canadian Constitution
not only can the governor-general appoint
the lieutenant-governor and probably
there are some gentlemen living within the
boundaries of New South Wales who are
studying, and preparing themselves to
exercise with honor the distinguished po-
sition of lieutenant-governor. We have seen
the kind of men whom some of our premiers
have delighted to honor. What would you
think of a premier giving us a snub by
making such a man lieutenant-governor ?
You could not remove him ; there is no
appeal of any kind whatsoever against the
appointment. But, further, I will suppose
that the lieutenant-governor is a man of
ability, and that the two houses of Parlia-
ment have given the greatest consideration
to some project of legislation, and that it
passes into law. You and I, and everybody
act upon that law; we may have bought
properties under it; we may have con-
tracted marriage under its provisions: we
may have entered into the most solemn ob-
ligations ; we may have altered our social
status, or private position, or business re-
lations under it, because we know it has
been passed by both houses of Parliament.
The Governor, it is true, has power to
reserve it, or to refuse his assent ; but we
will presume that he does neither. He
naturally submits to the law officers of
the Crown to see if it contravenes his in-
structions, and he is advised that the act
does not contravene any imperial act, and
that it is within the power of the provincial
parliament. Therefore, it passes into law,
and you and I act upon it. Yet I will
prove beyond all doubt, that even under
these circumstances, if the question arises
in a court of law, that court has to con-
sider whether it was within the power of
the provincial parliament to pass the act,
and if it decides that it is not, the act will
be an utter nullity. I have in my cham-
bers, if hon. members should take suffi-
cient interest in this matter to see whether
I am speaking upon well-founded materials,
more than twenty cases which have arisen,
not before the Privy Council only, but
which have been tested before the various
courts of Canada, and then been taken
on appeal to the Privy Council. Indeed,
there is in Canada a volume known as
Cartwright’s cases, under the British North
America Act—a volume of cases, of this
kind alone on questions which I will
point out never can be avoided. That is
one of the principal objections I have
to the system. If you have several pro-
vincial parliaments and a superior par-
liament, questions must always be arising
as between the powers of the different
states, first of all, and then between the
different states and the dominion parlia-
ment. The consequence is that Canada
has, like America, been flooded with law
ever since this act of parliament w r as
passed, and I am almost glad that I am
not in sufficiently good health to appear in
court for the next day or two, for I should
scarcely have courage to meet the mem-
bers of my profession after pointing this
out as my principal ground of objection.
In the year 1885 there arose an appeal
before the judicial committee of the Privy
Council between the attorney-general of
Quebec and a person named B.eid, re-
spondent. I will read a word or two from
the Privy Council Law Report to satisfy
you that it is unavoidable under a system
of federal government that there should
always be arising questions as to the limits
of the state legislatures inter se, and the
powers of the federal parliament with
regard to each state.
It was contended that the act in question was
within the province of the provincial legisla-
ture. It was passed several years ago, duly re-
ceived the assent prescribed by the imperial act
(the act creating the American federation) in
lieu of the former royal assent,
That is, that the act, instead of receiving
the royal assent as in former times, re-
ceived the assent of the governor-general,
with the advice of the executive council,
was never disallowed, and was acted upon.
Anri what was the effect ? Was it an
act affecting the liberty of the subject,
the foundation of the constitution, or the
powers of the federal or provincial par-
liament ? It was an order under 33, 34
Victoria, No. 9, declaring that a certain
duty of 10 cents, imposed by an act
of the Quebec legislature on every ex-
hibit produced in the courts of justice in
any action depending therein, was not
warranted by law, the act imposing it
being ultra vires of the provincial legisla-
ture. Here, then, was an act of Parliament


that had received the imperial assent, and
had been acted upon a number of years;
but a man named Reid thought fit to
question it, and there was an appeal from
an order of the Supreme Court reversing
a judgment of the Court of Queen’s Bench
of Quebec, and restoring a judgment of
the Supreme Court of Montreal. Then
the case was taken to the Privy Coun-
cil. The court held that the act was
beyond the power of the provincial par-
liament, and that it was consequently
void. I tell hon. members that the judges
of all the courts in Canada are constantly
differing on this very matter as to whether
the provincial parliaments are capable of
legislating in particular matters, or as to
the form in which they have legislated.
This act, 33 Victoria, was held to be
ultra vires of the provincial legislature.
Now, of course, I quite admit that if this
colony is a mere patch, it is of no moment;
but with regard to a mighty territory
like New South Wales, with a distin-
guished future before it, I appeal to hon.
members to think for a moment whether
our legislature would embrace within its
Avails persons of ordinary intelligence, to
pass acts of Parliament which could be
held by the courts years afterwards to be
%dtra vires. Supposing, for instance, that
I should be so unfortunate as to bring an
act of Parliament in here which perhaps
I might have framed with great earnest-
ness and perhaps affection, and then after
I had given months of attention to it,
and it had passed both houses, and the
had given his assent
to it, and whilst I was rejoicing I heard
that a telegram had come down from the
federal city saying that Sir Henry Parkes
has disallowed it. To suppose for one
moment that Ave would submit to having
a lieutenant-governor appointed by the
federal executive. Hon. members know that
in the American Constitution the system
of leaving defined sovereign powers in the
state parliaments, and the residuum in the
federal parliament gave rise to a civil war.
The statesmen of Canada, with the ap-
proval of the best advisers, came to the
conclusion that they ought to avoid that
danger, and therefore they placed the resi-
duum of power in the proA T incial parlia-
ments. I have stated that the appeal
to the Privy Council might be given up by
the Queen. Supposing it were. A local
appeal court must stand in its place. Do
hon. members not see that there must be
an unbroken stream of contest on the ques-
tion, whether a certain provincial act is
within the powers of the provincial par-
liament or within the powers of the federal
parliament ? There must be somebody to
decide the point. Even in Canada, the
ultimate decision rests with the judicial
committee of the Privy Council. And
if you do not have that body, you must
have a local supreme court. I, for one,
with all respect to the most distinguished
members of my profession, whether on
the bench or off it, decline to give in
effect legislative power to the supreme
court of any of the colonies, singly or
jointly. The ultimate legislative power
would be vested in a supreme court of
appeal—that is to say, in a majority of
the judges. Bear in mind, that if there
were five judges sitting, and two of them
thought that an act was valid, but the
rest thought differently, the opinion of
three would prevail just as much as if the
court were unanimous. You would have
not only provincial acts, but also federal
acts, open to question before the court of
appeal. In Canada, the right of the Queen
to grant leave to appeal has been left.
The Privy Council, after long argument,
came to the conclusion that her Majesty
had not parted with her prerogative. The
judicial committee has not, I regret to
say, that local knowledge which, to my
mind, is an essential in coming to a
judicial conclusion upon a local act. For
instance, in the matter of the power of the
Minister to determine the rents of pastoral
tenants of the Crown, our Supreme Court,
against their original impression, after a
long debate and reserved judgment, unani-
mously came to the conclusion that the
act gave that power : they said they could
not legislate, and that the act could only
be read in that way; but a number of
distinguished jurists, forming for a moment
the judicial committee of the Privy Council
—which, bear in mind, is not a fixed body,
but consists at times of the first judges in
the world, and at other times of men not
so eminent—to the astonishment of the pro-
fession, the judges, the parliament, and the
people, reversed that unanimous decision.
Of course I would not presume, as I was
counsel for the Crown in the case, to say
one word disrespectful to that distinguished


body ; but the fact is that it had not, and
could not have, the knowledge of the state
of things, speaking generally, in New South
Wales "which our judges possess. Now,
that difficulty would seldom arise, I admit,
as to a question between the federal par-
liament and the provincial parliaments,
and therefore to roam into the realms of
fancy, and imagine that this state of things
has been brought into existence, I should
prefer that the decision of these great
questions should be left to the judicial
committee of the Privy Council; but if it
were not, it would have to be left to a local
tribunal. So that you have this choice,
and no other. You must either allow our
citizens and our Government to take their
appeals, at vast expense and unnecessary
delay, to be heard before the tribunal
in London —which, mind, is the absolute
arbiter with regard to legislation, and if
it holds that a federal act or a provin-
cial act is void, it is gone entirely—or you
must have it decided by the judges of the
Australian tribunals. I should be very
sorry, under present circumstances, to live
under a form of government where the
acts of the superior and subordinate legis-
latures were subject, not immediately after-
wards, but at any time to be considered
by the judicial body, with whom should
rest the power of overturning, it may
be after the lapse of years, the decision
of the legislature. I am afraid I must
leave to other speakers the completion of
the work X have desired, and no doubt
have ineffectually attempted to do this
evening. Do not let it be thought that
there are not matters of, if not equal,
nearly equal moment which could be
dwelt upon in opposition to a federal form
of government. Let it be remembered
that Nova Scotia has already tried to free
herself from the federal yoke, and that
Newfoundland has never joined the Do-
minion. Let me presume to occupy
a few moments more in pointing out
that practically there has been a rebel-
lion against the federal act. I may state
that in a book of great merit, written on
this matter by a member of the English
bar, called “ Munroe on the Constitution
of Canada, ’ it is stated that the federal
parliament having disallowed a railway
act of the Parliament of Manitoba, the
Government of that province proceeded
with the construction of the railway, and
thereupon the federal minister for justice
obtained an injunction against the con-
tractor and the company practically pro-
hibiting the carrying out of the work.
During the dispute the provincial govern-
ment petitioned the Queen-in-Council,
urging that a provincial bill ought nob
to be vetoed so long as it was within the
power of the provincial legislature to pass
it. Well, we may pass a bill here author-
ising the construction of a railway, and
commence to carry out the work, but the
federal premier may not allow the mea-
sure because it is inconsistent with the
rights of the federal parliament, and our
government may disregard the veto, and
then a federal minister will apply to the
federal court for an injunction. Look at
the degradation :
It may be pointed out that any interference by
the Crown,with the veto of the governor-general
exercised on the advice of his responsible ad-
visers, would be distinctly unconstitutional and
at variance with the principle of ministerial
responsibility.
Then this writer states that negotiations,
not yet completed, were being carried on
to bring about an understanding between
the dominion provinces and the Pacific
Railway Company, by which the company
are to surrender their monopoly in con-
sideration of the money payment. I de-
sire to point out that the minor pro-
vinces, like Columbia, are vast territories,
with comparatively small populations ;
Columbia having 50,000 or 60,000 inhabi-
tants. We find that most substantial
bribes were given to those provinces to
induce them to come into the federation.
I have admitted that the stress of circum-
stances affecting the life of a country may
not only justify but may force you to
agree to federation ; but we are not in that
position and I want finally to point out
that it is beyond, in my humble mind, the
possibility of cavil, that all that is aimed
at can be obtained without any federal
parliament whatever. The origin of this
most pernicious suggestion was—as de-
clared by Sir Henry Parkes in his letter
to the Premier of Victoria in October last
—declared to be a great and pressing
military question, which has brought to the
surface the defining of a federal government
at the present juncture. Pirst of all, that
is not accurate. There is no great and
pressing military question at all. Put I


must pay one compliment to Sir Henry
Parkes, and it is this : That statesman
seems merely by his personal prestige to
have induced the other delegates to
abandon their own original and reasonable
proposition. It will be found that this
resolution was proposed by Mr. Deakin,
in addition to the resolution I have been
speaking of, and he was afterwards per-
suaded to abandon it :
That as some time must elapse before a federal
constitution can be adopted, and as it is desir-
able that the colonies should at once take united
action to provide for military defence, and for
effective co-operation in other matters of common
concern, it is advisable that the Federal Council
should be employed for such purposes so far as
its powers will permit, and with such an exten-
sion of its powers as may be decided upon, and
that all the colonies should be represented on the
council.
I am aware that Sir Henry Parkes—and
the matter is ridiculed by one of the great
English papers—ventured, although he
could not tell what the meaning of the
words in the act of Parliament was, to say
what, as a lawyer, I should like to hear
the Attorney-General support him in.
I know it is an inclination of human
nature that if A puts forward a thing,
B, who may be in the same profession, is
inclined to disagree with him ; but I will
submit my opinions to the general voice of
the profession, including those who occupy
judicial office, that the words “general de-
fence” in the act of the Executive Council of
Australasia must include this very question
of common defence. A reasonable objection
has been taken to the Federal Council on
the ground of its being composed of such a
small number of members ; but the fact is
that very few people have read the act.
One of the most distinguished members of
this House, Sir William Manning, although
a lawyer, has admitted that he never read
the act in his life, and it will be found
that nearly all who agree with Sir Henry
Parkes have not read a word of it. I de-
clare that within the four corners of that
act of Parliament everything that is de-
sired can be carried out. I admit that
some things would require an order in
Council, but the act authorises orders in
Council on any matter on its being re-
quired by two colonies. The advantage
of this act is that with regard to certain
matters, and that is the difference between
forced and voluntary union, the local legis-
lature is master of the situation. First of
all they can withdraw from the council at
any time. I admit that there is no execu-
tive power, but that can be created by the
several parliaments of the different colo-
nies. All that is wanted is an imperial
act of Parliament to give validity to that
act. In Canada a number of acts have been
passed since the imperial act became law to
aid in its construction. If the colonies were
to pass an act worded in the same way with
regard to the military forces, permanent
or otherwise, it would only require a few
words in the imperial act to give it vali-
dity throughout the whole of Australia,
and what are we to bring into existence
this mighty senate for, and for what are
we to have a governor-general to degrade
the position of our own governor, and a
dominion parliament over the provincial
parliaments 1 What is all this for 1 It is
to do what we can do already. It may
be that in some of the colonies the desire
for union is not sincere; but if it is sin-
cere, which I wish to believe, and do be-
lieve, all we have to do with regard to the
military forces is what I have indicated.
In Canada itself the Queen is stated in the
act to be the head of all the military forces.
So she must be and ever wrnuld remain
whilst we retain our present relationship
with the mother country. Another matter
was referred to which can hardly be spoken
of seriously ; the question as to a common
railway gauge. Ignorant as lam of all such
matters, I would undertake in an hour to
put on paper an act of Parliament which
directly it was passed would bring into
existence a common railway gauge with-
out any act of the Imperial Parliament.
Those are what I may call the failles that
are brought into existence to give life to
this dreamy scheme. May Ibe pardoned
for pointing this out. The 11th section of
the Federal Council of Australasia Act of
1885 says:
At the request of the governors of any three
of the colonies a session of the council shall be
summoned to deal with such special matters as
may be mentioned in the proclamation con-
vening it.
And there is a clause providing that
the governors of any two or more of the colonies
may upon an address of the legislatures of such
colonies refer for the consideration and deter-
mination of the council any questions relating
to those colonies or their relations with ofle
another, and the council shall thereupon have
authority to consider and determine by act of
council the matters so referred to it.


Matters of any kind whatsoever—but not
by force. You may take the military
question. On the address of the legisla-
tures of such colonies the determination of
the council will be as good law as even an
imperial act of parliament. But this does
not rest on force. Further on the act gives
power to any colony to withdraw at any
time. Any one who is candid will admit
that only a civil war could break up the
federal government if it were once brought
into existence. To think for a moment
that we are to be prevailed with by being
told that enmity may exist between the
colonies, which I deny. The jealousy said to
exist is grossly exaggerated ; rivalry is one
thing, and jealousy is another, and I hear
these words day by day grossly misap-
plied. Because I do not choose to share
my garden in common with my neighbour,
or to ask him to make a common table or
to share expenses with me, is that any
ground for saying that we are jealous of
one another? We think it better to bring
into existence our powers of conciliation
and of consideration for one another—-and
I deny altogether that there is the slight-
est possibility, except by the kind of cor-
respondence that the Premier has initi-
ated, of bringing about a state of feeling
that could ever result in bloodshed be-
tween the colonies ; and even if it did, do
you not see that in America the federal
union did not prevent the most disas-
trous civil war known in either ancient
or modern times. I thank this honorable
House for the very patient hearing that I
Sydney: Charles Potter, Government Printer.—lB9o.
have had accorded to my views. Ido not
speak from any private party or political
motive whatsoever. I admit that I may be
al together wrong, and I shoul d be indebted to
the man who would point out my error to
me. As far as I have been able to consider
this question, I have not been able to re-
sist the conclusion, first of all, that it is
premature; secondly, that it is not neces-
sary ; and, thirdly, that it is full of great
and critical dangers. As to those who see
in it an instrument of independence, I re-
gret that I know of nothing in the way of
argument that would affect them ; but 1
would pray this Chamber, and humbly
through it the whole colony, to defer as
long as may be the breaking of the link
that binds us to the old country. The
home from which we sprang is the home of
freedom. Ours is made the model for the
constitution of every independent state.
She has laid the foundation of the civil
and religious liberty to which I owe, per-
haps, the position I am honored in occu-
pying to-night. It was that country that
struck asunder the shackles of the slave.
The writers who move us either to tears
or to laughter are the geniuses who adorn
her unparalleled literature. All that is
sacred, all that is really elevated and re-
fined in our existence, has come from Eng-
land ; and I say that there is nothing in
the surroundings, in either public or pri-
vate life, than could be other than in the
direction of degradation when you pro-
pose to part company with that great
country.


i
#
*
!
