



V
►


public men, to whom expediency is strictly subordinated to justice.
It was tbe confidence which his character inspired that made the
task of pacification so easy in the .Punjab; and no public officer
probably ever existed in India, better qualified to represent the
British nation, or to embody and show forth in his charactei and
acts the spirit with which it is actuated towards the people of
India. It is as the pacificator and regenerator of the Punjab,
that the name of Lawrence will illustrate the recent history
of British empire. His influence over the people was unbounded.
His presence alone at Lahore, in 1847, seemed to check the
refractory spirit of the Sikh soldiery. Fearless and confident,
he went unattended among them attaching them by acts of kind-
ness, and controlling them by the energy of his administration.
His temporary absence in England proved the signal for distm-
bances, which brought him back to public life, but too late to
avert the rebellion which ensued. The private virtues are the
source of all public excellence. Those of Sir Henry Lawrence
were as conspicuous as his services were great. Indefatigable
in the discharge of his duties, he was a rigid exacter of work
from all w 7 ho held office under him, "With a heart of feminine
softness, and a tenderness for the feelings of others, that to moie
rugged natures sometimes almost assumed the appearance of
weakness, he displayed an immoveable firmness of purpose when
he had to deal with tyranny or w T rong. He w-as feared for his
justice, quite as much as he was loved for his beneficence. In
the highest part of his character, that of an earnest and consistent
Christian, he w 7 as unsurpassed by any individual in India; and
it may be long before w r e shall again see the skilful administrator,
the military reformer, the sagacious statesman, and the active
philanthropist so beautifully blended and usefully combined
as in the eminent man w 7 hose services w 7 e have briefly sketched,
and wdiose memory must always be held in the most reverential
estimation, not only in the country which w r as the immediate
sphere of his duties, but in that which has the honour to num-
ber him among her sons, and by the Empire whose interests he
gfeatly contributed to advance, and whose true glory it w T as
ever his highest ambition to promote.


" J,' 1Y :~ Re Po rf - of the Select Committee of the Legislative
rZZ l L° n tr Aborigines; together with the Proceedings of
Committee, Minutes of Evidence, and Appendices. By Au-
thontv: John Fereis, Government Printer, Melbourne.
In close alliance with the geographical element in human know-
ledge are severa questions, the general solution of which is fitted
to exercise a salutary influence on the progress of scientific in-
KnLT the advancement of the highest" interests of society.
Ut these questions, however, some of the most significant are
peculiarly liable to neglect, partly because, at first sight, they
seem trivial and superficial; but mainly, perhaps, because of the
inti usive inroads of the logical faculty on the legitimate domain
■ , p of ass .°ciation, and the consequent depreciation, by
minds of a certain order of any method of intellectual culture
at is apparently opposed to the claims of a rigorous dialectic.
.. t f ll , exact a P sw er to the question, in what direction do the
principal rivers of a new country flow? cannot, of course, be
received from any description, however faithful, of their charac-
teristic fishes, or the plants that adorn their banks, is a proposition
too obvious to require any detailed exposition. No such organic
connection subsists between the naked phenomena of locality
and life, as will allow any question regarding the former to be
directly replied to by the latter.
From the stimulus, however, that is naturally imparted to
e thoughtful explorer of any new region, by the presence of
living forms, animal or vegetable, more especially if such are
of a novel character, all questions regarding the strictly inorganic
features of the district in which they occur cannot fail to assume
an increase, alike of definiteness in form and urgency of import
In some vital respects, indeed, the manifold activities of life
than in °^ an . ic phenomena, -are a
needful auxiliary t8 tire f]l§tiiiet apprehension and serviceable re-
membrance of the merely visible bearings of the earth’s surface,
but especially of such portions of it as have not been directly
submitted to the chain and theodolite of the surveyor. ‘
- 111 y ! s both of the desirable excitement and the
associative links of thought that are supplied by the presence of
life, in its relation to the definition of the mere geography of a
the most minute and trivial portions of a thoughtful
travellers observations assume no mean or transient importance.
Attaching a positive value to the smallest fragments of fact, and
even to their most limited engagements of the suggestive faculty
of thought, the shrewd inquirer into the local arrangements of


nature, as presented to the eye, in different regions, will promptly
accept illustrations, however faint and remote, of his determining
principles of inquiry. He will not, for example, peremptorily re-
fuse to appreciate the feelings of a venerable judge in former days,
whose lively botanical predilections were wont occasionally to
exceed the due limits of senatorial self-restraint; because, in that
delighted twinkle of the eye, when, as on one occasion, he unex-
pectedly beheld from his carriage-window a pre-eminently hand-
some specimen of the common harebell, a silent but emphatic ex-
pression of his having acquired a more distinct knowledge of the
surrounding district, was unconsciously implied. In that sharply
realised habitat of that very simple plant, for the first time, a clue
to far wider relations in the organic and inorganic constitution
of the environing landscape had been indirectly vouchsafed.
Nor, if the subtle bonds of sympathy, that, winding in mystic
mazes through the thoughts of the poet, link together in fertile
union the inward law of interpretation with the outward facts of
observation, be recognised as of legitimate influence in the
structure of true knowledge, will the following brief narrative of
a summer noon’s walk be devoid of instruction as to the sug-
gestive nature of living things, when viewed in the light of
stepping-stones to a more intelligible acquaintance with the
visible scenes in which they occur, and a more enlarged concep-
tion of the landscape of which such scenes form a part.
“ When,” remarks the Eev. Perceval Graves, in a charming
letter to Mr Woodward in Archer Butler’s Life, “ we reached the
side of Loughrigtarn (which you may remember Wordsworth
notes for its similarity, in the peculiar character of its beauty, to
the Lago de Nerni, Dianse Speculum), the loveliness of the scene
arrested our steps and fixed our gaze. The splendour of a July
noon surrounded us and lit up the landscape, with the Langdale
Pikes soaring above, and the bright tarn shining beneath; and
when the poet’s eyes were satisfied with their feast on the beauty
familiar to thorn* they sought relief in the search, to them a
happy vital habit, for new beauty in the flower-enamelled turf
at his feet. There his attention was attracted by a fair, smooth
stone of the size of an ostrich’s egg, seeming to imbed at its
centre, and, at the same time, to display a dark star-shaped fossil of
most distinct outline. Upon closer inspection, this proved to be
the shadow of a daisy projected upon it with extraordinary pre-
cision, by the intense light of an almost vertical sun.”
But, moreover, in recognising the importance of organic forms
—the characteristic mammal or bird, or attractive blossom of a
prevailing tree—in relation to man’s more definite and memorable
acquaintance with the superficial features of any region, it is also
YOL. XXXIT. NO. LXIY. 2 A


deserving of special remark, that, in submission to the laws of the
inorganic phenomena of nature, living beings constantly receive
lasting impressions from these, and are moulded by them into
various impressive forms. It is, indeed, impossible so to analyse
the history of any one species of animal or plant, as to trace
the sources of colours, or describe tlm causes of the
different proportions of the raw materials of organic or inorganic
chemistry, that in different parts of the earth enter into its mani-
fold tissues. Of the many formative Influences of life, however,
when selecting the appropriate materials as they exist in a crude
form, that unique force quietly transforms them into novel shapes
—giving to the eye its characteristic pigment, to the muscle its
fibre, to the nerve its sheath, and to the bone its cells every
man, who at any time asks himself the simplest questions regard-
ing his own flesh and blood, is fully aware. TV hile, in the
presence of Ufa) accordingly, there is a stimulus to the better
knowledge of locality , in the material phenomena, also, of a
country, there are, to some the means of interpreting
living forms. Man, for example, is not only the creature of
animal causes—nutrition, growth, decay—he is also the result
of a daily inorganic synthesis. The living soul, on which no
physical agency can exert any direct effect, and which, amidst
the ceaseless transformations of dead matter around it, is ever
consciously the same, is the tenant of the dust, and the neighbour
of corruption.
In judging, therefore, of the manifold varieties in which man’s
animal life makes itself known, in different regions of the world,
it is of vital importance to be ever on the watch to form a due
estimate of the influence exerted on their respective structures
and functions by the inorganic phenomena amidst which they
were originally produced, and by which they have been gradually
moulded. Anything, of course, like a complete explanation of
the manifold causes of tli§ present Condition of any one aspect of
the human family, or of the extent to which the primary type
has been affected by the agency of the essential laws of mattei,
during the vast periods of time that have elapsed since its crea-
tion, is obviously impossible. Why the Ugrian stock of man,
for example, should embrace within it the Lap and the Magyar,
between whom very wide differences indeed obtain, both physically
and morally, is a question for the solution of which no more
sufficient materials can be had, than for tlm explanation of the
common descent of the Caucasian and Oceanic varieties from the
first parents of our race. But in the view of giving to the
reader such an impressive view of physical and moral extremes
in the various races of man, as may tend to enhance the import-
ance of an inquiry into the influences of geographical distribution


upon the latter, we give the following extracts, which are not more
instructive than suggestive, from Dr Latham’s “ Varieties of the
Human Race—
“ The Western Ugrians consist of the Laplanders, the Finlanders,
the Pamians, Siranians, and Yotiaks of the Russian governments of
Perm, Vologda, and Viatka ; the Tsheremiss, the Mordvins, the
Tshuvash, on the Middle Volga; the Vognls and Ostiaks on the
ridge of the IJral mountains, and along the rivers Obi and Yenesey,
and finally the Majiars of Hungary. Between the extreme types there
are broad differences, e.g ., between the Laps and Majiars. So there
is in respect to their social and intellectual histories.
“ In regard to physical form, the IJgrians are light-haired rather
than dark, —many of them are red-haired. This is the first stock where
the colour has, in any notable proportion, been other than dark.
“ The Majiars of Hungary belong to the IJgrian stock,—a fact
which has long been known to philologues, but which is not sufficiently
flattering to the Majiar pride to be willingly admitted. So, however,
it is. But as the Majiars are outlyers, having conquered Hungary
from the southern part of the LTalian Mountains, they lie beyond the
true IJgrian area, just as the Osmanli of Rumelia lie beyond the
Turks. Laying aside, however, the Majiars, the IJgrian stock ex-
tends far southwards, and far westward as well, —to Lapland in the
latter direction, to the Mordvin country in the former. Now, the
Mordvins occupy parts of the Russian governments of Karan, Saratov,
Simbirsk, and Tamboo. So that the IJgrians extend as far south
as the latitude of Lombardy and Piedmont—Northern Italy; thence
to the Arctic circle, as aforesaid.
“ The northernmost portions of the IJgrian area are tundras . Here
the inhabitants are nomadic, with the rein-deer for their domestic
animal. They live, too, in tents. Elsewhere, however, the IJgrian
dwells in houses, and tills the soil. The tribual organization grows
less prominent as we advance westwards. The steppe gives way to the
forest, for alluvial tracts, thickly wooded, are occupied by the various
Ugrian populations along the whole of the upper and middle Volga.
There are no great mountains in the IJgrian area; the most con-
siderable range being that of the Hralians, between Europe and Asia.
These are cold and inhospitable ; not because they attain any great
elevation, but because they run far towards the north, and lie far in-
land. Their occupants are the Voguls, a population of hunters in the
country of the bear, the beaver, the glutton, and the elk, —hunters of
the forest rather than of the prairie or open country.
“As hunters of the extra-tropical forest rather than the open
country, the Voguls are the most northern tribes of the world—as
hunters of game rather than as fishers. This last is what their
neighbours are—the Ostiaks of the rivers Obi and Yenisey. Contrast
these two tribes with their neighbours of the south and west—with
the IJgrians of the leveller country, and the alluvial soils on the
Viatka and Rama—and we see the difference between a life of agri-
culture and a life of venatorial activity. The size of the villages gives


us the means of comparison. With the Yoguls, the villages consist
of some five or ten huts, made of poles, branches, bark, or skins, with
a distance between them of not less than ten or twelve miles ; so
much free space being necessary to the sustenance of the hunter. The
Tsheremiss villages number from thirty to forty houses. The Tshuvash
are larger still.
“ The Yogul andOstiak are undersized, even as compared with the
agricultural tribes —not, however, as compared with those of the
tundras. Their face is eminently Mongol; so much so, that the
eminent geographer Malte Brun, has allowed himself to believe that
they are a ‘ Kalmuc population, conquered at some far back period
by the Hungarians, who imposed upon them their language.’ No
philologue, however, assents to this. The Yoguls are the more Mongol
of the two.
“ The word Hungarian introduces a new series of facts. It is to
these venatorial and piscatorial Ugrians—these Yoguls of the Uralian
ridge, and these Ostiaks of the lower Obi—that the Majiars of
Hungary are the most closely allied, at least in language. How is
this explained? That the Majiars are an intrusive population, who
invaded Europe from the north-east, in the tenth century, is a matter
of history. That their original country was the southern part of the
Urals, is a matter of almost equal certainty. If so, they were the
third branch of a Uralian division of the Ugrian stock, whereof the
Yoguls and Ostiaks were the other two. But their habits have
changed. So have those of the Ugrians of Yologda and Yiatka, who
were once hunters like the Yogul, but are now tillers of the soil like
the Finlander and the Esthonian.
“To the character of the Majiars of the tenth century, when they
won their present quarters, let the old chronicle writers give their
testimony : — 4 Out of the aforesaid parts of Scythia did the nation of
the Hungarians, very savage, and more cruel than any wild beast, —a
nation that some years ago was not even known by name, —when
pressed upon by the neighbouring people of the name of Petshinegs,
come down upon us ; for the Petshinegs were strong, both in numbers
and valour, and their own soil was not sufficient to sustain them.
From the violence of these the Hungarians fled, to seek some other
lands that they Alight OGfflp and to their settlements elsewhere.
So they said Farewell to their old country. At first they wandered
over the solitudes of the Pannonians and Avars, seeking their daily
sustenance from the chase, and by fishing. Then they broke in upon
the boundaries of the Carinthians, Moravians, and Bulgarians, with
frequent attacks. Very few did they slay with the sword—many thousands
with their arrows , which they shot with such skill, from bows made of horn,
that it was scarcely possible to guard against them. This manner of
warfare was dangerous in proportion as it was unusual. The only
difference between the Hungarian manner of fighting and that of the
Britons ( sic ), is, that the former use arrows, the latter darts.’ Again :
4 They never knew the ways of either a town or a dwelling, and they
never fed upon the fruits of human labour until they came to that


part of Russia which is called Susudal. Till then, their food was flesh
and fish. Their youths were hunting every day; hence, from that
day to this, the Hungarians are better skilled than other nations in
the chase.’
“ Looking solely at the physical conditions of this area, and remem-
bering that he belongs to the most northerly group on the face of
the earth, we may place the country of the Ugrians amongst the more
favoured portions of the extra-tropical world. The oak and lime
grow in its southern parts ; the fir and birch extend beyond the Arctic
circle in the northern. There is abundance, too, of mineral wealth.
Nevertheless, the Ugrian population is scanty, fragmentary, and de-
pendent. It lies between two stocks eminent for their aggressive
character, —the Turk on the east, the Russian on the west. For this
reason there is only one country where the stock is well represented,
and that is, the Duchy of Finland. In the Duchy of Finland alone,
about one-half of the whole Ugrian population is contained. Here,
and in Esthonia, we find the Ugrians, for the first time, in contact with
a practicable sea; for the Arctic Ocean, which washes the seaboard of
the Laps and Siberians, can scarcely be taken into account as an in-
strument of civilisation. But the Baltic connects the Western Ugrians
with the nations that best represent European civilisation, —the Ger-
man and the Swedes. Here, though the physical conditions of soil and
climate are but indifferent, the social development of the Ugrian stock
attains its best development; better, however, in Finland than Esthonia.
“ The Northern Finlanders come in contact with the more southern
Laps ; the relations between the two divisions being of interest. In
language they are liker than in bodily organization and habits. On
the other hand, the bodily organization of the Lap is more like that
of the Samoyed than is his language. Hence, the evidence of the two
tests, or criteria—the anatomical and philological—differs.
44 1 believe, however, that the difference is greater in appearance
than in reality; inasmuch as, at one time, the Laps were extended
much further south than at present, and that on both sides of the
Gulf of Bothnia. Thus they covered nearly the w r hole of Norway and
Sweden, —some say the whole. This was, of course, before the fore-
fathers of the present Finlanders moved northwards, and before the
forefathers of the present Norwegians and Swedes did so. As the
0116 encroached, the other retreated. This is the history of the weaker
families of mankind all the world over. But this is not all. Where-
ever two families of strongly contrasted frames and habits are brought
into close geographical juxtaposition, and there is no corresponding
change of the physical conditions of their respective areas, there has
always been encroachment and intrusion on the one side or the other;
on the side of the more southern population of the two, when the
area is Arctic or Sub-Arctic, or the side of the more northern of the
two when the area is Tropical or Sub-Tropical. Now, the result of
such encroachments is the obliteration of transitional and intermediate
forms. That the Finlander has encroached on the Lap is a matter of
history; that he continues to do so is a matter of observation.


“ As the eastern Ugrians are amongst the most American of the
Asiatics, the western are amongst the most European.”
Now, keeping in view the ceaseless drafts made by man’s
complex nature on inorganic matter, and the transforming laws
to which that is subject,—the vital, chemical, electrical laws, —for
the supply of physical stamina, sensational impressions, and the
exciting occasions of pure thought, the reflections promoted by
the foregoing extracts cannot fail to prove of much significance
and fruitfulness as to their legitimate issue. Questions manifold
will ever come forth, almost unbidden, and importunately demand
at least a partial reply. Why is it, for instance, that, as Cap-
tain Beechey informs us, in the same Archipelago of Amphinesia,
the darker skins are found in those tribes that inhabit the lower
and coralline islands, while in the occupants of higher and vol-
canic islands lighter skins prevail ? And why, in allied divisions
of the same stock of men, do crisp, short, dense locks, characterize
one section, while in another, a loose, lank, thin, style of hair,
seems to be a permanent feature; and is there any direct con-
nection between the prominent rocks and plants of a country,
and the kind or quantity of bone, nerve, or colour, that obtains
in its living inhabitants, in plants, beast, and man ? Is there
any basis, in fact, for the inference that, in Great Britain, the
light and dark eye in man prevails or declines in proportion as
the prevailing rocks of the district belong to the Carboniferous or
Silurian series ?
But we must now request the attention of the reader to the
many illustrations, direct and suggestive, of not a few of these
inviting questions that are supplied by the various instructive
statements of a purely ethnological character, embodied in the
Report which w r e have selected as the groundwork of this paper.
As the circumstances in which this document had its origin,
will be found peculiarly interesting to such readers as studiously
mark the vital, though indirect, effects of well-guided scientific
inquiries Oil the higfl§§t interests of mankind, it may be well to
explain these as communicated by the Hon. Thomas M*Combie,
the Convener of the Select Committee appointed by the Legis-
lative Council of Victoria to inquire into the condition of the
Aborigines :
“ Some time ago,” Mr M‘Corabie remarks, in the initial words of a
communication, on the Aborigines of Victoria, to the Ethnological
Section of the British Association met at Aberdeen, “ the Ethnologi-
cal Section forwarded to me at Melbourne, Victoria, a printed list of
queries in reference to races likely to become extinct. I was requested
to reply to all, or at any rate to such as might be suitable to the
position, or bear on the character, of the Australian aborigines.
“ In order that the subject might receive full justice, and have the


widest possible attention, I moved for and obtained a Committee of
the Legislative Council of Victoria, of which I was elected chairman.
This Committee was granted not merely to gain all the information
which could be acquired regarding them, but also to devise some
means of improving their condition, and providing for their wants.
In addition to the reception of evidence from a number of competent
witnesses, questions were framed and widely circulated, and replies
received from a large number of persons scattered over the interior.
I was also favoured with the assistance of Dr Becker and Mr Soyer to
obtain diagrams of aboriginal heads, which were skilfully engraved,
and beautiful prints have been added to the report and evidence.
I have, moreover, attached to this document two complete grammars
Of the aboriginal language, an account of the Poonindie School, and
various other documents.”
To the admirable manner in which Mr M‘Combie and his
committee have accomplished their design, every page of this
Report affords distinct and full testimony. A most instructive
record of the wide aims and benevolent spirit of its authors,
it is also replete with information, equally significant and pathetic,
of the extreme degradation and the intensely rapid disappear-
ance of the black man of Australia.
In briefly noticing some of the more prominent topics of eth-
nological import that are either expressly explained or are
naturally suggested by references and hints of a more occasional
nature in the pages of this valuable document, we shall have
regard, though not exclusively, to their bearing on the higher
interests of that unhappy race that forms the special subject of
the Report.
To one or two preliminary sentences, however, of a more
general kind, in explanation of the physical geography, the re-
lations, organic and inorganic, of the Oceanic Archipelago, it
will be needful to solicit the sustained attention of the reader;
because not a few of the most instructive results of a careful
investigation of the early history of the original inhabitants of
Australia, in the more restricted meaning of the term, imply
rather intricate processes of special study, and a nice adjustment
of numerous details of fact.
In thoughtfully passing the eye, then, over any map allowing
at once an entire view of the three groups, into which the vast
assemblage of islands—to which some geographers have given
the name of Oceanica —and which are situated between the
24th parallel of north and the 50th of south latitude, and
between 92° east and 109° west longitude, it will, we believe,
be felt, even by the most prosaic persons, to be no merely idle
trick of fancy, to conjecture that they are the fragments of a
former continent or continents.
For, not to dwell at any length on the impressive circumstance


that the mountain chains exhibit a very marked polarity of
arrangement, we would point to another fact, no less expressive
of physical continuity throughout the Archipelago, that the axis
of the great mountain range, which, rising in Van Diemen’s Land,
and then passing out of sight beneath the waters of Bass’ Strait,
once more rears its noble summits in the Australian Alps, is
geologically extended into the southern coast of New Guinea.
Whilst, moreover, evidences of convulsion by the agency of vol-
canoes arrest the eye of the speculative navigator at various
points throughout these widespread islands, it is, at the same
time, impossible for him to trace the outlines, more especially
of the larger masses of land, without acknowledging that an
incalculable amount of abrading and dislocating pressure has
been excited upon them by the surrounding seas.
In the floras, also, of Australia, Papua, and New
there are specially close alliances; while, in still more remote
members of the same vast insular aggregate, the obvious repre-
sentation of one kindred genus of plants by another, is indicative
of important conclusions respecting their common origin and
uniform diffusion.
And, in leaving conjectures regarding the causes of similarities,
more or less marked, in the distribution of animal and plant life
over islands more or less divided, throughout the wide area of
the Australasian seas, for inquiries as to the different races of
man, in connection with the higher animals, that when wild con-
tribute to his daily food, or when domesticated promote his social
prosperity and comfort, there are many circumstances in his
condition, both as regards other vital phenomena, and their
necessary relations to prevailing kinds of inorganic matter, that
seem to indicate a common origin and a similar diffusion. Of
the means, indeed, by which these vast groups of islands were
prepared for the reception of their various living occupants,
their now prevailing animals and plants, and especially for the
appearance of man, history cannot, of course, afford any explana-
tion. It is obviously vain to ask questions where several answers
are all equally probably Of where, because of a prevailing
obscurity, almost no room whatever is left for conjecture. At
the same time, it does not appear to exceed the limits of legiti-
mate inference regarding the present physical and moral features
of the existing human aborigines of Oceanica, to ascribe to their
hereditary circumstances of various soils and climates, and to an
intensely promiscuous intercourse of the sexes—that naturally
inducing a profound disturbance of the better conditions of off-
spring, is also a too sure preparative for fatal familiarity with
imported forms of vice—whatever departures from a common
type may exist among them.


As existing, moreover, within the historic period, and included
in that class of facts, from the explanation of which, considerations
of important results in man, through the agency of inorganic
laws, are commonly excluded, certain points of agreement in the
languages of the Archipelago form an influential complement to
the impressive indications of a common origin, not only in the
physical structure of the islands, but also in their original living
tenants, to which we already adverted. Because it is deserving
of special remark, that, deep and massive though the obscurity
be that invests the general history of these languages, it is in
§om@ measure needful to the most likely explanation of any one
of them, that they be conjecturally grouped together by the com-
parative philologer, in almost entirely the same order as that by
which the geographer and naturalist are theoretically led to
associate the islands and their natural productions.
But, in the view of affording the most authoritative elucidation
of these views within our reach, we submit to the careful study
of the reader another valuable extract from Dr Latham.
“The Oceanic Group.— Area: the Peninsula of Malacca,
Sumatra, Java, and the chain ending in Timor and Rotti;
Borneo, and the. chain leading to the Phillippines; the Bashi
and Babyani Isles; Formosa, Celebes, and the Moluccas; the
islands between Timor and New Guinea; Madagascar.
“ Divisions : Amphinesian and Kelsenonesian.
“The Peleu Isles and Lord North’s Isle; Micronesia ( i,e ., the
Caroline and Marianne Islands).
“ Polynesia ( i,e ., the Navigators’, Society, Friendly, Mar-
quesan, and Sandwich Island groups); Easter Island and New
Zealand.
“ The Fiji Islands.
“New Guinea, and the islands to the east thereof (i,e. y Louis-
iade Archipelago, etc.) ; Tanna, New Caledonia.
“ Tasmania (Van Diemen’s Land).
“ Australia.
M Language : Agglutinate rather than when
Amphinesian, with patent and recognised affinities to the Malay;
when Kelsenonesian, with Malay affinities fewer, more obscure,
and only partially recognised.
“ Physiognomy : when Amphinesian, more brown (or yellow)
than black, also more Mongol than Negro ; when Kelgenone-
sian, more black than brown (or yellow), and as much Negro as
Mongol.”
But we must now leave these general views, and proceed to
the more detailed explanations that are demanded by our pre-
sent design.
According to the information contained in the most recent


maps, the colony of Victoria lies between the parallels of 34° and
39° south, and the meridians of 141° and 150°. It embraces an
area of 98,000 square miles. Southward, its winding boundary
extends from Cape Howe on the east, to the mouth of the river
Glenelg on the west, and is washed by 900 miles of sea. Its
northern frontier is skirted throughout almost its entire extent
by the great waters of the Murray, to which the rivers Loddon,
Goulburn, and Ovens, with numerous other smaller streams de-
scending in a northerly direction from the leading w r ater-sheds
in the interior of the colony, largely contribute. Generally, the
climate is mild and pleasant, though, at certain seasons of the
year, dry parching winds from the north prevail. As first beheld
by its earliest explorers, the widespread plains of luxuriant
dotted by shady groves of trees, suggested its earlier name of
Australia Felix. "Eemarkably free from brushwood, the surface
allows an immediate introduction of tillage as well as cattle, and
thus presents a marked contrast to the primitive state of almost
all other colonies ; a circumstance which has not been overlooked
by those writers who have described its peculiar advantages as
a settlement.
In the w T ords of Mr Westgarth, a Victoria, and indeed
Australia generally, has been, by the natural features of the
country, more favoured than most others of our colonial settle-
ments, as regards that preliminary physical drudgery of every
new country by which colonial society is long withheld, more
or less, from the higher aspects of refinement and civilisation.
The beauties of cultivation presented almost everywhere through-
out England, as w 7 e rapidly traverse by modern modes of
travel; the varied surface of our noble country; the alternate
port and garden ; the every aspect of the arts and appliances
of man, —represented the accumulated achievements of human
toil, graduated over centuries since the age wdien the forest,
the bog, and the morass formed the conspicuous features. If
we transfer our view to the backw r oods of America, we per-
ceive the recommencement, as it were, of the same labour, and
a society depressed in its outward aspects by the daily sweat
and toil in which it is continually immersed. But the free
grassy surface of a great part of Australia, ready made for the
plough, has overstepped a long age of such customary colonial
toil, and saved her fortunate sons from a century of physical
warfare.”
Of the aboriginal possessors of this colony—if any such term
as possession may be used where occupation of the soil is so fluc-
tuating and uncertain—and of the changes that have occurred
since their earliest introduction into it, no materials of history
exist. In so far, however, as the earliest records of Australian


discovery seem entitled to reliance, the natives of Victoria, so
long as they have been known to intelligent observers, may
generally be described in the words first applied to the natives of
other parts of the continent.
When Dam pier landed, in January 1688, on the coast of New
Holland, he found the natives sunk in the most abject physical
and moral degradation. Destitute alike of houses and clothing,
they were also ignorant of the most common forms of religion
and government. Nor, while making all legitimate allowance
for misconceptions, arising from inadequate knowledge of the
true intellectual and moral condition of the Australian black, on
the part of the earlier navigators and explorers, can a much
more flattering description be given of him at the present day.
He is still one of the most abnormal specimens of the human
family.
Physically, the aborigines of Victoria, like the other sad decay-
ing remnants of their race in other parts of Australia, are not only
misshapen in outline, owing to the marked disproportion between
the cranium and the limbs, but they are also characterized by a
very great deficiency of bone throughout the skeleton generally.
On the extreme frontiers of degraded humanity, their osseous
system is evidently dying out. In sharp contrast to the ascend-
ing ratio of the endo-skeleton in the upward scale of animal life,
according to the most philosophical, because the most natural
arrangement of the animal kingdom, the chemical proportions of
the solid textures of the body in the native Australian seem to
be steadily diminishing.
Let us take, in the way of eliminating this special point, the
Australian style of head as shown by the u skull of King John,
a chief of the Adelaide tribe,” which is given in an appendix to
the Report, and which, according to Dr Ludwig Barker, is a
typical character of the Australian race. In its parietal diameter
it measures inches, in the occipito frontal 7|, and in the width
of forehead between the temples 3J. In every vigW==pfßfile,
front face, as gggn from behind, and also from above—it is emi-
nently the brain-case of a savage of the lowest and weakest form.
The jaws are strongly marked by that peculiar prolongation or
extension forward, that prevails also among the most degraded of
the African nations, though the heads of the latter have their
characteristic differences. " In its superior segment, the cranium
is of a pyramidal form. In front, when regarded on the upper
surface, it is as remarkable for attenuation in breadth as it is for
the direct aspect of the frontal sinus. Nor, when viewed in re-
lation to intellectual capacity, do such inferior measures of accom-
modation for the use of the brain greatly belie the miserable
native of Australia.


66 If a line,” remarks Professor Owen, ü be drawn from the
occipital condyle along the floor of the nostrils, and be intersected
by a second touching the most prominent parts of the forehead
and upper jaw, the intercepted angle gives, in a general way,
the proportions of the cranial cavity and the grade of intelligence;
it is called the facial angle. In the dog this angle is 20°, in the
great chimpanzee, or gorilla, it is 40°, but the prominent super-
orbital ridge occasions some exaggeration ; in the Australian it is
85°, in the"European it is 95°. The ancient Greek artists adopted,
in their beau ideal of the beautiful and intellectual, an angle of
100°”
And on a comparison of their countenances and figures, when
we take the soft parts of the frame which have their own dis-
tinct function in the expression of man’s nature, as well as the
bony , a similar result, as may naturally be expected, comes
strongly out. In seeking for a test, we need not go higher in
the scale of man than what is presented in a good specimen of
the Hindoo.
What more truly picturesque, and in certain aspects beau-
tiful in contour, than the features and bust of Earn Ruttun, a
Brahman, and secretary of Ram Mohun Roy, as given by
Dr Prichard in his u Natural History of Man.” In the want
of high serene repose, indeed, or, to use perhaps more exact
terms, in the deep, strong, fiery passions that will not be con-
cealed by the best-wrought veil of a purely Indian culture, the
grand primary expressions of human elevation—an earnest
thoughtfulness, simple affection, and humility—are painfully
awanting. Most unmistakeably, however, it is one of the
children of men, though widely distant from the highest ideal
of our kind that is before the eye, in these Eastern outlines
and hues, the regular features, the dolikho kephalic head,
and the brunette rather than black skin. Nor, when esti-
mating Ram Ruttun’s ethnographic position, even from the
elevated point of view peculiar to the most highly refined in-
habitants of Western Europe, can any obstacles be experi-
enced to such a judgment of the manifold sources of the physical
and moral modifications of the human species, as will admit
of a secure assent to the inference, that in the osseous frame-
work of the face, the peculiar shape as well as markings of
the eye, the mould of the lips, and the characteristic set of the
head on the shoulders, the identification of their possessor with
the other descendants of one single pair, in the beginning of time,
is alike simple and just. These unique features, obviously, can
only be scientifically explained by associating him with the other
members of that sole genus among mammalia, of which there is
but a single species.


In another part, however, of his great work, Prichard illustrates
the extent to which strong and repulsive contrasts in physical
form and features may prevail in different races. Two Australian
natives of King George’s Sound, as figured by M. D’Urville in
his great atlas, are set before us at page 355. Attenuated in
bulk, and weak in outline, almost to marked deformity, there is
also a very strong disproportion in the size of the head and the
limbs. A painful resemblance to the Cretin at once arrests the
eye, and painfully affects the heart with the conviction, that no-
where else on the earth does man so obviously indicate in his
skeleton—its amount and quality of bone —in his relaxed caste
of fflu§eulaf d§¥elopfflgiit; abjeet mould of and §ntire
style, a fatal tendency to extinction.
At the same time, it must be admitted, that legitimate as such
conclusions seem to us to be, opinions by no means so derogatory
to the 'physiognomy of the Australian hlach man are entertained
by writers fully entitled to use words of authority on this point.
It is, for example, in the following terms that Pickering describes
those natives whom he personally saw :—-
“ About thirty Australians came under my own observation,
who neither had the lips so uniformly thick, nor the nose so
much depressed, as in the Negro ; but in certain instances both
nose and mouth were wider. Some individuals were of surpass-
ing ugliness, while others, contrary to all anticipation, had the
face decidedly fine, and several of the young women had a very
pleasing expression of countenance. The general form, though
sometimes defective, seemed, on the average, better than that of
the Negro ; and I did not find the undue slenderness of limb
which has been commonly attributed to the Australians. Strange
as it may appear, I would refer to an Australian as the finest
model of the human proportions I have ever met with ;in mus-
cular development combining perfect symmetry, activity, and
strength, while his head might have compared with an antique
bust of a philosopher.”
Mf M-Combie also, in his paper on the Aborigines of Vic-
toria, read at a recent meeting of the British Association, while
expressing his full concurrence in these strong opinions of
Pickering, at the same time expressed himself as follows :
“The Australian aborigines are active, strongly-formed, and
stately.”
On this opposition of sentiment, however, we will not enlarge,
there being but few data embraced by the report that seem to
us to lend any material support to more flattering conclusions
than such as have been expressed by other observers. We will
merely subjoin the following table of relative physical propor-
tions, leaving the reader to form his own estimate of its import


_ . , , Measures round
Name. Weight. Height. the Chest.
Stone. Ihs. Feet. In. Feet. In.
Daniel 10 0 5 7 2 2 10
Johnny Johnny ...10 0 5 5 2 10
Billy 8 0 5 4i 2 8
Larry 10 10 5 8* 3 0|
Billy Toole 10 0 5 4* 3 %
Murray 10 0 5 6* 2 11 5
King John 11 12 5 9| 3 1
Mora 9 0 4 10j 3 2
and value. It was laid before the select committee by Mr
Strutt: —
Ko other woman could be persuaded to be weighed or measured.
Generally, as may naturally be anticipated, the black man of
Victoria, in common with all the other tribes of his race, and the
savage universally, is marked intellectually by a very great dispro-
portion between his perceptive and reflective faculties. On this
subject the following graphic delineation, by Mr M'Combie, of
the general accuracy of which the Report generally supplies
many interesting confirmations, will prove interesting to our
readers 1 —
u They are exceedingly quick and keen, their minds resem-
bling rather a treasure which has been sealed up than a vacuum.
Their perceptive faculties are of the very highest order, accord-
ing to my own observation and all the evidence which I have
been able to collect on the subject; but they have a great want
in their reflective faculties. In imitating their civilised brethren,
in mimicking, in drawing rude figures and likenesses of objects,
they are very happy. If you examine a picture with one of
these untutored children of nature, you would be astonished at
his observations ; not an outline escapes flashing eye. In
most of the rude arts with which a race so isolated could have
become acquainted, they are perfect. In throwing the spear and
bomerang, they are quite inimitable. The latter well-known
weapon displays a greater amount of ingenuity than the world
can boast of; and our most scientific countrymen have not been
able to master the principle upon which its strange gyrations are
p-uided. In shooting with any kind of firearms, and in managing
horses, the aborigines shame civilised men by their expertness.
Their quickness in pursuing game, or tribes with whom they
are at war, is worthy of remark. They can detect the proximity
of game with unerring correctness : they will creep after a kan-
garoo for miles ; during the time that the glance of the animal
is toward them, those in pursuit are like so many statues,— the
trees around them are not to appearance more destitute of voli-
tion. By slow degrees they near the game, and the hunter,
securely concealed behind a favouring tree, takes deadly aim


with his spear, and lays the monarch of the Australian forest
low. Their aim is quite as accurate with the bomerang; thrown
in the opposite direction, it returns unerringly, and hits the in-
tended object.”
Several inferences of vital import will, we doubt not, promptly
suggest themselves to every thoughtful reader of this passage,
not only as regards the educational necessities of these abori-
gines, but also with respect to certain grave defects in the cul-
ture, even of the most highly civilised communities. Why, for
it may be asked, is there so ripe an education of the
observational senses in the untutored savage, who enjoys no
opportunities of intellectual improvement, when some men of
high philosophic reason and ample furniture of thought, are so
often almost entirely destitute of a capacity for seeing what they
look at ? Is it not humiliating to witness how little an almost
absolute imbecility in judging of the most familiar products of
air, earth, and sea, tends to affect the conscience or lowers the
pretensions even of some of the teachers of mankind ? What a
marked contrast between the dull senses of such men, and the
highly educated eye of the roaming savage, of whom Campbell
in former days so sweetly sang—•
“ Then forth uprose that lone wayfaring man ;
But dauntless he, nor chart, nor journey’s plan
For woods required ; whose trained eye was keen
As eagle of the wilderness, to scan
His path, by mountain, swamp, or deep ravine,
Or ken far friendly huts on far savannas green.”
“If,” as that most memorable man, the late Dr John Flem-
ing, whose special mission and faculty as a teacher so few of our
modern guides in theological science seem to understand or care
to imitate, used to say, “1 can promote the education of the eye,
jf I can help those that have eyes so to use them as to see objects
ill Mtllfg 811 more Sides than one, I shall not have lived ill vaill”
Is it not, however, much to be feared that many, of whom, to
use the solemn accents of a regret, that in their deeper tones are
far more of heaven than earth, “ better things might be hoped
for,” are, in the service of intellect in its most extreme forms,
either of a misty latitudinarianism or bat-eyed bigotry, greatly
insensible to the valid worth of any such high accomplishment
of the senses in happy union with the reason as would enable
them to detect, for example, the tiny moss or lichen on the old
wall coping, discern truly the characteristics of a chaffinch or a
wren, or admire the exquisite memorials at their feet of bygone
ages, in the sweet simplicity of the Pachypteris or the symme-
trical leafage of the Sphenopteris ? Surely in vain will men


discourse of the claims of philosophy, or speculate on the recon-
ciliations of the outward with the inward, of faith with know-
ledge, or of the deep chords of the soul that link together things
u unseen and eternal” with the obligations of 66 things seen and
temporal,” if they are content to leave one half of their nature as
sterile of good as are the ashes that are cast out into the sea from
the furnace of a steam engine. All truth is divine. All truth
therefore, is fitted and designed, in its lower as well as higher
discoveries, to transform the nature of man into its own lustrous
and holy image. From the subtle, divining, and most certain
eye and ear even of an Australian savage, the man of advanced
Western civilisation may learn some wholesome l§§§ofi§ f§gai ? d=
ing the disadvantages of a one-sided culture ; because it is only
when in submission to the ample and methodical discipline of
the senses, in a genial union of subordination with the intellectual
functions of order, interpretation, plastic development, and rule,
that man can be truly said to know anything to good purpose in
the world around him. And then only, with our greatest national
poet —an illustrious type of a many-sided soul —he may say —
“ What a mental power
This eye shoots forth ! How big imagination
Moves in this lip ! To the dumbness of the gesture
One might interpret.”
At the same time, however, no truly thoughtful ethnologist
will fail to perceive, that, however remarkable the sensational
energies of the wild man, in any region, may be, the superiority
of these serve all the more powerfully to bring out in dark and
terrible relief the abject weakness and famine of the higher
powers of his spiritual being.
This defect in the capacity of a higher style of thought than
is implied in the efforts of the merely practical understanding,
is evinced with peculiar significance in their inaptitude for
arithmetic. “Mr Thomas,” says Mr M‘Combie, “ the guardian
of the aborigines for the colony of Victoria, who has studied them
most attentively for many years, said—The female children are
not so quick as the male in learning: both sexes can learn to
read and write, but make no figure in arithmetic; they soon
learn to sing, and get by heart poetry, and repeat pieces. They
like oral instruction in geography, and knowledge of maps ; they
are very quick. An aboriginal boy at the Normal School of
Sydney took the first prize for geography two succeeding years,
but the master said he was stupidly dull in arithmetic.”
Do any of our readers feel inclined to ask the question, Why
this marked contrast of a ready mind for geographical knowledge
in the native Australian in union with a marked incapacity for


arithmetic? The reply may be given by means of another
question. _ Does not the fact of that lively state of the faculties
of perception, for which he is so conspicuous—for example, of the
eye that so shrewdly measures distances and so exactly discrimi-
nates objects—at once explain his ready use of the map or globe ?
And is not the concrete a main material of geographical know-
ledge, into the rudiments of which the wanderings of the home-
less nomade are a special means of initiation ?
1“ regard to numbers, however, the case is widely different.
numerals at all,” remarks Dr Donaldson in his
-New Cratylus,” page 185, “is an abstraction, and one of the
highest kind; it is stripping things of all their sensible pro-
perties, and considering them as merely relations of number, as
members of a series, as perfectly general relations of place.” How-
ever, then, indicative of the inferior nature of the capacity for
abstract thought in the aborigines of Australia this marked de-
fect of an arithmetical sense is—and nothing can more palpably
evince such inferiority—there is, after all, no such great disparity
at this point, if their unhappy lot be fairly estimated, between
the young black and the children of more highly favoured races
as should render it unprofitable even for the most abstract
thinkers of the age to revert occasionally with gratitude to their
own sharp experience of perplexity and cumber in their earliest
efforts to master the multiplication table. But as regards their
unprovability in intelligence by suitable methods of instruction
and training, severely conflicting though some portions of the
evidence are, it would be equally unjust and painful to have any
serious doubts. Ifj indeed, as one or two of the witnesses seem
to believe, a speedy extinction of the whole race is their natural
and proper destiny, because of their generic inferiority to what
are termed “ the superior races,” and if all efforts, however wisely
made, to lead them to the cross of Christ, and the transforming
baptism of the Holy Spirit, must, because of inherent physical
obstructions in their mental constitution, prove of no avail, none
but the most gloomy predictions regarding all endeavours to
improve them, may be expected from the lips even of the most
benevolent and reasonable men. If, moreover, a despondino-
spirit in the hearts of those who have higher views of the aborH
gines excited by painful disappointments originating in their un-
settled habits generally, and their deep-rooted tendency, even at
the distance of years, to relapse into the native style of life is
encouraged, while it does constitute a claim to sympathy and
earnest intercession for Divine strength and comfort, it cannot
expect any measure of vindication on the part of those who be-
lieve in the Divine power of Christ’s presence with His Church
VOL. XXXII. NO. LXIY, . 2 B


in all ages, and the eternal validity of His hallowed counsel and
purpose of mercy to men of all nations. All such theoretical
notions, however, as have been referred to, with every gloomy
feeling, natural though it be in such trying circumstances, are
happily of no authority in dealing with the question, Is the
black man of Victoria, or any other part of Australia, capable of
intellectual and spiritual improvement? In the success of the
« Poonindie Mission,” and of the Aboriginal School at Mount
Franklin, of which the most encouraging accounts are given in
Appendices A and 1 > of the Peport, indisputable evidence is sup-
plied of the success that may be expected from wise and per-
severing efforts.
«I will now,” writes Mr Hawkes, in a letter to the .Bishop ot
Adelaide, giving an account of a visit to the Poonindie Mission,
« attempt to give you a sketch of their week-day course of life.
During the present (winter) season the first bell rings at seven
o’clock A.M., prayers at half-past seven, then breakfast; at half-
past nine the people go to their respective employments,—some
to ploughing, some trenching and draining, etc., others (the boys
chiefly) herding cattle, milking the cows, and digging the gar-
den. The women and girls go to morning school, where read-
ing, writing, spelling, and sewing, also arithmetic, are taught.
The duties of schoolmistress are conducted by Miss Hammond.
Most of the women make their own dresses. At twelve o’clock
the men come back to dinner, which is cooked by Mindise. I
believe several take the office of cook and butcher by turns. All
the meals are prepared in the large kitchen. The children dine
first, then the men and women. The bread they bake, made
from flour ground out of wheat grown on the station, is capital.
There is a large brick oven, which will bake a batch sufficient to
last for several days. I was much amused at observing the con-
duct of the ‘ Wurley’ natives, as they call the Port Lincoln
natives, who congregate, especially during the winter months, in
the neighbourhood of the station. They treat the Poonindie
< settlers’ with marked deference, and are literally made ‘ hewers
of wood and drawers of water’ for their more civilised brethren,
in return for which they are liberally supplied with food, and
further rewarded for good behaviour with tobacco. Our friends
at Poonindie evidently look upon them as inferior beings. See-
ing two ill-clad natives busy scrubbing out the kitchen, and
another occupied in tending the fire and pouring water into a large
pot containing rice, hanging over the fire, I asked who they were.
The reply I received was, ‘ Oh, only wild black fellows.’ These
wild black fellows are often induced to leave their children at the
station, where they know they will be cared for. In the after-
noon, the women, children, and boys attend the school, when the


men again return to work ; from which they return at half-past
three or four o’clock. After tea, the men willingly attend the
school, to be instructed by the Rev. Mr Hammond, in writing,
reading, and arithmetic. I was much gratified to find that they all
appeared both willing to learn and desirous to acquire knowledge.”
In Appendix B similar information is given regarding the
“ Aborigines attending the Aboriginal
lin,” in the following table. It shows
. School
their am
at Mount Frank-
, period of stay at
age,
school, and present educational progress
Names.
Age.
Period of Stay at
School.
Social Relation.
Progress in Education.
Males.
Morpoke ..
Occasionally
for six years
Has an aged
mother living
Can read and write,
and has some know-
ledge of arithmetic.
Can read and write,
and has some know-
Warbourp....
Occasionally
for six years
An orphan
ledge of arithmetic.
Can read and write.
Weregoondet
Two years and
a-half
An orphan
Willie
Denny
Fred ..
Robert
Two years
Three months
Two years
Three months
Half-caste
Half-caste
An orphan
An orphan
Can read and write.
Can read and write.
Can read and write.
Can read.
Females.
Alice
Three years ..
Half-caste
Can read and write,
and has some know-
ledge of arithmetic.
Can read and write,
and has someknow-
Helen
Four years
Father and
mother living
ledge of arithmetic.
Can read and write.
Mary Jane
Adult
Occasionally
for five years
Married
Charles Judkins, Schoolmaster.
Edwd. S. Parker, Visiting Magistrate
But equally encouraging views of the docility and intelligence
of the aborigines generally, and as specially afforded in the pre-
ceding table regarding those of Victoria, are expressed by several
of the most intelligent witnesses (including Mr Parker, who sup-
plied this table), and who either appeared personally before the
committee, or complied with their request to be furnished with
written reports of opinion on this and the other points embraced
by the object of their appointment.
Mr Edward Stone Parker, who, since 1850, “has held the
honorary appointment of visiting magistrate of the Aboriginal
School at Mount Franklin, and has virtually acted as guardian
of the aborigines,” when under examination by the committee,
stated—


“ 335. I have always been of opinion that,
if the natives are taken at an early period of life, before their
habits become decisively formed, they are just as capable of
improvement as our own population. The great obstacle to
their civilisation is to be traced to moral causes, and not to any
physical disabilities. I may add that the members of these
families are receiving instruction, either in the Aboriginal School,
or, in the case of the young men themselves, by availing them-
selves of the opportunity of getting evening instruction at a de-
nominational school in the neighbourhood. They regularly attend
Divine service every Sabbath ; and are always seen in European
clothing, the women making their own entirely.
“336. By the Chairman. —In reference to that Aboriginal
School, is it a school kept up by voluntary subscription or by
Government aid ?—lt is solely a Government establishment. I
had perhaps better state the history of that school. Prior to
the abolition of the Protectorate establishment, I instituted,
under the authority of Mr La Trobe, an Aboriginal School,
which is maintained to the present day, on the premises origi-
nally belonging to the Protectorate, and entirely at the cost of
the Government.
“ 337. Is that school well attended?—l produce, for the in-
formation of the committee, a return drawn up yesterday of the
number of the children then in the school, the time they have
been at school, and their present educational progress. (The wit-
ness delivered in the same.— Vide Appendix B.)
“ 338. By Mr Paterson. —Do you consider the results satis-
factory ?•—To a certain extent they are satisfactory. I have not
always been satisfied with the way in which the children have
been" treated. The native mind is so constituted, that it requires
peculiar treatment to promote its educational progress. The
system that would be most suited to the younger portion of the
native children is that known as the infant school system; and
in any system of scholastic instruction to which the natives are
subjected, they should be made to feel as little under the influ-
ence of restraint as possible. The instruction should be given to
them in the most attractive way.”
It may, however, be thought by some of our readers, that this
point has rather unduly absorbed our attention, especially when
other matters of a greater strictly ethnographic interest— e.g ., the
language of the aborigines—and therefore entitled to a larger
place in our pages, have been almost overlooked by us. As, how-
ever, no subject can be more significant or interesting, even in a
strictly scientific point of view, than the acquirement of exact
information regarding the prospects and probabilities of any por-
tion of mankind being redeemed from social extinction, or becoming


merely a subject of meagre and fugitive tradition, we have been
solicitous of enforcing the possibility of such redemption by the
prompt use of a judicious communication of Divine truth, the
reception of which is profitable alike for “ this life and the life
which is to come.” It would, indeed, be an achievement worthy
of the best efforts of missionary enterprise, if it could be shown,
that, while seeking to introduce the degraded black man of any
portion of Australia into the serene activities and hopes of the
Christian \i% it §hould lay at th§ §am§ time a decisive arrest
alike on his decay as a member of the human family, and the
predictions of those who are disposed to claim for him nothing
higher in earthly destiny than a rapid and entire disappearance.
But we now turn to that most obscure and intricate question,
viz., Whence have the aborigines derived their language, or lan-
guages, if there are more than one spoken amongst them ?
And here it is necessary to have regard to a previous question,
which naturally presents itself at the threshold of every linguistic
inquiry, viz., Does any general concurrence of opinion now pre-
vail among philologues regarding the safe method of investigating
strongly-marked differences in the leading types of language ?
Is there such an agreement regarding fundamental principles as
will conduce to anything like a trustworthy examination, for
example, of the Tai and Malay stocks of speech, and promote
true results respecting their conjectured alliances ? And then,
supposing that first principles of linguistic study are generally
allowed, it may also be asked, W r hether it is possible, however
large our vocabularies of particular languages may be, to employ
the rules based on such principles to any satisfactory end, if those
special parts of speech which constitute the criteria be but im-
perfectly supplied ?
Now, assuming as a guide the now commonly received axiom,
that the syntactical or logical element of language, in contradis-
tinction to the glossarial, is the true basis of classification, it is
rather hazardous, in the present state of information regarding
the Australian forms of speech, to affirm any certain conclusions,
valuable in many respects though the vocabularies of Mr Thomas,
in Appendix D, undoubtedly are.
That there is, to a considerable extent, a relationship to the
Malay—that remarkable link to various forms of Asiatic and
Polynesian speech—is highly probable. As yet, however, there
are but few traces of that connection so clearly ascertained as to
afford a means of credible investigation.
As the words of Max Muller—in his u Last Results of the
Turanian Languages,” in reference to the link furnished, by the
coincidences of Malay and Tai, between Asia and Polynesia—
seem to have a very special applicability to the Australian lan-


guage, as exemplified in the dialect of Victoria, we shall here
quote them:—
“ But further researches will strengthen this link, and add new
traces of their common origin, though we have hardly a right to
expect many, considering that we have to deal with languages in
which grammatical elements are, as it were, at the mercy of
every speaker, in which roots are of the vaguest character, and
can, by means of accents and determinate syllables, be made to
express every conceivable shade of meaning,—languages which
had received no individual impress since their first separation,
and have grown up since under the guidance of but few logical
or grammatical principles, so as to make us sometimes doubt
whether we should call them works of art or products of nature,
or mere conglomerates of an irrational chance.”
Did our space allow, one or two statements regarding the
notions of the aborigines on their relations to God and a future
state, would not only corroborate the views already expressed, as
to the depth of moral darkness and physical degradation in which
they are sunk, but would also show that there are still such frag-
ments of truth cast up by the deep tides of hoary tradition and
the dim impulses of conscience, as to invite the earnest labours of
Christian love for their highest good. In reading those passages
of the evidence in which the native religion is described, we were
forcibly reminded of the following profound and touching words
of Dean Trench, in his precious little work on u Words
u Yet, with all this, ever and anon in the midst of this wreck
and ruin, there is that in the language of the savage, some subtle
distinction, some curious allusion to a perished civilisation, now
utterly unintelligible to the speaker, or some other note which
proclaims his language to be the remains of a dissipated inherit-
ance, the rags and remnants of a robe which was a royal one once.
The fragments of a broken sceptre are in his hand, a sceptre
wherewith he once held dominion (he, that is, in his progenitors)
over large kingdoms of thought, which now have escaped wholly
from his sway.”
Meanwhile, the opportunities of reclaiming the Australian black
from the withering bondage of increasing evils, and restoring
him, by the blessings of Divine love and worship, to the con-
sciousness of true manhood and the hopes of heaven, are rapidly
passing away. The many pregnant sources of decay that existed
long ere the white man set his foot on their old sea-beaches and
hunting-grounds, have been immeasurably quickened into activity
of influence and enlarged extent by the infusion of foreign mis-
chiefs. By the earnest and persevering prayers and toils of
Christian missionaries and other benevolent men—and by these
only—can that unhappy race be rescued from speedy annihilation.


. J
*- I
■
*|| v fegjjjSff I ! 5 v WBM * JS| S <I % *£.* %
a * -||P| ■■’ *> § ®|Ny| wtt| |* JJ |€ V Ss r p f |fef £ss J|| v* V* 4 '* t t m
J ' * *. J ""V • *s .tj. * t , B ’* ' jlfe * , ;
* v ff || '% A f * a' ,ir " i, .
/r '! /v~. r.r.!« . . '-.ti',t:..5 4J ! * £.%*.% :l„ !.«r«*: ,*\*. v! ~ te . * \- ■ *, . :
v Jp* ife«v
' 77. ' -'^f
v „T *V* *Vv ' ' tfe*' %y-- * -» v . %
J 7 - 4 *.** T , a **'-»£*** "1/ v %>^*l


H
