

60
US.I l<\l I \N
V \ PIONEER
\ -WO MEN


JANE LADY FRANKLIN
Portrait by Miss Romily
Reproduced hy permission of \L/
the Mitchell Library, Sydney. f
(The signature reproduced above appears, together with that of Sir John
Franklin, on the top-righthand corner of the title page of a small 12-mb.
work on Van Diemen’s Land, published in 1824 by Edward Curr, who was
for a time in charge of the V.D.L. Company Settlement at Circular Head,
Tasmania. One can only guess whether it was Sir John or Lady Franklin
who was the actual owner of the book, but it is probable that it was
brought by them to Tasmania in 183 7 and that both carefully studied the
little work on th'e Colony which they were about to govern.)


Australian Pioneer
Women
From Talks by
SHEILA WIGMORE
With Introduction by
HER EXCELLENCY LADY ISAACS
CONTENTS :
INTRODUCTION
LADY FRANKLIN
MRS. BAXTER
Page 6
„ 9
„ 14
LADY FORBES
MRS. CAMPBELL
„ 21
„ 29


• .


FOREWORD
Australian Broadcasting Commission pre-
111 sents this little book to listeners, with the
object of preserving, in a more permanent
form, four word-pictures of Australian pioneer-
women which have been broadcast through its
Stations.
In doing so the Commission re-echoes the hope
expressed in the Introduction written by Her
Excellency Lady Isaacs—to whose gracious interest
the Commission is deeply indebted—that these
stories may serve as a well-merited tribute to the
past and an ever-present inspiration for the future.


INTRODUCTION
IT is curiously difficult, in a world made up of change and pro-
gress, to remember that all was not always as it is. We know that
there have been changes—yes, but we cannot think in terms
of what existed before those changes took place. As we automati-
cally board our tram or lift our telephone from its stand, how many
of us can visualise what our lives would be without them? How
many of us can picture Sydney without its motor cars, Melbourne
without Prince s Bridge, or Adelaide as a hill-encircled native
wilderness? How many of us can place ourselves mentally in a
period when books were rarer than precious stones, when moving
pictures were unthought of, when coaches did the work of trains,
when Shakespeare, Wagner, Dickens and Shelley had as yet to com-
pose their first faltering phrases, when highwaymen infested the
roads as pirates ravaged the seas and when torches and rushlights
lit the unplaned rafters? How many of us can even realise how we
thought or felt or hoped or feared, five short years ago.
Perhaps it is well, for if the human race dwelt more upon its
past and less upon its future, if it appreciated the progress it had
made, then it might grow contented. And with contentment there
is no advancing. Vet those earlier states existed and in them men
and women lived. They were as necessary to our present condition
as we are to the future, and our quick forgetfulness is poor recom-
pense for their sufferings and their achievements.
Some few there are who hold high places in history, yet what
are they but names? Solon and Augustus Caesar, Archimedes,
Sappho, Euclid and Columbus, Joan of Arc, Queen Elizabeth, Mary
Queen of Scots, Newton, Stephenson and Napoleon, Raphael,
Beethoven, Keats and George Eliot—what are they but labels,
pasted by Time’s swift hand on a series of ideas and events? They
were once human beings, but nobody cares about that now!
Louis Pasteur did more to make human life secure than most
are privileged to do. He used his own in doing it. None can say
whether some other would have performed his splendid work if he
had followed a different path of life. Had it not been for him,
rabies and a host of other diseases might have wiped humanity
from the earth. But, as it is, we have our serum and it is unnecessary
to bother about that now.
These are the great men and women of the world. Each in his
or her different manner has altered and embellished the course of


our lives. In return we record their names. There are, however,
others, countless others. They, too, have played their parts worthily,
following where others have pointed the way, taking up the tasks
the leaders had but begun, turning each victory into conquest; they,
too, have helped to shape our lives, but to us they are not even
names; less, indeed, than labels. Without an army the General can
do nothing; without others to develop his principles, the scientific
genius is wasted; without engineers to follow his instructions, the
inventor leaves no benefit to posterity; and without settlers to people
his new lands, the explorer discovers in vain the hidden resources of
the globe. But the soldiers, the scientists, the engineers and the
settlers did their work and we have the benefit of it, so you cannot
expect people to worry about that now.
We must look to the future, lest we stagnate. At the same time,
it does us little harm—especially those of us who are inclined to
be discontented with our lot—to glance occasionally at the past. If,
in doing so, we can place ourselves, even for a few moments, in the
position of those who lived in the different conditions of other days,
and if we can appreciate the difficulties which they faced and cari
see how by facing them they lightened ours, then we shall restore a
little our lost perspective.
In the four vivid pen pictures printed in this little book,
Sheila Wigmore has made four of Australia’s pioneer women live
again for us; Lady Franklin, smiling at the straight-laced social code
of early Hobart and thrilling at the wonder and excitement of long
camping-trips through the Australian bush; Mrs. Baxter, cheerful
throughout a voyage on a convict-ship and her husband’s six-months’
illness, making light of the troubles that beset the wife of a pioneer-
ing squatter on the Macleay River, where breakable supplies arrived
invariably broken; Mrs. Campbell, carrying mid-Victorianism even
into the Beechworth gold-fields (which, in the eighteen-sixties, were
mid-Victorian in a purely geographical sense) and facing the prob-
lems of housekeeping when butter was five-shillings a pound and a
loaf of bread cost seven-and-sixpence; and Lady Forbes, attending,
as the second lady of New South Wales, Sydney’s public and private
entertainments at the beginning of the nineteenth century, when
Circular Quay boasted its orchards and when country residences
were to let at Kirribilli.
Tempora mutantur, et nos ... Yet here through these four
women, the appearance, the ideas, the conditions, the institutions
and the buildings of the infant Australia have shaken off the
dust of the intervening years and stand revealed for our inspection.
Widely as they differ in character, degree, location, circumstance


and outlook, they have this in common, that they were pioneers.
The wife of a governor in Hobart; the wife of a Chief Justice in
Sydney; the wife of a squatter on the Macleay River; and the wife
of a police magistrate at Beechworth; none of them will secure a
distinguished place in history, yet to each of them the Australians
of to-day owe something. They blazed no trails, but they went
courageously along rough paths which many another refused to
follow and they did much to turn them into reasonably comfortable
roads for us to ride along. And so the pictures of these four pioneer-
ing women, not only enable us better to realize the great advance
Australia has made, but are an inspiration to the women of the
present day to help its forward march
Government House,
Canberra.
Sept. 13th, 1933.
8


Lady Franklin
OOKING out to Sydney Heads one afternoon, and watching
|| Q the arrival of that graceful yacht the “Franklin,” returning
from New Guinea, provided a pleasant re-awakening of my
interest in the Franklins, Sir John and his wife Jane. Conjecturing
that the yacht—which used to be a tender at the Naval College,
Jervis Bay, and later was used by the Administration of New
Guinea—was called after the famous explorer, it occurred to me
that probably Australia has a little forgotten that striking person-
ality, Lady Jane Fraklin, his second wife.
The eight years, 1837 to 1844, that they spent in Australia,
when Sir John was Lieut.-Governor of Tasmania—or let us be
historically correct and call it Van Diemen’s Land—were after all
only an episode in a tremendously full, almost crowded, life. The
ingrained love of travelling, of seeing all that there was to be seen
in any country in which she happened to find herself, was Lady
Franklin’s outstanding characteristic, so much so that her life may be
divided into four periods.
These periods, are, first, her voyagings before her marriage;
second, the time she spent in touring the Mediterranean countries
when her husband was in command of the “Rainbow” frigate,
stationed near the Greek coast; third, her camping excursions in the
Tasmanian and Australian bush; and fourth, her constant journey-
ings in her devoted effort to fit out relief ships when no word came
of her husband’s Arctic quest.
So, although her adventures out here were only one of these
four, the deep impression they made, and her apparent love of the
country—she speaks often of her beloved Van Diemen’s Land—
give her a right to be ranked among the pioneer women of Australia.
THE ROMILLY PORTRAIT
Lady Franklin was the daughter of John Griffin, of London, a
Governor of the Goldsmiths Company, a man whose position and
income gave his family great social advantages. Both he and his
wife came from well-known Huguenot families, and it was perhaps
this French strain that was responsible for the mental alertness and
vivacity of daughter Jane. That she was an extremely lovely and
sparkling young person is evident to anyone who looks at reproduc-
tions of her portrait by Miss Romilly, painted when the sitter was a
girl in her teens. In one of Lady Franklin’s early diaries—the habit
of noting down impressions and happenings seems to have begun
early—she gave some notes on the first portrait sitting.


“I was drawn with my hair flat, in the English fashion, perfectly
simple, in a plain muslin frock with a low neck, and my pelisse
thrown back on my shoulders,” she says. “The artist arrested me in
an attitude I accidentally fell into, and said she should choose that.
She carefully hid the portrait from us, never suffering it to be looked
at till finished. She asked me questions, made Fanny read to me,
made me pay attention to what she read, and as much as possible
diverted my attention.”
The picture which resulted from these sittings shows a charm-
ing young face, with large sparkling dark eyes and curling hair; a
modern face, supremely intelligent, without a trace of the simpering
miss, and a sweet mouth, revealing the kindness she showed so often
in her treatment of convict women, especially her convict servants
at Hobart Town Government House. I hoped that 1 should be able
to find at the Mitchell Library the actual manuscript of the very full
diaries and letters which Lady Jane left, or at least a part of them.
But three short notes of invitation which she wrote in London, and a
few references to her in other Australian letters were all that I could
discover.
It seems rather a pity that documents of really great interest
and value to us out here should be buried away in some English
collection. However, a newspaper clipping describing these diaries
says that the notes are scrappy and disjointed, and the scrip difficult
to read, except with the use of the utmost patience and a magni-
fying glass. This description scarcely fits the letters in the Mitchell
Library, in which the penmanship is finely delicate and very clear,
which goes to prove, perhaps, that we are all of us sisters under the
skin when it comes to writing letters for others to see, and records
that we intend to keep for our own satisfaction. We can pity Lady
Franklin s inability to reach for the handy portable typewriter when
her brain flowed on faster than her pen. Incidentally it may interest
you to know that many of the manuscripts were deciphered and
arranged by Sophie Cracroft, a niece of Sir John, and his wife’s
devoted and constant companion in her travels.
KEPT IN THE BACKGROUND
I suppose it was the intense narrowness of Hobart life at that
time that made her frequent camping trips so attractive to Lady
Franklin, for the colonial ladies—l would not dare to refer to them
as mere women —had very firm ideas about their place being in the
home, and well in it. There is an amusing glimpse in her account
of their official reception on arrival, the Governor being met with
all pomp and ceremony, while, as she rather pathetically puts it,
“we ladies walked quietly through the gardens to Government
House.”


Social etiquette was of the rigid, steel-encased order. There is a
story of early Hobart days relating to a certain cheap shop, a primi-
tive forebear of the “cash and carry” as we know it. Shops being few,
and commodities being elsewhere dear, this place was much patron-
ised by the local housewives who had a reputation for being rather
cheeseparing. But because it was also patronised by the humbler
families, it was distinctly not the thing to be seen there, and the very
social lady would follow an unwritten law in politely refusing to
recognise any friends she might happen to meet there. Though
probably she knew half the customers, she would dispense neither
word nor bow.
Lady Franklin, perhaps rather despairingly, energetically took
up the cause of a wider education for girls, and tackled the problem
of a high school for them. Writing to her sister about the Colony’s
younger set, she raps them metaphorically over the knuckles,
declaring that “their frivolity, emptiness, and ignorance, and bold-
ness of manner, are deplorable, at least in this town. However
naturally shy and reserved, they lose it all as soon as they go into
society, and yet they are sharp-witted and pretty. A great portion
of the women of this town live in much seclusion. They ought to
have a love of reading. Their time is divided between housekeep-
ing and their children. At present it may be said of the girls
generally that they do nothing.”
A WELCOME CHANGE
While Sir John Franklin, also intensely anxious for the founda-
tion of some proper educational system, was corresponding with
Dr. Arnold, of Rugby, on the subject, his wife busied herself with
the appointment of suitable schoolmistresses. Her letters to her
sister at this time were full of it, so it was probably in holiday mood
that these weighty affairs were set aside, and a Vice-Regal party set
out to see their lovely little country for themselves. The party was
often accompanied by Mr. Gould, celebrated ornithologist, and
Mr. Gunn, also much interested in natural science. It is rather a
coincidence that nearly 100 years later another Vice-Regal party,
his Excellency and Lady Game, travelled through much the same
district in Tasmania, studying local birds, and that they were some-
times accompanied by another well-known bird man, Mr. A. H.
Chisholm.
To return to Lady Franklin, who in two years had thoroughly
expored the southern and western coasts of Tasmania, her insatiable
craving for travel took her to Melbourne, then very much in its
babyhood, a flourishing infant of 1 8 months with a very clean face.
This was the start of perhaps the longest of her camping trips, for
she left the straight new streets of Melbourne and embarked upon


the rather ambitious journey overland to Sydney, following the
explorers’ route of Hume and Hovell. Before she left the city she
was presented with an address which, signed by 65 leading residents,
makes interesting reading, though it is too long to give now. An
extract from her diary conveys some idea of what the trip was like.
“I look back on many nights spent in the bush, with much
pleasure, thanks to the beauty of the climate,” she says. “Our
party grouped itself into small knots, each with a fire. The fires
were close together with the exception of one, the ladies’ fire being
the most distant, simply within hail of the rest. The light cart was
brought within a few feet of the chief fire, the back was turned
towards it, with the shafts resting on the ground. Between these a
blanket was fastened. On the earth were spread our cloaks and
kangaroo skin rugs, and finally our carpet bags were to serve as
pillows.”
A SHOCK FOR LOCAL SOCIETY
On this trip they went after sunset to witness a corroboree—
“coroberry,” she spells it—and though this was not the first time
Lady Franklin saw the dance, there follows a detailed, description.
She said it filled her with undefined horror and dread, as the coun-
tenances of the dancers were demoniacal, their agility startling and
unpleasing. The monotonous chant of the single musician, whose
only instrument consisted of two flat sticks struck together; the
almost wailing accompaniment of the women’s voices; and the
hearty exclamation “merrijig” (meaning “very good”), heard on all
sides, all contributed to make this spectacle a rather bewildering one.
En route, they pitched camp on the banks of the Murrum-
bidgee, and it is here that the diaries have their great interest for us,
for the party met such familiar pioneering families as the Gibsons,
Throsbies, Faithfulls, Osbornes, and Chisholms, and, to use a word
dear to the heart of the psychologists, she noted down her reactions
to them.
There is no doubt that this trip caused a sensation among local
society. That a Governor’s wife should risk the dangers and dis-
comforts of a six weeks’ trek must have impressed them tremen-
dously, and caused them to regard her as something of an eccentric.
The Mitchell Library has a letter among the Hassal correspondence
to James Hassal at Mulgoa from his sister Kate, who in a bunch of
local gossip informed him that their carriage went to Appin that day
to take Lady Franklin to Campbelltown, where the Governor’s
carriage would take her-to Sydney. Kate added, “She has come
all the way from Port Phillip by laud .” The italics are evident. The
journey ended in a triumphant arrival by carriage at Sydney Gov-


ernment House, where Sir George and Lady Gipps did the honors.
Dr. Broughton was another person whom Lady Franklin visited, as
well as the Lethbridges, at Penrith, and the Coxes, at Mulgoa, but
she was most taken with the Berrys’ estate at Crow’s Nest. A good
deal of this splendid garden, next to the North Sydney girls’ high
school, is still left to remind the tram passengers in the Lane Cove
Road that Crow’s Nest was in an earlier day one of the beauty spots
of Sydney.
« . .
•Viry^
(Lady Franklin did much for Tasmanian science and education and left
Betsy Island, at the mouth of the Derwent River, to the Tasmanian Royal
Society, while the Acanthe Museum and Estate at Lenah Valley was given
by her, and is still administered by the Christ College Trustees, in the
interests of education. The above note is a formal acknowledgment to the
great-grandmother of Dr. William Crowther, of Macquarie Street, Hobart,
who had forwarded to Lady Franklin an ornament made from th’e feathers
®f the now almost extinct Tasmanian Ground Parrot; Mrs. Crowther was
very expert in the preparation of these things and her son possessed
a large collection of the skins of Tasmanian birds and animals.)
13
LADY FRANKLIN


Mrs, Baxter Looks on the Bright
Side
THE second figure in these pictures of women in Australia in the
early days will not be found in any encyclopaedia or history.
She was only one of hundreds of countrywomen who took no
prominent place in the young Colony’s life, but who did as much,
and perhaps more, than statesmen and politicians to build Aus-
tralia’s foundations firm and sure.
I should like to take her as a prototype of these women, because
she set down her experiences and thoughts in a most delightful
little book of memoirs, so let her voice be the voice of all those
whom she represents, and who passed their lives unrecorded. I have
called her “The Cheerful Mrs. Baxter” because of her blessed gift
of seeing the gay side of life in spite of her troubles and sorrows, of
which, incidentally, she had a substantial share.
She remarks somewhere in her book, apropos of the weather
or something equally trivial, “we carried the sunshine in our hearts,
most of us.” This she says simply, and with a complete lack of
pomposity. It gives a perfect picture of this sunny, witty person-
ality, whose very human love of gossip immediately endears her to
all women.
A point struck me as typical of her—she never once throughout
the book mentions her personal appearance, or bewails ill-health,
except a few humourous references to seasickness.
We find but scant space devoted to her personal history. In
a few lines, we are informed that she was the wife of Lieut. Andrew
Baxter, who belonged to one of the crack regiments; that soon after
her marriage, the regiment got sailing orders for Van Diemen’s Land
to act as escort to a shipload of convicts. Here most women would
pause to bemoan their fate, and offer a “Term of His Natural Life-
ish” picture of convict misery and horrors.
CONVICTS’ MOONLIGHT CHORUSES
Not so Mrs. Baxter. For her of the sunny heart, life presents
a more cheerful aspect; yet no one who reads her memoirs would
ever accuse her of being indifferent to suffering. The ship, at
Portsmouth, took in 3 1 0 male convicts, and she says of them, “We
must have been fortunate in having a good draft of prisoners. They
gave no trouble and, on fine moonlight nights, to hear them singing
no one would have supposed that they were sent from their country
for its good, or that any but themselves had paid for their passages.
They sang well, and good choruses were formed in which excellent
voices were heard.”


She was a delightful gossip, and got a good deal of entertain-
ment on that tedious voyage, particularly in watching one of the
sergeants—a bachelor and a woman-hater.
This man was in charge of the dispensing of rum to the soldiers
and their wives on board. It certainly comes as a surprise to most
of us that a beneficent Government included soldiers’ wives in the
daily rum ration. Mrs. Baxter often watched this primitive cocktail
party on the lower decks. Here is her description:—‘‘He (the
sergeant) would come to the capstan, and, holding himelf erect,
would call out Grog. To this appeal all would respond, but when
on deck the ladies would look around to see who could witness their
swallowing of the draught. They would pretend they did not like
it, or say ‘Sergeant, sir, do you think it would do me good, as I feel
very seasick, sir? They would get a surly response, ‘Really, madam,
1 don’t know. If you don’t want it, say so,’ and at any hesitation
would seize the pannikin and empty it overboard.”
She had the eagle eye of a good gossip reporter, had Mrs.
Baxter. Nothing escaped unnoticed, so of course she did not miss
seeing an exciting incident which occurred when their ship was leav-
ing England. Among the crowd that had collected to see the ship
off was a young girl of not more than 1 5, who had married a soldier
without leave, and was to remain behind.
Dazed with grief at the parting, when the order came to clear
the decks of visitors, she threw herself into the river. Mrs. Baxter
tells, with her usual knack for a happy ending, how immediately an
officer not only dived into the river and rescued the girl, but paid
her passage out to Australia. Not to be outdone in kindness, Mrs.
Baxter engaged her as a maid when she arrived.
It is quite a blow to civic pride to find that this pleasant per-
sonally found the scenery around Sydney, with the exception of the
harbour, definitely ugly. She probably mislaid her accustomed
rose-coloured spectacles, for soon after arrival her husband con-
tracted rheumatic fever, and was invalided for 1 3 weeks.
LIEUT. BAXTER’S CURIOUS RECOVERY
She accounts for his recovery in a singular manner, which,
although it may not accord with the theory of medicine, at least fits
in with the principle of gossip. They were lodged near the Domain,
and looked out on an immense stack of firewood, collected for the
use of the Governor’s household. Some young men who had never
been invited to dine at Government House, resolved that that wood
should serve to cook no dinners for luckier persons, so they placed
some tar balls amongst it, and fired it at midnight. They had taken
the precaution of warning the popular Mrs. Baxter not to be
alarmed, but she, anxious not to miss the fun, rushed out without


passing the warning on to her husband. When she returned she
found him out of bed and quite cured. The shock of the fire, and
the excitement, had worked the miracle.
So they took a little vacation, the lieutenant being granted sick
leave to recuperate, and went to Port Macquarie, visiting as well a
friend who had a station inland from that town. Here they both
fell so much in love with country life, that Baxter sold out of his
regiment and took up a grant of land in that district on a tributary
creek to the Macleay River.
PORT MACQUARIE. 1832
From a painting by Peacock in the Mitchell Library, reproduced by courtesy
of ‘the trustees.
Probably it was the prospect of a settled home after the
cramped quarters of a soldier’s life that appealed so strongly to the
feminine side of Mrs. Baxter’s character. She was on the spot early
to watch their home being built, and her descriptions of it are de-
tailed. ‘‘Our pretty hut, and very nice garden, seemed to rise by
magic. It seemed so queer to me when the overseer —an immense
man named Webster—looked at a huge gum-tree, and said, ‘Yes.


you 11 do, and in a short time down came the tree, and the slabs
were run out the next day. The hut consisted of six rooms and a
wide verandah, and there was a detached kitchen with a room for
the servant. The hut had bark instead of slates or tiles, so they were
easily covered in.
“We lived in a pretty valley, on the banks of a creek which
swelled to a river, and was most enjoyable in the summer for bath-
ing. I liked the life very well, and there was plenty of horse exer-
cise and hunting of kangaroos, for we had some very good dogs,
which we had brought with us. We had constantly some very
agreeable visitors.”
OLD-FASHIONED HOSPITALITY
Later on, we find her looking back on those days and recalling
them as “the days in which we were content with a hut formed from
a gum-tree, shutters in lieu of windows, and many other primitive
things, that would quite horrify the squatter of to-day (that would
be about the ’seventies of last century). Still, I must say we prof-
ferred and accepted unbounded hospitality. We vied not with one
another in grandeur or expenses we could not afford, and were not
a whit less happy than the present race. On the •contrary, there
was the greatest gaiety forever prevailing, and if we did not possess
an acre of bought land, why, we could not mortgage it, and have to
pay a ruinous rate of interest —a happy philosophy which might
appeal to many to-day.
She describes the rush of guests at picnic racetime. She was
staying on this occasion in the New England district, at a homestead
near Armidale. So, freed from the responsibilities of a hostess, she
could enjoy herself thoroughly. I think even Mrs. Baxter’s unfailing
cheerfulness might have broken down under the strain of catering
for so large a number of unexpected visitors. She says “Mr. Marsh
(her host) maintained that he had 24 varieties of vegetables on the
dinner-table—it took the guests most of the morning to gather
them. There used to be 20 people at table during race-week, and
all could not be accommodated at the one table, so those who came
first sat down at the long table on the verandah, while the latecomers
would stand below on the ground, and a cloth would be spread on
the verandah in front of them. Tea was brought in at seven o’clock,
and soon after the meal was over, wine and spirits were placed on
the table, and we two ladies did not remain there long,”
Her own considerable difficulties in keeping house left her
quite undismayed. A saving sense of humour came to her rescue on
more than one occasion that must have left a less sunny tempered
person choking with rage. All supplies had to be brought up to Yess-


aba—the Baxter’s station on the Macleay—by packhorse or dray.
The more attractive loads were often mysteriously broken, and only
a few of the expected goods arrived intact. The roads had a knack
of being exceptionally bad when the carters were asked to bring up
a load of liquor. Mrs. Baxter records this blandly, and with an
admirable lack of bitterness. “We had great difficulty,’’ she said,
“in getting even spirits or ale up to the station. All our supplies
came from the settlement—a distance of 3 3 miles—to within seven
miles of Yessaba, by water.
“We then had to send a dray, with a bullock team, to fetch
them, and some accident invariably happened to the drinkables.
Either the dray had gone over some immense log, or into some
desperate rut, and the bottles or the cask of ale or porter had
broken, or the hoops of the spirits cask had loosened and the spirits
leaked out.’’
A CARTER WHO WAS FRANK
The arrival of things ordered from England was an event that
thrilled the whole countryside, and neighbours rode in from far
and wide to watch the unpacking. She recalls one such incident.
“An order was sent to England for a crate of crockery, consisting of
things impossible to get in the Colony, yet of much value in the
dairy and kitchen. We heard of its arrival in Sydney, and then Port
Macquarie, and the dray was sent for it. We walked out to meet
the dray, and rushed to unpack the crockery and pieces of delf.
Pieces they certainly were. Of the whole lot, not more than a dozen
pieces were whole! The driver of the dray was called, and admitted
having had a spill on the road. We said, “Just look what you have
done—broken all my crockery nearly.”
“Well, surely it does not matter much,” he returned, “for a
greater set of rubbish I never did see,” At this, man, master and
mistress burst out laughing.
This little incident scarcely needs a comment, but I think I
know what the average woman would have said in similar
circumstances.
There seems to have been an easy fellowship between servant
and employer on that farm that was very refreshing, and this in
spite of the fact that the farm servants were mostly convicts. “Our
farm servants were prisoners,” she says, “but we had only two
black sheep out of 10, and one of these was a ‘special,’ or gentle-
man, prisoner. I have always found prisoners well disposed, and
very rarely dishonest, and any little indulgence was appreciated by
them.


“As to my female servants, I must say that in Australia I have
found the prisoners undoubtedly the best. They used to have £l5
per year, and were, to my mind, neater looking than the generality
of emigrant women who go into service. These ask you, with the
greatest assurance, for from £25 to £35 per year. When you take
them in, you find they require teaching their work, and just as you
think you have got them to understand your methods, you may rest
assured that Joan has found her Darby, and is going to what she
calls 'settle herself.’
JOHN SUPPLE'S MANNERS
“The servant woman I brought with me had been transported
for life for forging a cheque on her uncle. She was very young and
pretty. Our man servant had bought out of the regiment at the
same time as we left for the purpose of going with us to Port Mac-
quarie. We were there about three years when Supple, the man,
came and asked leave to marry Mary, and my husband thought, as
she was so much the younger of the two, it was a pity for her to
throw herself away, so he spoke to her.
‘Mary,’ said he, ‘what makes you think of marrying Supple,
a man old enough to be your father, and you such a'pretty girl?’
‘Well, sir, John Supple is NOT a pretty man, but his manners
—oh, sir, his manners!’
We could say nothing to this, and manners carried the day.”
The farm servants on the Baxter station had comfortable huts,
and small gardens attached. All of them had plenty of melons,
cucumbers and pumpkins, from their own cultivation, and very
soon were given as many peaches as they liked to eat from the
orchard. Isn’t it pleasant to hear of convicts being made comfort-
able like this? As a contrast, I remember being shown on a recent
tour of the Wiseman’s Ferry district the courthouse caves, where a
rough justice was shown to the unfortunates who had been found
stealing fruit from the overseer’s garden.
Our cheerful gossip found little need for hoarding provender.
She says, “It was wonderful how quickly everything grew in that
lovely climate. The only trouble in gardening was to keep down
the weeds, as the vegetation is so rapid, and you have nothing to do
but put cuttings of any kind into the ground to make sure of them
growing.”
They had scarcely set their station in order when flour rose to
an unprecedented price of £75 per ton —that is compared to £l 1
per ton present price. Her remarks on this domestic setback might


be the musings of the countrywoman of to-day. Here they are:—
‘Of course, we had no money to spare —who has, no squatter, I am
sure—and therefore our consideration was what could we get to
mix with the flour so as to make it last longer than otherwise. We
agreed on rice, and we congratulated ourselves on it being cheap.
A friend rode up from the settlement one day, and our first question
was ‘what news?’
‘Oh, nothing much that will interest you, I think,’ adding with
a sickly smile—for he, too, was in rather straitened circumstances
—‘rice has risen in value, and is quite dear now.’
“He could not have made a more sure home thrust. I should
have felt heartbroken, only I had not time to think of it, as I had no
female servant at the time, and had to cook the dinner.”
MUTTON AND BEEF WRINKLES
She did enjoy an occasional visit to town, and the luxury of
staying at an hotel free from what she, with her usual gift for an apt
phrase, called “mutton and beef wrinkles,” which, she adds, “only
disfigure the face and sour the temper.”
We don’t notice any souring of her temper as the narrative
goes on, but can you wonder that domestic chores loomed large on
her horizon when she, as a woman fresh from England, was used to
having everything done for her by a staff of maids. This is her only
reservation, when full of praise for her new country, she puts down
her pen at the end of the last chapter.
“There is no doubt that this is a wonderful country, and it has
vast wealth and attractions, but the immense drawback is, like
America, the great want of good servants.”
The home at Yessaba did not last long, for bad luck dogged
them, and as a final touch of ill-fortune, Lieut. Baxter was obliged to
sell nearly all he possessed to pay a dishonoured bill to which he
had kindly put his name for a friend. But the soldier’s wife, though
broken-hearted at leaving her beloved Macleay, wasted no time on
tears, but set to work philosophically to prepare for the journey
overland to Port Fairey, where they planned to take up more land
and begin anew to build their fortunes.
But one cannot believe that outrageous fortune would follow
for long a woman so armed by a sunny temperament against its
slings and arrows. 1 prefer to think of her, her worries well over,
like the princess in the fairy tale, living happily ever after.


From Lady Forbes 5 Scrapbook
AS a contrast to the talk last week, which gave a glimpse of
country life at the beginning of last century, from the femi-
nine angle, let us turn the pages of Lady Forbes’s scrapbook,
and from this medley of gossip, anecdote, and copies of official
documents, paint on the colours of a picture of early Sydney town.
Lady Forbes, as the wife of the then Chief Justice of N.S.W.,
and second only to the wife of the Governor, has a right to a pro-
minent position in the foreground of the picture; and her own remin-
iscences will supply the other figures.
Sir Francis Forbes having accepted the office of Chief Justice
in 1823, she arrived in Sydney with him and her children and ser-
vants, to settle in the house prepared for them on the site now
occupied by the Lands Department, facing Macquarie Place.
“I was very pleased,” she says, “with the house which had
been provided for us in accordance with the terms of my husband’s
appointment, and which I found to be a well-built, commodious
dwelling with very thick walls. The grounds in which it stood were
enclosed by a low brick wall with a wide gate opening on to a gra-
velled drive round a circular lawn.” She tells us also of the wide ver-
andah, tree-shaded, with a broad flight of stone steps leading up to
it from the lawn. At the back of the house a porch opened on to a
large gravelled yard, with servants’ quarters, coach-house, and
stables. The children were delighted with the large garden.
All this seems so remote from our own idea of Macquarie Place
that we might be pardoned for wondering if the house was really
there, but she speaks of the obelisk, familiar to all of us—which
marks the distance from that spot to the towns up country —being
right in front of their garden.
ORCHARDS AT CIRCULAR QUAY
It comes as a curious shock also to find her referring to an
acquaintance, Mr. John Campbell, a wealthy merchant, as having
built himself a fine house at Circular Quay, where he cultivated an
extensive garden; and to hear that most of the governmental
officials had houses in that neighbourhood, with great gardens and
orchards.
With Circular Quay as the “best” suburb—quite the “nicest”
place to live—it is only a matter of social relativity that Kirribilli
was regarded as the country. A To Let notice for Carrabella


Cottage, Kirribilli, which appeared in the “Sydney Morning Herald”
at a little later date, read:—“Desirable Country Residence; near
Sydney. To be let furnished for such term as may be agreed upon
Carrabella Cottage, North Shore, consisting of four rooms and
store room and detached kitchen. Ground consists of five acres,
well fenced, and includes an excellent garden, well stocked with
vegetables. A good boat and a few cows may also be let with the
house.”
George Street, stretching then in a long, irregular line from
Circular Quay towards Brickfield Hill, was the principal business
centre of the rapidly-growing town. Lady Forbes mentions several
good business houses there, as well as the Bank of New South Wales,
but adds “Other buildings I do not recollect, for 1 seldom went into
the town, as the shops were not very tempting, and we had brought
a supply of clothing with us from England sufficient to last us for
some time.”
A SHOPKEEPER WITH ENTERPRISE
A woman used to having the resources of Bond Street for her
shopping excursions in London, might excusably have shuddered at
some of the Sydney shops, one of which, displaying more enterprise
than elegance, was constructed merely of slabs on wheels, so that
it could be moved from one street to another if business became
slack.
But for all that, there must have been a certain fascination
about the shops of those days. Their advertisements in the news-
papers of the day yield a spice of romance to anyone who turns up
the old files. With such a swing do these old ads. read that writers
of free verse might take them as a model. This is how William
Higgins, of No. 6 King Street, listed his wares:—
“Prints and calicoes,
“Shirtings and sheetings;
“Bedtick, cotton and linen.
“Stuffs, assorted,
“Cotton stockings,
“Worsted ditto;
“Gloves, assorted,
“Silk and cotton handkerchiefs.
“Fustian, corduroys and velveteens,
“Beaverteens, and moleskins.
“Sugar per lb. or bag,
“Tea per lb. or chest.
“Brazil and negrohead tobacco,”
—which, he adds tersely, will be sold at reduced prices for ready
money. Composing advertisements in the days when the “Sydney
Morning Herald” boasted a circulation of 1,100 subscribers was
an easy matter.


Although William Higgins gives no indication of retail prices,
they are quite easy to find, and may afford an amusing comparison
for the modern housewife. We discover that clothing was very
dear, and that tailors charged £6 or £7 for men’s cloth coats, £l/5/-
for waistcoats, and £2/10/- for trousers, and that warm under-
clothing was very expensive. This last item was in great demand,
for emigrants from England, thinking of blazing tropic skies and
hearing overmuch of the heat of the Australian summer, were apt to
leave their winter woollies behind them.
BUYING WATER BY THE BUCKET
As to household commodities, an expensive item was water,
which some citizens had to buy at a penny a bucket from men who
carried it about the streets. The rations of the assigned servants,
too, had to be considered. The weekly regulation allowance per
servant was lbs. of meat, 1 lbs. flour, 7 oz. sugar, 2 oz. salt,
a small quantity of soap, and an optional allowance of possibly £ lb.
each of tea and tobacco, as well as their clothing, shoes and
bedding.
As regards the treatment of these assigned servants, a para-
graph from the police news of 1832 is eloquent:— ,
“Charlotte W., for being insolent to her mistress and insisting
upon having brandy on her Christmas pudding, was sent to the
factory (a reformatory for women) for six months.”
A little domestic reminiscence is characteristic of the times.
Lady Forbes tells of her butcher who was a shrewd man of business,
and did a good trade, but, in those days of limited education, had
never been taught to read or write. He was able to enumerate cor-
rectly, and he used to draw very neatly the pieces of beef or mutton,
or whatever the goods supplied might be, with the prices set opposite
them, and added up without mistake. When the bill was paid, he
would draw a man in the corner of the paper hanging from a gal-
lows, which was his receipt, and meant “settled.”
A great friend of the Forbes’s was the famous Captain Piper,
harbourmaster and collector of Customs at that time. Piper lived
in princely splendour in a mansion built on the point that has taken
its name from him. Here he maintained carriages, horses and
boats, besides his own cutter and band. A row of miniature guns
on the lawn fired a salute at his approach, or that of any distin-
guished guests.
Captain Piper’s unbounded hospitality made him many friends
—he was the proverbial “good fellow”—and nearly every evening
at his mansion ended with a ball. Lady Forbes often called at the


house, and dined there occasionally with her husband, but remarks
non-commitally, “I did not attend any of the balls. I wonder if
this is a hint that the company was perhaps a little too free and easy
for a woman who had the dignity of an official position to maintain?
PARTIES AT MACQUARIE PLACE
LADY FORBES.
(From photograph in The Mitchell Library)
Lady Forbes’s own enter-
tainments seem to have been,
as might be expected, of the
formal dinner-party order; but,
like a true woman, she de-
lighted in the informal, too, and
recalls with evident pleasure
little afternoon gatherings in
her own home. The military
band was in the habit of play-
ing occasionally by the obelisk
in the square in front of the
house, and she always chose
those days for her “at homes,
so that the guests might enjoy
the music.
As Governor succeeded
Governor, so the tone and to
some degree the manners of
society changed. From the
harsh formality of the martinet
Darling, whose severity resulted
in his recall, the Colony turned
with relief towards the kindlier
regime of Governor Bourke,
and his popularity was in no small measure due to the charm and
tact of his sister, who acted as hostess for him following the death
of his wife shortly after he had been installed in office. Miss Bourke
—who subsequently, as Lady Deas Thompson, became the life-long
friend of Lady Forbes—did much to put an end to the jealousies
and heart-burnings which had been rife during Governor Darling s
administration.
She isued invitations for a number of small informal parties to
the best-known people in the social circle, and at one of these
friendly gatherings began to do some fancy work upon which she
was engaged—at the same time talking to those friends who were
sitting near her.
24
FROM LADY FORBES’ SCRAPBOOK.


This informality at Government House, however, did not meet
with the approval of a certain society dame who had been much in
evidence in the Vice-Regal circle during Governor Darling’s time. Fo
quote Lady Forbes’s own account of the incident, ‘walking up to
where our little party was seated sociably together, this would-be
stickler for etiquette said (I thought rather rudely) :
‘I am sorry I did not know you were going to be so indus-
trious, Miss Bourke. I have a bag of the children’s socks at home
that badly need mending, and if I had thought of it, I would have
brought them with me.’
“Miss Bourke laughed good-naturedly and begged her guest
to bring the socks with her ‘the next time she came to one of her
parties.’ But 1 may here mention that this opportunity did not arise
for a very long time, for Miss Bourke was not one with whom a
liberty of this kind could be taken with impunity, and a certain
name was erased from the Government House visitors’ book.’’
TACT IN A TRYING TIME
Lady Forbes herself must have had the gift of handling a diffi-
cult situation diplomatically, for all through the period when Gov-
ernor Darling and Sir Francis Forbes were officially at loggerheads,
their wives remained socially at peace. She refers to it as “this
trying time during which both my husband and 1 had suffered so
much.’’ Of her husband she says:—“The Chief Justice, who never
bore malice, nor cherished any personal feeling, placed his name at
the head of an address presented to the departing Governor, and I
received a charming note of farewell from Mrs. Darling, accom-
panied by a very handsome vase.’’
This comment follows a lengthy account taken from “The Aus-
tralian”—Wentworth’s newspaper—of the quite undisguised and
almost delirious enthusiasm that greeted the departure of Governor
Darling. There is no record left by the tactful authoress as to
whether she herself took any part in them, or in the huge fete that
Wentworth gave at Vaucluse House, but she was woman enough to
leave us all the details. The clipping reads:—
“On Wednesday last upwards of 4000 persons of both sexes
and all grades assembled at Vaucluse to partake of Mr. Went-
worth’s hospitality, and to evince their joy at the approaching
departure of the Governor.
“Almost from daybreak to dark, South Head Road was
crowded by parties in every sort of vehicle and on foot. Sydney
might be said to have been deserted, for in various other directions


not a soul was to be met with during the whole of the afternoon.
The scene of the fete was the lawn in front of Mr. Wentworth’s villa,
which was thrown open for the reception of all respectable visitants,
while a marquee in which were casks of Wight’s strong ale, was
pitched a short way off for the refreshment of all.
“On an immense spit, in another direction, a bullock was
roasted entire. Twelve sheep were also roasted in succession, and
4000 loaves of bread were consumed at the enormous banquet. On
Tuesday, a fatted ox was led in triumph through the streets of
Sydney, decorated with ribbons, amid the cheers of the surrounding
spectators.
“Nothing could have been more orderly than Wednesday’s
proceedings. All was festivity and good feeling . , , By 7 p.m.
two immense bonfires were lighted on the highest hill, and the
illuminations had a most brilliant and imposing effect. Surmounted
by a crown and flanked by two stars, there appeared the words,
“God Save the King”—“Down With the Tyrant.’’ Sports and
speeches whiled away the night, and morning dawned before the
hospitable mansion was quitted by all its guests.”
SYDNEY’S FIRST THEATRE
Another newspaper clipping dated a year later (1832) is of
interest to Sydney-siders. This reported the opening of the first
Sydney theatre—the Theatre Royal—and gives the programme for
the holidays, to include “that popular melodrama in three acts as
performed in London for some hundreds of nights in succession,
called ‘Black-eyed Susan,’ to conclude with that far-famed and
highly comical farce, ‘Monsieur Tonson.’ Price of admission, boxes
5/-, pit 3/-. Half price at 9 o’clock. Performance to commence
at 7 o’clock precisely.” Other plays on the list seem to have been
of the richly-flavoured order of good old-fashioned melodrama.
They included, “Fortune’s Frolic,” “The Tales of Mystery,” and
“The Village Lawyer.”
The report of the opening night and the critique of the play
are, of course, too long to give. We are told, quaintly enough, that
the audience was “rather numerous and very respectable”— a qual-
ity they seem to have valued highly, for the word crops up in the
most unlikely places in the news of the day. Incidentally, the stage
of the theatre must have been tiny, as even the soft-tongued re-
viewer refers to it as a “miniature,” and adds, “The stage is indeed
so small—unavoidably so, however—that the performers have not
space to move about on it, and their action consequently seems con-
tracted.”


THEATRE^]aciYALp- ■
SYDNEY.
m WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER ,l le 3<kh 1833
THIS THEATRE
Will open lor the first time, with New Scenerv. Marhimiry.
Dresses. ami Decorations, under (he manac-ement of -
MR. MEREDITH.
The Pieces selected for (he opening arc first i
■ TMVI Mfell UJMUIfCO
Nautical Afelo . Drama.
is three acts,
I rl-U.O
HJLA CK-EYED
ALL IN THE DOWNS.
M Mf. V«lf* I n«HiftU \SK \i# ii„ .we ~
hStFN M'« *'“ m I »■«*.’ «*• Mr. ». S,
iir/orr. .. . w .? Mr. Ha.nH.wl, ONAKiHAIN, l,v Mr. Val„.
I'J.ol t.II-UaKK. )„ Mr, WW.
try Mr. fcnby. M ATCHKT. t,v Mr. Mil*
V lftN, try Mr. Slim
.... ~ WILLIAM, BA" MU. MEREDITH.
»(,A( KAu.O M s.VN Uy Mr, hnc, DOLLY MAV-ei.mvKU.bv Mn,. Vmw
Captainx, . 1/ iihhipmtm, Sai/nrs, VUltHfrr*, At. A*c
r« cuui-tmif >»,rli ((Ml Faf.f.ui«o Uisl.lv « Far.-,- W
IN TWO ACTS.
HIOM T.WtOH > VKhfMHMKp POEM, j VTIII.KD
MONSIEUR TONSON.
M, Sf ' Kr iiS'iii,!”'
•t-teWl| fc Vi , M U -« ,I,V , SAP. try Mr. Kv<k-r
u A V-rmi . (r ««*. fey Mr. M,.'tii„sv*onh.
WtSawW*-* ■ , ssfe*
A.KLT.H.NE DF. La,
/7,f la U ivffvnd /.» thTnLl of HU J/ojrUu, 17 M flre.Wn/ /«,//„
uilnMj iy Count* t Vcsnna, ami eerutaiUM la/ Mr. IjcrJt. ' *
viL. BOX 884TaJTjeiT.MA«i. *.
PLAYBILL OF THE OPENING NIGHT OF THE FIRST SYDNEY THEATRE
27


A last glance before closing the scrapbook, and we find an
account of the first Australian regatta. To two naval officers goes
the credit of this bright idea—Captain Sterling, of H.M.S. Success,
and Captain Rouse, of H.M.S. Rainbow. The programme con-
sisted of three races, one for sailing boats, and two for rowing.
Present-day yachtsmen may find the details interesting:—lst race,
a rowing match, with a prize of 20 Spanish dollars; 2nd, a sailing
THE SYDNEY RESIDENCE OF SIR FRANCIS AND LADY FORBES
The house faced Macquarie Place, on the site now occupied by the Lands
Department.
[Reproduced from The Australian Museum Magazine.]
match for a purse of 50 Spanish dollars, the course being from the
flagship in Sydney Cove, round the Sow and Pigs, and back; 3rd, a
rowing match for 20 Spanish dollars, from Dawes’ Point round
Pinchgut and back.
The Success and the Rainbow were dressed with flags and
bunting for the occasion, and the band of the 5 7th regiment played
dance music for the French quadrilles and country dances on the
deck of the flagship.


Mrs, Campbell Goes to the Goldfields
f (Ip HE Mrs. Campbell whose excursions and adventures form
'pill the basis of to-night’s talk, seems to have been one of those
rather rare people who run absolutely true to type. She
belonged to that monumental type, the regulation Victorian matron,
and no nonsense about it. But when she found time to write for her
children’s edification the story of her own and their papa s experi-
ences on an Australian goldfield, she probably did not realise that
she was doing something very valuable and almost unique.
It is obvious that not many women were actually living on the
early goldfields, and that few of those who did would have had the
inclination or even the education to fill in diaries with their daily
activities. This Mrs. Campbell did, or at least remembered so
vividly that she was able later to make a most fascinating little book
for her children, and incidentally for anyone who wants a picture of
those days, taken from a woman’s angle.
She called her book “Rough and Smooth,’’ and, as she was
writing for children, she thoughtfully added a sub-title more suit-
able for their tastes, though perhaps for her almost a little skittish.
This was “Ho! for an Australian Goldfield.”
The date of writing was 1865, but the story commences 1 3 or
1 4 years before this date, when Mrs. Campbell, with a family party
consisting of her husband, her young sister, a youthful brother, her
three-year-old daughter, and a nurse, left Canada for Melbourne—
which then appeared to the whole world as the gateway of a glitter-
ing Eldorado.
The journey to Australia by way of New York was a long one,
and was further delayed by the ship calling in at the port of Rio for
repairs. There is the only too usual tale of the passengers’ priva-
tions —a surly captain, rotten provisions, and water thick, black,
and intolerably smelly.
MELBOURNE IN THE GOLD RUSH
So it was a grateful sight to them when, coming up Port Phillip,
they had their first glimpse of Melbourne, and saw a motley collec-
tion of vessels at anchor, flying the English, Dutch, French, Swedish,
and some even the Chinese flag. One ship, from Liverpool, was in
quarantine, and the newly-arrived travellers heard a ghastly tale of
its voyage out, during which 101 of its passengers died from ship
fever. And Mrs. Campbell draws a very obvious moral from that
in comparison with her own discomforts.


She gives us here also a vivid impression of the town of Mel-
bourne during the early days of the gold rush. Lodgings were
almost impossible to obtain, and it was only on the payment of £ 1 5
a week for two small rooms —and that in advance—that they could
secure any accommodation at all. They were fortunate to get even
this, for many immigrants arriving at this time had to join the huge
colony of campers, and pitch their tents on the other side of the
Yarra. The Campbells’ acquaintances congratulated them not only
on getting lodgings at all, but on getting them so cheaply in Mel-
bourne. Mrs. Campbell gives us her opinion of the Yarra and the
town itself. No doubt the strain of getting her family even tem-
porarily settled had told upon her usually more charitable nature.
She says:—
“We heard much of the beauty of the Yarra, and the charming
landscape around it, and found it a filthy, muddy stream, the only
variety in the monotony of the scenery being an occasional shed for
the washing of wool, surrounded by skins and filth of every descrip-
tion, from which proceeded an odour anything but agreeable. Here
and there would be seen a dead cow or bullock, while the brown
and withered grass (Mrs. Campbell was writing of April), gave us
but a poor idea of the fertility of the soil surrounding the chief city
of Australia Felix.”
CAMPBELL RECEIVES AN APPOINTMENT
Papa Campbell, who had useful letters of introduction, and
seems besides to have been a man of real ability, soon received an
appointment as police magistrate on the recently opened goldfields
along the valley of the Ovens River in Victoria. He was to take up
residence at the May Day Hills, now known as Beechworth, over-
looking the valley, then only a huddle of huts and tents. He was to
receive £l2OO a year besides rations and a cottage, which, of course,
would have to be built for him. So, seeing that they did at least
have lodgings of some sort in Melbourne, and that the prospect of
any decent accommodation on the goldfields for some time was very
doubtful, Mrs. Campbell decided to stay where she was until her
house was ready.
Her husband, with her young brother as a clerk, set off on
horseback for the Ovens Valley, while Mrs. Campbell settled herself
to wait. Wait she certainly did, for there were more important
things for a somewhat bewildered government to attend to in those
wild days of the gold rush than the building of a police magistrate’s
cottage; and as the weeks went on, and there was no word of any-
thing doing, even the patience of a Victorian matron was exhausted.


Finally she decided that roughing it was better than this waiting
about, and, her husband being in Melbourne for a few days, she
took the chance of going back with him. Luggage was loaded into
a cart, the heavier boxes to follow by dray, and the Victorian
BEECHWORTH POST OFFICE IN 1856.
(From the original lent by courtesy of Mr. Gus Hardy, Beechworth, Victoria.)
matron, with befitting dignity, took her place, gathered up her small
daughter beside her and, with her husband as driver, set off sedately,
with as little idea of the sort of place she was going to as an explorer
on the edge of an unknown land; for there reposed in her port-
manteau, as articles likely to be of immediate necessity, several
antimacassars.
All through the trials and tribulations of that deplorable jour-
ney, over unspeakable roads, bogged in mudflats, overturned in
rivers, she maintained an admirable calm, and from her description
of the trip—too long to give in detail here—we gather that she
managed to appear through it all her own dignified self.


BEECHWORTH’S FINEST HOUSE
After 1 1 days of this sort of travelling, they arrived at Beech-
worth, and Mrs. Campbell saw the home she had to live in until the
permanent cottage was built. At the end of a long, exhausting day
driving in a cart, they reached it—a small wooden hut, 1 2 by I 6
feet in size, flanked by two large canvas tents. And this was the
finest residence on the field. No wonder Mrs. Campbell s heart
sank to her strong, sensible boots.
But though the prospect looked bleak enough at first glance,
as they drew nearer she was considerably cheered to see that some-
one had been at work with good effect. A small detached kitchen,
built of bark, stood near the hut, and a little garden, filled with the
fragrance of bush flowers, had been made. She was soon to dis-
cover that this was the work of the invaluable Barnes, her husband’s
BEECHWORTH IN THE ’SIXTIES
servant, and an Admirable Crichton, if ever there was one. He was
to prove her staunch ally and a tower of strength in the battle with
domestic difficulties.
Once inside the hut Mrs. Campbell found, too, that things were
not by any means so dismal as she had imagined at first sight. The
neighbours, perhaps at a broad hint from Barnes, had rallied round
with all sorts of house furnishings, and the whole camp had been
canvassed to provide cups, saucers, plates and forks, bedding and
chairs, and finally sheets, pillow cases, and even a tablecloth! By a
herculean effort, even hot soup was provided for the travellers.


They were overwhelmed with kindness. Mrs. Campbell probably
ate her dinner that night, considered it adequate, and thought no
more about it; but she must have been amazed next morning, when
in a heart-to-heart talk with Barnes on domestic subjects, she learned
what it cost in effort to procure the food, and in actual cash. It
was not only that food was so incredibly dear, but it was so scarce,
and so many foodstuffs, so usual as to be taken for granted, were
absolutely unprocurable.
So Mrs. Campbell set to work on her first morning at Beech-
worths, with Barnes’ assistance, to straighten out her ideas a little.
Barnes did all the cooking, and made the bread, as well as doing
most of what little housework there was to be done.
“First thing,” said Barnes, the practical, “are the rations,
ma’am. We can draw for the master, the young gentleman—that
was Mrs. Campbell’s young brother—and myself, 4i lbs. of fresh
meat a day, 30 lbs. of flour a week, and an allowance of tea, sugar,
wax candles, soap and salt”—this was the Government ration to its
officials.
“But,” continued Barnes, “potatoes are very scarce, and for
the six or seven you had last night for dinner I paid 35., and it was
a great favour to get them at all.”
HOUSEKEEPING UNDER DIFFICULTIES
Butter, the dumbfounded housewife found, was ss. a lb., and
likely to be rancid, rice 2s. a lb., milk 2s. 6d. a pint; so the ordering
of dinner, which once upon a time had meant nothing more than
having the cook up from the kitchen and handing over to her the
desired menu, became an affair of planning and contriving, for
Barnes, though willing, could not achieve the impossible. Vege-
tables and eggs were ideals not to be obtained, so Mrs. Campbell
and her henchman felt justly proud of a good job of work done
when they set on the table for the second day’s dinner a leg of
mutton boiled with the costly rice, and a plum pudding, concocted
after much difficulty.
She remarks with a sigh “How sorry I have often felt that I
had not striven to learn more of the really useful. True, it was
never dreamed that I should be placed in a position when I would
have myself alone to depend upon. I had also foolishly forgotten
that useful appendage to a young housewife’s library—a cookery
book.”
With a child of three to cater for, this sort of diet was not much
use, and Mrs. Campbell began to “get busy.” She might be a
stranger to these conditions, and more than a little confused, but she


did not lose much time in sending a messenger to the nearest station
to buy a cow and some poultry. The hens cost 1 Os. each, but they
were worth it, for eggs on those rare occasions that they could be
bought at the store were anything from 1 2s. to 1 Bs. per dozen.
NO PURE FOOD ACT TO BOTHER HIM!
The sort of butcher that Mrs. Campbell had to contei
Campbell had to contend with
The cow did its duty nobly, and soon they were making butter
from the cream. The churn was a difficulty. They were unable to
make one from the wood of the gum-tree, but the versatile Barnes
converted a stone jar with a wooden cover into a very serviceable
substitute.
MID-VICTORIAN REFINEMENT
The hut as she first found it was the despair of Mrs. Campbell
after the lush velvets and imposing mahogany of mid-Victorianism.
She began to trim it up as best she could, dividing the hut into
rooms, and using the tents as dressing rooms, cutting up some bright
chintz she had brought with her to make covers for boxes and
benches. The treasured antimacassars were set out with pride. She


says of them these articles were here much admired and praised by
the gentlemen as bringing with them traces of civilisation and
womanly refinement.”
The coming of winter further delayed the finishing of the new
house, and they had to make up their minds to weather the cold
months in their somewhat primitive dwelling. She says: “We
made ourselves as comfortable and contented as we could. This
the contrast of everyone else’s case with our own contributed to do.
The camp consisted of rows of tents facing one another, officers’
tents, police tents, and servants’ tents. In the middle was a large
courthouse tent, and a flagstaff with a bell to sound the hours. The
stores were open tents. Mine, therefore, you see, was the only
wooden building, and had the only glass window for miles.
“Roads were bad, communication between the diggings and
Melbourne was almost cut off, and we had to wait for the post long
after the proper time. This caused a scarcity of provisions, flour
rose to £l5 a bag, oatmeal Is. Bd. a lb., split peas 2s. a lb., and
dried apples were 3s. 6d. a lb.”
Matters were made no easier for Mrs. Campbell by the loss of
the invaluable Barnes, who at last felt the call of the hidden wealth
around him, and put down his rolling pin for a miner’s pick. Barnes
had at last taken to rocking a cradle, but it was a miner’s cradle
that he rocked.
THE SERVANT PROBLEM AGAIN
Wages of £l5O a year, paid by the Government, failing to
induce a female servant to Beechworth, the Campbells were forced
to rely on the local labour market, and in desperation engaged the
services of one Frederick, an unsuccessful miner, who knew abso-
lutely nothing of a domestic servant’s work, having been a composi-
tor in a London printing house before he decided to try his fortune
on the goldfields. But the fact that he was, as Mrs. Campbell
describes him, very respectable, was a great recommendation in her
eyes.
Soon she was making her first loaf of bread, bought bread
being 7s 6d. a loaf, and made from sour and dirty flour. From this
she became really ambitious, and essayed cakes, pastry, and even
muffins; so that when the great day arrived and the new house was
at last ready, she was able to make fitting preparations for entertain-
ing the nobility and gentry of the district at a grand house warming.
And here we will leave her in her new house, built to her
liking, and containing as a final touch of elegance a melodeon
brought all the way from New York.


JOHN SANDS LTD
PRINTERS
SYDNEY
