



AUSTRALIA.
AN
APPEAL
TO
THE WORLD
ON BEHALF OF THE
YOUNGER BRANCH
OF
THE FAMILY OF SHEM
tig tovt’ cic/34/3iyic' aXyijcMvog
&ai9* avia p vtt7}\9£ yy rs Kovpav<p
X<£m, /ioXou<rftv Stvpo, A&arpaXiag Tv%ag»
[KicXvov <pojvi]v, IkXvov dk /Spijv*
tloov Itti Trapij'iotg fftortivoig
aiinljg rd daKpvd .■ ■■■ - -
So greatly have Australia’s sufferings
Moved me, that, imped'd by sorrow, 1 came here
To tell them, undismay’d, to earth and skies.
I beard the voice, I heard the loud lament ;
I ntw the tears upon her sable cheeks.
*Apiffret&pc,
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY J. SPILSBUEY AND J, M'BACHEKN,
LOWER GEORGE STREET.
1839,


OBJECT OF THE PUBLICATION.
The moneys arising from the sale of this work are to be
devoted to the support of those who may be employed in the
promulgation of the Gospel among the Aboriginal inhabitants.,
within and beyond the Australian Colonies. The
PRICE
therefore to the opulent and liberal minded, will be
ONE GUINEA.
To the humbler classes, whose means are more limited, five,
ten, or fifteen shillings, as inclination may prompt the donor.
In short, to all what they choose to give—to the rich a guinea,
to the poor a shilling—that all may shed a tear over the mise-
ries of an interesting people, pray for their, salvation, and
contribute to the cause of mercy, as their hearts may be moved
with love to the Saviour of men and compassion for nations
about perish. If I have breathed a heavenly wish, let it inspiie
every bosom. To Australia —Christianity apart —Britain is
under a double obligation. She has received her convicts, she
has enriched her people, while she herself is ruined in time and
eternity.
Those who feel an interest in rescuing.her from destruction,
may render important service to the great work, by purchasing
a number of copies for sale or distribution among their families
and friends.
Reader, how much do you spend annually in visiting the
theatre, or in the purchase and reading of novels—amusing
yourself only for the moment and trifling with an everlasting
futurity? Perhaps ten times the amount here solicited. A
guinea for a work to promote the salvation of the heathen, will
intellectually profit you more, render you more happy in life,
and be more grateful to your recollections on your entrance
into another world, than thousands expended in scenes of gaity
and dissipation, fleeting as the wind and bitter to remembrance.
Reflect, the object is, not merely to evangelize, but to save
the Aboriginal inhabitants of Australia—one-fifth of the habit-
able globe—from extermination, and the British name from
indelible infamy. Say not, with Cain, “Am I my brother’s
keeper ?”


TO HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN.
Madam,
When he whom seraphs adored, w r as, in compassion
to Adam’s lost race, about to manifest himself in flesh to redeem
them, there was no room for him even at an inn. On the occur-
rence of that most interesting and extraordinary of all the events
that ever happened in time, the virgin that bore the incarnate
Deity—the creator of worlds unnumbered —could find no place
of repose but a stable. If inspired with divine love, you will
probably say, in youthful simplicity, were he to appear on
earth again, I would set apart the palace of my ancestors for
his reception. The thought and the feelings it indicates, are of
celestial origin; but the opportunity of thus entertaining the
heavenly guest, is gone, never to return —never will he in like
manner visit earth again. On ascending to the primeval abode
of his glory—the glory which he had with his father before th§
world was, and before the morning stars of creation sang to-
gether—all the wants of humanity, to which those who loved
him while on earth had the privilege of ministering, for ever
ceased. Still the Redeemer of men has wants. He still lives
in his ministers, who are commissioned to proclaim the object
of his death to the world, and to set up a kingdom for him.
They, while thus employed, are often hungry, thirsty, cold, and
naked; and, like to him in the days of his humiliation, know
not sometimes where to lay their heads. To those therefore
who for his name’ sake minister to their wants, he will say at
the last day : “ Inasmuch as ye did it unto one of the least of
these—ye did it unto me.”
The author of this Appeal, anxious to obtain the means of
supporting those who may be employed in. erecting the Re-
deemer’s kingdom in the Southern hemisphere, has determined
to approach Your Majesty with his humble but important suit.
Millions upon millions have been spent in hurrying men into
perdition, merely to gain a useless crown or an empty title,
while the paramount concerns'of .eternity have been banished
from the counsels of nations. The salvation of a continent
would be the brightest gem that ever adorned the diadem of a
sovereign; and its attainment, though it would really cost little,
would be worth the expenditure of millions: but who could


expect such a thought to be entertained amidst the bustle of
human affairs, the din of ambition, and the clashing of worldly
interests? Influenced by these reflections, the author, in re-
liance on Divine providence, is induced to attempt a work
hitherto neglected by Christians and disregarded by the go-
vernment. He asks, however, no part of the revenues of the
empire; though a guinea from the Chancellor of the Exchequer
for every one of the Aboriginal inhabitants of Australia, slain
by Your Majesty’s subjects and those bearing Your Majesty’s
commission, would, in proper hands and properly managed,
form a fund sufficient for the promulgation of Christianity
among the innumerable tribes that yet survive within the vast
extent of her shores. Were the Princesses Charlotte and Amelia
permitted to draw aside the curtain of the invisible world, and
to look in upon earth again—were they at liberty to give you
the estimate they have now formed of sublunary things, and to
set before you the vanity of all the glitter, and pomp, and parade
of human life, attired in its gayest dress and gaudiest forms—
were they suffered to remind you of the possibility of being cut
off, as they were, in the bloom of youth, without doing any
thing that would immortalize existence, or bear to be viewed
in the light of eternity—were they allowed to disclose to you
the reflections that crowd upon princes on passing that “ bourne
whence no traveller returns”—the dismay, the terror, the re-
morse that torture their bosoms, when, after having neglected
the eternal welfare of the millions intrusted to their care, and
every thing that related to the interests of the Redeemer’s king-
dom, they find themselves ushered into his presence, amidst
myriads of attendant angels, and that, no longer clothed with
mercy, but in the attributes of power and vengeance, he is to be
their judge, the arbiter of their destiny for ever—the writer will
not ask what impression such communications would make upon
you, or what counsel the disembodied spirits of these princesses
would give you. It is not necessary. When he recollects the
character of her who cared for you from infancy, and calls to
mind that of your father and grandfather, he is more inclined
to trust the cause he pleads to the tender feelings of the heiress
of the House of Brunswick, than to the dilatory, cold, formal,
and often abortive efforts of legislative charity. Nor will his suit
on behalf of Him that was born in Bethlehem lessen your do-
mestic comfort, or diminish the means of discharging the duties
essential to the dignity of the crown. It extends merely to the
purchase of a few thousand copies of this Appeal to distribute
among your attendants, the social circles around you, and
those with whom they mingle in the different walks of life.
Every copy pleading the cause among your subjects, will excite


the compassion of others for Australia; and thus many will be
induced to follow Your Majesty’s example, by interesting them-
selves in the salvation of the heathen—a charity of a higher and
a holier character, than any that are to be found in the catalogue of
Christian duties, or within the range of Christian benevolence.
The unprecedented nature of the request, will perhaps excite
a smile. Its singularity is occasioned by an unwillingness to
touch any of the funds which those whom you consult may
consider indispensable to other objects. But what is there of
excellence in the sublunary scenes of the life which man leads
in this terrestrial abode that is not singular. The disposition,
the life, and the actions of the Saviour of men, as well as those
of his apostles, were distinguished by a heaven-horn singularity.
Nor should it excite our surprise. The common walks of life
are all crowded with worldly pursuits and worldly interests,
which tend alike to harden the heart, to darken the under-
standing, and to exclude heavenly things from our consider-
ation, or to clothe them in an earthly garb, and degrade them
with worldly associations. Hence, the treading of an unbeaten
path, by the followers of the Redeemer in their efforts to save
mankind, is as indicative of wisdom and good taste as it is of
self-denial. It is impossible for them to act otherwise. In a
world abounding with iniquity, singularity has therefore been,
and ever will be, the characteristic of the religion of Jesus.
Singular, however, as the means which delicacy prompts for
the attainment of an end so great and important, my suit itself
is not without an example worthy of Your Majesty’s imitation.
Between the scene that occurred in the palace of Susan and
that now acting in the British cabinet, there are coincidences
and contrasts which are deeply interesting. True, I stand not
in the same relation to the Queen of England as that of the
distinguished Israelite to the Queen of the Persian empire. In
this respect the suit of Mordecai and mine differ. Mine! did I
say? Not mine, but that of the Redeemer of men. What
though Ibe unrelated and unknown to Your Majesty? “ The
wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound
thereofyet it is not necessary—nor would it answer any end
—to know “ whence it cometh or whither it goeth.” Such
sometimes is the bearer of divine communications to a fallen
world. lam merely the voice—the message is from heaven.
There are in Your Majesty’s dominions a people devoted to
destruction by the colonizing enactments of your legislature
and the avarice of your subjects, as certainly as if an edict had
issued from the throne for their extermination. This is an
affecting coincidence. The contrast, however, between your
a


situation and that of the Persian queen, is great and striking.
Esther, in attempting to save the lives of her people, had to
approach the ensign of mercy and vengeance at the risk of her
own life: but you weild the sceptre. The means, too, are
simple. They involve no burden on your subjects, no injury
to their interests, and consequently cannot excite the opposition
or disapprobation of any. You have only to command the sal-
vation of Australia, and it is done. May I ask, whether would
you wish on the last day to blush, when standing beside the
Persian Queen, or receive the grateful smiles and glowing bene-
dictions of innumerable tribes, saved by your benevolence,
amidst the plaudits and greetings of admiring worlds 1 The
event will decide and time will tell, whether an interesting
race, plundered of their patrimonial inheritance, are also to be
proscribed and exterminated; or allowed to live, to sojourn in
the land of their fathers, and joyfully triumph in the knowledge
of a Redeemer, under British sway.
There may he, even in the court of St. James, those that
would ridicule the perusal of such a work as this; but angels
will rejoice when they behold the daughter of Japheth in the
north, with the diadem of empire upon her head, reading; and,
while she reads, dropping a tear over the miseries of the de-
scendents of Shem in the south.
TO THE QUEEN DOWAGER—AND THE ROYAL
LINE OF HANOVER.
Madam,
To individually address the members of a family
whose name has been, for generations, associated with the glo-
rious work of the Reformation, the destinies of the British
empire, and the best interests of mankind, in order to interest
them in the salvation of a recently discovered world, would be
superfluous. The best wine flows from the grape with the
gentlest pressure. The finest fruits require no force to gather
them. In an appeal to the princes and princesses of the house
of Brunswick, in a cause interesting to angels, neither embellish-
ment nor argument is necessary. Australia, terrified at the
sight of her species, fleeing before her spoilers, abandoning her
very offspring, and bathed in tears, shall therefore herself relate
her wrongs and sorrows. Listen to the sad tale. The story of
her misfortunes, enough to melt a stone, cannot but command
the sympathy of the generous—the feeling heart.


TO THE PEERS OF THE REALM.
My Lords,
Since the day of Runimede, your name has made the
tyrant tremble, wherever the British flag was unfurled. Since
the day on which the bishops walked to the Tower, at the com-
mand of a minion of the court of Rome—because they refused
to pioneer the re-establishment of Popery, by proclaiming an
act of toleration which they knew to be the forerunner of into-
lerance, tyranny, and persecution the British constitution,
under the shield of your protection, has been the watchword
and the retreat of the oppressed throughout the world.
Does a sense of whatever is noble, independent, honorable,
and humane, still form the distinguishing characteristic of your
order? Ye have sanctioned the expenditure of millions to rescue
Africa from slavery. Will ye allow Australia to perish? Will
ye suffer the British flag to be indelibly stained by the extermi-
nation of one of the most interesting races of the human family?
In trying to interest you in their salvation, I am pleading the
cause of the Redeemer of Men. Can an appeal be made to you in
vain, on behalf of Him who bled upon the cross, whom angels
worship, and to whom ye owe your coronets? Impossible.
TO THE HOUSE OF COMMONS.
Gentlemen,
When I find you wrangling with unprincipled dema-
gogues, neglecting the affairs of the empire, and insulting the
Supreme, by contending for the desecration of the Sabbath
that prolific source of every evil that constitutes a nation’s shame
—I doubt whether I ought to add to the indignities heaped upon
Australia by appealing on her behalf to such an assembly. The
constitution, in your hands, so far from being the palladium of
virtue and freedom, has become the shield of vice and licentious-
ness. Ye have fallen from your dignity, and lost the estimation
of the wise and the good. Instead of guarding the morals and
the wealth of the realm, ye spend your time in catering to the
vulgar and the vicious. Ye neglected the timely remedying of the
evils incident to an increasing population, accumulating riches,
and an advancing age, till a flood set in upon you, the waves of
which, sporting with your puny efforts to still them, threaten to
ingulf the kingdom in revolution. Ye have placed yourselves
and the sacred deposit intrusted to your care by preceding gene-
rations at the mercy of a licentious mob, who, while they com-
mand your obedience, treat you with scorn and contempt.


The glory has not yet departed from St. Stephen’s; but the
sacred cloud, retiring from the defiled interior, appears to be
gathering round the dome, ready to take its flight from a
people whose multiplying iniquities have almost doomed
them to the vengeance of an insulted Deity. It lingers only
while the righteous pray. Will nothing teach you wisdom? Are
ye bent upon keeping the kingdom in a ferment on domestic
concerns, till tranquillity be impossible ? Are ye determined,
instead of revering the Most High, obeying the oracles of
Heaven, and maintaining purity of morals, to court the Roman
harlot, to set up the Man of Sin, to nurse superstition, to en-
courage scepticism, and to sacrifice the rising generation to Mo-
loch— by an unscriptural, atheistical, popish education, which
will exercise its evil genius, not in enlightening the understand-
ing, elevating the soul, and imbuing the mind with principles of
virtue and useful knowledge, but merely in gilding ignorance,
substituting letters for learning, impiety and anarchy for religion
and liberty, and deluging the state and its imperial appendages
with immorality —till, rampant with infidelity and polluted With
vice in every department, the nation ripen for destruction?
This is strong language. But who that wishes Britain’s weal
can use mild words, when he sees her threatened with convul-
sion by the conduct of those who might have given her the
command of Europe, remodelled her institutions with timely
prudence, provided for her moral wants according to the pre-
cepts of Divine revelation, and made her—stern in virtue,
smiling with grace, and playing with the thunder of her arsenals
—a terror to tyranny and a blessing to the w r orld.
The Deity has specially enjoined every human creature to
search the Scriptures, without reserve or limit, expressly
adding: “Thou shalt teach them to thy children.” But the
British Parliament say, in their system of education : Thou
shalt not teach them, lest—lest what? lest we offend the Pope!
—a foreign monk? an arch imposter!—and the interested
supporters of his influence and authority in the British isles!
O! Ye are men of renown! The friends of religion and liberty
wish ye were still in the nursery; while the brainless, the worth-
less, and the profligate tell us that were ye to die wisdom would
die with you. Die! It is to be hoped she will live, when nothing
of yon remains, except the memory of the evils ye have inflicted
upon the country by your blunders in legislation. Whence could
have originated the maddening fit that sent you to Rome for
canons and a rubric for the instruction of the rising genera-
tion ? Was not Scotland before your eyes with a system of
national education worthy of the imitation of all nations?
Could ye learn nothing from her example ?


But I forget. My concern is with Australia and her wrongs.
Some of you, I am aware, blush at deeds which they cannot
prevent; and, hoping that symptoms of compunction on the part
of others, will indicate a return to better things, before threat-
ening ruin overtake you, I venture one word upon a subject,
paramount to the squabbles in which ye waste your time, and
to all that ever yet engrossed your attention—if a word from a
stranger may be heard, amidst the noise, the clamour, and the
heat of party conflict, in which, to the disgrace of yourselves
and the empire, ye are everlastingly engaged.
A resolution, proposed some years ago, to allow other states
the right of mutual search, in order to induce them to agree to
the extinction of the slave trade, passed the House with accla-
mation ; ordering that the flag which waved triumphant on the
ocean without a rival, even while the world was in arms, and
in the sight of which no enemy dared to appear with impunity,
should be lowered in the cause of humanity. Have I gained
your attention, gentlemen? The unfurling of that flag in the
southern hemisphere for the protection of adventurers, has be-
come the signal for the extermination of nations !
FIRST LETTER
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE SECRETARY
OF STATE FOR THE COLONIES.
My Lord,
Thebe is no compact, no covenant of any kind, between
the British Government and the Aboriginal inhabitants of
Australia. We have taken possession of the country on the
simple ground that might is right. When the original owners
of the soil, famishing with hunger and driven to desperation
by the loss of the fish and the game on which they subsisted,
chance in their wanderings to come upon a shepherd with a
flock of sheep, being the stronger party, they kill him and help
themselves to a little meat to satisfy the cravings of hunger.
They are then, when apprehended, shot, or tried by a jury of
their enemies and hanged-—for what? for following the example
we have set them, and acting on the principle that might is
right.
But this is not all. Thousands and tens of thousands, the
proceeds of the sale of Australian lands, are annually remitted
to England, while the interests and the well-being of the
Aboriginal inhabitants, whose property is thus seized and


exclusively appropriated to the benefit of a strange people, are
totally overlooked and forgotten. In plain English, it has
been determined by the spoilers of a defenceless race, that the
surplus of the spoil shall be annually set apart to enable swarm
after swarm of adventurers from the shores of Britain to join
the gang, for the purpose of carrying on the work of plunder.
By what other term can the policy pursued towards Australia
be designated? The sarcasm of the Roman, is but too appli-
cable to those both at home and abroad who have enriched
themselves by our colonial possessions in the Pacific, that, “ if
every man were to have his own, they would be obliged to
return to the straw-built habitations of their forefathers.” The
very dogs eat the crumbs which fall from their master’s table;
but not a crumb is allowed to the Australian. Of the thou-
sands and tens of thousands, the annual proceeds of the sale of
his lands, and the hundreds of thousands that are annually
accumulating in private fortunes from the agriculture and the
commerce of his country, not a single pound is appropriated
to the improvement of his state in this world or his prospects
in another. Robbed and wounded by the thieves among whom
he has fallen, he is left bleeding in the bush and abandoned to
his fate, unless by chance some Samaritan, wandering through
the forest, should be moved with compassion at the sight of
his misfortunes.
Throw aside for a moment, My Lord, the dispatches, letters,
and papers which, from the colonial empire over which you
preside, are, I am aware, continually pouring in upon you —a
mountain of trash under which the table in Downing Street
groans—reflect upon the sad condition of the Australian—it is
a case of paramount importance—and think, whether a few
thousand pounds out of the proceeds of the sales jnade by the
Crown, might not in each colony, be annually set apart to
ameliorate and improve the condition of a people whose lands
are thus seized and sold for the benefit of others. This will
not touch the revenues of the empire, nor the pockets of those
who are ever ready to exclaim against taxation for any thing
but their own selfish interest, or their whims. It will be a
trifle, and but a trifle, from funds which belong to neither the
Chancellor of the Exchequer nor the people; and which Her
Majesty can, by a single word, reserve for the rightful owners,
out of whose inheritance so much has been already taken to
enrich Her Majesty’s subjects.
Let it not be imagined for a moment that I am opposed to
conquest, when justly provoked; or to colonization, when it
can be carried into effect without injury to the original occupiers
of the soil. British sway, notwithstanding the mal-administra


tion with which It is sometimes accompanied, is, when absolute
and properly administered, fraught with blessings great and
many. The English standard is, to every country over which
it waves, the ensign of deliverance from tyranny, injustice, and
cruelty. As the friends of the human race, therefore, our con-
quests ought never to be relinquished ; and the happiness,
temporal and eternal, of the conquered or adopted nations,
though it cannot be expected to be the primary, ought to be
the ruling motive in all our colonizing proceedings. Nor is it
necessary to the attainment of this grand object, or our own
interests, to seize their uncultivated lands. We have no more
right to do this, than the Sovereign has to take possession of
the untilled lands of the nobility and gentry of the United
Kingdom.
It is cruel to add to the misfortunes of the wretched.
Savages are men, and therefore possessed of all the privileges
that belong to man. To disregard these privileges, is to insult
the supremacy of the Creator, from whom they emanate, and
who never authorised any nation to invade those of another.
When governments, therefore, or adventurers sanctioned by
them, possess themselves of the patrimonial inheritance of the
savage by force, and for no other reason than that of his
inability to defend it, they rob their fellow-creature with a
w r antonness of cruelty which shows how little influence Chris-
tianity has yet gained, at the end of nearly two thousand years,
over either the private or the national character of its European
professors. When they take advantage of his ignorance and
his necessities, acquire possession at a price far beneath its value,
expose him thus defrauded to vice, and then leave him to perish
by famine—a practice extensively acted upon I fear at this mo-
ment in New Zealand, to which adventurers are flocking like
vultures to carrion—they commit an act of duplicity so infa-
mous, that it is difficult to fin'd in language a term sufficiently
appropriate to its designation. Such aggressions, too, on nations
who never invaded the inheritance of others, is the more repre-
hensible when we reflect that the difficulty of accomplishing all
the good we wish to them and to ourselves, is easily surmounted.
The Aboriginal inhabitants are ever ready to enter into treaty,
and will readily part with their lands for a consideration,
which, not bearing the stamp of swindling, but that of an
honourable and a generous disposition, ought to be ample and
sacredly reserved for the purpose of communicating to them a
knowledge of revelation. Nor, to those who are influenced by
no higher consideration, ought it to appear a light argument in
favour of such a mode of proceeding, that it is as cheap as it is


just and dignified. It is a thousand times less expensive than
that which is marked by deceit and rapine, which, generating a
deep sense of injury and a bitter desire of revenge, require an
armed force to secure the ill-gotten wealth, and effect either the
conquest or extermination of a people driven to madness by
wrong and oppression.
Suffer no man, My Lord, to persuade you that indifference
to this momentous subject will end auspiciously. Let Spain,
now suffering for the cruelties she practised on the American
branch of the family whose cause I plead—Spain, groaning
under the deadly fruits of her inquisition, and bleeding at
every pore during thirty years of internal war and revolution,
—once, one of the most rich, powerful, and respected—now
the most impoverished, weak, and contemptible of European
nations, possessing not a remnant of her former grandeur and
glory—nothing but her pride, her ignorance, depopulated
cities and desolated fields—still cursed, too, with the infatuation
of clinging to Rome, the promptress of her misdeeds and the au-
thress of all her misfortunes—scowled by Heaven, become herself
her own tormentor, writhing under the agonies of amputation
in the loss of her colonial possessions, and presenting a picture—
not yet indeed a full and perfect similitude, but one sufficiently
admonitory to other states—of the misery she inflicted on the
people she found beyond the Atlantic—let Spain, avaricious,
cruel, and blood-thirsty Spain, with these bitter reminiscences
of Mexico and Peru, her Corteses and her Pizarros,be a warn-
ing to the British ministry and the British people. Nations
may, for a time, recklessly pursue schemes of spoliation, flat-
tering themselves that they will escape consequences ; but they
indulge a vain hope. The eye of the Eternal is upon them. And
though Justice, at the intercession of Mercy, may pause, till
they have deliberately taken their iniquitous resolves, steeled
their hearts against remonstrance, and committed themselves in
their mad career, it will neither linger nor relent in the inflic-
tion of punishment; for the Omniscient has sternly and irrevo-
cably decreed—it is the law of eternity—that as reward is the
never-failing accompaniment of virtue, so certainly shall
punishment follow in the wake of crime, even without the inter-
vention of human tribunals. They who prefer the shedding of
blood to a trifling expenditure in money, will ultimately find an
ocean of the one and a mountain of the other insufficient to ex-
tricate them from the difficulties and troubles ever attendant on
such a line of conduct. The mines of the Western world could
not shield the spoilers from Divine displeasure. A violent
policy cost Van Diernan’s Land, in the course of a few months,


at one period alone, nearly £30,000; and that under one of
the best and ablest men # that ever represented a sovereign. To
remedy the error of his predecessors—in other words, to pro-
tect the settlers from being daily cut off by a people exas-
perated to revenge, and to save even a remnant of the natives
from extermination—was found to be almost impossible. A
kind and gentle policy, with one-fifth of the amount, not ex-
pended, but merely invested, and the proceeds annually applied
to ameliorate the condition of those who had been plundered of
their patrimonial inheritance, would have not only prevented
that expense, but those scenes of murder which, continuing for
years, have left an indelible stain on the annals of the early
history of the colony.
The United States of North America acknowledge the right
of the Aboriginal inhabitants to the soil; and, therefore, when
they wish to enlarge their boundaries, they invariably acquire
the additional territory by purchase ; and, if I mistake not,
at the same time make provision for the moral improvement of
its original owners; thus conferring on them a double benefit.
What a contrast to the policy of the British, who act the part
of the assassin, and possess themselves of the lands they require
by powder and ball. Bankrupt, as republican governments
generally are, in benevolence, gratitude, morals, and public
virtue, republicanism, in this instance, puts monarchy to the
blush.
TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR OF
NEW SOUTH WALES.
Sir,
Her Majesty’s colonies in these parts are at present all
ruled by men of the most excellent disposition ; but their time
and talents are so occupied with the secular concerns of the
people they govern, that a subject of the most momentous
concern, imperatively enjoined by Christian duty, and deeply
affecting our moral character as a nation, is almost entirely
neglected. The report of your humanity, and your determi-
nation to protect the aboriginal inhabitants, so far as the laws
of the empire permit, induce me to submit the following work
to your perusal, in hope that it will rouse the energies of
a mind so constituted, and that your government may be
distinguished by some measure that will rise above the common
puerilities of benevolence, with which men soothe their con-
* Colonel Arthur.


sciences and flatter their vanity—some measure fraught with
mercy and kindness, suitable to the magnitude and the exigen-
cies of the case —some measure that will make reparation to the
insulted laws of heaven for our first violating the rights, and
then trampling on the interests, of a deeply injured race, that
will apply a prompt, decisive, and effectual remedy to the evils
we have inflicted upon them, and that will bear inspection on
that day when the conduct of princes and rulers will pass in
review before the penetrating eyes of Deity amidst assembled
worlds. Our brother’s blood is upon our heads; and ex-
piation ought to begin where the British flag was first stained
with the guilt of a crime all but unpardonable, and committed
against a people whose unprotected and sad condition, ought,
instead of exciting our cupidity, to have commanded our com-
misseration.
TO THE BISHOP OF AUSTRALIA.
My Lord,
Trusting that the name of the first Bishop of Aus-
tralia will be associated with the salvation of its Aboriginal in-
habitants, I take the liberty of calling your attention to this
appeal on their behalf. lam an utter stranger to Your Lord-
ship ; but the zeal you have already shown in the cause of the
heathen, is a proof that nothing is wanting on your part, but
means, to effect every thing that scriptural duty enjoins and
Christian love would suggest, for this large and yet unknown
portion of your diocese.
TO THE AMBASSADORS OF CHRIST IN BOTH
HEMISPHERES.
Those who minister in divine things, whatever may
he the particular charge or department intrusted to their care,
will, it is hoped, promote the circulation of a work which is
intended to rouse the energies, and kindle the zeal of the
Christian world for the salvation of Australia.


TO THE PEOPLE OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
On committing this appeal to the press, I learn that
a beginning has been made in the work of mercy to Australia ;
and that about <£4ooo is now set apart for the protection of
the Aboriginal inhabitants. It is gratifying to witness the
manifestation of a disposition so humane on the part of His
Excellency and the Bishop of the Diocese, with whom I believe
an attempt to ameliorate their condition was made prior to
His Excellency’s arrival. Far be it from me to undervalue
a boon originating in the best of motives, and granted with the
best intentions. But, knowing that little efforts in the cause
of humanity, whether made by ourselves or others, often lull
the conscience to sleep, and gender a self complacency which,
clogging the wheels of benevolence, relaxes our commisseration
for the objects of our charity, at the very time when their
condition calls for our most strenuous exertions, I venture one
or two remarks.
At length, then, after the lapse of half a century, when one
generation, despised, neglected, and trampled upon, has passed
away, and part of another been slain, a crumb is allowed to
fall from the richly-furnished table of the colonists to the
Aboriginal inhabitants. The colonists, did I say? lam in error.
It falls, not from their board, but from that of Her Majesty’s
Treasury—a table annually spread, not to feast the poor,
ousted, famishing owners of the soil whence its dainties spring,
but the colonists themselves, rolling in wealth and affluence at
their expense, through the nursing indulgence of the parent
state.
Four thousand pounds, a crumb! Yes. Out of a fund
amounting to nearly half a million annually, it is but a crumb,
and a very little crumb. If levied by cessment, it would not
amount to sixpence each person, in a community most of whom
are worth thousands, tens, and hundreds of thousands. The
registered transactions in mercantile affairs alone, at only four
of the Banks of the capital, amount, according to the official
quarterly returns, to upwards of ten millions per annum ; inde-
pendently of nearly half a million of specie lying dormant.
Here I cannot be in error; but the remarkable—to some per-
haps incredible—fact is confirmed by additional evidence. If
the revenue of a country, especially when lightly taxed, be any
criterion of its prosperity, the British, since their arrival in
Australia, have amassed riches to the amount of hundreds of
millions. The sura total of their possessions in houses, lands.


stock, shipping, fisheries, and commerce, justly estimated, will
certainly equal—probably exceed—that of the national debt,
forming a distinct creation of property in addition to the
wealth of the empire. Four thousand pounds out of millions!
Not one farthing of the sum, however, is from the colonists.
Taken out of moneys arising almost entirely from the sale of
land and a duty on imported spirits that pestilent com-
modity of pure unmingled poison to the morals of a community
—it comes out of neither their current income, nor the wealth
they have acquired, great as it is, but from funds which are a
mere index of its vast and progressive accumulation.* Even
if it did, £4OOO out of millions, the produce of the lands of
which ye have dispossessed the Aboriginal inhabitants, thrown
to them at the end of half a century, to protect them from
being murdered by your own servants, would afford you but
little ground for boasting of your liberality. Say, does not the
very thought make you blush ? especially when placed beside
the immense sums expended on yourselves, or hoarded up to
effect perhaps the moral ruin of your offspring? Fulness of
bread was the sin of Sodom and Gomorrah.
Still, better this than nothing; and better late than never.
It is highly honourable to His Excellency, as well as the mem-
bers of the Council who seconded the benevolent wishes of
Bishop Broughton; and I record the fact with pleasure. At
the same time it must be remembered that this sum will go
but a very little way towards the protection, and still less
towards the moral improvement of the Aboriginal inhabitants
within the colony. What then is to become of the innumera-
ble and yet unknown tribes of the interior? Are they, sitting
in darkness and the shadow of death, to be neglected till, sur-
prised by the striding march of colonization, they perish by
the blast of European morals, or be exterminated by the powder
and ball of unprincipled adventurers, aided perhaps by the''
police, the military, and those bearing Her Majesty’s com-
mission. To suppose, whatever may be the disposition of the
representatives of the Sovereign, that colonial governments,
hampered as they are between orders from home on the one
hand, and clamour in the colonies on the other, will ever
grant funds adequate either to the urgency or the magnitude
of the object, would betray great ignorance of human nature.
The cause, however, is that of the Most High; and he will
yet say to Australia, “ Arise, shine; for thy light is come.”
* I find from the estimates for this year, that the grant, now increased to
£5OOO, is entirely from the land fund, and that a small portion of it is approprU
ated to one or two missions recently attempted within the colony.
Sydney, September 9, 1839,


Nor are the means difficult of attainment. There is a way in
which funds may he raised in abundance, independently of any
charge whatever on the revenues of the State. The Government,
too, without being at any expense, can furnish facilities of the
greatest importance; for which those who have the salvation
of the southern hemisphere at heart, will feel deeply grateful.
Assistance in such a cause, kindly, promptly, and liberally
rendered, will command the benedictions of generations yet
unborn.
Sydney, July 30, 1839.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE SECRETARY OF
STATE FOR THE COLONIES.
Mv Lord,
The following is the leading article in The Herald
of this morning, one of the most widely circulated, and, in other
respects, one of the best conducted papers in the colony.
Should the principles it maintains and the policy it urges
upon the community, be acted upon, the work of extermination
will be neither slow nor doubtful; and Australia, bereaved of
her children, may sit down in silent sorrow till the sun, an-
nouncing the approach of the Judge of quick and dead, put on
habiliments of mourning, and set to rise no more on a guilty
world.
Sydney, September 18, 1839.
“By a letter in another column our readers will be made
acquainted with still further facts in corroboration of the
opinion which every sane man holds—namely, that nothing
hut the “ strong hand” will prove effectual in subduing the
murderous black cannibals of this country. Grown still more
daring and reckless, from impunity, they are, it seems, be-
coming a terror to the settlers and their servants in distant
parts of the colony. The Government must do something more
than merely conciliate, or the settlers must do it. Supposing
that a gang of bushrangers was to attack the house of a settler,
put him and his family in fear, and destroy or carry off bis
property —would not such settler be fully justified in killing the
ruffians if he could? Of course he would. Then upon what
principle is it that black savages, committing similar offences,
may not he treated after a similar fashion ? ‘ Answer that,’ ye
C


canting hypocrites, who are virtually the instigators, because
ye are actually the defenders of savage outrage ; not only in
this, but also in other colonies. At the Cape, these pests
abetted the savages until the colonists were driven from their
homes—until life and property on the borders of the colony
have become not worth a * pin’s fee.’ Do their worthy com-
peers in New South Wales desire to ‘do likewise?’ The
shepherd, the stockman, or the settlers’ property is not safe for
an instant; and yet, the Government, instead of arming the
settlers and their servants, send a cargo of tomahawks and
blankets, as presents to the murderous savages! Let the
settlers—aye, and their assigned servants, too —rise up as one
man in determined opposition to such a system. With respect
to the servants, no magistrate would dare to order a man to be
punished for refusing to be placed in a situation, in which he
would be in momentary danger of losing his life from the blow
of a club, or the thrust of a spear. No master could justly
complain of a servant for such refusal; because the men, even
if armed, fear to fire upon the savages, in dread of being hanged
for protecting their own lives or their masters’ property. Here
is a pretty state of things! In May last, Lord John Russell
wrote to the magistrates of the English counties, acquainting
them that the Government was willing to supply arms to all
peaceably disposed persons, desirous of forming themselves into
associations for mutual protection against the designs of the
mad-brained anarchists who are endeavouring to excite a revo-
lution in England. When that offer was made, no overt act
had been committed by the disturbers of the public peace ; yet,
in this colony—where the most treacherous murders and
robberies are daily committed by savages, the Government not
only does not arm the settlers and their servants, but deals out
threats of vengeance to them, and tomahawks and blankets to
the blacks! We say that the settlers ought not, and will
not endure this. Then, with respect to those humbug appoint-
ments—the black Protectors—what effect have they had in
suppressing the outrages of their interesting proteges ? What
have they done? What are they doing? We said, from the
first, that the creation of such officers as ‘ Protectors of Blacks’
was nothing but a Whig job, the only effect of which would be
that of imposing additional expense upon the colony. The
result has shown that we were right. These ‘ Protectors’ have
not only proved inefficient, but they have, also, in some
instances, proved mischievous. One of them, at the south-
ward, is doing nothing whatever, except —as we are well
informed—granting permission to convicts to be at large for
their own benefit. Of course, these favours are not undeserved


by the recipients; but as the public do not comprehend the
right of a ‘ Protector of the Blacks’ to grant tickets-of-leave, it
would be as well if this matter was explained. Another ‘ Pro-
tector,’ to the northward, appears to be ingeniously attempting
to make the outrages of the blacks a source of individual gain ;
by intimidating the settlers at a distance with reports of these
outrages, and then offering to purchase their cattle ? That is
certainly a very ingenious device; but we apprehend it is not
for the exercise of such ingenuity that the settlers are to pay
the salaries of ‘ Protectors of the Blacks’ —some of whom do
not even try to do any good, as they are constantly absent from
their respective stations, at Sydney or elsewhere. The Govern-
ment must do something in this matter, or the settlers will.”
THIRD LETTER.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE SECRETARY OF
STATE FOR THE COLONIES.
Mr Lord,
The following narrative of a scene which recently
occurred on the Orawaldo, will form a fair comment on the
foregoing article. The account, which, it appears, has found its
way beyond the shores of Australia, I copy from are-publication
of the revolting deed in The Monitor of this morning. For what
reason it is re-published, does not appear; but, having acci-
dently caught my eye, it shall occupy a place in the page of
history, where it will remain an indelible stain on the memory
of every British ministry intrusted with the administration of
affairs since we began to lay the foundation of sovereign
command in the South; and who, whether Tory, Whig, or
Radical, seem to keep to the one policy of restoring the
Church of Rome to life and animation out of the sweepings of
our jails, pampering her into wealth and power by donations
and stipends, and permitting an interesting people to be immo-
lated to make room for the establishment of her dominion and
the spread of her abominations in a new world. Thinking the
blessing of one Ireland not enough for the empire, they seem
anxious to create another in every one of our colonial posses-
sions. The emissaries of Papal influence therefore throughout
the kingdom, taking advantage of the policy of our simpleton
legislators, cannot do better than fill the jails with the millions
they have demoralized as fast as these receptacles of crime can
be emptied. The British government engage, at the expense
of the British people, to find them a free passage to one of the
finest countries upon earth, and then provide salaries for as
many priests as His Holiness —to use the appellation by which
he is blasphemously designated—chooses to appoint, and ,over
whom they dare not exercise the least control. Do they not


deserve the rank of Cardinals and the honour of canonization?
The jails of Britain are thus converted into colleges de propa-
gandajidei—excellent and effective auxiliaries of that at Rome!
And for this England is to pay and Australia to bleed! The
innocent and unoffending children of the latter, placed at the
mercy, are to fall by the hands of our very criminals. Admi-
rable philanthropy! Splendid legislation!
And this is the policy of a wise, a humane, and an
enlightened people! Could the most unprincipled democrat ex-
hibit more folly ? Could the most barbarian despot practise
greater cruelty ? Verily the British cabinet, in every adminis-
tration, must be Solons.
Sydney, September 30, 1839.
ATROCIOUS MASSACRE OF THIRTY NATIVES OP NEW SOUTH WALES.
“ Letters and papers which have just arrived, furnish us with accounts of a
series of as cold-blooded and heartless murders as ever stained the annals of
crime in any country, however barbarous. What renders these offences still more
revolting, is, that they were perpetrated by twelve or thirteen of our own country-
men, and, apparently without the least provocation. The names of seven of these
monsters in human shape were Chas. Kilmaister, Wm. Hawkins, James Perry,
Edward Foley, Jas. Cates, John Russell, and John Johnson, all convicts. They
had been assigned as stockmen or shepherds to some of the settlers in the
interior. In the month of June last these ruffians, influenced or induced by
what motive has not been discovered, beyond a determination to extirpate the
unhappy natives, set out on horseback, in pursuit of their hapless victims. They
were traced in their progress, inquiring after blacks, and at last arrived at a hut
near the Orawaldo, commonly called the Big River, beyond Liverpool Plains,
accompanied by Kilmaister. Here they discovered a little tribe of about thirty
natives, men, women, and children, including babes at their mothers'breasts, con-
gregated in the bush unsuspicious of danger and unconscious of offence. This
was on Sunday. They immediately approached their victims, who, terrified at
their manner, ran into Kilmaister’s hut crying lor protection ; but they appealed
to hearts of stone, who, having caught them as it were in a trap, dismounted,
followed them into the hut, and, despite of their entreaties, tied them together with
a rope. When all were thus secured, one end of the rope, was lied round the
body of the foremost of the murderers, who, having mounted his horse, led the
way,dragging theterrifled group after him, while his infamous companions guarded
them on all sides. Onward they were dragged till a fitting place in the bush was
reached, when the work of slaughter commenced, and, unresisting, were these
hapless wretches, one after the other, brutally butchered. Fathers, and mothers,
and children, fell before the previously sharpened swords of these self-appointed
executioners, till all lay a lifeless mass in death, clinging to each other with the
throes of natural affection. But one shot was fired, so that it was presumed one
only perished by fire-arms. The precise number thus immolated has not been
accurately ascertained, but it is computed that not less than thirty lay stretched on
the ensanguined earth. The demon butchers then placed the bodies in a heap,
kindled an immense fire over them, and thus endeavoured to destroy the evidence
of their unheard-of brutality. The eye of providence, however, was not to he
thus thwarted ; and, although for a time these miscreants imagined they had
effectually disguised their horrible work, circumstances led to their detection and
apprehension. Birds of prey were seen hovering about the spot where the un-
consumed remains yet existed. Stockmen in search of their strayed cattle were
attracted to the locality, supposing they should find their carcasses. In this way
it was that the ribs, jaw-bones, half-burnt skulls, and other portions of human
skeletons were found, while symptons of the conflagration in the vicinity were
likewise detected. This led to inquiry, and ultimately to a discovery of the hot


rible Iruih, Tlie place was fifty miles from the nearest police station. The
whole of the villains were apprehended, and their own admissions, and conduct
previous and subsequent to the horrid work, added to a chain of circumstantial
evidence, left no doubt of their guilt. It chanced, too, that on the nittht previous
to the murders a heavy rain had fallen, and traces were thus discovered of horses’
feet, as well as of the naked feet of the wretched natives on ttie way to the field
of death. Every possible pains were taken to save these monsters from condign
punishment—subscriptions were made for their defence, and counsel retained,
but in vain. Their guilt was established beyond a doubt, and Sir George Gipps
suffered the law to lake its course.
FOURTH LETTER.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE SECRETARY OF
STATE FOR THE COLONIES.
My Lord,
It appears from The Colonial Gazette of the 19th of
June, that the public lands in the colonies—meaning I presume
those belonging to the Aboriginal inhabitants, for there are no
other—have been pronounced by Mr. Ward in the House of
Commons, “ the birthright of every British subject—an inhe-
ritance —a trust which the government is bound to administer
for the public good!” When or how did the lands of foreign
nations become the birthright and inheritance of the people of
the British isles? Never did a more iniquitous declaration
issue from the Vatican in the dark ages, when his holiness was
in the habit of granting to whomsoever he thought proper,
and resuming at pleasure, all countries discovered and un-
discovered on the habitable globe. I rejoice that the school-
master is abroad ; but it will damp my pleasure not a little, if
the Pope, Voltaire, and Tom Paine, are to be the professors of
the university in which he qualifies himself for office. The
march of intellect, is a fine, a captivating expression. It is
enough to fire the world with enthusiasm. But if its fruit is to
be plunder, it will end not in joy but in sorrow, and prove an
illusion fraught with misery to millions.
The House, it seems, approved of the marauding declaration,
differing with the honorable member only as to the mode of dis-
posing of the spoil. One step more and we gain the revolution-
ary precipice—an equal division of property throughout the
empire. Nothing will then be wanted but Robespierres and guil-
lotines to dispose of the lawful proprietors. In this there will be
no difficulty. It appears from the papers of this morning that
Robespierres in full training are now carrying on the work of
murder here and ridding themselves of the rightful owners of
the soil, the Aboriginal inhabitants, not by the guillotine but
by arsenic. After seizing the country, they create a famine by
the destruction of the game, and then complete the work of
extermination by administering poison to the victims of their
avarice. This information I think it also my duty to commu-
nicate to your lordship.


How infamous is our conduct in the Southern hemisphere.
We take forcible possession of Australia and slay her inhabi-
tants. Polynesia, to terminate the horrors of internal war and
escape foreign aggression, earnestly solicits the protection of
the Britich flag, and is refused. The interests of our manufac-
tures, shipping, commerce, and the opportunity of establishing
an empire in the Pacific, teeming with benefits to mankind,
are all disregarded, and the people are either murdered or
cruelly exposed to the buccaneering attacks of that Jesuitical
production of the French revolution Louis Philip. An upstart
who is indebted to England for his life, his crown, and his king-
dom, openly insults her with impunity by making war upon her
very missions to the heathen. Well did the Most High say: “By
me kings reign, and princes decree justicefor when left to them-
selves, or abandoned to the counsel of the wisest of their subjects,
they err lamentably. Revelation is setat nought and nations bleed.
Is there to be no end to the wrongs inflicted upon Australia?
Is there to be no change in the blundering policy of the British
Cabinet? Is the mistress of the ocean, with the empire of India
and the destinies of the world in her hand, to be forever doomed
to an imbecile ministry? Sydney, Nov. 8,1839.
TO THE READER.
You lire probably at the rate of £5O, £5OO, or £lOOO
per annum; or you spend £5OO, £lO,OOO, or £50,000 per
annum. The writer, therefore, in asking you to buy a copy of
this appeal, the profits of which are to be devoted to the cause
he pleads, is only soliciting one of the least of the crumbs that
fall from your table, on behalf of Him who is daily loading it
with all the luxuries of life. Perhaps you are heaping up
riches to be squandered in dissipation by others when you are
gone to another world, to account for the disposition you made
of your wealth, as well as your time and every other talent
entrusted to your care, in this. In a dying hour or at the day of
judgment, you may bitterly repent of the manner in which you
now spend your money; but the devoting of a few hundred or
a few thousand pounds of it to the service of Him that died to
rescue you from endless woe, will form no source of regret to
you, either at the close of life or the termination of time—that
solemn period that will usher in the interesting, awful, and
stirring scenes of eternity.
The writer is determined to live on bread and water till the sal-
vation of Australia be accomplished. Assist him in the great work,
if you can ; but waste not your time in trying to gratify a vain
curiosity by idle conjectures respecting his name. Let it suffice
that you hear “The voice of onecrying in the’ Australian ‘wilder-
ness : Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight.”


AN APPEAL
TO
THE WORLD.
Often have I gazed on the face of the Australian, desirous if
possible to ascertain his origin, as well as the time and the
manner of his migration to a land utterly unknown to the rest
of mankind; and as often as I surveyed the copper-colored
countenance of this inhabitant of the woods and lawns of a
country which has undergone no change since, fresh, interest-
ing, and lovely from the fountain of creation, it floated at the
command of the Supreme on the bosom of the Pacific, so often
have I imagined that I could trace in his Malayan features some
resemblance to the elder branch of the family of Shem—that
family through whom came the Messiah, thejoy of the redeemed
and the hope of the world.
There have been occasional mixtures and admixtures of the
human race to a limited extent, arising out of conquest, vicinity
of abode, storms, and shipwreck; but the three great families
from whom they all originally sprang, remain as distinct and
distinguishable as they were immediately after the flood, when
the pen of inspiration described them and the localities of their
respective habitations.
While the posterity of Ham migrated to Africa, and that of
Japheth to Scythia, Scandinavia, and Europe, the family of
Shem, having the right of inheritance, took possession of Cen-
tral, Southern, and Eastern Asia.
The lapetusof the Greeks, is unquestionably the Japheth of
scripture; and the Hellespont is but a corruption of Elis-pont;
while this, as well as Elis in the Peloponnesus, bears too close
a resemblance to Elisha, the name of the grandson of Japheth,


to be mistaken for any other. Profane history confirms the
sacred, Thessaly once bore the name of Eolia; and we learn
from Herodotus that one of the one hundred and twenty pro-
vinces of Persia, as they stood in the rolls of the Persian empire,
was called Alysionenses; that it compreheded Eolia, which lies
between lonia and Phrygia; and that Eolus—whence Eolia—
is a mere corruption of Elisha.
Egypt, one of the principal entrances into the great peninsula,
now called Africa, still bears in Hebrew the name of Ham’s
second son. And Africa itself, called in scripture the land of
Ham, was by the Greeks, apparently guided both by observa-
tion and its Hebrew name Cush, designated Ethiopia; which
means literally Face-burning , and may be rendered the face-
burning country. So early did the influence of climate begin to
operate a change on the human frame; and so sirpply and intel-
ligibly did the ancients account for that variety of complexion
in the human body which, to modern philosophers, appears such
a mystery.
Moses expressly tells us that the East, which points to
India and China, became the inheritance of the descend-
ants of Shem. His silence respecting the younger children
of the great antediluvian patriarch,—those born to him after
the flood—indicates that they had lost their distinctive cha-
racter ; either by being placed, for the purpose of instruction
in revelation and divine things, under the guardianship and
protection of the elder brother, as senior and superintending
patriarch on his father’s death; or, by voluntarily taking up
their abode in the East among his family, to whom belonged the
birthright and the supremacy. Mingling with them, both seem
to have blended together, assuming by degrees, with some
slight variety, the same family-likeness, and passing under the
same name. Hence it is, that receiving such an accession, the
family of Shem became much more numerous, than that of
either Ham or Japheth.
Writers on Zoology have attempted to divide the inhabitants
of the earth into five classes, insinuating as many different
origins; but the fancifulness of their distinctions is equalled
only by the puerility of their arguments. Even if history were
silent, the distinguishing characteristics of the three great
families of mankind are not darkly visible, but clear and dis-
cernible, as any other object on which the light of heaven shines.
The red, bronze, or yellow colour, prevalent in Palestine,
Persia, India, China, Australasia, and America; the woolly
hair, black figure, flat front, and elongated visage, prevalent
in Africa; and the white skin, finely formed head, and Circas-
sian beauty, prevalent to the north of the Mediterranean and


Central Asia, point so directly to the three great postdiluvian
patriarchs, that no doubt can be entertained relative either
to the order of classification or the common origin of our race.
Variety is essential to recognition, and therefore common to
every order of created beings. Without variety creation would
be defective. Its worlds, its classes of matter, animate and
inanimate, and the different orders of intelligent beings it
contains, would be undistinguished and undistinguishable.
Persons and things would be alike incapable of identification,
and would present us with nothing but a mass of congregated
confusion. Hence nature, in obedience to an admirable and
universal law, and in a manner known to none but herself,
displays her endless powers of variation by diversifying, not
only the genus and the species, but the individuals of the same
class or tribe, and even those sprung from the same matrimo-
nial union. But how conclusive soever the argument thence
derived, I pass over the peculiar features and striking charac-
teristics by which the three great families of man may be
recognized and distinguished one from another. A single
sentence from the lips of Noah, decides the point at issue:
“ Ham shall be a servant of servants, and Japheth shall dwell
in the tents of Shem.” Were there no peculiarities in the
personal formation of the negro, the doom of slavery, so re-
markably verified as it has been by the event, would prove the
inhabitants of Africa to be the posterity of Ham; while the
dominion of the Greeks and Romans anciently in Asia; the
conquest of Palestine, Persia, India, and China at a later
period, by the Tartars ; the occupation of South America by
the Spaniards and Portuguese; and the empires established '
and establishing in North America, India, and Australasia by
the British, traversing the ocean thousands of miles for this very
purpose, bear out the prediction of 4000 years, and assure us
that, when the earth was divided amongst the three great
patriarchical families, the sons of Japheth took up their abode
in the North, and that the inhabitants of Central Asia, India,
China, America, and Australasia, are the descendants of Shem.
After consulting the sacred records, a glance at the map of
the world will be sufficient to convince the candid and the
intelligent. Should a lingering doubt remain, relative to the
countries which lie beyond the Atlantic and the Indian, it will
vanish on a moment’s reflection. The geographical position of
Japheth in Europe, Ham in Africa, and Shem in Asia, will lead
to correct conclusions respecting the peopling of the continent
discovered by Columbus in the West, and that found by
Hartog in the South ; while the vicinity of these continents to
Asia, and their conquest and occupation by the descendants of
P


Japheth, will leave no doubt in reflecting minds that the Abori-
ginal inhabitants of America and Australasia are also the
descendants of Shem.
The traditional prophecy among the inhabitants of America,
that a people were to come from a country beyond the ocean to
assume the dominion, discloses to our view one of the most
remarkable and extraordinary facts recorded in history. The
existence of such a prophecy among such a people, is, without
reference to Revelation, utterly inexplicable ; and forces upon
us the unavoidable conclusion that the patriarchical prediction,
“ Japheth shall dwell in the tents of Shem,” had been delivered
to them by their ancestors, and that it had passed down with
fearful apprehensions of its accomplishment, from generation
to generation. On the arrival of the Europeans, they were not
only actually expecting its fulfilment, but appear, by pointing
to “the rising sun,” to have been aware of the very abode of
the family of Japheth. This, without any other light, furnishes
incontrovertible evidence of their descent from Shem.
The idols of Mexico and the temples of Peru, are evidently
of Asiatic origin; and the argument drawn from family like-
ness, one of the surest guides on such a subject, is in itself
conclusive. None of the Aboriginal Americans, except the
Esquimaux and a tribe of negroes on the Amazon, have any
resemblance in colour or personal appearance that would justify
us in supposing them to have had either a European or an
African origin. They are neither white nor black, but red, the
prevailing Asiatic colour, common to the descendants of Shem.
Nor is history, even among the descendants of Japheth,
entirely silent respecting the existence of the western continent.
The garden of Hesperides, the Ultima Thule, and the Atlantis
of the ancients, all point to America ; for they are all placed,
by the writers who profess to have any knowledge of them, in
the West. The climate, the soil, and the capability of Central
America for the production of all kinds of tropical fruits,
justify the high character bestowed on the garden of Hespe-
rides ; which Hesiod expressly declares to be beyond the ocean,
and others under the setting sun. The planet Venus received
the name of Hesperus, simply from the circumstance of her
appearing so frequently near this part of the world at the close
of day. Nor are the northern and southern divisions less
appropriately designated. In North America, a great part of
which is everlastingly enveloped in ice and snow, we may at
once recognize the Ultima Thule of remote ages, which has
been so long vainly sought for in the North Sea and to the
westward of the British isles. South America, lying opposite
to Africa, was thence so appropriately named, and so exactly


corresponds in position to the Atlantis of antiquity, that no
doubt of their identity can be reasonably entertained. The
existence of such a place was so decidedly affirmed by the
ancients that the moderns, not being able to find it, have come
to the sage conclusion that it must have long since submerged
in the ocean!
The peopling of America is equally practicable from China,
the Red Sea, the Persian Gulf, or the Levant; all of which
lie in the very latitude where man must have first come into con-
tact with the ocean. And when we reflect that navigation, like all
the other arts, had its origin among the descendants of Shem,
that they covered the waters adjacent to their respective habi-
tations with commerce, not only before the descendants of Ham
contrived a canoe, but long before those of Japheth launched the
Argo in search of the golden fleece, or felled a pine in the forests
of Thessaly, and that Asia had the command, not only of the
Indian and the Chinese seas, but of the Mediterranean, which
gave her easy access to the Atlantic, the argument assumes a
character that dispels every doubt relative to its practicability.
But the time and the manner in which this grand division of
the globe was first inhabited, being greatly involved in obscurity,
owing to the paucity of historical records in all ages among the
descendants of Shem, # demand one or two passing observations.
That America had been colonized from the shores of Eastern,
Southern, and Western Asia, seems, on close examination, to be
placed beyond dispute; and the numerous population found in
occupation of her domains and forests, when re-discovered,
proves that the first migrations had been early and considerable.
But the state of things consequent on the Babylonian disper-
sion, shrouding the early movements of mankind, produced a
cloud of obscurity, which, owing to her distance from the rest
of the world, hung over the date of her first settlement, dense,
thick, and almost impenetrable, till it merged in that non-
intercourse which caused such a blank in her history. Her
contiguity to China, however, afforded facilities which put an
end to all surprise at the manner in which she was thence
occupied; and the southern trade, wheeling round the con-
tinent of Africa during six months of the year, will as easily
account for her colonization from the Red Sea and the
Persian Gulf. The objects of sacred reverence, the mode
of worship, and the religious rites of many of her nations
so strikingly resemble those of the ancient Persians that
historians are confounded, and confess themselves utterly
• The sacred records, among the elder or Hebrew branch of the family, are an
exception ; but these are of divine origin, and relate to concerns of higher impor-
tance.


unable to account for the circumstance. The tradition among
the Peruvians, too, that the royal family were the children of
the Sun, strongly indicates an Eastern origin ; and to no other
part of the East but the Persian Gulf and the shores of the Le-
vant can we trace those migrations which erected the temples
and founded the dynasties of Central America. Add to this,
that the long and narrow sea which, stretching westward from
the Levant, separated the great peninsula from Europe, was, at
a very early period, the scene of navigation and commerce; the
conductors of which, passing the Pillars of Hercules, explored
the Atlantic, and thus led the way to America long before
Rome and Carthage contended for empire. We must also
recollect that between the three great patriarchal families there
appears to have been always a broad and marked line of dis-
tinction. Hence the very circumstance of the western continent
being peopled by the descendants of the elder family, would
cause it to excite less Interest among those of the two younger;
which, together with the number of countries then open for
settlement, the growing tendency to a secluded, savage, and
hunting mode of life, the infancy of commerce, and the absence
of historical records at that time among all nations, will account
for the inability of the ancients to give more than the names of
places beyond the Atlantic, to which they nevertheless knew
that considerable migrations had proceeded. It is important
to add, that the first attempt at empire was made by the family
of Ham. Whether they were actuated merely by ambition, or a
desire to avert the doom pronounced upon them by Noah, cannot
be determined ; but the fact is certain. Influenced probably by
the troubles thence arising, a portion of the descendants of
Shem,finding the principal entrances into Africa occupied by the
aspiring family, the approaches to the North by that of Japheth,
and the East crowded with their brethren, seem to have bended
their steps from Central Asia towards the shores of the Levant,
to seek there or beyond the ocean a more peaceable and roomy
abode. At a period, therefore, long antecedent to the existence
of the annals of Greece and Rome, launching their slender
barks, they unfurled the flowing canvass on the briny deep;
and the trade wind, which, when they passed the straits of
Gibraltar, wafted them rapidly to the land of their future home,
would in general prove an insurmountable obstacle to their
return. The invasion of Asia by the Greeks, and the contest
which sprang up between Rome and Carthage, absorbing the
attention of the belligerents, and virtually interdicting the Me-
diterranean to other nations, destroyed the spirit of Phoenician
enterprise, and finally cut off all intercourse between the eastern
and western divisions of the globe, till navigation received that


improvement from modern science which, enabling the mariner
to launch into the main ocean, at all seasons and against all
winds, disclosed to the view of the astonished sons of Japheth
a new continent, which had been for ages inhabited by the
descendents of Shem—but, they knew not their brethren!
A glance at the map of the Indian ocean, will show the
track by which the Australian moved, island after island,
from the Malayan peninsula to the southern continent; while
the vicinity of Java, Timor, and New Guinea, and the
discovery that the Malays have been for ages annually visiting
its shores for the purpose of fishing and trading with China,
are more than sufficient, were there no concurring evidences,
to establish the conclusion that Australia was peopled from
India.
The time when the Australian found his way across the
Indian archipelago to the southern continent, is, and will
Eerhaps be forever buried in that cloud of obscurity which
angs over his history ; but there is reason to believe that his
migration had a very early date. The absence of friendly
recognition, and the non-intercourse which subsists between
him and the Malays of the present day who visit the coast, each
viewing the other in no other light than that of strangers and
enemies, would lead us to adopt this view of the subject. But
the argument rests on still stronger data. The island of Java
possesses, in the ruins with which it abounds, evidence of two
distinct invasions from India —that of the Hindoos prior to the
Christian era, and that of the Mahomedans several centuries af-
terwards. But, since neither idols nor temples, neither literary nor
architectural remains are to be found in any part of Australia,
the conclusion is unavoidable, that the present are its Aboriginal
inhabitants, and that their ancestors must have belonged to a
migration which left India, not only before the imposture of
Mahomet, but prior to the rise of the Hindoo superstition, even
in its most ancient form, that of Budism. This migration, ‘too,
must have preceded all those to the several islands of the
Pacific, where either idols or temples, literary or architectural
remains are to be found, as well as all those to the American
continent, thus distinguished from preceding migrations.
But though it cannot be determined when the Australian
left India, whether before or after the Grecian era, no doubt
can be entertained, that he is of the family of Shem ; and there-
fore, according to the ties of consanguinity, related to the
Redeemer of the world —an honour which those who treat him
with scorn and contempt cannot claim. Away then with the
doctrine, that he is incapable of that moral and intellectual


improvement which the gospel effects in the character of man,
wherever it is proclaimed, received, and cherished. He may
he despised alike by the ignorant and the learned ; he may be
shut out of the pale of Christian charity by its lying professors;
and he may be neglected as a worthless outcast by those who
ought long since to have interested themselves in his character
and history : but there is ONE who has bowels of compassion
for him. The touching tenderness manifested by Jesus towards
this his younger brother, according to the flesh, in the parable
of the prodigal son, which, to the Australian, has a peculiar
and striking application, proves, that though he has long
wandered from the way of life, he has not been forgotten by
Him who bled for the sins of the world. I never look on this
houseless, homeless child of want and woe—l never contem-
plate his sad condition, whether despondingly wandering he
knows not whither beneath a burning sun, or standing still
and shivering in the pitiless storm, or uttering the famishing
cry, “ Bread—bread —give me bread—me very hungry,”—
without being convinced that the Saviour specially alluded to
him when he uttered that affecting parable. He is actually the
“younger son,” the junior brother to that very branch of the
family of Shem, to whom our Lord, in the parable, addressed
himself. And how literally, how strikingly, are his state and
character therein delineated. He obtained “ the portion of goods
that fell to him, and took his journey into a far country”—a
country so far removed from the arena of human affairs—
Judea, Greece, and Rome—that when, after thousands of years,
it was discovered, it received the appellation of Terra incognita,
a land unknown. Here, “ having spent all his living,” he has
nothing either to cover his nakedness or to satisfy the cravings
of hunger, unless he chance to kill a wild animal in the forest
where he wanders. To him the joys of spring time and harvest
are utterly unknown. He is now actually hiring himself to “ the
citizens of this far country,”—the invasion of which, filling to
the brim the bitter cup put into his hand by misfortune, has com-
pleted his calamities—to hew wood, to draw water, or “to feed
swdne, and would fain fill his belly with the husks which the
swine eat.” The allusion to the necessity of “ food and clothing”
for him on his conversion, or “ return to his father,” filling up
the parallel, completes the evidence, and enables us to identify
the character spoken of in the parable, in the person of the
Australian.
How has Christendom—how have the British conducted
themselves towards this unhappy wanderer, whose misery is so
touchingly pourtrayed by the Redeemer of men 1 The game
of the forest, from which he derived a precarious subsistence,


is fast disappearing from the haunts of his comfortless abode.
The “ famine” spoken of in the parable, has consequently begun
sorely to press upon him; compelling him to deeds of horror
in order to sustain life, thus remarkably verifying the predic-
tion of his sad fate, “ and no man gave unto him.” The time
of his saying, “ I will arise and go to my father,” is, therefore,
now come. Have the British, then, the only nation with
whom in his exile he can communicate, attempted his conver-
sion, or encouraged him to adopt the heavenly resolution of
returning to his father? How have they conducted themselves
towards him in Tasmania, and in Eastern, Western, Southern,
and Northern Australia? I pause for a reply. Alas! all
around me is silent. I can hear nothing but echo in the graves
of the slain, repeating the ominous monosyllable, as if it came
from the lips of the injured dead, “How?!” I need no other
reply. Your deeds answer for you. Ye have proclaimed this
younger branch of the family of Shem, to be exclusively under
your protection.—lnstead of alleviating the famine brought
upon him by your avarice, ye have driven him to the dreadful
alternative of eating his own young in sight of the very
habitations ye have erected on the lands of which ye have
dispossessed him # —ye have forbidden other nations to hoist
a flag on, or adjacent, to the continent of Australia, as if ye
wished that the guilt of exterminating her inhabitants might
rest entirely on your own heads—ye have poured the filth of
your jails on her shores —ye have raised the “ great whore
of Babylon” from the dust—she that for ages “ made the
nations drunk with the wine of her fornication”—ye have
decked her out afresh, and sent her to perpetuate the pollution
of a virgin land—ye have imparted to the Australian your own
vices in their worst forms—ye have compassed sea and land,
not even to proselyte, but to render him twofold more the child
of hell than yourselves, and then ye have slain him. “O ye
generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of hell.”
Yet ye sing psalms and hymns, ye offer many prayers, ye build
Christian temples, and ye dedicate them to the Most High;
while, before your march into the interior of this interesting but
yet unexplored country, which ye now encompass on all sides,
instead of the voice of the missionary proclaiming the gospel of
peace, nothing is to be heard but the sound of the musket in
pursuit of the flying prodigal over whose forlorn condition the
son of God wept. Well did the prophet describe you, when he
* See instances of this deed of horror in Bennett, Bamber, and other writers
on Eastern Australia.
“ I heard of a child being eaten by the parents; the reason given was, that
they were very hungry.”.— Bennett,


uttered these words, and thoroughly have ye merited the tre-
mendous rebuke pronounced against you in the records of
Heaven : “To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices?
—saith the Lord. Bring no more vain oblations; incense is
an abomination unto me; the new moons and sabbaths, the
calling of assemblies, I cannot away with ; it is iniquity even
the solemn meeting. Your new moons and your appointed
feasts, my soul hateth : they are a trouble unto me; lam weary
to bear them. When ye spread forth your hands, I will hide
mine eyes from you :—when ye make many prayers, I will not
hear : your hands are full of blood.”
Gentle reader, restrain your indignation at the dishonour
brought upon your country, till you have perused the following
relation from the lips and the pen of Aristides.


In the latter end of 1832,1 had occasion to visit the capital of
the province of Western Australia. It was one of those lovely
spring mornings, which, in the southern hemisphere, shed an
indescribably balmy influence on all around. The acacia was
in full bloom, the birds were chanting the notes of their morning
hymn, and every creature, excepting man, seemed to rejoice
in conscious innocence, gratefully acknowledging the goodness
of a beneficent creator. The contemplation of a scene so
cheering, as I passed along, beguiled my weary steps in a rather
fatiguing journey of several miles.
When I emerged from the forest, and cast my eyes on the
embryo capital, I beheld men, women, and children, running
from all points towards its centre. Inquiring into the cause
of a commotion so great and universal, one of the women,
running along with a babe in her arms, cried, “ O that terrible
man is taken.” I soon learned that a powerful chief had just
been insnared by stratagem, and made prisoner; a chief on
whose head, for the display of a feeling similar to that which
immortalized Tell of Switzerland and Wallace of Scotland, the
government had set a price. Two others that accompanied
him, were taken with him. By the offer of bread, and feigned
signs of honourable intentions, they had been inveigled into a
boat, which, for this very purpose, had put off from the town
to the opposite side of the water, where a number of natives,
thinking themselves there secure, the river being from one to
three miles broad, were observed to be employed in fishing. So
soon as the men in the boat got their unsuspecting victims into
their power, they seized, bound, and carried them off, in view of
their respective tribes, who stood amazed, and mad with indig-
nation at the perfidy thus practised upon them.
When I came within a few hundred yards of the governor’s
residence, I found a crowd collecting in the open air, in front
of the guard-house, with the lieutenant-governor and council
in the midst, assembled apparently for deliberation, and the
three captive chiefs bound hand and foot, and lying on the
ground, in fearful expectation of the doom that awaited
them. Not a word of their language was known; nor did
they know a syllable of that of the people whose captives
they were. The principal chief maintained a stern silence,
viewing all around him with sullen disregard. The other two,
displaying a presence of mind, courage, and fortitude, not
always possessed by the warrior under similar circumstances,
E


attempted to soothe and pacify their victors, by singing a
few stanzas of poetry. This brought to my mind the case
of the Athenians, many of whom saved their lives, after
the terrible affair of the Asinarius, in the contest between them
and the Lacedemonians for the ascendant in Sicily, by reciting
some of the verses of Euripides; and also that of the Jewish
captives who, when the Babylonians desired them to sing, hung
their harps on the willows and made that affecting reply:
“ How can we sing the songs of Zion in a strange land.”
I saw, I felt, that a crisis had arrived, and that if the govern-
ment carried into effect their intention of putting these men to
death, it would lay the foundation of interminable hostilities.
There was not a moment to be lost, I stepped up to the Honor-
able , a member of Council, and said ; “ The putting
of these chiefs to death, will be attended with fearful conse-
quences. Nor is there any thing to justify sanguinary pro-
ceedings. The necessity of hostilities might be altogether-
prevented, if we only knew the language of the Aboriginal
inhabitants. Can I have access to the prisoners? What do ye
intend to do with them prior to the doom that awaits them ?”
The answer was : “We intend to send them to jail.” I said,
“ I will go to jail with them.” He replied : “ You may, if you
can get a magistrate to commit you.” Turning to the Honor-
able W.H. Mackie and Captain # lrwin the Lieutenant-Governor,
men of very different sentiments and feelings, I said: “ Refrain
from an act that is as impolitic as it is unjust and cruel. Give
me the lives of these men—let mine answer for them—and let
me have access to them, that I may acquire a knowledge of
their language and prevent that frightful state of things in
which the deliberate shedding of blood will involve the settle-
ment.” After talking for a moment together, Mr. Mackie
turned to me and said: “Your request is granted. The
prisoners will be sent to the island of Carnac. Thither you may
accompany them ; and there prosecute the object you have in
view.” The-Lieutenant Governor, then, to show the cordial
manner in which they entered into my views, said : “ Come and
take tea with me to-morrow evening that we may have some
conversation on the subject.”
I arranged, or rather abandoned my own affairs to their fate,
and in a few days gave notice that I was ready. Lieutenant
Dale, the aid-de-camp, was ordered with a guard of soldiers to
accompany me and the prisoners to Carnac, a barren rock, per-
haps 600 yards long by 200 in width, between Garden Island
and Rotnest, and about eight or ten miles from the main.
On a Monday morning about the beginning of October, we
* Now Major.


stepped into the revenue boat at Fremantle, amidst a crowd
whom the novelty of the scene had attracted, and in a few
hours reached our destination. As we neared the island, I
desired the prisoners to be unbound, which produced on their
countenances a gleam of joy; but it was transitory. For several
days there was a struggle in their minds between hope and
despair. One moment they expected life, and another nothing
but death. Nor would they be persuaded to the contrary, till
gentle words and kind treatment at length convinced them that
I had nothing in view but their welfare; for they now began
to feel that they were in my hands.
On our landing, 1 learned that their names were Yagan,
Doumera, and Ningina. Yagan had been the terror of the
colony. He was tall, athletic, and muscular, with a strong-
dash of the savage in his countenance. When placid, animated
in conversation, or even a little excited, no peer in the realm
could excel him in dignity of demeanour or urbanity of man-
ners. The passions of the savage, however, occasionally
flitting across his brow and playing behind his bronze coloured
countenance, kept confidence in check ; and yet, when conci-
liating, he exhibited a disposition so candid, cordial, and
generous, that the most timid could not but feel at perfect ease
in his company, be it where it may, whether in the midst of the
city or the solitary desert. He was altogether a noble, a princely
character —one of nature’s best productions. The characters of
the others may be given in a few words. Doumera was mild,
gentle, candid, and generous. He possessed one of the finest
dispositions I ever knew; and,under the influence of divine
grace, might have been taken for the brother of John the
Evangelist. His countenance beamed with every thing that is
excellent and amiable. How exceedingly repulsive it must
have been, I often thought, to a mind like his, to handle a
spear and mingle with barbarians in the strife of battle —but he
was born in a land of darkness, and compelled by a mysterious
but unerring Providence to lead the life of a savage. Ningina,
on the contrary, was dark, reserved, timid, and cunning. He
affected confidence, but was always distrustful.
On our landing, Mr. Dale, at my request, made them ascend
the rock which was for a time to form their abode, in order to
show them that they were surrounded by water. When we
reached the summit, Yagan at once understood the object of our
walk, concluded that his doom was sealed, and in an agony of
mind threw himself on his knees in the attitude of prayer ; but
whether a feeling of devotion, or of grief and despair, laid him
prostrate on the ground, could not then he determined.
After eating some salt pork and a little biscuit, the guard


and the prisoners lay down by a fire which they had kindled
on a mound under a pendant rock, adorned with a few of those
stalactite formations which are not uncommon on the western
coast. Mr. Dale and I stretched our limbs at a little distance
close to the water, on some sharp fragments which the surge
had washed from the precipice above. Though our bed was
not made of down, it was clean; and thus we passed the first
night on this rock in the ocean. When day dawned, and we
had partaken of a similar repast, the aid-de-camp took his
leave, and left me to form my own plans and manage as well
as I could.
Surrounded by the sea, and nothing over our heads but the
sky, it became necessary to contrive shade from the sun and
shelter from the storm. I therefore sent to the adjacent island
for spars, and planned a little encampment of huts—one for a
place of worship, one for the prisoners, and one for myself—in a
little valley in the centre of the rock, in which grew a few
acacia shrubs. But a serious difficulty now presented itself.
We could find no water ; and without this element, so essential
to the existence of animated nature, we could not live. I had
therefore no alternative but to attempt a well; and, after boring
about twenty feet through the rock, we found, to our great joy,
an abundant supply. A garden, around the well in the little
valley, to show the savages that his mother-earth, notwithstand-
ing the curse, is still capable of furnishing man with nourishing
food, completed my contemplated arrangements.
We immediately commenced operations, by sloping the bank
and forming a pathway from the valley to the beach. While
thus occupied, Yagan became very melancholy, hung over his
spade, and refused to work. Wishing to enforce obedience, so
essential to discipline and good order, I spoke to him in rather
a commanding tone; on which he turned on his heel and
looked upon me with a scowl of ineffable contempt, while his
eyes were red as lightning and flashed fire. I Instantly per-
ceived that he had fallen into an error, calculated to appal and
unman the bravest, actually supposing that we were making
preparations for his execution, and that here we intended to
bury him. What fiends he must have imagined us to be, when
he supposed that we were capable of such a refinement in
cruelty as to make a captive assist in digging his own grave.
I undeceived him as quickly as possible by walking up and
down the bank, and thus showed him that it was not a grave
but a road that we were making to and from the beach ; after
which he became tranquil and assisted in the work. On our
making the holes for the corner posts of the first hut, however,
the same dreadful impression seized him again; and when the


third hole was dug, Ningina and Doumera also began to weep,
believing that their deaths, as well as his, were now intended ;
and it required no little persuasion to convince them of the
contrary.
We prosecuted the different undertakings we had in hand ;
and, in a few days, the natives became cheerful, pleasant,
and happy. The day was spent in work, and the mornings
and evenings in conversation around the fire in the open
air, where we all mealed together. At night, they gene-
rally entertained us by singing or reciting a few stanzas of
their poetry; and these occasions, as well as every interval
from labour, I improved by endeavouring to gain a knowledge
of the language.
Cleanliness being akin to godliness, I caused them to be
shaved, washed, and clothed; and made them at length wash
themselves and their own linen. To my surprise, when
washed, they were not black but red or bronze coloured. When
attending prayers on the Sabbath, they were quiet, atten-
tive, and serious ; and, but for their copper-coloured counte-
nances, might have been taken for well-instructed British
peasants. Our congregation was small; but I never saw one
better behaved. Solemn and interesting were the reflections
that crowded upon me on these occasions, and delightful were
the sensations that pervaded my bosom. These rocks, unin-
habited from creation, and on which the sound of prayer and
praise had never been heard, now responded in echoing accents
to the worship of Him that made them. The expanded ocean,
lying to the westward, and reminding me of a country from
which the light of the gospel was breaking forth to every land,
but this; the extended continent lying to the eastward and
stretching north and south, with a range of elevated mountains
in the distance, bounding the horizon like a rainbow or ribbon
of blue, and veiling the unexplored interior with its innumerable
tribes on whom a Sabbath never smiled, presented scenes on
which the imagination ruminated with intense interest. The
happiness of being the first to announce the name of Jesus to
those who, exiled from the rest of the world for thousands of
years, were utter strangers to revelation, and who had never heard
oftheadventofaSaviour,madetherock on which 1 reclined softer
than a bed of down, and the humble fare of a coarse biscuit and
a glass of cold water, sweeter than the dainties of a royal table.
The beginning indeed was small. I had just got a hold of the
key that would unlock the native language; and was thus
merely preparing the way for the missionary by opening for him
a door to the preaching of the gospel. Still it ims a beginning.
It was not the first comiscation of the morning light; but it was


the first twinkling of the morning star, struggling through the
haze, while ascending the horizon to proclaim the approach of
“ the day spring from on high” to Australia. So, at least, I
earnestly prayed and fondly hoped.
Among the spars for the erection of the huts, were several of
the melaluca, of which the natives make their weapons of war.
These immediately attracted their attention ; and they solicited
leave to make a few spears, taking care to explain that it ■was
only for the purpose of fishing. Compliance with such a re-
quest in the circumstances in which we were placed, would
appear to many a dangerous experiment. In my mind, it
excited no apprehensions. Desirous to afford them every inno-
cent gratification, and to banish that distrust which is injurious
to social intercourse, I granted them permission. Nor was this
or any other indulgence ever abused. The guard, not being
under the command of an officer, and not choosing to be under
my control, instead of keeping watch at night always slept.
There was therefore nothing to prevent the prisoners from at
any time taking the lives of all on the island. Yet such a
friendly and mutual confidence prevailed, on their part and
mine, that though the soldiers thus passed every night in bed in
their tents, I slept by the side of these savages in the open air,
as safe and as tranquil as if I had been guarded by a thousand.
Things went on in every way to my satisfastion, and promised
to realize my most sanguine expectations, till an incident oc-
curred which interrupted the harmony that reigned in our little
camp, and ultimately frustrated my grand design—their in-
struction in Christianity and its propagation, through their
instrumentality, among their own and the adjacent tribes.
One morning the soldier—for there was only one on the
island with me at thqf time—very injudiciously called Yagan
to work before he had finished his breakfast. Yagan, still
recollecting that he was a chief, did not choose to be so unce-
remoniously dealt with, and refused. The soldier threatened,
till Yagan’s temper began to rise, when the one ran for his
musket and the other for his spear. I w'as at some distance,
but providentially heard the noise; and, on looking towards
the place whence it came, beheld the soldier with his firelock
rushing to the combat and Yagan standing to'receive him,
with the passions of the savege in full play, and the spear qui-
vering in his hand ready to heave. It was a critical moment.
I ran to the spot and rushed in between them, not knowing
but I might receive the bullet of the one and the spear of the
other. But the moment I gained the dangerous position,
Yagan, with a dignity and grace I shall never forget, surren-
dered, placing his spear, and with that his life, in my hands;


upon which, at my desire, the soldier returned his musket to
its place in his tent, and in a moment all was quiet; but, like
the troubled state of the ocean in a calm after a storm, there
was a feeling of distrust in the minds of both which made the
prisoners ever after uneasy, and ultimately determined them
upon planning their escape. Sensible that I had saved his life,
Yagan threw his arms around me, and, unable for some time
to express his feelings in words, gave vent to his gratitude in a
flood of tears.
Convinced that I was their friend, but concluding that I was
the only friend they had, as their attachment to me daily in-
creased they became more and more distrustful of those around
them, not considering their lives for a moment safe while the
soldiers resided on the rock to which they were confined.
Against the careless manner in which the island was guarded,
I had repeatedly but in vain remonstrated. At length the very
opportunity they wished for presented itself. The revenue boat,
anchored in the little bay, the crew passed the night on shore,
and the guard as usual went to sleep. About one o’clock, the
prisoners, having ascertained the preceding evening that the
wind was fair, rose, unmoored the boat, and, utter strangers as
they were to the art of the mariner, made their escape. They
reached the main about two hours after daylight; and, by ten
o’clock, having traversed the country for about twenty miles,
crossing both the Canning and the Swan, they were in the
camp of Yellowgongo, relating the adventures of their two
months’ captivity ; about six weeks of which they had spent in
the midst of the ocean, -which neither they nor their fathers
had ever navigated.
Though the grand object I had in view—that of making the
Saviour’s name known to the heathen on the western coast of
Australia—had for the present failed, it was consoling to reflect,
that a foundation was laid for it at some future period; and that
the affair of Carnac was productive of many immediate benefits
to the settlement. Instead of enmity and blood-shedding, the
confidence, friendship, and good-will of the natives were
gained ; while their acquisition of English and the publication
of a vocabulary of their language, led for a time to the most
friendly intercourse between them and the settlers. This state
of things would have been lasting, had it not been interrupted
by one of those wanton acts of cruelty which are ever sure to
involve a community in ruin or endless trouble. The settlers
having taken possession of their fishing stations and hunting
grounds, the fish and the game —the two great sources of their
living—were gone. Starving for want of food, therefore, and
unconscious of any moral wrong in helping themselves to the


sustenance of human life, under such circumstances, wherever
they could find it, a number of them attempted ope morning to
take a little flour from a store in the town of Fremantle to
satisfy the cravings of hunger. While in the act of doing so,
two servants from a neighbouring house, without desiring them
to desist, or giving them any warning, fired upon them and
killed two, of whom the brother of Yagan was one—a most
quiet inoffensive character, who occasionally put on clothing,
worked for the settlers like a common labourer, and was much
esteemed by all that knew' him. The practice of taking life for
life, is alluded to and sanctioned by the Mosaic law ; and, mo-
dified in manner, the slate becoming the executioner instead of
the aggrieved party, is held sacred by modern nations. Yagan,
in obedience to the immemorial usage of his country, felt that
he was bound to avenge the death of his brother; and, joined
by his father and the rest of the tribe, crossed the river for this
purpose at Preston Point about nine o’clock, announcing his
intention to the ferryman, but at the same time assuring him
that he should not be touched. The whole of the natives had
fallen into the error of supposing that the whites were, like
themselves, divided into separate clans, and that the settlers on
the Swan were a distinct tribe from those on the adjoining river.
Remembering, therefore, after having fallen into the hands of
the former, the kindness shown to him at Carnac, he deter-
mined to attack those on the Canning, whom he supposed to
be a part of the tribe that had slain his brother, and from whom
he had besides received many provocations. Such an exercise
of discrimination and judgment in his revenge in the height of
excitement, the most ignorant, unreflecting, and prejudiced,
will, I apprehend, allow to be highly creditable to his under-
standing and his feelings. It exhibits a character very superior
to that of the majority of his enemies, who, born and bred under
similar circumstances, would not have scrupled for a moment
to make the first that came in their way the victim of their ven-
geance. He soon fell in with two men driving a team; and,
in their death, avenged that of those of his tribe who had been
that morning slain at Fremantle.
This deed of blood, dreadful as it was, being perpetrated at
noon-day, and almost in presence of the owner of the team,
was only an act of retaliation ; and bore no comparison to that
of the murder of Major Andre by General Washington, merely
because he was found within the republican lines—a murder
which the British felt themselves bound in duty to avenge on
the most distinguished of their American prisoners.
Such frightful occurrences, happening one after another on
the same day, threw the settlement into a state of consternation,


dismay, and terror. Those in the Council who advocated hos-
tilities, now resumed their influence; a price was again set on
the head of Yagan; his father Midjegoorong was taken and
shot in the midst of the capital; and others were doomed by
proclamation to a similar fate.
These sanguinary proceedings, however, though applauded by
a certain class, were far from being universally approved.
Many were silent; but some of the most respectable of the
settlers, loudly expressed their disapprobation. Even the com-
mon people showed in their conduct towards Yagan, their sense
of the wrongs inflicted upon the Aboriginal inhabitants. The
following is far from being a solitary instance. Pursued by the
police and the soldiers in his own district, he was compelled
to take refuge on the Swan in the district of Weeup. On my
saying to one of the servants in a farming establishment, with
whom he had passed the preceding day, “ Were you not
tempted by the government reward of £3O, to give information
and have him apprehended,” he replied : “ No; nor would ten
times the amount induce me to be accessory to his death.”
About this time he paid a visit to a farm on the Swan for the
purpose of ascertaining whether his father Midjegoorong was
dead or alive. The Gazette thus relates the occurrence :
“ Midjegoorong’s wives and children were marked in a pe-
culiar manner about the face, in white and red streaks, ‘ the
humble trappings of their woe;’ for the absence or death of
their father and chief. They were extremely inquisitive res-
pecting his fate. Their apprehensions, however, were silenced
by one of the servants leading them to understand that he was
sent to Carnac, in a similar manner to that in which Yagan and
other natives were confined a short time ago. They took their
departure, visiting the other settlers and exhibiting the fullest
confidence in them, in happy ignorance of the steps which had
been taken. The blind, however, has since been removed from
their eyes. Mr. Shaw of the Upper Swan having imprudently
disclosed to Yagan himself on the following day that Midje-
goorong had been shot at Perth. llis Honor the Lieutenant-
Governor, who happened casually to be near the residence of
Mr. Shaw, hearing the fact, and sensible of the consequences
of such a communication to Yagan, instantly proceeded to
inquire into the truth of the report; and, finding it confirmed,
hurried down to Perth, where immediate arrangements were
made to increase the military force as far as practicable in that
neighbourhood.”
The following account of an interview with this distinguished
chief, is from the pen of the Attorney-General, the Honourable
G. F. Moore.
r


“ In the present excitement of the public mind, perhaps the
following sketch of a scene which has just occurred here, may
not be uninteresting. A party of natives, under the conduct
and authority of Weeup, have been in the habit for some time
of visiting several settlements in this neighbourhood, and
having conducted themselves in a peaceable and friendly man-
ner, passing harmlessly among our flocks and herds, and
cordially greeting our shepherds, whether man or boy, armed
or unarmed, alone or in company, on all occasions, many of us
thought it better to endeavour to establish this friendly inter-
course, even at the expense of a gratuity which is sometimes
burdensome—whether wisely or not is yet a moot question among
us, and can only be decided by the event. On seeing a party
approach the house, accompanied by my shepherd, I went
towards them wholly unarmed as usual, supposing they were
only my old familiar acquaintances. To my surprise, the first
one I met was Migo, the intimate friend of Munday. On my
looking a little round, I discovered Munday himself at my side.
Suspicion once awakened, I examined the faces more atten-
tively, and at last saw Yagan standing aloof, as it were, under
the safe conduct of Weeup, and watching narrowly my move-
ments and manner of receiving them. I had just been accusing
Migo with having been present at the murder of the men on
the Canning, when my eye fell upon Yagan. I said imme-
diately, ‘ What man is that?’ They all answered, ‘ Boolgat.’
I said‘No! Yagan.’ Seeing that he was known, he stepped
forward, avowing himself, as if to challenge discussion. ‘ Yes,
it is Yagan. # —Fremantle white men shot Domjun, Yagan’s
brother—they shot two black men; and therefore Yagan
speared two white men.’ I said, ‘ But Domjun stole ; there-
fore white men shot him.’ ‘ Yes,’said he, as if he laid little
stress on the theft, ‘ Domjun stole—but, if white men shoot
black men, black men will spear white men—white men shot
Domjun, Yagan’s brother—therefore Yagan speared white men,
but faraway.’ I said, ‘All white men are brethren.’ ‘No,
no,’ from all the natives. ‘Yes! All white men are brethren :
they are all one people. If black men spear one white man,
all white men will be angry —all white men will make war and
shoot.’ ‘lf white men shoot,’ said he, in a friendly tone ‘ black
men will spear.’ Appealing to them all, I said, ‘lf black men
will neither spear white men, nor their cattle, nor steal, white
men will regard them as brethren. Black men, then, may
often hold corroberies, and many white men will shake hands
• Condensed from the broken monosyllabic, yet not less energetic English and
Derbalese in which it was spoken, but which to many would be unintelligible.


with them in token of friendship.’ All immediately ran to
seize my hands, save the moody chief himself. They had
grouped around me, evidently attending to the argument, and
glad of any thing like a friendly pause. Yagan stepped for-
ward, and leaning with his left hand on my shoulder, while he
gesticulated with the right, delivered a sort of recitation,
looking earnestly in my face. I regret that I could not fully
understand it. I thought, from the tone and manner that the
purport of it was this:— ‘ You came to our country —you have
driven us from our haunts, and disturbed us in our occupations.
As we walk in our own country, we are fired upon by the white
men—why should the white men treat us so?’ This song re-
minded me of a chorus in a Greek tragedy, and was commented
upon and explained in this way by the other natives, who
seemed all to act as subordinate characters to Yagan. After a
short interlude, Yagan approached again ; and fixing his eyes
as if to read the countenance, said inquiringly, ‘ Is Midjegoo-
rong shot? or, is he sent to Carnac?’ I felt the question was
full of hazard, and gave no reply. Weeup anxiously asked the
same questions, putting his finger to my ear to know if I heard
or understood him. I answered slowly: ‘The white men are
angry —the Governor is angry.’ My men, however, assured
him that Midjegoorong was sent to Carnac. Yagan continued
to read my countenance; and when he could get no answer
from me, said, with extraordinary vehemence of manner, dis-
tinctness of utterance, and emphasis of tone : ‘ If the white men
shoot Midjegoorong, Yagan will kill three,’ holding up three
fingers. I said, ‘Were Yagan to kill all the white men, the
soldiers would shoot Yagan.’ He scowled a look of daring
defiance, and turned on his heel with an air of ineffable dis-
dain.
“ He was accompanied by a select band from his own tribe,
stood pre-eminent in height among those around him, and
walked very erect. During the greater part of this conference
he held a beautifully tapered and exquisitely pointed spear,
grasped like a stiletto about fourteen inches from the point,
while the shaft lay over his shoulder with a seeming careless-
ness. He evidently dreaded treachery; and was on his guard
against it, taking care not to let the Europeans press on him
too closely, and keeping generally some of the natives between
him and them. Nothing short of an overpowering force, which
I did not possess, or a cold-blooded deliberate treachery, of
which I was not capable, would have sufficed to secure him as
he then stood. 1 may be blamed by some for not having made
an attempt; but, were he who finds fault placed in the same
situation, he must be more or less than a man to act differently.


“ The doctrine of taking life for life, seems perfectly estab-
lished ; and they avow their determination to act upon it.
Though I expressed strong dissent, they seemed thoroughly
satisfied of its propriety.
“ Every one should, therefore, now be on his guard. Yagan
seems to possess the power of übiquity. He has declared, and
his are not idle threats, that he will take three lives for that of
of Midjegoorong,” *
This bold, decided, and fearless patriot, the avenger of his
country’s wrongs, met with a fate not more unexpected than
generally deplored. Thrown off his guard by his generous,
confiding disposition, and the kindness shown to him atCarnac,
he fell by the hands of a worthless workhouse boy. This per-
sonification of ignorance, laziness, and vice, one morning en-
ticed him from those that accompanied him to the side of the
river, under the pretence of assisting him to look for ducks ;
and, when the head of the chief was turned, bringing the muzzle
of his gun, as with pretending carelessness it lay on his arm,
round to the ear of his unsuspecting victim, pulled the trigger,
and treacherously shot him. The report of the musket being
heard by Weeup and others of the Wurerup tribe, who hap-
pened to be close at hand, retribution quickly followed. Before
five minutes had elapsed, the avenging spears of the natives,
exacting the penalty in the death of the blood-stained youth,
hurried his guilty spirit after that of his murdered victim into
another world, there to answer for the crime he had just per-
petrated. The Gazette shall tell the rest of the sad tale ; and,
it will be seen that, though bound to side with those who
advocated sanguinary measures, it, on this occasion, quailed
before public opinion.
“ The affray which led to this horrid catastrophe, and ter-
minated in the death of two natives and the youth Keates, took
place on Thursday last. Keates had frequently expressed a de-
termination to kill Yagan, although in opposition to his master’s
will, with a desire, it is presumed, to obtain the reward.
“ The scene of the murder was a short distance from Mr.
Bull’s residence; and no gentleman, we believe,has been more
anxious to prevent it, having given repeated and positive orders
to his men not to shoot Yagan. * * * *
“ We look with some degree of curiosity for the result of the
death of this chief, to ascertain whether he has left his so-
vereign influence to an equally daring successor. We are in-
clined to believe it will be the case; but if not, a favourable
time has arrived for adopting some decisive and amicable system
of proceeding. Unlike some of our neighbours, we are disposed
to place a certain degree of reliance upon of a native :


we should therefore be glad to hear Weeup’s relation of the
affray. We strongly suspect he will agree with us—that it was a
wild and treacherous act; and not the heroic deed which some
unthinkingly have designated it. The unfortunate youth has
suffered for his temerity, and has entailed upon us a stigma
which it will be the work of time to eradicate. The penalty of
death, we have been led to understand, is attached to crime—
for the effect of example as well as punishment. What a fear-
ful lesson of instruction have we given to the savage! We have
taught him by this act to exercise towards us deceit and
treachery, which, in him, we have daily reproved, and led him
to draw no very favourable conclusions of our moral and physi-
cal superiority. We do not remember to have heard one
instance, in which the Aborigines of this country have abused
our confidence when we have encountered them in the bush.
We must, therefore, again deplore an act which, it appears to
us, will annihilate the surest road to perfect amity—mutual
confidence. We must remember Yagan was killed, after
spending the morning in company with the youth who shot
him, and when upon the point of partaking of his frugal repast,
a portion of which he would not have withheld from the hand
that slew him.”
Thus fell the chief of Beeliar. It is impossible, in con-
templating his melancholy fate, not to call to mind the lamen-
tation of David over the grave of Abner, who was treacherously
slain by Joab, under pretence of avenging the death of his
brother Asahel, who had fallen before him in battle. “ Died
Abner as a fool dieth! Thy hands were not bound, nor thy feet
put in fetters : as a man falleth before wicked men so fellest
thou. And all the people wept again.”
Suffice it to add that one scene of blood followed another, till
Sir J S , returning from England, resumed the reins
of government, and gave an impetus to the evil counsels which
had for some time predominated. The fate of the tribe of Ban-
youla, on the Murray, cannot be related without exciting feel-
ings of sorrow and indignation. In The Gazette of February 8,
1834, maybe found the relations which they were anxious to
form with the settlement. In the leading article, they and their
country are thus mentioned :
“ An important discovery has been made within the last
fortnight on the Murray, at the instance of the natives in that
quarter. An intimation, it appears, was conveyed to Mr. Peel
and Captain Byrne by the natives, that a considerable number
of cattle had been seen on the banks of the Murray, which led
to an inquiry and a determination on the part of those gentle-
men to proceed to the spot which was pointed out; and, after


continuing their journey for about sixteen miles, the reports
were found to be perfectly accurate, several head of cattle being
found feeding upon a pasturage abundantly luxuriant. The
number, we are informed, was about eight or ten; but a
district was pointed out by the guides at a distance not far re-
moved from the spot at which they had arrived, where a vast
number had collected. The description we have from Captain
Byrne of the country in which the cattle were seen, is highly
flattering,—and the anxiety evinced by the natives that we
should settle down with them on this desirable tract of country,
may relieve the qualms of conscience which Mr. , evinces
upon the subject of our taking possession of their lands. They
have not confined their invitation to the settlers on the Murray,
but have solicited that it may be extended to our more popu-
lous neighbours of Perth and Fremantle.”
Does ancient or modern history furnish a single instance of
such kindness, confidence, and generous feeling on the part of
one nation towards another, as that exhibited on this occasion
by these savages towards a people to whom they were utter
strangers? Dreadfully was their liberality requited by the
white savages with whom they had to deal. Can it be believed,
that a few months after this spontaneous and friendly invitation,
to share with them their patrimonial inheritance and all they
possessed in the world, Sir J S , accompanied by a
strong detachment of soldiers and police, went for the express
purpose of taking possession of the country ; and, falling, with-
out any provocation whatever, upon its peaceable and un-
offending owners, while apparently employed in fishing, nearly
exterminated the whole tribe. The interesting picture of the
kindly disposition of these people just before given in The
Gazette , now stared the perpetrators of this revolting massacre
full in the face. In giving to the public the official details of
the affair, it consequently became necessary that the organ of
government should change its tone ; and, in order to justify the
foul deed, blacken their character as much as possible by enume-
rating the acts of retaliation to which some of them had formerly
been driven, but carefully passing over the numerouspro vocations
they had received in the wanton cruelties practised upon them.
Such was the fate of a people who, influenced by feelings of
kindness and humanity, had often saved the lives of Mr. H—’s
children in a lonely unprotected spot, fifty miles from the capital
of the colony, by furnishing them with food iu his absence, when
they chanced to discover that they were famishing with hunger.*
•The difficulties of both land and water carriage in a new colony, will often
prevent an anxious parent from returning with a supply of provisions to his
family for days—sometimes weeks—together.


The contemplation of the scene of carnage—even as given in
The Gazette, which told but half of the tragic story —nearly
a whole tribe, slaughtered indiscriminately while calling for
mercy; and when they could find none, plunging into the river,
trying in vain to conceal themselves under its waters from
the unremitting fire of the merciless foe that lined its banks
—would be heart rending. Male and female, old and young,
were left in gory masses on the ensanguined earth and in the
flood. Not a man that fell into the hands of the murderers
escaped. Deeply was the British flag stained ; and long will
the affair of Pinjara cause Derbal to mourn.
Of the common murders, retaliations, skirmishes, and more
serious contests which took place, from the commencement of
the settlement down to this the tenth year of it's history, I make
no mention. But I trust I have said enough—enough to render
further evidence of the injustice and barbarous cruelty with
which the Aboriginal inhabitants of Australia have been treated,
unnecessary. Here therefore I drop the veil till the day of
doom, when many will have a fearful account to render.
The following papers, which made their appearance amidst
the scenes just described, will probably be perused with some
interest.


A wolf and a lamb, it is said, once happened to meet at a
stream, where they both came to drink. The former accused
the latter of muddying the water, and rendering it offensive to
his taste. In vain did the innocent lamb point out the impos-
sibility of sustaining the accusation, by remarking that the
water did not flow from him to his accuser, but from his accuser
to him. The wolf, determined upon a quarrel, was regardless
of the truth or falsehood of the charge. The complaint was a
mere pretence to palliate the determination of falling upon his
victim. The simile is strikingly illustrative of the conduct of
the British in Australia.
Punic faith was the proverb and the watchword of Rome,
when she wished to crush her rival. But had the annals of
Carthage—or that of those who shared her fate—escaped the
storm which razed her walls and laid her prostrate in deso-
lation, Roman perfidy would have been as proverbial as Punic
faith. The history of exterminated nations may perish with
their names. It matters not. A chronicle of the ills and
wrongs inflicted upon the unfortunate, though lost on earth,
will one day be found in the records of heaven.
It may be farther remarked, that when one state resolves on
the conquest or destruction of another, the cry is raised : A
breach of treaty, unreasonable demands, unprovoked aggres-
sion, or an insult offered to the national flag; and the affair
is painted in the strongest colours in order to justify an appeal
to arms. Nothing of this kind being chargeable on the Ab-
original inhabitants of Australia, who were not even aware of
the existence of the British isles till British arms gleamed on
their shores, those who advocated the adoption of an hostile
position towards them, were driven to the alternative of invent-
ing some view of the case that would justify such a line of
conduct. The plan hit upon was to render them odious to the
public at home, by representing them in the worst light. Nor
were facilities wanting for misrepresentation. The main body
of the settlers, located in the capital or at the port where they
landed, and often afraid to go a mile from either, knew nothing
whatever of the people whose country they came unceremo-
niously to occupy. Conscious that they were aggressors, their
imaginations conjured up a thousand frightful ideas respecting
the rightful owners of the soil, and what they had to expect at


their hands.* Taking advantage of this feeling, and alarmed
at the appearance of a better one beginning to spring up, it was
determined, by those who ought to have acted a different part,
to embody all that could be said against them in an article
which was published in The Gazette. So miserable, however,
was this attempt, that the Editor himself candidly acknowledged
that the writer by no means handled the subject with the ability
which it required. They were described as being ferocious,
cunning, cowardly, dishonest, contemptible, and destitute of
every virtue, moral or military, that could command esteem.
To these misrepresentations the following reply was sent; but
the Editor refused to publish it, being, as is supposed, forbidden
by authority.
• Walking from Perth to Fremantle once, on descending an elevation into an
open valley near the sea-beech, I beheld two lawyers apparently wrestling with
a grass tree. My surprise was excited. As I approached, I perceived that they
were trying to uproot and throw it down. This not being an action of trover but
one of assault, and seeing the harmless tree exposed to the vengeance of the law,
I was induced to inquire what offence it had committed ? They informed me
that, mistaking it for a native, it had more than once dreadfully frightened them,
and that they were determined it should never do so again. These redoubted
champions of the oppressed and the oppressor, so bold amidst courts and clients,
were terrified at the very idea of meeting an Aborigine.
The following account, so illustrative of the feeling which pervaded the settle-
ment from its commencement, is from the journal of the leader of a parly npo n
an exploring tour in his own words,
“At midnight we were aroused by the most alarming cries— ‘ The natives, the
natives are among us 1’ I started up, and saw a dark shadow passing swiftly
near me. All were now awake, and running against eacli other, scarcely com-
prehending the cause of the alarm or the extent of the danger; but adding their
shouts to the general uproar. A voice now cried, ‘ I have him: I’ve got him fast.’
‘Where? where? Blood an’oons, where?’ cried another close beside me, on
his knees, with his gun pointed from his shoulder, —we had overturned each
other. The intimation of a capture implying the certainty of an enemy in the
camp, added to our confusion ; figures were seen running to and fro—who could
know in the dark where to retreat ? or whether the spear would strike in front or
in rear?— ‘ twas dreadful 1 Pinjarar and blood-thirsty retaliation, were incur
minds. The fire at length brightened a little, and showed the position of the
party —some were on the ground, dead or dying, peritaps—one was roaring
dreadfully. To our inexpressible delight, we got together unhurt, and no
strangers were seen. ‘But where is the captured native!’ we all cried. It
proved to be only a grass tree, closely hugged by one of the parly. A dream
had caused the whole alarm; and the sharp shrubs around accounted lor the
fancied pricking of the spears.”


TO THE EDITOR OF THE GAZETTE.
g IRj —Those who are inimical to the moral and religious im-
provement of the native tribes, have opened their first line of
batteries upon me. Yet their fire is so feeble that it would not
be worth returning, were it not for the consideration that the
best of causes, undefended, may suffer in the minds of the
ignorant and unreflecting. In the estimation of the multitude,
silence is defeat.
Your correspondent conceives that the way to obtain a cor-
rect view of the character of the Aboriginal inhabitants in
private life, is, to pass by all that is to be admired in their dis-
position, all that is commendable in their conduct, and to fix
our eyes upon their vices only. What would the colonists say
—what would the world think—were he to refer us to the ca-
lendar of Newgate for the real character of the British people !
In public life, he severely censures their demonstrations of
hostility. Would he then have us to take the character of the
nations of Europe from the acts of an infuriated soldiery in the
heat of a military contest ? He forgets that we have provoked
these people to hostilities. Taking possession of the country,
and also destroying the fish and the game, we leave them no
alternative but to resist or to perish.
But he complains of their mode of warfare. Did he never
hear of the stratagems of war—a branch of military tactics jus-
tified by ancients and moderns, and practised by civilised as
well as savage nations. Had he been a Dane, in days that are
gone, he would have complained bitterly of the ferocity of the
British when resisting Danish invasion; and Alfred, at one
time hiding himself in a marsh, and at another entering the
enemy’s camp in disguise, would have been pronounced by the
enemies of the Derbalese, a cunning and cowardly savage.
Such, according to their mode of reasoning, would have been the
character of a prince justly and universally admired—a pattern
of every virtue, moral and military—an example to kings and a
model to Christians.
Is it not amusing to hear the invaders of a country complain-
ing of the manner in which the inhabitants attack their enemies
and defend themselves? The guerilla war, in which Spain
repelled the invader of her throne, was lauded from one
extremity of Europe to another.
I allow, nothowe ver in the sense of your correspondent,thatsome
of the natives may at times be guilty of theft. A people who know
not what private property means, are in this respect, like chil-
dren. Having neither barn house nor store, and living as the
fowls of heaven do, to help themselves to food, where ver they find
it, is to them as natural as to drink at the brook and to breathe
the air; and to take their lives for so doing, without any attempt
to instruct them in the moral impropriety of the act, is just about
as rational as it would be to put children to death for fancying


any thing they may chance to see in the house of a friend. But
are civilized nations free from this vice ? If so, what are we to
understand by locks and keys, bolts and bars, watches and
watch-dogs—so common in Christian countries —and the mul-
titudes of police maintained at a vast expense throughout
Europe ? To look nearer home, what are we to understand by
the jails of Perth and Fremantle ? Were these erected for
black or for white thieves ?
Colonel Collins, in his account of the first settlement near
Botany Bay, when describing the natives, says:—“ Their spears,
fiz-gigs, gum, and other articles, they were accustomed to leave
under the rocks, or loose and scattered about the beach.” A
recent writer adds: “It would be well for the world, if a little of
this savage honesty could be imported into even the most civil-
ized society; and they who are accustomed to moralize on such
matters, will regret that a people so perfectly unsuspicious,
should, at their very first intercourse with civilized men, have
“ fallen among thieves?”* And as deeply is it to be regretted
that the natives of Swan River, equally undeserving of such
a fate, should have fared no better.
A moment’s reflection may satisfy the most prejudiced that
covetousness, the root of this vice, thrives in civilized society,
wherever the heart is not under the power of divine influence,
even more than among the savages of the desert. But I trust
the day is not far distant when Christianity will bear the same
testimony to her converts in Australia that she once did to her
converts from among the thieves of classical Greece: “And such
were some of you ; but ye are washed; but ye are sanctified.”f
Your correspondent is far from being happy in the choice of
his figures for illustration on the subject of martial courage.
Did he never see a coat-of-arms ? If not, let him go to the
Herald’s office, and he will find that most of the repre-
sentations of military virtue, there displayed by the great and
the noble, are taken from the various orders of the brute
creation—such as lions, tigers, bears, wolves, foxes, and dogs,
to whom he likens the Aboriginal inhabitants. He could not,
therefore, pay a higher compliment to the warriors of Derbal,+
than thus unwittingly to rank them with the nobility of his
mother country.
Nor is he more fortunate in the selection of his facts. If a
native had the boldness single-handed to make a stand against
a whole party of British officers, it was no very contemptible
exhibition of martial courage: and if, as is supposed, his family
were in the valley behind him, the act displayed a concentration
* Picture of Australia. f I. Cor. vi. 9 —ll.
J The native name of the country.


of virtues of no ordinary kind. It was the husband, the father,
the patriot—determined, unsupported, to sacrifice his life in
defence of his wife, his children, and his country.
History contains few instances of courage more striking than
that recently displayed by Yagan, when, presenting himself at
head quarters,, and brandishing his spear in the presence of
numbers, he warned Mr. Watson of the consequences of again
threatening to shoot him. This occurred in your own presence,
Sir, in the street in front of The Gazette office, in the Very
midst of the capital of the settlement. Is conduct such as
this “ cowardly, cunning, and like that of the secret assassin?”
Let assassinating Italy, the favourite resort of the fashionables
of Europe, and which no doubt stands high in the estimation
of your correspondent, blush at the recital.
I was one of the earliest arrivals in the settlement. Leaving
my servants at the embouchure of the river, I set out almost
immediately after landing, quite alone, and pushed into the
forest. After penetrating along the right bank to the distance of
about thirty miles, I lost my way. To add to the comfort of my
reflections I was totally unarmed —arms I never carry —and
wandered about till all at once I found myself on the verge of
a native encampment and the chief of Mooro approaching me.
His tribe stood behind him, his arm was raised, and the spear,
poised and ready to heave, was quivering in his hand. There
was only a moment between me and death. But the instant
he recognised the symbol of peace, he dropped his spear, be-
haved with the greatest kindness, and conducted me out of the
thicket in which I was bewildered. Had I fallen into the
hands of white savages, under similar circumstances, my life,
I am satisfied, would have been the forfeit of my temerity.
I once saw a party of these people throw down their spears,
rush to the bank of the river, seize two men who had fallen
into it, and haul them out, their countenances showing at first
the deepest concern, and afterwards the liveliest joy, evincing
the pleasure they felt in saving their lives. As your corres-
pondent seems to be one of those ignorant sceptics who either
affect incredulity, or whose narrow intellects will not allow
them to believe any thing that occurs beyond the limited circle
in which they move, he may see the two men, Henry Bourne
and Richard Thacker, both of whom are now in Perth, and
learn the tale from their own lips.
In humanity, their white brethren would do honor to them-
selves by following their example. At an interview held with
them at Woburn Park, at which I was present, Mr. Bull was
about to shoot a bird for them; but, notwithstanding their con-
tinual want of food, and the interest they take in witnessing the


effect of fire-arms, they requested him in this instance lo forbear,
pointing out that the bird he was about to kill had young ones.
Time would fail me to enumerate the many instances of dis-
interested benevolence shown by them to the invaders of their
country. They repeatedly recovered strayed stock and brought
them to the owners, carrying in their arms the kids and the
lambs which they found, while they themselves were wandering
through the forest in search of food and famishing with hunger.
They treated the lost wanderer with the kindest hospitality,
dividing their humble repast with him, allowing him to rest for
the night in their camp, and conducting him on his way in the
morning. They held the house and the property of the lonely
settler sacred, aiding him in his toils when present, and sharing
their food with his children when absent. They rescued the
fainting soldier and the emaciated explorer from the mazes of
the forest; and, not only saved them from the horrors of
famine, but restored them to their families, their friends, and
the settlement. To examples of virtue so remarkable, and
taking into account the relation in which we stand towards
them, unparalleled in the history of nations, Captain Banister,
Mr. Hall, Mr. J, Butler, and many others can bear testimony.
Nor are these splendid instances of a friendly, generous, and
noble mind, peculiar to the tribes immediately around us- The
subject of the following narrative presents us with a picture of
moral excellence which will probably excite universal astonish-
ment, and induce the question, Is there one of the countless
multitudes of that charming sex who adorn the parks, grace
the assemblies, and form the source of domestic happiness in
Britain’s favoured isle, that would, if born in a barbarous land
and exposed to the degrading influence of savage life, exhibit a
disposition so amiable, so interesting, and so worthy of admira-
tion. Thedeistwill probably point to the example with exultation.
But Christianity triumphs over the system of the sceptic, not
only in the heavenly influence which renders that which she
finds good, better, but in the omnipotent power which, melting
the heart of stone into tenderness, transforms a character the
most depraved into one of angelic purity and loveliness. This
—far beyond the limits of her art —the goddess of reason
cannot accomplish. She may conceal the deformity of vice,
but she can neither elevate the soul nor change the heart.
Destitute of ability either to improve or convert, she leaves
human nature just as she finds it, whether exhibiting some faint
impression of the creator’s workmanship, or thoroughly marred
by sin and Satan. It receives no plastic touch from the stiff
hand, no inspiring influence from the cold, lips, no heavenly
animation from the lifeless form of that phantom of the infidel's
imagination, natural religion.


The picture of an Australian savage, thus drawn by a travel-
ler* in New South Wales, I give in his own words.
“ A female of one of the Aboriginal tribes in the Murrum-
bidgee country, formed an attachment to a convict, named
Tallboy, who, becoming a bushranger, was for a long time
sought after by the police for the many atrocities he had com-
mitted, but always eluded pursuit. This female concealed him
with true native ingenuity, and baffled his pursuers —she would
fish and hunt for him, whilst he remained secluded in the
retreat she chose. She often visited the stock-keeper’s huts at
the different stations, and whatever provision she received from
them was immediately conveyed to the unworthy object of her
devoted attachment. Although many knew that she was privy
to his concealment, yet it was found impossible to elude her
vigilance, by following her, and thus discover his retreat:—
she evaded all attempts and seemed ever watchful for his safety,
knowing the fate that awaited him, if taken. Neither threats
nor promises of>rewards—enough to excite the cupidity of
any individual, but one in whom a higher feeling was para-
mount, — could induce her even to acknowledge she was
acquainted with the place of his concealment, much more be-
tray it. Nay, it has occurred more than once, when there was
a fear of discovery, that she has given voluntary information
to the police of having seen him thirty or fifty miles distant,
when, in fact, his place of concealment was in the immediate
neighborhood. The brute, however, manifested no kind red affec-
tion with this female, but would frequently beat and ill use her.
“ Whilst she administered to him the refreshing cup of kind-
ness, he bestowed on her misery in return. He had in one
instance given way to his natural brutish disposition by ill
treating the being who had done so much for him, —just as he
was on the verge of discovery, indeed had himself given up all
hopes of escape —when she again saved him, by engaging to
point out to the police his place of retreat, and absolutely led
them away under that pretence, in a contrary direction, afford-
ing her paramour both time and opportunity to seek out a safer
asylum. When she arrived with the police at the spot she had
informed them he last was, he was of course not there, and a
strict search in the vicinity was equally unsuccessful. She
then left them to continue their search after the criminal,
pretending to know nothing further respecting his place of
concealment. At last he was captured by venturing out too
boldly during her absence, was tried, condemned, and expiated
his offences on the scaffold at Sydney.
“ She wished to follow him, on hearing he was a prisoner,
but that was impossible: so, reclaimed by her tribe, she was
* Bennett.


obliged to become an unwilling wife of one of the blacks. It is
but too well known in what degradation the female sex are held
among savage nations, so different from the deference and respect
iustly given to that portion of the creation in civilized life.
“ This unfortunate female was ordered by her husband, whose
word is law, to follow him, at a time when she was rendered
incapable by illness;—on her hesitating he struck her with sa-
vage barbarity with his tomahawk so severely over the head
and legs that she fainted from the loss of blood. She was found
lying on the ground and taken to the house of a settler residing
on the banks of the Murrumbidgee, and every kindness and
attention shown her; but after lingering and suffering severe
mental and bodily anguish, she expired.’’
Read this narrative again; and say, Is there to be found in the
annals of Rome or Greece a character so transcendently excellent ?
Away with dissimilation. If ye pretend to doubt the sunburnt
skin of the Australians, apply the lance to their veins. Even
this is needless. Ye have already gone to the fountain head and
thrust the pointed steel into their hearts. Examine the crim-
son fluid, as it pours out—there can be no mistake here—and
say, Is it not blood of your own? Yes. The bleeding victims
of your avarice are your brethren! To slander an innocent
race, in order to justify their extermination, is as cruel as it is
cowardly and base. Glory in your apparent security ; only
flatter not yourselves that vengeance will allow the guilty to
escape both in this world and the next. Even in life’s short
span, ye will have some cause to repent. Ye may disregard the
sleeping tribunals of your country; but ye shall not escape the
infamy which your deeds justly merit.
Farther evidence in favour of the disposition and conduct
manifested by the Aboriginal inhabitants, under circumstances
the most trying to human nature, I conceive to be unnecessary.
A thousand instances might be added; but ten thousand could
not be more decisive of the question. I have seen them in al-
most all the common walks of life—l have met them accident-
ally in the lonely desert—l have met them by appointment—l
have walked and conversed with them I have eaten, I have
drunk, I have slept with them—l have performed the meanest
offices for them when sick —I have taken the spear from them
when quivering with rage—they have bathed my neck with
tears of gratitude— and, after all this, am Ito be told that I
have no premises on which to ground my conclusions and form
an estimate of their character?
The enumeration of their vices I leave to their enemies. The
reader may rest assured they will be duly announced from time
to time, with all the misrepresentation that calumny dares to
invent, by those, who wish to possess their inheritance, even if


drenched with the blood of its owners. When Ahah covets the
vineyard of his neighbor, the Jezebel of power will soon
find out a way of putting him into undisturbed possession.
Subornation, to set Naboth on high, will be easy; false wit-
nsses will not be wanting among the sons of Belial; and the
multitude, ever governed by ignorance, prejudice, and interest,
will readily pursue him to death. But will the ministers of the
gospel—will Elijah be silent—surely there is one among them—
and will the God of Elijah look on with indifference when a
whole nation are defamed, disinherited, and slain ?
Often have I wished that those who have heads to understand
and hearts to feel, were but to see the children of these savages
—these interesting little prattlers—when, hastening to meet
me in the forest, they group around me, some laying hold
of my hands, some hanging on the skirts of my coat, and others
running before to announce my arrival in the camp. Who could
avoid calling to mind the scene in Galilee; or resist the convic-
tion that the Saviour of men had these also in his eye, when he
said, “ Suffer little children to come unto me and forbid them
not.”
I was annoyed at hearing it continually asserted that the
language of this people is an unintelligible jargon. I have
proved that it is not: and that to obtain a knowledge of it is
far from impracticable. It is an interesting language one
that will richly repay the labour of acquisition both to the
Christian and the man of letters.
My enemies may sneer, lampoon, and defame. I regard
them not. My endeavours to prevent a war of extermination,
and the difficulties I have had to contend with in paving the
way for the heralds of salvation to these unfortunate savages, I
leave to the missionary and the future historian. In their
hands lam not afraid of my reputation. But honor and dis-
honor, evil report and good report, often fall to the lot of the
Christian; and to him they are all alike.
The language of Herbal, difficult as it is, is, to a certain
extent, laid open ; the manners and moral condition of its in-
habitants are unveiled; a foundation is laid for the propagation
of Christianity on the Australian continent; and, whether I
live to see it or not, the superstructure will rise ; and I rejoice
in the anticipation. Hell may stir itself and men may oppose;
but neither the malice of the one nor the rage of the other, will
prevent the happy consummation. The decree has passed the
lips of the Most High.* Another continent will, ere long, be
added to the empire of heaven—Christians will hail the intelli-
gence with joy, and angels will celebrate the event in hymns
of triumph. April, 1833.
* See the second Psa!m.


A GLANCE at the MANNERS and LANGUAGE of the Aboriginal
inhabitants of Western Australia—a paper which appeared in
The Gazette of the colony in 1833.
The Aboriginal inhabitants of this country are a harmless,
liberal, kind hearted race; remarkably simple in all their
manners. On our first settling among them, they not only
abstained from all acts of hostility, but showed us every kind-
ness in their power. Though we were invaders of their
country, and they had therefore a right to treat us as enemies,
when any of us lost ourselves in the bush and were thus com-
pletely in their power, these noble minded people shared with
us their scanty and precarious meal, suffered us to rest for the
night in their camp, and in the morning directed us on our
way. It is unnecessary to adduce instances in support of facts
attested by many witnesses and well known to the community.
Such was the treatment we received from a people who,
cradled in storms the moment they come into being, and se-
cluded from other nations by an uninviting, unsheltered,
and dangerous coast, seem for ages to have had no inter-
course with the rest of the world. In simplicity of man-
ners, generousness of disposition, and firmness of character,
they present us with a striking likeness to the picture drawn
of the ancient Caledonians, Were the disbelievers in the
authenticity of Ossian to become acquainted with them, they
would be almost persuaded to adopt the opposite opinion; so
greatly do these inhabitants of the Australian forests resemble
the race whose deeds were sung by the bard of Morven.
The sable tribes of Derbal, it must be allowed, yield to the
ancient clans of the north in point of cleanliness and ingenuity.
But the former arise? from the custom, perhaps the necessity,
in the absence of clothing, of anointing themselves with oil—•
a practice by the by common to the most venerable nations of
antiquity—and the latter from their mode of living, the climate,
and the nature of the country. The powers of the human
mind, so far as mechanical science is concerned, can be called
forth only by agriculture and commerce. These, however,
are neither a commercial, an agricultural, nor even a pastoral
people. They live entirely by the chase; differing in this
respect from all the nations of antiquity with whose history
we are acquainted, and resembling the Americans only. The
pastoral life was common, even when mankind were most
H


remarkable for the simplicity of their manners, and in coun-
tries where agriculture was unknown. But these people, not
having a single domesticated animal, are utter strangers to the
concerns of civil life. They are, in fact, distinguished from
brutes only by the erectness of their form, their reasoning
powers, the gift of language, and that universal characteristic
of the human race, dominion over the other creatures that
inhabit the globe. The reasoning faculty, however, and the
gift of language, are so allied to instinct and inarticulate sound
that they can scarcely be said to be distinguishing character-
istics, when not called into exercise by the attractive scenes
of civilized life, or displayed in full operation on terrestrial
and celestial objects. Man, therefore, the head of crea-
tion, made originally only a little lower than the angels,
here retains no trace of his high origin, by which he may be
singled out from the animals over whom it was decreed that
he should exercise sovereign control, but that of his personal
figure. If Ovid was a stranger to revelation, one would be
tempted to think that a ray of light from heaven must have
shot across his mind when he uttered these striking lines:
Pronaque cum spectent animalia caetera terrain,
Os, homini sublime declit; coelumque tureri
Jussit, et erectos ad sidera tollere vullus.
Whilst other creatures towards the earth look down.
He gave to man a front sublime, and raised
His nobler view to ken the starry heaven.
Since the Aborigines of this country neither sow nor reap,
they have no need of agricultural implements. Strangers from
infancy to the luxuries of civil life, the fineness of the climate
renders them equally indifferent to houses and clothing. Even
in fishing, they use neither seine nor rod; and in hunting they
require neither horses nor fire arms. A spear, eight feet long
and little more than an inch in diameter, furnishes them with
food, and forms the whole of their materiel for war. Every
plain, as well as every shee't of water, supplies their commissa-
riat. Their rivers abound with fish and their forests with game.
Their time is therefore spent in moving from place to place as
inclination may prompt, or hunting and fishing require, and
in paying or receiving visits from the neighboring tribes. The
kangaroo, the opossum, the emu, the swan, the pelican, the
bustard, the duck, the pigeon, the quail, the frog, the grub,
the dyergee,* the yandyeedee, the boom, and the beanboorabe-
rang,t each furnishes its number of repasts at the proper season.
Many of my readers, I may venture to say, would not fancy
some things in such a bill of fare, if presented to them even in
* Zamia spiralis. f Diosoorea.


the bush. Whether the mind be endowed with a faculty of
taste, and whether that faculty exclusively governs us in the
articles of food, clothing, furniture, architecture, painting, and
other things, are questions that have never yet been satisfac-
torily determined. Taste seems to manifest itself in a preference
or selection of what is agreeable to the ear, the eye, the touch,
the smell, and the palate, and consequently does not exercise
any influence over us in the common wants of life. In these,
necessity prompts and then avails itself of the first suitable
thing that comes to hand. So far discrimination is all
that is necessary. It is only when there is a variety, and
therefore room for selection, that the province of taste begins.
Since all minds, however, are not finely attuned or properly
constituted, what appears the most agreeable is not always the
most excellent. Hence reason, and reason only can ultimately
decide ; and, in order to a just determination, nature tbe never-
failing and only safe guide in all cases must be consulted. No
decision that clashes with her laws can be correct. Taste then
appears to be the power of selecting what is agreeable, subject
to reason under the guidance of nature. But taste is seldom
consulted in any of the affairs of life. Her place is generally
usurped by custom, which rules according to the tyrannical
dictates of usage. The repetition of melted butter with almost
every dish at an English table, is as offensive to a Frenchman
as the never ending use of oil at a French table is to an English-
man. In each country the stomach is generally loaded with
what is customarily eaten, heedless of the constitution and
without any reference whatever to propriety or to health.
Sailors inform us, that no pancakes can equal those done on the
surface of a potful of boiling train oil from whale blubber. The
savage, whose only concern is, not to pamper his appetite, but
to supply the wants of nature, will not scruple to eat a piece of
a whale, if it chance to come in his way when he is hungry ;
and were he to see an Englishman eating fat pork, he would
probably attribute his predilection for the one and his dislike to
the other as much to habit as to taste. That which nourishes
without injuring the digestive powers, may be pronounced the
most wholesome food; and, therefore, whether fine or coarse in
its appearance, will be invariably selected by good taste. If
the simple and limited supply of his food, leaves the savage
without any room for the exercise of this faculty, subject to
reason, he has the consolation of knowing that fce acts under
the guidance of nature, the parent of taste, and that she will not
permit him to eat any thing pernicious—an exemption which
those that imagine they fare better amidst an endless variety
and profusion, cannot boast.


The personal appearance of the Aboriginal inhabitants fur-
nishes conclusive evidence that, though a precarious supply of
food may at times be accompanied with inconvenience, occasional
inanition is far less injurious to health than the constant reple-
tion of a richly furnished table, which never fails to draw after
it in its train of consequences the attendance of the physician
and the apothecary. So equally does the Deity, holding human
contrivances in derision, distribute human happiness to civilized
and to savage.
It is not a little surprising that a people so unceremonious in
the articles of their food, should have a greater horror of the
dog fish than that entertained even by Europeans. Such a
coincidence in the antipathies of nations so wide apart and in
other respects so dissimilar, is remarkable; and, in whatever it
may have originated, proves that the aversion is ancient and
universal.
The rivers of Derbal are, in many places, easily forded; and,
abounding with large and wadable estuaries, in which the finny
tribes of the deep sport in myriads, are admirably adapted to
spear fishing. Hence, there being few islands on the coast, the
Derbalese have not the least inducement to attempt navigation.
Even swimming is unknown among them. They have been
seen to paddle themselves across deep water with their hands,
where the distance from bank to bank was short; but of the
art of swimming they are entirely ignorant.
It is therefore not to be wondered at if a people, whose mode
of life is so simple, and whose wants are so few and so easily
supplied, should be found destitute of mechanical knowledge.
Where one accustomed to the luxuries of life, could not contrive
to live a day, nature, at the mandate of Him whose providence
watches over every branch of the human family, brings forth
annually for these inhabitants of the woods an abundant supply.
Never Were the words of the poet more strikingly exemplified ;
Man wants but little here below ;
Nor wants that little long.
The apparent absence of ingenuity in these people, is there-
fore evidently occasioned by the nature of the country, the
climate, and their mode of living ; and is not to be attributed
; to any defect, physical, merttal, or moral in their constitution.
But if we do not find in Derbal the halls of the Celtic and Gothic
•nations, in which the shell of joy circulated, or the high
-mounted car -in which they rushed -to battle, in other respects
they greatly resemble those nations, particularly the ancient
Caledonians. Like them, they are formed into distinct tribes
who have their particular districts and whose chiefs have but


a limited authority, excepting in war or affairs of immemorial
usage. Like them, they fight with the spear, are often found
in the chase, and are fond of music and poetry. They resemble
them, too, in their religious notions; for, though they seem to
have some idea of the existence of a supreme being, it is accom-
panied with so much scepticism that they have neither priest
nor altar, neither temple nor worship.
They are all perfectly naked. But the chiefs and the more
elderly of the men carry a kangaroo skin thrown over their
shoulders, to spread on the ground under them at night in cold
damp weather ; and the married women have one each, made
into a convenient form to carry'their infants on their backs.
They are not remarkable for stature; and instances of corpu-
lency are rare. The tribes in this part of the settlement, are
well limbed and finer made than those to the south. But the
women are utterly destitute of beauty of countenance and
symmetry of person. I have seen but one that could be called
a handsome woman.
There are instances of bigamy among them; and I believe poly-
gamy is not uncommon. Consequently jealousy, the invariable
attendant on such manners, frequently burns like fire in the
breasts of the men; and, as they have no seraglio to guard the
chastity of their wives, the life of the frail and unfortunate fair
One, I fear, too often falls a sacrifice to her imprudence. The
practice of spearing their females whenever they offend them,
is cruel. . How much is woman, in every part of the world
where it prevails, indebted to the benign influence of Chris-
tianity.
The fingers, not enabling them to go farther than a single
decimal in the process of arithmetic, their ideas of figures are
limited to ten. For any number, definite or indefinite, beyond
that, they hold up both hands.
The manner in which they count time, is worthy of observa-
tion. They do not, like European nations, compute by days
but by nights. The distance from one place to another, is not
With them a journey of so many days but of so many nights or
sleeps, making the interval, or rather the act of repose the term
of enumeration, and evidently reckoning the day, not from
'Sunrise to sunrise, but from sunset to sunset. This is perhaps
one Of the most remarkable instances of ancient manners now
'any where to be found; and exactly agrees with the account
“which the scriptures give us of the computation of time when it
first began. It is not SaM: “ And the morning and the evening
were the first day;” but, “And the evening and the morning
were the first day.”
The practice of polygamy, the custom of avenging every


visit which the king of terrors pays them on a neighbor-
ing tribe, thus causing a double mortality, together with
the endless and sanguinary contests to which it gives rise, will
account for their limited numbers compared with the extent
of the country they occupy.
Greatly do philosophers err, when they eulogize the life led
by a barbarian in a state of nature, as the perfection of human
happiness. The uncontrolled freedom of the savage is em-
bittered by the dangers, as well as the privations, to which he
is ever exposed. The gleam of pleasure that occasionally breaks
upon his countenance only resembles, in its momentary stay,
the forked lightning which, darting from the cloud of darkness
and of death in which he is enveloped, continually plays
around him, as if sporting with his unhappy situation.
The profession of surgeon or physician is unknown among
them. When they are sick, they sometimes resort to charms,
rubbing the part affected, drawing the hand away, and snapping
the finger and thumb. Their practical operations are confined
to pressure and bleeding. If it be a pain in the head or bowels,
the patient, lying down on his back, desires some one to stand
on his forehead or belly, and press with so much weight as he
is able to bear. They never open the veins; but topical
bleeding, performed with a sharp stone, is common among
them. There are few without scars from spear wounds, a
proof of the frequency of their wars. Their flesh, however, heals
readily; which may be attributed to the absence of. spirituous
liquors and their temperate mode of living.
I have already observed that they are formed into distinct
tribes; and that the whole country is divided into districts.
But, though they have places to which they are accustomed to
resort for encampment,they have no fixed habitation, and there-
fore move about from place to place, generally in large bodies.
The only shelter they ever contrive from the weather in the
most inclement season, consists of a few sticks thrust into the
ground to windward of the fire-place, in the form of a semi-
circle, gathered at the top like a bee-hive, and covered with
green boughs or pieces of bark.
Private property seems to be utterly unknown among them.
The game and the fish of the district are considered the common'
property of all its inhabitants; and, as every dispute between
the different tribes relative to their respective boundaries or
encroachments thereon, is decided by the spear, they are utter
strangers to the quirks and quibbles »f the law.


Their love of the desert and their unwillingness to adopt the
habits of civil society, surprise many, and are sometimes urged
as proofs of inferiority of species. Those who thus reason forget
that the upper classes in civilized life are involved in the stigma.
Whence that universal and ardent pursuit after riches which
characterizes all nations ? Does it not originate in a desire of
freedom, independence, and idleness ? The charms of travel-
ling, sporting, fox hunting, and gambling, are so irresistible as
to become objects of the highest ambition to men, even under
the blaze of Revelation; and yet we affect to wonder at the
attachment of the unenlightened savage to a hunting mode of
life, which, by a less circuitous and more certain route, puts
him at once in possession of that exemption from servitude and
control which is so eagerly coveted by all mankind. The
amusements, pleasures, and advantages of the chase, imme-
diately supplying his indispensable wants, renders it to the
savage, a gentleman’s life, and induces him to despise the ignoble
crowd in civilized society who aim at. the same things through
the drudgery of fatiguing occupations. Tell the world that the
doom which obliged man to earn his bread by manual toil, is
not, as many suppose, a curse but a blessing; that the sweat of
his brow, expelling, without the pernicious aid of medicine,
the peccant humors generated in the human body by the sen-
tence of death, is a preservative of health ; that such a dispen-
sation is a merciful though only a temporary remedy for the
evils consequent on exclusion from the tree of life ; that con-
stant and rational employment, is a rampart against temptation
to vice and folly with their train of soul-destroying influences;
and that all this, devised by infinite wisdom, is sanctioned by
the mandates of Revelation; and yet, how few will be reconciled
to working pursuits, or persuaded voluntarily to relinquish the
fond desire for a state of independence, freedom, and idleness
—a convincing proof that aversion to labor is as prevalent in
civilized as in savage life. In the pauper, having no other
means of support, it is criminal. In the gentleman, because
he is independent of laborious occupations, it is honorable.
Why should it be counted dishonorable in the savage who is
equally independent; and who moreover has the merit of being
neither unwilling nor ashamed to work when his personal
wants, and the calamities or even the necessities of his enemies,
demand exertion.
When Mrs. Birket’s house was enveloped in flames, the most
active extinguishers of the fire were the Aboriginal inhabitants.
Mr. Hall’s child, who had wandered many miles into the bush,
■vvas, by their persevering exertions, rescued from an untimely
grave, after Mr. Norcott, tired even upon horseback, was on the
point of giving up the search in despair. The whole of the
timber, about 8000 feet, for the erection of the Bush Inn, was
carried by them from the forest to the site at Fresh Water Bay.


They carried, on one occasion, 1000 feet in one day. Persuade
an English fop, with his curled hair and twirling cane, to sub-
mit his naked shoulders to a task like this, to serve his enemies
—if you can work a miracle. Yet this idle, brainless ass, a
burden perhaps to himself and his family, must be called a
gentleman, while the Australian, who will fly to save his very
murderers from destruction, is designated a savage. There is
not perhaps a more dangerous occupation—one that requires
more dexterity, quickness, and presence of mind—than whaling.
The world will not produce a band of men, who, without in-
struction and practice, would venture to approach one of these
monsters of the deep. What then will be the surprise of my
readers when informed that a whale boat belonging to the
Imlays of Twofold Bay, entirely manned by the Aboriginal
inhabitants, recently killed and brought in a whale, without the
aid of a single European—a striking instance of their powers
when called into action by kindness and proper treatment.
An attempt was recently made at Hobart to determine by ex-
periment whether savage life contributed more than civilized
to strengthen and invigorate the human body; and, as usual,
savages were, even in this respect, pronounced inferior to their
proud and ignorant compeers. That a civilized mode of living
has a thousand advantages for which there is no equivalent in
savage life, no one will deny; yet the decision in this case must,
to every reflecting mind, appear strange. But our surprise will
subside when informed that the attempt was made by the
French—a people who, even in experimental philosophy,
merely skim the surface, and seldom take the trouble to examine
a subject in all its bearings. The strength of the human body,
exerted on any given object, is more the result of practice than
that of any particular kind of food. A mason will lift a larger
stone, a miller will carry a heavier burden, than any other man;
and a woodsman will fell a large tree with more ease than a
man not accustomed to wield an axe, though living upon a diet
very superior to that of the former. It is therefore not to be
wondered at if, in the employments of civilized life, civilized
men should excel savages who are utter strangers to such labors.
Vigor, as well as health, depends not upon delicate living, but
upon plain wholesome food combined with exercise. Delica-
cies, instead of strengthening, enervate the body. No fact in
natural history is more certain ; and hence the stern opposition
made by the ancients to the introduction of luxury, which
gradually undermined and ultimately destroyed the dominion
of both the Greeks and the Romans. Let the personal prowess
of the natives of Australia be tested by the fatigue of the march
or endurance of privation, and they will be found to excel those
in civilized life who live better and fare more sumptuously.
They have been also greatly misrepresented in matters
«f much higher importance. If we are to be guided in


the formation of our judgment by that conduct and those qua-
lities of mind which are really commendable, a slight knowledge
of this despised race will convince the candid that, far from
being the lowest of the human family, they are entitled to a
very high rank in our estimation. No people are perhaps less
known. It has been their misfortune, too, to come partially
under our observation through the worst medium, our criminals
and the random accounts of persons who had no better source
of information. Our very mode of reasoning on this subject is
false. No nation can boast the creation of its own intelligence,
which in every instance springs from circumstances and dis-
coveries beyond the reach of human control. This gift of
Heaven is the communication of Him whose ways are past
finding out, by whom it is issued without measure to one gene-
ration after another, according to the dictates of that unerring
wisdom by which he governs the world. Men, so far from even
assisting to carry into effect the plans of Heaven for their hap-
piness, are, maniac like, continually employed in thwarting the
benevolent designs of the Deity towards them, or abusing his
giftswhen imparted inspiteoftheirwaywardness. Hence, even in
densely populated states, there are few that excel in intelligence.
When we read or hear of great men, the imagination instantly
invests the multitude with all their light, knowledge, talents,
and intelligence. Nothing can be more erroneous. The millions,
in the most enlightened age and country, are naturally as stupid
as the lowest of their fellows in uncivilized life. Instead of
taking the trouble to collect information and to think originally
and correctly for themselves, they invariably follow those who
take the lead in the community ; and, whether right or wrong,
adopt such of their opinions as they find subservient to their
own prejudices, passions, and interests. Man, it should never
be forgotten, is the creature of circumstances. He owes what-
ever is excellent in mundane concerns to social intercourse,
and that elevation of mind which distinguishes him from his
fellow man, to the combined influence of letters and Revelation.
The former, by collision of intellect and mutual communi-
cation of ideas, leads to improvements in art and discoveries in
science; and the latter, purifying the hearts of a few and operat-
ing by their example on the many, either regenerates the soul
or subjects the passions to the government of reason. Take
these away from the most polished nation and they will be like
their forefathers. Yet we expect to find in the inhabitants of
the desert, without social intercourse, letters, or Revelation, all
the intelligence of minds possessed of these advantages, and, if
we do not, immediately pronounce them an inferior race of
beings. Let the most enlightened people be scattered like the


wanderers of Australia, Over a wide continent, and the barba-
rizing influence of dispersion will soon be apparent. The
expiration of a single generation will unhinge the intellectual
powers and bury the arts and the sciences in oblivion.
To the circumstances therefore in which they are placed,
and not to any mental inferiority, are we to attribute the pre-
sent condition of the native tribes. It is impossible to become
acquainted with these children of nature without feeling the
most sincere esteem for them and a deep interest in their im*
pending fate. The very virtue which we admire among
ourselves, and one for which they are distinguished, that of a
retiring and unobtrusive disposition, is spoken of with scorn
and contempt as indicating in them a deficiency of intellect—a
charge which, originating as it does in gross ignorance, reflects
not a little upon the intellect of those by whom it is uttered.
In no point of view are they inferior, and in many respects they
are superior, to those of the same grade with themselves in
civilized life. The only thing that would in the least justify
the epithet of “ savage,” so liberally bestowed upon them in its
worst sense by those who are entirely ignorant of their manners
and disposition, is the charge brought against them on some
occasions, of repeatedly thrusting their spears into the body of
the slain. But their character will not suffer in the estimation
of impartial judges even on this point, if compared with that of
the far famed warriors of Greece at the siege of Troy. The
testimony of Homer is decisive of the question :
Ovd f dpa oi rig dvovrr)TL ye itapetfTij.
*Qde de rig eiireaicev, ldu>v kg irXrjaiov aXXov
T Q iroiroi, f) fidXct dr) fiaXctKiorepog
*Ecra»p, i] ore vrjag kvtTrprjGev irvpi Kr)Xsip»
"Qf dpa Tig ehreffKi, Kai ovrijaadKe irdpaarag.
Nor fail’d
One Grecian of them all to pierce the slain ;
And to his fellow thus the soldier spake:
“ Ye Gods! how much more patient of the touch
Is Hector now, than when he fired the fleet! "
Thus they would speak, then give him each a stab.
This however I believe is never practised by the Australians
excepting after great provocation. Even then it is merely the
consequence of momentary excitement, when, taking life for
life, they intend not to wound but to kill an enemy ; and such
conduct is certainly not more savage than that of the
I will not say in the use of the bayonet in the field, but--in
hanging their prisoners, or coolly and deliberately tying them
to an iron bolt and riddling them with bullets the certain
doom of every Aborigine who dares to resist the invasion of
ids country.


The wander is, not that those who wander from the scenes of
Revelation should sink so low, but that they have not sunk
lower. Hence, the many instances of fine feeling and generous,
disinterested conduct, met with among them and related by
travellers, are, even to those who admire them, unaccountable.
The philosophers of the French school and their worthy English
coadjutors, who endeavour to poison the sources of literature
with infidelity, being ever ready to pervert what they cannot
explain, have not been backward to avail themselves of this, in
order to elevate the phantom of natural religion and depreciate
the value of a written communication from Heaven. The fact
is, that the barbarizing influence of the desert is not so injurious
to moral character as the demonizing influence of large towns,
which, in spite of art, science, and social organization, converts
men into fiends and emboldens them to trample on Revelation
itself. Civilization changes the manners and .provides for
bodily comfort, but leaves the depravity of the heart iultouched .
Nothing can cleanse the soul from inbred pollution and trans-
form the moral charadter but the atonement of the cross,
embraced by a living faith as described and enjoined in the
divine oracles. The .Deity did not intend by the Babylonian
dispersion to drive men into savage but into rural life; and had
those who took up their abode in the desert, taken Revelation
along with them and devoted their attention to the care of flocks
and herds and the cultivation of the earth, which includes all
that is essential to terrestrial happiness, they would have
ranked far higher in every estimable feeling than those who, in
opposition to the divine will, still pursue the Babylonian scheme
of herding together in large towns, for the sake of indulging in
a vicious course of life or accumulating wealth which they will
never require. Little do those who spend their lives either in
town or country in heaping up large fortunes for their children
imagine, for they never take time to reflect, that they are only
preparing fuel for their destruction in this world and in the next.
To say nothing of a thousand temptations which are peculiar to
a crowded state of society in civil life, the envy, bitterness, and
contention attendant on the never ceasing struggle for the at-
tainment of riches, and the idleness, folly, and dissipation,
generated by their possession, harden the heart, destroy the
moral character, and imbue the mind, with vices to which the
scattered and savage inhabitants of the desert, are utter
strangers. This will account for those instances of moral ex-
cellence among the native tribes which put multitudes to shame,
and which prove that they only require the enlightening and
saving influence of the gospel to render them exemplary in
every virtue.
I


They have no knowledge of letters; and yet I have in my
possession an attempt at writing by one of them. He solicited
pen, ink, and paper, which then lay before me, for the purpose
of answering my questions in this way more satisfactorily. He
did not take a moment to think. The writing is hieroglyphic.
It consists mostly of men, animals, birds, and trees, and is
traced in circles round the central character with which he
began. What surprised me not a little, was, his giving a
character for an abstract term. This he did in more than one
instance. The specimen would be considered as man’s rudest
attempt at letters, by those who do not believe writing to have
been coeval with language.
It is generally allowed that the natives of Australia have
some resemblance to the Malays. The first word in my vo-
cabulary, the generic term for river, and the word used in
salutation at meeting by some of the tribes, are all pure He-
brew. These coincidences in likeness and language, afford
conclusive evidence of their connexion with the old world at
some period, and that they are of Asiatic origin. But how
thoroughly does this upset the theory of infidel writers, that
man from the rank of a brute or savage raised himself by
degrees to all the polish, intelligence, and refinement of civil
life. Here the descendants of those who built the tower of
Babel, and founded the capital of one of the most renowned
empires of antiquity, are without a single vestige of architectural
knowledge; and though their ancestors must have crossed the
line from the northern to the southern hemisphere in a bark of
some sort, they know not how to make a canoe, or even—that
rudest of all attempts at navigation—a katamaran.* Instead
of rising in the scale of being, it is manifest beyond dispute that
man, unaided by the cheering light and elevating influence of
revelation, degenerates. To the truth of this important fact,
so subversive of the great leading principle of infidelity, the
condition of this branch of the human family affords abundant
evidence. They have lost every trace of civilized life, and retain
only those characteristics of man which it is impossible for him
to lose under any circumstances; namely, the erectness of his
form, the faculty of reason, the gift of language, and dominion
over the lower orders of creation. Here we find, after the
lapse of thousands of years, not an ascent from rude barbarity to
the elegance, refinement, and intelligence of polished society,
* Frima navis fait cavata arbos. The Romans were in error; and, in this,
betrayed their ignorance no less than in their attempt at satire in the expression,
Kara avis in terris, nigroque simillima cygno. A hollowed tree was not the first,
but the third invention in the art of navigation; and seems to have succeeded the
more frail, but less laborious and more simple contrivance, of a bark canoe.


but a descent from a state scarcely inferior to that of angels to
the condition of a savage—a condition in which, though still
distinguishable by the erectness of his form, he is, as to his
mode of living, on a perfect level with the beasts that dispute
his dominion and range the forest along with him. This is not
a fine-spun theory, written to amuse and decoy the reader into
the adoption of principles destructive of human happiness. It
is the relation of a matter of fact, attested by ocular demon-
stration. It is truth, the handmaid of revelation, disclosing
herself to view in the attractive singleness of unsophisticated
nature. Few things, therefore, are more interesting than an
examination of the tongues of different nations. The cognate
character of languages goes far to prove the common origin of
the human family, and establishes the great truth that “ God
made of one blood all nations of men.”
Almost every tribe has a different dialect. The difference, in
some cases, is merely provincial; but in others, it is so great as
to require interpretation. Still, like the languages of India
and those of Europe, it seems to have a common origin.
The following is a list of words that are precisely the same
at Swan River and at King George’s Sound, districts far
asunder, and that have no communication one with another.
THE DERBALESE OR SWAN THE MONKBEELVEN OR KINO
RIVER DIALECT. GEORGES SOUND DIALECT.
Maar, the firmament. Maar, the firmament.
Dtowel, the thigh, Dtowel, the thigh.
Moorn, black. Moorn, black.
Goolang, a youth. Goolang, a youth.
In the following list there is a provincial difference.
Meega, the moon. Meeak, the moon,
Dunga, the ears. Twank, the ears.
Katta, hair. Kaat, hair.
Mingat, eye-brows. Mingart, eye-brows.
Dya, the lips. Ta, the lips.
Wardo, the neck. Waart, the neck.
Yaba, the temples. Yama, the temples.
Kaburla, the belly. Korpul, the belly.
In the following list, the difference is so great that the
speakers must be unintelligible one to another.
Nangar, the stars. Kindy, the stars.
Mamerup, a man, Nyoonger, a man.
Karup, the nostrils. Dyogolet, the nostrils.
Moko, water. Kyp, water.
Gidye, a spear. Kyk, a spear.


Such is the state of the language from Derbal to Monkbeelven,
a space of 300 miles to the south of Swan River; and it probably
presents no greater variety in dialect and pronunciation for
300 miles to the north. A translation of the Scriptures there-
fore into Derbalese, with parallel columns for words in the
neighboring districts that present a dialectical variety, would
be perfectly intelligible from the North West Cape to Cape
Leuwen, a distance of perhaps not less than 1000 miles.
There is reason to believe, however, that much more is prac-
ticable. The generic term for river is every where the same,
even in districts the most remote from one another. Meeal
the eye, is called mil in Eastern Australia, exhibiting, at a
distance of nearly 2000 miles, merely a difference in pronun-
ciation. These discoveries I made by chance. A regular investi-
fation would probably bring to light a multitude of coincidences,
am strongly inclined to think that one third of the language is
the same all over the continent, that one third differs merely in
pronunciation, and that one third only will be found to present
a dialectical variety. To combine the dialects of Australia into
one tongue, cannot be more difficult than it was to unite those
of ancient Greece. True, the literature, the commerce, and
the politics of Greece, bringing the different states into contact
with each other, aided the combination ; and their absence in
the case under consideration, present obstacles to its accomplish-
ment. These however are not insurmountable. Greece, in
her infancy, before the arrival of Cecrops and Cadmus, had
neither literature, commerce, nor politics. Greece—a country
that, on receiving letters from a foreign nation, burst the chains
of ignorance, soared to a height of perfection in the sciences
that excited the admiration of the world, and left a name,
the glory of which became the envy of almost all nations—
was once as rude, wild, and savage as the sable, wandering
children of the forests around us. Let the dormant intellect
of Australia be only awakened—let her energies De combined
in the prosecution of industrious pursuits; let her mental
powers be concentrated on objects of art and science; and,
above all, let her views be directed to the contemplation of
things beyond the skies—the heart-stirring and interesting
scenes of a life to come—and, with a living original evidently
common to all within the extent of her shores, there will be no
occasion to despair of the assimilation of her different dialects.
The very preservation of a language so ancient and primitive,
would be worth any expense. But to communicate to her innu-
merable tribes a knowledge of Revelation—to raise them in the
scale of being, to rescue them from endless woe, to impart to
them immortal hopes and prospects, and to make them partakers


of the high-born destinies assured to the sons of God—would be
attended with results gratifying to angels. On the other hand,
we must recollect that the neglect of the language, the cultiva-
tion of which is essential to their civilization, is sure to effect
the oppression and gradual extinction of the Aboriginal inhabi-
tants—dreadful price, not to give, but to exact in order to obtain
a country for mr criminals, room for colonization, and an outlet
to our manufactures. Legislators may pun and lawyers may
quibble; but neither puns nor quibbles can extricate us from
the dilemma, or justify our' conduct. We are committed in a
fearful career. And unless we change the wanton and wicked
policy hitherto pursued, awful will be our meeting in another
world with a people we have so deeply wronged.
Whether the language of Australia has any affinity to the
modern languages of the East, cannot at present be determined.
Be the source, however, whence it springs what it may, it is
original, euphonious, and significant, combining great power
with inimitable simplicity. It would be difficult to find in any
language a word more elegant or expressive, than the term
for a cloud, gabby maar, the well of the sky, or the foun-
tain of the firmament. Terms corresponding to those in the
modern tongues of the northern hemisphere, in the language of
a people who have had no communication with the rest of the
world for thousands of years, are remarkable. Moorangween to
weep, is the same in import, and differs very little in pronun-
ciation from the word mourning. Dibee, the term for breast, is
evidently cognate to the word babe, Kai, dropping the guttral,
is precisely the same in sound and signification with the old
affirmative aye. The word bed is simply a contraction of the
first syllable of beed-jar, the term for sleep. The first syllable
in goo-nyan, the term for palate, is pronounced like the French
word gout, signifying taste. Dak, the generic term for
flowers, evidences, both in sound and sense, its relationship to
the word deck, to adorn. Little did our lexicographers imagine,
when they fancied its derivation from the Dutch, decken, that
the word itself was in Derbalese, the language of a people
whose abode and existence were alike unknown to men
of letters and to fame. But one of the most extraordinary
coincidencies of this kind, is to be found in the name given to
the ocean, which they call gabby-Wodin —the well of Wodin—a
term which, both in meaning and pronunciation, exactly corres-
ponds to that by which the Scandinavian deity is designated.
Striking as the similarity of names is, the import of the term is
still more remarkable. If we reflect that the Creator, through
the combined influence of the sun’s rays and the atmospheric
air, has constructed an apparatus by which he is continually


drawing water from the fountain of the great deep, as from a
well, to water and irrigate the earth, in order that it may bring
forth food for man and beast, it will be impossible to conceive
any thing more appropriate, or more beautifully illustrative,
than the Derbalese designation. Dyaat, the sun, is perhaps not
less interesting, since, from its resemblance to Titan, the name
by which that luminary was anciently known among the Greeks,
it establishes the antiquity of the language and the remoteness
of the date of their migration from the Asiatic continent.
The number of letters necessary to form the alphabet, a point
not less difficult than important in the literary formation of a
language, I have fixed at twenty-two. This is precisely the
number of characters which compose the Hebrew alphabet.
The Ong of the Hebrew, the pronunciation of which has been
so long a desideratum to the philologists of Europe, is of fre-
quent occurrence, and easily expressed by these people.
Strange as it may seem, however, after contemplating these and
other coincidences, they have neither the Zain, the Samech, nor
the Shin of the Hebrews. The letter s, they are incapable of
pronouncing. While, therefore, I have made a selection from
the English alphabet in forming that for the language of Herbal
—there being no reason for inventing, or selecting a foreign
one—l have been obliged to throw out every character in the
least allied to the letter s. Should the same characteristic in
pronunciation prevail throughout the continent, and should the
same number of letters, and precisely the same characters, be
necessary to form the alphabet, it will dispel every doubt relative
to the existence of a common original, and prove that the lan-
guage of all the tribes of Australia was once the same, —'and
that they were originally one people.
Here opens an interesting view of the subject. The adoption
of the English character and the use of a common alphabet,
will not only afford a facility of communication between those
who engage in the great work of evangelizing the Aboriginal
inhabitants, but will tend ultimately to assimilate the different
dialects, and thus obviate the difficulty of the provincialisms
which time, circumstances, and locality of habitation have
gendered; so that all the tribes of the Australian continent may
again communicate with one another in their own tongue, and
sing the praises of the Redeemer of men in the same language.
But, if ever the scriptures are to be translated into Derbalese
or any other of the leading dialects —if ever the British govern-
ment or the British people intend—and both are in duty bound
—to civilize the Aboriginal inhabitants, and communicate to
them a knowledge of the Christian religion, the language must
be thoroughly and accurately acquired, and committed to


writing grammatically; and this can be accomplished only by
persons at leisure to devote themselves exclusively to the object
—persons who are more or less imbued with a missionary feel-
ing, who have a predilection for a literary mode of life, and
who, at the same time, will not be afraid to take their lives in
their hands and plunge into the forests of the interior. When
or where such men, or the means of supporting them, are to be
found, time only can tell.
The whole of each tribe seem to be bards; and their evenings
are generally spent around their fires, singing, or rather chant-
ing, their poetical compositions, in which all join from the
oldest to the youngest.
The circumstance frequently excited my curiosity to ascer-
tain the origin of a custom so unusual with Europeans, except-
ing in places of worship. Among the Greeks the word vojuoc
signified either a law, a song, or a piece of music. “To sing
the Orthian song, vofiov rov ooOiov," is an expres-
sion of Herodotus; and Xenophon employs the same word
when he speaks of “singing a particular tune, vo/iy tivi
aSovref.” Hence Aristotle asked: “Why is vo/ioi used for
laws and songs? Is it because men, before they discovered the
art of writing, sang their laws, that they might not forget
them?” Had he stood at the foot of Sinai, he would have seen
abundant cause for so doing.
This leads to the conclusion that music and song had their
origin in the practice of reciting laws, to impress them on the
mind and preserve them from oblivion ; and hence the custom
of rehearsal by old and young. Whatever repugnance the
Muse may feel at the bare idea of associating her name with
the dry', unmetrical, harsh, rugged, verbose, incomprehensible,
and blundering enactments which occupy the statute books of
modern legislators, she had none to the laws of the ancients—
which were expressed in a simple, elegant, intelligible style—
for she lent the harmonious accents of her voice to their re-
citation before she sang either in comedy or tragedy. Such
seems to have been her employment, till, on the commencement
of war, conquest, and empire, the events with which human life
began to teem, courted her services, engrossed her powers, and
finally made her a slave to the passions.
Grecian fiction claims the honor of her birth; but she gave
forth her melodious sounds to charm the ear and purify the
heart—the legitimate object of her appearance on earth—long
before Hellas or Latium had a name or an existence. We find
her in the wilderness, chanting the mandates of revelation as
they were uttered by the Most High; who commanded Moses
to teach the children of Israel a song, to deter them from


iniquity, to prompt them to righteousness, and to he a witness
against them—prophetic and admonitory—till the end of time.
About 1600 years afterwards, she presents herself to our view
in the interesting capacity of an attendant on the Redeemer of
the world, in the great tragic scene of the New Testament.*
Fair offspring of the skies, the Muse of Israel, ordained to he
the companion of prophets and preachers, bore in her counte-
nance and character evidence of an origin divine. Emanating
from the smile of Deity and blooming with celestial grace, she
abhorred carnal pleasure and its soul-destroying abominations.
No low desires, no vile affections found a place in her bosom.
Clothed with majesty and glowing with inspiration, her
thoughts were chaste, her aspirations were hallowing, and her
words, sparkling like the dew drops of the morning with the
loveliness of virtue in ten thousand forms, inspired heavenly
sentiments and formed the soul for the life and the felicity of
angels. Her brow, cheering as the day spring, was adorned
with the diadem of truth, and her countenance, roseate in smiles
like the blushing morn, was resplendent with illumination, as
when, putting the clarion to her lips to lead the way on the
burst of the celestial choir, she sent forth echoing and re-
echoing throughout new made worlds the first electrifying note
on the vast and silent expanse of ethereal, illimitable space,
and sang with the morning stars of creation, amidst the joyful
shouts of seraphic hosts, the wonders of Almighty power. Re-
gardless of earth and its low-born gratifications, she had no
affection for any thing beneath the skies, excepting so far as it
led to scenes and joys beyond. No subject could interest her
but that of the divine glory and man’s salvation, which, in-
separably connected by the decree of Him whose goings forth
were from eternity, never ceased to be her theme, whether re-
joicing at the formation of a new world in Eden, or weeping
over a fallen one in Gethsemane. Her steps were radiant
with light, darkness fled at her approach, her eyes beamed
with tenderness on the penitent, the sound of her voice made
the guilty tremble, and the tempter stood abashed before her or
slihked away from her presence. She never stooped to folly;
she never smiled on sin. Her doctrines were pure as the
stream from the crystal fount, and salutary as the helm of
Gilead. Nothing that dropped from her lips could defile; and
the happiness she imparted was life-giving, unalloyed, and
lasting as immortality. Deeply is it to be lamented that of
all her daughters among the heathen, not one escaped the
contamination of a fallen world but that of Ossian, the
despised and neglected Muse of Caledonia. It would tbere-
Malthew, xxvi. 30; M«rk, xir. 26.


fore be interesting to know whether the Muse found in
Australia, among a people so primitive in their manners and
so entirely unconnected with the rest of mankind from the
earliest ages, be free from the puerilities, falsehoods, and ob-
scenities with which, both in their lyric and epic effusions, her
prostituted sisters of Greece and Rome abound—the pride of
our universities and the models of taste, even in a refined and
an enlightened age!
It is perhaps important to state, that, when meeting them
in the bush, alone or in company, to hold up the hands, is a
token of peaceable intentions; and should therefore never
be omitted.
The custom of exchanging names with a stranger, so indi-
cative of ancient manners, and so illustrative of some remarkable
expressions in our Lord’s address to the churches in Pergamos
and Philadelphia,* is a pledge of protection and a token of
inviolable friendship.
The manner in which they answer questions, relative to the
botany and zoology of their country, giving first the name of
the genus and then that of the particular species which forms
the subject of inquiry, discovers great intelligence. No clown
—none but a person of education—could reply with so much
propriety.
The invention of the Koilee —a piece of wood, shaped like the
segment of a circle, for killing birds on the wing—and the pre-
cision with which it is thrown, at any angle from ten to
ninety degrees, causing it to return from a given point in
the atmosphere to the feet of the thrower, forms an exhibition
of mechanical and mathematical science that would excite the
wonder and command the admiration of the most skilled in
Europe; and proves how greatly they err who imagine them to
be deficient in mental power.
f They are far from being insensible to the attractions of a
civilized state of society. But, not knowing that our fathers
were rude as they are, and that we attained our superiority
gradually, they can see nothing between our condition and
theirs but an impassable gulf. They also labour under the
extraordinary impression that the advantages of civil life are
the result, not of mental improvement and Christianizing
influence, but a resurrection from the dead. This is the grand
secret of that apparent indifference they so frequently manifest
on subjects which, otherwise, would be to them deeply inter-
esting. Considering the attainment of any thing beyond savage
life at present utterly hopeless, they cling to its fascinations
and reconcile themselves to its ills under the firm persuasion
* Kev. ii. 17, and ill. 12.
K


that such is their doom till death release them from it and
allow them to visit the moon ; after which they expect to come
to life again, endowed with all the wealth, power, and privi-
leges, now enjoyed by the whites. Desire for improvement,
however, is by no means a stranger to their bosoms. Once,
during one of those rambles which I sometimes took with them
in the bush, a few of them accompanied me to the top of Mount
Eliza, to give me the names of some places adjacent to the con-
fluence of the Swan and the Canning, From this commanding
position these rivers open into full view, as they enter the capa-
cious and forest-encircled basin of Melville water; which,
washing the southern base of the Mount, conveys their united
streams to the ocean at Fremantle, about ten miles distant.
While thus employed, Doumera, looking down upon Perth,
which, stretching from the foot of the Mount along the right
bank of the Swan to the eastward, now began to present an
opening to the sky, and appeared as if springing from the
bosom of the dense wood with which it was still surrounded
on all sides excepting that fronting the river, broke into a strain
of touching reflection on the contrast between the comforts of
civilized and the privations of savage life. As he gazed on the
rising capital of the colony, contemplating the streets, houses,
and gardens, together with a moving scene on land and water,
of people, vehicles, and boats, he exclaimed, —“ O Midjar!”—
pointing as he spoke—“ mya, mya, mya, —then pausing,
he added, with a sad look and a mournful accent, “ White
man’s way of living very good. Poor black man ! no house,
no home, and soon, no country!” The site of the town, abound-
ing with springs, game, and fish, and recently shaded from the
sun and sheltered from the storm by an abundance of tim-
ber, had been the favorite encampment of his tribe, the recol-
lection of which rendered the sight he then beheld doubly
affecting to him.
The law of inheritance among them is inexplicable. On the
death of Midjegoorong and Yagan, the district of Beeliar on the
south side of Melville water, instead of finding an heir in its
own tribe, became the property of Doumera and Ningina, who
with their families had hitherto lived with and formed part of
the tribe of Yellowgongo in the district of Mooro, on the north
bank of the river.
In martial courage they are perhaps not excelled by any
people in the world. The savages of America, when an army
is thrown into confusion, will scalp them by thousands, but can
never be brought to face their enemies in the heat of the contest.
Not so with the tribes of Derbal. Though fire arms be per-
* O Mr. , houses, houses, houses, springing up in all directions!


fectly new to them, no men stand their ground better. The
heros of Homer, whose courage depended upon augurs and
omens, were brave only when assisted by the gods; but the
Derbalese are brave without augurs, omens, or gods. The
martial character they display will appear the more remarkable
when it becomes known that, both in their first onset and in
their succeeding conflicts with the whites, they imagined them-
selves in colision with beings from another world, and that they
were actually contending with the heros of the dead. Few of
the renowned warriors of ancient or modern times, would,
I presume, have nerve enough to maintain their ground, if
they beheld the ghosts of antiquity coming shouting from
the skies in battle array, and, with thundering artillery, bur-
nished chariots, galloping steeds, clanging armor, and terrifying
aspects, rushing upon them with the fury of the tempest, when,
from the bursting heavens, the deadly lightning shoots in all
directions and mingles with the roar of the warring elements.
So terrific to the Derbalese was the appearance of the whites,
when, with arms such as they had never seen, and apparently
descending from the clouds, they came flying over the ocean,
and, in forests which had never echoed to the sound of a gun,
poured among them, pregnant with havoc and death, bullets
enveloped in smoke and winged with fire. None but spirits
the most daring and heroic would stand their ground and
heave the spear amidst scenes so unearthly and appaling.
Whoever reflects upon this, will feel no hesitation in awarding
the palm of valor to the aboriginal Australians, who, perfectly
naked, and without breastplate or shield, or any other weapon
than a slender spear, have the boldness to take the field
against the very hosts of heaven. Instruction, union, and dis-
cipline, would, I am persuaded, render them invincible.
In that combination of virtues which constitutes greatness
of character, they excel. allowed by every one to be
of savages the most savage, wept with gratitude when I saved
his life, and expressed his sense of the kindness shown to him
in the strongest terms. Yet this is the man who, in the midst
of his guards on a rock surrounded by the ocean, where
his life must have been the forfeit, could, seize his spear and,
erect in all the pride of independence, determine to die spear
in hand, and, in his fall, exact the penalty in the death of his
enemies, rather than submit even to an insult.
Nor is courage the only quality of the warrior they possess.
They are admirable marksmen ; and will make sure at a hun-
dred yards distance. The war shout and the googoomittle,*
* The terrific movement made in the act of throwing the spear. The word is
untranslatable, there being no corresponding term for it in our language.


make the stoutest quail. If, in addition to their knowledge of
the country, they had fire arms and a little practice, the rifle
brigade would scarcely be a match for them. They would put
an end to the settlement in less than a month.
The ancient custom of interring the remains of the dead, with
the face towards the East, and that of depositing the arms of
the warrior in or beside the gfave, are prevalent.
The belief universally entertained that the whites are their
ancestors come to life again, proves that, notwithstanding their
migrations and wanderings, and their final settlement in a
country so distant from the scenes of Revelation, they still
retain the doctrines of the immortality of the soul and the re-
surrection of the body. In speaking of death, they use the very
figure adopted for illustration by the apostle, calling it a sleep.
There can be no doubt, barbarian though they be, that they
possess all the tender feelings which belong- to human nature.
I have seen them weep at the sight of each other’s woe, whilst
the tears poured unaffectedly down their sable cheeks, indica-
ting at once their relationship to the human family and their
forlorn condition; for they sorrow as them that have no hope.
Ever exposed to danger by war or treachery, their lives are
never secure. Hence, the eye is continually on the watch and
the hand on the spear. The very rustling of a leaf will make
them spring upon their legs, armed and ready for action ; never
expecting any thing in the sound of a strange foot but an enemy.
The unchangeable and never ceasing law of retaliation, inva-
riably requiring blood for blood, and the wars which, thence
arising, are continually raging among them, confirm the scrip-
tural testimony, that “The dark places of the earth are full of
the habitations of cruelty.” Death reigns in this part of the
territories of Shem. He perambulates the rest of the world,
occasionally shooting in the private chamber, dredging in the
dungeon, hunting in the of life, angling in the streams
of business, sporting amidst the preserves of treasure, tilting in
the scenes of gaiety and pleasure, or mowing in the battle field;
but here, encircled by the ocean and shrouded in darkness, he sits
enthroned upon a vast mound—a continent—of graves, amidst
the bones of the dead, the groans of the dying, and the carnage
of the living. When will the day-spring from on high visit Aus-
tralia ! When will the sun of righteousness arise and dispel the
perpetual night in which the southern hemisphere is enveloped!
Can I obtain the ear of the Christian world for a moment ?
How long will Australia be neglected ? Here is a people free
from idolatry, prejudice, and the contamination of European
vices, and so far prepared for the reception of the gospel —a
people whose very designation— moorn, darkness, mourning—


supplicates compassion—a people, some of whom have already
heard a Saviour’s name, wondered at the strange but heavenly
sound, bowed the knee with those that worshipped him in their
own wild forests, and wait till the great mystery of Christianity,
God manifest in the flesh, be unveiled to them—a people, on
whose unnumbered generations not a ray of Revelation ever
shone, and many of whom, if ye delay, will drop into an awful,
an unchangeable eternity, utterly ignorant of that Redeemer in
whom centre all your hopes of happiness in this world and in
that which is to come.
January, 1833.


AN ADDRESS to the Settlers in Western Australia, delivered
at Guildford, June 7, 1833, at a meeting of the Magistrates,
Gentlemen, and Yeomen of the Colony, convened on an occa-
sion of great excitement, when the Aboriginal inhabitants were
threatened with a war of extermination.
Gentlemen, —Again the war shout echoes from hill to hill—
again our ears are assailed by the din of hostile movements
throughout the settlement; while the blood of the natives wan-
tonly shed, rouses them to vengeance dire and implacable.
Many of you have hitherto acted with a forbearance which,
though politic in itself, was not the less honorable to your own
feelings. I quite agree with you too upon another point, that
half, or rather opposite measures, such as the Government have
hitherto pursued, are to be deprecated. A wavering, uncertain
policy is the worst that can be adopted towards a strange people,
whether savage or civilized. But before ye suffer yourselves
to be hurried away by the fury which seems now to possess the
minds of so many, permit me for a moment, as the friend of
this unfortunate race, to remonstrate with you.
Are the Aboriginal inhabitants British subjects, or are they
not? I pass by the awkward question, whether ye have any
right to treat them as such, without their own consent—if they
are, they are entitled to the protection of the British Govern-
ment ; and consequently when accused of wrong, have a right
to be tried by the laws of the country which has proclaimed
them members of its commonwealth. If they cannot avail
themselves of the privileges thus conferred on them, because
they know not the language of their dictators, the fault is yours.
Can they acquire the language of a strange people intuitively ?
And if they cannot, are they to be shot, merely because they
cannot speak English? If ye usurp the dominion over them
and deprive them of their independence, it is but a small part
of your duty to inform them of the reverse of fortune which has
befallen them, and the laws by which they are henceforth to be
governed. Ye have taken possession of their lands; and,
having thus robbed them of their patrimonial inheritance, ye
mock them with the title of British subjects; but unless ye also
possess yourselves of their language, the proper and only ra-
tional medium of communicating with any people, ye may as
well call the kangaroos of the forest British subjects, as the
native tribes. Without a knowledge of their language, it will
be as easily to govern the one as the other.


To your own people, when charged with the commission of
crime, ye allow the benefit of Trial by Jury. They have a
thousand times more reason to claim the privilege, since they
are utterly ignorant of the moral character of the act of which
they are accused, or the guilt attached to it in your estimation.
And if they are to have what the privilege implies, trial by their
Jeers, the Jury should be selected from their own countrymen,
f ye would allow them any show of justice, one half, at least,
ought to be Derbalese. When ye are asked by whom ye will
be tried, ye reply; By God and my country. Alas for the
Derbalese! they are tried by neither. They are left to the
mercy of any ruffian who chooses to level his gun at them.
What is this? It is murder. To kill British subjects, without
trial by either Judge or Jury, can be designated by no other
term.
But if ye have taken their country from them, and they refuse
to acknowledge your title to it, ye are at war with them ; and,
having never allowed your right to call them British subjects,
thej- are justified by the usages of war in taking your property
wherever they find it, and in killing you whenever they have an
opportunity. Ye are the aggressors. The law of nations will
bear them out in repelling force by force. They did not go to
the British isles to make war upon you; but ye came from the
British isles to make war upon them. Ye are the invaders of
their country —ye are the plunderers of their wealth—ye destroy
the natural productions of the soil on which they live—ye de-
vour their fish and their game—and ye drive them from the
abodes of their ancestors.
Tell me not of the absence of local attachment in the hearts
of roving savages. Where is the record from which ye learn
that nature was ever unfaithful to the law of her creation,
and forgot to impress her offspring with regard for the spot
where they first inhaled the breath of life? The monster that
disregarded the land of his nativity never yet beheld the light.
The very bird loves the nest in which it was hatched. In man,
whether civilized or savage, the inborn passion is still stronger.
The lawns and the woods, the hills and the dales, even the
rocks and the deserts, attach the soul to the place of her birth
like the enchantments of Elysium. Nor do they quit their hold
on her affections with increase of years. On the contrary, the
natal fire burns brighter as the shades of evening advance; and
old age, rolling on with its grey hairs, feeds the flame and
makes her cling closer to objects consecrated by time and en-
deared by a thousand recollections. Ye may vent your fury
upon her till she become broken hearted, but ye cannot turn
the current of her feelings—she cannot turn them herself.


Nothing can either force or allure her from the scenes of her
childhood—nothing can dissolve her attachment to her natal
soil, but death. It came from the dust with her; and she
can resign it only when her earthly tabernacle dissolves, and
again mingles with its original element. Nor is it the character
of the place that forms this inextinguishable regard. Like
every other part of our constitution it derives its origin, not
from locality of situation, but from the author of our being. It
is a fire kindled within us by the breath of nature, the moment
the soul springs into existence; the place of our birth forming,
not the source, but the object of attachment. It is nourished
by association, it grows with our growth, it ripens with our age,
and becomes stronger and stronger, the more it converses with
surrounding objects. The Highland cottager sees as many
charms in the barren heath, the silent pine, the solitary glen,
the wild crag, and the stupendous rock, as the royal tenant
beholds in the peopled terrace, the galaxy of beauty, the monu-
ments of art, and the towers of Windsor. Were it possible for
them to change places in the womb, they would reciprocally
exchange their predilections. The descendant of a royal line
would discover an attachment to the lonely cottage, and would
as enthusiastically admire the bleak uncultivated waste around;
while the Highlander, English born, would chill at the sight of
the north, and kindle into rapture amidst the gorgeous scenery
of the royal residence.—lt is kindly ordered. In the love of
country, we may still trace, amidst the ruins of our fallen
nature, and in characters sufficiently legible, the impress of
divine wisdom and benevolence in our creation. The soul is
so formed as to love above all others, whatsoever may be
their character, those objects on which she opens her eyes
on coming into life; and is thus constitutionally prepared
for the enjoyment of an allotted portion of happiness, where-
soever in the unerring arrangements of divine providence
she may first behold the light, whether amidst the cheer-
less snows of the polar regions, or the perennial bloom of the
tropical.
Think not, then, that the Aboriginal inhabitants of Australia,
offspring of the same great parent with yourselves, and partakers
of all the kindred feelings of a common humanity, can resign
the mountains and seas, the rivers and lakes, the plains and the
wilds of their uncradled infancy, and the habitation of their
fathers for generations immemorial, to a foreign foe, without
the bitterness of grief. What, though the grass be their couch
and the tree of the forest their only shelter, their blue mountains,
and the country where they first beheld the sun, the moon, and
the starry heavens, are as dear to them as your native land with


fell its natural and artificial beauties, its gilded spires and mag-
nificent palaces, is to you.
If ye are determined to discard every principle of jus-
tice, and have resolved to consider the King’s proclamation
a sufficient title to their lands, I beseech you to bear in mind
that ye are forbidden alike by the maxims of Christianity and
the law of nations to slay them, unless it be in self defence in
the field ; the guilt of which will still fall on your heads as the
aggressors. And even in the field—for they will have recourse
to arms in their own defence—and what nation would not ? ye
are still bound by the usages of war, by every principle of honor
and humanity, to spare their lives when they surrender and
call for mercy. In short, whether ye reckon them enemies or
British subjects, ye have no right to hunt them down and kill
them, as if they were so many wild beasts. This is contrary to
all law human and divine.
Reflect that ye have to do with a people who are not less the
antipodes of the inhabitants of the British isles in their manners,
laws, and polity, than in geographical position. The laws and
polity of Britain contemplate all property as private property,
and protect it in this character, restricting each individual to
the enjoyment of his own particular portion. The laws and
polity of New Holland are just the reverse. They contemplate
all property as public property and guard it as such, allowing
the free unrestricted use of the whole to every person in the
community. Ngyronon of Monkbeelven will tell you that he
has killed a man for no other reason than that of attempting to
introduce the law of private property ; namely, appropriating
a kangaroo to himself and refusing to share it with his fellows.
In a country where the law of private property is unknown,
there can be no thieves. Of the meaning of the word theft, in
the sense in which ye use the term, these people have not the
least conception. How can they ? Theft can be practised only
among a people who are possessed of private property. The
commission of it in a country where every thing is held in
common, is morally impossible. The spear of the warrior is
perhaps the only exception. Other private property they cer-
tainly have none. And the possession of this, is an object
only when actually engaged in battle. On all other occasions
it is carried about as the common property of the tribe.
The word quipple means properly to pillage, or to spoil an
enemy—a practise as common to the nations of Europe as to the
savages of Australia. But to quipple from a brother, or one
of the same tribe, tp all of whom they extend the appellation,
would excite their astonishment. What may come to pass,
should they ever be introduced to a state of soeiety in which the
L


law of private property prevails, and be initiated into the art of
stealing by your own thieves, lam not prepared to say. But
at present, the vice of thieving is certainly unknown among
them; though, like the Christian tribes of another hemisphere,
they considered it lawful to spoil an enemy,
I am aware of the objection that when they quipple or pillage
they use a great deal of cunning. So does the sportsman in
pursuit of his game ; and so does a general at the head of an
army; but in neither instance is their any sense of guilt, or of
moral delinquency. Just so with these people. They may fear
the defeat of their purpose, or the consequences of being sur-
prised in the act, but they have no apprehension that they are
doing wrong. How can they, till ye instruct them in your man-
ners, laws, and customs ? They have actually pointed out to
you where their kangaroos are to be found, when ye wish to
kill. Is it to be wondered at, if, with equal simplicity, they
should help themselves to one of yours, when they find them
grazing on their own domains'?*
It is not my intention, nor can it be necessary in an assembly
who have been not only eye witnesses but more or less actors in
the tragic scene from its commencement, to enter into a history of
all the evils which our invasion of the country has inflicted upon
them ; but I will mention a circumstance which is not generally
known. Soon after the formation of the settlement, some of
the servants in a farming establishment on the Swan, finding
that they were fond of anointing themselves with oil, poured on
the back of one of these unfortunate beings a whole potful of
boiling slush. This was more than a personal injury. It was
a national insult. And the cruel deed, independently of all the
other wrongs, many and grievous which they have suffered at
our hands, was enough to rouse any people and render them
implacable.
But what shall we say to the barbarous practice of firing
upon them wherever they are seen—a,practice, unconfined to
the lower orders, and common to some from whom better things
might be expected! Apart from the fiend-like wickedness of
thus wantonly destroying human life, what will such a course
of proceeding profit you in the end 1 They have tendered their
services to you as hewers of wood and drawers of water; could
the most despotic conqueror—the most iron-hearted tyrant —
require more 1 The very powder and ball ye expend in shooting
them would purchase their lands.
It was the policy of the late ruler of France to make every
war in which he engaged maintain itself; which, laying the
* European stock of all descriptions, they call kangaroos, having never before
seen sheep, cattle, or horses.


foundation of future wars, answered the double purpose of
saving him expense and gratifying his ambition; for the quarrels
thus produced and the feelings engendered, could issue only in
thirst for revenge. Ye have not merely followed his example.
In wanton cruelty ye have gone beyond him. Ye have hitherto
lived in a great measure upon the fish and the game of the
country, while the Aboriginal inhabitants are fired at if they
dare to approach either, though famishing with hunger. But,
as I have already remarked, I conceive it unnecessary to reckon
in detail the numberless provocations they have received at
your hands. They are numerous and well-known. I would
merely ask, what did ye when ye arrived on these shores? Ye
seized their fishing stations; ye took possession of their hunting
grounds; ye drove them from the scenes of their childhood, and
ploughed up the graves of their fathers. Yet all these ills they
bore with a patience unparalleled in the history of nations. In
not a single instance, did they throw a spear, or attempt to
shed blood, till they began to fall under the fire of the merciless
invader. Even in the affair of Bull’s Creek, which has kindled
such a flame, they were not the aggressors; they were only
exercising the law of retaliation—a law as ancient as the records
of history, and sanctioned by divine authority. The brother of
Yagan and the son of Midjeegoorong, the principals in this
affair, had bedt killed that very morning at Fremantle. What
brother is there among you, if required by the laws of hiscountry,
that would not avenge the death of a brother? What father that
would not revenge the death of a son.
Ye were born under a meridian where a benign religion
enjoins the exercise of mercy even to the criminal. Shall
the avenger of his country’s wrongs, the high minded pa-
triot, whose character forms a theme of admiration among
all nations whether friends or foes, in every age and in every
country, find none at your hands? Ye sustain in society the
various connexions of sons, brothers, husbands, or fathers—
a name to which ye are indebted for the privilege of beholding
the light, and all the sweet enjoyments of domestic and social
intercourse. Ye have sisters, daughters, wives, or mothers who
watched over you during the years of helpless infancy and wept
over your departure to a foreign land. Will ye, then, dis-
regarding alike the feebleness of old age, the fond expectation
of youth, and all the tender feelings of consanguinity which
bind man to man and constitute the mainsprings of human
happiness, send the hope of the country ye have invaded to a
premature grave, and cause the survivors to mourn, in the
loss of these endearing relationships, all that can render life
desirable? Shall the defenceless Australians, who never


wronged either you or yours, find in you no compassion, no
trait of a kindred humanity, nothing but tigers, bears, wolves,
and beasts of prey ? By laying thp foundation of the colony in
blood, ye will not only treasure up wrath to yourselves against
the day of wrath, but invoke a storm of vengeance on the heads
of your children, which a just and retributive Providence may
one day cause to burst in full measure for the iniquity of their
fathers in rendering Australia childless. Rest assured, if ye
refuse to be admonished, the usual lot of the wicked at the last
day will not be yours. When dragged before the tribunal of
Heaven, unable to lift your guilty eyes to behold the great
original parents of your race, abhorred too by every tribe and
every nation of the human family, the just decision of Him who
will render to every man according to his works, will not allow
you to mingle with the common damned, but will assign to
the murderers of their species a place of torment far apart by
itself in the shades of darkness.
Man, in a state of nature, may be ignorant of the manners of
civil life, but he has as keen a sense of right and wrong as the
most polished of his kind. Talk to the savages of Australia
about the jurisprudence of civilized nations, and legal means for
the redress of wrongs and injuries!—about laying their com-
plaints before a magistrate of whose language they are ignorant,
whose authority they do not acknowledge, and whose residence
they dare not approach ! What do they know about Courts of
Justice, or your laws for the punishment of crime? Among
them, as in the patriarchal state, every man is the judge and
the avenger of his own wrongs. Nor do they deem it presump-
tuous to carry the principle still higher, and consider themselves
in their collective capacity, as competent as you to judge and
avenge their national wrongs.
How hard is the fate of this people! They may stand to be
slaughtered; but they must not. throw a spear in their own
defence, or attempt to bring their enemies to a sense of justice
by the only means in their power,—that of returning like for
like. If they do—if they dare to be guilty of an act which in
other nations would be eulogized as the noblest of a patriot’s
deeds—they are outlawed ; a reward is set upon their heads ;
and they are ordered to be shot, as if they were so many mad
dogs! Thus, in the most barbarous manner, ye practice what in
them ye condemn, the law of retaliation.
Let it be borne in mind that these people have never had any
intercourse with the rest of mankind. While Ninus founded
the Assyrian empire, and Cyrus gained that of Babylon; while
Asia poured her overwhelming millions on Europe, and the
valor of Sparta bled at Thermopylae ; while Philip of Macedon


strove for the ascendant at Olynthua, and the glowing eloquence
of Demosthenes, poured upon the ear of listening assemblies,
kindled the beacon fire at Athens; while Alexander pushed his
conquests towards the rising, and Csesar towards the setting
sun ; while Macedonia trampled on the gorgeous East, and the
legions of Italy contended with the phalanxes of Greece for the
empire of the globe; while Scythia, Sarmatia, and Scandinavia,
rising in the pride of their strength, sprang on the Latin Eagle,
and the dominion of Rome yielded to the fury of the North ;
while thrones were erected and overthrown in Asia, in Europe,
in Africa, and America, the tribes of Australia, unconscious of
the existence of any other continent, were chasing the kangaroo,
chanting their poetical compositions by their fires in the forest,
and moving as distinctly in a world of their own, as if they had
been the inhabitants of another planet. Up to this moment,
they imagine you to be a swarm of emigrants from the Moon.
If therefore ye act upon the maxims and customs which
guided you in your intercourse with civilized nations, ye will
miss your aim at every step, in your policy towards this people.
Their government is patriarchal, and their manners are antedi-
luvian. Of conquest they know nothing ; because they are
strangers to riches and luxury, the great incitements to conquest
and empire. But the law of retaliation, blood for blood, is
established by the sanction of ages, is familiar to them from
infancy, and prevails from one extremity of New Holland to
another. It is their mode of punishing offences, whether per-
sonal or national; and if it be criminal in them to practise this
law, it must be equally criminal in you to follow their example.
But this is not all. By retaliating ye yourselves become sa-
vages ; ye perpetuate the law of retaliation, and entail upon
your offspring all the evils consequent upon a system of endless
bloodshed. Who, in this case, is to set the example of a nobler
conduct? These untutored savages, or a people who consider
themselves the most humane and polished of the nations of
Europe ? Strangers as ye are become, gentlemen, to the sound
of the church-going Bell by your residence in these woods, I
am not afraid to trust the appeal to your consciences. If the
religion of the land of your fathers yet retains any influence
over you, it will require but little reflection in the presence of
Him “ who divided to the nations their inheritance,” to decide
you in favour of a better policy, and induce you to set the ex-
ample of peace and of good will to a people to whom ye are
indebted for your adopted country —a country which ye intend
to make your domicile and the inheritance of your children.
Are ye aware that the whole country is divided into districts j
and that no tribe can occupy that of another? Consider for a


moment, the sad condition in which your invasion has placed
the tribes of Derbal. Before them is the British banner, frown-
ing destruction, and behind them the spear of the neighboring
tribes, threatening them with a contest the most sanguinary.
Which are they to choose? ' A glorious death by rushing on the
sword of the invading foe? or a cruel and unnatural war with
their own countrymen ?
Remember, too, that ye have never attempted to make peace
with them. Every cessation of arms has been only a tacit truce
—a calm that preceded a storm. And while ye act upon a
wavering uncertain policy, the war will assume a more sangui-
nary character on every recurrence of hostilities, till it become
interminable; and, staining your title deeds with blood, involve
the destruction of one of the most interesting races of Aboriginal
inhabitants now to be found on the face of the globe.
There are still two courses open for you to pursue—either a
decidedly pacific one, or a decidedly hostile. To the adoption
of the former, I know of no obstacle that may not yet be easily
surmounted. They have all along shown themselves ready to
be reconciled, desirous to, live in peace and amity with you, and
even willing to be taught your manners, laws, and polity. It
remains for you to consider the consequences of adopting hostile
measures. A bad name to the colony, a stop to emigration,
and a depreciated property, are but minor evils. An extermi-
nating war, the flames of which, spreading with increasing fury
among the surrounding tribes as the settlement extends itself,
must be the consequence. An exterminating war over a conti-
nent as large as Europe, and abounding with tribes unknown
and innumerable! The very thought is appalling. The awful
•drama, the tragic scenes of which opening and closing succes-
sively amidst the cries of the dying and the tears of widows and
orphans, and extending its desolations to generations yet unborn,
will be without a parallel in the history of the world ! Who
will take upon himself the responsibility of giving such counsel ?
Who among you will answer for the frightful consequences to
God, to his country, and to the myriads of the slain, whose
blood will clamor through the skies for vengeance in both
worlds, upon the guilty head of him that advised and of him
that lighted up the inextinguishable fire?
Taking advantage of your distance from the mother-country,
ye may flatter yourselves with the idea that it is possible either
to commit the infamous deed of extermination clandestinely, or
that ye can persuade the world that ye were not the aggressors.
Vain thought! These game plundered and falling forests,
which have so often filled their mouths with food and their
-hearts with gladness; that Moon, to whose mild beams they have


so often danced in wild and grotesque but innocent mirth, uncon-
taminated with the Bacchanalian fume or the lascivious waltz;
those stars, which have so often guided them in their trackless
path through the lonely desert; yon Sun, who has so often called
them from the unfurnished bower, where, mantled by the shades
of night, they enjoyed a healthful repose, to the ramble and the
chase; the sea, whose roaring billows, revelling from age to age
in solitary grandeur, have poured shoals of provision into their
rivers; the lakes whose shaded shores have bred, and whose
placid bosoms have borne for them myriads of gamboling fowl;
the hills that have echoed to their song, the valleys that have
sheltered them from the howling tempest, the plains over which
they have attempted to flee, and on which they have fallen
under the fire of the pursuing foe, all nature, Rachel-like
weeping for her children, will at the last day proclaim your
guilt amidst assembled worlds. But dream not of concealment
till then. The fate of Cain will be yours, Ye may enjoy the
blood-stained spoils of an innocent, unoffending people; but
ye cannot bury the crime ye perpetrate in the graves of your
victims, nor escape the eyes of Him who has drawn the lines
of demarkation around the inheritance of every nation. Your
fallen countenances will betray you. The voice of your bro-
ther’s blood will cry from the ground where it is shed. The
land of your fathers will abhor you ; and the page of history
will brand you to the latest posterity with the guilt of the un-
paralleled deed.
Choose for yourselves. If ye determine upon a war of ex-
termination, civilized nations will be mute with astonishment
at the madness of a policy so uncalled for, so demoniacal.
Spain, throughout the wide desolations of her American empire,
will groan forth a warning note ; even the merciless Turk will
point the finger of scorn at you ; and Greece and Rome will
rise from the tomb to sit in judgment upon you. When your
doom is passed, your own children, for whose sakes ye have
invaded the country, will join with the disinherited offspring
of those ye have slain to pour a flood of curses on your
memory.
If ye have any feelings of compunction, before the die be cast,
let the Aboriginal inhabitants of Australia live. Ye have taken
from them all they had oh earth. Be content with this, and do
not add to the crime of plunderingthem that of taking their lives.
Let them live that they may be put in possession of a title to a
better country —a country where the invading foe dare not
enter.
But if ye have steeled your hearts against remonstrance—if,
in contempt of the most touching reflections, and reckless of


consequences, ye have determined to put on the savage, and to
act the part of barbarians, by imbruing your hands in the blood
of a people whom ye have spoiled of their country—the patri-
monial inheritance of their fathers—repudiate the faith into
which ye were baptized, and renounce the Christian name—the
name from which your native land borrows all her glory—that
Christianity may not blush at your deeds, while she weeps over
the miseries ye inflict upon a hapless race.
TUB KND
SYDNEY t
S’RINTtt) BV .t. SDISIWRT AND J. M'£iCnißlf»
LOWER OBORL'S StRKBT.
